ROMANae HISTORIae ANTHOLOGIA.

AN ENGLISH EXPOSITION OF THE ROMAN ANTIQVITIES, WHEREIN many Roman and
English offices are paralleld and diverse obscure phrases explained.

By THOMAS GODWYN Master of Arts: For the use of ABINGDON School.

AC: OX

printer's or publisher's device

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1614.

AA


VENERABILI ET EGREGIO VIRO Do. FRANCISCO JAMES LEGVM Doctori, Curiae
audientiae Cantuariensis causarum and negotiorum Auditori, Reverendi Aepiscopi
Bathonensis and Wellensis Cancellario dignissimo.
QVOTIES mihi in mentem redeunt, redeunt autem multoties crebra illa eaque
aurea tua hortamina, quibus veluti frigida suffusa mihi puero in literaru^
stadio currenti animos feceras: toties (vir ornatissime) me aere tuo ita
obrutum sentio, vt non facultas modo, sed and spes omnis nomen meum expungendi
de tabulis tuis praecidi videatur. Novae scilicet mihi impetrandae sunt
tabulae, nam de sort accepta jacta est alea; and ita jacta vt nec reliquum
mihi sit quo foeneralia sim soluendo; nisi numismata haec, quae and antiqua
sunt and plumbea (id est) Antiquitates has, in quibus vereor ne me reperias
hominem (vt cu^ Tere^tio loquar) plumbeum: sed fas sit addere (ex eode^
Terentio) antiquae fidei; foeneraliorum vice acceperis. At quid tibi cum
foeneratione? Vtpote qui foenerari beneficium non soles, sed illud pulchre
foeneratum putes quo qui accepit recte vtitur: and quid mihi cum solutione? Qui
scilicet putare debeo me novum beneficium accepisse, si hoc nostrum officium
boni consulas: me devinctiorem tibi factum, si dignaberis tuo nomine (tanquam
insigni aliqua gemma) ornare hoc meum opusculum, quo nomine non me solum, sed
inventutem omnem (nempe antiquitatum studiosam) before tibi demereberis; mihi
si quid gratiarum a candido lectore, lectori si quid vtilitatis ex nostris
lucubrationibus accrescat: hoc ille, illud ego, tibi vni acceptum feramus
necesse est: nec enim quod res est diffitebor, nisi quod ardenter cuperem
insopitam nostram tui recordationem notam facere, nostrae certe antiquirates
adhuc sopitae and ignotae jacuissent, nec extra privatos parietes
subreptitassent. Deus Opt. Max. dignitatem tuam quam diutissime servet
incolumem.

Datum Abingdoniae decimo calend. Aprilis. Anno. 1613. Tuae dignitatis omni
obsequio observantissimus THOMAS GODWINVS.

BENEVOLO LECTORI, S.
TRia auguror potissimum futura in hoc opusculo, quae parum faciant ad
aliquorum hominum palatum; quae tamen singula lectorem aequum spero aequi
consulturum. Primo aegre ferent quod antiquitatis hae suo debito.i. Romano
destituantur nitore, and idiomatis nostri solaecis (tanquam tot laceris pannis)
vestitae for as extrudantur: secundo insimulabunt me gravem rei literariae
iniecisse plagam, nempe qui hac ratione feci, vt quivis fumiuendulus
Grammatista poterit in lectione Ciceronis sine cortice natare, poterit gryphos
antiquitatum qui passim historiarum occurrunt sine negotio solvere: tertio hoc
illos male torquebit, quod tota mea textura est adeo inconcinna and inconsona,
adeo sterilis and humi serpens, adeo sanguinis and sublimitatis expers. Primo
velim intelligant me no^ tam exuisse eas suo nitore, quam cruisse ex tenebris,
nempe transfundendo eas in linguam magis cognitam. Secundo sciant me, non alia
mente accessisse ad hoc opus quam vt meo labor cuivis sciolo and tyrunculo,
vix dum literarum studijs initiato imo pueris ad huc sub ferula militantibus,
facilis aditu^ ad adyta haec patefieret: de sterilitate quam mihi impingunt, me
mihi plaudo, rectiusque nomine perspicuitatis eam dici oportere contendo; quid
emolumenti enim ex ampull^sis istiusmodi verborum prodigijs (quibus fulminare,
nullus est elementarijs qui, si velit, nequit) emergit lectori? praesertim
tyrunculo, quem ista verborum tonitrua magis admiratione afficiunt, quam
instruunt cognitione. Sed his missis, Lectorem benevolum monitum velim, vt
quoties antiquitates Romanae, quoties antiqua aliqua lex, quoties minus
visitatae dictiones, vel dictionum significationes, quoties paraemiae ex his
antiquitatibus enatae illum morantur in lectione autorum, Ciceronis praecipue
(cui prae caeteris meum erat consilium lucem inijcere) vt indicem meum vice
Dictionarij consulat: vel si magis placebit, taedium quod ex gravioribus
studijs obrepere solet, discutiat and exuat, lectitando has antiquitates, in
quibus nihil occurrit ceratinum quod negotium cuivis facessat, nonnulla forsan
quae sopitum lectoris animum everberent and exacuant magis.

Vale.
GODWINE noli, pergis? inscite facis
Vulgo Camoenas edere.
Romana spernit lingua conarisonos
Idiomate extrusos novo.
Godwine pergas, fallor; eximie facis
Doctas Camoenas edere:
Antiqua Romae verba conari doces
Labor iuvenes improbo.
LAV. HVMFREDVS.

In Romanae Historiae Anthologiam, pueris Ciceronis anagnostis a Tho. Godwine
concinnatam.
DIversis diversa frutex animalibus idem
Pabula dat: In eadem herba apis florem, capra germen, sus radicem captat.
Plut. lib. de Poetis Audiendis.
Radix, sus tibi, dulce sapit;
Dum florem delibat apis; roremque Cicada;
Et baccas, volucres; germina, capra legit.
Qui Ciceronis adit sinuosa volumina Lector,
Non eadem quivis, queis saturetur, avet.
Lexios hic veneres mavult, suadaeque verba sequi.
Schemataque, and phaleras, Lectaque verba sequi.
Ille amentatas potius mirabitur hastas,
Argumenta, quibus causa perempta cadit.
Sunt quibus Antiqui ritus, quos prisca vetustas
Servat in Archivis, perplacuere magis.
Talem tu Godwine tuo polyhistora libro
Efformare pia sedulitate studes.
Nec labor incassum cedet; tibi nempe Minerval
Gloriaque and stabilis fama (...) erit.
IO. SANFORDVS.

A short table showing the argument of every Book and Section.
Lib. 1 Of the Roman city. Sect. 1. Of the chief parts thereof. 2. Of the
general divisions of the Roman people.
2 Of the Roman religion, Sect. 1. Of certain general divisions of their
Gods. 2. Of the Roman Priests with some particular Gods. 3. Of certain
collateral appendices belonging to the Roman religion (ex. gra.) of the
Roman year, where obiter of the Call. I^es, and Nones, with certain
distinctions of the days. Secondly of their plays where chiefly the parts of
a comedy or tragedy are shown. Thirdly of their manner of taking meat. Fourthly
of the Roman gowns and coats. Fifthly of their rites in marriages and burials.
3 Of the state political. Sect. 1. Of their assemblies, called Comitia. 2. Of
their civil Magistrates. 3. Of all those laws, which I have observed to be
touched in Tully his orations.
4 Of the art military, as it was practiced by the Romans Cap. 1. Of their
manner observed in establishing their leagues. 2. Of the Roman Legion and the
parts thereof 3 Of the manner of besieging a city. 4. Of the punishments
toward their enemies captivaetad. 5. Of punishments toward the Roman
soldiers offending. 6. Of certain rewards after the performance of any noble
exploits.


THE ROMAN ANTIQVITIES expounded in English.
Lib. 1. Sect. 1.
Of the chief parts of the City.
CHAP. 1.
De monte Palatino.
ROmulus, and Remus being (as it is agreed upon by most writers) Plutar. vit.
Rom Pighius
the first founders of Rome, built it at the first in Rosin antiq. lib. 1. c. 2.
form of a quadrangle upon one only hill called Mons Palatinus, though Fabius
left Rome, as it was first builte, with the fields thereof painted in the
form of a Sig de iur. Romans l. 1. c. 2.
bow, the river. Tiber being the sting thereof. Upon this hill was always the
seat of the Roman Empire, which from the hill took the denomination of a
Palace: and hence Rosin. antiq. lib 1. c. 4.
all stately buildings, which we call Palaces, took their name, Palatia. This
hill had his first appellation Palatinus Rosin. ib.
quasi Balatinus, a balando, from the bellowing of cattle, pasturing there in
former times. But in process of time six other hills by several kings of
Rome were added; whereby the city, and the Pomoerium, that is, the territories
of the city were enlarged: and Rome was called vrbs septi-collis.i. the city
upon seven hills. Upon this Palatine hill also stood the Asylum, or sanctuary
of refuge, which Romulus opened Alex. Genesis dier. l. 3. c. 20.
in imitation of Cadmus, who at the building of Thebes was said to have opened
a sanctuary of refuge, whither whatsoever malefactor could escape, were he
bond or free, he was not to be punished. It was much like unto a custom of
the people in the city Croton, who flying, unto the altars of their Gods,
obtained the forguienesse of faults not voluntarily committed. Whence these two
phrases are expounded alike, Ad te tanquam ad Asylum, and Ad te tanquam ad ara^
confugimus.i. we fly unto thee as our only refuge.

CHAP. 2.
De monte Capitolino.
THis hill was famous for three names: it was called Capitolium, mons Tarpeius,
and mons Saturni. It was named Saturnes hill Rosin. antiq. li. 1. c. 5.
from the heathenish God Saturn, who vouchasafed to undertake the protection
of that Tarpeian hill Plutarch. in Romulo.
from Tarpeia one of the Vestall Nuns, daughter to the chiefe-keeper of the
Tarpeia betrayed the Capitol into the enemies hands, bargaining to have the
golden bracelets upon her enemies left hands for this her treason. Now the
enimes when they were admitted in did cast not their brace lets alone but their
bucklers also upon her, through the weight whereof she was pressed to death:
upon which occasion the whole hill was afterward called the Tarpeian mount; but
more principally a certain rock of that hill called Tarpeia rupes, from
whence malefactors were sundry times tumbled headlong. the honor of Jupiter,
was laid a man's head full fresh, and lively, as if it had bin lately buried,
Dion. Halicar. lib. 4.
yea hot blood issuing out of it, was found there. Lipsius de magnitud. Romans
cap. 5.
Arnobius says, that the name of this man being alive was Tolus, and hence
from Caput and Tolus the whole hill was called Capitolium.

CHAP. 3.
De colle Quirinali.
THis hill being in former time called Agonalis, then began to be called
Quirinalis, when certain Sabines, called in Latin Curetes, came and inhabited
there, (truce being made between the Romans, and the Sabines:) though some
would therefore have it named Quirinalis, because there was a temple erected
in the honor of Romulus, called also Quirinus. It was called in the time of the
Emperors mons Caballus, that is, the horse-hill, taking its denomination from
two marble statues of Alexander taming his horse Bucephalus: which statues
Constantine the Emperor brought to Rome, and placed the^ in the midst of
certain bathes, which he made upon this hill. There do appear in this hill
three risings, or hillockes, the one being called Salutaris, the other
Martialis, and the third Latiaris. All this may be collected out of Antiq. Romans
lib. 1. cap. 6.
Rosinus.

CHAP. 4.
De monte Coelio.
THis hill has his name from a certain Alex. Genesis dier. l. 6. c. 11.
captain of Hetruria, which assisted Romulus against the Sabines. On this hill
king Tullus Hostilius erected stately edifices, which for a time served as his
palace: but afterward they became the chief Counsell-house, whither the
Senators assembled themselves, for the determining of state-matters: and
because this Curia did far exceed all others, therefore authors many times
use this word Alex. Genesis dier. l. 1. c. 16.
Curia simply, without any adjunction to signify Curiam Hostiliam, as if there
were no other. It much resembles our Privy-cou^sel-chamber in respect that
none might sit there, but only Senators; whereas in the courthouse, which
Pompey built (being therefore called Curia Po^peia) Rosin. antiq. lib. 7 c. 6.
other city-Magistrats were admitted amongst the Senators: and in curia
Iulia.i. the courthouse which Julius made, were examined Rosin. Ibid.
foreign matters, as Embassages: but in curia Hostilia domestical matters
only were treated of, and that only by the Senators. Munster in sua Cosmog.
lib. 2. cap. 9.
At this present time this hill is beautified with many Christian Churches, as
the Churches of S. Steven, S. Paul, and S. John, our Saviors Hospital, etc.
Alex. Genesis dier. l. 6. c. 11.
It was also called Mons Querculanus from the abundance of oaks growing there.

CHAP. 5.
De monte Esquilino.
THis hill was so named quasi Rosin. Antiq l 1. cap. 8.
excubinus ab excubijs.i. from the night watching which Romulus did undertake
upon that, somewhat distrusting the fidelity of the Sabines in the beginning of
their league. In this hill there were three hillockes named Cispius, Oppius,
and Septimius.

CHAP. 6.
De monto Aventino.
THE Aventine mount took his name Alex. Genesis dier. li. 6. c. 11.
from Aventinus a certain king of Albanum, which was there buried. Upon this
hill stood Hercules his altar, and certain temples consecrated to Juno,
Diana, Minerva, Lucina, and Murcia.i. Venus: whence the hill has sometime
been called Diana her hill, and Mons Murcius. Alex. Genesis dier lib 3. c. 5.
Here were those Scalae Gemoniae, whither condemned persons were dragged, and
so cast headlong into the river Tiber down a pair of stairs. Upon Plutarch.
in Romulo.
this mount Remus would have built Rome, and therefore it was called Remonius
mons. But since it has been called mons Rignarius, as it appears by Plut.
in the same place. It had moreover the name of the holy mount, being called in
Latin Mons sacer.

CHAP. 7.
De monte Viminali.
BEcause of the abundance of wicker twigs, which did grow upon this hill, it
was called mons Viminalis, vimen signifying a twigge, or ozier. I am not
ignorant that some would have this hill to be named Viminalis from Jupiter
Vimineus, whereas Jupiter himself was named Vimineus from this hill, because
he had here many altars erected in the honor of him. Both this hill, and
Jupiter were called Fagutales from sylva fagea.i. a cops of beech-trees, which
did grow thereupon. vid. Rosin. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 9.

CHAP. 8.
De tribus collibus adiectis.
THree Rosin. Ant. lib. 1. cap. 11.
other hills there were, which in process of time were added unto the city,
which partly because they were not included within the Pomoerium so soon as
the other, but chiefly because they were not of such note, therefore Rome
retained the name Septi-collit.i. the city upon 7. Collis hortulorum.i. the
hill of gardens, so termed because of the many garde^s near adjoining.
Barthol. Latomus in verrin. 7^m Cic.
Here was the Cireque, or the shew-place of the stru^pet Flora, which made the
people of Rome heir to those goods which she had gotten by prostituting her
body to young gentlemen, leaving also a certain sum of money to procure a
celebration of her birthday: which because of her infamy the people shaming
to do, they feined her to be the goddess of flowers, and that she must first
be appeased by sports, and plays performed in the honor of her, before the
trees and fruits of the earth would Ianiculus from Ianus that two-faced God:
who, as writers testify, was there buried. It did lie beyond the river Tiber,
and now has changed its name, being called from the yellow sands mons aureus,
and through negligence of the Printer, Montorius.i. the golden Vaticanus from
Vaticinium, a foretelling. Munster in sua cosmog. lib. 2. cap. 8.
It is at this time famous for a library in it, called Bibliotheca Vaticana.

CHAP. 9.
De Foro Roman.
FOrum has diverse acceptions: sometimes it is taken for a place of
negotiation, or marchandising, which we call a marketplace; and being taken in
this sense it has commonly some adjective joined with it, as Forum boarium,
the beast-market, forum piscarium, the fish-market, Olitorium forum, the
hearb-market. Other times it is taken for any place, wheresoever the chief
governor of a province does co^vocate his people together, there to give
judgment according to the course in law: whence a man is said Forum agere,
Hubertus in Cic. lib. 3. ep. fam. 6.
when he keeps the Assizes, and Forum indicere, when he appoints the place,
where the Assizes shall be kept. Thirdly it is taken for a place, where
controversies in law are iudicially determined, and orations are had unto the
people. And of this sort there were Rosin antiq. lib. 9. c. 7.
fix distinct Forums: One called Forum Iulium, because it was Julius Caesar. A
second was added by Octavius Augustus, Augusti Forum. The third Forum Domitian
the Emperor: but by reason of his sudden death Nerva had the finishing
thereof. It had the name of Forum Transitorium, the transitory Forum, because
there was transitus.i. a way or passage through it into three several market
places. A Traianus, wherein was erected a stately column or pillar 140 cubits
high, having all the noble exploits performed by Traianus engraven in it.
Another was called Salustij Forum, because Salust horti Salustini. The last
Forum, which indeed Forum Romanum, and Forum vetus, or by way of excellency the
Forum, as if there were no other Forum. Where we must understand, that as often
as Forum is used in this latter sense, namely for a pleading place, it is so
used figuratively, by the figure Synecdoche: for in truth the pleading place,
wherein Orations were had, was but one part of the Forum Romanum, namely that
Chapel, or great building, which they called Rostra. Henr. Salm in Pancirolli
lib. rerum deperdit. cap. de Basil. and taber*
Round about this Forum Romanum were built certain trades-mens shoppes, which
they termed Tabernae; and also other stately buildings called Basilicae Pauli.
Here was the Comitium, or hall of justice; the Rostra,.i. the Orators pulpit;
Saturnes sanctuary, or the common treasure house; and Castors temple: of all
which in their order.

CHAP. 10.
De Basilicis.
BAsilicae were upper buildings of great state and much cost, being supported
with Pilae.i. flat. sided pillars; and having underneath them walks, much
resembling our cloisters, saving that the I^tercolumnia, or space between the
pillars lay open unto the very grond. That they were upper buildings may be
collected by the custom of many men, which were wont to walk under these
Basilicall buildings, and therefore were called Subbasilicani by Plautus. The
use of these were principally for the Sigon. de iudiciis lib. 1. cap. 28.
Judges to sit in judgment: but in their absence it was lawful for merchants
to deal in their businesses. Those of chief note were three, thus named,
Pauli, Porcia, and Iulia.

CHAP. 11.
De Comitio.
COmitium Sig. de iud. lib. 1. cap. 7.
was a part of the Forum Romanum, being a great large hall of justice, which
for a long time was open at the top having no covering, and for that reason the
assemblies were often dissolved in rainy, or unseasonable weather. In it stood
the Tribunal, being a place erected up on high in form of our pulpits, but
many degrees larger, and in the midst thereof the Sella Curulis.i. the Ivory
chair, from whence the chief magistrate administered justice; other inferior
magistrates fitting on be^ches on each side, which were called Subsellia,
because they were lower the^ the Tribunal. Those which sat upon these benches
had power cognoscere, but not pronuntiare; much like to our Justices at the
Assizes, which may examine or inform against a malefactor, but not condemn
him. Where we may observe the difference between Comitium, signifying such an
edifice, or building, and Comitia, signifying the Roman assemblies: both being
so called a coeundo. Sig. de iud lib. 1. cap. 28.
In this hal did stand an Altar, upon which the Judges laying their hands, did
take their oath to administer justice without partiality. It was called puteal
Libonis.

CHAP. 12
De Rostris.
NEXT to the Comitium stood the Rostra, a goodly fair edifice in manner of the
body of a Cathedral Church. In it stood an orators pulpit decked and
beautified with the stemmes of many ships, which they got from the people of
Antium in a memorable battle upon sea: and Hubert. in Cic. lib. 8. ep. fam. 1.
hence from those ship-beakes called in Latin Rostra, has this place taken
his name. It may be englished the great Oratory, or place of common plea.

CHAP. 13.
De templo Castoris.
ANother part of the Forum was a sanctuary built in the honor of Castor, and
Pollux: the Sueton. in Iulio Caesare
reason thereof was because they appeared unto the Romans in the Latin war
in the likeness of two Angels sent from heaven to lead the Roman army, and to
assist the Romans against the Latins: who being vanquished, they suddenly were
departed out of the field, none knowing how, and even in the same moment they
appeared upon their sweating horses unto the Roman citizens in the Forum, who
taking them for soldiers demanded what news they brought home from the camp:
they replied that the Romans were conquerours: which news being delivered,
they suddenly vanished, and were seen no more. Upon this occasion did A.
Posthumous being at that time Dictator, build a Temple in that place of the
Forum, where they were seen in honor of them both. Although in the after ages
it had the name only of Castors Temple; Whence arose the jest of M. Bibulus
against his fellow Consul Julius Caesar, saying that it fared with him, as it
did with Pollux;.i. as this Temple which was erected in the honor of both the
brethren, carried the name only of Castors Temple; so the great expe^ces in
exhibiting shows in the time of their Consulshippe though they went deeper on
Bibulus his side, yet Caesar carried away all the thanks, and credit. Insomuch
that the people being wont to subscribe the names of both Consuls at the end of
their deeds, and Charters, for a remembrance of the year; that year they
wrote, Such a thing done not Bibulus, and Caesar, but Julius and Caesar being
Consuls.

CHAP. 14.
De aede Saturni.
SAturnes sanctuary Plutarch. in Publicola.
was the common treasure house, wherein the subsidy money which the commons
paid unto the treasurers called Quaestores, was to be laid up: whereof diverse
men conjecture diversely. Alexander Neop. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 4. c. 15.
says, that Saturn found out the use of brazen money: and therefore this
Temple might be thought the fittest place for the treasury. Plutarch thinks
rather that the making of the treasury in that place did allude to the
integrity of the time, wherein Saturn reigned, being the worlds golden age.
Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 2. c. 2.
But the most received opinion is the strength of the place, whereby it was the
safer from thieves. This temple by reason of the use it was put unto, was
called aerarium from aes.i. brass: which name now is common to all treasure
houses; for that the first money used by the Romans was of that metal, until
the year of Rome 485 (as Pliny witnesses lib. 3. cap. 33.) Alex. Genesis dier.
l. 4. c. 15.
Some are of opinion, that before the use of brass they made money of leather:
whence Numa Pompilius is said to have given leather money in a dole unto the
people. Touching their order observed in the treasury, we must understand that
their care in providing against sudden dangers was such, that they laid aside
the twentieth part of their receipts, which they Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 2. c. 2.
called aurum vicesimarium, Incensimarium, and Cimiliarchiu^, into an inner
chamber, or more sacred room, named in Latin aerarium sanctius. Servius l. 2.
Virg. Georg.
We may read also of a third treasury called aerarium militare, wherein
Augustus had appointed that the twentieth part of certain legacies should be
laid up to defray charges in extraordinary wars: where it lay so privileged,
that it was a capital crime to use any of it, but in extreme, and desperate
necessity. Notwithstanding howsoever it was used as a treasure house, Alex.
Genesis dier. lib 2. c. 2.
yet diverse authors testify that the acts of their senate, the books of
Records, together with such books, as were for their immeasurable bigness
called libri Elephantini, wherein all the names of their Citizens were
registered, and also their military ensigns, were contained there. Plutarch in
suis problemat. vid. Franc. Sylviu^ in Catilinariam 4.
And from those statute books called tabulae publicae, this treasury was also
called Tabularium, because they were laid up there.

CHAP. 15.
De campo scelerato.
CAmpus sceleratus, the field of execution, Munster. in sua Cosmog.
lying withing the city, joined to the gate Collina. It was the place, where
the Vestall Nuns, if they were deflowred, suffered punishment after this
manner. There Plutarch. in Numa.
was made a Vault under the earth with an hole left open above, whereby one
might go down; and within it there was a little couch with a burning lamp,
and a few victuals: whither the defiled Votary was to be brought through the
market place in a litter so closed up with thick leather, that her mournings
might not be heard to the moving of pity. She being thus brought to the place
of execution, was let down by a ladder into the hollow cave, and the hole
presently stopped. And the reason why they suffered such a kind of death, was
because they thought it not fit; that she should be burnt with fire, which
kept not the sacred fire with greater sanctity. And it was thought unlawful to
punish them by laying violent hands on them, because they had in former time
served in so holy a function.

CHAP. 16.
De campo Martio.
THe Rosin. antiq. lib. 6. c. 11*
campus Martius, otherwise called Tiberinus, because it was near the river
Tiber was given unto the Roman people by Caia Tarratia, a Vestall Virgin: but
Tarquinius Superbus the last king of Rome did take it from the people,
converting it to his own private use: in so much that he sowed corn there,
which, when he was deposed, the Romans did cast into the river Tiber, judging
it unfit that any man should reap any commodity from so holy a ground. In
process of time the sheaues of corn being stopped in a shallow foard of the
river, became firm ground, and was called the holy Island, or Aesculapius his
Island. And presently after the expulsion of Tarquinius, this Campus Martius was
restored unto its former use. Beside the natural pleasantness of the place it
self, it was beautified with many ornaments brought out of the Capitol (the
Capitol being too full) as likewise with diverse images of well deserving men.
Hither did the younger sort of Romans come to exercise al matters of
chivaldry, namely the horse-race, the foot-race, wrestling, fencing, vaulting,
casting the bowl, the sledge, the dart, using the sling, the bow, with such
like: and upon this occasion it was dedicated to Mars, and called by Strabo,
the Romans great school of defense. In this field were men of best note
burned, when they died. Here were the kings, and other magistrates at first
created. In this Serve. in Bucol. eclog. 1.
field of Mars also was a place at first railed, like a sheepe-pen, called
therefore Ovilia, or septa; but afterward it was mounted with marble-stone,
beautified with stately walks, and galleries, and also with a tribunal, or
seat of justice, within which precinct the people often times assembled to
give their suffrages toward the election of magistrates. The means of
ascending up unto these Ovilia was not by stairs, but by many bridges made for
that time; every parish in the assembly of parishes, and every tribe, or ward
in the assembly of the tribes, and every hundred in the assembly of ce^turies
having his bridge: whence this proverb was occasioned, de ponte deijciendus.i.
he is to be barred from giving his voice, Joan. Saxonius in orat pro S. Roscio.
These bridges were not made over any river, but over the dry land: whence men
were said to be cast, Non vt periclitarentur de vita, sed ne suffragarentur in
Comitijs.

CHAP. 17.
De Circo Maximo.
AMongst other places where the Romans exhibited their plays unto the people,
the most remarkable was the great Circque, or shew-place, called in Latin
Circus Maximus. It was a large piece of ground, lying near that part of the
Aventine mount, where Dianaes temple stood. It was built by Tarquinius Priscus
with diverse galleries round about it, from whence the Senators, and gentlemen
of the city did behold the running with great horses at lists, the fire-workes,
tumbling, the baiting, and chasing of wild beasts, etc. In former time all did
stand on the ground, being sheltred from the rain by the help of boards
vpheld with forkes in manner of house-pentices: and this custom continued
until the aforesaid Tarquinius erected those galleries, called Fori, making
thirty distinctious of them, allotting every ward or company their several
quarters all the seats being able to contain one hundred fifty thousand
parties. Rosin. antiq. lib. 5. c. 4.
Under these places were cells, or vaults, where women did prostitute their
bodies, and would buy stolen goods, and for this reason Horace calls it
Fallacem circum.i. the deceitful shew-place. There was at the one end of the
circque certain barriers.i. places barred, or railed in, at which place the
horses began the race; and at the other end was the mark, whether the horses
ran: it was called in Latin Meta, and the barriers carceres, a coerce^do.
Whence we say a carceribus ad metam.i. from the beginning to the ending.

CHAP. 18.
De Theatro.
THE Theater Ioach. Camerarius in orat. pro L. Flacco.
has his name from the Greek verb (...).i. to behold: because the people
flocked thither to behold plays, and shows exhibited to them. The custom
Servius lib. 2. Virg. Geor.
first sprang from sheep-heards, who leading a contemplative life, were wont to
compose dialogues in meetre, and at their leisure to recite them under the
trees pressed down in form of an arbor; whence this theatrall term (...)
has been derived from (...), a shadow. But afterward learned Poets composed
Comedies, and Tragedies, which were publicly acted in the city upon a stage:
and although at the first it was counted infamous to frequent them, yet
afterward the Senators themselves, yea the Emperor, and all the chief of Rome
assembled thither. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 5. c. 16.
Neither for a long continuance were there any seats built, but commons and
nobles promiscuously one with another all stood on the ground; insomuch that
those which stood behind, raised up places with turfes of earth, which gave the
people occasion to call the place between those turfes, and the scaffold
Cavea,.i. a cave, or den: yea sometimes the people that stood there were so
called from the place. Though the Theater be now taken only for the stage, yet
then by it was understood all the whole room, where these plays were acted:
and it had diverse parts, some proper to the actors, some to the spectators. To
the actors belonged first the prosceniu^.i. the house, whence the players came,
where they apparelled themselves, though sometimes it is taken for the
scaffold, or stage it self: secondly the pulpitum, that is, the stage, or
scaffold upon which they acted: and thirdly the scena, that is, the Serve. lib.
3. Virg. Georg.
partition, which was commonly made of wood not of hangings. Now that they
might change their scene according to their pleasure, they made it either
Servius i^.
Versatilem.i. so that with engines it might upon the sudden be turned round,
and so bring the pictures of the other side into outward appearance: or
otherwise ductilem.i. so that by the drawing aside of some wainscot shuttles
(which before did hide the inward painting) a new partition might seem to be
put up. And as I think, because those sheepe-heards did act no more at a time,
then one of our scenes, hence have we distinguished our plays into so many
parts which we call scenes. The places which were proper to the spectators
were distinguished according to their degree and place: for the remotest
benches were for the commons, and called popularia; the next for the knights,
and gentlemen of Rome, called therefore Equestria; the others, wherein the
Senators did sit, were built between the Eguestria, and the stage in manner of
a triangle, or a wedge sharp toward the stage and broad behind, by reason
whereof those seats were sometimes called Cunei, but more commonly Orchestra:
De Amphitheat. cap. 14.
this may be collected out of Lipsius. There was also another scaffold built
quite round, made as it were of two theaters joined together; It was called
Amphi-theatrum, and differed from the theater Pancirollus lib rerum
deperditarum cap. de amphitheat.
only as the full moon does from the half, or a complete rundle from a
semicircle. Upon this kind of scaffold, did the masters of fe^ce play their
prizes. The area, or plot of ground, wherein these scaffolds did stand, was
called cavea, for the reason aboue-mentioned: and it was also called arena,
which signifies sand, or gravel, Lipsius de Amphitheat. cap. 3.
because the ground was covered with sand, that the fencers, if any of them by
chance fell of the stage, might not hurt themselves. And this gave occasion of
our Latin phrase, In arenam descendere.i. to go into the field.

CHAP. 19.
De Pistrino.
THere remains another place yet to be spoken of, whereof there is frequent
mention in Comical authors. It much resembles our bridewell, or place of
correction, being called in Latin pistrinum a pinsendo, from pounding. For
before the use of mils was known the Romans did pound their corn in a great
mortar, calling the place where they pounded it, pistrinu^. Whereupon our
hand-mil has retained the same name to this day: and because of the great
pains that men did suffer in pounding, hence grew a custom among them, that
when a servant had offended, his master would menace him in this manner, In
pistrinum te dedam, I will cast thee into Bride-well.

CHAP. 20.
Moreover for the better understanding of classical autors, it will not be
impertinent to point at the general names, by which their religious places
were called: and to declare the proper acception of each name. The names being
these, Templum, Fanum, Delubru^, Aedes sacra, Pulvinar, Sacrarium, Lucus,
Scrobiculum, Ara, Altar, Focus.

De Templo.
This word Templum does sometime signify those Rosin antiq* lib. 2. c. 2.
space, and regions in the air, and earth, which the Augures did quarter out
with their crooked staff at their sooth-saying. It does seldom signify the
heaven, and most commonly it does signify a Church, or Temple: in which sense
as often as it is used, it is said a Fr. Sylvius in orat. pro Muraen.
templando, from beholding; because when we be in the Church, by lifting up
our hearts by a divine contemplation, we do, as it were behold the great
majesty of God.

De Fano.
It is also called Fanum a fando, from speaking: not from the speaking of the
Priest; but because the people do there speak unto God, and God again to the
people.

De Delubro.
Thirdly, a Church was called delubrum Synechdochic (...) because it was the
principal part of the Church, namely the place where their Idol God stood;
and it was called delubrum from Deus: Rosin. antiq. li. 2. ca. 2.
as we call the place, where the candle is put, candelabrum from candela. As
concerning the outward form of the Churches, some were uncovered, because they
counted it an heinous matter to see those Gods confined under a roof, whose
doing good consisted in being abroad; Other-some covered, some round, some
otherwise: but within they much resembled our great Churches. They had their
pronaon, or Church Porch, whereabouts they were wont to have the image of the
beast Sphinx, which was so famous for his obscure riddles: so that by this
image was signified, that the oracles of the Gods which were treated of within
the Church were dark and mystical. They had certain walks on each side of the
body of the Church, which they called ^^rticus: and in these places it was
lawful for them to merchandise, make bargains, or confer of any worldly
business; as likewise in the basilica, or body it self. But their quire
called Chorus, was counted a more holy place, set apart only for divine
service. The manner of hallowing it, was as follows. Rosin. ib.
When the place where the Temple should be built, had been appointed by the
Augurs (which appointing, or determining the place they called Effari templa,
and sistere Fana) then did the party, which formerly in time of need upon
condition of help from the Gods had vowed a Temple, call together the
Aruspices, which should direct him in what form the temple should be built:
which being known certain ribbands, and fillets were drawn about the area,
or plat of ground with flowers, and garlands strowed underneath, as it was
probable to distinguish the limits of this ground now to be hallowed. Then
certain soldiers marched in with boughs in their hands, and after followed
Vestall Nuns leading young boys, and maids in their hands, who sprinkled
the place with holy water. After this followed the Praetor, some Po^tifie going
before, who after the area had been purged by leading round about it a sow, a
ram, and a bull, sacrificed them, and their entrals being laid upon a turfe,
the Praetor offered up prayers unto the Gods, that they would bless those holy
places, which good me^ intended to dedicate unto them. This being done the
Praetor touched certain ropes, wherewith a great stone being the first of the
foundation was tied: together with that other chief Magistrates, Priests, and
all sorts of people did help to pluck that stone, and let it down into its
place, casting in wedges of gold, and silver, which had never been purified,
or tried in the fire. These ceremonies being ended, the Aruspex pronounced with
a loud voice, saying, Ne temeretur opus, saxo, auroue in aliud destinato..i.
let not this work be unhallowed by converting this stone, or gold into any
other use.

De Aede sacra.
Fourthly, a Church was called Aedes sacra, an holy house, because of the
sacrifices, prayers, and other holy exercises performed therein. Although (as
Gellius has long since observed) every holy house was not a Church. For the
proper note of distinction between a Church, and a religious house was this:
that a Church beside that it was dedicated unto some God, it was also hallowed
by the Augures, without which hallowing the edifice was not called a Church,
but a religious house: of which sort was the Vestall Nunnerie, and the common
treasury, called Aedes Saturni. We may add hereunto this word Pulvinar,
Barthol. Latomus in Philippic. 4^^.
which does often signify a church: the reason being taken from a custom
amongst the Painims, who were wont in their churches to make certain beds in
the honor of their Gods, and those beds they called Pulvinaria from pulvis,
because they were filled with dust or chafe.

De Sacrario.
Sometimes Cic. pro Milone.
Sacrariu^ signifies a temple, though properly it signifies a Sextry or
Vestry, nempe Franc. Sylvius in orat. pro L. Muraen
Sacrorum repositorium.

De Lucis.
Near unto diverse temples stood certain groves dedicated to some of the
Gods: they were called in Latin Luci a non lucendo, as diverse say, by the
figure antiphrasis. But others are of a contrary opinion, giving it that name,
because of the exceeding light it had in the night time by reason of the
sacrifices there burnt.

De Scrobiculo, Ara, and Altari.
The places upon which they sacrificed either in their religious houses, or
their groves, were of three sorts, which we in english term altars; but the
Romans distinguished them by three several names, Scrobiculus, Ara, and Altar.

De Scrobiculo.
Alex. Genesis dier. l. 5. c. 26.
Scrobiculus was a furrow, or pit containing an altar in it, into which they
poured down the blood of the beast slain, together with milk, honey, and
wine, when they sacrificed unto an infernal God.

De Ara.
The second kind of altar was called Ara, either ab ardendo, because their
sacrifices were burned upon it: or from their imprecations used at that time,
which in Greek they called (...). It was made foure-square, not very high from
the ground, or as some say, close to the ground: and upon this they sacrificed
unto the terrestrial Gods, laying a turffe of grass on the altar: and this
gave Virgil occasion to call them Virg. Aen. 12.
Aras gramineas.i. grassie altars.

De Altari.
The third sort was called Altar, either because it was exalted, and lifted up
somewhat high from the ground; or because he that sacrificed (by reason the
altar was so high) was constrained to lift up his hands in altum, on high:
Serve. in Bucolic. eclog. 5.
and upon this they sacrificed unto their celestial Gods only.

De Foco.
Focus is a general name, signifying any of these altars, so called a fovendo:
because as Servius has observed, that is properly focus, quicquid fovet ignem,
sive ara sit, sive quicquid aliud, in quo ignis fovetur.

Lib. 1. Sect. 2.
The general divisions of the Roman people.
CHAP. 1.
De populo Romano, and eius prima divisione.
THus having premised a short treatise concerning the first situatio^ of Rome,
and the most remarkable parts thereof, I purpose to proceed to the
Inhabitants, which antiquity has styled Citizens of Rome. And Erasmus rather
describing a Roman, then defining him, says, A Roman was grave in his
conversation, severe in his judgment, constant in his purpose: Whence Cicero
in his Epistles often uses this phrase, More Romano, for ex animo.i.
unfeignedly. Sig. de iur. Romans l. 1. c. 1.
Sigonius rendering the definition of a Roman citizen, averreth that no man is
lege Optima.i. in full and complete manner a citizen of Rome, but he which
has his habitation there, which is incorporated into a tribe, and which is
made capeable of city preferme^ts. By the first particle those which they term
municipes; by the second those which they call Inquilini; and by the third those
which they call Libertini are in a manner disfranchised. But whereas Sigonius
says that they must have their habitation at Rome, he would not be so
understood, as if a Roman citizen might not remove his habitation to any other
country: For says he a Roman citizen may be as long absent from Rome, and the
fields belonging to Rome, as he please, so that he suffer himself to be
sessed and taxed in common with others toward the subsidy paiments, and denies
to be incorporate into another city. For T. Pomponius was a true citizen of
Rome, though he dwelt at Athens. The Roman citizens being by these privileges
as by a more proper and peculiar character distinguished from other people; and
being planted in the city according to the appointment of Romulus their king,
it seemed good unto him to divide them into Sigon. de jure Romans lib. 1. cap. 3.
tribes, not taking the note of distinstion only from the diverse places they
then inhabited, as we read that Servius the sixth king of Rome did, making
therefore four tribes (...), local, namely Suburanam, Palatinam, Collinam,
and Esquilinam (which number of local tribes in process of time increased
unto the number of 35:) but dividing them according to the several nations,
which at the first were donati civitate.i. made free denizens of Rome: (and
they being in number three. 1. the Sabines, which were named Tatienses, from
their king Tatius: 2. the Albanes, called Rhamnenses from Romulus. 3. other
nations promiscuously flocking out of other countries to the Roman Asylum
placed in a grove called in latin Lucus, which gave Romulus occasion to name
the^ Luceres) he made in all three tribes (...) or national. After that
Romulus had thus divided the whole body of the Romans into three tribes, he
then subdivided each tribe into ten lesser numbers, which he called curiae,
or parishes: and then followed five other divisions in respect of their
different degrees, and callings: of which in their several order.

CHAP. 2.
De prima divisione Romanorum in Senatores, sive Patres, Patricios, sive
Patronos, and Plebei, sive Clientes.
THe first division of the Romans in respect of their degree, and place was
this. The elder, wealthier, and gravest sort of Romans, were called sometimes
Patricij, either because of their age, and gravity; or because they had many
children (for great privileges were granted unto fathers of three children:)
and sometimes Patroni, because they were as patrons, and fathers in helping and
assisting the causes of the common people seeking to them. The younger, poorer,
and simpler sort were called, as they had relation to the Patricij, Plebeij.i.
the commons; as they had relation to their Patrons, they were named Clientes.i.
Clients. Between whom Lazius de Repub. Romans lib. 12. cap. 3.
there was such a mutual, and reciprocal intercourse of love, and duty, that
as their Patrons were ready to protect their clients, so the clients were bound
with all faithfulness to cleave unto their Patrons: and that not only to
credit them with their attendance in public assemblies, but to disburse out of
their own purses toward the bestowing of their daughters, the paying of
public mulcts, the giving of largesses in suing for offices, etc. Neither was
it lawful for either of the^ to inform, to depose, to give their voices, or
to side with adversaries one against another without the guilt of treason: for
which crime of treason they were dijs inferis devoti.i. cursed to hell, and the
law gave liberty for any man to kill them. Out of the Patricij did Romulus elect
100. counselors to assist him in determining matters concerning the
co^mo^-weale: to these did Romulus after add another 100. and Tarquinius
Priscus, as diverse authors testify, made them a co^pleat 300. which they
called Patres, or Senatores, and their sons Patricij. But in process of time
the commons also were eligible into a Senators place. Some say that Tarquinius
Priscus added the second hundred to the Senate out of the commons, Martin. Ph^
leticus in Cic. lib 1 Ep. fam. 1.
who were called Senatores minoru^ gentium.i. Senators of the lower house.
Brutus added the last 100. and made them 300: at what time they began to be
called Patres conscripti. And this accords with Ioannes Rosa in his Epitome
of the Roman history, in his chapter de Regibus Romany: where he says, that
Tarquinius Priscus did double the number of the Senators: And likewise Alex.
Genesis dier. l. 2. c. 29.
Alexander Neop. says, that Brutus made them a complete 300.

CHAP. 3.
De secunda divisione Romanorum in tres ordines, Senatorium, Equestrem,
Popularem, seu Plebeium.
AFter that through Tarquinius Superbus his tyranny, the very name of a king
became odious to the Romans, not only the present king was exiled, but the
authority of a king ever afterward detested, and perpetually abrogated: so that
the office, which was before monarchical then was divided between two, called
Co^suls; neither were they admitted for any longer space then one year. At
which time of change, the Romans were divided into three orders, or ranges, 1.
into Senators, of whom before. 2. into Gentlemen, called of the Romans ordo
Equestris: by which we do not understand those 300. Celeres.i. Pensioners,
called sometimes Equites, for that was a place of service, this a title and
token of gentility. Who although they were inferior to the chief Senate, yet
they were of great esteem among the Romans: and although they might not
wear the same robe as the Senators did, namely the laticlavium, or garment
bestudded with flowrishings of purple silk in manner of broad nail heads;
Rosin. Ant. lib. 1 cap. 17.
yet they might wear the angusti-clavium, a garment differing from the former
only in this, because the purple studdes, wherewith it was purfled was
narrower, and not so large as the lati-clavium. They also at the time of their
election received from the Censors an horse, called by them equus publicus,
because of the yearly allowance out of the common treasury to keep him: it
was also called equus militaris, because of their service in war ( Lipsius de
magnitud. Romans l. 1. dial. 5.
they having their horses kept as well in peace, as war.) They received also
a gold-ring, Alexan Genial. dier. li 2. cap. 29.
whereby they were distinguished from the Populacie: for it was not lawful for
any to wear a gold-ring under the degree of a Senator, or a Gentleman. The
estimation and value of a Senators estate Suet. in August.
until Augustus his time was octingenta sestertia, that is, 6000l. Plin. lib.
33. cap. 2.
Of a gentleman's estate it was quadringenta sestertia, that is, of our English
money 3000l. 3. The third order, or degree in the Roman commonwealth was
Populus, the populacy, or commons, which should exercise trading, manure the
ground, look unto the cattle, etc. Where by the way we must understand that
the baser sort of the Romans, which did wander up and down to and fro, not
settling themselves to any vocation, were not contained within this division:
for unto them there was no name vouchsafed: but according to the Poet they were
sine nomine turba; or as Livy says, ignota capita, men of no account, and
therefore of no name.

CHAP. 4.
De tertia divisione in Nobiles, Novos, and Ignobiles.
THis division was taken from the right or privilege of having images; for
they were accounted Noblemen, which had the images of their predecessors: Those
which had their own images only were called Novi.i. late-coyned nobles or
vpstarts. Salust uses this word often in the disgrace of Tully calling him
Novum and reptitium civem, one that lately crept into the city. The third sort
called ignobiles were those that had no images, neither of their predecessors,
nor of themselves. Before we proceed, we must understand, that it was not
lawful for who would to have his own image, if he so desired; for none might
be thus privileged, but those alone to who^ the right of riding in a Curule
chair belonged; and to these the right of images was permitted, as well for the
credit of their house, as to incite others to the like atchieuements, when they
would consider the diverse ceremonies used unto these images in an honorable
remembrance of those whom they did represent. Whence it follows, that Ius
nobilitatis is nothing else but Ius imaginis; insomuch that this word Sig^ de
iur. Romans l. 2 c. 20*
Imago does oftentimes signify Nobility: and the right of having Images with
them, was the same as the right of having arms with us. Alexan. Genial. dier.
lib. 5. cap. 24.
The superstitious conceit which the Romans had of these images was such, that
upon festival days and all occasions of joy and mirth, those images should
be beautified and adorned with garlands and flowers; upon occasions of grief
and mourning they would take from them all their ornaments, making them in a
manner to partake of their mourning. Some they kept in their private closets,
Barthol. Latomus in Verrin. 7.
others they exposed to the public view of passengers, placing them in the
gates of their houses together with the swords, targets, helmets, ship-beakes,
and such other spoils as formerly they had taken from their enemies; which it
was not lawful for any though they bought the house so much as to deface.

CHAP. 5.
De quarta divisione Romanorum in Optimates, and Populares.
THis fourth division of the Romans has been occasioned through the faction
and siding of the Citizens. Those (according to the description of Cic pro
Sextio.
Tully) were Optimates.i. the best citizens, who desired their actions might be
liked, and approved by the better sort. Those Populares..i. popular, who
through a desire of vainglory, would not so much consider, what was most
right, as what should be most pleasing unto the populacy. So that here by this
word Popular we understand not the commons, as formerly we did, Geor. Merula
in orat. pro. Ligario.
but be he Senator, Gentleman, or inferior, if he do more desire that which
shall be applauded by the mayor part, then that which shall be approved by the
better part, him the Romans called Popular.i. such a one, that prefers the
popular applause before the right.

CHAP. 6.
De quinta, and vltima divisione Romanorum, in Libertos, Libertinos, and
Ingenuos: item de Manumissione.
THe difference of freedoms in the city of Rome has given occasion of this
division: For he, or she that had served as an apprentice, and afterward was
manumized, was named Libertus, or Liberta. The son whose father, and mother
were once apprentices, was called Libertinus: but that son whose father and
mother were both libertines, or both freeborn, Justin. inst. lib 1. tit. de
Ingenuis. vid. Franc. Sylviu^ in Catilinariam. 4.
yea whose mother only was free, was called Ingenuus.i. freeborn. But after
Appius Coecus his Censor-ship, then began Liberti, and Libertini to signify
one, and the same degree of freedom: so that Liberti, and Libertini were taken
for those which served for their freedom, and Ingenui were taken for those
which were freeborn, whether their parents were Liberti, or Libertini. Here
is occasion given us to consider the manner of their freedom, and such
ceremonies which belonged thereunto. The freedom of the city of Rome was three
ways obtained: First by birth, both or at least one of the parents being free,
and such were called cives originarij. Secondly by gift, or cooptation, when
the freedom was bestowed upon any stranger, or nation, and they were termed
civitate donati: and so we read that Caesar did take in whole nations into the
freedom. Lastly by manumission, which was thus; when as the servant was
presented by his master before the Consul, or Praetor, the master laying his
hand upon the servants head, used this form of words, Hunc liberum esse volo,
and with that turning his servant round, and giving him a cuffe on the ear,
he did emittere servum e manu: The Praetor then laying a certain rod or
wand called P. Ramus i^ orat pro C. Ra^^^^.
Vindicta upon the servants head, replied in this manner, Dico eum liberum esse
more Quiritum. The^ the L^ctor or Seriant taking the wand did therewith strike
the servant on the head, and with his hand be stroke him on the face, and gave
him a push in the back, and after this he was registered for a freeman.
Moreover the servant having his head shaven purposely at that time received a
cap, as a token of liberty: whence ad pileum vocare aliquem, is, to set one at
liberty, as likewise vindicta liberare. Here we may also consider the two
several kinds of servants: the first were called servi, and they could never
attain to any freedom without the consent of their Master: Dion Halicarn. lib
4.
for those that were thus servi were commonly captives, either bestowed as a
reward upon this, or that soldier, or bought sub corona, or of other citizens,
which had gotten them one of those two former ways. The second were called
properly Sigon. de iudiciis l. 1. cap. 31.
nexi and addicti, because though they were free, yet by reason of their debt,
addicebantur, that is, they were delivered up unto their creditors by the
Praetor to work out the debt, so that after the payment thereof either by money
or work, they did recover their liberty: whence they were said Michael Toxita
in orat. pro P. Quintio.
nomina sua liberare, when they paid the debt: as on the contrary they were
said, nomina facere, when they came in debt. And their creditors when they sued
for the payment were said nomina exigere: Nomen in these and the like places
signifying as much as Debitum a debt, Fr. Silvius in epist. vir orum illust. l.
1. epist. 6.
because the creditors did use to write down their debtors names.

Lib. 2. Sect. 1.
The general divisions of the Roman Gods.
CHAP. 1.
De dijs.
THough Satan had much blinded the hearts of men in old time, yet was not the
darkness of their understanding so great, but that they did easily perceive,
and therefore willingly acknowledge, that there was some supreme governor,
some first mover, as Aristot. says: some first original of all goodness, as
Plato teaches. So that if any made this question, whether there was a God, or
no? he should be urged to confess the truth of that rather argumento
bacillino, quam Aristotelico, rather with a good cudgel, then with any long
dispute. But as they were most certain, that there was a God, so were they
again very blind in discerning the true God: and hence has bin invented such
a tedious catalogue of Gods, that as Varro averreth, their number has exceeded
thirty thousand, and proved almost numberless. Wherefore I shall omit to make
any distinct treatise of the Gods, intending obiter, and by the way to speak
of them, which either had priests, or sacrifices instituted for them. Only I
purpose to show what is understood by those general distinctions of the Gods,
which diverse authors have used. Tully lib. 2. de legibus reduces all unto
three heads, Gods celestial, which Varro calls select, and others have styled
Gods maiorum gentium.i. of the greater nations, because their power was greater
then the others. Alex. Genial. dier. lib. 6. cap. 6.
Alexander Neapolitanus says, that twelve of these were the Penates, which
Aeneas did take forth with him at the destruction of Troy. Ovid calls them
Deos nobiles, noble Gods: others call the^ Deos consentes, quasi consentientes,
because Jupiter would do nothing without the consent of all. Ennius has
delivered them in this distich, Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Iovis, Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.
The second sort of Gods were called Semidei.i. Demigods: Servius. in lib.
Georgic.
also Indigites.i. Gods adopted, or canonized; men deified. For as the select
Gods had possession of heaven by their own right; so these Gods canonized had
it no otherwise then by right of donation, being therefore translated into
heaven, because they lived as Gods upon earth: but because their merit was
inferior, and could not parallel the deserts of the Gods select, therefore were
they called Gods of inferior note. In Aeneid. lib. 5.
Servius would have these called Divi; observing this difference between Dij
and Divi, that Dij should signify those which had bin Gods perpetually, but
Divi should signify men made Gods, though commonly they are used one for
another. Whence they called all their Emperors Divi, because for their deserts
they thought them worthy to be Gods. Now the Rosin antiq. l. 3. c. 18.
manner how a man became deified was this: The party to be canonized being
dead, a pile of wood was made in form of a great tent, or tabernacle, with
three other lesser tabernacles one upon top of another, the lower-most having
in it dry combustible matter, but in the outside adorned richly with gold,
Ivory, and painted tables: upon the top of which was placed an eagle made of
some light matter, as paper, or thin wood. Hither the dead corpse was to be
carried with great solemnities; the Senate, the gentlemen, and all the chief
magistrates going before, with hymns and songs, and al kind of honor, which
was to be performed even to the Gods themselves. He being in this manner
brought, and laid within the second tabernacle, the fire was kindled, by
reason of the smoke and vapor whereof the Eagle was carried up into the air,
and, as the Romans thought, it did transport the soul of the dead body into
heaven, in so much that ever after he was canonized amongst the Gods, and
worshipped as a God. And because they were thus turned into Gods, some have
called them Deos animales, Serve. in Ae^ lib. 3.
quoniam animae humanae verterentur in Deos. The third sort were those moral
virtues, by which as by a ladder men clymed into heaven: and therefore did men
style them Gods, because by their means men became deified. Late writers
perceiving that all the number of the Gods could not be reduced unto these
three heads, have added a fourth sort, which they Rosin. antiq. lib. 2. c. 19.
call Semones, quasi semi-homines, because ancient writers, as Rosinus has
observed, called men hemones, not homines. In which point I shall willingly
condescend unto him; but I shall leave to the judgment of others, to determine
how justly he has restrained the Gods minorum gentium of the lesser nations,
only unto this last classis: whereas my opinion is, that the demigods, the
moral virtues which have been styled Gods, and these Semones, may all of them
be called Gods of the lesser nations, standing in opposition with the Gods
select, which are called Gods of the greater nations. But that we may
understand what is meant by these Semones, we must remember, that by them are
signified unto us not those Gods, which do appertain to man himself, but to
the necessaries of man's living, his victuals, his clothing, and the like: not
to the being of a man, but to the well being of him, of which sort is Salus,
Fortuna, with others. We read likewise of other names given in common to
diverse Gods, not as opposite members of a division, but as notes of
distinction drawn from the diversity of help, which they severally did afford
unto man. In this espect some were called dij Patrij, or tutelares, such as had
undertaken the protection of any city, or town: which opinion has sometimes
been entertained by our Englishmen, and thence have risen these, and the like
speeches S. George for England, S. Denis for France, S. Patricke for Ireland,
etc. And the Romans being fully persuaded of the truth thereof, whenever they
went about to beseege any town, by certain enchantments, or spells they would
first call out these Tutelar Gods; because they deemed it a matter impossible
to captivate the city, as long as these Gods were within; or at least they
thought it a crime vnexpiable to take the Gods as prisoners. And least other
nations might use the same means in beseeging Rome, therefore, Sylvius in
epist. virotu^ illuctrium.
as diverse authors have thought, the true name of the Roman city was never
known, least thereby the name of their Tutelar God might be descryed. Others
namely the Tyrians have tied fast their God Hercules with a golden chain,
thereby the more to secure themselves of his residence among them. Alex. Genesis
dier. l. 6. c. 4.
Others have been called Dij communes, namely Mars, Bellona, and Victoria,
because in time of war they are not bound to either side: but sometimes they
help one side, and sometimes the other. And as they supposed some Gods to have
the protection of whole countries, so did they believe that others had the
charge of particular men; and that so soon as any man was borne two spirits
did presently accompany him invisibly, the one termed the bonus Genius, or
good angel, persuading him to that which should be good: the other called the
malus Genius, or evil angel, tempting him to that which should be hurtful:
insomuch that they thought all the actions of man to be guided by these angels
called Genij, so that if any misfortune befell a man, they would say that the
matter was enterprised Dijs iratis.i. our Genius being displeased with us.
Virgil calls these bad Angels Manes, as it appears by that, Quisque suos
patimur manes,.i. Every man has his evil Angel.i. some misfortune. They are
therefore called Genij, because they have tuition of us so soon, as we are
Geniti.i. borne, although every place had also his genius, as hereafter shall
appear. This opinion was the more confirmed by a vision which appeared unto
Plutarch. in Bruto.
Brutus in Asia near unto the time of his death: for Brutus, watching upon a
certain night in his pavillion, the candle being nere spent, saw a fierce
tragical person appear unto him, somewhat bigger then a man, and he presently
being of an undaunted spirit, demanded whether he were a God, or a man? To whom
the vision answered, Brutus, I am thy evil Genius, which haunteth thee, thou
shall see me at the city Philippi again. And the same vision appeared unto
him, as he was fighting at Philippi: which was the last fight that ever he
fought. And because that Juno was wont to be invocated in time of childbirth,
therefore many have thought that every man has not his two angels, but one
angel, and Juno to observe him. This Genius, as often as he is understood for
the good or evil angel which has charge of a man's body, is painted in form of
a man, as we read he did appear to Brutus; though some time he is painted as a
young boy, sometime as an old decrepite man, Rosin. Antiq l. 2. ca. 14*
but always with a crown of plane-tree, which therefore was called genialis
arbor. In the right hand he held a platter over an altar garnished with
flowers. In the left he held a scourge hanging down. The sacrifice that was
performed unto the Genius was wine, and flowers: whereupon (as if by wine, and
fragrant odors were signified all kind of pleasures) certain proverbial
speeches have been occasioned: as when we see a man given much to his
pleasure, and dainty feeding, we say he does indulgere Genio.i. pamper or
make much of his Genius: on the contrary he that is abstemious, and debarreth
himself of his pleasure is said defraudare Genium, to defraud his Genius: and
Gentalis also signifies iocund, or pleasant. Vid. Erasm. Adag.
It was also the custom after meals to have a cup pass round the table,
much like unto our poculum charitatis, and it was called poculum bon^ genij.
But the reason, why they would not sacrifice unto their Genius by killing some
host, as they did to their other Gods, was, because they judged it unfit to
deprive any creature of his life upon that day, when they first began their
life. (For this sacrifice was performed yearly by every one upon his birth
day.) The other Genius, which is supposed to have chief power over high ways,
and places, being therefore called Genius loci, was pictured in the form of a
snake, in which form Virgil faineth him to have appeared to Aeneas, when he
performed the funeral rites due unto his father Anchises, Aenead. lib. 5. --
Adytis cum lubricus anguis ab imis
Septem ingens gyros, septena volumina traxit.
And Persius, Pinge duos angues, pueri sacer est locus, extra
Meiite,.i. duos genios.
Another sort of Gods was supposed to have the keeping of men's houses: Franc.
Sylvius in orat. pro Sext. Roscio Amer.
which they painted in form of a dog: because those to whom the charge of
houses is committed ought to resemble dogs, that is, to seem fierce, and
angry toward strangers, but gentle, and kind to those of the household. They
were named Lares, and because of the charge, they had over men's houses, this
word Lar is sundry times taken for an house it self, as parvo sub Lare, Horat:
in a little cottage, Homo incerti Laris.i. a man that has no house to dwell
in. Sen. in Med. And the custom in sacrificing unto them, was to eat up all
whatsoever was left of the offering. For they thought it an heinous matter to
send any part of that sacrifice abroad either among their friends, or the
poor: and thereupon when we see a glutton leave nothing in the platter, not
so much as the curtesymorsell, we say, Lari sacrificat.i. he sacrifices to his
household God.

Lib. 2. Sect. 2.
Of the Roman Priests with some particular Gods.
FAunus the ancientest of all the kings in Italy was the first, that brought
any form of religion into Italy. He consecrated groves, gave names unto
cities, erected temples, ordained sacrifices, etc. from who^ the churches, as
some say, were named Fana. But after Faunus, Euander coming out of Arcadia,
and afterward being king of Latium, he instituted, and appointed many other
ceremonies, which before were unknown to the Latins. After him Aeneas coming
from Troy, taught many of the Trojan ceremonies: by whose examples Romulus, and
Numa were incited to add many other kinds of holy rites, and at length
reduced their whole religion into a certain order. My intent therefore is, to
speak first of the God, in whose honor these holy rites were performed, and
then to descend unto the priests, which were to perform them, showing withal
the ceremonies they used in the performance.

CHAP. 1.
De Pane Lycaeo, sive Juno: de Lupercis, and Lupercalibus.
PAn was supposed to be the God of the shep-heards, and is Servius in Virg.
Ecl. 2.
thus described: he is pictured naked, having horns in likeness of the
sunne-beams, a long beard, his face red like the clear air, in his breast the
star Nebris, the nether part of his body rough, his feet like a goat: in
one hand he holds a pipe, in the other a shepherds crook, and always is
imagined to laugh. Fenestella d^^^cerd. c. 1.
He was worshipped first in Arcadia, and there called the God Pan Lycaeus: but
afterward he was had in great esteem at Rome Fenest. (...).
and in the honor of him certain sacrifices, and games called Lupercalia were
solemnized by the Romans. Pomponius L^tus de Sacerdot. cap de Luper.
There he took the name Inuus, or as some say Iunus. Concerning the time, when
these sacrifices were to be performed; it was upon the Plutarch. in Romulo.
unfortunate days of the month February, which has his name a februando, from
purging: whence the feast or game is as a purification; though the Latin word
signifies as much as a feast of wolves, in a memorial that Romulus, and Remus
were nursed by a shee-woulfe. This seems very probable, because the Priests,
which were called Luperci began their course at the foot of the mount
Palatine, called by the Romans Lupercal.i. the place, where the woulfe nursed
Plutarch. in Romulo.
Romulus. The ceremonies were these: The host (being two goats) was to be
slain; and two noble men's sons were to be present, whose foreheads being
blouded with the knives of them that had slain the goats, by and by were to be
dried up with wool dipped in milk. Then the young boys must laugh
immediately after their foreheads were dry. That done they cut the goats skins,
and made thongs of them, which they took in their hands, and ran with them all
about the city stark-naked (saving they had a cloth before their privities)
and so they struck with those thongs all they met in the way. The young wives
did never shun them at all, but were well contented, to be strike^ with them;
believing it helped them to be with child, and also to be easily delivered.
Moreover it is to be noted, that a dog was sacrificed at this time, because
there is a natural antipathy, or contrariety of nature, between the dog and
the woulfe: whereby Romulus thought to testify his gratefulness unto the
woulfe for her pains in nourishing him. The reason why the priests ran up
and down the streets naked, was, because that Pan the God of this sacrifice
was painted naked. As the feast, so also the place from whence they came, and
likewise the Priests had their names a Lupa which signifies a woulfe. Some
authors have observed three sorts of the Luperci, some called Fabiani, some
Quinctiliani, from Fabius, and Quinctilius their governors the third sort,
which Rosin. antiq. lib. 3. c. 2.
Rosinus affirms to have been added in the honor of Julius Caesar, I cannot
find according to his quotation in Suetonius. But thus much Suetonius says in
Sueton. in August.
another place, namely that Augustus Caesar when he was chief Pontifie did
restore these games again being formerly abolished.

CHAP. 2.
De Cerere, and sacris eius.
CEres otherwise called Eleusina was honored first among the Grecians,
afterward among the Romans, as a goddess, which first taught men the skill of
husbandry.

Prima Ceres ferro mortales vertere terram
Instituit. Virg. Georg.
Whence she is sometimes metonymic (...) taken for corn, as Credenda Ceres
aruis. Ovid. It is seed time. She is called Ceres, Cic lib. 3. de not deor.
quasi Geres, a gerendis frugibus, from bearing fruit: because, as some say, by
Ceres is understood sometime the earth it self: whence also (...) being the
greek name of Ceres is said quasi (...).i. the earth, which is the common
mother of us all. Rosin. antiq. li. 2. c. 11.
She is painted in the habit of a matron wearing a garland of corn; sometime
sorrowful with a lamp in her hand, as if she were seeking out her daughter
Proserpina carried by Pluto into hell; and sometime with a handful of corn or
poppy-seed. Upon the fifth of the Kalends of April the Romans were wont to
perform sacrifices unto her, which they called sacra Graeca.i. the Grecian
sacrifices as likewise they termed the chief woman which did perform them,
sacerdotem Graecam.i. the Greek ministresse, because they were translated into
Rome out of Greece by Evander. The time of their solemnities was at the dawning
of the day, and the Priests, which were only women ran up and down with lamps
in their hands in manner of mad women; into whose temple none that was guilty
of any fault committed might enter: whose mysteries were to be buried in
silence, and by no means to be blabbed abroad. And as it is to be supposed,
that was the reason why all wine was forbade in this sacrifice. So that hence
Plautus in Aulularia.
we say Cereri sacrificat, he sacrifices to Ceres, when he makes a feast
without wine.

CHAP. 3.
De Potitijs, and Pinarijs, Herculis sacerdotibus.
HErcules had an altar erected in the memorial of him near unto Tiber by
Evander, upon occasion of the heards-mens complaint brought unto Evander of
him, whom they accused to have slain their chief heardsman Cacus, the history
being Serve. Aen. lib. 8.
thus. Hercules after his conquest over Geryon brought away with him certain
goodly Oxen, and as well to rest himself, as to pasture his oxen, he laid him
down to sleep in a green field near the river Tiber. In the mean while a
certain heards-man called Cacus happened to come that way, and perceiving
Hercules to be in a sound sleep, he stole away two of his oxen, which he hid
in a cave, or hollow rock, pulling them in by the tail back ward, thinking
that Hercules when he should look his oxen, and see the print of the
footsteps, would easily believe, that his oxen had rather gone out from that
rock, then into it, as indeed he did for a time believe: but afterward by the
bellowing of the oxen within, answering their fellows without, Hercules entered
the rock, and finding the thief Cacus there with his oxen, he killed him, by
reason of which murder he was brought before Evander, and after a while known
to be the Hercules, of who^ the prophetess Carmenta had foretold unto Evander,
that he should be a God. Whereupon Evander presently saluted him by the name of
Hercules the son of Jupiter, and in honor of him caused an altar to be
built there in that place: upon which yearly was to be offered up an heifer
which had never borne yoke; and that this sacrifice might be had in the more
esteem, two noble men well stricken in years, and of good repute among the
Romans, one of them being called Potitius, and the other Pinarius were
appointed as the Priests to perform these sacrifices; from whom ever after
Hercules his Priests were called Potitij, and Pinarij. Where by the way we must
observe, that Pinarius was not the sur-name of this old nobleman, but a name
added unto him, intimating his, and his successors punishment for not coming
soon enough according to the time appointed by Hercules. For, as Serve. (...)
lib. 8.
diverse writers testify, the entrals of the host were almost eaten up by the
family of Potitius, before Pinarius, and his family came; and in punishment of
their negligence Hercules enjoined the Pinarij never after to eat of the
entrals, giving the^ this name Pinarij at that time, from the greek word
(...), signifying hunger.

CHAP. 4.
De Fratribus arualibus.
THis college or company of Roman Priests may be englished the Arvall
fraternity: the number of them being twelve, eleven of them natural brothers,
sons to Acca Laurentia Romulus his foster mother; Fenest. de Sacerd. c. 3.
for which respect Romulus yielded himself her adopted son, instituting this
order in the honor of the Gods, that they being therewith appeased might the
willinger cause the earth to fructify, and added himself to the former eleven
as the twelfth priest or brother to help in the performance of this public
sacrifice. Moreover beside the performance of this sacrifice, these twelve were
appointed arbitrators, or judges to decide controversies concerning
land-markes, and bounds of the field, from whence they took their name fratres
Arvales. Their sacerdotal ornaments was a garland of wheat bound up with a
white riband, this being, as Plin lib. 17 cap 2.
Pliny writes, the first crown, or garland amongst the Romans.

CHAP. 5.
De sexaginta Curionibus.
AFter that Romulus had divided the whole body of the Romans into three
tribes, or wards, and subdivided those three wards into thirty parishes,
called Curiae, he ordained out of each Curia two parish Priests or Curates
called Curiones, or Flamines curiales; which were publicly to offer up
sacrifice in the behalf of the people. Neither was every one equally capable
of this honor of Priesthood; Dion Halicar. lib. 2.
but he was to be at the least fifty years old, of a life unspotted, and a
body vnmaimed. And over all these there was one which had chief rule, and
therefore was called Curio Maximus, the Bishop, or chief Prelate: and these
sacrifices were called Curionia. Dion. Halicar. lib. 2.
Their sacrifice being ended each parish had a ^east in a common hall built for
that purpose: it was called Domus Curialis, and sometimes Curia.

CHAP. 6.
De Augur bus, and eorum Collegio.
AMongst other kinds of Fore-tellers we read of three principally used in
former time, namely, Aruspices, Auspices, and Augures: all which we english
Soothsayers, though the Latin words do import a main difference worth our
observation. The Aruspices did divine, or foretell things to come by beholding
the entrals of beasts sacrificed: whence they had their name, Bened. Pe^er lib
2 de Magia.
ab aras inspiciendo, from beholding the altars. The Auspices did foretell
things by beholding the flight of birds, so that Auspices are said quasi
avispices, ab aves aspicie^do. The Augures did divine from hearing the chatting
or the crowing of the birds: whence they are called Augures ab avium garritu,
from the chirping and chatting of birds. These two last kinds of sooth saying
have occasioned these, and the like phrases, bonis avibus, or auspiciis, with
good luck, malis avibus.i. with ill luck: and because they would begin Fr.
Sylvius in orat. pro Cluentio.
nothing inauspicato.i. without the counsel of the Augures, hence Auspicarirem
has been translated, to begin a matter. The college of the Augures at Rome
was first appointed by Pomp. Laetus cap. de Augur.
Romulus himself being very expert in soothsaying, there being at the first
but three, namely one of each tribe: (The word Augur being not taken in his
own proper sense, and signification aboue-mentioned; but generally by the
trope Synecdoche, signifying all kinds, and sort of divining whatsoever,
whether it were by observing the entrals of beasts, the flying, screeching, and
chatting of birds, or thundering, or lightning in the heaven, or marking the
rebounding of crummes cast unto birds, which kind of divining was called
Tripudium.) Rosin. A^^. lib. 3. cap. 8.
Servius Tullius the sixth Roman king, when he divided Rome into four local
tribes.i. Regions, or quarters, then did he add the fourth Augur, all of them
being elected out of the Patricij, or the nobility of Rome. Rosin. ib.
In process of time Quintus, and Cneius Ogulinus being chosen Tribuniplebis.i.
protectors of the commons, obtained that five other Augures should be chose^
out of the commonaltie, and added unto the former four: at which time the
Senate decreed that the college of Augures should never exceed the number of
nine. Rosin ib.
Notwithstanding Sylla being Dictator added six more, insomuch that their
college increased to the number of fifteen: the eldest of which was called
Alex. Genesis dier. l. 5. c. 19.
Magister Collegij, the master, or Rector of the college. The Augures excelled
other Priests in Alex. ib.
this respect, because if any of them had been convinced of any heinous crime,
he did net loose his office, neither was any other subrogated into his room,
although the Roman custom was, that if any other priest had committed any
notorious offense he should presently be discharged of his office, and another
chosen in his place. Pomp. Laetus. c. de Aug.
The manner how the Augur did observe was this: He sat upon a castle, or a
tower, the air being clear, and fair without clouds, or rain, holding a
crooked staff, (called in Latin Lituus) in his hand, where he ^itting in his
sooth saying robe, called Laena, and in Greek (...), a calefaciendo, from
heating, because it was well lined within, being guarded in the outside with
purple and crimson gards) having his head covered, and his face turned toward
the east, so that his back was westward, his right side southward, and his
left northward. Being thus placed he quartred out with his crooked staff the
heaven into certain templa.i. Regions, or places, observing in what region the
birds did appear: Then killing his sacrifice, and offering up certain prayers
called Effata, he proceeded in manner as follows. But first suppose we for
our better understanding hereof, that now the Augurs were to resolve the
people, whether the Gods would assent that Numa Pompilius should be King. The
Augur having done as above is shown, his Lituus being in his left hand, he
reached forth his right hand putting it upon Numa Pompilius his head, using
this form of words, Jupiter pater, si fas sit Numa^ Pompiliu^, cuius ego caput
teneo, regem Romae esse, vti nobis signa certa, ac clara sint inter eos fines,
quos feci.i. If it be lawful for this Numa Po^pilius, whose head I hold to be
king of Rome, show some manifest tokens within these regions, or quarters,
which I have described. Then if he observed lucky signs, and tokens, he
presently pronounced Numa Pompilius king of Rome: if he perceived unlucky
tokens, then did he obnunciare, or gain say, and show that the matter proposed
was not pleasing to the Gods. Where by the way we must note, that nothing was
confirmed by the Augurs without the appearance of two lucky tokens one after
another; neither was any thing gainesaid by the appearance of one only evil
token. The distinctions of the soothsayings have been taken, some from the
event, and thence are they called prospera, lucky, or adversa, unlucky. Some
from the manner of their appearing, Serve. Aenei. lib. 6.
and that was either wished being called therefore impetrativa; or vnwished
called oblativa. Some from the diversity of things which offered themselves in
time of divining, and so there were five distinct sorts: The first was by the
observing of lightning, and thunder from heaven; the second from the flying,
and chatting of birds; the third from bread cast to pullets, or little chicken;
the fourth from four footed beasts, which either should cross the way, or
appear in some unaccustomed place; the fifth from those casualties, whereby the
Gods do make their anger appear unto us. Of this sort are those voices, which
we hear we know not whence; (as Vox subito audita est, neque erat cognoscere
promptu^ Vnde, sed audita est. Ovid. Met. lib. 3. ^ab. 1.
Cadmus heard when he overcame the serpent) the falling of salt toward us at
the table, the shedding of wine upon our clothes. From which casualties, and
the like the Augurs would pronounce either good fortune, or bad to ensue: And
these tokens were therefore called Dira, because thereby Dei ira nobis
innotescit, the Gods anger is made known unto us. Now the things that in
divining time appeared on the left hand were commonly tokens of good luck,
because the givers right hand in bestowing a benefit is opposite to the
receivers left hand. Whence Serve. Aene^. lib. 2.
sinistru^ though in humane affairs signifies as much as unlucky, yet in
those holy rites of divining sinistrum is taken in a contrary sense, as Avis
sinistra, good luck, Intonuit laevum, it has thundered luckily, we shall have
good success: and it is said a sinendo, because the Gods thereby do suffer us
to proceed in our purposed proiects. And therefore Tully says, lib. 1. de
divinatione, A sinistra cornice ratum, and firmum augurium fieri: and in the
law of the 12. tables it is said, Ave sinistra populi magister esto.

CHAP. 7.
De Tripudijs, and pullarijs.
THis kind of coniecting is called auspicium coactum, Cic. de divina. lib. 1.
quoniam necesse erat offa cadere frustum ex pulli ore, cum pascitur, The word
Tripudiumn is used by a syncopation for terripudium, which is as much as
terripavium.i. a dancing or rebounding of any thing upon the ground: for pauere
is the same with ferire. Hubert. in lib. 6. Ep fam. Cic.
Others say Tripudium quasi tritio pedum It is here taken for a divining, or
coniecting of good or evil to come by the rebounding of crumbs cast to chicke^
in a coop or pen: whence the Augur from these pullets or chicken was called
Pullarius. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 1. c. 29.
The manner in observing was this. As often as by this kind of conjecting they
desired to know the Gods pleasure concerning the enterprizing of any matter,
early in the morning those that were skillful in this kind of observation,
repaired unto the place where the chicke^ were kept, where silence being
commanded, and the coop opened they cast crumms of bread to the chicken. Now if
the chicken either came slowly, or not at all unto the bread, or if they walked
up and down by it not touching it, then was it a token that the matter to be
enterprized was displeasing unto the gods: but if contrarily the chicken did
hastily leap out of the coop and eat so greedily of the crumbs, that some
should fall out of their mouths again, then the pullarius, that is, the,
Augur pronounced that it was well pleasing to the Gods, and encouraged the
enterprizing of what they had intended cheerfully: and this was called
Tripudium solistimum. This kind of coniecting may seem to have its original
from the Lycians, Alex. ib.
who as often as they desired to foreknow the success of any enterprise, they
went unto a fountain dedicated to Apollo, into which they cast in baits for
the fish: now if the fishes did eat them, it did betide good luck; if
otherwise they neglected the baits, then it did be token some, evil event.

CHAP. 8.
De Aruspicibus, Aruspicina, and Extispicio.
THis kind of sooth saiers as they were called Aruspices ab aras aspiciendo,
from beholding the host upon the altar; so were they called Extispices, ab
exta aspicie^do, from beholding the bowels, or entrals of the beast, called in
Latin Extra. In this kind of sooth saying the Aruspex observed in manner as
follows. Senec O^d. Act. 2. seen. 2.
first whether the beast to be sacrificed came unto the altar willingly,
without plucking, and halling; whether he dyed without much struggling, or loud
bellowing; at one blow, or many; whether any unlucky object were seen, or
heard by the^, whiles they were sacrificing. Again after the beast was slain,
then would they observe, whether the bowels were of an unnatural color, whether
they were not vlcerous, exsiccate, or impostumated: moreover they would divide
the bowels into two parts, the one they would call partem familiarem, from
whence they would foretell what should befall themselves, and their friends;
the other they would call partem hostilem, whence they gathered predictions
touching their enemies. Hence Manto in Oedip. Act. 2. scen. 2.
Seneca describing the entrals of his killed sacrifice says, Hostile valido
robore insurgit latus, meaning by hostile latus, partem hostilem. Afterward
when the sacrifice was, to be burned, they considered, whether the flame of the
fire was smoaky, whether the smoke rolled, and tumbled in the air, whether it
were of any continuance or no: for all these were unfortunate tokens, as the
contrary did betoken a good and fortunate issue to their designements. These
last which observed the fire and smoke were called by a more peculiar name
Capnomantes smoakaugurers, from the greek words (...), signifying smoke, and
(...).i. vates, or a soothsayer. The first instructions that the Romans
received was from the Hetrusci, who (as they themselves say) received their
knowledge from a little boy, which they named Tages, the history being thus.
Cie. de divinat. Indigenae dixe^re Tagem, qui primus Hetruscam edocuit ge^tem,
casus ape^ire futuros. Ovid Met. l. vlt.
When the Hetrtisci were plowing their lands, upon a sudden up started this
Tages out of one of the furrows using diverse speeches unto the plow-men: but
they being much affrighted at this sudden, and strange vision, began with a
loud cry to lift up their voices; upon occasion whereof many other people
flocked thither, where he gave many good instructions concerning this kind of
footh saying, which were presently recorded in books, and practiced afterward
by the Hetrusci.

CHAP. 9.
De Flaminibus.
THe mitre or head-ornament which these Priests did wear, was called in old
time Rosin. antiq. lib. 3. c. 15
Flama, whence the Priests took their name Flamines. The Rex Anius, rex idem
hominum Phoebique sa cerdos, Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 3.
custom amongst the Grecians, as likewise afterward among the Romans was,
that the kings should as well perform ceremonies, and holy rites of religion,
as civil business* But Numa Pompilius perecauing that foreign wars did
often times occasion the kings absence, insomuch that those religious
ceremonies which he himselse personally should perform were of necessity
sometimes neglected; herevpo^ he ordained out of the Patricij three priests to
perform that divine service unto Jupiter, Mars, and Romulus, which he
himself otherwise ought to have performed, calling the first Flamen Dialis,
the other Flamen Martialis, and the last Flamen Quirinalis, from Romulus, which
was often called Quirinus. In process of time twelve others chosen from the
commons were added unto these, but with this note of distinction, that the
three first were had in greater esteem. and were called Flamines maiores, high
priests; the other of less note called Flamines minores, inferior priests. The
chief of al was the Flame^ Dialis Jupiters high priest, and whereas every one
did wear a certain b^onet in form of a mitre, which sometimes was called
Pileum, sometime by the figure, synecdoche Apex, (whereas Apex does properly
signify only the top of the bonnet) Alex. Genesis dier. l. 6. c. 12.
none might wear Albo-galerum,.i. a white mitre, but only Jupiters priest, and
that was to be made of a white sheep skin, after the sheep had been sacrificed.
Whatsoever malefactor could escape unto this Priest, he should not be punished
that day. None was eligible into this office, but he that was married: neither
was it lawful for him to mary twice, but if his wise died, Flaminio abibat.i.
he resigned his sacerdotall office. To him was permitted a rich robe of state,
and a curule-chaire: none might fetch fire out of his house, unless it were to
perform some sacrifice therewith. Servius Aen. lib. 1.
None might barbe or pole him, but a freeman: and that with a brazen scissers.
Many other ceremonies there were which concerned this Flamen, as likewise time
added many other Flamines, namely Fenest de sacerd. cap. 5.
every God one, yea sometime those threescore parish priests, which formerly
were called Curiones, were called Flamines Curiales; and diverse Emperors
after their death had also their Flamines. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 6. c. 12.
Moreover we must note that those priests wives were called Flaminicae; Their
ministers (for they were wont, when they went to sacrifice to take a boy or a
maid with the^) Flaminij, or Flamineae: And the Chiefe-flamens. dwelling house
was called aedes Flaminea, or Flaminia. But as it seems probable Numa
Pompilius, and so the other kings succeeding him did still reserve their right
and authority in holy matters so far, that they would instruct other inferior
priests, yea and personally perform some special sacrifices themselves: where
upon after that the kings authority was abrogated amongst the^, the^ that these
sacrifices might be continued, they chose a certain Priest, which they
preferred before the Flamen Dialis, but judged him inferior to the Pontifex
maximus, or Arch-Pontifie, and him they called, Rex sacrificulus, and Rex
sacrorum, the King priest. To him once every year the Vestall Nuns repaired,
Serve. Aeneid. 10.
and used this form of words, Vigilasne Rex? Vigila. King art thou awake?
awake. For unto him it did belong to bid holy days, and to provide al things
nccessarie for public sacrifices. He was to instruct those that sought unto
him, the causes of the holy days, and to tell them what was lawful or
unlawful every month, and upon the fifth of the Ies dof January he sacrificed
a Ram to Ianus. He was likewise wont to offer up a sacrifice in the comitium
or great hal of justice, which being finished, he ran as fast as he could
out of the market place without delay. His wife was called Rigina sacrorum, the
Queene-priestesse, and was wont upon the Kalends of every month to sacrifice a
porker or a lamb in her palace in the honor of Juno.

CHAP. 16.
De Mart, sive Mavorte, and Salijs Palatinis Marti dicatis.
MArs otherwise called Mavors by the figure Epenthesis, we say Induperator for
Imperator, was reputed the God of war, and so Metonymic^s is used for war;
as vario Mart pugnatum est, the battle was doubtful; proprio Mart, by ones
own strength, and labor. He was the son of Juno only without company of her
husband: for when Juno was greatly displeased with her self, that Jupiter by
striking his head without company of a woman did bring forth the goddess
Minerva, she by the counsel of the goddess Flora touched a certain? flower in
the field of Olenius, by virtue whereof she immediately conceived the God Mars.
This God by reason of his dominion in war, the Romans painted fiery,
sometimes in his chariot, sometimes on horseback, with a iauelin in one hand,
and a scourge in the other. In old coins there was sometimes the picture of a
cock joined with him, to show the vigilance, and carfulness that soldiers
are to use. He was called Rosin. antiq. lib. ^. c. 10*
Gradivus a gradiendo, from marching in battle against his enemies. He had a
temple without the city, whence he was called Extramuraneus. Rosin. Ibid.
Near unto this temple without the gate Capena did lie a stone of great note,
which upon great drouths the people would bring into the city, and presently
rain would follow, whereupon it was called the Raine-stone. Lapis manalis a
manando, Numa Pompilius in the honor of Mars surnamed Gradivus ordained 12
dancing priests called Salij a Plutarch. in Numa.
saliendo from dancing, which number afterward we find to have been doubled
by Tullus Hostilius in the war against Fidena a town of the Sabines. The
former 12 being called Salij Palatini, from the Palatine mount, where they did
begin their mauriske; the others Collini from the hill where their chapel
stood; Dion. Halicarn. lib. 2.
and sometimes Quirinales, and sometimes Agonales: so that the Whole college
contained 24 priests. Plutarch. in Numa.
The occasion of their first institution was this: upon a certain time in the
reign of Numa, the plague or some other contagious sickness was very hot
among the Romans, insomuch that no sacrifice, or holy offering could remove it:
at that time a certain brazen target, or scutc^ion called in Latin aenea
pelta, or ancile, bigg at both ends, but cut like an half moon on each side
fell from heaven into Numa his hands, with a certain voice promising al health
unto Rome so long as that brase^ target could be kept safe. Wherevpo^ Mamurius
a cu^ningwork-man by the appointment of Numa made eleaven other ancilia so like
the first, that neither could be known from the other: (to the iate^t that if
any should be so wicked minded as to steal it, he might fail of his purpose
by mistaking one for another.) These twelve Priests had the custody and keeping
of them committed to their charge, and in the month of March every year they
apparelled themselves with a party colored coat, called tunica versicolor,
girt cloase to their body, with a belt, or sword-girdle, and a breast plate of
harness called aneum tegmen upon that, and a robe of estate called trabea
clasped about them vpmost of all. Upon their heads they did wear apices.i.
caps Dion. Halicar. lib. 2.
much like unto the Persian bonnets called in greek (...) or (...). They did
somewhat resemble our head-peeces in war made close unto the head, with a
crest of cloth Upon the top, whence some have called them galeas. They being
thus apparelled daunced about the Forum, or marketplace, and the Capitol with
short swords by their sides, a iavelin in the right hand, and their ancile in
the other; using certain songs either of the Gods, and those they called
Ianualij, Iunonij, and Minervij; or of men, and those they called axamenta,
because in those songs they did axare.i. nominate and call upon the names of
some well deserving men: as Mamurius which made those eleaven scutchions, was
often called upon in those songs. Upon these their festival days they had
excess of cheer, whence Horat. lib. 1 Ode 37.
Horace has used saliares dapes, to signify dainty fare.

CHAP. 11.
De Foecialibus, and Patre-patrato.
THese Foeciales were officers at arms, or Heralds, to denounce war, or
proclaim peace, appointed thereunto at first Pomp. Laetus de sacerd.
by Numa Pompilius. Dion. Halicar. lib. 2.
The chief part of their office was to dissuade the Romans from molesting any
confederate nation with unjust war: and if any confederate nation did offer
injury unto the Roman people, the^ did these Foeciales go as Ambassadors unto
them persuading, and exhorting them to yield the Romans their right: but if
they continued thirty days obstinate refusing to yield unto that, which should
be just and right, then did they presently denounce war against them, casting
forth a dart in token thereof: which denunciation.was Serve. Aenci. lib. 10.
called clarigatio a clara voce, qua vtebatur Foecialis. Others are of opinion
that whenever war was denounced, this Herald at arms should Vid. Erasm.
adag.
turn loose a ram unto their enemies borders; signifying thereby that their
fields should shortly become pasture for the Romans: from which custom we
say of one that challenges another into the field, Ariete^ emisit. Again if
the Imperator, or Lord-general had done ought against his oath, these Foeciales
by their sacrifice did avert the wrath of the Gods from him. The chiefest of
them was called Pater-patratus, a perfect father: for he only could be
Pater-patratus, which had both children of his own, and his father also alive.
They were called Foeciales a foedere faciendo, from making a league or peace
between nations. This league which we in Latin do call foedus, the Romans in
old time Pighius Septim. lib. 1.
did call Fidus, as Ennins and Pighius witness: whence these Foeciales were
termed also Fidei Flamines.

CHAP. 12.
De Duumviris, Decemviris, and Quindecimviris sacris faciundis: item de
Sibyllis.
THis priesthood had his first institution from Tarquinius Superbus, whose
office was as well to expound, as to keep the oracles of those ten
prophetesses so famous through out the world, called Sibyllae. Concerning who^
Munster in sua cosmog. lib. 2.
Munster has these words: In times past there came a strange woman to
Tarquinius the king offering 9. books full of the Sibylline oracles to be fold:
But Tarquinius thinking the books to dear, refused to buy them. The woman
departing burned three of these books, and came the second time unto
Tarquinius, demanding as much for those six books, as formerly she had done
for the 9. Tarquinius then began to deride her, whereat the woman departed, and
burned three more, returning again unto Tarquinius, and asking as much for the
three left, as she asked at first for all nine. Then began Tarquinius more
seriously to bethink himself thereof, and sent for his Augurs asking counsel
and advise of them. And they understood by certain signs observed, that the
king had refused some special goodness sent from the Gods: and for the books
that remained they advised that the woman should have what she asked: As
soon as the woman had delivered her books she presently vanished, and was
never seen again, only warning them to keep the books as safe as possibly
they could. For the safe keeping of these, Tarquinius chose two of the noble
men, or patricij, calling them Duumviri, appointing them as well by study to
expound, as with care to keep those oracles. In process of time the people
obtained, that ten should be appointed to this office, Fenestel. de sacerd.
c. 13.
five of them being chosen out of the commons, and five out of the nobles: and
then were they called the Decem-viri. Afterward by L. Sylla, as it is thought
five more were added, so that they were then called the Quindecim-viri: nay the
number was increased by Sylla unto forty, Serve. Aenei. lib. 6.
as Servius thinks, but still called by the name of Quindecim-viri. Of these
women that had the spirit of prophecy ten were very famous: the first was
called Persica, the second Libyca, the third Delphica, the fourth Cumaea, the
fifth Erythraea, the sixth Samia, the seventh Cumana, the eighth Hellespontia,
the ninth Phrygia, the tenth Tiburtina. They a^ prophesied of the incarnation
of Christ. The place where these books were kept was within the Capitol under
ground in a chest of stone, where they remained safe until the burning of the
Capitol, at which time they also were burned. Notwithstanding many of the
prophecies have bin known, partly by tradition, and partly being taken out of
other copies in other countries. One of the prophecies concerning our Savior
Christ was uttered by Sibylla Delphica in manner as follows: Munster. in sua
Cosmog. lib. 2.
Nascetur propheta absque matris coitu ex vtero eius, that is, There shall be a
prophet borne without any copulation of the mother, even out of her womb. It
was spoken at Delphos. All their prophecies, were of that certainety, that when
we would aver any thing to be undoubtedly true, Credit me vobis folium
recitare Sibyllae.
we use to say it is Sibyllae folium, as true as Sibyllaes oracles. The Cumaea
Sibylla did write her oracles at the mouth, or entrance of her cave in leaves
of trees, which the fierceness of the wind did often times so scatter, that
they could hardly be brought in order again: insomuch that when we would show
the great difficulty of bringing things it order, we may use Epist. lib. 1.
epist. 1.
Politian his words, Laboriosius est, quam Sibylla folia colligere, it is
easier to gather together Sibyllaes leaves. This name Sibylla is not a proper
nam^, but an appellatiue common to all women endowed with the spirit of
prophecy, taking their denomination from Serve. Aen^i. lib. 6.
(...) which is in the Aeolick dialect the same that (...).i. God, and (...).i.
counsel, because they did open and declare the counsel and determination of
God unto the people. It appertained also ynto these Quindecimviri
aboue-mentioned to see, that sacrifice and divine service, that supplications,
and processions, expiations, and all ceremonial rites were duly performed.

CHAP. 13.
De Bona dea, and sacris eius.
THis Goddess, which is so famous by the name of Bona dea, is the globe of the
earth, which is therefore ^earmed Bona dea, the good goddess, because we reap
so many good things from the earth. She is called also Ops the helping goddess
ab open, from help, because by her help we live. She is called Fatua, and
Fauna.i. the goddess of speech, because young children do never speak until
they are able to go, and so have touched the earth. The Grecians called her
(...), the femal goddess, because that no male might be admitted to her
sacrifices; ^ay the very pictures of men were at that time to be covered. The
inner room, where her sacrifices were, was called (...), the place for women's
assemblies. Cic. orat. de Arusp. respo^sis.
Those that were chief in these sacrifices were the Vestall Nuns. This good
goddess was supposed to be the wife of Faunus, and upon a time to have been
taken drunk with wine by him, for which fault Faunus is said to have beaten
her to death with rods of myrtle tree. But afterward being sorry for that he
had done, in amends he made her a goddess: and as it were ever after
detesting the mirtle-tree, he allowing all other herbs, and flowers to be used
in these sacrifices, for bad the mirtle-tree. Some say she was so chaste, that
she never was seen by any man but her husband, and in respect of his
chastity the mirtle-tree is forbid, because it was consecrated to Venus. But
whereas in this sacrifice they used wine, they called it not by the name of
wine, but milk or honey: Alex. Genesis dier. l. 6. c. 8.
whence they called the vessel wherein the wine was put, amphoram mellariam.i.
the honey vessel. This sacrifice became very famous by reason of Clodius, who
being in love with Pompeia, Julius Caesar's wife came unto these sacrifices in
woman's apparel, and was found out by Aurelia, Julius Caesar's mother. This
Clodius became so infamous for this, and other his adulterous prancks, that he
occasioned a common proverb amongst the Romans, Clodius accusat moechos,
answerable to which our English saying is, One thief accuses another.

CHAP. 14.
De Cybelle, and sacerdotibus eius.
THis goddess Cybele, or rather Cybelle was in her infancy exposed unto wild
beasts upon the hill Cybellus, where she being nourished by the wild beasts
afterward became a woman of admirable beauty, and being found by a shepherds
wife was brought up by her as her own child, and called Cybelle from the hill
Cybellus. She excelled in all natural gifts, and was the first that used a
taber, and pipe, and cymbals among the greeks. Moreover she tenderly loved
children, and therefore was called magna ma^er: she was also called matter
deorum, the mother of the Gods:

Ipsa deum fertur genetrix Berecynthia. Virg.

She was called Rhea a (...), to flow, because she does flow and abound with
all kind of goodness. She was also named Pessinuntia from the city Pessinus
a Mart-towne in Phrygia, where she had a temple. Moreover she was called
Berecynthia from the hill Berecynthus in Phrygia, where she was worshipped.
Her priests were called Pomp. Lae^us de sacerd.
Galli, and their chief governor Archi-gallus: they took their name from a
certain river in Phrygia called Gallus: of which whosoever drank, he became
so mad, that he would presently geld himself: (as in truth all her Priests
were enjoined to geld themselves with a fish shell.) The original of which
custom is rendered thus: Cybelle loved a young man of Phrygia called Atys: and
him she appointed ^hiefe overseer for her sacrifice upon condition that he
would keep himself chaste perpetually: But he not long after deflowred a
nymphe, for which fact Cybelle bere^t him of his wits and understanding, so
that he in his madness did geld himself, and would have killed himself
also, Cybeleius Atys Exuit hac hominem truncoque induruit illo. Ov. Me^.
had not the Gods in their commiseration toward him turned him into a
pine tree. In remembrance of him, ever after her Priests were gelded. Every
year the Praetors did sacrifice unto this goddess. But the performance of the
holy and religious tites at that time did belong unto a Phrygian man, and
Phrygian woman chosen for that purpose: which according to the manner of their
country being apparelled with a party colored garment called in Latin
Synthesis, or amictus variegatus, and carrying the picture of their goddess
about with them in the streets, they stroke their breasts with their hands,
keeping tune with the tabers, pipes, and cymbals, which other people following
played upon: and they were called Corybantes from one Corybantus, which was one
of her first atte^dants. And hereupon we call the cymbals era corybantia. In
this manner dancing about the streets they begged money of the people whom they
met: and hence were they named Cybelle her collectors, or her circulatores.i.
iuglers. Some calls them (...), from (...) which in this place signifies
Cybelle, called the great mother, and (...) a beggar or gathere^ of alms.
Rosin. antiq. li. 3. c. 27.
Others have called them Mitriaci: But by what name soever they were called the
place was so infamous by reason of their drunkenness, and vncivilitie used at
these times, that when they would point out a notorious naughty fellow, they
would call him c^rculatorem Cybelleium. Cybelle her iuggler. Neither was it
lawful for any free borne to undertake that office.

CHAP. 15.
De Collegio Pontificum, and Pontifice Maximo.
THis word Pontifex is commonly translated a Bishop or Prelate, being called
Pontifices in Latin, as also Po^tifies in English from one part of their
office, which was to have the oversight of a great wooden bridge called in
Latin Pont sublicius, being so great, that carts and waines might pass over
it; having no arches to uphold it, but only great piles, and posts of wood:
Plutarch. in Numa.
and that which is most remarkable in it, was that it was ^oined together only,
with wooden pinnes, without any iron at all. Others are of opinion that they
were termed Pontifices quasi potifices from potis, and facio, of which opinion
Lucane seems to be, according to that, Pontifices sacri quibus est commissa
potestas. Concerning the Fenest de sacerd.
number of them only four were appointed by Numa, all which then were to be
chose^ out of the Patricii: afterward four more were added out of the commons.
These were called Pontifices maiores, or chief Pontifies, to distinguish them
from seven other, which afterward Sylla added, and Rosin. antiq. lib. 3. c. 22.
called them Pontifices minores, inferior Pontifies. The whole company of them
was called the college of Pontifies. This college is privileged from all
allegiance, being not bound to render an account of their doings either to the
Senate, or Commonaltie. They were to determine all questions concerning
religion, as well between their priests, as between private men. They had
authority to punish any inferior Priest, if he either detracted or added unto
those religious rites, which were prescribed him. They had their great
Po^tifie, whom they called Pontificem maximum. These Pontifies were wont to
exceed in their diet, insomuch that when the Romans would show the greatness
of a feast, they would say it was Pontificia coena,.i. according to our english
phrase a feast for an Abbot. Coena adijcialis is taken for the same.

CHAP. 16.
De epulonibus.
THe Pontifies in old time appointed three men, whom they Lazius de Repub. Romans
lib. 3. cap.
called Triumvi^os Epulonum (from Epulu^ a feast) to have the oversight of the
feasts made at sacrifices; afterward by reason of two twice added, they were
called first Quinqueviri, and at length Septemviri Epulonum.

CHAP. 17.
De Titijs.
ANother sort of religious men there were which lived in the subvrbs of the
city and practiced sooth saying; They were called Titij Panciroll^^ lib rerum
deperdi arum cap. de mole Hadriani.
from the name of the birds which they observed, which in latin were called
Titiae.

CHAP. 18.
De Virginibus Vestalibus.
NEre unto Castors temple stood the religious house, or Nu^nery dedicated to
the goddess Vesta: where at the first were four, after 6. Virgins, or
votaries elected, whose office was chiefly to keep the sacred fire: the
extinction whereof proved ominous, and did portende some evil event shortly to
happen: And therefore for their negligence herein, as for all other small
faults, they being had into a dark corner, stripped naked; and a curtain
drawn half way over them, the chief Pontifie scourged them: neither was it
lawful to kindle the fire once put out, with any other fire, but from the sun
beams; for which purpose they had certain instruments named Plutarch. in Numa.
(...) which were formed in the manner of a pyramid, but hollow; so that the
beams being collected within the circumference, and meeting in the vertex did
easily kindle any combustible matter put unto it; but chiefly if the matter was
of black color: because, as philosophy teaches, a dark color does
co^gregate, or collect the beams, whereas whiteness does disperse them. A
second part of their office was to work reconciliation between parties
offended, as appears by Suet in Iulio.
Suetonius: where we may read that by their intercession Sylla was reconciled
to Caesar. They were chosen into this place between the sixth, and the
eleaventh year of their age: and they, were to remain in this Nunnery 30.
years space, 10. years to learn their ceremonies and mysteries, 10. years
to exercise them, and 10. years to instruct others: within which space if they
had suffered their bodies to be defiled, they were to undergo that fear full
punishment Vid. s^p. p. 11.
before mentioned. But these 30. years being expired, marriage was lawful for
them, so that they laid aside their scepters, their fillets, and other their
sacerdotall ornaments. Notwithstanding those which did marry in the end dyed
fearful deaths: whereupon they chose rather to abstain commonly. The Romans
had them in great honor, so that they never walked abroad, but with an iron
scepter in their hands, and whatsoever malefactor met the^ (if the Nun would
take her oath it was by chance) he escaped punishment. They were named Vestals
from their goddess Vesta, which word (as Munst. in sua co^^og. lib. 2. c* 9.
Munster writes) is derived from the Hebrew radix signifying fire. The eldest
was called Maxima Vestalis virgo.i. the Lady prioresse, or chief governesse.

CHAP. 19.
De veterum sacrificiis and ritu sacrificandi.
WHatsoever was burnt or offered up unto the Gods upon an altar it had the name
of a sacrifice: and sometimes it was called victima, quod vincta ad aras
stabat, because the beast to be sacrificed stood bound unto the altar.
Sometimes Hostia, from an obsolete verb Hostio, which is to strike: because
certain under officers called in Latin Popae (standing by the altars, all
their upper part naked, and a laurel garland upon their head) did Hostiare
victimam.i. strike down and kill the sacrifice. Others are of opinion, that
this name Hostia is taken from hostis, an enemy: according to that of Ovid.
Hostibus a domitis hostia nomen habet: because either before war to procure
the Gods favor, or after war in token of thankfulness, they did hostiam
ferire.i. offer up the sacrifice. The second difference of sacrifices have
been occasioned in respect of the time, and so they have been called
Praecidaneae, or succidaneae, quasi praecedaneae and succedaneae. Those
sacrifices which were offered up the day before any solemn sacrifice, were
called Praecidaneae hostiae, fore-sacrifices, as we english praecursorem, a
forerunner: which fore-sacrifices if by any token they found unlucky, then
would they offer up a second sacrifice which they termed hostiam succidaneam:
And because these second sacrifices were to be offered only in steed of the
other, when they were unlucky or faulty; hence has Plautus used this speech
Meum tergum stultitiae tuae subdes succidaneu^? Must I be whipped for thy
fault? The manner of sacrificing was as follows. Some certain days before
any sacrifice was to be performed, the priest was wont to wash his whole body,
Vid. Eras^. Adag.
especially his hands and feet, which if he had not washed, the sacrifice was
accounted polluted: and alluding unto this custom we say a man does Acoedere
ad rem illotis manibus, or illotis pedibus, as often as he enterpriseth any
business without due reverence or preparation thereunto.

(...)
(...). Hesiod. (...)
Moreover the priest was to abstain from his marriage bed, as likewise from
diverse kinds of meats, and at the time of his going to sacrifices, either
himself, or some inferior S^xton going before him, with a rod or wand in his
hand (called commentaculum) Plutarch. Numa.
used this form of words unto the people: Hoc age, attend this you are about:
which custom seems to have had its original from the Grecians. For before
the time of sacrifice the Grecian Priest used almost the like speech unto his
people. As (...).i. who is here? the people answered (...).i. many men, and
good. After this preparation, then did the Priest laying his hand upon the
altar, rehearse certain prayers Serve. Ae^e^. lib. 1.
unto the God Ianus and the Goddess Vesta: because the Romans were persuaded,
that without their intercession they might not have access unto the other
Gods. His prayers being ended then did he lay P^ncirol li. re^^um deper d^t. c
de sale Ammoniaco.
upon the beasts head a little corn together with a cake made of meal and
salt, called in Latin Mola. Textor in sua officina. Sparg^ (...) colla
taurorum mola Sen Oedip. Act. 2. ^c. 2
Mola erat far tostum, sale aspersum. From this ceremony the act of
sacrificing has been termed Immolatio. After this the soothsayer drank wine
out of an earthen or woodde^ chalice called in Latin Simpulum or simpuuium: It
was in fashion much like our eywers, whence we power water into the basin. This
chalice afterward was carried about to all the people that they also might
libare.i. lightly taste thereof Pancitol. li. ^erum deper dit cap de Ammoniaco
^ale.
which rite has been called Libatio. Now every one having tasted thereof, the
rest of the wine with frankincense mixed in it was to be powered upon the beasts
head, Media inter cornua ^undit. Virg. Aeneid.
between the horns, one crying out with a loud voice, Macta est hostia.i.
Magis aucta, more increased and made more pleasing unto the Gods; as Virgil
says, Macte nova virtute puer.i. O good child which encreasest in virtue. And
hence even from this term, we may co^iect, that the word Macto, which
signifies to kill, and sometimes to sacrifice, has had its original, because
they did immediately after that voice, mactare hostiam, that is, slay the
sacrifice, and that was done in this Rosin. antiq. lib. 3. c. 33.
manner. First the Priest did pluck off some of the bests hairs between the
horns, and cast them into the fire, calling them his prima libamina.i. his
first offerings: Then did he turning his face toward the East, draw a long
crooked knife upon the beasts back, commanding his under officers, which I
called Popae (others Cultrarij, from their knife; Victimarij, from the host;
and Agones, because they standing ready to give the stroke, often used this
word Agon'? for Agone.i. must I to my work?) to kill the beast. The other
people standing by, some did with vessels save the blood, others did flea or
skin the beast; others washed it. Anon some soothsayer or Priest did observe
the intrals, turning and winding them with a knife which was called Secespita,
a secando: for he might not touch them with his hand, they conce^ting that if
the sacrifice had proved polluted, his hand would then have perished. Now after
the soothsayer or priest had sufficiently turned the intrals, and found no ^ll
token therein, then did those Popae, or Church-butchers, cut off from every
bowell some portion, which after they had rolled in barley meal, they sent it
in baskets to the priest, and the priest taking it up into a broad charger or
platter called discus, or lanx, laid it upon the altar and burn it, and Ioach.
Camerar. pro Flacco.
this was properly termed litare, or Reddere.i. to satisfy by sacrifice, or
to pay the sacrifice, which was owen unto the Gods. After that the portion laid
out for the Gods, had been burnt, then did all the people repair unto a common
feast; where, as they were eating, they sung hymns, and songs in the praise of
their Gods, and playing on cymbals, they danced about the altars; intimating
thereby, that there was no part of their body, but should be employed in the
service of their Gods. Now until all their ceremonies and mysteries were
finished, it was not lawful for any to taste of this feast: insomuch that we
since have used to check a glutton, or greedy-gut, which can not abstain from
his meat til grace be said, in this manner, Sacra haud immolata deuorat.

Lib. 2. Sect. 3.
Of the Roman year.
CHAP. 1.
De Anno and partibus eius.
IT follows that now we should descend unto those several appendices unto
religion; namely the Roman year, their plays, their manner of feasting,
their several kinds of garments, their Nuptials and Funerals. This word Annus
is so called quasi Annulus, because (as the Greek word (...) signifies)
(...).i. in se convertitur annus: which was the reason why the Egyptians in
their mystical ciphers (called literae hieroglyphicae) did use the picture of
a serpent, having his tail in his mouth to signify an year. The time or
space of this year has been diverse, according to the diversity of nations.
Plutarch. in Numa.
Some allowed no more days to an year, then we do to a month; and thence
they called it annum lunarem. Plutarch. ib
Some allowed four months, some six months, some ten: And thus Romulus
measured his year, counting that a sufficient time for an year, which was
sufficient for a womans travel in childbirth: or for an woman to mourn for the
death of her husband.

Quod satis est vtero matris dum prodeat infans,
Hoc anno statuit temporis esse satis.
Per totidem menses a funere coniugis vxor
Sustinet in vidua tristia signa domo.
Thus Romulus his year contained of months ten; of days three hundred and
four: but after this, Numa, Vid. Geor. Merulam in orat. pro Q. Ligario.
or as some say, Tarquinius Priscus perceiving that the months did not
always fall out alike every year; but sometimes the same month would happen
in the summer, sometimes in the winter, thereupon after long study and many
instructions from the Grecians finding the reason of this confusednesse, he
added unto Romulus his year fifty days, so that the whole year afterward was
divided into twelve months; because the moon had finished her course 12.
times in that space; Beginning their year then at January: because then in his
iudgemnt was the fittest time to begin the year, when the sun being
farthest from us did begin to turn his course, and to come unto us again;
which is about January, the sun being about the Tropicke of Capricorn.
Afterward upon a superstitious conceit of the odd number, Numa added one day
more unto January, so that whereas at the first Numa his year did agree with
the Grecian year, both of them containing three hundred fifty four days; Now
the Roman year contained three hundred fifty five days, which computation
falling out too short for the true year by the space of ten days, and six
hours yearly, it occasioned every eighth year the interposition of three
whole months, which they called their leap year: G Merula in orat. pro Q.
Ligario.
This confusednes afterward Julius Caesar by long study remedied, adding the
odd ten days unto Numa Pompilius his year. And least the odd six hours
might at last breed disorder in their computation, he appointed that every
fourth year a whole day should be inserted, next after the three and
twentieth of February; which inserting they called Intercalatio from an old
verb Intercalo, and that day they called Intercalarem. Now the day following
being the four and twentieth of February, was always the sixth of the Kalends
of March, G. Merula in orat. pro Q Ligar.
and therefore because of the interposition of that day, they called the
leap-yeare Annum bissextilem.i. the year wherein there falled out two days
which they called Sext. Calend. Martij. And the day thus interposed, was called
dies bissextus. This computation which Julius Caesar found out we have
embraced, and do at this day follow, calling our year Annum Iulianum, Rosin.
Ant Romans lib. 4.
and Annum magnum, having relation to the monthly year called Annus Lunaris;
and sometimes this great year is called, Annus vertens a verte^do, because it
is always turning, and running on. Hubert lib. 3 epist. famil. 18.
Moreover we must remember that the Romans did begin their year at March;
whence that month which since has been called Julius in the honor of Julius
Caesar was by them called Quintilis, because it was the 5 month: and that month
which since has been called Augustus, in the remembrance of Augustus Caesar
was by them called Sextilis, because it was their sixth month. Thus then the
great year being divided into twelve months, every month was divided into
three parts.i. Calendas, Nonas, and Idus. For the better, understanding of
which, I shall insert three common verses.

Principium mensis nostri dixere Calendas:
Sex Maius Nonas, October, Julius, and Mars,
Quatuor at reliqui^tenet Idus quilibet octo.
That is the first day of every month is called the Kalends of that month. The
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. and 7 of these four months, May, October, July, and March, were
called the Nones of that month: but in all the other months the Nones contained
but the 2. 3. 4. and 5 day, so that the fifth day (for example sake) of
January was called Nonae Ianuariae, or Ianuarij, the fourth Pridie Nonarum, or
Nonas Ian. (For they used always to say Pridie Call. Pridie Nonar. and Pridie
Iduum, in steed of secundo Call. Non. Id.) The third day of January, they
called tertium Nonarum, vel Nonas Ianuar. the second day of January they
called quartum Nonarum, vel Nonas Ianuar. After the Nones followed the Ides,
which contained eight days in every month, so that the 15 day of the four
aforesaid months, were called Idus Maij, Idus October. Iaus Iulij, and Idus
Martij. In all the other months, the 13th day was the Ides: as to proceed in
January, the thirteenth day was called Idus Ianuar. the twelfth Pridie Iduum,
vel Idus Ianuar. The eleventh tertio Iduum, or Idus Ian. the tenth quarto
Iduum, vel Idus Ian. the ninth 5o Id. Ian. the eighth 6o Id. Ian. the seventh
7o Id. Ian. the sixth 8o Id. Ian. After the Ides then followed the Kalends of
the next month. As the fourteenth of January was decimo nono Calendarum, or
Calendas Februar.; the fifteenth decimo octavo Calend. Feb. the sixteenth
decimo septimo Call. Feb. etc. Where we must note that as often as we use
Pridie, tertio, quarto, or any of those numerals with an accusative case, as
Pridie Calendas, etc. the Grammarians say that this praeposition Ante is
eclipsed. It follows now that I should treat of the days, which are the
lesser parts of the year: where before we proceed we will consider the parts
which the Romans divided their day into.

Dies Civilis continet Luce^ cuius parts sunt Diluculum. The break of day.
Mane. The full morning. Ad meridiem. The fore noone. Meridies quasi Medidies.
Midday, or quasi Merus dies. Perfect day, Noone. Demer die. After noone. Solis
occasus. Sunset.
Noctem cuius part^s sunt Crepusculum. The duske of the evening. Prima fax.
Candle-tining. Vesper. The night. Concubium. Bedtime. Nox intempesta. The
first sleep. Ad mediam noctem. Toward midnight. Media nox. Midnight. De
media nocte. A little after midnight. Gallicinium. Cock-crowing. Conticinium.
All the time from cock-crowing to the break of day.


The day and night again were each of them divided into primam, secundam,
tertiam, and quartam vigilia^, every watch containing three hours. The first
of the night began at six of the clock in the evening, and the fourth ended at
six of the clock in the morning. Alex. Genesis lib. 1. cap. 12.
These watches were distinguished by several notes and sounds of cornets or
trumpets, that by the distinction and diversity thereof, it might easily be
known what watch was sounded. Moreover we must understand that the Romans,
upon a superstitious conceit, and observation of misfortunes and evil events
falling out on some days, and more happy success upon others, have called the
former sort of days Atros dies, and the latter sort Albos dies, Vid. Erasm
Adag. union signare.
borrowing the names from the Scythians, who used to chalk out the fortunate
days in their Kalenders with white characters, whence Horace says, Cressa non
careat pulchra dies nota. Other-some, as their unfortunate and unlucky days,
were noted with a coal or black character, according to that, Nigro carbone
notatus. Again their Calendar distinguished some days for Holydaies, which
they called Dies festos, festival days, or dies Feriatos, and Ferias,
Holy Days, Ascensius in epist. 3. illust. vir. lib. 2.
because they did upon such days Ferire victimas.i. offer up sacrifices.
Others were distinguished for working days, which they called Profestas quasi
procul a festis. The third distinction was of halfe-holy-daies, which ab
intercidendo, they called Dies intercisos as it were days cut asunder: the one
part of them being allotted for worldly businesses, the other for holy and
religious exercises. Rosin. antiq. lib. 4. c. 3.
These feriae were either privatae, and so they belo^ged sometime to whole
families, as Familiae Claudiae, Aemiliae; Iuliae, etc. sometimes to private
persons, as every one his birth day, particular expiations, etc. or else they
were Publicae, such as the whole commonwealth did observe: and they were of two
sorts, the one called Anniversaria, which were always to be kept on a certain
day, Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 5. c. 7.
and thereupon they were called feriae statiuae; the other conceptiuae which
were arbitrarie, and solemnised upon such days as the magistrates and priests
thought most expedient, whereof the Latinae Feriae were chief: which Latinae
Feriae were kept on mount Albane to Jupiter Latiar, for the preservation of all
the Latin people in league and confederacy with the Romans, and were
solemnised in memory of the truce between those two nations. Those feriae
which were called Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 5. c. 7.
Imperatiuae and Serve. Aenei. lib. 1.
Indictiuae, because the Consul, Praetor, or chief Pontifie, according to
their pleasure imperabant, and indicebaut has.i. commanded them, may in my
opinion be contained under that member of Feriae conceptivae, in respect of the
uncertainty of them. Another distinction of days is found in the Roman
Calendar, to have been in Fastos, whole court or leet-daies; Ex part Fastos,
Half court days; Nefastos, Non-leet days: though this word Nefastus be often
expounded unlucky, as in that of Carminun. lib 2. Ode. 13*
Horace touching the tree, Ille and nefasto te posuit die.i. He planted thee in
an unhappy time. These days were so called a fando, from speaking; because
upon those days which were Fasti, the Praetor, or L. chief Justice might
lawfully keep court and administer justice, which was not done without the
speaking of these three words, Do, Dico, and Addico; Ioach. Camerar. pro Flacco.
Dabat actione^; dicebat ius; Addicebat ta^ res, qua^ homines. Where by the way
we must note, that sometimes these court days were also called dies
comitiales, because that Bersman. in suis annot. in Rom Calend ad finem O^ Fast.
upon every such day as the comitia.i. the public assemblies were held, it was
lawful to keep court: whence not only comitialis dies does signify a law
day, but comitialis homo also does signify a wrangler in the law, or a
litigious person.

CHAP. 2.
De Ludis.
THis word Ludus has diverse acceptions, sometimes it is taken for a jest or
scoff, as vt me ludos facit? How he scoffeth me? Sometimes for a place of
exercise where any feate is learned, as ludus literarius, a school for
learning; ludus gladiatorius a fence-schoole; and Aperire ludum, to set up a
school. Sometimes for any game, pastime, or sport publicly exhibited, either
that thereby the Gods might be appeased, or the applause and favor of the
people gained. These games from the diversity of the place where they were had,
may be divided into ludos compitales, circenses, and scenicos. Compitales were
such as Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 6. c. 19.
usually were sole^nzied in compitis..i. in the crosse-waies and open streets.
Circenses were circque-shewes, taking their appellatio^ either from the great
circque, or shewplace, called Circus Max: where the games were exhibited; or
from the swords wherewith the players were environed, as one would say
Circaenses. They much resembled those Grecian games, called certamina Olympica,
where the ru^ners with chariots were hemmed in on the one side with the running
river, and on the other with swords pitched point-wise, that they should hold
on the race directly, and not swerve aside without danger. Rosin. Ant lib. 5.
cap. 5.
Some have thought the^ to be the same with ludi Gymnici, so called from (...),
naked; because that those which did perform these kind of exercises did
either put off all, or the greatest part of their clothes, to the intent that
they might the more readily and nimbly perform their games; for which purpose
they did also anoint their bodies with oil: Vid. Erasm. adag. operam and
oleum pe^dere.
Whence we say when a man has lost his cost, and labor, Operam and oleum
perdidit; oleum in this place signifying cost and charges: so that the proverb
was the same with that of Macrob. lib Satur.
the coble^s crow, opera and impensaperijt. The games and Masteries used in the
circque were diverse; namely fifty-cuffes, fencing with swords, shaking the
spear, dancing in plain ground, leaping, iumping, casting the dart,
wrestling, running the race with chariots, which was called certamen bigarum
vel quadrigarum; playing at whorle-bats, which was termed bel^are coestu;
casting or hurling the great stone called discus; though sometimes this discus
was made of iron or brass: The players thereat were called (...) from (...)
and (...), to dart or cast out any thing. The third sort of plays were ludi
Scenici, stage-plaies. The reason of this name scena may be seen Vid. page 14.
before. Lazius de Repub. Romans lib. 10. cap. 11.
The first institution of them was occasioned by reason of a great sickness,
which by no medicinary help could be removed; The Romans superstitiously
conceiting, that some new games or sports being found out the wrath of the Gods
would thereby be unarmed. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 6. c. 19.
Whereupon about the four hundredth year after the building of Rome they sent
for certain stage players out of Hetruria, which they called Histriones from
the Hetruria^ word Hister, which signified such a player. Concerning the
diverse kinds of stage-plaies I read of four, called by the Grecians,
Mimicae, Satyrae, Tragoediae, Comoediae: by the Romans Planipedes, Attellanae,
Praetextatae, Tabernariae. In English, Fables Mimicall, Satyricall, Tragical,
Comicall. These Mimicall players did much resemble the clown in many of our
English stage-plaies, who sometimes would go a tip-toe in derision of the
mincing dames; sometimes would speak ful-mouthed to mock the country-clownes;
sometimes upon the top of their tongue to scoff the citizen. And thus, by
their imitation of all ridiculous gestures or speeches, in all kind of
vocations, they provoked laughter; whence both the plays and plaiers were
named Mimi, from (...) an Imitator, or one that does apelike counterfeit others:
as likewise they were called Planipedes, because the Actors did enter upon the
stage planis pedibus.i. Alex. ib
Excalceati barefooted. The second sort of plays were called Satyrae,
Antesignan in suis obser. de metris comicis. Teren. praefixis.
from the lascivious and wanton country-Gods called Satyri, because the Actors
in these Satyricall plays, did use many obscene poems, and unchaste gestures to
delight their spectators. Afterward these kind of actors as we may coniect,
did assume such liberty unto themselves, that they did freely and without
controlement, sharply tax and censure the vices even of kings, as well as of
the commons, insomuch that now we call every witty poem, wherein the lives
and manners of men are sharply taxed, A satyr, or satyricall poem. Vid
Erasm. adag. (...).
Satyra mordax fuit and salsum genus carminis. These satyricall plays were
also called Attellanae, from the city Attella in Campania, where they were
often acted. The third sort of stage-plaies, were called Tragoediae, from (...)
a goat, and (...) an ode or song; because the actors thereof had a goat given
them as a reward. And likewise they were called Praetextatae, from Praetexta, a
certain Roman robe, which these actors did use to wear in their plays. The
fourth sort were comoediae, from (...), which signifies villages, and (...):
because these kind of actors did go up and down the country acting these
Comedies in the villages as they passed along. They were likewise called
Tabernariae a tabulis.i. from the boards or pentices wherewith they were
sheltred from the weather, whiles they were acting. These two last sorts of
plays, namely Tragedies and Comedies being still in use amongst us, it will be
worth our labor to consider the communities, wherein they agree; and likewise
the proprieties or notes of distinction by which they differ. I find three
sorts of parts, wherein they agree, namely parts primariae, accessoriae,
circu^stantes; parts principal, accessory, and circumstances, which are not so
truly parts, as accidental ornaments added to beautify the plays. The
principal parts are 4. in respect of the matter treated of. For as far as the
declaration or exposition of the matter in hand reaches, without intimation of
the event to ensue, so far reaches the first part called (...), which word
signifies no more then a proposition or declaration. But when the play
inclines to its heat and trouble, the^ ensues the second part called (...),
which signifies the intension or exaggeration of matters. The third part is
called (...).i. the state and full vigor of the play. The last part which is
an unexpected change into a sudden tranquillity and quietness is called
(...): whence by a metaphor it has been translated to signify the end, or
period of any other thing; or rather the inclination unto the end, as vitae,
humanae catastrophe, the end of a man's life. In respect of the players
forsaking the stage, the parts were five; namely the five Acts. For the Actors
did five times in every Comedy and Tragedy forsake the stage, and make as it
wear so many interruptions. The occasion whereof is supposed to have been
this, That the spectators might not be wearied out with a continued discourse
or action, but that they might sometimes be delighted with variety intermixed.
For those breaches and chasmes between each act, were made up and supplied,
either by the Chorus, or Music. Where we must note, that every Tragedy and
Comedy must have five Actus, and no more, according to that of Horace. Neue
minor quinto, neu sit productior actu
Fabula. --
Again we must remember that it is not necessary that the (...) should always
be contained in the first Act, though many times it happens so: for in
Plautus his bragging soldier the Protasis is found in the second Act: and so
likewise have the other three parts.i. Epitasis, Catastasis and Catastrophe
their bounds unbounded. These Acts are divided into several scenes, which
sometimes fall out more, sometimes fewer in every Act. The definition of a scene
being Vid. Erasm. Adag.
Mutatio personarum: Whence we call a subtle Gnatho, which can humor himself
for all persons and times omniu^ scenarum hominem, A man fit for all parts. Now
amongst the Romans it was thought unfit, that above three persons should come
on the stage in one scene. Nec quarta loqui persona laboret. Hor. The parts
accessoriae in a Comedy are four, Argumentum, Prologus, Chorus, and Mimus. The
first is the matter or subject of the Comedy: the second is the Prologue, which
is either (...), such as does open the state of the fable, at which time there
needs no argument; or else (...), such as commends the fable, or the Poet
unto the people; or lastly (...), such as shall refute the objections and
cavils of adversaries. The third is Chorus, which speaks between each Act;
and this Chorus may consist either of one, or many speakers, and that either
male or female: Rosin. ant. cap. de trag. and com. lib. 5.
but with this caution, that if a male be to be commended, then must the Chorus
consist of males; if a female be to be commended, then must it consist of
females. And always whatsoever the Chorus speaks, it must be pertinent unto
the Act past, or covertly intimating somewhat ensuing.

-- Non quid medios intercinat actus,
Quod non proposito conducat and haereat apt. Horat.
The fourth and last accessory part, was Mimus the clown or fool of the play.
Of all these parts (...) tragedy has only a Chorus. The parts circumstantes,
or accidental ornaments were four, common to both, Titulus, Cantus, Saltatio,
Apparatus.i. the title of the play, Music, Dancing, and the beautifying of
the scene. By the Scene in this place, I understand the partition between the
players vestry, and the stage or scaffold. This partition at the acting of a
Tragedy was underpropped with stately columns and pillars, and beautified with
paintings resembling princely buildings, and the images as well of Gods as
Kings. At the acting of a Comedy country-cottages and private buildings were
painted in the out face of the partition. In the Satyricall plays the painting
was overcast with shadows of mountains and woods: The Alex. Genesis dier. l. 5.
c. 16.
first of these partitions they called Scenam Tragicam, the second Comicam, the
third Satyricam. The differences between a Tragedy and a Comedy which may be
collected out of Antesig. in suis observe. de metris comicis Teren. praefixis.
Antesignanus are these: first in respect of the matter, because a Tragedy
treats of exilements, murders, matters of grief, etc. a Comedy of love
toys, merry fictions, and petty matters, the one being (...); the other (...).
In a Tragedy the greatest part of the Actors are Kings and Noble persons; in a
Comedy private persons of meaner state and condition. The subject of a Comedy
is often feigned, but of a Tragedy it is commonly true, and once really
performed. The beginning of a tragedy is calm and quiet, the end fearful
and turbulent; but in a comedy contrarily the beginning is turbulent, and the
end calm. Another difference which Antesignanus has omitted is behouefull for
us to know, namely that the Tragedians did wear upon the stage a certain
shoe coming half way up the leg in manner of buskins, which kind of shoe
was called by the^ Cothurnus, and from that custom it has been occasioned,
that Cothurnus is translated to signify a Tragical and lofty style; as
Sophocleo digna Cothurno, matters beseeming Sophocles his style: and sometimes
a tragedy it self. The Comedia^s did use an high shoe coming up above the
ankle, much like a kind of shoes which plough-me^ use to wear to keep
themselves out of the dirt. This kind of shoe is called Soccus, by which word
sometimes also is signified a Comedy, as Hunc socci cepere pedem, grandesque
Cothurni. Horat.
Antesig. ib.
All these sorts of stage plays both Mimicall, Satyricall, Tragical, and
Comicall, if they were acted according to the Grecian rite and custom, then
were they called Palliatae, from pallium, a certain mantle which the Grecians
did use to wear: if according to the Roman manner, then were they called from
the Roman gown Togatae. Another division of plays has been taken not from
the place where they were exhibited, but from the final cause or reason why.
Some were celebrated in the honor of the Gods, and they were named Ludi sacri;
others for the performance of some vow, being called therefore Ludi votiui;
others for the more solemn celebration of funerals, whence they were called
Ludi funebres: lastly others for sport and exercise called therefore Ludi
ludicri. Unto those sacred or holy plays belonged these; ludi Megalenses,
otherwise called Megalesia, which were sports solemnized in the honor of
Cybele; Cereales, sports in the honor of Ceres; Florales, in the honor of the
goddess Flora; Martiales in the honor of Mars; Apollinares in the honor of
Apollo, etc. The votiui ludi were also performed in the honor of some God, but
they were distinguished from ludi sacri, because these votivi were performed
only upon occasion of some special vow made: for whenever the Romans did
undertake any desperate war, then did some Roman magistrate Vovere ludos vel
templa, conditionally, that they got the conquest. Ascensius epist. viror.
illust. lib. 5.
Whiles the magistrate uttered this his vow, he was said Vota nuncupare or
facere vota.i. to make a solemn vow unto the Gods; The vow being thus made,
he was said to be votireus..i. conditionally bound and obliged to the
performance of this vow, so that the Gods might challenge the thing vowed as
due debt, if they granted his request. But the request being granted, then was
he said damnatus voti, vel voto.i. simply bound to the performance of it; so
that by a consequence Damnari voti vel voto, is to have ones desire
accomplished. The third sort of plays, which we called ludos funebres, was
fencing and playing of prizes, the custom among the Romans being, that at the
funerals of their friends, they would procure certain slaves and captives to
join combat upon the Amphitheatre, until one of them had been killed; whence
those fencers were called Bustuarij, from bustum, the place where dead men's
bodies were burned. They first began their fight with certain cudgels, or
yardes called Rudes and after ward went to naked weapons (and that was termed
dimicare and versis armis pugnare, this word versis signifying mutatis
according to Saturn. sermon. l. 2. c. 19.
Lipsius) whereat they fought till one was killed; neither was the other so
acquitted, but he stood liable to undertake another, and so a third, until he
had foiled six or seven combatants: and if his hap were to prevail so often,
then did he receive a garland or coronet of palm tree, wound about with
certain woollen ribbands called Lemnisci. Fr. Sylvius in orat. pro Sex. Roscio.
The coronet it self was called therefore palma lemniscata: and hence
figuratively has palma been translated to signify the victory it self; and
Fr. Sylv. ib.
such a man as has often gotten the prize, we say proverbially, that he is
Plurimarum palmarum homo. The reason why the palm tree rather then any other
tree should be given in token of victory is rendered by Arist. prob. 7. Plut.
symp. 8 q 4. A. Gell. lib. 3. cap. 6.
diverse good authors to be this; because the palm tree, though you put never
so ponderous and heavy weight upon it, yet it will not yield, but rather
endeavor the more upward. After he had foiled six or seven, he received one
of those staves or cudgels also, wherewith they began their combat, in token of
liberty; signifying thereby, that he should hence for-ward lead his life free
from shedding of blood. Alluding unto which custom this word Eras. Adag. Rudem
accip.
Rudis has been used to signify any other kind of freedom, or discharge,
whereupon Horace said of himself, that he was Rude donatus.i. set at liberty,
and discharged from his pains in poetry. The last sort of plays called Ludi
ludicri, were either military to train up young men in the knowledge of the art
military, and those were called ludi castrenses: or else they were only for
exercise, namely running the race, iusting, or turname^ts, which were called
sometimes Troianus ludus, sometimes Suet in Iulio. Caes. c. 39.
Troia without any other word added thereunto, Rosin. Ant. lib. 5. cap. 29.
because Ascanius Aeneas his son first brought them out of Troy into Italy.

CHAP. 5.
De mensis and convivijs Romanorum.
BEfore we proceed unto the description of the Roman tables, and manner of
their feasting, we will explain those five terms Ientaculum, Prandium,
Merenda, Coena, and Comessatio: which five words do signify the five several
feedings each day, which children, old men, servants, travelers and such like
did usually observe. Ientaculum signified their breakfast, and it had its name
like as our English word has a Ieiunio from fasting. In former times it was
called Rosin. Antiq. l. 5. cap. 27*
Silatum from Sile, with the root whereof they were wont to season that wine,
which they had at breakefast. For (as Plutarch. in symp. l. 8. q 6.
Plutarch says) their breakfast was nothing but a sop dipped in wine. In the
same place he likewise says, that in old time they had no dinner, but that
which we call prandium, was the same with them as ientaculum; and thus much the
Greek word (...) signifying a dinner does intimate. For it is so said quasi
(...) from (...), which Plutarch interprets the morning. And therefore, when
through Epicurisme this dinner time called prandium crept in as a distinct
meal, it was called (...) from (...), which signifies in continent, or one
which cannot te^perate himself. Plutarch. in symp. l. 8. q. 6.
The name prandium is said quasi (...) signifying noone-tide. The third time of
taking meat, was called Merenda, because it was taken post meridiem; we may
english it our afternoones boever; it was called also Antecoenium, because it
was taken a little before supper. Just. Lips* ep cent. 1. ep 65.
Merenda est cibus qui declinante die sumitur, quasi post meridiem edendus, and
proxime coenae; vnde and Antecoenium a quibus^a^ dicitur. The fourth time was
their supper called coena, quasi (...), which signifies as much as common.
Plutarch. in symp. ib.
Quia antiquitus seorsim solebant prandere Romani, coenare cum amicis. Their
fifth and last time of feeding, was called in latin comissatio by some, by most
Laevinus Torrent. in Suet. Vitell. vid. Rosin. antiq. l. 5. c. 27.
comessatio a comedendo. In orat. pro M. Coelio.
Ioannes Tistinus says that it is a boever taken after supper, or a night
drinking. But the chief feast whereat Lazius de Repub. Romans lib. 3 cap. 3.
they gave entertainment being their supper, we will consider these three
things therein. First Accumbendi vel discumbe^di rationem.i. the manner of their
lying at supper (for they sat not at table as we do.) Secondly, the form and
fashion of their table; and lastly the parts of their supper. The place where
they supped was commonly called coenaculum a coena, as our dining-chamber is so
called from our dinner. It was also called Tricliniu^ or Biclinium from (...) a
bed: for sometimes there were three beds, sometimes but two about the table,
upon which the guests did sit, or rather ly along. In this dining parlour was
placed a table, sometimes made quite round; and for the common sort of people
it was made of ordinary wood, standing upon three feet; but for men of better
fashion, it was made of better timber, inlaid sometimes with wood of diverse
colors, sometimes with silver, and it stood upon one whole entire foot made
of yvory in the form of a great Lion or Leopard, etc. sometimes this table was
made in the form of an half moon, the one part of it being cut in with an
arch or semicircle, and then it was called Sigma, because it did much resemble
the letter Sigma, Just. Lips. cent. 1. ep. 65.
which (as it appears by certain marble monuments) was in old time made like
a Roman C. If any man should demand the reason why they cut their table in
that form, I must confess that I have not read any reason in any author: but
my conjecture is this. It is agreed upon by all autors, that in the round
tables the one quarter was reserved void from guests, that the waiters might
have a co^venient roomth to attend. Thereupon it seems not improbable to me,
that this crooked arch was made for the waiters. I acknowledge that this Sigma
has been translated diversely by diverse writers, as it appears by Just.
Lip. ib.
Lipsius. By some it has been taken for the parlour or supping chamber;
(Lipsius in his Antiquities) by others for the supper, or feast it self; so
Coelius thought. By Lipsius since it has bin thought a certain place erected
in manner of an hemicycle, or halfe-moone, against which they did place their
beds: but Brodaeus and Ditmarus (in my opinion) have more truly taken it for
the table it self. About the table that was perfectly round were placed three
beds, covered with tapestry or some other kind of covering, according to the
wealth and ability of the person: and thus strato discumbitur ostro, the beds
being ready furnished the guests lay down on them in manner as follows. Each
bed contained three persons, sometimes four, seldom or never more, except at
their great feasts. Many times it fell out, that each guest had his bed to
himself, whence A. Gel. (...) Attic lib. 13.
A. Gellius says, that the number of guests should begin with the Graces, and
end with the Muses.i. they must not be fewer then three, nor more then nine.
This also has been the reason of that Adage. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 5. c. 21.
Septem convivium, novem convitium faciunt. If one only lay upon the bed, then
he rested the upper part of his body on his left elbow, the lower part lying at
length upon the bed: but if many lay upon one bed, then the uppermost did lie
at the beds head, laying his feet behind the second his back: the second
rested his head in the others bosom, having a cushion put between, laying his
feet behind the third his back; in like manner the third and fourth did lie.
They divided their supper into three parts; which they called their first,
second, and third mess. In the first mess commonly was served mulberries,
lettices, sausages, and always eggs; as likewise in the last mess were
served, nuts, figs, grapes, but always apples: Pancirol. li re^um deperdit
cap. de cibi capiendi modo.
whence we say proverbially ab ovo ad mala, from the beginning of the feast to
the end, or simply from the beginning of any thing unto the end thereof. The
middle mess was the maine supper, and the chief dish thereof was called caput
coenae.

CHAP. 4.
De Romany vestibus.
WE may observe in reading old autors, that as well the Romans as the Grecians
had diverse distinct habits, or outward vestime^ts. The Grecians had their
Mantile called Pallium; the Romans their gown called Toga, and by this
different kind of garment the one was so certainly distinguished from the
other, that this word Togatus was often used to signify a Roman, and
Palliatus a Grecian. Sigon. de iudic. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Togati pro Romany dicti, vt Palliati pro Graecis. Before we proceed, we will
first observe what this Toga was, and then how many sorts there were. Mic.
Toxita in orat. Philippic. 2am.
Toga a tegendo dicta est. It was made commonly of wool but according to the
worth and dignity of the person, sometimes of courser, sometimes of finer wool.
As we may collect by that of Horace, -- Mihi sit toga, quae defendere frigus
Quamvis crassa queat --
Mic. Toxita ib.
We must note with Toxita, that no women of any credit did wear the Roman
gown, but insteede thereof did use a garment called stola from (...)
signifying demitto, quod vsque ad talos demitteretur: whence old Poets, when
they would point out unto us an infamous or lewd strumpet, they would term
her Rosin. ant. Romans
Mulierem togatam. Sig. de iud. lib. 3. cap. 19.
This toga sometimes was worn open and vntuckt; then was it called Toga
aperta: other times it was tuckt up, and then it was called toga praecincta.
This cincture or girding up of the gown was according to Sig. ibid.
Sigonius threefold; Cinctura laxior, Astrictior, and Cinctus Gabinus. Cinctura
laxior or the loose kind of girding was such, that notwithstanding the tuck,
yet the tail trailed upon the ground. Cinctura astrictior the close kind of
girding was such, that after the gown had been lapped or tucked up, it should
not reach so far as the feet. The first kind of these cinctures did argue a
remiss soft and effeminate mind; the latter did signify the promptness or
readiness of the person; Sig. ibid.
Vnde, Alte praecincti pro expeditis dicti sunt. Thirdly, Cinctus Gabinus was a
warlike kind of girding, not so that the whole gown should be tucked up about
the middle, but that it being cast quite backward, the party should gird
himself with one skirt thereof. Serve. Aenci. lib. 7.
This kind of girding was so called from a certain city of Campania called
Gabij, because upon a time the inhabitants of this city being at sacrifice,
were set upon by their enemies; at which time they casting their gowns behind
them and girding one lappet or skirt about them, went immediately to war, even
from the altars, and got the conquest. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 1. c. 14.
In memory of which ever after, the Consul when he would proclaim war
girded himself in like manner. Neither had the Consul alone a peculiar garment
when he proclaimed war, but every soldier in time of war did wear a
different kind of garment from the gown, which they called Sagum: we may
english it a soldiers coat. Whence Tully uses this phrase ad saga ire, which
Erasmus has paralleld with this, Ad certamen se accingere, to buckle for
war. Insomuch that Cedant saga togae, is aequiualent to that of the Orators,
Cedant arma togae. Touching the difference of the Roman gowns I find them
distinguished by Sig de iud. lib. 3. cap. 19.
Sigonius accordingly as follows; in Togam Puram, Candidam, Pullam,
Praetextam, Paludamentum, Pictam, Trabeam. Togapura was the common ordinary
gown worn by private men at man's estate, not by women at al, nor children,
until the sixteenth year of their age, at which time they were said Excedere
ex ephebis.i. to be past striplings. Notwithstanding the sixteenth year was
not always strictly without exception observed; Rosin. antiq. lib. 5. c. 32*
for M. Aurelius was permitted to wear this gown being but fifteen years
old; and Caligula did not wear, it till the nineteenth year of his age. This
kind of gown besides that it was called Pura, it was also sometimes called
virilis, sometimes libera. It was called pura in respect of its pure white
color, being free from all admixtures of purple or any other color, and
therefore some have termed it (...), al white, others (...), void of purple.
It was called virilis, because it was given to striplings now growing to man's
estate. Whence we use to say of a stripling past 16 years of his age, virilem
togam sumpsit, he is now become a man. Lastly, it was called libera, Rosin.
antiq. Romans lib. 5. c. 32.
because then they did receive some beginning of freedom, as being about that
time freed from their schoolmasters, and overseers. Aldus Manutius. vid.
Rosin. ib.
This kind of gown was not made open but sowed down to the bottom, and also
it was made without sleeves, so that if at any time they had occasion to use
their arms, they would take up their gown and cast it quite behind them, or
upon their shoulders. But these striplings could not for one whole years
space, cast back their gowns in that manner for the liberty of their arms
without the imputation of immodesty, as it appears by Cic. in orat. pro
Caelio.
Cicero, Nobis annus erat vnus ad cohibendum brachium toga constitutus. The
like liberty it seems was denied those that stood for places of office; Sig
de iud. lib. 3. cap. 19.
and thence is it, that Horace wishes such to hire them a servant -- Laeuum
Qui fodiat latus, and cogat trans pondera dextram Porrigere -- In which place
by pondera is understood the Roman gown, as Sigon. ib.
Sigonius has expounded that place. Now for the understanding of Toga candida,
we are to learn a difference between this candida toga, and the toga pura
above spoken of, which is often times called toga alba, both of which were
white, but differed in the degree of whiteness. The toga alba had only the
natural whitenes of the wool; the toga candida had an artificial white die:
whereby the glass of the white was made more orient and inte^siue. Or else as
Sigon. ib.
Sigonius has observed out of Isidorus, Intendendae albedinis causa cretam
addiderant.i. they chalked it to increase the whiteness thereof. Whence
Polibius calls it togam (...), that is, shining or splendent. Moreover
whereas the alba toga was the ordinary Roman gown which commonly the Roman
citizens did wear; this candida toga was only worn by those, which did ambire
magistratum, sue for a magistracy or place of office who during the time of
their suit were called from their gown candidati: and Quintilian borrowing his
metaphor from them, has called an young student eloquentiae candidatum. The
third sort of gown which I termed togam pullam, was a black gown, and
thereof was two several kinds; the one cole-blacke, which was worn luctus
causa, in token of mourning, and the mourners were thence called Atrati and as
often as they did wear this gown, they were s^id Mutare vestem, Sig. de iud.
lib. 3. cap. 19.
which phrase in old autors does signify nothing else, but to go in mourning
apparel: The other not cole-blacke, but only fouled or stained, and that was
worn reatus causa, in times of arraignement, and those that wore it were
called sordidati, a sordibus in vest, from the spots or stains in the gown.
Where we must note, that in process of time Togapulla became the ordinary
gown which the common people did wear; at which time the ordinary gown, which
the citizens of better place and esteem did wear, was the toga candida:
whereupon there did then grow a distinction of the citizens unknown to the
former age, says Rofinus, namely that some were termed candidati, others
pullati. Candidati were those, not which became suitors for places of office
(as in old time it signified) but those which did live in better repute then
others, from whence it is, that Fenestella de mag. Romans cap 3.
he whose office was to read the Emperors letters in the Senate was called
Candidatus principis* or Quaestor candidatus. It did somewhat resemble the
office of our King his Majesty's chief Secretary. Pullati were those of the
commonalty or inferior sort. The fourth sort of gown was the togapraetexta,
so called, quia eipurpura praetexta erat, because it was guarded about with
purple silk. This kind of gown at the first was used only by the Roman
priests, and chief magistrates: Neither was it lawful for such as did wear
that gown to be arraigned, or sentence to be given on them until that gown
was put off. In continuance of time this togapraetexta was permitted first to
Noble men's children; afterward to all Roman children in general: where upon
Pet. Pellitarius in orat. pro A. Cae^in
Togatus a praetextato differt, vt privatus a magistratu and vir a puero, and
aetas praetextata, is taken for childhood; and praetextati sometimes for
magistrates, but commonly for young children. The fifth sort of gown was
called Paludamentum; It was a military garment, which Alex. Genesis dier. l. 5. c.
18.
none but the L. General or the chief captains did use to wear. Sig. de
iud. lib. 3. c. 29.
Isidorus says it was not only guarded with purple, but with skarlet, and gold
lace, whence it was sometimes called Sigon. ib.
togapurpurea, sometimes coccinea. It was much like the habit which the Grecian
Emperor was wont to wear called Chlamis; yea now it is Rosin. antiq. li. 5.
c. 31.
called Chlamis; we may english it an Heralds coat of Arms. The sixth sort of
gown was called togapicta, Sig. de iud lib. 3. c. 19.
because in it were embroadered goodly pictures with needle work: it was also
called Purpurea, not because of any purple guard (in which respect the
praetexta, and the paludame^tum were called purpureae) but because it was all
over with a purple die. It was by some termed toga palmata, because in it many
palm branches being the reward and token of victory were wrought; whence by
others it was called toga triumphalis, because Emperors in their triumphs did
wear such gowns. The last sort of gown was Trabea, whereof there were Serve
Aenei. lib 7.
three several kinds; the one woven all of purple, which was consecrated unto
the Gods; the second was purple woven upon white, and this only kings and
Consuls might wear; the third was skarlet woven upon purple, and this the
Augures only did wear. Alex. Genesis dier. li. 5. c. 18.
This last sort was therefore called trabea auguralis, the second trabea regia,
the first trabea consecrata.

CHAP. 5.
De Tunica.
THose coats which were worn under the gown were called Tunicae; and that they
were worn under the gown it appears by that Adage, Tunica pallio proprior
est.i. every one for himself first; or according to our english proverb,
Close sits my shirt, but closer sits my skin. Sig. de iud. lib. 3. cap.
20.
This tunica was both narrower and shorter then the gown: at first it was made
without sleeves, afterward with sleeves, and by it, as well as by the gown
were the citizens distinguished. The first sort of coats was made of white
cloth commonly, Salmuth in Pancirol. lib. rerum deperdit. cap. de fibula.
but purfled over and embroadred with studs of purple in manner of broad nail
heads; whence it was called Laticlavia, or Latus clavus; and the persons
wearing this coat were Senators called thence La ticlavij. The second sort
belonged unto the Roman knights and it differed in making from the first, only
that the purple studs or embroadred works of this, were not so broad as the
former: whence the coat was called Angusticlavia, or Angustus clavus, and the
persons wearing it were called Angusticlavij. The third sort belonged unto the
populacy and poorer sort of Romans, it was made without any purfled works,
being called Tunica recta. This coat was given together with the Virile gown
to striplings past sixteen years old, and to new married women. And as the
recta tunica was given with the virile gown; so was the tunica clauatae given
together with the toga praetexta: and the laticlavia, otherwise called tunica
palmata, given with the toga picta. The fourth and last sort belonged unto
women, being a long coat reaching down unto the heels; they called it stolam.
Upon it they did wear an outward garment Ro^^^ Ant lib. 5. (...). 35
called palliu^, and sometimes palla, quia palam gestabatur. (...) lib. 3. cap.
19.
Sigonius says, that this palla was a certain gown used by stage players:
howsoever certain it is, that not only women, but men also and children did
wear this kind of garment. Besides the Roman gown and coat there remain
other parts of their apparel to be spoken of: such are these which follow,
Lacerna, which some do english a cloak, but Sigon. ibid.
Festus would have it to be a little kind of hood, which men should wear to
defend themselves from the rain and weather; It was made that either side
might be worn outward; and at first it was worn only in war, so that
lacernati stood in opposition with togati. Sigon. ibid.
Isidorus Togatos pro vrbanis, lacernatos pro militibus vsurpatos scribit.
Afterward as we may coniect, it was made longer in manner of a cloak, for it
was diverse times worn upon their coats instead of gowns. Another kind of
garment was the Penula, so called quasi pendula, we may translate it a long
hanging cloak. A third was called Mitra, which sometimes did signify a
certain attire for women's heads, as a coyfe or such like; though this kind of
attire was more properly called Calantica: other times it signified a girdle,
which more properly was called zona; This zona chiefly signified a soldiers
belt, or a marriage girdle: The soldiers belt was lined within in the inside,
where when they went to war, they did put their money* whence Horace says of
a man that has lost his money, zonam perdidit. Young maids when they were
married were wont to have a marriage girdle tied about their middle, which
their husband at the first night of their marriage should untie: whence zonam
soluere has been translated to deflowre a Virgin: this marriage girdle in
former times was called Cestus, from whence comes the latin word incestus,
and the english word Incest: which in truth signifies all kind of pollution
committed by undoing or untying this girdle called cestus: but now in a more
strict acception it signifies only that kind of naughtiness, which is
committed between two of near kin^: Caelius in orat pro Milone.
and that other folly which is committed with a strangers wife, is now
properly called adulterium; and that which is committed with a maid or widow
stuprum. The last thing touching their apparel is their shoes. Rosin. antiq
Romans lib. 5. c. 36.
Calceamentorum genera duo fuerunt, ^alceus, and solea: For the soale of the
shoe called in latin solea, sometimes crepidula, and in Cicero his time
gallica, was tied on to the bottom of the foot with leather straps or
buckles, and so worn insteede of shoes: the diverse kinds of these shoes did
distinguish the Roman people also. To omit the difference in colors, we may
reduce the chief kinds to five heads, Mullei, Vncinati, Perones, Cothurni,
Socci. All these sort of shoes were made half way up the leg, as the
Turkish shoes are according to Josephus Scaliger: and they were either laced
close to the leg, as many of our boots are now adays; or clasped with
taches or haspes. The first sort called Mullei Salmuth. in Pancirol. lib.
rerum. deperdit. cap. de fibula.
from the fish mullus, being like unto it in color, were also called from
their claspes calcei Appositam nigrae lunam subtexit alutae. Iuvenal.
lunati, because the claspes were made in form of an half moon, which half
mooned claspe resembling a Roman C, signified an hundred; Salmuth. in
Pancirol. lib. rerum deperdit. cap. (...) fibula.
intimating thereby, that the number of the Senators (they only being
permitted to wear this kind of shoe) were at first a full hundred and no
more. Vncinati calcei, were those, which the soldiers were wont to wear.
Perones (as we may conjecture) were laced up the leg; for Tertullian making
but two sort of shoes, says there were the Mullei called from their claspes
lunati, and the perones made without such half mooned claspes, called also
calcei puri, quoniam ex puro corio facti; and these perones or puros calceos
all the other Romans did wear Salmuth in Pancirol. lib. rerum deperdit. c. de
fibula.
with this note of distinction, that the magistrates shoes were beset with
precious stones, private men's were not. Thus much concerning both the kinds and
fashion of the shoes may be collected out of Rosinus in the place above
quoted. The description and use of the Cothurnus and Soccus may be seen in the
tract Vid. page 37.
de Romany ludis.

CHAP. 6.
De nuptijs and nuptiarum renunciatione.
BEfore we come unto the solemn ceremonies used by the Romans in their
marriages, we will first show the manner of their contracts, Salmuth in
Panciroll. lib. rerum deperdi^arum c. de nupti^s.
which were called by the Romans, Sponsalia a spondendo; because in their
contracts each did promise other to live as man and wife. Now the manner of
contracting was commonly thus: They did for the greater security write down
the form of the contract upon tables of record, as it appears by Iuvenal.
Satyr. 16.

Si tibi legitimis pactam iunctamque tabellis
Non es amaturus --
These tables were also sealed with the signets of certain witnesses there
present, who were termed from the act of their sealing Signatores. Moreover
before they would begin the ceremonies of their contract, the man procured one
soothsayer, and the woman another, with whom first they would consult. Whence
Iuvenal.

-- Veniet cum signatoribus auspex. The token or sign which these soothsaiers
in time of observing accounted most fortunate was a crow: Alex. Genesis lib. 2.
Ea enim cornicum societas est, vt ex duabus socijs altera extincta vidua
altera perpetuo maneat. The man also gave in token of good will a ring unto the
woman, which she was to wear upon the next finger to the little of the left
hand; Aul. Gell.
because unto that finger alone a certain artery proceeds from the heart. The
word nuptiae which signifies marriage had its derivation a Nubo Rosin. antiq.
lib. 5. c. 37
which verb in old time signified to cover: the custom being that the woman
should be brought unto her husband with a veil (called Flammeus) cast over her
face. Again because of the good success that Romulus and his followers had in
the violent taking away of the Sabine women, Sig. de iur. Romans l. 1. c. 9.
they continued a custom that the man should come and take away his wife, by a
seeming violence from the lap or bosom of her mother or her next kin. She
being thus taken away her husband did dissever and divide the hair of her head
with the top of a spear, wherewith some fencer formerly had been killed. This
spear was called by them hasta celebaris, Salmuth in Pancirol. lib. rerum
deperdit. cap. de nuptiis.
and the ceremony did betoken, that nothing should disioine them but such a
spear or such like violence. We must note that Fr. Silv. in orat. pro L.
Flacco.
three manner of ways a woman became a man's lawful wife vsu, co^farreatione,
coemptione. A woman became a man's lawful wife vsu.i. by prescriptio^ or long
possession, if that she were wedded with the consent of her overseers, and so
did live with the man as with her lawful husband a whole years space, nullo
interrupto vsu.i. Sig. de iure Romans l. 1. c. 9.
she being not absent three nights in the whole year from him. And some
have thought that the counterfeited violence in taking away the maid from her
friends was used only in this kind of marriage. A woman became a man's wife
confarreatione.i. by certain solemnities used before a Pontifie or
chiefe-bishop, when the woman was given unto the man using a set form of
words, ten witnesses being present and a solemn sacrifice being offered, at
which the married couple should eat of the same barley cake, which formerly had
been used in sacrifice. Which sacrifice was termed from far confarreatio,
and the marriage it self Farracia, and Cic. orat. pro Muraena.
sometimes sacra simply; the dissolution of this kind of marriage Diffarreatio.
A woman became a man's wife coemptione.i. by buying and selling, when the woman
did under a feigned form of sale buy her husband, by giving him a piece of
coin. Sig. de jure Rom lib. 1 c. 9.
Veteri Romanorum lege, nubentes mulieres tres ad virum asses far solebant:
atque vnum quidem quem in manu tenebant, ta^quam emendi causa marito dare. Cic.
orat. pro Muraena. Ite^. Fr. Sil. ib.
In which kind of marriage the man was not named by his proper name, nor the
woman by hers, but the man was named Caius, and the woman Caia in the memory of
the chaste and happy marriage of Ca^a Cacilia wife to Tarquinius Priscus: from
whence sprang a custom among them, that the new married bride when she was
brought home unto her husbands house, was to use this proverb, Vbi tu Caius,
ibi ego Caia; by which words she signified that she was now owner of her
husbands goods as well as himself: and therefore Erasmus has expounded that
saying by these words, Vt tu dominus, ita ego domina. If any of these
ceremonies were omitted, Hieron. Ferarius in Philippic. corat.
then was the marriage termed Nuptiae innuptae, in which sense we call our
enemies gifts no gifts, (...). These ceremonies being ended, toward night
the woman was brought home to her husbands house with five torches, signifying
thereby the need which married persons have of five Gods or Goddesses.i.
Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Suadela, and Diana, who often times is called Lucina (the
reason being rendered by Ovid: -- Dedit haec tibi nomina lucus,
Aut quia principium tu dea lucis habes.)
The matter whereof these torches were made, was a certain tree, from which a
pitchy liquor did issue: it was called Teda, and thence have the Poets
figuratively called both the torches, and the wedding it self Tedas. When the
woman had been thus brought to the door, then did she anoint the posts of
the door with oil, Serve. Aenei. lib. 4.
from which ceremony the wife was called vxor quasi vxor. This ceremony of
anointing being ended, the bridemen did lift her over the threshold and so
carried her in by a seeming force, because in modesty she would seem not to
go without violence into that place where she should loose her maiden head: At
her carrying in all the company did cry out with a loud voice Talassio, Talassio:
for which custom Plutarch. vita Pompeii
Plutarch allegeth many reasons; this being one. Among those who ravished the
daughters of the Sabines, there were found some of the meaner and poorer sort
carrying away one of the fairest women: which being known certain of the
chief citizens would have taken her from them, but they began to cry out that
they carried her to Talassius, a man well beloved among the Romans; at which
naming of Talassius they suffered her to be carried away, themselves
accompanying her, and often crying Talassio, Talassio. From whence it has
been continued as a custom among the Romans ever after at their marriages to
sing Talassio, Talassio: as the Greeks did Hymen, Hymenaee. From this custom
of leading or bringing home the new married bride, comes that comicall phrase
Ducere vxorem, to mary a wife. She being thus brought home, received the keys
of her husbands house, whereby was intimated that the custody of al things in
the house was then committed unto her. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 2. c. 5.
The marriage bed was called Genialis lectus, as we may suppose quasi Genitalis.
The next day after the marriage the bridewoman received gifts from her friends,
which the lawyers termed Nuptialia dona. Vid. Fr. Silv pro Clientio.
But Cicero expounds these dona nuptialia, to be certain tokens which the
husband sent unto his wife before the betrothing. If after the marriage any
discontent had fallen out between the man and his wife Sig. de iure Romans l. 1.
c. 9.
then did they both repair unto a certain chapel built in the honor of a
certain Goddess called Dea viriplaca a viris placandis, whence after they had
been a whiles there, they returned friends. We having thus seen the rites and
ceremonies which the Romans used in their contracts and marriages, it would not
be impertinent to annexe the manner of their divorcements, which upon just
causes were permitted. There Rosin. Antiq. l. 5. cap. 38.
were two manner of divorcements, the one between parties only contracted; the
second between parties married. The first was properly called Repudium, in which
the party suing for the divorcement, used this form of words co^ditione tua
no^ vtar. The second was called Divortium, wherein the party suing for it used
these words, Res tuas tibi habeto: vel Res tuas tibi agito. Both these kinds
were termed Matrimonij renuntiationes, a renouncing or refusal of marriage.
Where we must note that instead of this verb renunciare, diverse good autors do
use this phrase Mittere, or Remittere nuncium: As C. Caesar Pompeiae nuncium
remisit, C. Caesar has divorce Pompeia. And alluding hereunto, Ep. fam. l. 5.
Cicero says virtuti nuncium remisit.i. He has cast off all goodness, he
has even divorced virtue. Secondly we must note that this verb Renuncio, does
not only signify to renounce or to refuse, but many times in Tully it
signifies to declare or pronounce a magistrate elected, as Renunciare
consulem, praetorem, etc.

CHAP. 7.
Quo apparatu, quibusque ceremonijs apud veteres defuncta corpora igni
tradebantur.
THE Romans in ancient time when they perceived a body dying, had such a
custom, that the next of the kin should receive the last gasp of breath
from the sick body into his mouth, as it were by way of kissing him: (to show
thereby how loath and unwilling they were to be deprived of their friends) and
likewise should close the eyes of the party being deceased. Whence Anna said
unto her sister Dido now dying -- Virg Aen. 4.
Extremus si quis super halitus errat
Ore legam --
And Penelope wishing that her son Telemachus might out live herself and his
father, writes to her husband in this manner Ille meos oculos comprimat, ille
tuos. After the body had thus deceased, they kept it seven days unburied,
washing the corpse every day with hot water, and sometimes anointing it with
oil, hoping that if the body were only in a slumber and not quite dead, it
might by these hot causes be revived.

Per calidos latices and ahena vndantia flammis
Expediunt, corpusque lavant frigentis and vngunt.
In these seven days space, all the dead man's friends met together now and
then making a great out cry or shout with their voices, hoping that if the dead
body had been only in a swoune or sleep, he might thereby be awaked. This
action was termed conclamatio, whence when we have done the best we can in a
matter, and cannot effect it, we say proverbially conclamatum est: for this
third conclamation or general outcry (which was always upon the seventh day
after the decease) was even the last refuge, at which if the body did not
reviue, then was it carried to burial being invested with such a gown as the
parties place or office formerly had required. Those who had the dressing,
chesting or embaulming of the dead corpse were called Pollinctores: After they
had thus embaulmed the corpse, they placed it in a bed fast by the gate of the
dead man's house, with his face and heels outward toward the street, according
to that of Persius. -- Tandemque beatulus alto
Compositus lecto, crassisque lutatus amomis
In portam rigidos calces extendit --
This ceremony was properly called corporis collocatio: and fast by this bed
near the gate also was erected an altar called in Latin Alex. Genesis dier. lib.
3. c. 7.
Acerra, upon which his friends did every day offer incense until the burial.
The gate in the outside was garnished with cypress branches, if the dead man
were of any wealth or note: For the poorer sort, by reason of the scarcity of
the tree, could use no such testimony of their mourning. Lucanus.
Et non plebeios luctus testata cupressus. In these seven days space certain
men were appointed to provide all things in readiness for the funeral: Which
things were commonly sold in the Alex. Genesis dier. l. 5. c. 26.
Temple of Libitina, from whence those providers were termed Libitinarij;
though sometimes this word Libitinarius does signify as much as capularis an
old decrepit man, ready for the grave. Upon the eighth day a certain crier in
manner of a bellman, went about the town to call the people to the
sole^nization of the funeral, in this form of words: Rosin. Ant. ib. 5.
Exequias L. Titio L. Filio quibus est commodum ire. Iam tempus est. Ollus ex
aedibus effertur. After the people had assembled themselves together, the bed
being covered with purple or other rich coverings, the last conclamation being
ended, a trumpeter went before all the company, certain poor women called
praeficae following after, and singing songs in the praise of the party
deceased. Where we must note that none but the better sort had a trumpet
sou^ded before the^; others had only a pipe. Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 3.
Senatoribus and patricijs tuba; minoribus and plebeiis tibia canebant
siticines; this word Siticines signifying either a trumpetter or piper, because
they did both ad sitos.i. mortuos canere. Again, except it were one of the
Senators or chief citizens, he was not carried out upon a bed, but in a coffin
upon a beer. Those that carried this bed were the next of the kin, so that it
fell often among the Senators themselves to bear the corpse, and because the
poorer sort were not able to undergo the charges of such solemnities,
thereupon were they buried commonly in the duske of the evening; and hence a
vespertino tempore, those that carried the corpse were termed vespae or
vespillones. In the burial of a Senator or chief officer certain waxen
images of all his predecessors were carried before him upon long poles or
spears, together with all the ensigns of honor which he deserved in his
life time. Moreover if any servants had been manumized by him, they
accompanied the mourners lamenting for their masters death. After the corpse
followed the dead man's children, the next of the kin, and other of his
friends atrati,.i. in mourning apparel. The corpse being thus brought unto
their great Oratory called the Rostra, the next of the kin Suet. C. Julius
Caesar. c. 6.
laudabat defunctum pro rostris.i. made a funeral oration in the commendation
principally of the party deceased, but touching the worthy acts also of those
his predecessors, whose images were there present. The oration being ended, the
corpse was in old time carried home again in manner as it was brought forth,
Sedibus hunc refer ante suis and conde sepulchro. But afterward by the law of
the twelve tables it was provided, that no man besides the Emperor and Vestal
Nuns should be buried within the city; though some upon especial favor have
obtained it. The manner of their burial was not by interring the corpse, as in
former times it had been, but burning them in a fire ( Salmuth in Pancir. lib.
reru^ deperd. ca. de exequijs.
the reason thereof being to prevent the cruelty of their enemies, who in a
merciless revenge would at their conquests dig up the buried bodies, making
even the dead also subjects of their implacable wrath.) This fire before the
burning was properly called Pyra; in the time that it burned it was called
Rogus, Servius Aeneid 5.
quod tunc temporis Rogari solerent manes; after the burning then was it called
Bustum quasi been vstum. This Pyra was always built in form of a tabernacle,
as it is Sup. page 30.
above more at large to be seen: whither after the dead man had been brought,
his friends were wont to cut off one of his fingers, which they would afterward
bury, with a second solemnity. The charges at funerals growing by this means to
be doubled, the law of the 12. tables provided in these words Homini mortuo
ossa ne legito, etc: that no man's finger should be cut off, except he died
either in the war, or in a strange country. Where we must observe, that lego
in this place does signify as much as adimo or aufero, in which sense we call
him sacrilegum, qui legit.i. qui adimit and aufert sacra. After the dead body
had been laid upon the pyra, then were his eyes opened again to show him
heaven if it were possible: Alex. Genesis dier. l. 3.
and withal an half penny was put in his mouth, they superstitiously
conceiting, that that halfe-penny was naulum Charontis, the pay of Charon, the
supposed ferry-man of hell, who was to carry men's souls in his boat over the
stygian lake after their decease. About this Pyra were first many boughs of
Cypress tree to hinder the evil sent of the corpse to be burned. The dead body
being thus laid upon the Pyra, the next of the kin turning his face averse from
the pyra, did kindle the fire with a torch: After this commonly certain fencers
hired for this purpose did combat each with other till one of them was killed;
they were termed bustuarij from bustum. The blood of those that were slain,
served insteede of a sacrifice to the infernal Gods, which kind of sacrifice
they termed Inferiae. Servius.
Inferiae sunt sacra mortuorum, quae inferis solvuntur. Anon after the body had
been burned, his nearest friends did gather up the ashes and bones, which being
washed with milk and wine were put into certain pitchers called vrnae: whence
this word vrna is often used by Poets to signify a grave or sepulcher, as --
Vna requiescit in vrna. Ovid. Met. lib. 4. Rosin. antiq lib. 5.
Though properly sepulchrum was in old time a vault or arched-roofe, round
about the walls whereof were placed certain coffines called loculi, within
which those former vrnae were laid up and kept, namely two or three in each
coffine. Now these funeral solemnities were commonly toward night, insomuch
that they used torches; these torches they properly called Servius in Aeneid
lib. 1.
funalia a funibus cera circundatis, vnde and funus dicitur. Hub. in Cic. ep.
fam. lib. 4.
Others are of opinion that funus is so said from the greek word (...),
signifying death or slaughter. The bones of the burned body being thus gathered
up, then did the Priest besprinckle the company with clean water thrice, and
the eldest of the mourning women called praeficae, with a loud voice pronounced
this word, Ilicet, thereby dismissing the company, (the word signifying as much
as Ire licet;) Then presently did the company depart taking their farewell of
the dead body in this form of words: Vale, vale, vale: nos te ordine quo
natura permiserit sequemur. If any of these ceremonies had been omitted Hier.
Ferrarius in Cic. orat. Philip.
then was it termed sepulitura insepulta, in the same sense as nuptiae
formerly were termed innuptae. The old and aged men were invited after the
burial to a feast, or funeral banquet called silicernium Servius in Aeneid.
lib. 5.
quasi filicaenium.i. coena supra silicem posita, their custom being to eat
that feast upon an altar of stone, and because this feast was only eaten at
funerals, and by the elder sort, Antesig in Tere. Adelph. Act. 4.
hence figuratively this word silicernium does sometimes signify an old
creeple ready for the grave. The poorer people insteede of a feast, received a
dole or distribution of raw flesh: this dole was termed Visceratio. Moreover
there was a potation or drinking of wine after the burial called Murrata or
Murrhina potio, which afterward the law of the 12. tables for the avoiding of
expenses did prohibit: as likewise for the moderating of grief in the mourners
it did prohibit the use of this word Lessum, [Neve lessum funeris ergo habento]
for that word was often ingeminated in their mourning as a doleful eiulation,
or note of inward sorrow. This sorrowing or mourning was in some cases utterly
prohibited, in others limited; Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 3. c. 7.
Namely an infant dying before he was three years old, should not be mourned
for at all; because he had scarcely yet entered into his life. Neither might
children mourn for their fathers, or wives for their husbands any longer then
ten months, within which time without special dispensation or license, it was
not lawful for the widow to marry another husband. Here we may with Raeuardus
observe a distinction between lugere and Elugere. Lugere signified no more
then to mourn some part of the time prescribed; Elugere to mourn the whole
and full time.

Lib. 3. Sect. 1.
Of the Roman assemblies.
De Comitijs.
Hitherunto have we insisted upon the description of the most remarkable parts
of the Roman city, together with the several divisions of the Roman people,
as also the Roman religion: where we have seen the general divisions of
their Gods, their sacrifices, with their ceremonies thereunto belonging; and
other collateral tracts, as appendices unto religion. Now are we to proceed
to that part of government which is political or civil, where we will first
speak of their civil magistrates, then of so many of their civil laws, as I
have observed needful for the understanding of Tully; and that principally in
his orations: for the more easy conceiving of both I have premised a chapter
or two De Comitijs.

CHAP. 1.
De Comitijs, idque Calatis praecipue, and de Rogationibus.
EVery assembly of all the Roman people, being called together by a lawful
magistrate to determine any matter by way of giving voices, is a co^undo
termed Comitia, simply, without the adiection of any other word; or Comitia
calata, that is, assemblies called together, from (...), or the obsolete latin
verb calo, which signifies to call: though afterward those assemblies only,
which were held either for the inauguring of some pontifie, some Augur, some
Flamen, or him that was called Rex sacroru^, or for the making of their wills
and testaments were called Calata comitia. Whence the will that was made in
these assemblies was called Testamentum calatis comitijs. This kind of
assembly is sometimes called comitia Joan. Tiflinus in orat. pro coelio.
pontificia and comitia sacerdotum, in that sense as others are called
Co^sularia, or Aedilitia comitia; namely because the pontifies in these, is the
Consuls, and Aediles plebis in the others were chosen. There follows three
other kinds of assemblies: for either the people did assemble themselves by
parishes, called Curiae; or by hundredths, called Centuriae; or by wards,
called Tribus. The first sort of assemblies they called comitia Curiata, the
second comitia Ce^turiata, the last comitia Tributa. Sigon. de iure Romans li. ^.
cap. 17.
Where by the way we must note, that that thing which was determined by the
mayor part in any parish, hundredth, or ward was said to be determined by that
whole parish, hundredth or ward, and that which was determined by the mayor part
of parishes, Pars putat vt ferrent iuvenet suffragia soli^ Pontibus infirmos
praecipitasse senes. Ovid. Fast.
hundreths, or wards, was said to be approved comitijs Curiatis, Centuriatis,
vel Tributis. Secondly we must note that neither children until they were
seventeene years old, nor old men after the sixtieth year of their age, were
allowed to suffrage in these assemblies, whence arose that adage Sexagenarij de
ponte deijciendi: and old me^ were hence called Depontani, for the explication
of which see Page 13.
before. Likewise those whom for some notorious crime the ce^sors had
disfranchised, had no authority of suffraging: They were termed Aerarij because
they did pro capite suo tributi nomine, Sigon. de iure Romans lib. 1. cap. 17.
era pendere. Here before we speak of those three several kinds of
assemblies, we will consider the manner of their proceedings in propounding
cases unto the assemblies. Philip. Beroaldus in orat. Phil. 11.
The custom was at first, that the Romans should bestow their suffrages Viua
voce, but afterward that every one might with freer liberty give his voice,
they commanded certain wooden tables, wherein the names of those that stood
for offices were written, to be carried about, every suffrager receaving so
many tables, as there were suitors: then did the people give back that table
with whom they would suffrage. But if a law were to be enacted, the^ every
suffrager received two tables, in the one or which were written these two great
letters V. R; in the other was written a great Roman A. Those who delivered
these tables unto the people, did stand at the lower end of Vid. page 13.
those bridges (which were erected up for the suffragers to ascend unto the
ovilia) whence they were called a diribendo.i. from distributing Diribitores.
At the other end of the bridges were placed certain chests or little coffers,
into which the suffragers which did approve the law did cast in the first
table; those that disliked it, did cast in the second: for by those two letters
V. R. which were written in the first, is meant Vti Rogas.i. Be it as thou have
asked, this word Fiat being understood. By A. in the second table was meant
Antiquo.i. I forbid it, the word signifying, as much as antiquum volo; I like
the old law, I love no innovations. The tables being thus cast into the chests,
certain men appointed for that purpose in manner of Scrutators (they called
them Custodes, and sometimes Plin. l. 33. cap 2.
Nongenti) did take the tables out of the chests, and so number the voices by
making so many points or pricks in a void table, as they found tables alike:
which kind of accounting occasioned these and the like phrases; Suffragiorum
punctano^ tulit septem, and Omne tulit punctum; where punctum is used for
suffragium. The voices being thus numbered, it was pronounced by the common
crier what was decreed. Because the use of those tables is now grown quite out
of use, I shall make bold to insert that, which with much labor I have
collected out of several autors touching these tables. It is certain that a
long time the use of paper was not known, whence men were wont to write
sometimes upon the inward rinds of trees, called in Latin Libri (so that to
this day we call our books Libri, because in old time they were made of those
rinds of trees:) sometimes they did write in great leaves made of that rush
Papyrus, growing in Egypt, from which we have derived our english word Paper,
and the latin word Papyrus, now signifying our writing paper; but the Romans
at this time did use to write in tables of wood, covered with wax, called in
latin ceratae tabulae. They wrote their wills and testaments in tables, P.
Pellitar. in orat. pro A. Coecinna.
Hinc secundum and contra tabulas bonorum possessio; The possession of goods
either according or against the testator his will. Because of the wax wherewith
these tables were covered, cera is often used in the same sense, as Haeredes
primae cerae.i. primae tabulae and in primo gradu instituti; by which words I
think are understood such heirs as Alex. Genesis dier. l. 1. c. 1.
Alexander calls Haeredes ex toto ass.i. heirs to the maine inheritance,
opposing them to those which did receive only legacies, whom he calls there
Haeredes in ima cera, secu^dos haeredes, and legatarios. Fr. Sylvius pro (...)
Sylvius not upon improbable grounds does think that Tully does understand by
Haeredes secundi, such heirs as were nominated to succeed the chief heir or
heirs if they died. They wrote their accounts in tables, hence Tabulae accepti
and expensi, signifying reckoning books. They wrought their statutes also in
tables, whence Tabulae publicae, are englished statute books, or rather books
of record. Those writings or instruments which the Senate or Emperor caused to
be hanged up in the market place, to release and discharge any banckrupt from
paying his debts, they termed Fr. Sylv. in orat. Catilin. 2am.
tabulas novas; we may english them letters of protection. They wrought their
inventories of goods set at sale in tables calling them tabulas auctionarias:
yea they indicted their epistles and common letters in tables, insomuch that
tabellae are expounded missiue letters, and tabellarius which properly
signifies a carier of tables, is now used to signify a letter-carier. Fr.
Sylv. in orat. Catilin. 3.
The manner how they sealed their letters was thus: they did bind another table
unto that, wherein the indictment was, with some strong thread sealing the knot
of that thread with wax, whence Cicero says Linum incidimus.i. we opened the
letters. P. P^llitar. in orat. pro A. Coecinna.
Lastly they wrote their books in tables, whence from them we do at this day
call our books codices a caudicibus, caudex signifying properly the truncke,
or stock of a tree, whereof these tables or books were made. We must note
withal that they wrote not with inck or quill, but with an instrument of
steel or iron, having Vid. Erasm. Adag.
a sharp point at the one end, and being broad, yet keen and well edged at
the other: with the sharp point they did write what they pleased, with the
broad end they did scrape out what they had written: whence stylum invertere
is to say and unsay a thing, to turn his punch the wrong end downward, as it
were to scrape out that which one had formerly written. And as we use this
word Manus to signify the writing it self, according to that of Cic. orat.
contra Catil.
Tully, cognovit manum, and signum suum: so in the like sense we use this word
stylus, to signify the peculiar tenure or strain of phrase, which any man
observes in the composing of an oration, epistle, or such like; in which sense
Tully uses it as the antitheto^ to gladius, in that speech of his Cic. orat.
pro Muren.
Cedat foru^ castris, otiu^ militiae stylus gladio; though in another place he
uses it to signify, if not a sword yet a pocket dagger, as Etsi meus ille
stylus fuisset; Mic. Toxita in orat. Philippic. 2.
in which place stylus does signify as much as pugio. Now that we may return
to the matter whence we have digressed, we will proceed to show the manner how
they enacted their laws. All the Romans had not power and authority of preferring
a law, but only eight of their magistrates which they called Magistratus
maiores: namely the Praetor, the Consuls, the Dictator, the Interrex, the
Decemviri, the military Tribunes, the Kings, and the Triumviri, unto these
eight was added one of those whom they called Magistratus minores, namely the
Tribunus Plebis. If any of these Magistrates thought it fit to prefer a law,
then did he first write it down at home, and consult with some lawyer, whether
or no it might be for the good of the common wealth, whether it would not
weaken any former law, or whether it was not formerly included in some other
law, etc. These and many other cautions were to be considered, before it was
preferred, yea some would have the approbation of the whole Senate after the advice of their lawyer, though diverse times that has been omitted. And the
lawyer alone allowing it, the law was hanged up publicly in the market place
for the space of three market-daies, which kind of publishing the law was
termed Legis Promulgatio quasi provulgatio, during which time of promulgation,
reasons were alleged pro and con: by the spectators: and all the people had so
much time to consult of the convenience thereof, and every one upon just
reason, had free liberty to admonish him that preferred the law, either to
amend it, or to surcease the proposeall. After the third Market Day, (for
unless it were upon an extraordinary occasion, no assembly might be called
upon a market day, because of the country folks businesses, they also having
freedom of suffraging) the magistrate did convocate, the people to that place
where the law was to be proposed: there the Towneclarke or notary reading the
law, the common crier proclaimed it, then did he which promulged it make an
oration unto the people, persuading them that it might pass. Sometimes others
of his friends would second him with orations in his behalf, as likewise
others that disliked it, would by orations dissuade the people, showing the
inconveniency thereof. After the orations had been ended, an vrne or pitcher
was brought unto certain Priests there present, into which were cast the names
of the tribes, if the comitia were tributa, or of the centuries if they were
centuriata, or of the parishes if curiata: then sortibus aequatis.i. the lots
being shaken together, they drew their lots; and that tribe or centurie whose
name was first drawn, was called Tribus vel Ce^turia praerogativa, a
praerogando, because they were first asked their voices: that curia upon which
the first lot fell, was called Rosin. antiq. lib. 6. c. 7
Principium, because that curia did first suffrage. Those Tribes upon whom the
other lots fell, namely the second, third, fourth, etc: were termed Tribus
Iurevocatae. From this distinction it is that such a man as has the voices of
the praerogatiue tribe, or century, is said to have (...)
Omen praerogativum: which good fortune whosoever could attain unto, was in
great hope of obtaining the other voices of the Iurevocatae; for they never or
very seldom would swerve from the determination of the prerogative tribe or
centurie. Whiles the people were busy in their lottery, in the mean time if
any (...)
Tribune of the commons would intercedere.i. forbid the proceeding, he might be
heard, and the whole assembly therevpo^ should be dismissed: likewise they
were dismissed if either he which first promulged the law did alter his
opinion, or if the consul commanded supplications to be offered up in the
behalf of their Emperor, or any of those holy days called Feriae Latinae vel
Imperativae to be observed upon that day; or if any of the people assembled
were taken with the falling sickness (by reason whereof that disease is called
by the (...)
Physicians at this day, Morbus comitialis:) lastly the assemblies were
dissolved by reason of the soothsayings, which kind of dissolution was caused
either by the civil magistrate his observing of signs and tokens in the
heaven, and that was called Spectio, and sometimes de coelo observatio; the
very act of this observation, though no unlucky token did appear dissolved the
assembly: or else it was caused by the Augures, and civil magistrate
promiscuously, whenever any evil token was seen or heard either by the
magistrate or Augur (amongst which thunder was always counted the vnluckyest)
at which time the assemblies were in like manner to be dissolved: this manner of
dissolution was termed obnunciatio or Nunciatio. Stadius in Flor. l. 3. c. 7.
Obnu^ciabat, qui contra auspicia aliquid fieri nunciabat. Both these kinds
are easily to be collected out of that speech in Tully Cic. orat. Philip. 2.
Nos augures nunciationem solam habemus, consules and reliliqui magistratus
etiam spectione^. Here we may fitly in way of conclusion unto this tract, add
a just difference to be observed between these phrases, Promulgare, Rogare,
Far, et Figere legem. Promulgare legem was to hang up a law not yet asked, to
the public view of the people, to be examined by them touching the
conveniencie thereof. Rogare legem was to use a certain oration unto the
people, to persuade the conveniencie of the law, which oration because it began
with this form of words, Velitis, iubeatisne Quirites?.i. O ye Romans is it
your will and pleasure that this law shall pass or no? Hence was it termed
legis rogatio. Far lege^ was when the law had been approved of by the
people, then to write it down upon record, and so to lay it up into the
treasure-house; Fr. Matura^tius in Phil. 1.
Cum approbata fuisset lex, in aes incidebatur, and in aerario condebatur, and
tunc demum lata dicebatur. Lastly, Figere legem was to publish the law after it
had been approved and recorded Corn. Tacit annal. l. 11.
by hanging it up in tables of brass in their market places, or at their
church doors: hence it is that we use Fr. Matur. in Philip. 12.
tabulam figere in the same sense, namely to enact or establish a law, and
refigere legem to disprove or cancel a law. Sig. de jure prou. lib. 3. c. 1.
And that which was determined Comitijs curiatis was termed lex curiata, that
which was Comitijs centuriatis, lex centuriata, that which was comitijs
tributis was not called a law, but Plebiscitum.

CHAP. 2.
De Comitijs Curiatis.
COmitia curiata were those, wherein the Roman people being divided into thirty
parishes did give their suffrages: they were so called from curia signifying a
parish. And until Servius Hostilius his time, who did first institute the
comitia centuriata, all things which were determined by the suffrages of the
people, were determined by these curiata comitia: But after the other two
sorts of assemblies had been established, these curiata were used only
either for the enacting of some particular laws, or for the creating of some
certain priests called Flamines. For the better understanding hereof we must
remember, that though at first these thirty parishes were parts of the three
Tribes (each tribe being divided into ten parishes,) yet in process of time
the increase of the Roman people was such, that a great part of the Roman
fields were filled with buildings and places of habitation, insomuch that the
tribes of the Romans were increased to thirty five: but the parishes (because
none that dwelt out of the city were tied to the rites and ceremonies of the
Roman religion) did not increase, so that the parishes did not always remain
parts of the tribes. Hence it follows that all the Romans had not power to
suffrage in these assemblies, but those alone, who dwelt within the city: for
no other could be of any parish. The place where these assemblies were held,
was the great hal of justice called from these assemblies Comitium. Before
these assemblies were held, it was required that some lawful magistrate for
some competent time before hand should solemnly proclaim them, and the
thirty serjants (each parish having for that purpose his serjant) should call
the people together; as likewise three Augures or at least one should be
present to assure them by their observatio^s, either of the favor or
displeasure of the Gods. Upon these premises the matter was proposed unto the
people, who if they liked it, the^ they proceeded unto their election; if
otherwise they disliked it, then did the Tribunus plebis intercedere.i. forbid
their proceedings: whereupon their assemblies were presently dissolved.

CHAP. 3.
De Comitijs Centuriatis.
AS those former assemblies were called Curiata a curijs, so were these called
Centuriata a Centurijs. Servius Tullius caused a general valuation of every
citizens estate throughout Rome, to be taken upon record together with their
age: and according to their estates and age, he divided the Romans into six
great armies or bands which he called Classes; though in truth there were but
five of special note: the sixth contained none but the poorer sort and those of
no worth or esteem. The valuation of those in the first Classis was not under
two hundred pounds, and they alone by way of excellency were termed Classici:
and hence figuratively are our best and worthiest authors called Classici
scriptores, Classical authors. All the others though they were enrolled in the
second, third, or any other Classis, yet were they said to be Infra classem.
The valuation of the second band was not under seven score pounds. The
valuation of the third was not so little as an hundred pounds; of the fourth
not less then forty pounds; of the fifth not less then twenty five pounds.
The sixth contained the poorer sort, whom Horace calls Tenuis census homines,
men of small substance; and also they were called Proletarij, a munere
officioque prolis ede^dae, as if the only good that they did to the common
weal, were in begetting of children: and sometimes they were called
Capite-ce^si, that is such as paid either very little or nothing at all
toward subsidies, but only they were registered among the citizens as it
appears by Sig. de Rom lib. 1. cap. 4.
Sigonius. These six great bands or armies were subdivided into hundreths
called in Latin Ce^turiae. The first Classis contained fourscore centuries of
footmen, and eighteen of horsemen: the second contained twenty centuries of
footmen, and two of workmen, which followed after to make military engines and
weapons: the third also, as likewise the fourth contained twenty ce^turies of
footmen, but to the fourth were added two other centuries of trumpeters,
drummers, and such like, who upon just occasion did Classicum canere, sound the
alarm and upon just occasion did again receptui canere, sound the retrait:
the fifth Classis contained thirty centuries of footmen: the sixth or last
Classis contained one centurie: so that in all the six Classes were contained
one hundred fourscore and thirteen centuries. Where we must note that all the
centuries of footmen did consist the one half in every Classis of the younger
sort, who were to make war abroad upon the enemies; the other half of old men,
who remained at home for the safety of the city. All that has been hitherto
spoken of these Centuriata comitia, may be collected out of Sigonius in the
place above quoted. The chief co^mander of every centurie was called Centurio;
the rod or tip-staffe, wherewith he did strike his soldiers to keep the^ in
array, was called by Pliny, Centurionum vitis. So then we may perceive, that
those Centuriata comitia were those, wherein the people did give their voices
by centuries, or hundreds. Now the ce^turies did not consist of those alone
which had their places of habitatio^ at Rome, but of certain Municipall states
also, and such colonies or other states, that could Rosin. Ant lib. 6. cap. 10.
Plenum civitatis ius cu^ iure suffragij adipisci. Rosin. antiq. Rom, lib. 6.
c. 16.
Now the custom in old time was, that al these centuries should march in their
armor after the magistrate which assembled them, into the Campus Martius,
there to give their voices. But this custom continued not long, for thereby
they did disarme the city, and give their enemies (if any should assail them
in time of their assemblies) the greater adva^tage: for their greater security
therefore, they appointed a flagge to be hanged out upon the mount Ianiculus,
some few armed men standing there in watch and ward for the safeguard of the
city: and when the assembly was to be dissolved, then did the watch depart,
and the flag was taken down: neither could any thing after that be
determined; but if they continued their assemblies, then did they proceed to
the giving of their voices, in old time thus. Those ce^turies of the first
Classis being the wealthier had the prerogative of suffraging first, and
because this first Classis contained more centuries then all the rest,
therefore, if they could agree among themselves, the other centuries were never
asked their voices. This kind of suffraging being somewhat partial in as much
as the richer and wealthier being placed in the first Classis did oversway the
elections against the poorer sort of people; thence did the after ages appoint
that that ce^tury should have the prerogative of suffraging first, upon whom
the lot fell. The other centuries were all called Rosin. antiq Romans lib. 6. c.
20.
Centuriae Iurevocatae, and did give their voices not by lots (as the Tribus
Iurevocatae did) but the elder and wealthier centuries did suffrage next after
the prerogative centurie, accordingly as their place required.

CHAP. 4.
De Comitiis Tributis.
FOR the better understanding of these assemblies by Tribes or wards, it will
be needful first to learn, that this word Tribus in this place does signify
a certain region, ward, or local place of the city, or the fields belonging
thereunto according to that, A. Gel. l. 15. cap. 27.
Tributa comitia erant cum ex regionibus and locis suffragabantur. It was so
called either a tributo dando every several region or quarter paying such a
tribute; or quia primo tres tantum fuerunt, the whole city being at first
divided only into three regions, or wards, each national tribe having his
several region or local tribe to dwell in. The first national tribe called
Ramnenses did in habit the mount Palatine, and the mount Coelius, and those two
hills made the first local tribe. The second national tribe called Tatienses
did inhabit the Capitol, and the Quirinall mountain, which two mountains
made the second local tribe. The third national tribe did inhabit the plain
between the Capitol and the Palatine hill, and that plain was called the
third local tribe. Of these tribes more is spoken in the Vid. page 22.
first division of the Roman people. Only here we must note thus much, that in
process of time after the city was enlarged, and the number of the Roman
citizens increased, these local tribes were also augme^ted, so that they
amou^ted at the last to the number of 35. some of them being called Vrbanae,
others Rusticae; Sig. de iure Romans l. 1. c. 3.
Vrbanae ab vrbis regionibus, Rusticae ab agri partibus erant nuncupatae. And
of these two sorts the Tribus rusticae were accounted the more honorable.
Moreover we must remember, that a man might be reputed of this or that tribe,
although he had no place or habitation therein. Concerning the place where
these Tributa comitia were had, sometime they fell out to be in the Campus
Martius; sometimes in their great hall of justice called Comitium; sometimes in
the Capitol; many times in other places, according to the discretion of the
magistrate which caused these assemblies.

CHAP. 5.
De Candidatis.
IT shall not be impertinent to annexe some necessary observations touching the
Roman petitors or suitors for bearing office: where we will observe these three
phrases ambire magistratum, inire magistratum, and abire magistratu. The first
signifies, to sue for an office, the second to enter into the office, the
third to depart out of the office. Again the difference of these phrases,
Conficere legitima suffragia, and Explere suffragia. Rosin. ant. Romans l. 6. c.
20*
The first signifies to have so many voices as the law does require. The
second signifies to have more voices then any other competitor, but not so
many as the law requires.

These persons were termed Candidati, a toga candida, from the white gown
which they did wear, as appears more at large Page 18.
where we have spoken De Romana toga. That they might the easier procure the
good will of the people, Rosin. Ant. Romans l. 7. c. 8
these four things were expected from them. First Nomenclatio, the saluting of
every citizen by his name; for the better discharge of which, they had a
certain follower, which should, by way of prompting, tell every citizens name
as he passed by, and hence this prompter was sometimes called Nomenclator,
which word does properly signify a common crier in a court of Justice, such as
call men to their appearance, whence they had their name from Nomen and calo,
an old latin word to call; sometimes Monitor; sometimes Fartor ab infarciendo
in aures. Secondly, Blanditia, that is, a friendly compellation by the addition
of some complementall name, as well met friend, brother, father, etc. Thirdly,
Assiduitas, that is, an hot canvasing or soliciting men without intermission.
Lastly, Benignitas, a bountiful or liberal largess, or dole of money called
Co^giarium from the measure Congius containing a gallon, because their G.
Trapez. in Phil. 2am.
dole was at the first made of oil or wine distributed in those measures.
Howbeit (...) any dole gift or larges in money or otherwise is called
co^giariu^. The distributors of this dole were called Sig. de iud. lib. 2. c.
29.
divisores and Barth Latomus in orat pro M. Coelio
sequestres, although sometimes sequester signified a briber or corrupter of a
Judge. Likewise their bounty or liberality consisted in providing great
dinners, and exhibiting great shows unto the people, etc.

Lib. 3. Sect. 2.
Of the Roman Magistrates.
CHAP. 1.
De magistratibus Romany.
WE being to treat of the Roman magistrates will first see what the
definition of a magistrate is. A magistrate is he Sig. de iur. Romans l. 1. c. 20.
who receives by public authority the charge and oversight of humane affairs
belonging to the common wealth. These Roman magistrates were either to be
chosen only out of the better sort of Romans, called the Patricij; or else
only out of the commonalty. Sig. de iure Provinc. l. 3. cap. 1.
The first were thence called Magistratus patricij, the second Magistratus
plebeij. The Patricij had power to hinder the assemblies of the people; namely
their Comitia by observing signs and tokens from the heavens: howbeit some of
them had greater power, others less; insomuch that some were called Maiores
magistratus, quoniam habebant maiora auspicia.i. Fenest. de magist. Romans cap. 1.
magis rata. Others were called minores magistratus, quoniam habebant minora
auspicia. Of these in their order.

CHAP. 2.
De Rege and Tribuno Celerum.
IN the infancy of Rome, it was governed by a king until Tarquinius Superbus
his time, who by maintaining that shameful act of his son toward Lucretia
did so incense the people, that they did not only for the present exile him,
but decreed that their city should never after that be governed by a king. This
king had absolute rule and government over the city. For the safety of his
person he had three hundred chosen young men always to be attendant about him,
much like unto our kings Majesty's Guard here in England, or rather his
Pensioners. They were called Plutarch. in Romulo.
Celeres a celeritate, from their readiness in assistance: sometimes they were
called Trossuli, Plin. lib. 33. cap. 2.
because they alone without the help of any foote-men did take a certain city
in Etruria called Trossulum. Other times they have been called Flexumines,
whereof as yet there has been no certain reason rendered. Each hundred of them
had their several overseer called Centurio: and over them al there was one
general overseer and chief commander, whom they called Praefectum vel
Tribunum Celerum, his place being next to the king. A second sort of attendants
about the king were called Lictores a ligando, according to that, Lictor
colliga manus. They did somewhat resemble our Serjants there being in number
twelve of them. Their office was to carry certain bundles of birchen rods with
an axe wrapped up in the midst of them: the rods in latin were called Fasces,
the axe Securis. Ioac. Camerarius in orat pro Flacco.
The reason why they carried both axes and rods was to intimate the different
punishment that be longed unto notorious and petty malefactors. The reason why
they were wrapped up together was not only that they might be thereby more
portable, Immedicabile vulnus Ense recidatur etc.
but that the anger of the magistrate might be somewhat allayed, whiles they
were unbinding. Hence because these Fasces virgarum and securium, did betoken
honor and chiefedome in place and authority, by the figure synecdoche this word
has been used to signify honor and dignity, as Fascibus suis abrogatis, he
being discharged of his magistracy or dignity.

CHAP. 3.
De Senatu, and quis Princeps Senatus, and qui Senatores Pedarij?
TOuching the election of the Senators, the number of them, and the distinction
of them into Senatores maiorum and Senatores minorum gentium, sufficient has
been delivered Sup. p. 23.
in the second division of the Roman people; as likewise Sup. p. 24.
in the third division has been shown the habit or gown, by which the
Senators were distinguished from the Roman gentlemen. Here therefore it shall
be sufficient for us to understand, that every solemn meeting or consistory of
these Senators was called Senatus. The foreman of them (which could be no
other then such as had been either Consul or Censor, was called Princeps
Senatus, and his opinion was always first asked. Now among those that had
borne those foresaid offices it was in the Censors power to make whom he would
foreman. The decree of this consistory was called Senatus-consultum. And many
times it is written with these two letters only S. C. The place where this
co^sistory was had they called Senaculum. None was Mart. Phi leticu^. in Cic l
1. ep. fam. 1.
ordinarily admitted into the place of a Senator, before the five and twentieth
year of his age: and of those that were admitted, some were allowed to ride
unto the Senate House in a Curule chair, others went on foot: Mart.
Phileticus. ibid.
whence these latter were called Senatores Pedarij. They determined their acts
which they called Senatus consulta sometimes by departing down their benches,
and dividing themselves into sides, those which did approve that which was
proposed sided with the party who did Refer ad Senatum.i. propose the matter
unto the Senate; the others departed unto the contrary side, or if they came
not down at all, but sat still on the benches, then did they signify by
holding up or beckning with their hands what side they would take. Now if the
mayor part were easy to be discerned, then they rested there, tearming that
act to be decreed Hubert. in Cic. lib. 1. ep. fam. 2.
per discessionem: and hence these and the like phrases have taken their
beginning, In illius sententiam iturus sum, and Manibus pedibusque discedere in
alicuius sententiam.i. to be fully persuaded of ones opinion. Now if both
companies were almost equal, so that the mayor part could not easily be
discerned, then did they proceed to give their voices, and that which was thus
determined was said to be decreed per singulorum sententias exquisitas.i. by
voices. Here we may observe that to those, who were favorably heard in
Senate, His Senatus dari d^ebatur; and Ascensius in Cic. l. 1. epist. fam. 4.
likewise they were said, Stare in Senatu: as on the contrary they were said
Iacere, whom the Senate neglected or rather condemned. Cic. orat. de arusp.
respons*
Cu^ mihi stanti iacens minaretur, says Rosin. Antiq. l 7. cap. 7.
Tully. If any Senator were absent without a lawful excuse, then was he fined,
and for the payment thereof he did put in a pledge, which if he did not
ransom, then did the common Treasurer Caedere vel concidere pignora.i. strain
or seize upon the pledges, making common sale thereof, in which sense those two
phrases are used, namely, capere pignora, and auferre pignora,.i. to strain or
seize upon a man's goods.

CHAP. 4.
De Consulibus.
AFter the expulsion of Tarquinius Sup. the last Roman King, all the citizens
in Rome assembled, and concluded that the government of their city, which
before was in the hand of one alone governor, called their King, should now
be divided between two: Rosin. ant. Romans l. 7. c. 9.
whom at first (before there was any such subordinate office as a Praetorship)
the Romans called Praetores, quod praeirent populo. Not long after they were
called Iudices a iudicando. In process of time they were known by no other
name then Co^sules a consulendo populo. Cic. orat. Philid. 5.
No citizen, was ordinarily created Consul before the forty third year of his
age. Neither might any be chosen without special dispensation either of their
absence out of Rome, Suet. Iul. Caes. cap. 18.
or in time of their triumph which was the reason that Julius Caesar was glad
to forgo his triumph at that time, when he was Consul with Bibulus. The
signs or tokens of this Consular dignity were the twelve Lictors carrying
their bundles of rodds and axes Alex. Genesis dier. lib. 3. c. 3.
the first month before one Consul, and the second before the other; as
formerly they had done before their Kings. Fenest. de magist. Romans
The reason why each Consul had not twelve Lictors always, was because the
tyranny of the Consuls might then seem to be doubled and to exceed the tyranny
of the Kings: another token was a certain chair of estate called Sella
^burnea.i. an yvory chair, so called from the matter whereof it was made, and
A. Gell l. 3. cap. 18.
because this chair was commonly carried about in a certain coach or chariot,
wherein the Consul did ride, hence from Currus which signifies a chariot, it
is also called Sella curulis: where Stadius i^ Flor. l. 1. c. 5.
note that this word Curulis is sometimes used substantiuely, and then it
signifies some chief magistracy or office amongst the Romans. The gown, by
which they were distinguished from other magistrates or private men, was a
certain purple gown, which from the great embroadred works was called
Trabea, and he that did wear it was thence called Trabeatus, according to
that, Trabeati cura Quirini. It will be worthy our observation to note, that
the Romans did date their deeds and charters in old time by naming the year
wherein their city was first founded; as to say Abvrbe condita the twentieth,
thirtieth, or fortieth year, etc. But in process of time their manner of
dating was by subscribing the names of their present Consuls: as to say, such a
thing was determined L. Valerio, M. Horatio Consulibus, such and such being
Consuls. Whence Suetonius speaking of Iul. Caesar, says, he was appointed to
be Flamen Dialis, sequentibus consulibus.i. the next year following. Those
alone who had borne the office of a Consul, not every one that was capeable
thereof were said to be Viri consulares. I. Tislinus in orat. Cic. pro Coelio.
At the first those who were created Consuls remained in their office the space
of an whole year, being designati ad consulatum upon the twenty fourth of
October. P. Ramus in orat. Ca^il. 1.
At consulatum non inierant ante Calendas Ian.i. the first of January. The
reason of this chasme, or interim between their designation unto their office,
and their entry into it, was (as we may probably coniect) that the competitors
might have some time to enquire de Ambitu.i. whether there was no indirect and
unlawful means used in their canvassing. In process of time either by
voluntary resignation or deposition or death many Consuls have been chosen in
the same year, and they were called Fr. Sylvius in Cic. Orat. pro Muren.
Non ordinarij, and suffecti Consules. At such times all their deeds were
dated by the names of the two first Consuls which began the year: whence those
two first, and likewise all those that continued in their office the whole
year were called Rosin. ant. Romans l. 7. c. 9.
Consules Honorarij, and Consules Ordinarij.

CHAP. 5.
De Censoribus.
THE Consuls finding themselves encombred with so many businesses of a
different nature, did by consent of the Senate choose two peculiar officers
called Fenest. de Magist. Romans cap. 17.
Censores a censendo; because they cessed and valued every man's estate,
registring their names, and placing them in a fit century. For it did concern
the Romans to know the number, and likewise the wealth of their people, to
the end they might be informed of their own strength, and so shape their
course accordingly, either in undertaking wars, transplanting Colonies, or in
making provision of victuals in time of peace. A second and maine part of their
office was in reforming manners to which end they had power to enquire into
every man's life. This part of their authority was noted out unto us by this
phrase being called Virgula censoria. If any one had played the ill husband,
and neglected his farm, or left his vine untrimmed, the Censors took notice
thereof. They did Senatu and Tribu movere.i. They did depose Senators, and
pull down men from a more honorable Tribe to a less honorable. They did
punish Capitis diminutione.i. with loss of freedom: and that was threefold I.
Tis^in. in Cic. orat. pro A. Coecinna.
Maxima, Media, and Minima. The least degree of disfranchising was the pulling
of a man down from an high Tribe to a lower. Diminutio media, was an exilement
out of the city without the loss of ones freedom. It is I. Camerar. in orat.
Cic. pro Muren.
commonly set down in this form of words, Tibi aqua, and igni interdico.
Diminutio maxima was the loss of ones Tribe, city, and freedom. These Censors
were reputed of the best rank of Magistrates in Rome: they remained in their
office an whole five years space ordinarily. I say ordinarily, because Fenest.
de Romans magist. cap. 7.
through the abuse of their place, the office has been sometimes made annual.
Pomp. Laetus de Rom magist^^. de Censor.
That five years space the Romans did call Lustrum, because they did once in
every five years revolution Lustrare exercitum Romanum, by sacrifice purge the
Roman army. Hence we say duo Lustra, 10 years; tria Lustra, 15 years, etc.
The performance of this Lustration belonged also unto the Censors: for after
the Censors had performed the one part of their office in registring the just
valuation of every citizens estate, Panciroll. (...) rerum depe^di^arum (...)
de (...) capiendi modo.
they did lead a Sow, a Ram, and a Bull three times about the army, and in
the end sacrificed them to Mars: and thus to purge an army, is condere Lustrum;
though sometimes condere lustrum does signify, to muster an army. These
sacrifices, as likewise all others of the like nature, that is, wherein there
was a Sow, a Ram, and a Bull sacrificed, were termed sometimes Alex. Genesis
dier. l. 5. c. 27.
Suovetauralia, sometimes Solitauralia, sometimes Pomp. Lae tus de mag. Romans
cap. de Censor.
Taurilia. Moreover it did belong unto these Censors to farm out the tributs,
imposts, tollage, etc. Pancirol. l. rerum deperdit. cap de ci by capiendi modo.
At the five years end, the acts of both their Censors were registered upon
books of record, which records were laid up in a certain religious house
dedicated to the Nymphs. Whence Cic pro Milone.
Cicero speaking of Clodius, says, Qui aedem Nympharum incendit vt memoriam
publicam, incensis tabulis publicis impressam aboleret.

CHAP. 6.
De Praetoribus.
THe Consuls by reason of their many troubles in war, having no time to
administer justice unto the Roman people, did for their better help therein
create two new officers for the executing of justice, the one to examine and
judge of matters within the city between citizen, and citizen; the other to
decide controversies between forreiners: The first they Pighius aequipet. comp
called Praetorem vrbanum, and Praetorem maiorem; the other Praetorem
peregrinu^, and Praetorem minorem: we may english them Lord-chiefe-Iustices.
Where we must note that at the first there was only the Praetor Vrbanus, until
the cases and suits in law became so many, that one was not sufficient to hear
them all: Alex. Genesis dier. l. 2. c. 15.
yea at last the number of the Praetors came to sixteen: namely when those two
were added for the providing of corn and grain: whence they were called
Praetores cereales; Fenest. de mag. Romans cap. 19.
nay there were at last eighteen Praetors, there being two others added to
judge of controversies touching feofme^ts of trust called thence Praetores
fidei co^missarij. Fr. Sylvius in orat. pro Muraen.
Causaru^ duo genera sut: aliae privatae, aliae publicae; has criminosas, illas
civiles appellant. In those cases which were private.i. I Saxonius in Cic.
orat. pro S. Roscio
touching equity and uprightness of any act or the restitution of any money or
goods unlawfully detained from the right owner, it belonged principally unto
the Rosin. antiq. lib. 7. c. 11.
two first Praetors to judge: I. Saxonius ibid.
but under them unto the Centumviri, who often times are called by Tully,
Recuperatores, and Iudices hastae; the court Hasta centu^viralis; because one
of the marks and special ensigns was a spear erected up in the place the
court was kept. Those cases which were public or criminal, as treason,
murder, buying of voices in the canvassing for offices, etc: were called also,
causae capitales, and capitis dimicatio.i. Fr. Sylv. in orat. pro Mur
such cases wherein if the party accused had bin found guilty he was capite
damnatus: by which phrase we must not understand always Vltimum suppliciu^,
sed aliquando exilium: quo scilicet caput.i. civis eximitur a civitate. Rosin.
antiq. l. 9. c. 18.
These cases at the first were heard by the kings and Consuls; afterward by
certain appointed thereunto by the people, being called from their inquisition
quaesitores parricidij. In continuance of time the examination and hearing of
these public cases was turned over unto certain magistrates, who because
they were to continue their office a full and entire year (whereas the others
had their authority no longer then they sat in judgment) were thence for
distinction sake called Praetores Quaesitores, and the cases were termed
Quaestiones perpetuae: Rosin. antiq. lib. 7. c. 11
because in these cases there was one set form of giving judgment
perpetually to remain; whereas in those private or civil causes the Praetor
did commonly every year change the form of giving judgment by hanging up new
edicts. Rosin Ant lib. 6. cap. 18.
Here we must note that these Quaesitores Parricidarum, otherwise called
Praetores Quaesitores, had not the examination of all public cases, but
sometimes upon extraordinary occasions either the Consuls, the Senate, or the
people themselves would give judgment. Now as those former Praetors had a
spear erected up, whereby their court for private causes was known; so had
these Quaesitores a sword hanged out in token of their court. Sig. de iud. lib.
1. cap. 7.
Praetorum insignia duo fuere, hasta, and gladius; illa ad iurisdictionem, hic
ad quaestionem significandam. The officers which did attend these Praetors were
Scribae.i. certain notaries much resembling the Clearkes of our Assizes, their
offices being to write according as the Praetors or chief Justices did bid
them, taking their name a scribendo. The second sort were called Accensi ab
acciendo, from summoning, because they were to summon men to their appearance.
They much resembled our bayleiffes errant. The third sort were lictores, of
which before: Fenest. de Romans magist. cap. 19.
The authority of the vrbane Praetor was so increased in time, yea his honor
was such, that whatsoever he commanded, it had the name of Ius honorariu^. P.
Pellit. in Cic orat. pro A. Coecinna.
Others are of opinion that only the Praetors edict was that Ius honorariu^,
Pighius Aequipet comp.
the Praetor Vrbanus being wont at the entrance into his office to collect a
set form of administration of justice out of the former laws and several
edicts of former Praetors, according unto which he would administer justice all
the year following. And unless the people might be ignorant of the contents
thereof, he caused it to be hanged up to the public view. This form of
justice was termed Edictum, ab edicendo.i. P. Pellit. in Cic. orat. pro A.
Caecinna.
imperando; because thereby he did command, or forbid something to be done.
Whence Pellitarius in the place now quoted does translate consulum edicta,
Mandatory letters, that it might be distinguished from other magistrates
edicts. It was commonly called Praetoris edictum. And as Pighius observes in
the place above quoted, it was called edictum perpetuum; not absolutely,
because the virtue thereof was perpetual (for that expired together with the
Praetors office, and therefore Cic. in. Verrin. 2.
Tully calls it lege^ annuam:) but in respect of other edicts made in the
middle of the year upon extraordinary and unexpected occasions, which latter
sort of Edicts Cic. in Verrin 5.
Tully calls peculiaria and nova edicta. Afterward Sigon. de iudic. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
Salvius Iulianus collected an Edict out of all the old edicts of the former
Praetors, wherein almost all the whole civil law was contained and this was
called properly Edictum perpetuu^, because that all the Praetors ever after did
administer justice according to that Edict by the appointment of Hadrianus
being then Emperor. The edict being given out, the administration of justice
consisted in the use of one of these three words, Do, Dico, and Addico.i. I.
Camerar. in Cic. orat. pro. Flacco.
Dat actionem, Dicit ius, Addicit ta^ res, quam homines. For explanation
whereof we must know, that this word Addico is sometimes verbum Augurale,
sometimes Forense, sometimes a term of art belonging unto the discipline of
the Augures, and so the birds are said Addicere, when they show some good and
lucky token, that the matter consulted about is approved by the Gods; the
opposite hereunto is Abdicere. Sometimes this verb Addico is a term of law
signifying as M. Toxita in orat. pro Pub. Quint.
much as to deliver up into ones hands, or into ones possession: whence we do
not only call those goods that are delivered by the Praetor unto the right
owner Bona addicta, but those debtors also which are delivered up by the
Praetor unto their creditors to work out their debt, are termed servi
Addicti: yea moreover because in all port-sales it was necessary that the
Praetor should Addicere bona deliver up the goods sold: hence does this word
often signify to sell, as Addicere sanguinem alicuius, to take money to kill a
man, to sell a man's life. Touching the reason of their name they were called
Praetores a praecundo, quonia^ iure prae^ba^t. And Fr. Maturantius. in
Philippic. 13.
those alone were properly termed viri Praetorij, which had borne this office,
not they which were capeable thereof: in the same sense we say Viri censorij
and viri Aedilitij, etc.

CHAP. 7.
De Imperatoribus, Caesaribus, sive Augustis.
When C. Julius Caesar had overcome Pompey his sons in Spain, at his
return to Rome the Senate welcomed him with new invented titles of singular
honor, styling him Pater patriae, Consul in decennium, Dictator in perpetuum,
Sacro sanctus and Imperator: all which titles were afterward conferred upon
Octavius Caesar; and all the Emperors succeeding desired to be called
Imperatores and Caesares from him. Where we must understand that this name
Imperator was not altogether unknown before, for by that name the Roman
soldiers were wont (even at that time) to salute their L. General after some
special conquest. Servius Aen. lib. 6.
These Roman Emperors were afterward called also Augusti from Octavius Caesar
whom when the Senate studied to honor with some noble title, some were of
mind that he should be called Romulus, because he was in manner a second
founder of the city. But it was at length decreed by the advice of Manutius
Plancus, that he should be styled by the name of Augustus: which we may English
Sovereign, and they counted this a name of more reverence and majesty then
that former name of Romulus, because all consecrated and hallowed places were
called Loca augusta. The authority of these Emperors was very great, even as
great as the Kings in former times.

CHAP. 8.
De Principibus iuventutis Caesaribus, and nobilissimis Caesaribus.
A Rosin. ant. l. 7. c. 13.
custom was received amongst the Roman Emperors in their life time to
nominate him whom they would have to succeed them in their Empire: and him they
called Princeps iuventutis Caesar, and Nobilissimus Caesar. The like custom
was practiced by Charles the fifth Emperor of Germany, and so has been
continued by his successors; namely, that one should be chosen whom they called
Rex Romanorum, who should be so far invested in the title to the Empire by
the means of the present Emperor, that upon the death, resignation, or
deposition of the then being Emperor, he immediately should succeed.

CHAP. 9.
De Praefecto vrbis.
ROmulus for the better government of the city appointed a certain officer
called Vrbis Praefectus to have the hearing of all matters or causes between
the master and the servant, between orphans and their overseers, between the
buyer and the seller, etc. Afterward in time of the Roman Emperors this Vrbis
praefectus did assume unto himself such authority, that he would examine and
have the hearing of all causes, of what nature soever, if they were Intra
centesimum lapidem, within an hundred miles of Rome (for Despaute^^us in sua
syntaxi.
Lapis in old time signified a mile, because at every miles end a great stone
in manner of a mark-stone was erected.) In the absence of the King or Consuls,
he had all authority which belonged unto them resigned unto him. I am not
ignorant, that some do make this latter kind of praefecture or Lieuetenantship
a different office from the former: but I should rather think them to be one
and the same, only his authority to be more enlarged in the Kings absence,
and of this opinion do I find Fenestella, Alexand. Neop. and Sig. de iure
Romans l. 1. c. 20.
Sigonius.

CHAP. 10.
De Decemviris legibus scribendis.
FOR the better administration of justice the Fenest. de mag. Romans cap. 14.
Romans appointed three men, namely those who were reputed the gravest and
wisest amongst them to go to Athens there to pervse the Grecian laws, to the
intent that at their return, both a supply might be made of those laws that
were wanting in Rome, and the other which were faulty might thereby be
rectified and amended. At the return of those three men, the Consuls were
deposed, and both their authority and ensigns given unto these Decemviri. The
laws which they brought from Athens were written at first in ten tables of
brass: afterward two other tables were added. At which time those laws began
to be known and distinguished from others by the name of Leges 12 tabularum.
And according to those laws justice ever after was administered to the Roman
people. At first by these ten me^ appointed thereunto, whose authority was as
large even as the Kings and Consuls, in old time only it was annual: one of
them only had the ensigns of honor carried before the^; one alone had the
authority of convocating the Senate, confirming their decrees and the
discharge of all state businesses. Rosin. ant. Romans l. 7. c. 19
The other did little differ from private me^ in their habit; only when the
first had ruled a set time, the others succeeded by turns. This kind of
government did not continue long in Rome, for in the third year all their
power was abrogated, because of their tyranny and oppression used by them
toward the Roman people.

CHAP. 11.
De Interregia potestate.
AFter the death of Romulus Dion. Halicar. l. 2.
the Senators divided themselves into several companies called Decuriae
comitting the government of the kingdom to that Decury.i. to those ten men
upon whom the lot fell, calling the^ the Interreges: where we must know, that
these ten did not rule altogether, but each man ruled for the space of five
days, whence Rosin. lib. 6. cap. 16.
Rosinus calls this magistracy Magistratum quin queduanum. After that five
days government had passed through the first, then did they go to lots to
have a second decury chosen, and so a third, etc. This office of an Interrex
remained even in the Consuls time, so that if by some extraordinary occasion
the Consuls could not be created, Alex. Genesis dier. li. 5. c. 6.
then they chose one to whom alone they committed the whole government of the
kingdom, and him they called Interregem.

CHAP. 12.
De Dictatore.
Whensoever the Romans found themselves encombred with dangerous wars, or
any other eminent dangers, they presently chose a Dictator, to who^ alone was
committed the authority and rule of the whole kingdom, differing from a King
only in respect of his name, and the continuance of his office. Touching his
name he was so called, quoniam dictis eius parebat populus. His office
continued but six months and at the expiration thereof if need required he was
chosen again for another six months. He was also called Pighius in Tyrannif.
Populi Magister, in as much as none could make their appeal from him unto the
people. As soon as himself was established in his office he chose a
subordinate officer whom he called Stadius in Flor. l. 1. c. 11.
Equitum magister: his authority much resembled his whom they called Vrbi
praefectum: for as the Praefectus vrbi in the absence of the absence of the
king, so this Magister Equitum in absence of the Dictator had full and
uncontrollable authority of doing what he would.

CHAP. 13.
De Tribunis militum.
THese Rosin antiq. lib. 7. c. 20.
military Tribunes were of two sorts. The one had all power and authority,
which beelonged unto the Consuls; and thence were called Tribuni militum
consulari potestate. The occasion of them was this: The protectors of the
commons called Tribuni plebis did earnestly labor that the commonalty might
be made as capeable of the co^sular dignity as the Nobility: Rosin. ibid.
This was followed so hot that in the end though the nobility would not grant
them way unto that dignity under the name of Consuls; yet in effect they would
grant it them. Namely the Consuls should be deposed, and in their steed other
magistrates should be chosen; part out of the the nobility, part out of the
commonalty, who though they were not called Consuls, but Tribuni, yet were they
of Consular authority: By which they were distinguished from the other sort of
Military Tribunes, who had power and authority only in matters military, and
were known by the name of Tribuni militum without any addition. Alex. Genesis
dier. lib. 6. c. 18.
Sometimes there was one of these 3. words praefixed Rutuli or Rufuli, Suffecti
and comitiati; not thereby to intimate unto us any distinction of office or
place, but to signify their manner of election. For if they were chosen by the
Consuls, then were they called Tribuni Rutuli or Rufuli, because they had their
authority confirmed unto them by virtue of an act or law preferred by Rutilius
Rufus, when he was Consul. If they were chosen by the soldiers themselves in
their camp, then were they called Tribuni fuffecti.i. Tribunes substituted or
put in the place of another. Whence we may co^iect that the soldiers were not
permitted to make any election, but in time of need, when their former Tribunes
were taken from them by some violent or unnatural death. The last sort called
Comitiati were so called because they were chosen by the Roman assemblies
called in Latin Comitia. They were named Tribuni, because at the first
institution of them (whether we understand the Consular Tribunes or this latter
sort) there were but three of each. In process of time notwithstanding I find
the number not only of those Consular Tribunes, Rosin. Ant. lib. 7. cap. 20.
but of those other also to have been increased to six accordingly as the
thousands in a legion were multiplied. These latter sort of Tribunes, in
respect of their military discipline which was to see the soldiers being
faulty to be punished, we may english Knights Martial: In respect that
their authority was over footme^ only, we may english them Seriants mayor:
only this difference there was, to every thousand of footmen in any legion;
there were as many military Tribunes under their chief commander called
Imperator. But in our english armies there is but one Seriant mayor, who alone
under the L. General has command over all the footmeen, be there never so
many thousands.

CHAP. 14.
De Triumviris Reipub: constituendae.
THis tyranny of the Triumviratus began by a conspiration between Augustus
Caesar, Antonius, and Lepidus. For these three under the pretense of reve^ging
Iul: Caesar his death obtained chief power and authority for the space of five
years thorough out Rome, Fenest. de magist. Rom, cap. 21.
pretending that they would settle the common wealth, which at that time by
reason of Iul: Caesar's death was much out of order. Those five years being
expired, they refused to resign their authority, exercising excessive cruelty
toward all the Romans of what degree soever. Suet Octa. Aug. cap. 27.
This kind of government remained but ten years, neither ever were there any
other then those three above named. They had power to enact any new law, to
reverse any former Act without the consent of the Senate, or commons. They
might prescribe and bannish any Roman at their pleasure; and as often as we
read de Triumvirat^ simply without any adiunction, or de Triumvirat^ Senatus
legendi, we are to understand it of this, though some upon unsure grounds do
disioine them.

CHAP. 15.
De Quaestoribus ararij.
THis office of the Quastors seems not unlike to a public Treasurers, which
collecteth the subsidies, customs, money, yearly revenues, and all other
paiments belonging to any state or corporation. And hence Fenest. de Romans mag.
c. 3.
quonia^ publicae pecuniae quaerendae praepositi erant, they took their name
Quaestores: Sometimes they are called Quaestores Vrbani, to distinguish them
from the provincial Quaestors, which bare office in the Roman provinces:
sometimes they are called Quaestores aerarij, to distinguish them from those
that were called Quaestores parricidij, or rerum capitalium, of which you may
see more in the tract de Praetoribus. Sig. de iure Romans l. 2. c. 8.
Lastly they were called Quaestores aerarij, to distinguish them from the
Tribuni aerarij.i. those Martial treasurers, or Clerks of the band, which did
receive the soldiers pay from these city-Treasurers, and so pay it to the
soldiers. The office of these city-Treasurers (then being at first but two)
was to receive all the city-accounts; to disburse at all occasions of public
expenses; to take an oath of him that the soldiers had saluted by the name of
Imperator, that he had truly informed the Senate both of the number of enemies
slain, as also of the number of citizens lost: otherwise he might bar the
Emperor of his triumph. Moreover whatsoever spoils were taken in war they
were delivered up unto these city- Quaestors, and they selling them laid up
the money in the great Treasure-house called Aedes Saturni.

CHAP. 16.
De Tribunis Plebis.
THe I. Rosa. in Epit. rerum Romans
Roman commonalty finding themselves oppressed by the wealthier sort, departed
unto the Aventine mount, threatening the Roman nobility, that they would
forsake their city, and never again adventure them selves in war for the
defense thereof; unless they did find some release and casement from those
excessive payments of use and interest unto their creditours: yea beside the
remission of their present debts, before they would return unto their city
again, they would have certain magistrates chosen, which should be Rosin. Ant.
l. 7. c. 23.
Sacrosancti.i. such as might not be hurt or violently used, not so much as in
words: and if any had violated that law, whereby they were made Sacrosancti,
then was he accounted homo sacer.i. an excommunicate person, or such an one
whose soul should be vowed unto some God; insomuch that if any after had
killed him, he should not be liable unto judgment: Alex. Genesis dier. l. 6. c.
14.
quoniam illius anima dijs devota amplius humani commercij non sit. To these
Rosin. ant. lib. 7. c. 23.
magistrates the protection of the commons was committed, who because they were
at first chosen out of the Military Tribunes, therefore did they always retain
the name of Tribunes, being called that they might be distinguished from the
others, Tribuni Plebis, Protectours of the commons. At the first institution of
them they were in number but 2, as Pighius in suo Tyranni fug.
some have thought: Pomp. Laetus.
Others say five: afterward (as it is yielded by all writers) they increased
unto te^. Their authority at first consisted chiefly in this, that they had
power to hinder any proceedings in the Senate, which they thought might prove
prejudicial unto the commons; so that they had not authority to enact any new
decrees, as afterward by abusing their authority they did. Stadius in Flor.
lib. 3. c. 2.
Sed eoru^ autoritas magis in intercedendo, quam iubendo. And hence was it that
in old time these protectours of the commons were not permitted to come into
the Senate: but Pighius in suo Tyranni fug.
they sat with out at the door, whether whatsoever was determined with in the
Senate was sent unto them, to be perused by them, and if they did approve it,
then did they subscribe a great Roman T being the first letter of this word
Tribuni. Rosin. ant. lib. 7. cap. 23. ^
The houses of these Tribunes stood open night and day, as a common refuge or
place of succor for all that would come; Pighius in suo Tyranni-fug.
neither was it lawful for them to be absent out of the town one whole day
through out the year.

CHAP. 17.
De Aedilibus, and Praefect^ annonae.
WE may read of three sorts of Roman magistrates called Aediles; the two
first had their names ab aedibus curandis, having in their charge to repair
both temples and private dwelling houses which belonged unto the city. The
first sort were called Aediles curules, a sella curuli, from the chair of
state, wherein it was permitted them to ride; and these were chosen Philet. in
l. 2. Cic. epist. fam. 10.
out of the Senators. The second sort were called Aediles plebeij, and they
were added unto the former at the earnest suit of the commons, they being to be
chosen out of them. Where we must note that they were not so added that both
sorts should rule at one and the self same time, Alex. Genesis dier. l. 4. c. 4.
but that the Curules should rule the one year, and the Plebeij the other. To
these Aediles it did belong, beside the reparation of temples and private
houses, to look unto the weights and measures in common sale: for they had
power to examine Actiones redhibitorias, that is, such actions, by virtue of
which he that had sold any corrupt or sophisticated wares, was constrained to
take them again. Moreover they had the charge of the public conduits or
water conveyances, of provision for solemn plays, etc. Of the third sort
there were also two, who were in a manner Clerks of the Market. Alex. Genesis
Ibid.
For unto them belonged the looking unto the victuals sold in the market, and
corn: Whence they were called by them Aediles cereales; and Pighius in suo
tyrannif.
by the Greeks (...). This office, for ought that can be collected out of
those that treat of it, differs but little from his, who^ the Romans called
Annonae Praefectum; only this, the Aediles Cereales were magistratus
ordinarij; the Praefectus extraordinarius, namely, Rosin. antiq. l. 7. c. 38.
such as was chose^ only in time of extraordinary dearths; he having for that
time larger authority then those ordinary clerks of the market. For as it
appears by Rosinus in the place now quoted, this Praefectus had power of
himself to examine all such cases or questions as should arise touching the
dearth: as suppose we hoarding of corn, forestalling the market, etc.

CHAP. 18.
De Triumviris.
BEside that Triumviratus Reip: constituendae, of which we spoke before, there
were diverse kinds of Triumvirates; namely Triumviri capitales, three high
Shireiffes, who had the charge of prisons and were to see malefactors punished:
for which purpose eight Lictors did attend the^. There were also Alex. Genesis
dier. l. 3. c. 16.
Triumviri Mensarij, three me^, we may term them Bankers, who had authority
to pay out of the common treasury poor men's debts. Sometimes there were
appointed five to this office, whence they were called also I. Camerar. in
orat. Cic. pro Flacco.
Quinqueviri Mensarij, both being called Me^sarij from Mensa, a table, whereon
they told their money. Another sort of Triumviri there were appointed to press
soldiers, whence they were called Triumviri conquirendi iuvenes idoneos ad
arma ferenda. We read also of certain Triumviri, which were elected as chief
captains to guide and conduct the people in trans^lanting colonies; and thence
were they named Triumviri Coloniae deducendae: but sometimes for this purpose
they elected seven, ten, or twenty, and so named them Quinqueviri,
Septemviri, Decemviri, and Vigintiviri Coloniae deducendae. Three other sorts
of Triumviri remain, which were offices of small account; as the Triumviri
monetales, three Masters of the Mint, who thence were called Triumviri A.A.A.
F.F..i. Auro, Argento, Aere, Flando, Feriundo; for they had the charge of
coining the money. Secondly, Triumuiri valetudinis, Three Pest-men, which were
to oversee those that lay infected with any contagious sickness. Thirdly,
Alex. Genesis die^. l. 3. c. 16.
Triumviri nocturni, three Bell-men which were to walk the town at night, and
to give notice of fire.

CHAP. 19.
De praefectis Aerarij.
AVgustus Caesar desiring for the better safety of the city to maintain many
bands of soldiers, which should always be in readiness for the defense of
the city, desired of the city an yearly subsidy for the maintenance of those
soldiers: but being denied it, he built a certain Treasure-house, which he
called Aerarium militare, whereinto he cast his money for himself, and
Tiberius; and promised to do so every year. Afterward when he saw the
Treasury not to be enriched enough, either by that money which himself
bestowed, or by the contributions of others, he appointed that the twentieth
part of all inheritances and legacies (except it were to the next of the kin,
or to the poor) should fall unto this Treasury. For the charge and custody
hereof he appointed three of those soldiers, which always attended about him
for the safeguard of his person, calling them Praefectos Aerarij.

CHAP. 20.
De Praefecto praetorio.
ALL captains and governors to whom the rule of an army belonged were in
ancient time called Pancirol. in notitiam imper. orient. cap 5.
Praetores; This word Praetor signifying then three chief officers among the
Romans: First a Consul; secondly a L. chief Justice; thirdly a L. General in
war; all of them being called Pighius in Aequipet. compos.
Praetores, quasi Praeitores qurniam iure and exercitu praeibant. Answerable to
which threefold acception this word Praetorium has three several
significations: sometimes it signifies a Princes palace or manor house;
sometimes a great hall or place where judgment was wont to be given; and lastly
the L. General his pavilion in the camp; Asconius in Verrinam 3.
from which last signification it is that those soldiers that gave attendance
about that pavilion for the guard of their captains person are sometimes called
Milites Praetoriani, sometimes Cohors praetoria; Christr Fr. Sylvius in Catil.
2am.
and he to whom the oversight of these soldiers was committed was thence
called Praetorio praefectus.

CHAP. 21.
De Advocato fisci.
FOR the right understanding of this office we must first note a difference
between these two words, Aerarium, and Fiscus. Aerarium was a common treasury
belonging unto an whole state or corporation, whence all public and common
expenses are to be supplied. Fiscus was the Kings or Emperors private coffers:
it may be englished the Kings Exchequer. The keeper thereof was called
Advocatus Fisci. There are many other petty offices with in the city, which I
have purposely omitted, because there is but seldom mention of them in old
autors; and as often as they are mentioned, their names do explain their
office.

CHAP. 22.
De praecipuis magistratibus provincialibus.
OVer the Provinces at first ruled certain magistrates sent from Rome by
commission from the Roman Senate, called Praetores, whose office was to
administer justice unto the Provincial inhabitants: yea, and if occasion
served, to make war also upon their enemies; and this was the reason that the
number of the Praetors did so increase always, namely accordingly as the
number of Provinces did increase. The wars and tumults in the Provinces
sometimes were so great, that the Praetour was not sufficient both to manage
war and execute justice: whereupon the Senate thought fit to send another
magistrate into the Provinces, whom they called a Consul, because properly the
managing of war belonged unto the Consul. So that there were at first two
ordinary Provincial magistrates, a Consul to manage war, and a Praetour, or
L. chief Justice to sit in judgment. And if these two by a second grant from
the Senate did continue in their office above the space of an year, then were
they called Proconsules, and Propraetores. But in process of time this custom
was altered. For then none could be Proconsuls, but those alone who had been
Consuls in Rome; neither could any be Propraetours, which had not been
Praetors at Rome. Their manner being, that the next year after the expiration
of their offices in Rome they should depart into some certain province to
bear the same offices again being not called Consules or Praetores as before,
but Alex. Genesis dier. l. 3. c. 3.
Proconsules and Propraetores; and for this cause always, so soon as the
Consuls had been created, the Senate did appoint certain Provinces for the
Consuls, which being appointed the Consuls did either agree between themselves,
who should go to the one, who to the other; and that was termed comparare
provincias; or else they did decide the question by lots, and that was termed
sortiri provincias; howbeit sometimes the Senate did interpose their authority,
and dispose the same. Under the Emperors the governors of some Provinces were
appointed by the Senate, and the people, and those were called Proconsules, and
the Provinces, I. Camerar. pro L. Flacco
Provinciae Consulares, others were appointed by the Emperors, and they were
called Propraetores, and the Provinces Praetoriae Provinciae. For all this,
which has bin noted touching the Provincial Magistrates, it is almost
verbatim translated out of Rosin. Antiq. l. 10. c. 24.
Rosinus. To which we add this, namely that every Proconsul and Propraetor did
usually choose a Lieuetenant such a one as should be assistaunt unto him in
matters of government, Pomp. Laetus de magist. Romans
whom they called Legatum. So that this word Legatus signified three several
Magistrates amongst the Romans, two whereof may be proved out of Sig. de iure
Prou. l. 2. c. 2.
Sigonius; first that it signified such a Lieuetenant or L. Deputy under a
Proconsul or Propraetour in a Province: secondly, that it signified such a one
as is employed in the delivery of a message or embassage from one Prince or
State to another: we commonly call them Ambassadors. Rosin. ant. Romans l. 10. c.
7.
Lastly it signified a Lieuetenant or chief captain in war, whose place was
next under the L. General. Moreover every Proconsul and Propraetour had with
them certain Treasurers, called Quaestores Provinciales. These provincial
treasurers Sig. de iure Prove. l. 2. c. 3.
were chosen by the Roman people commonly, namely such a number as the number
of Provinces did require. After the election they between themselves did cast
lots who should go unto the one, who unto the other Provinces: Sig. ibid.
sometimes extraordinarily by virtue of special Act or decree this or that
special man has obtained this or that Province without any lottery. By the
way we must note, that all Provincial Quaestors could not be called
Proquaestores, as all Provincial Consuls and Praetours were called Proconsules
and Propraetores. Rosin. ant. Romans l. 7. c. 45.
For these only were called Proquaestores, which did succeed these Provincial
Quaestors, when they did either die in their office or depart out of the
Province, no successor being expected from Rome: at which times it was lawful
for the Proconsul or Propraetor to choose his Proquaestor. Moreover there were
beside these Legati and Quaestores Sig. de iure Prove. l. 2. c. 2.
other military officers; such as are the Tribuni militum, Centuriones,
Praefecti, Decuriones, together with other inferior officers, as their
Secretaries, Baylieffes, Cryers, Serjants, and such like.

Lib. 3. Sect. 3.
Of the Roman Laws.
CHAP. 1.
De Legibus.
HAving spoken of the civil Magistrates, we will now also descend unto the
civil law: where first we will note among other differences between Ius and
Lex principally these. First Lex signifies only the law, but Sig. de iud. lib.
1. cap. 7.
Ius signifies also that place, wheresoever the law or justice was
administered; not only if it were administered out of the tribunal in the
Comitio, or great hall of Justice, which was termed by the lawyers Agere pro
Tribunali: but also if it were administered in a private house, or in ones
journey; so that it were by a lawful Magistrate, and out of the curule chair;
and this was termed by the Lawyers, Agere de Plano: and hence is it, that In
ius vocare signifies to cite one into the court. Secondly Lex signifies only
the written law, but Ius signifies equity; so that Fr. Sylv. in orat. pro Mil.
Ius permaneat semper, nec vnquam mutetur: Lex vero scripta saepius.
Notwithstanding these two words are used promiscuously one for the other; and
therefore leaving all curious differences between those words (whether the
Roman laws were truly Iura or Leges) thus much we may observe, that the
laws used among them were of three sorts; either they were such as were made by
several Roman kings, and afterward collected and digested into a method by
Papirius, Fr. Sylv. in epist. viroru^ illus. l. 5. ep. 1^.
from whom it was called Ius Papirianu^: or they were such as the Decemviri
brought from Athens, and were called Leges 12 tabularum: or lastly they were
such as the Consuls, the Tribuni Plebis, and such Magistrates did prefer,
whence every several law bore the name of him or them that preferred it. My
purpose is to explain only this latter sort; and that not all of them, but
such alone as I have observed in Tully, and that chiefly in his orations. My
proceeding shall be first to show the diverse kinds of judgments; and then to
descend unto the laws themselves, beginning with those which shall concern
the Roman religion, and then proceeding to the others, which concern the
common wealth.

CHAP. 2.
De Iure publico and privato.
THe Cases to be decided by the law were either public or private; and
accordingly were the judgments, Sig de iure Romans l. 2. c. 18.
Velprivata, in quibus ius suum privatus quisque persequebatur: vel publica, in
quibus iniuria quae reip. facta erat vindicabatur. The private (as we observed
before) belo^ged unto the Praetori vrbano and peregrino.i. the L. chief
Justices, who did either give judgment themselves, and then were they said
Iudicare; or they did appoint others to sit in judgment, and Sig. de Iud. lib.
1. cap. 7.
then were they said Iudicium dare: Yea in their absence there were ten called
Decemviri Stlitibus iudicandis.i. Rosin. ant. l. 7. c. 29.
Super lites iudicandas, who in the same manner, as the Praetor, might either
give judgment themselves, or appoint others; for they were even in Alex. Genesis
dier. l. 3. c. 16.
one place and in steed of Praetors. Those which either the Praetor or the
Decemviri did appoint to debate the cases under them, were taken out of the
Centumviri.i. Pet. Ramus in 2am de lege Agrar.
out of certain Commissioners chosen for that purpose; namely three out of
every Tribe or ward; so that in all the number of them amou^ted unto an
hundred and five, but in round reckoning they went for an hundred; and from a
certain spear that was wont to be erected up in token of this court, hence
was the Sig. de iud. lib. 1. c. 28.
Court called either Praetoria Decemviralis, or Centumviralis hasta. In some
cases their form of acquittance was thus, Sig. de iud. lib. 1. cap. 29.
secundum illum litem do; whence Cic. pro Quin. Roscio.
Tully says, Quo minus secundum eos lis detur, non recusamus.i. we do not
deny, but they may be acquitted. Those that were cast in their suit, were said
Lite vel causa cadere. The public Cases belonged ordinarily (except the
Consuls, the Senate, or the people did interpose their authority) unto those
who^ we called Praetores Quaesitores. Some have Rosin. antiq. lib. 2. c. 18
thought them to be the same with those, whom Rosinus calls Iudices
Quaestionum, and that I think not altogether upon unsure grounds: first
because most of these public cases, which they termed Quaestiones, had their
Sig. de iud. lib. 2. c. 4.
several Praetors to enquire them; whence they were called Quaesitores, and
may in my opinion be called Iudices Quaestionu^, especially seeing that those
which would have them be different officers, cannot well show the difference
of their offices. Now as the Vrbane Praetor had an hundred commisioners under
him: so had these Praetores Quaesitores certain Judges chosen Sig. de iud.
lib. 2. cap. 6.
by the Urban or foreign Praetor, when he took his oath, and that not
according to his pleasure as many as he would, or whom he would, but sometimes
more, sometimes fewer, sometimes only out of the Senators, sometimes only out of
the order of Roman Gentlemen, sometimes out of both; sometimes also out of
other orders, Sig. ibid.
according as the law appointed, which often times varied in those points. The
Judges how great soever the number was, ^ Sig. de iur. Romans l. 2. c. 18.
were called Iudices selecti, and were divided into several companies called
Decuriae. These judges were upon any citation from any of the Praetors, to give
their assistance in the Court upon the day appointed by the Praetor. Now the
manner how they did proceed in their judgment follows in the exposition of
one of the laws, and therefore I will refer the reader thither. Only let him
by the way understand, that whereas Tully is quoted in every law, it is not so
much for the proof of the law, as to signify, that he in that place makes
mention thereof. For the proof of the laws I refer the Reader to Rosinus
and Sigonius: touching the expositions my marginall quotations do prove
sufficiently.

CHAP. 3.
De Legibus religionem spectantibus.
Lex Papiria.
L. Papirius Trib. Pleb. established a law touching the consecration or
hallowing of places, Cic. pro Domo.
that it should be unlawful for any to consecrate either houses, grounds,
altars, or any other things Iniussu plebis.i. without the determination of the
Roman people in their assemblies called Comitia Tributa, which determination
was always termed Plebiscitum.

Roscia Lex.
L. Roscius Otho Trib. Pleb. preferred a law, Cic. Philip. 2. Item pro Muraen.
that whereas heretofore the Roman Gentlemen did stand promiscuously with the
Commons at their theatrall shows, now there should be fourteen benches or
seats built for those Roman Gentlemen which were worth H-S. quadringenta.i.
about 3000^ of our English money. As for other Gentlemen whose substance was
under that rate, they had a certain place allotted them by themselves, with a
punishment imposed upon them, if they offered to come into any of those 14.
benches.

Here we must note that this character H-S stands for a silver coin in Rome
called Sestertius, and is by Rosinus in this place improperly used for
Sestertium. For this character H-S is by our Printers false printed, the true
character Fr. Matur. in Philip. 2.
being LL-S signifying duas Libras (as the the two LL do intimate) and
Semissem which is intimated by the letter S. Where if Libra does signify no
more then the Roman coin called AS, then is this opinion touching the
character LL-S easy to be confirmed. For diverse authors Chr. Hege^dorphinus in
Verrinam 1.
rendering a reason of the name Sestertius, say it was so called quasi
Semitertius.i. such a coin as contains Duos solidos asses and semissem. This
Sestertius, was such a common coin among the Romans, P. Nannius in Verrin. 5.
that Nummus and Sestertius became at length one to be used for the other. Chapter
Hegen dorph ius in Verrin. 5am.
Mill huiusmodi ses^ertij vel nummi faciunt vnum sestertium in neutro genere,
and conficiunt plus minus viginti quinque coronas. According to which rate
quadringenta sestertia amounts to 3000l: and every particular Sestertius is
according to this rate, in value about three halfe-pence farthing q.

Clodia lex.
Publius Clodius Trib. Pleb. made a law, Cic. pro Sextio item de Arusp. respon*
by virtue whereof the priest called Pessinuntius sacerdos (from the place where
he did first exercise those holy rites in the honor of the mother Goddess)
should be deprived of his Priesthood, and the Temple built in the honor of
this Goddess should be bestowed upon Brotigarus of Gallo-Graecia.

Domitia lex.
Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus Trib. Pleb. enacted a law, Cic. Agtar. 2.
that the Colleges of priests should not as they were wont, admit whom they
would into the order of Priesthood: but it should be in the power of the
people. And because it was contrary to their religion, that Church-dignities
should be bestowed by the common people, hence did he ordain that the lesser
part of the people, namely seventeene Tribes should elect whom they thought
fit, and afterward he should have his confirmation or admission from the
College.

Lex incerti nominis de vacatione sacerdotum.
Cicero in his orations mentions a law (not naming the author thereof)
whereby the priests were privileged from their service in all wars, Cic.
Philip. 8. and pro Font.
except only in vproares or civil tumults. B. Latomus in Philip 7.
And these privileges were termed Vacationes.

CHAP. 4.
De Civitate, and iure civium Romans
Porcia lex de civitate.
M. Porcius Trib. Pleb. established a law, Cic. pro Rabi^. and saepe alias.
that no magistrate should beat any Roman citizen with rodds.

Lex Sempronia.
C. Sempronius Gracchus Trib. Pleb. preferred a law, Cic. pro Cluentio. and
saepe alias.
whereby he disabled the magistrate from punishing any Roman citizen, either
with rods, or with his axe.i. with death, without the allowance of the
people. Secondly by virtue of this law, if any magistrate did condemn any
Roman citizen Indicta causa, he should be liable to the judgment and
censure of the people. A third clause to this law was, Ne quis coiret,
conveniret, quo quis iudicio publico circumveniretur Indicta causa. He was said
to be condemned causa indicta, which was condemned before he had spoken for
himself. Although P. Ramus in orat. pro Rabirio.
Indicere pro non dicere, sicut and invidere pro non videre vix reperiatur;
tamen indictu^ and invisum, pro non dicto, et non viso saepe reperiuntur. Fr.
Sylv. in orat. pro Cluentio.
They were properly said Coire, which did work under hand against a man, that
he might be condemned; we may translate it in this place, to Conspire. I.
Camerar. in orat. Cic. pro L. Flacco*
The verb Circumvenio does commonly signify as much as Circumscribo, to
deceive or cheat one: Fr. Sylv. in orat. pro Cluentio.
but in this place, to oppress one with false judgment, procured by briberie
or confederacy.

Lex Papia de peregrinis.
The privileges of the Roman citizens became so great, Cic. pro Balbo*
that almost all the inhabitants of the confederate nations, would forsake
their own dwellings, and use means to become free denisons in the Roman
city; insomuch that the Ambassadors of the Allies, and associates, did grieve
much and complain of the loss of their inhabitants: whereupon a law was made
by Papius, that all forreiners and strange comers should be expelled out of
the city. Cic. offic. l 3.
To the same effect was Lex Iunia, and also Licinia Mutia de peregrinis: the
first being preferred by Mar. Iunius Pennus: the second by L. Licinius Crassus,
and Q. Mutius Scaevola.

Servilia lex de civitate.
C. Servilius Glaucia preferred a law, Cic pro Balbo.
Vt si quis Latinus, If any of the Latin associates could prove an action of
bribery against a Senator, then should he be made a freeman of the city.

Quis Latinus] Here we will observe with Sig. de iure Ital. l. 1. c. 2.
Sigonius, that the Latin people were not always called Latini and Italici^
Sed and socij, and Latini socij; and socij nominis Latini, and socij nomenque
Latinum, and socij ab nomine Latino, and socij ac Latium dicti sunt.

Sylvani and Carbonis lex de Peregrinis.
Silvanus and Carbo being Tribuni Pl: preferred a law, Cic. pro. Archia.
vt qui foederatis civitatibus adscripti essent, si tum, cum lex ferebatur, in
Italia domicilium habuissent, ac sexaginta diebus apud praetorem professi
essent, cives Romani essent.

Adscripti.] For the right understanding hereof, we must note, that there were
Fr. Sylv. in orat. pro lege Manil.
two sorts of citizens; some cives nati.i. citizens by birth; others civitate
donati.i. citizens by donation, or gift: who because they were added unto, and
registered with the first sort of citizens, were thence called Adscripti cives.

Professi apud Praetorem.] This verb profiteri is some times P. Ramus in or.
Cic. Agra^ 2.
Comitiale verbum, and signifies as much as profiteri nomen.i. to tender ones
name unto a magistrate: and this construction it bears in this place.

Cornelia de Municipijs.
L. Cornelius Sylla preferred a law, that all Municipall states should loose
their freedom in the Roman city, Cic pro Domo.
and also their privilege of having commons in the Roman fields.

Gellia Cornelia lex.
L. Gellius Publicola, Cic. pro Balbo.
and Cn: Cornelius Lentulus being Consuls decreed a law, that all those private
persons upon whom Cn: Pompeius in his wisdom should bestow the freedom of
the Roman citizens, should ever be accounted free denisons.

CHAP. 5.
De legibus ad comitia spectantibus.
Aelia lex.
Q. Aelius Paetus asked a law in time of his Consulship, Cic. multis in locis.
vt quoties cum populo ageretur.i. as often as any Roman Magistrate did
assemble the people to give their voices, the Augures should observe signs
and tokens in the firmament, and the magistrates should have power obnunciandi,
and intercedendi.i. to gainesay and hinder their proceedings.

Ageretur cum populo.] Here we may note the difference between these two
phrases, Agere cum populo, and Agere ad populum. A. Gel. l. 13. cap. 14.
He was said Agere ad populum, whosoever made any speech or oration unto the
people, and this might be done upon any day indifferently: But then only was
it said Agi cum populo, when the people were assembled to the giving of their
voices by a lawful magistrate, and this could not be done, Bersman. de vet.
dier. ratione ad fine^ Ovid Fast. Cic. in suis orat. saepe.
but upon one of those days, which they called Dies Comitiales.

Fusia lex.
Pub: Furius sive Fusius Philus being Consul ordained a law, that upon some
certain days, although they were dies Fasti.i. Leet-daies, yet no magistrate
should s^mmon an assembly.

Clodia lex.
P. Clodius Trib. Pl. abrogated both those former laws, Cic. pro Sext.
making it unlawful to observe signs and tokens in the heavens, upon those
days when the Roman people were to be assembled: And secondly, making it
lawful to assemble the people upon any Leet-day whatsoever.

Gabinia lex.
At first for many years the Roman people in their assemblies did suffrage
Viva voce: Cic. 3 de leg.
at which time many of the inferior sort, gave their voices contrary to their
wills, fearing the displeasure of those that were of higher place. For the
better help in this point, Gabinius asked a law, that the people in all their
elections might not suffrage Viva voce, but by giving up certain tablets, the
manner whereof has been formerly shown: whence both this, and all other laws
tending to this purpose have been called Leges tabellariae.

Cassia lex.
After Gabinius, Cic. in Laelio
Cassius also preferred a law, that both the Judges in their judgments, and
the people in their assemblies should suffrage by rendering such tablets: Rosin.
antiq. lib. 8. c. 3.
but this is to be understood only of those assemblies by wards called Comitia
Tributa: wherein they treated of mulcts and mercements.

Coelia lex.
Coelius Trib. Pl. established a law, Cic. 3. de leg.
that not only in mulcts and mercements, but also In perduellionis iudicio.i.
in taintments of treason against any person of state (namely such as were
sacrosancti) or against the common weal, this Tabellary liberty should have
place, when the people should judge thereof.

In perduellionis iud.] Caelius Sec. Curio. in ora. pro M^lone.
This word perduellis does signify an enemy unto the state, a traitor: and
hence comes this word perduellio, signifying not only the crime of treason,
but the punishment also due thereunto, Sig de Iud. lib 3. cap. 3.
Si crimen quoderat gravissimum inter crimina, nempe imminutae maiestatis: si
poena, quae erat acerbissima, nempe mortis.

Papiria lex.
C. Papirius Carbo Trib. Pl. persuaded, Cic. de leg. 3.
that not only in their elections, but in the proposal of their laws also,
this suffraging by tablets should be used.

Sempronia lex.
C. Sempronius Gracchus Trib. Pleb. preferred a law, Cic. multis in ^ocis.
that the Associates of Latium should have as great right of suffraging, as the
Roman citizens.

Manilia lex.
C. Manilius Trib. Pl. preferred a law, Cic pro Mur.
that all those who were Libertini, in what tribe or Ward soever, should have
the right of suffraging.

CHAP. 6.
De Senatu and Senatoribus.
Claudia lex.
Q. Claudius Trib. Pleb. persuaded a law, Cic. Verrin. 7.
that no Senator or Senators father, should have any ship, which should
contain above three hundred of those measures called Amphorae, deeming that
sufficient for the transportation of their come from the Roman fields.
Secondly, by this law the Senators were forbidden the use of trading.

Amphorae.] Alex. Genesis dier. l. 2. c. 20.
Alexander Neopol. observes two sorts of these measures, namely, Amphora
Italica containing 2. Vrnas; and Amphora Attica containing 3. Vrnas: every
vrna contained two gallons and a pottle. This in probability is understood of
the Italian Amphora.

Tullia lex.
When as a custom had grown, that many of the Senators having by special
favor obtained Liberam legationem, Cic. Philip. ^
upon all occasions would abuse that their authority, procuring thereby their
private gain, and the increase of their own honor; then M. Tullius Cic.
being Consul labored, quite to take away these kinds of embassages: which
though he could not effect, yet thus far he prevailed; That whereas in former
times this Libera legatio being once obtained, was never (not through a man's
whole life) taken from him again: yet afterward this authority should never be
granted to any longer, then the space of one year.

Legatio libera.] We may observe in ancient autors three several kinds of
embassages. The one, which is a message sent from the Prince or chief
governors of one country unto another, and that is expressed commonly by this
one word Legatio, without any addition thereunto, sometimes it is called
Legatio mandata. The second, which is when one purchases the title of an
Ambassador, thereby the more honorably to perform some vow made, whence it
was called Legatio Votiua. The third is the office or title of an Ambassador,
granted upon special favor unto a Senator, that he might with the greater
authority prosecute his private suits in law, or gather up his debts in that
province whither he went: this last was termed Legatio libera. All three sorts
are b^^fly touched by M. Toxita in orat. Phi. ^.
Toxita.

CHAP. 7.
De Magistratibus.
Cornelia lex.
L. Cornel^us Sylla being Dictator, Cic. in Pison.
made a law, that all such as would follow him in the civil war, should be
capeable of any office or magistracy before they came unto their full years.
A second part of this law was, that the children of such as were proscripti,
should be made incapable of the Roman magistracies.

Before they came to their full age.] For L. Villius preferred a law, whereby
he made such as were under age, to be incapable of the city preferments: and
those he accounted under age, who had not attained unto that number of years,
which he had prescribed each several office: P. Ramus in Agrar. 2.
and this law was termed lex annalis.

Proscripti.] Those were termed proscripti, who were not only exiled and
banished their country, but also their goods were seized upon and consiscated.
Fr. Matura^tius in Phil. 5.
Quoniam eorum nomina in publico scribebantur, hinc proscribi dicebantur.

Hircia lex.
A. Hircius made a law, Cic. Phil. 13.
that all those that followed Pompey, should be made incapable of all places
of office.

Cornelia lex.
L. Cornelius Sylla finding the Praetores.i. the L. chief Justices not to give
sentence always according to equity, Cic Philip. 2.
yea sometimes to go quite contrary to their own Edict, made a law, that
every L. chief Justice should administer justice according to that his first
Edict, hanged up at the beginning of his office. An addition unto this law was,
that the L. chief Justice should not be absent out of the city above ten
days.

Clodia lex.
In former times it was lawful for either of the Censors to censure whom he
pleased, and how he pleased, except his fellow Censor did plainly gain say
it, Cic. pro Sent
and make opposition therein. But many abusing this their authority, P.
Clodius Trib. Pl. made a law, that the Censors should not overskip any in their
election of Senators; neither should they brand any with disgrace, except such
as had been accused unto them, and been condemned by them both.

Valeria lex.
The office of a Dictator at the first institution continued but six months
space, Cic. Verrin. 4.
until L. Valerius Flaccus, being Interrex in the vacancy of the Consuls
preferred a law, that L. Cornelius Sylla should be a perpetual Dictator.

Cornelia lex.
L* Cornelius Sylla in the time of his Dictatorship, did by virtue of a law
preferred by him clip the authority of the Tribuni Pl. disabling them of
bearing any office after the expiration of their Tribuneship, Cic. 3. de leg.
taking away their authority of preferring laws, of using any solemn speech
or public oration unto the people, of hearing appeals, of hindering any
statute or decree tending to the hurt of the populacy.

CHAP. 8.
De legibus.
Coecilia Didia lex.
Q: Coecilius Metellus, and Titus Didius being Consuls, forbad, Cic. Philip. 5.
that Vna rogatione.i. in one and the same bill many things should be proposed
unto the people: least by that means, the people by granting the whole bill
might grant something which they would not; or in denying the whole bill might
deny some particular clause, which by it self they would have accepted.
Moreover these two Consuls ordained, that before a law should be asked in the
assemblies it should be promulged.i. hanged up to the public view of the
people three market days.

Iunia Licinia lex de trinundino.
Iunius Silanus and L. Licinius Muraena being Consuls, Cic. Philip 5.
established that law of Coecilius and Didius, annexing a more severe
punishment for the breakers thereof.

Clodia lex de intercessione.
P. Clodius Trib. Pl. made a law, Cic. pro Sext
that the Trib. Pl. should have full authority and power to propose laws;
neither should they be hindered by the Intercession.i. gainsaying of any.

Licinia Aebutia lex.
Licinius and Aebutius being Tribuni Pl. ordained, Cic. contra Rullum 2.
that if any preferred a law touching the oversight, the charge or cure of any
business in hand; neither he, nor any fellow officer with him, nor any allied
unto him should have this oversight or charge committed to him.

CHAP. 9.
De Provincijs.
Sempronia de provincijs.
C. Sempronius Gracchus Trib. Pl. ordained; that the Senate every year before
the election of their Consuls, should as it seemed best to them, appoint out
what Provinces the Consuls now to be elected; should after the expiration of
their office go unto; for which provinces afterward the Consuls designed should
cast lots. Another clause to this law was, Cic. de province consularibus.
that whereas in former times, by a decree from the Senate it was lawful for
the Tribunes to hinder the Roman assemblies, he^ceforward they should have no
authority.

Cornelia de Provincijs.
L. Cornelius Sylla being Dictator preferred a law, Cic ep. 9. ad Lentul.
that whosoever went into a Province cum imperio, tam diu illud imperium
retineret, quoad in vrbem reversus esset: whereas in former times his rule and
government was to be resigned at the expiration of a set time appointed: yea
although no successor were sent, it could he not continue there cum imperio
without a new commission. A clause added unto this law was, that after the
coming of any new President or governor into the Province, the old
Provincial President should depart within thirty days.

Esse cum imperio.].i. Sig. de (...). Prove. l. 3. c. 13
Exercitui praeesse Sig. eiusd. lib. cap. 6. Cic. pro L. Muraen.
vel haebere ius administrandi, and suis auspicijs gerendi belli.

Titia lex de Provincijs.
Titius, or (as Melanct^o^. in orat. pro Muraena.
some say) Decius preferred a law, that the Provincial Treasurers called
Quaestores, should cast lots for their Provinces: whence Tully in the oration
now quoted infers, that although Ostia being the better Province fell upon
Servius Sulpitius, yet in as much as it fell lege Titia.i. by casting lots, he
could not therefore challenge any superiority above L. Muraena. Sed vtriusque
nomen consedit in Quaestura.i. their same and renown was equal in their
Quaestorship.

Iulia lex de provincijs.
C. Julius Caesar established two laws touching the Roman Provinces: Cic.
Philip 1.
one that no Praetour should govern a Province above twelve months; nor
Proco^sull above two year. The several heads or clauses of his second law
could not all be found out, but those which have come to light are these. First
that Achaia, Thessalia, and all Graecia should be free, neither should any
Roman Magistrate sit in judgment in those Provinces (Cic. pro domo.) Secondly,
that the Provincial governors and their Comites.i. assistants or attendants,
should have hay, and all other necessaries provided the^ on the way, by those
towns and villages through which they passed. (Cic. in Pison.) Thirdly, that
the Provincial Magistrates at their departure, should leave a book of their
accounts in two cities of their province, and likewise should send a copy of
their accounts unto the Roman Treasure-house (Cic. in Pison.) Fourthly that it
should neither be lawful for the people to bestow, nor for the Provincial
Magistrate to receive Aurum eoronarium unless it were in a triumph (Cic. in
Pison.) Lastly, that it should be unlawful for the Provincial Magistrate
without the allowance of the people or the Senate, to depart out of their
province, to lead forth any army, to wage war, or to go into any foreign
country. (Cic. in Pison)

Aurum coron.] Lipsius de magnit. Romans lib. 2. cap. 9.
There was a custom amongst the Romans in times of victory to present unto
the L. General Coronets of gold, insteede whereof the after-ages presented a
certain sum of money, which was thence called Aurum coronarium.

Vatinia de Provincijs.
P. Vatinius Trib. Pl. procured a law, that C. Julius Caesar should have the
government of Gallia Cisalpina, and Ill^ricum for five years space, without any
decree from the Senate, Cic. pro Bal bo.
or casting lots. Secondly that they also should go as Legates or L. Deputies
unto Caesar, without any decree from the Senate, whosoever were nominated in
that law. Thirdly that Caesar should receive money out of the common
Treasure-house toward having an army. Lastly, that he should transplant a
Colony unto a certain town of Cisalpina Gallia called Novocomum.

Clodia de Provincijs.
P. Clodius being Trib. Pleb. procured a law that the government of Syria,
Cic. Pro Domo.
Babylon, and Persia should be committed to Gabinius. The government of
Macedonia, Achaia, Thessalia, Graeci^, and al Boeotia should be committed unto
Piso; and they should receive together with an army, money out of the common
Treasury toward their iourny.

Clodia altera de Cypro.
P. Clodius preferred another law, Cic. pro Sext
that the Island Cyprus should be made a Province. That P^olemaeus the king of
Cyprus sitting in his purple, with his scepter and other his princely ornaments
Praeconi publico subiiceretur, and cum bonis omnibus publicaretur.i. should
himself with all his goods be sold by a common crier. That M. Cato being then
Treasurer, cum iure Praetorio, adiecto etiam Quaestore, having by commission
the office of a L. chief Justice, and another Treasurer to accompany him,
should be sent into the Island Cyprus, both to make sale of the kings goods and
estate, and also to bring back the money. Lastly it was decreed by this law,
that those who lived in exilement at Byzantium being condemned for some
capital crime, should be brought back unto that city, under the name of
Romans.

Praeconi publico subijceretur.] For the better understanding of that phrase,
we are to understand the manner of portsale amongst the Romans: which we may
read in Sigonius thus. Those things were rightly sold in portsale, which were
publicly sold Per praeconem sub hastu.i. by the crier under a spear sticked
up for that purpose, and some Magistrate making good the sale by delivery of
the goods. Whence I take Publico praeconi subijci, and Hastae subijci to
signify one and the selfsame thing, namely to be set at sale: and Cic. Phil 11
Cicero uses almost the self same phrase, Bona Cn. Pompeij, voci acerbissima
subiecta praeconis. This kind of sale was termed Auctio; because as Sigonius
says in the same place, to him the goods were sold, Qui plurimum rem
augeret.i. which would bid most for it: and hence is the seller thereof termed
Auctor, as Verrin. 7.
Cic. Id quod a malo auctore emissent.i. that which they had bought of one
which had no authority to sell: and from this custom of setting up a spear
in this kind of sale, this word Hasta alone is used to signify portsale, as
Cic. Phil. 8.
Hasta Caesaris, the sale of Caesar's goods. Those who bought these goods Cic.
in Ver.
Tully does call Sectores, Sig. de iud. lib. 2. c. 24.
quia spem lucri sui sectabantur.

CHAP. 10.
De legibus Agrarijs.
THose laws were termed Leges Agrariae, which did concern the division of the
public or common fields. And these were either given by Romulus and other
kings; or taken from the enemies, or from private me^ which had made
incloasures; or lastly bought out of the common Treasury. Vid. Sig. de iure
Ital. l. 2. c. 2. Cic. pro Sext.
Sigon.

Sempronia lex Agraria.
Titus Sempronius Gracchus Trib. Pleb. preferred a law which forbade, that any
of the Romans should have to his own part above five hundred acres of the
common fields, the one half of which it was lawful for his sons to enjoy.
If it had so happened that any should enlarge these common fields, three
surveyers called the Sig de iure Ital. l. 2. c. 2.
Triumviri agro dividundo, did mark out which was common, which private
ground. Moreover it was by this law provided, that the money of king Attalus
who made the people of Rome his heir, might be bestowed upon those citizens,
which had by this law obtained a part of the common fields, to the buying of
instruments for husbandry. Moreover, that the kings lands should be farmed out
at a set rent by the Censors, whence an yearly tribute should be paid to the
people.

Cornelia lex.
L. Cornelius Sylla being Dictator preferred a law, that all the fields of those
Romans which he had banished, should be common. This publication is to be
understood chiefly of those fields in Thuscia nere unto the city Volaterrae,
and the city Fesulae, Cic. in Rullu^.
which grounds Sylla divided amongst his soldiers.

CHAP. 11.
De frumentarijs legibus.
Sempronia lex.
T. Sempronius Gracchus being tribune of the commo^s provided, Cic. pro Sext.
that a certain quantity of corn should monthly be give^ unto the poorer
sort at a low price, Semisse and triente, that is, about six pence farthing a
bushel. Hereupon was there a place appointed in Rome for the keeping of this
common corn, together with certain laws hanged up there called leges
frumentariae. This place was called Rosin. antiq. lib. 8. c. 1^
Horrea Sempronia.

Semisse and triente.] It appears by the next law, that Semissis in this
place, must signify the same as semiaeris does there. Whereby we may note, that
semissis does not always signify the half part of the Roman coin called
As, but sometime it signifies a greater coin ^alewing almost our six pence.

Clodia lex.
P. Clodius Tribunus Pleb. ordained that that corn which heretofore was sold to
the poor senis aeris and trientibus in singulos modios, that is, for six
pence farthing a bushel, should hereafter be given gratis, and the charge and
oversight of this dole was committed to Sext. Claudius. Cic. pro Sext. in
Pisone.


Terentia Cassia.
M. Terentius and C. Cassius being Consuls preferred a law, Cic. Verrio. 5. and
7.
Vti alterae decumae a provincijs coemerentur, pretio in singulos modios HS
trium constituto. Item vt civitatibus aequaliter imperaretur, pretio in
singulos modios HS quatuor constituto.

For the better understanding of this law, we must note Sig. de iure Prove. l.
1. c. 1.
a threefold tithe paid by the Provinces. The first was the tenth part of the
grain, growing in the Province to be paid in gratis, and that was properly
called Decumae, or frumentum decumanum, and those that took this tithe to rent
were called thence Decumani. A second sort of tithes was a certain quantity
of corn taken up for the L. President or chief governor of the province to
keep his house, and that was called Frumentum aestimatum.i. corn gathered up
by way of taxation: for so this word aestimo coming from aes does signify.
Fr. Sylv. in or. pro Cluentio.
Est autem aestimare ab aere dictum, id quod vulgo dicunt appreciare and
taxare. The third sort of tithes, was when the Senate finding scarcity of
corn in Rome, did inioyne the Provinces to sell them a quantity of corn at a
price set down by the Senators themselves, and this corn sold upon
iniunction, if it was paid but once in the year, it was termed Frumentum
emptum: but if in the same year a second sale was enjoined them, then they
called that second pay Fr^mentum imperatum. In the first clause of this law by
[alterae decumae] is meant frumentu^ emptum; in the second clause, by these
words [civitatibus aequaliter imperaretur] is understood Frumentum imperatu^.

Lex Hieronica.
Hiero king of Sicily obtained a law, Cic. Ve^rin. 4*
wherein was set down the quantity of corn that the Aratores or country
farmers should pay unto the Publicani.i. those which received the tithes,
together with the time of payment and the price agreed upon.

CHAP. 12.
De re militari and bellis.
Gabinia lex.
A. Gabinius Tr. Pl. preferred a law that the managing of the war against the
Pirates should be in such manner committed unto Pompey for three years space,
Cic. pro lege Manilia.
that over the whole sea between Hercules his pillars, and in the maritime
provinces unto the four hundredth Stadiu^ from the sea, he should have power to
command any Kings, L. Presidents, or whole corporations to furnish him with all
things necessary for that war.

Manilia Lex.
C. Manilius Trib. Pleb. persuaded a law, Cic pro lege Manilia.
that the managing of war against Mithridates should be committed unto Cn.
Pompeius. That the whole Province where L. Lucullus ruled, together with his
whole army should be resigned up unto him. Moreover that Bithynia, where
Glabrio ruled, should be added, together with all those bands and forces,
which he had upon the sea against the Pirates, and all those provinces, over
which the law Gabinia did entitle him governor, as Phrygia, Lyc^onia, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Ciliciae, Colchis superior, and Armenia.

CHAP. 13.
De Tutelis.
THis word Tutela does signify a wardship, guardianship, or protection of a
child in his non age: whereof I. Camerar. in orat pro L. Facco.
Camerarius observes four sorts, and we may with Pellitarius add the fifth.
Either the overseers were appointed by will; or else the next of the kin were
overseers; or the magistrate did appoint whom he thought fit: and these three
sorts I. Omphal. in orat pro Cecinna.
Omphalius calls thus: the first Testamentaria^, the second Legitimam, the
third Dativam. The fourth sort Camerarius calls Tutelam fiduciariam, quae
eorum est, qui emancipati desijssent esse agnati. The fifth Pellitarius pro
Cecin.
Pellitarius calls Tutelam honorariam, namely when as the office of
administration is committed to others, but yet certain chief overseers were
appointed to see the will performed, who were called Tutores honorarij. Cic.
pro Muraen.
Where we must note, that the law provided overseers, not for children under
age only, but for women also.

Emancipati desijssent esse agnati] By the Roman law every son was in such
subjection unto his father, that before he could be released of this
subjection and made free, he should by an imaginary sale Vid leg 12. tabul.
be sold three times by his natural father to another man, who was called by
the lawyers Sig. de iure Romans l. 1. c. 10*
Pater fiduciarius.i. a father in trust; yea and be bought again by the
natural father, and so manumised by him, and then he became free. The form of
this kind of sale or alienation is set down more at large in the explanation
of one of the laws that follows, with an example not much unlike this. This
imaginary sale was called Mancipatio; the children thus alienated from the
father were termed Emancipati; this form of setting free was termed
Emancipatio. This F^duciaria tutela then, in my opinion was thus. That when any
goods did fall unto a child thus alienated, by the death of his father, then
should not the oversight of this child fall unto the next of the kin termed
Agnati, but Quoniam desiit esse agnatus.i. because he had in a manner lost his
aliance with his kindred, therefore should the oversight of the child belong
unto the father in trust, termed Pater fiduciarius, whence the gardianship it
self was called Tutela fiduciaria.

Laetoria lex.
This law made by Laetorius provided, that there should be overseers appointed
for those which were distracted, C. 3. de offic.
or did prodigally wast their patrimony. For, as it appears by the common
adage, Ad agnatos and Gentiles deducendus est, they did account al prodigals,
mad men: they meaning no more by that, then we do by our english proverb, when
we say of a spend-thrift: let him be begged for a fool. The reason of their
adage was, because if any were distracted, by the Roman law his wardship fell
Adagnatos and Gentiles.i. the next of the kindred.

CHAP. 14.
De Testamentis.
BEfore we descend unto the laws themselves, we will explain those three
diverse sorts of wills in use amongst the Romans. Namely Testamentum calaris
comitijs, which was so called, because twice in the year in time of peace the
Roman people assembled themselves together to this end and purpose, that if
any would make his will the whole people might bear witness there unto: these
assemblies were termed Calata comitia. Secondly Testame^tum in procinctu.i.
when a soldier in time of war ready to give battle, did call out three or
four of his fellows, and in the audience of them did by word of mouth
pronounce his last will and testament. Thirdly, Testamentum per ema^cipationem
familiae.i. by making over his goods and possessions under a fained form of
sale, unto a second party called Haeres fiduciarius and imaginarius.i. an heir
in trust, who should afterward resign them unto the true and lawful heir:
and this imaginary kind of sale, was performed with certain solemnities circa
aes and libram: and also the sale it self was sometimes called Nexus, as
likewise Emancipatio. Hence was the will sometimes called Testamentum per aes
and libram, sometimes Testamentum per Nexum. For the proof of this, which has
been delivered, touching the three sorts of wills I will refer the reader to
Sig. de iure Romans l. 1. c. 12*
Sigonius.

Furia lex.
C. Furius Trib. Pleb. made a law, Cic. Verrin. 3*
that it should not be lawful for any to give away in way of legacy, unto
any, except to the kinsmen of him which manumised him, or some other certain
persons, supra mill asses.i. above fifty shillings or thereabout, there going
2 Asses and semis to the making of one Sestertius.

Voconia lex.
Q. Voconius Saxa Trib. Pleb. tulit legem, Cic. Verrin. 3*
Ne qui census esset, virginem, neve mulierem supra quadrantem suorum bonorum
haeredem institueret, plusue cuiquam legaret, quam ad haeredem, haeredes ve
perveniret.

Census.] This word Census does sometimes signify all such as have tendered
the just valuation of their estate unto the Censors: and then Incensus is
opposite to it, signifying such an one, as has not tendered his estate or name
to be registered by the Censors. But in this place Census is taken for such a
rich man, whose estate was in the Censors book valued at one hundred thousand
Sesterces (Vid. Asconium in Verrin. 3.)

Supra quadrantem suorum bonorum].i. No woman should be heir to more then one
quarter of such a rich man's goods. For the right conceauing of this, we must
note with Barth. Latom. in orat. pro Cecinna*
Latomus, that the whole inheritance (were it never so great) was termed As,
and that was divided into twelve parts which the lawyers called Vnciae: Duae
vnciae dicebantur Sextans; tres quadra^s, quatuor Triens, quinque Quincunx, sex
Semissis, septem Septunx, octo Bessis, novem Dodrans, december Decunx, vndecim
Deunx, Totum As, vt dictum est. Again every Vncia was divided into six parts
called Sextulae: Duae sextulae Duellam, tres Semunciam faciunt. So the^
according to the lawyers (as Alex. Genesis dier. l. 1. c. 1.
Alexander observes) if there were one heir alone instituted, he was termed
Haeres in Assem totum institutus; if otherwise there were many coheires, then
was it according as the Testator did appoint. Some were ex Deunce haeredes.i.
heirs to eleven parts of his goods, there being but one part bestowed from
him: some were haeredes ex quadrante.i. heirs to one quarter of his goods:
others were Haeredes ex semuncia.i. they had the four and twentieth part:
others were Sextula aspersi.i. they had the threescore and twelfe part of the
whole As.i. of the whole inheritance be it more or less, etc. Here we must
understand that there is great difference between these two phrases. Institui
haeres in totum Assem, and ex toto Ass. For all those, which were nominated
Haeredes, whether it were ex Dodrante, Quadrante, vel Semuncia, or howsoever,
yet were they termed Haeredes ex toto Ass.i. they were not Legatarij, such as
received legacies. Now none ca^ be said In totum assem institui, but he which
is the alone and sole heir unto the whole.

CHAP. 15.
De Vsu-capione.
Atinia lex.
A Tinius made a law, Cic. Ve^rin. 3*
that the plea of prescription or long possession should not avail in things
that had been stolen, but the interest which the right owner had in those
stolen goods should remain perpetual. The words of the law are these: Quod
surreptu^ est, eius rei aeterna auctoritas esset. Where by Sig. de iure Romans l.
1. c. 11*
auctoritas is meant ius dominij. This crime of theft as likewise of usury was
so odious unto the Romans that whosoever was found guilty thereof was condemned
Fr. Sylv. in Verrin. 1.
Lege quadrupli.i. to pay four times as much: whence the informers against
such were termed Quadruplatores.

CHAP. 16.
De Iudicibus, and Iudicijs.
Lex accusatoria.
TVlly me^tioneth a law termed lex accusatoria, which in truth was no law,
Cic. pro Mur.
neither was there any author thereof: but there was a such a received custom
amongst the Romans, that the accuser should object against the party accused,
not only the present crime then questioned, but all other scapes and faults
committed long before to the bettering of his matter: that at length this
accusatory custom became in manner of a law, and so was called Lex
accusatoria. vid. Franc. Syluium in orat. pro Mur. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 3. c. 5.
Their custom also was to procure others to join with them in their
accusations; those Cic. pro Muraen.
Tully calls Subscriptores, because they did subscribe unto the accusation.

Lex Servilia and Sempronia.
Whereas Sempronius had preferred a law, Curio in ora. pro Scauro.
whereby he took away the authority of sitting in judgment from the Senators,
and appropriated, it to the Roman Gentlemen; Q. Servilius Caepio being Consul
did afterward prefer another law, whereby the administration of judgment
was divided between the Senators and the Gentlemen.

Rupilia lex.
Rupilia lex vetabat diebus triginta sortiri dicam.] Cic. in Verr.
Here we must note with Sig. de iure Prove. l. 2. c. 5.
Sigonius, that this law was of force only in the province of Sicilia: also
that it is one thing scribere dicam.i. to enter an actio^, another sortiri
dicam.i. by lots to choose the Judges, which was 30. days after.

Livia lex.
Though by virtue of Servilius his law the Senators were made capeable of the
office of a Judge, Cic. de orat. l. 3.
yet they were not thereby equally capeable with the Roman Gentlemen: and
therefore did M. Livius Drusus ordeine, that the Judges should be elected
equally out of both orders, namely three hundred out of the Senate, and three
hundred out of the Gentry.

Plautia lex.
M. Plautius Sylvanus preferred a law, Cic. pro Cornel.
that the number of Judges should be chosen not only out of the Roman
Senators and Gentlemen, but out of the populacy also, namely out of every Tribe
fifteen Judges.

Aurelia lex.
L. Aurelius Cotta being Praetor made a law, Cic. in Verr^e saepe.
that the Judges should be chosen out of the Senators, the Gentlemen, and those
Martial Treasurers or Clearks of the band called Tribuni aerarij.

Pompeia lex.
Cn. Pompeius Magnus being Consul ordained, Cic. in Pison.
that the Judges should be elected out of the wealthiest Centuries, tying the
election notwithstanding to those three degrees of people, namely Senators,
Gentlemen, and Martial Treasurers; also he added that the number of Judges to
examine causes should be seaventy and five.

Iulia lex.
C. Julius Caesar ordained, Cic. Philip. 1.
that the election of Judges should be out of the Senators and Gentlemen only,
leaving out the Martial Treasurers; and this Tully calls lege^ Iudiciariam
Caesaris.

Antonia lex.
M. Antonius tulit legem, Cic. Philipp. 1. and 5.
vt tertia iudicum decuria e Centurionibus, Antesignanis, Alaudis,
Manipularibus fieret.

Iudicum decuriae:] When the L. chief Justice had taken his oath, he chose out
some ex certis ordinibus, non ex omni populo.i. out of such degree and place,
as the law required, to sit in judgment in the trial of those cases, which
were termed causae publicae: and these Judges he afterward divided into lesser
numbers called Decuriae. vid. Sigon. de iure Romans lib. 2. cap. 18.

E Centurionibus.] Centuriones were captains over an hundred footmen.

Antesignanis.] This word Antesignanus has a double acception in the Roman
histories. Sometimes Antesignani do signify the third part of the Roman army:
For all those soldiers, that fought before the banners or ensigns, as they
were called Hastati in respect of their weapon, so were they called Antesignani
in respect of their ensigns, before which they fought. The second part of the
army as they were called Principes in respect of their prowess and valor, so
were they called Subsignani, as fighting under the ensigns. The third part, as
they were called Triarij because they fought in the third, or rereward, so were
they called Postsignani, as fighting behind the ensigns. Where we must not
think, that those which were called Antesignani, and Subsignani, were
altogether destitute of ensigns among themselves (for every Maniple had his
ensign) But the Eagle and other chief ensigns were carried by the Subsignani,
and in respect had to them they had their names. And hence arises the second
acceptio^ of this word, namely that all those soldiers of every Maniple, which
stood in front before their ensign were called Antesignani, and those were
commonly the best soldiers in the company. See the several proofs of this.
Lips. Milit. Romans lib. 4. dial. 3.

Alaudis.] Iul. Caesar pressed a legion of soldiers out of Gallia Transalpina,
all which afterward he made free of Rome. This legion he called Legionem
Alaudarum, from the form of their helmets which did resemble the head of the
Lark, called in french Alauda. Barthol. Latomus in Philip. 1.

Manipularibus.] Those captains which governed a Maniple of soldiers, were
called Manipulares. Fr. Maturantius in Phil. 1.

Cornelia lex.
L. Cornelius Sylla, preferred a law, that the chief judge of the bench called
Iudex quaestionis, Cic. pro C^entio.
should refer it unto the choice of the defendant, whether he would have
judgment passed on him Clam an Palam.i. (as Sylvius observes) either by
voices, or by tables.

Memnonia lex.
This law (made by Memnius) provided, that no action should be entered against
those, Cic. in Vatin.
who were employed abroad in businesses for the common wealth. An addition unto
this law was, that whosoever should calumniari.i. forge an accusation against
another, Cic. pro Sext Roscio.
a certain letter should be burnt in his forehead in token of infamy. This
law is sometimes called Lex Rhemnia. Here we may with Fr. Sylv. in orat. pro
Cluentio.
Fr. Sylvius observe the difference of these three phrases, Calumniari,
Praevaricari, and Tergiversari. He which does in his accusation forge faults
never committed, is said Calumniari. He which undertakes ones suit, and either
will not urge reasons in the behalf of his client, or answer the objections of
his adversary when he is able, is said Praevaricari.i. to play the false
Proctour. He which does desist in his accusation, and let his suit fall, is said
Tergiversari.

Lex incerta de Nexu.
In ijs rebus quae mancipi sunt, Cic. pro Mur.
is periculum iudicij praestare debet, qui se nexu obligavit.i. If the buyer of
any thing in that form of sale called Nexus be troubled in law, the seller
thereof must secure him, and save him harmless.

Mancipi sunt.] Fr. Sylv. in orat. pro Mur*
Those things were termed res Mancipi, which were alienated from the seller
Nexu.i. by such a form of sale as follows. The form was thus; At the least
five witnesses, all Roman citizens and of full age, besides one called
Libri-pens (from holding of a pair of balla^ces) should be present: and the
chapman or buyer should come with a certain brass coin in his hand, and say
(for example sake, if it were a bondslaue to be sold) Hunc ego hominem ex iure
Quiritium meum esse aio, i^que mihi emptus est hoc aere; and forthwith striking
the balance with the brass coin, he gave it to him that made the sale. This
kind of chaffering was termed Nexus, as we may suppose a necte^do, because it
did bind the seller to make good the sale: Sylv. ibid.
sometimes it is called Per aes and libram venditio, because of the ceremonies
used in it. Melanct. (...) ora. pro Mur.
Now it is commonly called Mancipatio, I. Camerar. in orat. pro Muraen.
a manus capione, from taking that which is sold into ones hands or possession:
whence the word Mancipatus, and Mancipium are used to signify a bondslaue,
that is in this manner sold; though sometimes Mancipium does signify the sale
it self: whence Cic. uses this phrase, Lex Mancipij, to signify a clause or
condition put in the sale. All things sold after this manner were termed Res
mancipi; Priscian. l. 3 vid. F. Sylv. in ora. pro Mur.
The word Mancipi being a nowne indeclinable, as Frugi, Cordi; Huiusmodi, etc.
We may coniect the reason of these balances, why they should be used in this
kind of bargaining, to be, because Alex. Genesis dier. l. 4. c. 15.
in old time they did not bargain by paying coined money, which was called Aes
signatum, but by paying a certain weight of money, whence such money was
termed Aes grave. And hence it is, that metaphorically we translate Pendo and
Rependo, to pay and repay.

CHAP. 17.
De Maiestate.
Lex Varia.
Q. Varius Trib. Pl. made a law, that the Praetores Quaesitores should sit in
judgment upon those, Cic. pro Cornel.
by whom the Allies or Associates had been moved to attempt war against the
Roman people.

Iulia lex.
C. Iul. Caesar ordained, that such as were condemned of treason, Cic. Philip.
1.
or causing vproares in the common wealth, should be banished.

CHAP. 18.
De Ambitu.
THose laws were termed Leges de Ambitu, which were made against indirect or
unlawful courses used in canvasses for offices.

Fabia de Ambitu.
This lex Fabia restrained the number of those poor me^ who because they were
wont to follow up and down, and all the day to attend such as did stand for
offices, were thence called Sectatores.

Acilia Calpurnia.
M. Acilius Glabrio, Cic. pro Mur.
and C. Calpurnius Piso, being Consuls, made a law, that such as were convinced
of sinister and indirect means used in their canvasses, should be fined at a
certain sum of money set on their heads, and they should be made both
incapable of bearing office, and vneligible into a Senators place.

Senatus-consultum de Ambitu.
M. Tullius Cic. and C. Antonius being Consuls, a certain decree was made by
the Senate, Cic. pro Mur.
that if such as did either salute or attend upon those that stood for offices,
were hired by any manner of reward; or if any public prizes were occasioned to
be played; or any public feasts made by the^, they should be liable to the
censure of Calpurnius his law.

Tullia lex.
M. Tullius Cic. made a law, that no man standing for an office should cause
any public prize to be played, within two years that he either had stood, or
should stand for an office, unless the day had formerly been appointed by
some will. Item he ordained, that Senators being found to have used unlawful
means for the attaining of any office, Cic. pro Sext*
should suffer ten years exilement. And the commonaltie offending in that
point, should be punished with an heavier punishment, then the law made by
Calpurnius la^ed on them. An addition unto this was, that if any being cited to
his answer in the court for his indirect means, Si morbu^ excusaret.i. If he
did urge his sickness for his not appearance, then should he undergo a
penalty.

Si morbum excusaret.] So that Tully here seems to cut of that liberty which
the twelve tables permitted in these words [Si Iudex alterue ex litigatoribus
morbo sontico impediatur, iudicij dies diffisus esto].i. If either Judge,
Plaintiff, or Defendant were sick, they should diffindere diem..i. Sig. de
iud. lib. 1. cap. 28.
proferre and in aliud tempus reijcere, proroge the time of judgment. And
unless some might think, that by morbus sonticus was meant some strange
disease, Sigonius infers that every disease is termed Sonticus, which
hinders us in the performance of our businesses: Sontes enim nocentes dicunt.

Licinia de Sodalitijs.
M. Licinius. Crassus being Consul, Cic. pro Pla^cio.
persuaded vt in Sodalitijs Iudices ab accusatore ex tribubus ederentur.

Sodalitia.] In the later times the Romans in their canvasses would gather
together a certain company of their side or faction to follow them, tearming
them Sodales: and these Sodales would as it were by violence force the people
to suffrage with them, whence the violence offered by them was termed
Sodalitia. Sig. de Iud. lib. 2. cap. 30.

Iudices ab accusatore ederentur ex tribubus.] We may read of three sorts of
Judges among the Romans, or rather of three diverse kinds of elections of their
Judges. For either they were Lecti sortitione, of which more may be seen in one
of the laws following; or Editione, by nomination or naming them, the manner
thereof being thus; That either the plaintiff should choose them all, and then
were they called Iudices edititij; or the plaintiff should choose one half,
and the defendant the other, and then were they called Iudices alterni.
Melancthon in Cic. pro Muraen.

CHAP. 19.
De pecunijs repetundis.
FIrst touching the word Repetundae, Sigonius says, that such money was
termed Pecuniae repetundae, quae possent repeti, which might by the course of
law be recovered; Namely such money as any Magistrate, Judge, or public
officer, did either in the Provinces, or in the city receive as a bribe, from
the Allies and Associates, or from the Roman citizens for the administration
of justice, or the execution of any public duty: and this kind of bribe they
termed Pecunias Repetundas, pecuniam ablatam, captam, coactam, conciliatam,
aversam (Cic. in Verrinis) But as it seems very probable, these laws against
briberie were first occasioned, for the ease and relief of the Roman
Provinces and Allies, called in Latin Socij, who were much abused in this kind
by the Prove. Consuls, Praetours, and Quaestors, etc. Whence Tully calls this
law against bribery, Legem Socialem.

Iunia lex.
M. Iunius Pennus Trib. Pleb. preferred a law, that such as were convinced of
bribery, Praeter litis aestimationem, exilium etiam damnato esset irrogatum.

Litis aestimationem.] Here we will consider the difference of these three
phrases, Litis contestatio, Litis redemptio, and Litis aestimatio. Sig. de iud.
lib. 1. cap. 27.
The first signifies the producing of witnesses, when both sides shall openly
in the court use this form of words, Testes estote: which was not done,
antequa^ satisdationes factae essent, before sureties were put in, by the one,
that he would Iudicatum solvere, pay that which he was condemned: by the
other, that he would rem ratam habere.i. stand to the verdict or sentence in
the court. The second phrase signifies a composition or an argument agreed
upon by both sides between themselves: Fr. Sylv. in ora^. pro Q. Roscio.
Redimere lites est pactionem facere; qui enim paciscitur, facit vt lis non
sit. The third is, when the party which is cast in the suit is adjudged to pay
the money, or the worth of the goods called in question, together with the cost
and damages in law unto his adversary. Fr. Sylvius in orat. pro Cluentio.
Litem aestimare est pecuniam, de qua lis fuit, and propter quam condemnatus
est reus, in summam redigere, quae de bonis eius redigatur. I. Tislin in orat.
pro Rabirio.
And Aestimare litem est, quod vulgo dicitur, Taxare litis expensas.

Acilia lex.
M. Acilius Glabrio made a law, that such as were accused of briberie, Neque
ampliari, neque comperendinari possent.i. they must out of hand receive
judgment.

For the right understanding of these two words [Ampliari and Comperendinari]
we must consider the ancient customs and ceremonies used by the Romans in
handling their suits of law. First there was In ius vocatio.i. a citation of
one into the court. Secondly postulatio.i. a request put up unto the Praetour,
that it might be lawful for the Plaintiff to enter his action against the
Defenda^t; whence Postulare aliquem de hoc vel illo crimine, is to accuse one
of this or that crime. Thirdly Nominis delatio.i. the taking of the defendants
name into the court-booke: and this was termed Intendere actionem, vel Litem;
and Diem alicui dicere.i. to enter an actio^ against one. At which time the
plaintiff did Vadari reum.i. demand sureties or bale from the defendant, that
he would appear upon the day appointed by the Praetour, which commonly was the
third day following, called properly dies perendinus, and sometimes dies
tertius simply, as it appears by those capital letters. I. D. T. S. P. used
to be written in their actions: which letters Sig. de Iud. lib. 1. cap. 27.
Probus expounds thus. In diem tertium, sieve perendinum. So that the^
properly, lis vel reus dicitur comperendinari, when the giving of sentence is
differred til the third day. Moreover before the Praetor would suffer the
Action to be entered, he would swear the Plaintiff that he did not accuse the
Defendant calumniandi causa.i. falsely or maliciously, and this kind of
swearing was termed Calumniam iurare, calumniam deiurare, and In litem iurare.
Now if either party were absent from the court upon the third day, except he
were sick, he was cast in his suit, and the Praetor did grant an execution
called Edictum peremptorium, whereby he gave authority to his adversary to seize
upon his goods. Sometimes there were two or three Edicts in manner of Processes
or writs before the Edictum peremptorium could be obtained; some times it was
granted at the first, and then was it Sig. eiusd. l. cap* 28.
called vnum pro omnibus. Sig. eiusd. l. cap. 21.
Now if both parties came into the court and did appear, then were they said
se stitisse: so that this word sisto amongst the lawyers did signify to show
ones self in the court. Upon the third day the Praetor also with the whole
bench of Judges did meet, and the Iudex Quaestionis (whom Rosinus makes a
distinct officer differing from the Praetor) did cause all the Select Judges to
pull out certain lots, out of an vrne or pitcher brought thither for that
purpose, and those Judges upon whom the lot fell were to sit in judgment: This
was called Sortitio Iudicum. Now if either the Plaintiff or Defendant did
suspect any of those, that they would be partial, then might he except against
them, and that was called Iudicum reiectio: Then the Iudex quaestionis would in
manner aforesaid choose other Judges into their places, and that was called
subsortitio. Which being ended, those Judges which were thus chosen received
every one of them from the Praetor three tables, the one having this letter A
written in it, betokening Absolution: whence Tully calls it literam
salutarem: The other having this letter C written in it, betokening
Condemnation: the third having these two letters N. L. betokening Non liquet.
After the receipt of the tables, then did the Praetor mittere vel dimittere
iudices in co^silium.i. send them to cast their tables into the vrnes, there
being three vrnes or little coffers purposely provided; the one for those
judges which were chosen out of the Senators, the other for those that were
chosen out of the Gentlemen, the third for those which were chosen ^ut of the
Martial Treasurers. Now if they did cast the first sort of tables into the
vrnes, then the Praetor pronounced the defenda^t absolved; if the second, then
he pronounced him condemned; if the third, then he pronounced Amplius
cognoscendum, that they must have longer time to enquire: And this is properly
termed Ampliatio, A repriue; and in such manner it is said, quod lis vel reus
dicitur Ampliari. The proofs for this manner of proceeding in law may be
collected out of Rosinus lib. antiq. 9. cap. 19. 20. and 24. and out of
Sigonius according to the marginall quotations.

Lex Cornelia de Sicarijs, Veneficio, and Parricidio.
Cornelius Sylla being Dictator ordained a law, C. pro Cluen.
that the chief Judge called Iudex Quaestionis with the whole be^ch of Judges,
should sit upon life and death on such as had killed a man; on such as had with
an evil intent set any place on fire; on such as should walk with any weapon
either to kill or rob a man; on such as had either made, bought, sold, had, or
given any poison, thereby to kill a man; on any magistrate, whosoever should
cause any conventicle or secret assemblies, or should give their consent to the
suborning of any man to accuse another falsely, that thereby he being innocent
might be oppressed and condemned by public judgment. Moreover De eius capite
quaerito, etc..i. Let them sit upon life and death on that man, which shall
bear false witness, that another might be condemned to death; on that
magistrate or chief Judge, which shall take a bribe to condemn another to
death.

Parricidium.] This word does properly signify only a murdering of ones
parents or kinsfolk, but in Numa Po^pilius his time it signified as much as
homicidium.i. any ma^slaughter whatsoever.

CHAP. 20.
Lex 12. tabularum de Vindicijs.
SI qui in iure manum conserunt, vtreique superstitibus praesentibus vindicias
sumunto.

Si qui in iure:] Here we must note, that the custom among the Romans in old
time was, that as often as any controversy did arise touching the possession
of an house, a field, or any such like thing, the Praetor did go unto the
house, field, or the thing questioned, being accompanied thither with the
Plainteiffe and the Defendant, together with others whom the law required to be
present as witnesses. This place wheresoever it were, though in the open
field, during the time that the Praetor sat there to give judgment, was
termed in Latin Ius, in English a Court. Where in the presence of the Praetor
and the witnesses, the plaintiff and Defendant did manum conserere, that is,
as I. Camerar. pro L. Muraen*
Camerarius supposes, argue and dispute the case pro and con in a solemn
form of words prescribed them by the law. For this phrase is borrowed by the
lawyers from the art military, where soldiers are said manum vel manu
conserere, when they fight hand to hand. [V^reique superstitibus
praesentibus].i. let both parties in the presence of witnesses (so Rosin. ant.
lib. 8 c. 29.
Festus expounds superstites) [Vindicias sumunto].i. Let them take a turffe
of the ground: for so Sig. de iud. lib. 1. c. 21.
Sigonius expounds Vindiciae; though properly (as he observes) it signified
the possession of a thing, rather then the thing possessed. This turffe being
taken up, was carried to the Praetor, and judgment was given upon that, as upon
the whole. I do presume that in other cases, as in taking the possession of an
house, etc: some other thing in manner of the ^urffe was presented unto the
Praetor, upon which as upon the whole he gave judgment. In Process of time,
the Praetor by reason of the multitude of other employments, not finding
convenient leisure to review every particular ground, or house called in
question, A. Gell. vid. Rosin. Ant. l. 8. c. 29.
it was ordained contrary to the twelve tables, that the plaintiff in such
cases should come into the court, and challenge the defendant in this form of
words, Ex iure manu consertum te voco.i. I challenge thee to go out of the
court into the field, to use one toward the other that solemn form of words
which the law enioyneth. Then did the defendant either yield the possession of
the ground, or else he did reply, Vnde tume ex iure manu consertum vocasti,
inde ib^ ego te revoco. The^ did they both taking witnesses with them without
the company of the Praetor inire viam.i. go into the ground bringing back a
turffe thereof, upon the which (as in manner shown) the Praetor gave judgment
at their return.

For the better understanding of this that has been spoken in the explanation
of this law, we must note, that the action termed Vindicatio was twofold:
either the suit for the possession of a thing, or the suit for the Lordship or
right owning thereof. The possession of any thing was recovered, either by a
true and real violence, or by a seeming violence. This seeming violence was
twofold, either it was manus co^sertio, which was shown immediately before; or
Moribus deductio.i. a customary leading the unlawful possessor out of the
ground thereby to enter possession. Vis simulata altera a lege, altera emanavit
a moribus; says de iudic. lib. 1. cap. 21*
Sigon. The first of these did arise from the Roman law, the other from a
custom amongst the Romans: the first of these is to be seen in Tully his
oration pro Muraena, the other pro Caecinna. To these Sigonius adds a third
kind of seeming violence; which how justly he has termed a violence, I shall
leave to the indifferent judgment of the impartial reader. The right of the
Lordship or owning any thing was sued for in this manner: The plainteiffe did
question with the defendant thus; first An auctor esset?.i. whether he had not
covertly made away the possession of the thing, thereby to frustrate the
action. Secondly, An sponderet.i. whether he would put in a gage of money into
the court, which he would forfeit if he were cast; which being done, the
plaineteiffe did also upon the demand of the defendant put in a gage of money
to be forfeited, if he prevailed not in his suit. This gage of money was termed
Sigon. de iu dic. lib. cap. 21*
sacramentum; and in this sense, Tully pro Milone, says, Iniustis vindicijs,
and sacramentis alienos fundos petunt, that is, they sue for other men's
grounds, with unjust actions and gages of money. Thirdly, An satisdaret, that
is, whether he would put in surety, that during the trial in law, the ground
or house called in question should not be impaired. The solemn form of words
used in the first demand, is thus to be seen in Cic. orat. pro Muraena and
pro Coecina.
Tully, Quando in Iure te conspicio, postulo ann^e sies auctor? If the
defendant held his peace, then was he adjudged to pay all costs and damages; if
he professed himself the present possessor, then did the plainteiffe proceed
in manner as he should for the possession thereof; if he denied it, then did
the Praetor say unto the plainteiffe, Quando negat, sacramento quaerito:
Thereupon said the plainteiffe to the defendant, Quando negas, te sacrame^to
quinquagenario provoco, spondesne te soluturum quinquaginta asses, si auctor
sis? To whom the defendant replied, spondeo quinquaginta asses si auctor sim.
Tu vero spondesne idem, ni sim? The plaineteiffe answered, Ego quoque spondeo.
Now in this kind of stipulation, the plainteiffe was said sponsione and
sacramento pro vocare, sacramento rogare, quaerere, and stipulari.i. to
challenge one to pawn a sum of money for the trial of a suit in law. The
defendant was said, co^tendere ex provocatione, co^tendere sacramento, and
restipulari.i. to be sued in such manner. This money was termed sacramentu^,
Sig. de iud. lib. 1. cap. 21.
because when it was forfeited, it was bestowed in rebus sacris and divinis.
Touching the last Interrogatory, I read no set form of words, but by the word
satisdatio, the intelligent reader may coniect that it did somewhat symbolize
with our English custom of putting in bale.

Lib. 4.
Rites and customs observed by the Romans in their wars.
De Militia.
TOuching the art military used among the Romans, it will not be impertinent
to consider, first how war was proclaimed, and peace established by them:
Then to march on to the description of their bands or companies, where we may
first observe the office of their chief captain, and their subordinate
leaders, together with the several wards into which the universal army was
divided. After this we may descend unto the diversity of punishments used
toward captives, and likewise toward refractarious and disobedient soldiers:
Adding as a corollary or period to our whole discourse the several rewards,
which the L. General with his soldiers after the performance of certain
noble atchieuements received.

CHAP. 1.
De ritu, quem Romani observarunt vel foedus ferientes, vel bellum inferentes:
and de triplici ratione cons^ribendi milites.
We may remember that it, has been already shown, that both the proclaiming
of war and peace belonged longed unto a certain order of Roman Priests
called Foeciales, whom by reason of their office I englished Heralds at arms.
The rites and ceremonies, which they used, when they proclaimed peace were as
follows. vz. One of those Heralds having his commission from the state (after
that both sides had agreed upon the truce and league now to be concluded)
took up a stone in his hand Polyb. vid. Rosin. antiq l. 10. c. 2.
using this solemn form of words: Sirecte and sine dolo malo hoc foedus atque
hoc ius iurandum facio, dij mihi cuncta felicia praestent; sin aliter aut ago
aut cogito, (caeteris omnibus saluis) in proprijs patrijs, in proprijs legibus,
in proprijs laribus, in proprijs teplis, in proprijs sepulchris solus ego
peream, vt hic lapis e manibus decidet, and therwithal he cast the stone out of
his hand: which manner of oath was termed I^^are Iovem lapidem, or per Iovem
lapidem.i. as it has been rendered by Festus, to swear by Jupiter holding a
stone in ones hand. Sig. de iure Ital. l. 1. c. 1.
Many say that he did cast that stone at an hog or porker brought thither
purposely, adding these words to the former; Si prior populus Romanus defexit
publico co^silio, tum ille Diespiter populu^ Romans sic ferito, vt ego hunc
porcum hodie feriam: alluding to which custom Virgill says, Et caesa
iungebant foedera porca.

The manner of denouncing war has been Vid page 50.
already shown. The act of service in war was termed Mereri sub hoc vel
illo duce.i. to serve in war under this or that captain: and whatsoever
soldier was discharged of his service, as having served out his whole time;
he was called miles emeritus, and by Orat. pro lege Manil.
Tully, such an one is said stipendia confecisse. Serve. l. 2. and 7. Aeneid.
Servius has observed, that the Roman soldiers were pressed three manner of
ways: per Sacramentum, Coniurationem, and Evocatione^. But Lips^de milit. Rom
lib. 1 dial. 8.
Lipsius censureth him for the amisse-explanation of the last member. Therefore
the indifferent reader shall give me leave to borrow the terms from Servius;
but the explanation of them partly from Servius, partly from Lipsius in the
places now quoted. Ordinarily soldiers at their press did each severallie
take their oath not to forsake their captain or country; and this oath was
called Sacramentum militare. The words thereof are rendered by Vid. Lips. de
milit. Romans l. 1. dial. 6.
Polybius thus: Obtemperaturus sum, and facturus, quic quid mandabitur ab
imperatoribu^, iuxta vires, and those were termed milites per sacramentum.
Upon extraordinary occasions, (as when tumults or commotions did cause any
suspicion of imminent danger) the chief leader of the soldiers did go unto
the Capitol and bring forth two banners or flags, the one red, called
therefore vexillum roseum, unto which the footmen repaired; the other
sky-colored called therefore coeruleum, which the horsemen followed. The
reason why the horsemens ba^ner was sky-colored is Serve Aenei. lib. 8.
rendered thus, because it did most resemble the color of the sea, which color
they deemed most acceptable to Neptune, who was both the God of the sea, and
the first author of horses. Now because the sudden danger would not yield
so much time, that they might severally be sworn, therefore did they take
their oath in common altogether; and thence were they called Milites per
coniurationem; as likewise Lips. lib. 1. d^e mil. Romans dial 4.
Milites subitarij in respect of their sudden press. The third member may
also be admitted, if we with Lib. 1. de mil Romans dial. 8.
Lipsius understand it in its true sense, namely for those soldiers who by the
L. General were added unto the body of their army; he having authority to
call out such other soldiers, who for their long service were discharged from
giving in their names at a muster. And these are generally by all autors
termed Milites evocati; and Lipsius deemeth them all one with those whom
Servius calls Milites per evocationem. The soldiers being thus pressed, if
they purposed to make war upon their enemies, then did the L. General summon
them to prepare themselves by a sound of trumpets; and this was termed
Classicum canere, a calando, which signifies to call. Which being done, a
skarlet banner was hanged out at the L. General his pavilion: from which
ceremony I think that that common adage did first arise, confer signa and
Collatis signis pugnare, to join battle. Immediately upon this they did
Barritum tollere, make a great shout or noise with their voices to the greater
terror of their enemies: and that the noise might be the greater, they did
Arma concutere, rustle together with their armor, and clash their swords.
These four ceremonies are to be seen more at large in Lib. 4. de milit. Romans
dial 11. and 12.
Lipsius. Unto which we may add the fifth observed by In ep viror. illust. l.
4. ep 1
Fr. Sylvius; namely that at the removing of their camp, they did conclamare
vasa, give a great shout or cry in token that the soldiers should trusse up
their bag and baggage: and hence it is that Plaut in Pseudolo.
Plautus uses this phrase, Colligatis vasis to signify as much as parate or
expedite. Now that they might be the readier for battle, they did gird (as I
suppose) their soldiers coats close unto them: And a soldier thus girt was
called Cinctutus.i. (says Pigh. in sua praef. ad lib. 1. septim.
Pighius) Cinctu tutus. Alex. Genesis dier. l. 1. c. 20.
Inde Discinctos ignavos, and militiae minime aptos putarunt; Praecinctos vero
fortes and strenuos. Hence also is that proverbiall speech In praecinctu stare
or Vivere, To be in a readiness continually.

CHAP. 2.
De Legione, Auxilijs, and legionis partibus.
THE Roman forces were in old time divided into two several parts; namely in
Legiones and Auxilia, into Legions and Auxiliarie bands. The Auxiliary bands
were such forces as the neighbor and confederate countries did send unto the
Romans. The legions were taken out of the body of the Romans: Plutare. in
Romulo.
Legio, a deligendo dicta est, from the choice and selecting of soldiers.
Rosin. Ant lib. 10. cap. 4
Romulus is said to have been the first author of these Legions, making every
legion to contain three thousand footmen, and three hundred horsemen, Sig. de
iure Romans l 1. c. 15.
one thousand footmen and one hundred horsemen being taken out of each
national Tribe. Afterward it was augmented by Romulus himself into four
thousand footmen, Sigon. ib.
whence it was called Quadrata legio. And in process of time a legion
increased unto the number of six thousand: which number it seldom or never
exceeded (as it appears by Sigon. in the place now quoted.) Now Alex. Genesis
die^. l. 1. c. 20.
none could be ordinarily registered for a soldier until the seventeenth year
of his age, Pancirol li. rerum deper. dit. cap. de habit. and vest. veter.
at which his first admission he was termed Tyro, a fresh water soldier: and
hence figuratively Tyrocinium has not been translated only the first entrance
into war, but also the initiation or first entrance into any art or science
whatsoever. After he had served many years, then was he termed Veteranus, an
old beaten soldier. Sig. de iure Romans l. 1. c. 15
The Roman legion was divided In pedites and equites, there being commonly for
every thousand footmen an hundred horsemen. Pedites distributi erant in
Cohortes^^ Chortes in Manipulos; Manipuli in Centurias: Equites distributi
erant in Turmas; Turmae in Decurias. The word Cohors does signify that part of
ground, which is commonly enclosed before the gate of an house, Edmunds in his
observe. upon Caesar's Comment lib. 2. c. 3.
which from the same word we call a Court: and Varro. lib. 3. de re ru i^a.
Varro gives this reason of the Metaphor. As in a farm house (says he) many
out buildings joined together make one enclosure: so Cohors consists of
several maniples joined together in one body. It is manifest (says Alex. Genesis
dier. l. 1.
Alexander) that the Romans in ancient time did very seldom, yea never
(exceptin great necessity) inroll into their universal army above four
legions: and in an ordinary legion which he terms Legione^ iustam ten
Cohortes, every Cohors containing 3 maniples, every maniple two Ce^turies,
every Ce^tury an hundred soldiers: whence they from Centu^ were called
Centuria, a centurie. Varro. vid. Rosin. ant. Romans l. 10. c. 5
These centuries were sometimes divided into lesser numbers called Contubernia;
every Contubernium containing ten soldiers besides their captain, Rosin.
ibid.
which was called Decanus, and Caput Contubernij. Where we must observe that
Contubernium does signify as well the pavilion or lodging it self, as the
soldiers lodging therein: and it may be so called quasi Contaberniu^, from
Taberna signifying any slight lodging made of boards. Those that ruled over a
thousand footmen we may in English call Seriants mayor. They called them
Tribunimilitu^. Those that governed over the centuries were called by the^
Centuriones, by us in english Centurions: and they had their inferior officers
under them which were called Tergiductores, or Extremi agminis ductores. Veget.
vid. Rosin. ant. Romans l. 10. c. 7
Their office was to oversee and look unto those of the camp which were sick,
who commonly came behind the army, Quasi extremum agmen, et tergum aciei. The
horsemen were divided into several troops called Turmae, every Turma
containing thirty horsemen. Again every Turma was subdivided into three
lesser companies called Decuriae, every Decuria containing ten horsemen: whence
their captain was called Decurio, and the captains over the greater troops,
namely over the several wings of the horsemen, were called Equitum praefecti.
Now the chief governor over the universal army was called commonly
Imperator: we in English call him a L. General. His Lieutenant or L. deputy
was called Legatus, Lips. de mil. Romans lib. 2. dial. 10.
who in old time was sent non tam ad imperandum, quam ad consulendum
imperatori. This word Imperator in the Roman histories has a threefold
acception. First it is taken for him; who by commission from the state has the
managing of an army, being the same that Praetor was in ancient time: and in
this sense it has affinity with the office of our L. General. Secondly for
such a L. General, who by his prowess having put Barth La tom. in Phil. orat.
14.
one thousand of his enemies to the sword, both his soldiers saluted him, and
the Senate styled him by the name of Imperator: But if he had slain less
then one thousand, he was not thought worthy of this solemn salutation by that
name. Lastly it was taken for a sovereign Prince, King, or Monarch, in which
sense it was the Praenomen of all the Roman Emperors from Julius Caesar
forward. Now because the soldiers in a Legion must of necessity differ much
in estate, age, and experience, some being welthier, elder, and of more
experience then others; hence was it requisite also, that there should be a
distinction of places in their armies, according to the desert and worth of
each several person. We are therefore likewise to understand, Lips. de mil.
Romans l. 1. dial. 3.
that the Consuls every year made a general muster: at which time the
military Tribunes chose out the youngest and poorest of all the rest, and
called them by the name of Velites. Their place in regard of the other
soldiers was base and dishonorable, not only because they fought a far off
and were lightly armed; but also because they were commonly exposed to their
enemies as forelorne hopes. According to Lip. de mil Romans lib. 4. dial. 3.
Lipsius these Velites did commonly make up the spaces between the Maniples of
the Pikemen; notwithstanding they did like scouts run to and fro, casting out
their darts (as occasion was offered) and so retire: whence when a man does
leap from one thing to another in his talk, we say he does Agere velitatim.
Having chosen out a competent number of these scoutes, they proceeded to the
choice of the^, which they called Hastati.i. Pike-men: forasmuch as they fought
with a kind of iaueling, which the Romans called Hasta. These Pike-me^ fought
in the first part or fore front of the maine army. The third choice which they
made, was of the stro^gest and highest bodiedmed men, who for the prime of
their age were called Principes: and hence was the second place or ward in the
maine army called Principia, according to Terent. Eunuch. Act. 4. Scen. 7.
Thraso his speech, Ego erapos^ principia.i. I will follow the Principes,
thereby choosing to himself the best, and safest place. The last sort of
soldiers, which stood in the third place or rereward, were called Triarij.
They were of al, the most approved, and the very last help and refuge; so that
if they failed, all was lost: and hence arises that form of speech, Ad
Triarios ventum est, Alex. Genesis dier. l. 5. c. 15.
whereby we signify that a thing is come to the last push. As I suppose, the
weapon, wherewith these Triarij fought, was a dart with iron fastened at the end
of it, called in Latin Pilum. The reasons of this my conjecture are these:
first because the first century of these Triarij was called Primum pilum, and
their centurion Primopilus, and Primipilus, and Primus centurio, because he was
the chief Centurion in a whole legion, as having the charge of the chief
banner called the Eagle; Lip. de mil. Romans lib. 2. dial. 8.
whence Aquila is sometimes used to signify Primopilatum, the office and place
of the Primopilus. The second Century was called secundum pilum, and their
Centurion Secundipilus, etc. Secondly, they called the Principes, which marched
in the battle immediately before these Triarij, Antepilanos: which argues that
those soldiers, which followed next should be the Milites Pilani; and by
consequence their weapon should be that kind of dart, which they called Pilum.
Their manner of embattelling was diverse. Sometimes they would make a winged
army, so that the maine body thereof should be in the middle, and on each side
a lesser company: The maine body we in English call the Vauntgard, and the two
lesser companies we call Wings; as likewise in Latin they called them Alas
aciei, and dextrum vel sinistrum cornu. Pancir in notit. orient. and occident
imper. c. 32.
Pancirollus calls them Vexillationes, because there fought no more in either
wing, then belonged to one banner called in Latin Vexillum. The governors of
these wings he calls Alarm Praefectos. Sometimes they embatled so, that the
forefront of the Army being small, it was enlarged bigger and bigger backwarde
in manner of a triangle: By Lips. milit. Romans lib 4. dial. 7.
Lipsius it is demonstrated unto us under the form of the greek letter (...).
He in the same place calls it caput porcinum, quia velut fodit and ruit
invadendo. Commonly it was called Cuneus militu^, the metaphor being borrowed
not only from the resemblance it had with a wedg, but also from the use of a
wedge: for they never embatled in that form, unless it was to break through
their enemies, the piercing angle being thick compacted with targets.
Sometimes they did in a quite contrary manner enlarge their army in the
forefront, making it to end in an angle: and Lips. milit. Romans lib. 4 dial. 7.
this they called Forfex and Forceps militum. Sometimes their form of
embatling was circular, and then was it called Orbis vel globus militum. The
banner or flagge was properly called Vexillum, being a diminutiue of Velum. It
was also called Festus vid. Panc. in not. orient. and occident ^^p. cap 32.
Bandum: whence we do at this day call so many soldiers, as do fight sub eodem
bando, a band of soldiers: as Romulus called those that fought sub eode^
manipulo foeni (an handful of hay being used at that time instead of a flagge)
Manipulum militum. Ovid.

Pertica suspensos portabat long a maniplos,
Vnde maniplaris nomina miles habet.
CHAP. 3.
De oppugnatione vrbis, and ijs quae ad oppugnationem requiruntur.
IF the siege of a town seemed difficult and hard to compass, then did the
Romans use certain means of policy for the better effecting thereof. They
environed the town with a broad and deep ditch, adding thereunto a rampire,
fortified with many castles and fortresses, whereby they both kept the town
from any foreign succor, and withal secured themselves from sallies and
other stratagems. This rampire did extend it self toward the walls of the city,
so that by making (as it were) a great hill, they might overtop the city, and
fight with the greater advantage. Now that this great heap of earth might
become firm and well able to support the buildings to be erected upon it,
they did cast in much timber and stones amongst the earth; and this heap of
earth, stones, and timber when it was reared, was properly called Agger; whence
comes both the Latin verb Exaggerare^, and the English to Exaggerate.i. to
amplify or increase a matter. The stakes, posts, and trees, which were ramined
in about this bulwark or rampire to uphold the earth, were sometimes called
Lips polio^ lib 2 dial 2.
Ceru, because of their forked and sharp tops; but more properly Serve. Aenei.
lib. 10.
Valli, and Valla. The distance or space between each stake was called
Intervallum; though now Intervallu^ does signify not only such a distance,
but any distance either of place or time, as it appears by that of Cic. ep.
fam. lib. 1. ep. 7.
Tully: Intervallo locorum, and temporum d^siuncti. Sometimes Vallus does
signify a pole or stake, whereunto vines are tied; according to that received
adage, which we use when a special friend forsakes one, Vallus vitem decepit.
From the first signification it is, that Vallum does often signify the
enclosure, or hedging in of trees and stakes, wherewith the bulwark is vpheld:
Alluding whereunto A Gel. Noc. Attic. l. 1. c. 15
A. Gellius translateth (...), Vallum dentium. The means of their defense,
whiles they were making this their rampire, was a certain engine or ordinance
of war Rosin. ant. Romans l. 10. c. ^6
made of plankes and hurdles, running upon wheels, under which they might rest
secure from all stones and darts cast from the walls of the city: It was called
Vinea. A second engine was Musculus: The matter whereof it was made I have not
read: but the use of it was, that under it the soldiers might approach unto the
walls of the city, and undermine them. Thus much Lips. polior. lib. 1. dial. 9.
Lipsius seems to infer, when he renders the reason of the name: Musculus
ideo dictus, quia instar eius animalculi foderent sub eo terram. A third means
of their defense was Militaris testudo. This word Testudo in the art Military
had a double acception, both being borrowed from the resemblance of the
Tortoise shell, which is the true and genuine signification of this word. In
the first acception Testudo, Rosin. ant Romans l. 10. c. 16
does signify a warlike engine or fense made with boards covered over with raw
hides, which served against fire and stones cast at the soldiers: under this
they might safely assail the walls. Stad. in Flor. l 4. c. 10.
In the second acceptio^ it signifies a target-fense, which was a close
holding together of targets over head like a vault or roof, wherewith the
footmen did defend themselves from the thick shot of arrows or slinging of
stones. Their rampire or countermure being finished, they used certain great
timber towers made upon wheels to run to and fro, which they called Turres
ambulatoriae, moveable turrets. These towers had many stories one over the
other, Rosin. ant. Romans lib. 10. cap 16.
wherein they carried ladders and casting bridges thereby to scale the walls.
The engines hitherunto have been defensive, such wherewith the Romans defended
themselves in their siege: others there were offensive, wherewith they did
assail the city; and of those the chief were Balista sive Catapulta, Scorpius
sive Onager, Aries, and Malleoli. The first of these engines, as it was called
Balista (...), from darting or casting forth any thing, Lips. Poliorc. lib. 3.
dial 2.
so was it in old time called Catapulta (...), which signifies a shaft or
dart. The form thereof follows translated word for word out of Am. Marc.
lib. 23. cap. 3.
Marcellinus. [Betweene two plankes there is set in frame, and fast joined a
strong and big iron, reaching out in length after the manner of a good great
rule; out of the round body whereof, which is artificially wrought, there lies
forth farther out a four square beam, made hollow with a direct passage in
manner of a narrow trough, tied fast with many cords of ^inewes twisted one
within the other, and thereunto are joined two wooden skrewes; near unto one
of which stands the cunning Balistier, and subtly puts into the hollow
passage of the beam a wooden shaft with a big head glewed fast to it. This
done on both sides, two lusty young men do bend the engine by turning about
certain wheels. When the top of the head is drawn to the uttermost end of
the cords, the shaft being carried forth of the Balista, by the inward force
thereof, it flies out of sight.] That the reader may receive the more light in
the understanding of this obscure description. I have added the very words of
Marcellinus. [Ferrum inter axiculos duos firmum compaginatur and vastum; in
modum regulae maioris extentu^: cuius ex volumine teretis, quod in medio ars
polita componit, quadrat us eminet stylus extensius recto canalis angustimeatu
cavatus, and hac multiplici corda nervorum tortiliu^ illigatus: eique
cochleaeduae ligneae coniunguntur aptissime, quarum prope vnam adsistit artifex
contemplabilis, and subtiliter adponit in temonis cavamine sagit tam ligneam
spiculo maiore conglutinatam: hocque facto hinc inde validi iuvenes versant
agiliter rotabilem flexum. Quum ad extremiatem nervorum acumen venerit summum,
percita interno pulsu a balista ex oculis evolat. In respect of its use we may
english it a Crossebowe: but it was much bigger, and of a different form. The
Scorpion, which now they call Onager, is described by Marcellinus in the same
place thus. [Two oaken or elm beams are hewn out, and somewhat bended, so
that they seem to bunch out in backs; and these in manner of a Machinae
Serrat^^iae.
saw engine are tied fast together, being bored through with wide holes,
through (which by the means of those holes) strong cords are tied, keeping in
the whole frame, that it start not asunder: Ab hac medi^tate testi^^] Here we
must (...) that this signification of testes is borrowed from the Anatomists,
which do call certain emine^t parts behind (...) Testes. Vid Fuchs. inst^t.
med. l. 1. sec. 5.
From between these bunches, another wooden beam reaching forth overthwa^t,
and in manner of a waine beam erected up, is tied with such devises unto
certain ropes, that it may be pulled up higher, or let down lower at ones
pleasure; and at the top thereof certain iron hooks are fastened, from which
hooks there hangs down a certain sling either of iron or tow: Under which
erected beam there lies a great piece of haire-cloath full of small chafe
tied fast with cords, and placed upon a bancke of tur^es, or a heap of bricks:
When therefore it comes to the point of skirmish, a round stone being put
into the sling, four young men on one side loosing the beams, into which the
ropes are incorporated, do draw back the erected beam unto the hook. Thus
at length the master of the engine standing in some high place, giving a
mighty stroke with a hammer (and, as I suppose, upon the cord, whereunto the
erected beam was fastened, with his hook) se^teth open the rayles, that
contain the whole work, insomuch that this erected beam being now at liberty
with that quick stroke, and hitting against the soft haire-cloath, it hurleth
out the stone, that will batter whatsoever is in the way. And it is called
Tormentum, quod ex eo omnis explicatio torquebatur. It is also called Scorpio,
because when the long beam or tillar is erected, it has a sharp top in manner
of a sting. The modern time has imposed unto it the name of Onager.i. a wild
Ass; because that wild Asses, when they are coursed by hunters, fling back
stones with their heels a far off. so that often times they pierce the
breasts of those that follow them.] The Latin word is made from the Greek
(...).i. Asinus and (...), rus vel ager. Now if any ask me, why that sa^k
cloth of ashes was interposed, the reason is rendered by Marcellinus in two
lines, which I purposely did not translate in their place, because I would
continue the sense, without such a long parenthesis. The reason is there
delivered thus; because the violence and force of the erected beam recoiling,
after it had been by the stroke discharged, was such, that it would shake in
pieces the strongest walls, except there were some soft thing interposed,
whereby the forceable strength of the recoile might be by degrees slacked. The
Aries or Ram is described also by Marcellin. in the same place. [The Ram was a
great tree, or beam like unto a mast of a ship, having a piece of iron in
manner of a Rams head, fastened at the end thereof, wherewith they did demolish
and batter down the walls of a city. It was hung unto a beam, which lay a
cross over a couple of pillars, and hanged thus equally balanced, it was by
force of men pulled backward, and then recoiled upon the walls.] In lieu of
these Rams another engine was found out, called Helepolis, ab invsitato
(...).i. capio, and (...).i. civitas. The form of it is to be seen also in
Marcell. ibid. [There was (says he) a Testudo, or vaulted frame made,
strengthened with very long pieces of timber: it was covered over with ox
hides, and green wicker hurdles: the upper part or convexe sur-face thereof
was overlaid with mud, to the end that it might keep of the fall of fire and
casting of weapons. Now there were fastened in the front of it certain Cuspides
tri^ulcae.i. iron pikes with three edges very massy, in manner of the
thunderbolts, which painters and poets exhibit unto us. This great engine the
soldiers ruling within with diverse wheels and ropes, with maine force they
thrust it against the walls.] [Malleoli (says the same Marcellinus) were
certain darts fashioned on this manner; there was an arrow made of a cane,
betwixt the head and the nocke whereof was fastened an iron full of cle^ts;
which arrow like unto a woman's distaffe, on which linen is spinned, was finely
made hollow within the belly, yet open in many places: In the belly it received
fire with fuel to feed upon. And thus being gently discharged out of a weak
bow (for with an over strong shooting the fire was extinguished) if it took
fast hold on any place, it burned the same, and water being cast thereon, the
fire increased: neither was there any means to quench it, but by casting
duston it.] Now if they could not prevail by these engines called Machinae,
then did they make certain passages under ground which they called Cuniculi
from Cuniculus signifying a cony-berry: insomuch that these two phrases are
opposite, Machinis, and Cuniculis oppugnare, as it appears by that of
Plutarc. in vit. C* Caes.
Plutarch: Caesar non iam cuniculis, sed machinis tollit rempublicam.i. He does
not now covertly, but with open violence assault the common weal.

CHAP. 4.
De poenis in hosts devictos.
ALbeit after the victory the Romans inflicted diverse degrees of punishment,
according to the malice found in an enemy; yet were they always
compassionate, and (as histories testify) more exorable then any other nation.
The punishments which we find them to have used toward a conquered nation are
these. Either they punished them by death; or sold them sub corona; or
dismissed them sub iugum; or merced them in taking away their territories; or
made them tributarie states. A. Gell. lib. 7. cap. 4.
An enemy was said to be sold sub corona, when he being placed in the market
place, a crown was put upon his head in token of such a sale: or therefore
certain capti^es were said to be sold sub corona, because at such times they
were environed about with soldiers to keep them together, and this circle of
soldiers, as likewise of all other companies, is called Corona. When they
dismissed any sub iugum, Stad. in Flor lib. 1. c. 12.
they erected two spears with a third lying a cross in manner of a gallows:
then they caused them being di^armed, and their belt taken away to pass under
in token of bondage. When their territories were taken from them, they were
commonly conferred upon old beaten soldiers, in way of remunoration for their
faithful service. This transplantation was termed Coloniae deductio; and the
place ever after Romana Colonia.i. a Roman Colonie. At which times they chose
out every tenth man, viz. such as were able and of best sufficiency to make
and establish a public council, Sig. de iure Ital. l. 2. c. 4.
whom they named Decuriones. Whence we may observe, that Decurio is not
always taken for a captain over ten horsemen, but sometimes it is used to
signify an Alderman, or chief Burgess in a Roman Colonie. Diverse times the
Romans would be content after the conquest to grant to their enemies a
peaceable enjoying of their lands and possessions, conditionally, that they
would yield all faithful allegiaunce unto that L. Deputy, who^soever the
Senate of Rome should place over them. The L. Deputy was either styled by the
name of a Propraetor, a Proconsul, or a Praefectus. Those places, where the two
first sorts of governors did rule, were termed Provinciae; the other from the
governor was termed Praefectura. Where we must observe that this word
Provincia has a threefold acception. First it is taken for a country, which by
the force and power of arms is subdued to the Roman empire, and governed by
some Roman Deputy sent from the Senate: and this is the proper and primi^iue
signification thereof, it being so called, Pig. lib. Tyrannif.
Quod populus Rom eam provicit.i. ante vicit. Secondly it is taken for any
region or country, where the L. General or chief captain over a Roman army
does manage war against any nation by commission from the Senate. Lastly it
signifies any public function or administration of office, yea any private
duty, charge, or task either undertaken, or imposed; according to that of
Terent. in Phor.
Terence, Provinciam cepisti duram.i. thou have undertaken an hard task. Now
the tribute to be paid was either certain, or uncertain. The certain was
properly called Tribut^^ vel Stipend^^^; and those who paid it were termed
Tributarij sive S^ipendiarij: and this tribute was of two sorts, either
ordinary, such as was required from every house yearly, even in the time of
peace; or extraordinary, such as was levied by a law or decree of the Senate
toward unexpected charges. The uncertain tribute Sig. de iure Romans l. 1. c. 16
properly called Vectigal, was Stadius in Flor. l. 3. c. 13.
either impost-mony, such as was collected in haven towns for the
transportation of marcha^ts wares, and that was called from Portus Portorium,
or from Porta Portarium, and the receavers thereof Portitores: or Tithe corn,
namely the tenth part of their grain, and that was called from December Decumae,
and the receauers thereof Decumani; though Decumanus when it is an adjective
signifies as much as Maximus, according to that of Ovid. lib. 1. de Trist.

Qui venit hic fluctus* fluctus supereminet omnes;
Posterior nono est, vndecimoque prior.
The reason of this signification is Fr. Sylv. in viror. illust. ep. 2. lib. 1.
supposed to be, because in Arithmeticke amongst simple numbers the tenth is
the greatest: or lastly that money, which was paid by certain heardes-men for
pasturing their cattle in the Roman fields and forests. This kind of tribute
was called Scriptura, and the pastures Agri Scripturarij; because (as Sig. de
iure Romans l. 2. c. 4.
Festus says) the bayliffe or receaver of this money, called Pecuarius, did
Scribendo conficere rations.i. keep his account by writing. Where we must
note, first that all these kinds of Tributes were not only required in
Provinces or Countries subdued, but throught Italy, even in Rome it self.
Secondly though each collectour of these Tributes was distinguished by a
peculiar name, yet by a general name they were al called Cic. de A rusp.
respons. and alias saepe.
Publicani, in as much as they did take to rent these public tributes. The
chief of them, which entered into bond, as the principal takers or farmers of
these tributes Tully calls Mancipes. The others which were entered in to the
same bond as sureties, were termed Praedes. Many times the Romans did bestow
the freedom of their city upon foreign countries; and the degrees of
freedom was proportioned accordingly as the countries were. Some they honored
with the name of Roman citizens, but excluded them from the right of
suffraging, leaving them also to be governed by their own laws and
magistrates. This state they called a Municipal state, in Latin Municipium,
because they were Muneris huius honorarij participes. Sig. l. 2. de iure Ital.
c. 7.
By Munus honorarium in this place is understood nothing but the bare title of
a Roman citizen, whereby they were privileged to fight in a legion as free
denisons, not in an auxiliary band as the associates. Now the first that ever
obtained this Municipall state, were the Cerites, who for preserving the holy
things of Rome in the time of the war against the Gauls, were rewarded with
the freedom of the city, but without power of suffraging; From whence it is,
that those tables, wherein the Censors enrolled such as were by them deprived
of their voices, were called Cerites tabulae; Horace calls such a table
Ceritem ceram, for the reason shown before. But we must withal observe, that
some Municipall towns have either by desert or instant suit obtained the
liberty of suffraging also, which occasioneth that received distinction, that
there was Municipiu^ sine suffragio, and Municipium cum suffragio. Other
countries which could not be admitted into the freedom of the city, have
obtained, and that not without special and deserved respects to be Associats
and confederats unto the state of Rome. The inhabitants of such countries were
sometimes called So^ij, sometimes Amici, sometimes Latini nominis socij, etc.
The King or Prince of such a country did style himself Amicus and socius
Senate. and Pop. Romans Here we must observe a difference between Pactio and
Foedus, both signifying a kind of league. That tru^e which in time of war is
concluded upon, and accepted of both sides for a certain Sig. de iure Ital. l.
1. cap. 1.
limited space of time, is properly called Pactio; we commonly call it
Induciae; and it differed from Foedus: Sigon. ibid.
first, because that Foedus is a perpetual truce or league; Secondly because
it was necessary, that one of those Heralds at arms called Foeciales, should
by a solemn proclamation confirm this league called Foedus; neither of which
conditions was absolutely requisite in their truce termed Pactio.

CHAP. 5.
Mulctae militares, quibus milites Romani ob delicta afficiebantur.
TOuching the punishments that the Roman L. General used toward his own
soldiers when they were faulty, they were commonly proportioned unto the fault
committed. Sometimes they were easy, of which sort were al those punishments
which did only brand the soldiers with disgrace; other times they were
heavier, such as did hurt and afflict the body. To the first sort belonged
these; First Ignominiosa dimissio.i. a shameful discarding of a soldier, when
he is with disgrace removed from the army. Secondly, Fraudatio stipendij.i. a
stopping of their pay: and such soldiers which suffered this kind of mulct
were said to be are diruti, Rosin. antiq. l. 10. c. 25.
because Aes illud diruebatur in fiscu^, non in militis sacculum. Thirdly,
Censio hastaria, whereby the soldier was inioined to resign and give up his
spear: for as those which had achieved any noble act, were for their greater
honor Hasta pura donati: so others for their greater disgrace were enforced to
resign up their spear. Fourthly, the whole Cohors, which had lost their
banners, were compelled to eat nothing but barley bread, being deprived of their
allowance in wheat; and every Centurion in that Cohors had his soldiers belt
or girdle taken from him, which was no less disgrace amongst them, then it is
now amongst us, that a knight of our order of the Garter, should be deprived of
his Garter. Fifthly, for petty faults they made them to stand barefooted before
the L. General his pavillion, with long poles of ten foot length in their
hands: and sometimes in the sight of the other soldiers to walk up and down
with turfes on their necks. In the last of these they seemed to imitate their
city discipline, whereby malefactors were inioined to take a certain beam
resembling a forke upon their shoulders, and so to carry it round about the
town; whence from Fur^a, and Fero they were termed Furciferi: It has some
affinity with our carting of queanes here in England. In the first we have no
custom, that does more symbolize, then the standing in a white sheet in the
open view of a congregation. The last of their lesser punishments was the
opening of a vain or letting them blood in one of their arms: Alex. Genesis
dier. l. 2. c. 13.
which kind of punishment was used toward those alone, which (as they
conceited through the abundance of their hot blood) were too adventurous and
bold. The heavier kinds of punishments were these: first Virgis vel Fuste
caedi, to be beaten with rods or with staves and cudgils. None were ordinarily
beaten with cudgils, but those who had not discharged their office, in the
sending about that tablet called Tessera, wherein the watchword was written; or
that had forsaken their place, where they were appointed to keep watch; or
those who had stolen any thing from out the camp; or borne false witness
against their fellows, or abused their bodies by women; or lastly that had
been punished thrice for the same fault: those which were in this manner
cudgilled, were often killed in the place; but if they escaped alive, they were
to live in perpetual exilement. The ceremony used in this kind of cudgilling
was, that the Trib. milit.
knight Martial should lightly touch the party to be punished with a club,
which being done, all the soldiers did beat him with staves and cudgils;
whence we may say of one that deserves a good cudgelling in Cic. orat. Phil. 3.
Tully his phrase, Fustuar^um meretur. If a Roman soldier had broken his
rank by going out of order, then Virgis caedebatur.i. he was scourged with
rods. Sometimes the knight Martial upon just occasion would cause them to be
sold for bondslaues, to be beheaded to be hanged. All these punishments were
personal or particular; there remains one which was general, namely when the
fault was general, as in their vproares, conspiracies, etc. Upon such
occasions the soldiers were called together, and every tenth man upon whom the
lot fell was punished with that kind of cudgilling above spoken of; all the
others escaped either without punishment, or with very little. The punishment it
self was termed Dec imatio legionis, and the reason of this kind of
punishment, is rendered by Cic. pro Cluent.
Tully: vt metus viz. ad omnes, poena ad paucos perveniret.

CHAP. 6.
De donis militaribus ob rem fortiter gestam.
Concerning the rewards which were bestowed in war, some were by the Senate
conferred upon the L. General: others were by the L. General conferred upon
his soldiers. Those honors which the L. General received were three. First
Nomen Imperatoris, of which Vid. p. 176.
before. Secondly supplicatio.i. a solemn procession continued for many days
together, sometimes more, sometimes fewer: all which days the Roman people
did observe as holy days, offering up daily prayers and sacrifice to the Gods
in the behalf of their L. General: The custom being that after some notable
victory, the soldiers having saluted their chief captain (whom I call their
L. General) by the the name of Imperator, then would he send letters unto the
Senate dight with laurel, wherein he required both that name to be confirmed,
and approved by them, as likewise that they would Decernere supplicationes.i.
appoint such solemn supplications. Thirdly, they honored him at his coming
home also with a Triumph. Triumphus vel mayor, vel minor erat, says Alexander.
The lesser kind of triumph was properly called Ovatio, Salmuth. in Pancir. l.
^eru^ deperd cap. de triumph.
ab ove, from a sheep, which in this time of his triumph was led before him,
and afterward sacrificed by him: As also in the greater triumph (called
properly Triumphus) the L. General sacrificed a bull. It differs from the
greater triumph first in the acclamation; for in the lesser triumph the
soldiers following did as it were redouble this letter O, and some are of
opinion that it was therefore called Ovatio. In the greater triumph the
soldiers followed crying Io triumph, Io triumph: an example whereof may be
seen in Ode. 2. li. 4.
Horace, where he describes the triumph of Bacchus, the first author of this
greater triumph; from whose Salmuth. in Pancir. l. reru^ deperd. cap. de
triumph.
name also diverse autors do derive this word Triumphus, he being in greek
called (...), which by a little change is made Triumphus. Secondly they
differed, because in the greater triumph, the L. General did wear a garment
of state, called by some Trabea, Alex. Genesis lib. 6. cap. 17.
by others Triumphalis, Picta vel Aurata vestis: likewise a garland of laurel,
riding in a chariot, the Senators themselves with the best of the Romans
meeting him, his soldiers with their coronets, their chains, and other
rewards following after: But in the lesser triumph the L. General did wear a
plain purple gown without any gold imbrodering, and a garland of myrtle tree
Dion. Halicar. lib. 5.
commonly going on foot, sometimes permitted to ride on a horse; the gentlemen
and commonalty of Rome alone without the Senators did meet him. Moreover for a
perpetual memory of this their triumph in some public place certain
trophies were erected. Alex. Genesis dier. li. 1. c. 22.
Tr^phaeum monumentum dixere nunc marmoreum, mod^o aeneum, cum in scriptione
and titulis aevo perpetuo duraturis. Serve. Aenei. lib. 10.
Dictum est (...).i. a conversione, from making the enemies to retire and turn
back. Sometimes there were statues, columns, and arches built in token of
triumph. These arches though commonly they were known by the name of Arcus
triumphales, yet sometimes they are called For^ces, Fr. Sylv. in orat. Cic.
pro. Cn. Plancio.
whence it is that Tully calls Fabianes triumphall arch Fabianum fornicem. If
it so happened that the Roman General himself personally, did take away any
spoils from the chief captain of the enemies, then did he hang them up in a
temple consecrated to Jupiter Feretrius, who was so called, Alex. Genesis dier. l.
1. c. 14.
because as the Romans conceited, without the special assistance of Jupiter,
Dux duce^^ fer^e non poterat: these spoils had the name of Opima spolia.i.
Royal spoils. The rewards bestowed upon the soldiers were diverse: either
places of office, as the place of a Centurion, of a Praefectus, a Decurio, etc.
or their pay was increased, the spoils distributed amongst the^, or lastly
they received certain gifts termed Dona militaria. In ancient times those
soldiers which ha d best deserved, received a certain measure of corn called
by them Adorea; Alex. Genesis dier. l. 4. c. 18.
and hence it is, that Adorea is now used to signify such laud and praise, as
is due unto a soldier. But after ages for the better encouraging of the
soldiers, have found out more honorable rewards, of which Sig. de iure Romans
l. 1. c. 15.
these were the chiefest; Armilla.i. bracelet for the hand-wrest; Torquis, a
chain to wear about their neck; Phalerae, horsetrappings; Hastapura.i. a
spear having no iron at the end of it; ( Rosin. ant. lib. 10 c. 27.
it is sometimes called Hasta donatica, and Hasta graminea:) Lastly Coronae,
crowns, of which A. Gell. observes these to have been the chief: 1. Corona
triumphalis, which in old time was made of Laurel, but afterward of gold, and
thence was it called Corona aurea: it was sent by the Senate unto the L.
General in honor of his triumph; secondly Corona obsidionalis, which was
given by the soldiers unto their General, when they were freed from a siege:
it was made of grass growing in that place, where they were besieged, whence
it had the name also of Corona graminea. Now the reason why they made this
crown of grass growing in the place where they were besieged, was thereby to
yield up their right in that place unto their captain: for by that ceremony,
as Plin. l. 22. cap. 4.
Pliny observes, they did Terra and ipsa altrice humo and humatione etiam
cedere. And hence it is, that in races, and the like masteries, he that was
overcome, did gather some of the grass of that place, and give it unto the
conqueror, as a token that he did acknowledge himself conquered. Salmuth. in
Pancir. l. reru^ deperd. cap. de coronis.
This is the reason of that Adage, Herbam dare.i. to yield the victory. Thirdly
Corona civica, which was bestowed only upon him, which had saved a citizens
life, Pigh. l. Tyrannif.
though in process of time it was also bestowed upon the L. General, if he
spared a Roman citizen, when he had power to kill him. It was commonly made
of oak; whence it was called Corona quernea. Fourthly Corona Muralis: Dion.
Halicar. lib. 10.
He only was honored with this, which did first scale the walls, and enter first
into the enemies city: and hence this crown was cut upon the circlet or top
like unto the battlements. Fifthly Corona Castrensis: This the L. General
bestowed on him, which first entered into the enemies tents; it did bear in it
the resemblance of a bulwark, or at least of the mound, wherewith the bulwark
was strengthened; which mound was called in Latin Vallum, and thence the crown
it self was often called Vallaris corona. Lastly Corona navalis, with which
he was honored, which first entered into the enemies ship in a battle upon
sea: it was portrayed with many ship-beakes called in latin Rostra, Pigh. lib.
tyrannif.
whence the crown it self was often called Corona Rostrata.

FINIS.
INDEX RERVM ET VERBORVM MAXIM INSIGNIVM.
A
A. Litera in tabula scripta quid significet? 98 A. litera salutaris. 166
Abdicere quid? 119 Abire flaminio. 47 Ab ovo ad mala. Prove. 78 Acca Laurentia
quae, and ei cur sacra instituta? 39 Actiones redhibitoriae quae? 128
Accumbendi ratio apud Romanos qualis? 76 Acerra quid? 91 Actus neque plures,
neque pauciores in fabula, quam quinque esse debent. 71 Ad agnatos, and
Gentiles deduce^dus est. Prove. 154 Ad meridiem. 65 Ad mediam noctem. ib. Ad te
tanquam ad aram confugimus. 2 Ad te tanqua^ ad Asylum conf. ib. Addicere quid
significet? 119 Addicta bona quae? 120 Addicti servi qui? 28. and 120
Adijcialis coena quae? 56 Adorea quid? 192 Adscriptus civis quis? 14^
Adulterium quid? 85 Advocatus fisci. 131 Aedes Saturni. 10 Aediles vnde dicti?
128 Aediles Curules qui, and vnde dicti? ib. Aediles plebeij qui? ib. Aediles
Cereales qui, and vnde dicti ib. Era Corybantia, and vnde dicta? 55 Aerarij
qui? 97 Aerarium vnde dictum? 10 Aerarium sanctius. 11 Aerarium militare. ib.
Aerarium quomodo differat a fisco? 131 Aere diruti qui, and quare dicti? 188
Aes signatum, 161 Aes grave. ib. Aesculapij insula. 12 Agere forum quid? 6
Agere pro Tribunali quid? 134 Agere de plano quid? ib. Agere ad populum. 141
Agere cum populo. ib. Agger. 179 Agonalis mons. 3 Agonales Salii. 49 Agones
qui, and vnde dicti? 60 Agrariae leges. 150 Agri scripturarii. 186 Alae aciei.
178 Alarm praefectus. ib. Alba toga quomodo differebat a toga candida.81
Albo-galerus. 46 Albi dies qui? 66 Altar quid, and vnde dictum? 20 Alte
praecincti pro expeditis dicti. 79 Amphitheatrum quid? 15 Amphora mellaria. 54
Amphora Italica. 143 Amphora Attica. ib. Ampliatio quid? 166 Ampliari quid? ib.
An auctor esset? 169 An sponderet? ib. An satisdaret? ib. Ancile coelo
delapsum. 49 Angues pinge duos i. duos Genios. 34 Angusticlavia. 34
Angusticlavij. ib. Anniversariae feriae quae? 66 Annonae praefectus. 129 Annus
quasi annulus. 62 Annus Lunaris. ib. Annus a Romulo institutus. ib. Annus
Bissextilis. 63 Annus Iulianus. 64 Annus magnus, and vertens. ib. Ante coenium
quid, and vnde dictum? 76 Ante-pilani qui? 178 Ante-signani qui? 159 Antiquo
quid significet? 98 Aperire ludum. 67 Apex quid? 46 Apex pileorum genus. 49.
Apollinares ludi qui? 73 Aqua and igni interdicere. 116 Ara quid, and vnde
dicta? 20 Arae quare gramineae dictae? ib. Archi-gallus quis, and vnde dictus?
54 Ar^us Triumphalis. 191 Arena. 16 In Arenam descendere. ib. Arietem emisit.
Prove. 50 Aries machinae genus, and eius descriptio ex Marcellino. 183 Armis
versis pugnare. 74 Arvales fratres qui, quot, and vnde dicti? 39 Aruspices vnde
dicti? 40. As. 155 Assiduitas in candidates. 109 Asylum. 1 Atri dies qui? 66
Attellanae vnde dictae? 70 Auctio quid? 149 Auctor quis? ib. Aventinus Mons. 4.
and vnde dictus? ib. Augurum collegium 40 Augures vnde dicti? and eorum numerus
initio, ac deinceps qua^tus? 41 Auguratus semel vni datus eidem vivo nuquam
adimi potuit. ib. Augurandi ceremoniae 42 Auguria prospera and adversa qua^ do
dicta? 43 Auguria impetrativa. ib. Auguria oblativa. ib. Augustus Octavius
Caesar dictus 120 Avibus bonis quid? 41 Avibus malis quid? ib. Avis sinistra
quid significet? 43 Aurea corona 192 Aurum coronarium quid? and vnde dictum?
148 Auspices quasi avispices. 40 Auspicijs bonis 41 Auspicijs malis. ib.
Auspicari rem quid? ib. Auspicium coactum quid? and vnde dictum? 44 Auxilia
quae? 174 Axare quid? 50
B.
BAlista quid? and vnde dicta? 181 A BAND of soldiers cur sic dict? 179
Bandum. 179 Barritum tollere 174 Basilica quae pars templi? 17 Basilicae
Romanae quae? 8 Bellare coestu quid? 68 Bellum quomodo indici solitum? 50
Benignitas in candidatis 109 Berecynthia vnde dicta? 54 Bessis quid? 155
Biclinium vnde dictum? 76 Bissextilis annus qui? 63 Bissextus dies qui? 64
Blanditia in candidates. 108 Bona dea: 53. and quare dicta? ib. Bustuarij qui?
74. and 94. Bustuarij vnde dicti? 74 Bustum quid? and vnde dictum? 93
C.
CAballus mons 34 Coelius mons 3 Caesar 120 Caesar juventutis Princeps 121
Caesar Nobilissimus. ib. Cajus, Caja, maritus and vxor dict. 88 Calantica 84
Calcei mullei 85 Calcei lunati. ib. Calcei Vncinati 85 Calendae 64 Calumniam
jurare, dejurare. 165 Calumniari, praevaricari, tergiversari quomodo differu^t?
160 Campus sceleratus 11 Campus Martius quare Tiberin dict? 12 Candida toga 79
Candidatus vnde? 81.108 Candidatus Principis 82 Candidatus Quaestor. ib.
Capitolinus mons 2 Capitolium vnde? ib. Capite-Censi 105 Capitis dimicatio 117
Capitis diminutio, maxima, media, minima 116 Capite damnatus 117 Capnomantes 45
Caput Porcinum in bello quid, and quare dict? 178 Carceres in circo quid, and
vnde? 14 A Carceribus ad metam. ib. Castoris templum 9 Castrenses ludi 75
Catapulta quid, and vnde? 181 (...) 70 (...) ib. Catastrophe vitae humanae. ib.
Cavea quid? 14 Caudex quid? 100 Causae capitales 117 Celebaris hasta 87 Celeres
qui and vnde? 27.111 Celerum Tribunus 111 Censor, Censoria virga. 115 Census
quid signif.? 155 Census Senatorius 25 Census Equestris. ib. Centum viri 117
Centuria quid? 175 Centuria Praerogativa 161 Centurio 106. 176 Ceratae tabulae
99 Cereales ludi 73 Ceres quomodo effingi solita? 37 Cereris sacra apud Romanos
quo tempore facta? 37 Cereri sacrificat. Prove. 38 Cerites, municipes primi. 187
Cerites tabulae. ib. Cervi, pars aggeris quare dicti? 179 Cestus 85 Chorus tam
e viris, quam mulieribus constabat 71 Cinctura laxior 79 Cinctura astrictior.
ib. Cinctus Gabinus. ib. Cinctutus 174 Cimiliarchium quid? 11 Circum venire
quid signif^? 137 Circenses ludi 68 Circus Maximus 13 Circus, quare dicitur
fallax? 14 Cives originarij 27 Civitate donatus. ib. Civilis dies quomodo
dividitur? 65 Clarigatio quid? 50 Classicus 105 Classici Scriptores. ib. infra
Classem 105 Classicum canere. ib. Clientes qui? 23 Clodius accusat moechos.
Prove. 54 Coactum auspicium 44 Codex vnde? 100 Coena vnde dicta? 76 Coena
Adjicialis; Pontificia. 56 Coenae caput 78 Cognoscere pronunciare quomodo
diff^? 8 Cohors 175 Coire quid signif^? 137 Collegij magister 41 Colligatio
vasis 174 Collina 22 Collini Salij 49 Collis salutaris 3 Martialis Latiaris
Collis Cispius 4 Oppius Septimius Coloniae deductio 185 Comoedia vnde? and ejus
part. 69 Comoediae and Tragoed differentiae quaedam 72 Comessatio 76 Comitium
quid, and vnde? 8 locus quis? 104 Comitia, and comitium quomodo differunt? 8
Comitia calata 96 Comitia, Pontificia, Consularia, Aedilitia. 97 Comitia
curiata 97.103 Comitia centuriata 97.104 Comitia tribu^a 97.107 Comitialis
morbus 102 Comitialis dies 67 Comitialis homo. ib. Comperendinari quid proprie?
l65 Compitales ludi 68 Conclamare vasa 174 Conclamatum est 91 Concubium 65
Condition tua non vtar 89 Confarreatio 87 Congiarium 109 Conscripti Patres,
quomodo primum dicti? 23 Consul 112 Consularis vir 114 Consules Honorarij,
Ordinarij 115 Consules non Ordinarij, and suffecti. ib. Conticinium 65
Contubernium: Contubernij caput 175 Convivia Romanorum quam varia? 75
Convivarum quantus numerus? 77 Cornu dextrum vel sinist: aciei. 178 Corona
quid? 184 Corona quae prima apud Romans 40 Corona Trium phalis, aurea,
obsidionalis, graminea 192 Corona Civica, quernea, muralis, Castrensis 193
Corona Vallaris, navalis rostrata. 193 sub Corona quid? 184 Corybantes vnde? 55
Corybantia era. ib. Cultrarij. 60 Cuneus militu^ quid and quare? 178 Cunei in
theatris quid? 5 Cuniculis oppugnare. 184 Curia per se quid sig.? 4 Curia per
se aliquando ide^ quod domus curialis. 40 Curia Hostilia. 4 Pompeia Iulia
Curiae olim apud Romans quot? 40 Curiales Flamines. ib. Curialis domus. ib. Curio
Maximus. 40 Curiones sexaginta. ib. Curionia. ib. Curulis sella. 114 Custodes
qui? 98 Cybelle, vel Cybele. 54 Cybelleius circulator. ib.
D.
DAmnatus voti. 74 Dapes Saliares 50 Dare herbam. 192. 193 De meridie. 65 De
media nocte. ib. Dea Viri-placa. 89 Dea bona. 53 Decanus. 175 Decemviri. 122
Decimatio Legionis. 190 Decum^ Decumanus. 186 Decumanus idem quod maximus and
quare? 186 Decunx. 156 Decuriae. i56 Decurio quot signif? 185 Delubrum quid and
vnde? 17 Deorum matter. 54 Depontani. 97 Devorat sacra haud immolata. 61
Devovere dijs inferis quid? 23 Deunx. 156 Dialis Flamen. 46 Dianae mons. 5
Dicam scribere. 157 Dicam sortiri. ib. Dictator. 123 Dies bissextus. 64 Dies
civilis quomodo divid. 65 Dies albi and atri. ib. Dies festi, feriati,
profesti, intercisi 66 Dies fasti, ex part fasti, and nefasti. 67 Dies
comitiales. ib. Diem alicui dicere. 165 Diffarreatio. 87 Diffindere diem. 163
Dij maiorum gentium. 30 Dij consentes ib. Dij and Divi quomodo differu^t. ib.
Dij animales qui? 31 Dij patrii. ib. Dij tutelares. ib. Dij communes 32 Dijs
iratis aliquid facere. ib. Diluculum. 65 Dimicare quid? 74 Diminutio capitis,
maxima, media. minima. 116 Diribitores. 98 Discumbendi ratio. 76 Discus. 61. 68
Divortium. 89 Do, dico, addico. 76 Dodrans. 155 Domus Curialis. 40 Dona
militaria. 192 Donatica hasta. ib. Duella. 156 Duumviri sacris faciundis. 51
E.
EDictum vnde? 119 Edictum perpetuum. ib. Edictum peculiare and novum. ib.
Edictum peremptorium. 165 Effari templa quid? 18 Elephantini libri qui? 11
Eleusina Ceres dicta. 37 Eloquentiae candidatus. 81 Emancipati qui? 153
Emancipatio. ib. Emancipati desijssent esse agnati. ib. Emisit arietem. Prove.
50 (...) quid? 70. Epulonum Triumviri. 57 Equestria. 15 Equestris ordo. 24
Equitum magister. 123 Equus publicus. 24 Equus militaris. ib. (...) quid Gell.
signif. 180 Esquilinus mons. 4 Esquilina tribus. 22 Ex part fasti dies. 67 Ex
iure manu consertum te voco 168 Exaggero vnde? 179 Extispices qui, and vnde
dicti? 45 Extra-muraneus Mars quare dictus? 48 Extremi agminis ductore^. 176
F.
FAbiani Luperci. 37 Fabulae palliatae, and togatae. 73 Fagutalis Jupiter. 5
Fagutalis mons. ib. Familiaris pars in victimis. 45 Fanum quid, and vnde
dictum? 17 Fana sistere. 18 Farracia. 87 Fartor. 108 Fasces pro magistratu. 111
Fasti dies. 67 Fatua Fauna Bona dea appellata. 53 Fax prima. 65 Februarius vnde
dictus. 36 Feretrius quare Jupiter dictus? 192 Feriati dies. 66 Feriae^
privatae, publicae, anniversariae, stativae, and conceptivae, 66 Feriae
Latinae, Imperativae, and Indictivae. 67 Far legem. 103 Festi dies. 66 Fidei
Flamines. 51 Fidus idem olim quod foedus. ib. Figere legem, and refigere. 103
Figere tabulam. ib. Flama. 46 Flamines quot, and vnde dicti? ib. Flamen Dialis.
ib. Flamen Martialis. ib. Flamen Quirinalis. ib. Flamines maiores, and minore^.
ib. Flamines Curiales, 40 and 47 Flaminio abire. 47 Flaminicae. ib. Flaminii
and Flaminiae. ib. Flaminia aedes. ib. Flammeus. 87 Flexumines, 111 Florales
ludi. 73 Focus quid, and vnde dictus? 20 Foeciales. 50 vnde dicti? 51 Foedus
quid? 18^ Folium Sibyllae. 52 Folia Sibyllae colligere. ib. Forfex, seu forceps
militum. 178 Fornices. 191 Forum quotmodis sumitur? 6 Forum agere. ib. Frorum
indicere. ib. Forum Iulium. 7 Forum Augusti. ib. Forum transitorium, and cur
sic dictum? ib. Forum Traiani. ib. Forum Salustij. ib. Forum Romanum, quod and
forum vetus. ib. Fori in Circo Max. quid? 13 Fratres arvales qui, quot, and
vnde dicti? 39 Frumentariae leges. 150 Frumentum aestimatum. 151 Frumentum
decumanum. ib. Frumentum emptum. 152 Frumentum imperatum. ib. Funalia vnde? 94
Funus. ib. Furcifer vnde? 189 Fuste caedi. ib. Fustuarium meretur. ib.
G.
GAlli Cybelles sacerdotes 54 Gallica quid? 85 Gallicinium 65 Gemoniae scalae
vbi 5 Genialis arbor quae? 33 Genialis quid sig? ib. Genialis lectus. 89 Genius
bonus and malus. 32 Genio indulgere. 33 Genium defraudare. ib. Genius loci. 34
Globus militum. 178 Gradivus a gradiendo. 48 Graeca sacra. 37 Graeca sacerdos.
ib. Gramineae arae. 20 Graminea hasta. 192. Graminea corona. ib. Gymnici ludi.
68
H.
HAsta pura. 192 Hasta pura donati. 188 Hasta donatica. 192. Hasta Gramin^a.
ib. Hasta Celebaris. 87 Hasta centum viralis. 117 Hasta pro venditione. 149
Hastae Iudices. 117 Hastaria censio. 188 Hastati qui 177 Haeredes primae cerae.
99 Haeredes ex toto ass. ib. Haeredes in ima cera. ib. Haeredes secundi. ib.
Haeredes Legararii. ib. Haeres fiduciarius, and imaginarius. 154 Haeres in
totum assem institutus, quomodo differat ab Haerede ex toto Ass? 156 Haeres ex
deunce. ib. Haeres ex quadrante Haeres ex semuncia. Haeres sextula aspersus
Helepolis machinae genus, quid and vnde? 183 Hemones aliquando homines dicti.
31 Herbam dare. 192. 193 Herculis sacerdotes. 38 Histrio vnde dictus? 69 Homo
comitialis 67 Homo omnium scenarum. 71 Homo plurimarum palmarum. 74 Homo sacer.
127 Homini mortuo ossane legito 93 Horrea Sempronia. 151 Horri Salustini. 7
Hostia vnde dicta? 58 Hostiare victimam. ib. Hostilia Curia. 4 Hostilis pars in
victimis. 45
I.
IAcere in Senatu. 113 Ianualij. 50 Idus. 64. Ientaculum vnde dict. 75 Igni and
aqua interdicere. 116 Ignominiosa dimissio. 188 Ilicet quid signif. 94 Illotis
manibus accedere ad rem. 59 Illotis pedibus. ib. Imago idem quod nobilitas. 26
Immolatio. 60 Imperativae fe^iae. 67 lmperator. 120 190 quot signif. 176
Impetrativa auguria. 43 In alicujus sententiam ire. 113 Inauspicato. 41
Incensimarium. 11 Incensus. 155 Incestus vnde 85 Indicere forum quid. 6 Indicta
causa damnari. 137 Indiem tertium sieve perendinum 165 Indigites. 30 Inferiae.
94 Ingenui qui. 27 In jus vocare. 134 In jus vocatio. 165 In justis vindicijs
and sacramentis alienos fundos petere. 169 In litem jurare. 165 In praecinctu
state vel vivere. 174 Intercalaris dies. 63 Intercisicdies. 66 Intendere
actionem, litem. 165 Intempesta nox. 65 Intervallum quid. 179 Interrex. 123
Intonuit laevum. 43 Intra centesimum lapidem. 121 Iudices selecti. 136 Iudices
quaestionum. ib. Iudices lecti sortitione. 163 Indices editione, edititij,
alterni. ib. Iudicum decuriae. 158 Iudicum rejectio. 166 sub Iugum quid?, 179
Iulia Curia. 4 Iulianus annus. 64 Iunonij. 50 Iunus, sive Invus aliquando nomen
Panis. 36 Iurare Io vem lapidem, vel per Iovem lapidem. 172 Jupiter Feretrius.
192. Ius honorarium. 118 Ius Papirianum. 134 Ius and lex quomodo diff. ib.
L.
LAcerna quid? 84 Lacernatus oppositus togato ib Laena qualis vestis. 42 Laevum
in rebus sacris quid? 43 Lanx. 61 Lapis manalis. 48 Lapis pro mill pass. 121
Lares. 34 Lare sub parvo. ib. Lari sacrificat. ib. Latiaris coilis. 3
Laticlavia, Laticlavij. 83 Latini no minis socij. 187 Latinae feriae. 67
Latinus quis. 140 Laudare defunctu^ pro rostris. 92 Lectus Genialis. 89 Legatio
mandata, votiva, libera. 143 Legatus quot signif. 133 Leges 12 tabularum. 122.
167 Leges tabellariae. 142. Leges de Ambitu. 161 Legio vnde. 174 Legio
Alaudarum. 159 Legio Quadrata. 174 Legio Iusta 175 Legis promulgatio. 101
Lemniscus quid. 74 Lemniscata palma. ib. Lessum. 95 Lex and Ius quomodo
differu^t. 134 Lex Accusatorla. I57 Lex incerta de Nexu. 160 Lex Acilia. 164
Lex Acilia Calpurnia. 162 Lex Aelia. 141 Lex Atinia. 156 Lex Aurelia. 158 Lex
Coecilia Didia. 145 Lex Caelia. 142 Lex Cassia. ib. Lex Clodia, ad religionem
spect. 138. ad comitia spect. 141. de Magistrate. 145. de Intercess. 146 de
Provinciis, 148. de Cypro, ib de frument 151 Lex Cornelia, de Municipijs. 140.
de Magistrate 144. 145. de Provincijs, 146 Lex Agraria, 150. de Iudic. 159. de
parricidio 167 Lex Curiata, centuriata. 103 Lex Domitia. 138 Lex Fabia. 162 Lex
Furia. 155 Lex Futia. 141 Lex Gabinia, 141.152 Lex Gellia Cornelia. 140 Lex
Hircia. 144 Lex Hieronica. 152 Lex Iudiciaria Caes. 158 Lex Iulia de Provincijs
147. de Iudic. 158. de Maiestate. 161 Lex Iunia. 139 164 Lex Iunia Licinia de
trinundino. 146 Lex Licinia. 163 Lex Licinia Aebutia. 146 Lex Licinia Mutia.
139 Lex Livia. 157 Lex Manilia. 142. 152 Lex Mancipij 161 Lex Memnonia. 160 Lex
Papia. 139 Lex Papiria. 137. 142 Lex Plantia. 158 Lex Pompeia. ib. Lex Porcia.
139 Lex Quadrupli. 116 Lex Roscia. 137 Lex Rupilia. 157 Lex Sempronia de
Civitate, 139 de commit. 142. de Provinc. 146 Lex Agrar. 150 Lex Servilia de
Civit. 140. de Iudic. 157 Lex Socialis 164 Lex Sylvani and Carbonis. 140 Lex
Terentia Cassia. 151 Lex Titia. 147 Lex Tullia de Senate. 143. de Ambitu. 162
Lex Valeria. 145 Lex Varia. 161 Lex Vatinia. 148 Lex Voconia. 155 Libatio. 60
Libamina prima. ib. Liberi alij ingenui alii libertini. 27 Libera toga. 80
Libitina. Libitinarij. 91 Libitinarius idem quod capularis. ib. Libri vnde. 98
Libri-pens vnde. 160 Lictores qui and vnde. 111 Linum incidere. 100 Litare. 61
Lite vel causa cadere. 136 Litis contestatio, Litis Redemptio, litis
aestimatio, quomodo differ. 164 Loculi. 94 Lucus vnde dict. 19 Luceres. 22
Ludus. 67 Ludum aperire. ib. Ludi compitales, circenses, and scenici. ib. Ludi
gymnici. 68 Ludi sacri, funebres, votivi, ludicri, Megalenses, Cereales. 73
Ludi Florales, Martiales, Apollinares. ib. Ludi Castrenses. 75 Ludus Trojanus.
ib. Lugere differt ab elugere. 95 Lunaris annus. 62 Lupercalium origo, and
ceremoniae. 36 Lupercalibus quid immolaretur. ib. Lupa aluit Romulum and Remum
expositos. ib. Lupercal vbi. ib. Lupercorum licentia quanta. ib. Luperci
Fabiani, 37 Luperci Quintiliani. ib. Lustrum. 116 Lustrum condere. ib.
M.
MAchinis oppugnare. 184 Mactare hostiam. 60 Magnus annus. 64 Magister
Collegij. 41 Magister equitum, populi magister. 123 Magistratum ambire:
magistratu^ inire. 108 Magistratu abire. ib. Magistratus quis. 100 Magistratus
Majores. ib. Magistratus Minores. ib. Magistratus Patricij, plebeii. ib.
Magistratus Quinqueduanus. 123 Malleoli, machinae genus. 183 Mancipatio. 153
Mancipes. 186 Mancipium, mancipatus. 161 Mane. 65 quisque suos patimur Manes.
32 Manibus illotis accedere ad re^ 59 Manibus pedibusque discedere in alicujus
sententiam. 113 Manipuli. 175 Manipulus militum. 179 Manipularis. 159. 161
Manum conserere. 167 Manumissionis formula. 27 Mars quomodo effingi solebat. 48
Mart vario pugnatum est ib. Mart proprio, 48 Martiales ^udi. 73 Martialis
collis. 3 Matter deorum. 54 Mavors. 48 Megalenses ^udi. 73 Megalesia. ib. Mel
laria amphora. 54 Mensae Romanorum quales. 75 Merenda, vnde dict. 76 Mereri sub
hoc vel illo duce. 1^2 Meridies. 65 Meta 14 Miles emeritus. 172 Milites per
sacramentum. 173 Milites per conjurationem. ib. Milites evocati. 172 Milites
subitarij. ib. Militaria dona. 193 Mimi, qui, and quare planipedes dicti. 69
Mimicae fabulae. ib. Minervij. 50 Mitra. 81 Mitriaci. 55 Mola. 60 Monitor. 108
Mons Palatinus vnde dict. 1 Mons Capitolinus, Tarpeius, Saturni. 2 Mons
Quirinalis, Agonalis, Caballus, Coelius. 3 Mons Querculanus, Esquilinus,
Aventinus, 4 Mons Murcius. 5 Mons Dianae. ib. Mons Remonius, Sacer, Viminalis,
Fagutalis. 5 Mons Vaticanus. 6 Montorius. ib. More Romano.i. ex animo. 21
Morbus Comitialis. 102 Morbus Sonticus. 163 Moribus deductio. 169 Mullei,
Calceorum genus, vnde. 85 Municipium, quid and vnde. 187 Munus honorarium. ib.
Murcia Venus. 5 Murrhata, Murrhina potio. 95 Muralis corona. 193. Musculus,
vnde and quare. 180 Mutare vestem; quid signif. 81
N.
NAvails corona. 193 Naulum Charontis. 93 Nefastus dies. 67 Nexi, qui. 28
Nobilitatis ius. 26 Nomen idem quod debitum. 28 Nomina facere, liberare,
exigere. ib. Nomenclatio, Nomenclator. 108 Nominis delatio 165 Nonae. 64
Nongenti qui. 98 Novi qui dicebantur. 25 Nox intempesta. 65 Nox media. ib. Nun
tiatio. 102 Nun cupare vota. 74 Nuptiae. 86 Nuptiae innuptae. 88 Nuptialia
dona. 89
O.
OBnunciatio. 102 Observatio de Coelo. ib. Obsidionalis corona. 192 Oblativa
auguria. 43 Occasus solis. 65 Olympica certamina. 68 Omen praerogativum. 102
Omne tulit punctum. 98 Omnium scenarum homo. 71 Opera and impensa perijt 68
Qperam and oleam perdidit. ib. Opima spolia. 192 Oppius Collis. 4 Ops. 53
Optimates qui. 26 Oracula Sibyllina. 51 Oration quid and vnde dict. 160. 191
Orbis militum. 178 Orchestra. 15 Ovile, quis locus in Campo Martio. 13
P.
PActio quid. 187 Palati^ Salii. 49 Palatia vnde dicta. 1 Palatina tribus. 22
Palatinus Mons vnde 1 Palla. 84 Palliatae fabulae. 73 Palliati pro Graecis
dicti. 78 Pallium. 78, 84 Palma, quare victoriae fignum. 74 Palma lemniscata
ib. Palmarum plurimarum homo. ib. Palmata toga. 82 Paludamentum. ib. Pan
Ly^aeus,and ejus forma. 35 Papia lex. 139 Papiria lex. 137 Papyrus. 99
Parricidium quid 167 Parricidij quaesitores. 116 Pars hostilis and familiaris
in victimis. 45 Pater Fiduciarius. 153 Pater-patratus quis* 50 Patres
conscripti quando primu^ dicti. 23 Patricij qui. ib. Patroni qui. ib. Pecuarius
quis. 186 Pecuniae repetundae. 163. Pecunia ablata, capta, coacta, aversa. 164
Pendere,idem quod solvere. 161 Penula. 84 Perduellio; Perduellionis iudicium.
141 Perones, calceorum genus. 85 Pessinuntia. 54 Pessinuntius sacerdos. 138
Picta toga. 82 Pignora caerdere.concidere, rapere auferre. 113 Pilani milites,
qui. 178 Pilum quid. 177 P^strinum quid, and vnde. 16 in P^strinum te dedam.
ib. Planipides excalceati. 69 Plebeii qui. 23 Plebiscitum. 103. 137 Poculum
boni genij. 33 Poculum charitatis, ib. Pollinctores. 91 Pomoerium quid. 1
Pompeia Curia. 4 Pondus pro toga. 81 de Ponte deij^rendus. 13 Pontes per quos
sufrragia tulerint apud Roman, qui. 13 Ponfifices vnde dict. 56 pontificia
coena. ib. Pon^ sublicius. ib. Popae 58 Populares. 26 Popularia. 15 Po^titores
qui. 186 Portorium. Portarium, vnde. ib postsignani. 159 Postulatio, Postulare
aliquem, de hoc vel illo crimine. 165 Potitij cuius sacerdotes dicti. 38
Praecidaneae hostiae. ^9 Praeconi publico subijci, 149 Praedes. 186 Praefectus
Annonae. 129 Praefectus Aerarij. 136 Praefectus Praetorio. 130. 131 Praefectus
vrbis. 121 Praefectura. 185 Praefica. 92 Praerogativa Tribus vel centuria. 101
Praerogativum omen. 102 Praetexta toga. 82 Praetextate. 69 Praetextatus differt
a togato, 82 Praetextata aetas. ib. Praetores vnde. 113. 117 Praetor vrbanus,
seu major. 117 Praetor peregrinus, seu minor. ib. Praetores Cereales. ib.
Praetores fidei Commis^arij. ib, Praetores Quaesitores. 118 Praetorium quot
significat. 131 Prandium. 76 Pridie Calendas. 65 Prima fax. ib. Prima libamina.
60 Principes inter milites Romans qui 177 Principta quae. ib. Privatae feriae. 66
Proconsul. 132 Profesti dies. 66 Proletarij. 105 Prologus quid sit. 71 Prologus
(...) ib. Pronunciare, and cognoscere quomodo discrepant. 8 Promulgatio legis.
101. 103 Propraetor. 132 Proquaestor. ib. Proscripti, qui. 144 (...) 70
Provincia quot fig. and vnde dict. 185 Provincias comparare, 132 Provincias
sortiri, ib. Provinciae Consulares. ib. Provinciae Praetoriae. ib. Provinciam
cepisti duram*` 181 Publicanus quis. 186 Publicae feriae. 66 Pulla toga. 81
Pullarius. 44 Pulpitum. 15 Pulvinar, aliquando idem quod templum. 18 Punctum
pro suffragio. 98 Pura hasta. 192 Purpurea toga. 82 Puteal Libonis. 9
Q.
QVadram quid. 155 Qundruplatores. 156 Quaesitores Parricidij. 118 Quaestiones
perpetuae. ib. Quaestor,vnde. 126 Quaestores aerarij. ib. Quaestores Vrbani.
ib. Quaestores rerum capitalium. ib. Quaestores provinciales. 133 Querculanus
mons. 4 Quernea corona. 193 Quincunx, quid. 155 Quindecimviri sacris faciundis.
51 Quinqueviri mensarij. 129 Quinqueviri epulonum, 57 Quinctiliani Luperci. 37
Quintilis mensis. 64 Quirinalis mons. 3 Quirinalis Flamen. 46 Quirinales Salij.
49 Quirinus nomen Romuli. 3
R.
REddere. 61 Regina sacrorum. 48 Rem ratam habere. 164 Remonius mons. 5
Renunciatio Matrimonij. 40 Repudium. 89 Res tuas tibi habe^o. 90 Reus voti. 74
Rex sacrificulus, and Rex sacrorum. 47 Rhamnenses qui. 2^ Rhea. 54 Rignarius
mons. 5 Rogare legem. 103 Rogus. 93 Roma Vrbs septicollis. 1 Romanae vrbis
nomen incognitum. 32 Romani civis descriptio. 21 Romano more. (...). ex animo.
ib. Romulum and Remum exposito^ lupa aluit. 36 Rostra vbi fuerint and vnde
dicta 9 Rostrata Corona. 193 Rude donatus. 75 Rudis apud gladiatores quid. ib.
Rupes Tarpeia. 2
S.
SAcer homo. 127 Sacra haud immolata devorat. 61 Sacramentum, quid sig. 170
Sacramento and sponsione provocare, ^^gare, quaere^e, stipulati. ib. Sacramento
contendere, restipulati. ib. Sacrarium, quid. 19 Sacri ludi qui dicti. 73
Sacrificia, and ritu^ sacrificandi. 58 Sacrilegus, quis and vnde. 93 Sacrorum
rex. 47 Sacrosanctus, quis dictus. 127 Sagum, quid. 79 ad Saga ire. ib. Saga
togae cedant, idem quod cedant arma togae. ib. Saliares dapes. 50 Salij, quot,
and vnde dicti. 49 Salij Palatini. 49 Collini. Agonales. Quirinales. Salij
quales pileos gestent. ib. Salutaris Collis. 3 Salutaris litera quae. 166
Salustini horti. 7 Satisdatio quid. 170 Saturni aedes, quare aerarium populi.
10 Saturni mons. 2 Satyrae. 69 Satyra quale genus carminis. ib. Scalae
Gemoniae. 5 Scena, in theatro, quid. 15 Scena, in fabulis, quid. 71 Scenici
ludi, quare and quomodo primum instituti. 69 Scena Tragica. 71 Comica.
Satyrica. Scena versatilis, vel ductilis. 15 (...), vnde dict. 14 Scorpio,
machinae genus. 182 Scriba. 118 Scribendo co^ficere rations 186 Scriptura
vectigalis genus quare dict. ib. Secespita. 61 Sectores. 149 Secundum illum
litem do. 136 Secundipilus. 178 Sella Curulis. 114 Eburnea. Semidei. 30
Semissis. 151. 155. Semones, quasi semi homines. 31 Semuncia. 156 Senatus
Senator: Senatus consultum: Senaculum. 112 Senator Princeps, Senatores Peda^ij.
ib. ad Senatum refer. ib. in Senatu stare. 113 Senatores minoru^ gentiu^ qui.
23 Senatus consultum de Ambitu. 162 Septem convivium, nove^ convitium faciunt.
77 Septem viri Epulonum. 57 Septa, qualis locus in campo Martio. 13 Septicollis
Vrbs. 1 Septimius collis. 2 Septun^. 155 Sepulchrum. 94 Sepultura insepulta.
ib. Sequestres. 109 Servi addicti. 120 Servorum duo genera. 28 Sestertius. 137
Sexagenarij de ponte deijciendi. 97 Sextans. 155 Sextilis mensis. 64 Sextulae.
156 Sibylla, vnde dict. 53 Sibyllae, quot. 52 Sibyllina oracula. 51 Sibyllae
folium. 52 Sibyllae folia colligere. ib. Sigma, quid, and quomodo olim
figuratum. 77 Signa confer, collatis signis pugnare. 174 Signatores. 86
Silatum. 75 Silicernium quid. 94 Simpulum, vel simpuvium. 60 Sinistra avis. 43
Sinistrum in rebus sacris quid. ib. Siticines. 92 Soccus. 73 Sodalitia. 163
Solea. 85 Solis occasus. 65 Solistimum tripudium. 44 Sophocleo digna cothurno.
73 Sordidatus vnde dict. 81 Sortitio Iudicum, subsortitio. 166 Spectio. 112
Sphinx in Pronao quid signif. 17 Sponsalia. 86 Stativae feriae. 66 Stipendium,
quid. 186 Stipendiarij. ib. Stipendij fraudatio. 188 Stola quid and vnde. 79
Stuprum. 85 Stylus, quot signif. 100 Stylum invertere. ib. Subbasilicani, apud
Plautum qui 8 Sublicius pons. 56 Subscriptores. 157 Subsellia. 8 Subsignanus.
159 Suburana. 22 Suffragia legitima conficere. 108 Suffragia explere. ib
Suffragiorum puncta non tulit septem. 98 Suovetauralia, solitauralia. 116
Supplicatio. 190 Supplicationes decernere. ib. Synthesis. 55
T.
TAbellarius. 99 Tabellae. ib. Tabernariae. 69 Tabulae ceratae, 99 Tabulae
accepti and expensi. ib. Tabulae Novae. ib. Publicae. Auctionariae. Tabulam
figere. 103 Tabularium, quid and vnde. 11 Talassio quid signif. 88 Tarpcius
mon^. 2 Tarpcia rupes. ib. Tatienses qui. 22 Taurilia. 116 Taeda, quid. 88
Templum. 16 Templum apud augures certa coeli regio. 42 Tergiductores. 176
Testera quid. 189 Testamentum calatis comitiis. 97 154 Testamentum in
procinctu. 154 Testamentum per emancipationem familiae. ib. Testamentum per aes
and libra^. 155 Testamentum per nexum. ib. Testudo, quot signif. 180 Testudo
militaris. ib. Theatrum quid and vnde. 14 Titij, qui and vnde. 57 Toga, vnde
dicta. 78 Togata mulier, pro impudica. 79 Tagam vitilem sumere. 80 Toga pura
quid. ib. Toga Alba. 81 Candida. Pulla. Toga praetexta, purpurea. 82 Toga
Picta, Palmata. ib. Toga Triumphalis. 83 Togatae fabulae. 73 Togati pro Romany
dicti. 78 Tormentum, quid and vnde. 182 Trabea. 114 Trabea Auguralis. 83 Regia.
Consecrata Tragoediae and Comoediae differe^tiae quaedam. 72 Triarij. 159. 177
ad Triarios ventum est. 177 Tribunus Celerum. 111 Tribus (...) and (...). 2^
Tribus locales quot. ib. Tribus Vrbanae. 107 Tribus Rusticae. ib. Tribus
iurevocata. 102 Tribus praerogativa. 101 Tribuni militum. 104 Tribuni Rutuli,
Rufuli. 124 Tribuni suffecti, Comitiati. ib. Tribuni plebis. 127 Tributum quid;
Tributarij. 186 Triclicium vnde dictum. 76 Triens quid. 155 Triumphus vnde
dict. 191 Triumphus quomodo differt ab ovatione. ib. Triumphus major; minor.
190 Triumphalis arcus. 191 Triumphalis corona. ib. Triumviri Reip
co^stituendae. 125 Triumviri Capitales. 129 Triumviri Mensarij. ib. Triumviri
conquirendi juvenes idoneos ad arma ferenda. ib. Triumviri Coloniae deduce^dae.
ib. Triumviri monetales. ib. Triumviri valetudinis 130 Triumviri Nocturni. ib.
Triumviri Epulonum. 57 Tripudium. 44 Tripudium solistimum. ib. Troia. 75
Trojanus ludus. ib. Tunica. 83 Tunica pallio propior. ib. Tunica Laticlavia. 83
Angusticlavia Recta. Turma. 157 Turres ambulatoriae. 180 Tutela Testamentaria.
153 Legitima. Dativa. Fiduciaria. Honoraria. Tutores Honorarii. ib. Tyro,
Tyrocinium. 175
V.
V. R. tabulis inscript. quid sign. 98 Vacationes 139 Vadarireum. 165 Vallaris
corona. 193 Valla, Valli. 179 Vallus vitem decepit. 180 Vbi tu Caius, ibi ego
Caia. 88 Vectigal. 186 Velites. 177 Velitatim agere. ib. Venditio per aes and
libram. 160 Versis armis pugnare quid. 74 Vesper. 65 Vespae, and vespillones
qui and vnde. 92 Vestales virgins. 57 Vestes Romanae. 78 Vexillum vnde. 128
Vexillum Roseum. 172 Vexillum Coeruleum. ib. Vexillationes vnde, and quare. 178
Vicesimarium aurum. 11 Victima vnde dicta. 58 Victimam hostiare. ib.
Victimarii. 60 Vigilia 1. 2. 3. 4. 65 Viminalis mons. 5 Vimineus Jupiter. ib.
Vindicias sumunto. 168 Vindicatio quid. ib. Vindicta liberare. 28 Vinea quid.
180 Virgis caedi. 189 Virgula Censoria. 115 Virilis toga. 80 Visceratio. 95
Vncia quid. 156 Vnum pro omnibus. 165 Vota nuncupare. 74 Votireus. ib. Votivel
voto damnatus. ib. Votivi ludi. 73 Vovere ludos vel templa. 74 Vrna. 94 Vt me
ludos facit. 67 Vt tu Dominus, ita ego Domina. 88 Vxor vnde. ib. Vxor Vsu. 87
Confarreatione Coemptione
Z.
ZOna quid. 84 Zonam perdere. ib. Zonam solvere. ib.
FINIS.

