Moses and Aaron. CIVIL AND ECCLESIASTICAL RITES, USED BY THE ancient HEBREWS;
observed, and at large opened, for the clearing of many obscure Texts thorowout
the whole SCRIPTVRE.

HEREIN LIKEWISE IS SHOWED WHAT CUSTOMS THE HEBREWS borrowed from Heathen
people: And that many Heathenish customs, originally have been unwarrantable
imitations of the HEBREWS.

By Thomas Godwyn, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM Earl of Pembroke, Lo. Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household, Lo. Warden of the Stanneries, Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and
Chancellor of the famous University of OXFORD, All Grace and Happiness.
Right Honorable:
THat many have no better acquaintance with Christ and his Apostles, is because
they are such strangers with Moses and Aaron: were customs antiquated thoroughly
known, many difficulties in Scripture would appear elegancies, and the places
which now (through obscurity) dishearten the Reader, would then become sweet
inuitements to an unwearied assiduitie in perusing those sacred Oracles. If my
present labors shall give such light to some obscure passages, that thereby
Gods people shall be drawn on with the greater delight, to exercise themselves
in reading of Holy Writ, it shall not repent me of my tedious travel in these
rites and customs of Generations long since past, which whosoever undertakes,
shall find the way long and thornie, the path ouergrowne and hardly
discerneable, the Guides few to direct, and those speaking in strange
languages, and many apt to disccurage him, because themselves are either lazy
and will not, or lame and cannot walk the same way. But now (through Gods
assistance) being come to the end of my journey, the discoueries made on the
way, such as they are (and such some are, as not observed before) humbly crave
your Lordships protection.

From Kensington, Feb. 21. 1624. Your Honors in all duty and service devoted,
THO. GODWYN.

THE ARGUMENT OF EACH BOOK AND Chapter.
The first Book. Of Persons.
Chap. 1. THE form of their Commonwealth till Christ, and when the Scepter
departed. 2. Publicans, their office, who the chief. 3. Proselytes, who, how
made. 4. Kings, why Pilat clad Christ in purple. Herod in white. 5. High
Priest, Priests, Levites, Nethinims. 6. Prophets, who the Wiseman, Scribe and
Disputer, mentioned, 1 Cor. 1. 20. 7. The title Rabbi, when, how, to whom
given. 8. Nazarites and Rechabites. 9. Assideans, difference between the
Righteous and Good man, mentioned, Romans 5. 7. 10. Pharisees, whence their name,
when they began, what their Dogmata. 11. Sadduces, whence their name, when they
began, what their Dogmata. 12. Essenes, whence their name, when they began,
what their Dogmata. 13. Gaulonitae and Herodians, what they were.
The second Book. Of Places.
Chap. 1. THeir Temple: how forty six years building: why certain Psalms
are entitled Graduales, Songs of degrees. 2. Synagogues, Schools, Houses of
prayer, why their School^ preferred above their Temple. 3. Gates of Jerusalem.
4. Groves and High places. 5. Cities of Refuge.
The third Book. Of Days, Times, and Feasts.
Chap. 1. THeir days, hours, weeks, years. 2. Their manner of feasting,
salutations, blessings, cup of blessing. 3. Their Sabbath: a Sabbath days
journey, how much and whence. 4. Their Passover, and feast of unleavened
bread: how a soul cut off from Israel. 5. Their Pentecost, what the
second-first Sabbath was, Luke 6. 1. 6. Their feast of Tabernacles: Hosanna,
and Hosanna Rabba. 7. Their feast of Trumpets, their New-Moones, Translation of
feasts. 8. Their feast of Expiation: what meant by the filth of the world, and
the off-scowring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 13. 9. Their Sabbaticall year. 10.
Their Iubile, their use thereof. 11. Their feast of Purim, and feast of
Dedication.
The fourth Book. Of their Idolatry.
Chap. 1. THe beginnings of Idolatry. 2. Moloch, Adram-Melech, Anam-Melech,
Baal, the Tabernacle of Moloch, etc. 3. Baal Peor, Baal Tsephon, Baal-Zebub,
Baal-Berith, Bell and the Dragon. 4. Dagon. 5. The Molten Calfe. 6. Astaroth,
Ammonia, Juno, the Queen of Heaven, Diana of the Ephesians. 7. Other Idol-gods
mentioned in Scripture. 8. Sorts of divine revelation, Vrim and Thummim. 9.
Teraphim, what they were. 10. Sorts of Divination forbidden.
The fifth Book. Of their Consistories.
Chap. 1. COurts of Judgment, their Ecclesiastical Consistory. 2. Sorts of
Excommunication. 3. Civil Consistories, what persons necessarily present, what
meant by the Magistrate, Judge, and Officer, Luke 12. 58. 4. The number of
their Civil Courts, what meant by a Council, Judgment, Fire of Gehenna, Mat.
5. 5. Manner of electing Judges. 6. Ceremonies common in all capital
judgments: whence that phrase came, His blood be on us and our children. 7.
Their capital punishments, what they were. 8. Punishments not capital. 9.
Punishments borrowed from other Nations: whether Saint Paul fought with beasts
at Ephesus.
The sixth Book. Of Miscellaneous Rites.
Chap. 1. CIrcumcision, whence the use of Godfathers in Baptism. 2.
First Fruits, Firstlings, Firstborn. 3. Sorts of Tithes, manner of paying
them. 4. Marriages and Divorces, copies of their Dowrie-bill, and bill of
Divorce: What meant by power on the woman's head, 1 Cor. 11. 10. 5. Burialls,
manner of embalming, manner of their Sepulchers: What meant by baptization of
the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 9. 6. Of their Oaths. 7. Of their writing, their
Masorites, and their work. 8. Isreal's pitching of their tents, or of their
camps. 9. Their Measures. 10. Their coins, first of brazen coins, silver
coins, and gold coins.
Faults escaped in the marginall Quotations.
Page 31. read Elias. page 52. read (...). page 111. read (...). page 112.
read prec. p. 115. read (...). p. 186. read (...). p. 186. read R. Dau. p.
200. read Tiraquel.

Faults in the Book escaped.
Page 21. read Lieutenants. p. 43. read Scripturarij. p. 69. read Iehu. p.
105. read Siuan. p. 123. Though remote, was left out in the printing, but
inserted with a pen. p. 178. read (...). p. 182. read Thensa. p. 182. read
Thensa. p. 191. read Gods to be made. p. 259. read Nauicula. p. 189. read
(...). p. 330. read Manch of gold. p. 330. read Manch of silver. p. 296.
read (...). p. 319. read (...). p. ibid. A pace.

MOSES and AARON. THE FIRST BOOK treats of Persons.
CHAP. I.
Of the form of the Hebrews Commonwealth until Christ his coming, and when
the Scepter departed from them.
THe form and state of government has been subject to change, and variation
amongst all Nations, but especially amongst the Jews, where these changes are
obserueable.

At first, the Fathers of their several families, and their Firstborn after
them, exercised all kind of government, both Ecclesiastical, and Civil,
being both Kings and Priests, in their own houses. They had power over their
own families, to bless, curse, cast out of doors, disinherit, and to punish
with death, as is apparent by these examples of Noah toward Cham, Genesis 9. 25.
of Abraham toward Hagar and Ismael, Genesis 21. 10. of Jacob toward Simeon and
Leui, (...) 3. and of Judah toward Thamar, Genesis 3^. 24.

In Moses his days then did this prerogative of primogeniture cease; and as
Aaron and his posterity were invested with the right, and title of Priests: so
Moses, and after him Joshua, ruled all the people with a kind of Monarchical
authority. For Moses was among the righteous as King, Deuteronomy. 33. 5.

After Joshua succeeded Judges; their offices were of absolute and independent
authority, like unto Kings, when once they were elected; but there were long
vacancies, and chasmes commonly between the cessation of the one, and the
election of the other: yea for the most part, the people never chose a Judge,
but in time of great troubles, and imminent dangers; which being ouerpast, he
retired to a private life. After that Gedeon had delivered the people out of
the hand of the Midianites, he being offered the Kingdom, replied, I will not
reign over you, neither shall my child reign over you, Judge 8. 23. That of
Samuel, that he judged Israel all the days of his life, 1 Samuel 7. 15. was
Zepper. lib. 3. leg. Mos. cap. 6.
extraordinary. In this respect their Judges symbolize with the Roman
Dictators. This state of Regiment continued amongst them by the computation of
Saint Augustine. de ciuit. Dei l. 18. c. 23.
Augustine, three hundred twenty nine years. In these vacancies or distances
of time, between Judge and Judge, the greater and weightier matters were
determined by that great court of the Seventy, called the Sanedrim, in which
respect the form of government may be thought Aristocraticall. Kings
succeeded the Judges, and they continued from Saul unto the captivity of
Babylon, that is, Zepper. leg. Mosaic. lib. 3. cap. 6.
about five hundred and 20. years.

From the Captivity unto the coming of Christ, (which time is Vide Funcii
Chronol.
thought to have been five hundred thirty six years) the state of the Jews
became very confused. Sometimes they were ruled by Deputies and Vicegerents,
who had not supreme authority in themselves, but as it pleased the Persian
Monarchs to assign them, Maimon. in Iad lib. vlt. tract. Sanedrin, cap. 4. 13.
they were termed (...), Rasche galiuth, (...), Heads of the Captivity. Of
this sort was Zerobabel and his successors, who are reckoned in the Seder Olam
minus.
Hebrew Chronicles to be these, Mesullam, Hanania, Berechia, and Hosadia. All
which are thought to have reigned under the Persian Monarchy, and to have been
of the posterity of David: as likewise the other succeeding ten chief
Governors after Alexander the great. In the last of these ten, the government
departed from the house of David, and was translated to the Maccabees, who
descended from the Tribe of Leui. They were called Maccabaei, from Judas
Maccabaeus, Carrion Chron. li. 2. p. 144.
and he had this name (...) Maccabaeus, from the Capital letters of this
Motto, written in his Ensign or Banner. (...), Quis sicut tu inter Deos o
Domine? Where the first letters are, M. C. B. A. I. Among the Maccabees
sovereign authority continued until Herod the Askalonite his reign, at what
time our Savior Christ was borne, according to Jacobs prophecy: The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiuer from between his feet, until
Shiloh (that is, the Targum Vziel. eadem poene verba habet Targum Ierosolym.
Messiah) come, Genesis 49. 10.

For the right understanding of this prophecy, we must note two things; 1.
The time when the Scepter was given to Judah; 2. When taken from him. But first
we must observe how these two words Judah, and the Scepter, are distinguished.

Some take Judah, 1. For the Origenes homil. 17. in Genesis Epiphan. contra
Ebionaeos, and maxima Hebraeorum pars.
Particular Tribe of Judah; but this seems flat contrary to Scripture, for
many of the Judges were of other Tribes, and all the Maccabees of the Tribe of
Leui. 2. For the Cunaeus de rep. Hebr. lib. 1. cap. 9. p. 81.
Two Tribes which cleaued to Rehoboam; because in that division of the people,
these two Tribes alone were called Jews, and that from Judah, and that never
before this division. 3. For Eusebius. demonstr. lib. 8. cap. 1. Montacut. in
Analect. p. 72. Casaub. contra Baron. p. 16.
all the whole body of Israel, consisting of twelve Tribes; all which (in the
judgment of these men) were afterward by the singular providence of God,
called Jews from Judah.

Some take Scepter, 1. For Patres plaerique omnes.
Regal power, and sovereign authority, residing in one man principally. 2.
For the Casaub^n. aduers. Baron. p. 19. It. p. 23. Justinius Mart. in dialog.
cum Tryphone. Cunaeus lib. 1. de rep. Heb. c. p. 9. p. 82.
form of government, and face of a Commonwealth, governed and ruled by its
own laws, customs, and rites: signifying as well the rule, and authority of
inferior Magistrates, yea of Priests also, as of Kings and Princes.

From these different acceptions of these two words, flow four different
interpretations of Jacobs prophecy.

Some are of Cunaeus lib. 1. de rep. Heb. cap. 11. p. 96.
opinion, that the Scepter taken in the second acception, began to be given to
Judah, that is, to the two Tribes cleaning to Rehoboam, at the time of that
division of the people: and that this Scepter was not taken from them until
the destruction of Jerusalem, because that after Herod's time until then, their
laws remained in force, their Priesthood continued, and their Commonwealth,
though it were much defaced, yet not quite overthrown.

Some are of Joseph Scal^ger ex quo Casaub. aduers. Baron. p. 19 li. p. 39.
opinion, that the Scepter taken in the second acception, began to be given to
Judah, that is, to the Twelve Tribes, from the time of Moses; and that this
Scepter was not taken from them, until the destruction of Jerusalem: not in
Herod, because he was a Jew (in that he was a Proselyte) for a Jew is a name,
say they, of profession, not of country, or nation.

Some are of Montacut. in Analect. p. 74.
opinion, that the Scepter, taken in the second acception, began to be given to
Judah, that is, to the Twelve Tribes, from the time of Moses, and that it was
taken from them in Herod's time: yet so, that in Herod's time, this was but
begun, and inchoate, and at the destruction of Jerusalem it was fulfilled and
consummate.

Some are of August. contra Manich. lib. 12. cap. 47. Eusebius. demonst. lib. 8.
Carrion Chron. p. 143.
opinion that the Scepter taken in the first acception, began to be given to
Judah, that is, to the Twelve Tribes from the time of Moses, and that it was
taken from them fully in Herod's time. The former opinions, makes the coming of
the Messiah, to be a forerunner of the departure of the Scepter: this makes the
departure of the Scepter to be a forerunner of the Messiah his coming, which I
take to be the principal thing aimed at in the prophecy. This opinion, as it
is more generally received than the others, so upon iuster grounds. Now the
Scepter was departed, and given to a Proselyte, never so before P. Galatin.
lib. 4. cap. 6. p. 203. ex Talmud. Ierosol.
: yea now also, the Lawgiuer was departed from between Iudahs feet, and now
the Messiah borne.

CHAP. II.
Of the Publicanes.
We having seen the most remarkable changes in the Commonwealth of the
Hebrews, we will note the chief observations concerning the persons there
inhabiting, and first concerning the Publicanes, who were in the latter times,
an heterogeneous member of that Commonwealth. After that the Jews became
tributary to Rome (which Joseph. Ioquutus de Pompeio lib. 1. de bello Iud. cap.
5. p. 720.
was effected by Pompey threescore years before the birth of our Savior)
certain Officers were appointed by the Senate of Rome, unto whom it belonged,
as well among the Jews, as in other provinces, to collect, and gather up such
customemoney, or Tribute, as was exacted by the Senate: those that gathered up
these public paiments, were termed Publicani, Publicanes; and by reason of
their covetous exactions, they commonly were hated by the people of the
provinces Harum societatum frequens mentio facta est apud Ciceren. in orat. pro
Sex. Rosc. Mura^a, Cn. Plancio.
: Every province had his several society or company of Publicanes: Every
society, his distinct governor, in which respect it is, that Zaccheus is
called by the Evangelist, (...), Princeps publicanorum, the chief receiver of
the Tribute, or chief Publicane, Luke 19. 2. And all the provincial
Governors in these several societies, had one chief Sigon. de Antiqiure
ciuium Romans lib. 2. ^. 4^
Master residing at Rome, unto whom the other subordinate Governors gave up
their accounts. These Publicanes were hated in all provinces, because of their
exactions, but chiefly in the Commonwealth of the Jews, because though it
were chiefly maintained by the Galilaeans, yet it was generally inclined unto
by the Jews, that Tribute ought not to be paid by them: this hatred is
confirmed by that Rabinicall proverb If. Casaubon. exercit. 13. 37.
, Take not a wife out of that family wherein there is a Publicane, for such are
all Publicanes. Yea a faithful Publicane was so rare at Rome it self, that
one Sabinus for his honest managing of that office, in an honorable
remembrance thereof, had certain images erected with this Sueton. in
Flau-Vespas. c. 1.
superscription. (...) For the faithful Publicane. And therefore no marvel,
if in the Gospel, Publicanes and sinners go hand in hand.

It is now generally received as a truth undoubted, that not only Heathen
people, but sometimes Jews themselves became Publicanes. Tertullian was of
another opinion Tertull. de pudic. cap. 9.
, and thought that all the Publicanes were Heathens; but he has been in that
long since confuted by Hieronym. epist. ad Damasum.
Jerome, and reason it self persuades the contrary. First, Matthew who was a
Publicane, was afterward an Apostle, and therefore unlikely to have been an
Heathen. Secondly, Zaccheus, his name was a pure Hebrew name, having no
affinity with Roman names. Thirdly, the ground or principal argument on which
Tertullian built, was merely Fraudl fuit acutissimo Poeno, Hebraicae linguae
ignoratio, nusquam enim occurrit in font, spurius ille textus, quo
Tertullianus potissimum nititur, Non erit vectigal, pendens ex filus Israel,
Deuteronomy. 23.
erroneous.

CHAP. III.
Israelites, Proselytes.
THe whole Commonwealth of Israel consisted of two sorts of men, Hebrews, and
Proselytes; he that was born an Hebrew either by Father, or Mothers side, was
an Hebrew; but he that was born so of both, was an Hebrew of the Hebrew; such a
one was Saint Paul, Phil. 3. 5. He that was borne a Proselyte either by Father
or Mothers side, was termed Benger, The son of an he-proselyte, or Bengera, The
son of a she-proselyte; But he that was by Father and Mothers side a Proselyte,
was termed Magni quidam nominis Rabbi apud Iudaeos fuit, quem ex Paganism^ ad
Iudaismum conuersum (...) per sigla appellarunt, i. filius proselyti, filius
proselytae. Pirke Aboth, cap. 5.
Bagbag, that is, the son of he and she Proselytes.

The Hebrews were of two sorts, some lived in Palaestina, and used the Hebrew
text, these were called Hebrews, or Jews; others were dispersed in diverse
places of Greece, they used the Greek translation, and thence were termed
(...), De Iudaeis Graeciensious v^de Scal. animaduers. Eusebius. 124. 1. and in
Can. Isagog. 278.
Graecists: Saint Luke mentions both. There arose a murmuring, (...), of the
Graecists, toward the Hebrews, Acts 6. 1. Where note the difference between
(...), and (...), the Graecians, and the Graecists; The Grecians are used by
Saint Paul, to signify all the heathen people, and stand in opposition with
Hebrews in the general acception, containing both the Graecists, or dispersed
Hebrews, and also those of Palaestina: the Graecists were both by birth and
religion Hebrews, standing in opposition with Hebrews in the strict acception,
taken for those of Palaestina.

The whole body of Israel was divided into twelve Tribes, and public records
were kept, wherein every ones genealogy was registered, to manifest unto what
particular Tribe he belonged. These records Herod burnt, hoping that in after
ages, he might be thought originally an Israelite, if those public monuments
might not be produced against him. Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Thus much Eusebius plainly delivers of him. I am of opinion, that another
reason might be added, namely, That no distinction either of tribe or family,
might appear, but all being confounded, and amongst the rest, David's (unto
whose family by a peculiar right the Scepter belonged) Herod and his posterity
might be the better secured of the Kingdom.

Proselytes were those heathen people, who disclaiming Paganism, became
conuerts, and joined themselves unto the Church of the Jews. They were termed
Proselytes, (...), from their coming, and adjoining unto the Jews. Concerning
these Proselytes, we will consider these three things: 1. The several kinds
of Proselytes; 2. The manner of making them; 3. In what account or respect they
lived among the Jews.

First, the kinds of Proselytes were two; (...), Ger berith, Proselytus
foederis, A Proselyte of the covenant. He submitted himself unto
Circumcision, and to the whole Mosaicall Praedagogie. Rabbi Solomon, Deuteronomy. 23.
14.
The Rabbis term such a one (...) Gertsedek, Proselytum iustitiae, A
Proselyte of righteousness. Secondly, (...) Ger schagnar, Proselytus portae, A
proselyte, or stranger within thy gates, Deuteronomy. 14. 21. Of him also we read in
the fourth Commandment. He was suffered to dwell amongst them, whence he is
also called (...) Toschab, Incola, an inhabitant. He was not circumcised,
neither did he conform himself to Mosaicall rites, and ordinances, only he
was tied to the obedience of those commandments, which among the Hebrew
Doctors go under the name of Noah's seven Commandments: Sheindler in
Pentaglot. p. 1530.
which they reckon thus: 1. Judgments, or punishments for malefactors. 2.
Blessing the name of God; under this is contained the keeping of the Sabbath.
3. Disclaiming Idolatry. 4. Uncovering ones nakedness. 5. Shedding of blood.
6. Robbery. 7. Eating of any member of a beast, taken from it alive. Of this
sort were Naaman the Syrian, the Eunuch Cornelius, and those of whom we read,
That there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, (...).
Men that feared God of every Nation under heaven, Acts 2. 5.

Secondly, to the making of one to be a Prosclyte of the covenant, according to
the difference of sex, and the difference of times, the rites of initiation
varied. To the making of Moses Kotsens. fol. 40. ^l. 2.
a Male Proselyte, at first three things were required. (...)
1. Circumcision. 2. A kind of purification by water. 3. The blood of
oblation. This oblation was commonly two Turtles, or Pigeons. To the making of
a Woman Proselyte, were required only, Purification by water, and Oblation
Drusius de tribus sect. lib. 2. p. 102.
. Now, because the Jews have neither Altar, nor Sacrifice, they say that for
the males, Circumcision, and Purification by water, suffices; and for the
females, only Purification by water. Moses Aegyptius in Assure biah, Perek 13.
fol. 137. vide Serarium trihae^. lib. 2. cap. 2.
In David's time they say, that many thousands of Proselytes were joined unto
the Church without Circumcision, only by this Purification.

Hence we may observe, that a kind of initiation by water was long in use
among the Jews, though it were not Sacramental until Christ his institution:
yea therefore it may seem to have been used by them, because they expected it
at the coming of the Messiah, as appears by their coming unto John,
questioning not so much his Baptism, as his authority, by what authority he
baptized; Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias,
neither that Prophet? John 1. 25.

Thirdly, the respect borne by the Jews toward Proselytes, was charitable; P.
Fag. Exodus 22. 21.
they used no vpbraiding terms toward them, saying; Remember thy former
deeds. Notwithstanding it was also provided, Moses Egypt. lib. ult. Iad tract.
Sanhedrin, cap. 2.
No Proselyte should be eligible into the Court of their Sanhedrim, yea in
their common commerce, they had a usual proverb which admonished them of
wariness; Casaubonus aduers. Baron. p. 27.
Vel ad decimam vsque generationem a Proselytis cave; Beware of Proselytes to
the tenth generation.

CHAP. IIII.
Of their Kings.
WE shall read of three sorts of Kings in the old Test. Melchisedek was King
and Priest, David King and Prophet, others simply Kings. Melchisedek was King
and Priest, David King and Prophet. The concurrence of Princely Sovereignty,
and holy orders, in the same man, intimates that supreme authority should
always be accompanied with care of religion: In which respect Ioash, when he
was anointed King, received the Testimony or book of the Law, 2 Kings 11. 12.
neither did these two meet only in Melchisedek and David, but the same man
among the Heathens Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos. Virg.
Aeneid. lib. 3.
was oftentimes King and Priest. And Trismegistus, had his name Ter maximus,
Alex. Neopolit. lib. 2. cap. 6.
because he was Philosophus maximus, Sacerdos maximus, and Rex maximus. All
Kings were not anointed, but only those in whom succession was broken, and
there the first of the family was anointed for his successors, except, in case
of dissension, where there was required a renewed unction, for the confirmation
of his authority. For this reason it was that Solomon was anointed as well as
David, because of the strife between him and Adoniah.

Furthermore, Saul and Iehu were anointed (...), Bepac, with a Cruse of oil,
to show the short continuance of their kingdoms. David and Solomon were
anointed (...), Bekeren, with an horn of Oil, that is, in a plentiful
measure, to show the long continuance of their kingdoms.

As Kings were distinguished from the people by many Ensigns of honor, by their
Crown, their Scepter, their Throne, etc. so likewise were they distinguished
by their apparel; that was the reason that Ahab entering into battle, changed
his apparel, 1 Kings 22. 30. Though purple and white colors were not
appropriated unto Kings, Valor. Max. lib. 1. cap. 6.
yet these colors were in chief esteem, and principally used by them, Alex.
ab Alex. lib. 1. cap. 20.
yea purple above others was affected by the Emperors, and Nobility of Rome;
and white, by the Nobility of the Jews, whence the Hebrews term their
Noblemen, and such as are of best rank, (...), Chorim, Albatos, men clad in
white; and on the contrary, men of meaner rank, (...), Chaschucim, Sordidatos,
men clad with a foul garment. Hence is that of Saint James, If there come a
man with a gold Ring, and in goodly apparel, (...), in a white garment, and
there come also a poor man, (...), in a vile or foul raiment, Iam. 2. 2. This
may be the reason, why when the Jews accused Christ of treason, Pilate his
soldiers clad him in purple, Matthew. 27. 28. and Herod the Tetrarch of Galile
put on him a White garment, Luke 23. 11. both therein applying themselves to
the customs of their own Country, and in derision, clothing him as a King.

CHAP. V.
The High Priest, Priests, Levites, and Nethinims.
THere were three ranks or degrees of Ministers about the Temple, Priests,
Levites, and Nethinims; they may be paralleld with Ministers, Deacons, and
Subdeacons, in the Primitive Church: Over all these the High Priest was chief.

In Aaron, and his posterity, was continued the succession of the Priests; the
High Priesthood was tied to the line of his firstborn; all the rest of his
posterity were Priests, simply so called, or called Priests of the second
order, 2 King. 23. 4.

Except Aaron, and those that issued from his loins (in whom the series of
Priests was continued) all the rest of Leui his posterity were called Levites.

Both in the High Priest, and the second, or inferior Priests, there are two
things considerable. First, their consecration: Secondly, their Office. In both
these, somewhat they differed, somewhat they agreed.

In their consecration they differed. 1. Hinc Sacerdos summus in font legitur
Sacerdos vnctus, Leu. 4. 5. Jonathan habet, Sacerdos magnus vel summus. Diserte
Aben Esra, Sacerdos magnus ipse est Sacerdos vnctus. Lyranus adhuc clarius,
Sacerdos vnctus est Sacerdos magnus, quia inferiores Sacerdotes non vngebantur,
etc.
The High Priest was anointed: the materials of this chrisme or ointment are
prescribed, Exodus 30. 23. It was powered upon Aarons head, Leuit. 8. 12. It ran
down to his beard and to the border of his garments, Psalm. 133. 2. The second
Priests were only sprinkled with this Oil, mixed with the blood of the
Sacrifice, Leuit. 8. 30. In this was typed out the unction of our Savior, who
was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. 8. He
was anointed above his fellows, Extensiue, and Intensiue, Extensiue, for
though Aaron was anointed Priest, Saul anointed King, Elisha anointed Prophet,
Melchisedek King and Priest, Moses Priest and Prophet, David King and Prophet;
yet none save only Christ, King, Priest, and Prophet. Intensiue, he was
anointed, we sprinkled. He was full of grace and truth, John 1. 14. And from
his fullness, we receive grace for grace, Verse. 16. And all Christians,
especially Ministers, are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 15.

Secondly, they differed in their garments, which were a necessary adiunct to
their consecration. The High Priest wore at the time of his ordinary
ministration in the Sanctuary, eight garments, Exodus 28. First, Breeches of
linen, put next upon his flesh. 2. A Coat of fine linen, put over the
breeches. 3. A girdle imbroidered, of fine linen, blew, purple, and scarlet,
wherewith the coat was girded. 4. A Robe all of blew, with seventy two bells of
gold, and as many Pomegranates, of blew, purple, and scarlet, upon the skirts
thereof; this was put over the coat and girdle. 5. An Ephod of gold and of
blew, purple, scarlet, and fine linen curiously wrought; on the shoulders
thereof were two fair Beryll stones engraven, with the names of the twelve
Tribes of Israel. This Ephod was put over the Robe, and girded thereto with a
curious girdle made of the same. 6. A Breast Plate wrought of gold, blew,
purple, scarlet and fine linen, which being a spanne square, was fastened by
golden chains, and ringes upon the Ephod: herein were set twelve several
stones, on which the names of the twelve Tribes were engraven: Moreover in this
breast plate were the Vrim and Thummim placed. 7. A Miter offine linen,
sixteen Cubits long, wrapped about his head. 8. A plate of pure gold, or holy
crown two fingers broad, whereon was graven, Holiness to the Lord: this was
tied with a blew lace upon the forefront of the Miter.

These eight garments the High Priest used in his ordinary ministration, and
they are termed by the Rabbis (...) Bigde Zahab, Vestimenta aurea, Golden
vestments, because of their richness in comparison of other extraordinary
garments, which he wore only, once a year, when he entered into the Holy of
Holies, upon the propitiation day, Leuit. 15. 4. 23. These latter are called,
(...) Bigde laban, Vestimenta alba, White garments, they were in number four.
1. A linen breeches. 2. A linen coat. 3. A linen girdle. 4. A linen Miter,
Leuic. 16. 4.

In time of the second Temple, Cunaeus lib. 2. de rep. Hebr. cap. 7. p. 222.
because the Chrisme or holy oil could not be found, therefore as formerly in
respect of his unction, the High Priest was called by the Talmudists, (...)
Mithrabe Mischa, Auctus unction, The anointed: so when the oil was lost, in
respect of his garments, he was termed, (...) Mithrabe begadim, Auctus
vestibus, The clothed. Those forementioned garments Moses Kotsensis praecept.
aff^^m. 173. fol. 212. col. 3.
the High Priest might not wear abroad in the city, unless some urgent
occasion compelled him, as Simeon the just did, when he went forth to meet
Alexander the great.

In his apparel the threefold office of our Savior Christ was shadowed, the
Crown signified his Kingly office; the Vrim and Thummim, and likewise his
Bells and Pomegranats, his Prophetical office: by Vrim and Thummim, he
answered as from an Oracle; by the Bells was typed the sound of his doctrine;
by the Pomegranats the sweet savor of an holy life; the names of the twelve
Tribes engraven on the Ephod, and the Breast Plate, signified his Priestly
office, presenting unto God the whole Church, for which he makes intercession.
He knows his own sheep by name, John 10. 3.

The inferior Priests had only four garments, which they used in their
ministration. 1. A linen breeches. 2. A linen coat. 3. A linen girdle. 4. A
linen bonnet, Exodus 28.

Thirdly, they differed in their marriage. The High Priest might not marry a
Widow, nor a divorced woman, nor an harlot, but a Virgin, Leuit 21. 14. From a
Widow he could not expect the first love: from a divorced woman he could not
expect the first or just love: from an harlot neither first, just, nor only
love: all which Christ (whom the High Priest did herein represent) expects
from his Church. The other Priests might lawfully marry a Widow, Leuit. 21. 7.

The High Priest and the inferior Priests, agreed in their consecration in
these particulars. It was required first, that both should be void of bodily
blemish, Leuit. 21. 17. Secondly that both should be presented unto the Lord
at the door of the Tabernacle, Exodus 29. 4. Thirdly, that both should be
washed with water, Exodus 29. 4. Fourthly, that both should be consecrated by
offering up of certain Sacrifices, Exodus 29. Fifthly, that both should have of
the blood of the other Ram, put upon the tip of the right care, the thumb of
the right hand, and the great toe of the right foot, Exodus 29. 20.

In the time of their consecration certain pieces of the sacrifice were put
into the Priests hand, Exodus 29. 9. The ceremony in the Christian Church, used
by the Bishop unto the Minister in time of ordination, that the Bishop gives
the Bible into the hands of the Minister, does much resemble this. And both may
signify, that no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called
of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5. 4. Hence consecration in the Hebrew phrase is
termed Filling of the hand. And contrary to this did Ieroboams Priests,
whosoever would, he Filled his own hand, 1 King. 13. 33. that is, He thrust
himself into the Priesthood.

In the discharge of their offices, the High Priest differed from the other
Priests: First, because he only, and that but once a year, entered into the
Holy of Holies, Exodus 16. 34.

Secondly, the High Priest might not mourn for the death of his nearest kin,
Leuit. 21. 10, 11. The phrases used there to express mourning are two. First,
uncovering the head. Secondly, Renting the clothes: Of both these somewhat is
spoken in the chapter of burialls, but concerning the latter it will not be
amiss, to note that the Talmudists determine the matter thus: saying, Vide
Cunaeum de rep. Heb. lib. 2. cap. 3.
That it was lawful for the High Priest to tear the skirt, or nether part of
his garment, but from the bosom downward, it was unlawful: which if it be
true, then it does not necessarily follow, that Caiaphas did contrary to the
law in renting his clothes, Matthew 26. 65. The inferior Priests might mourn
for these six; Father, Mother, Son, Daughter, Brother, and Sister, that had
no husband, Leuit. 21. 2.

In the discharge of their offices, the High Priest, and other Priests, agreed
in these particulars: 1. They both burnt incense, and offered sacrifices, 1 Chronicles. 6. 49. Secondly, they both sounded the trumpets, the use whereof was
twofold; sometimes to sound an alarm in war, sometimes to assemble the
people and their Rulers, Number. 10. Thirdly, they both slew the sacrifices, 2 Chronicles. 29. 22. Fourthly, They both instructed the people, Mal. 2. 7. Fifthly,
They both judged of leprosy, Leuit. 13. 2.

For the more orderly performance of these offices, the High Priest had his
suffragan, Elias Thisbit.
called (...), Sagan, who in case of the Highpriests pollution performed his
office. Of this sort was Zephaniah. Ier. 52. 24. And of this sort Annas is
thought to have been, when Caiaphas was High Priest. Casaubor. aduers. Baron.
p. 242. It. Joseph. Scaliger. in Prolegom ad Eusebius.
In this sense they interpret Annas and Caiaphas to have been Highpriests the
same year, Luke 3. 2. The High Priest and his Sagan, resembled our Bishop and
his Suffragan: The Patriarch of Constantinople and his Primore termed
Protosyncellus, and amongst the Romans, the Centurion and his Optio: for the
Lieutenant in war, who in case of necessity; supplied the Centurions place,
were termed Optiones.

That every one of the Inferior Priests might equally serve in his order, King
David distributed the whole company of them into twenty four ranks, or
courses, called (...), Turm^, vices. Nadab and Abihu being dead, there remained
only two sons to Aaron, namely, Eleazar and Ithamar; now as the succession
of Priests was preserved in these two families, so did David at this time
according to the number of people in each family, make his division. Eleazars
family he divided into sixteen ranks, and Ithamars into eight; the division
was by Lot, the first lot fell to Iehoiarib, the second to Iedaiah, the third
to Harim, etc. 1 Chronicles. 24. Every rank or course served weekly in the Temple
by turn, and the ranks received their names from those, who at that time were
the heads of the several families, and ever after retained the same names. The
chief of every rank was called, Summus Sacerdos istius classis: The chief
Priest of that rank. Hence it is that we read of many Highpriests assembled
together, Mark 14. 1. Furthermore we are to note, that as the weekly courses
fell out by lot, so did they by lot determine each particular Priests service;
namely, who should burn incense, who slay the beasts, who lay them on the
Altar, who dress the Lamps, etc. Zacharias was of the course of Abia, Luke 1.
5. that is, of the eight course, and his lot was to burn incense, Luke 1. 9.

The office of the Levites was to pitch, to take down, to bear up and down
the Tabernacle, and the vessels thereof. Leui had three sons, Gershon,
Cohath, and Merari: and accordingly the whole company of the Levites were
distinguished into three orders, Gershonites, Cohathites, and Merarites. The
Gershonites charge was to carry the couerings and hangings of the Tabernacle.
The chief things within the Sanctuary were committed to the Cohathites. The
wood-worke, and the rest of the instruments were committed to the charge of the
Merarites, Numb. 3. This was the office of the Levites, in Moses his time, and
whiles they were on their journey in the wilderness; but afterward when they
were settled in the promised land, then David changed their office, appointing
them some to have the charge of the treasures of the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 26. 20.
others to be ouer-seers and Judges, others to be Porters, others Singers, 1 Chronicles. 23. 4. The singers in time of singing were clad in linen Robes, or
Surplesses, 2 Chro. 5. 12. The Singers were divided into twenty four orders,
or courses, 1 Chronicles. 25. 8. And the Porters into as many, 1 Chronicles. 26. that
both might supply their turns weekly by lot as the Priests did. In Moses time
also, their consecration began at the five and twentieth year of their age:
In David's at the twentieth, 1 Chronicles. 23. 24. Ezra 3. 8. Here we may note the
liberty granted unto the Church, in changing Ceremonies: the office of the
Levites in David's time, was not the same as in Moses; and again, Moses and
David agreed not in the time of their consecration. Again, in the Christian
Church we shall find in Matthias his election, the use of lots; not so in
Paul's, or any other of the Apostles: In their meetings, use of an holy kiss;
and at the Lords Supper, use of their love feasts, both now antiquated
throughout Christendom.

Moreover there are certain degrees obserueable among the Levites: 1. Their
initiation, when they were a month old, they were initiated, and presented
unto God, Numb. 3. 15. Secondly, their consecration, they were consecrated by
imposition of hands, when they were 25. years old, Numb. 8. 24. From thence
for the five years following, they learned their office. Those that imposed
hands on them, are said in the Text, Numb. 8. 10. to be the sons of Israel.
Chazkuni interprets that place, the First borne of Israel. They were the
Representative Church, and in allusion to this, the Church of Christ is called
the Church of the first borne, Heb. 12. 23. At the same time the Levites were
waued by the Priests, that is, as the Greek reads it, (...).
Separated, which word is used for the Ministers of Christ, (...).
Separate me Barnabas and Paul, Acts 13. 2. Thirdly, their Ministration, to
carry up and down the Tabernacle, and this was at the thirtieth year of their
age, until the fiftieth, Number. 4. 3. Lastly, their vacation, or discharge from
that laborious service of carrying the Tabernacle; notwithstanding, even then
they were to serve in their charge, to encampe round about the Tent, to sing,
and to beware that no stranger came into the Temple, Francisc. Iunius Analyt.
expos. Number. 8.
and likewise to ouersee and instruct younger Levites in manner of Bishops.
Unto these degrees the Apostle seems to have respect: They that have
ministered well get themselves a good degree, 1 Timothy 3. 13. The like kind of
Dionys. Halicarnass. lib. 2.
degrees are obserueable among the Vestall Virgins, they remained in their
nunnery 30. years. Ten years they learned the mysteries of their profession;
Ten years they exercised them, and ten years they taught them others. From
this custom of imposing hands on the Levites, has flowne the like custom,
used by the Apostles in conferring orders, Acts 6. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 22.

Observe the difference of these three phrases, (...), The imposition of hands.
(...), The holding up of hands, in token of election, or ordination, Act. 14.
23. And (...), A stretching forth of the hands. Both the first gestures were
used in Ordination or conferring orders. The first of all, namely, imposition
of hands, was borrowed from the Hebrews, The second, namely the holding up of
hands, was taken from the Aeschines contra Ctesiphontem.
Athenians, who had two sorts of Magistrates, (...), Magistrates chosen by
lots: and (...), Magistrates chosen by holding up of hands. The third gesture
of the hands, called (...), A stretching forth of the hands, Herodian. p. 45.
sometimes it is termed, (...), the beckning with the hand, a gesture used in
craving silence; so Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself,
Acts 26. 1.

There were Moses Kotsensis, fol. 211. col. 4.
another sort of holy persons, termed (...) Ansche Magnamad, Viri stationarij,
the law requiring that whosoever offered either gift or sacrifice, he should
present it unto the Lord with his own hands, and stand by during the time of
his oblation. Now because all Israel could not stand by, for the narrowness of
the place, hence when an offering was made for all the people, certain selected
persons chosen for that purpose, supplied the stead of all the people. They
were divided as the Priests and Levites, into twenty four ranks or orders,
weekly to minister in the Temple, but the choice was not restrained to the
Tribe of Leui, but was indifferently made out of the people. Every rank had
one foreman, chief above the rest, termed (...).
Stationum Princeps: the Foreman of that station. The Nethinims office, was to
be hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the house of God; they were not
Levites, no nor Israelites, but Gibeovites, whom because of their fraudulent
dealing, Ioshuah made in this manner tributary, Josh. 9. 23. They were
afterward called Nethinims, Ezra. 2. 43. from (...), Nathan, which signifies
to give, because they were given for the service of the Temple. Their office
was vile and base, as appears by that prouerbiall speech. From the hewer of
thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water, Deuteronomy. 29. 11.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Prophets.
THere are diverse names given unto the expositors of the law, and although the
particular year or time when each name began, be not clearly euidenced by
monuments of Antiquity, yet in general, we may conceive three distinct
periods of time, in which the names altered. First, from Adam, until Moses.
Secondly, from Moses, till the peoples return from Babylon. Thirdly, from
their return, until the days of Christ, and after. In the first period as
Adam was Prophet and Priest in his family, so afterward every firstborn
supplied these two offices, together with their Princely office in their
several families. That they ruled their families as Kings, and instructed them
as Prophets, is clear to any acquainted with Scripture; the greatest doubt is,
what sufficient proof there is for their Priesthood. Adams Priesthood is
gathered hence, Bertram. Polit. Iud. cap. 2. p. 17.
because that, Genesis 4. 3. and 4. Abel and Kain are said to have brought their
sacrifices: to have brought them, namely, unto Adam, who offered them unto God
in their name. The Priesthood of the First borne is gatherable hence, because
the Levites were appointed to the service of the Altar, in stead of the first
borne, and as their (...), or price of Redemption, Numb. 3. 41. In the second
period, though a private catecheticall exposition of the law belonged to the
Masters of families, yet the public ministerial exposition thereof was
appropriated to Priests, and Prophets. In the third period when prophecy
ceased, then the office of expounding Scripture was more common, and in stead
of Prophets, came in a multitude of other expositors; In general we may call
them teachers of Israel, John 3. 10. We may distinguish them into 3. several
sorts. 1. Wisemen. 2. Scribes. 3. Disputers. The Apostle compriseth them all, 1
Cor. 1. 20. Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer? Unto
any of these, or whatsoever other Doctor eminently gifted above others, the
title Rabbi was prefixed. First, of their Prophets. Secondly, their Wisemen,
Thirdly, their Scribes. Fourthly, their Disputers. Fifthly, their Rabbis.

To Prophecy, or to be a Prophet, has diverse acceptions in Scripture. First,
It is taken for the books and writings of the Prophets. They have Moses and
the Prophets, Luke 16. 29. Secondly, for the whole word of God: No Prophecy in
the Scripture is of ^y private motion, 2 Pet. 1. 20. Thirdly, those unto whom
God vouchsafed familiarly to reveal himself, they are called Prophets.
Abraham was a Prophet, Genesis 20. 7. and Miriam a Prophetess, Exodus 15. 20.
Fourthly, ordinary interpreters of the word are called Prophets. He that
receives a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, Matt. 10. 41. Lastly, it is
taken for those, who were enabled by divine revelation, to lay open hidden
secrets, transcending all possibility of humane search. Hence it is, that
Prophets in old time were called, Seers, 1 Samuel 9. 9. And their prophecy was
termed a Vision, Esai 1. 1. because God extraordinarily enlightened their
minds, with the knowledge of these secrets.

There are three obserueable names applied to Prophecy in Scripture. 1. Verbum
Domini. 2. Visio. 3. Onus. The word of the Lord. Vision. A burden. The first
imports the Lord speaking, or revealing his secrets; the second implies the
Prophets attending or beholding them; the third, being applied only to
Judgments, signifies the burden somenesse of them, on that people against
whom they came forth.

For the propagation of learning, Colleges and Schools were in diverse places
erected for the Prophets, their Scholars were termed Eodem sensu Gracia
pellant artis medi^ae Candidato, (...) dedicatoria Hilario praesiae.
Filij Prophetarum, Children of the Prophets, 2 Kings 6. 1. unto which phrase
there is allusion, Matt. 11. 19. Wisdom is justified of her children: by
reason of this relation, the Prophet sometimes is called a Father. Elisha cried
out, my Father, my Father, 2 Kings 2. 12. The Targum. 2 Reg. 2. 12.
Targum expounds that place, Rabbi, Rabbi, as much as to say, my Master, my
Master. And in truth, the Rabbis, grew very ambitious of the name Father,
which was the reason of our Saviors speech, Matthew 23. 9. Call no man Father
upon earth.

The Chimchi in praefat. ad Hoseam.
Scripture, sometimes joins to the name of the Prophet, the name of his
Father, as Hosea the son of Beeri, Hos. 1. 1. And such a one the Hebrews
confess to be both a Prophet, and the son of a Prophet: Sometimes it
mentions the Prophets name, but not the Fathers, such a one they confess to
be a Prophet, but not the son of a Prophet: Sometimes it mentions with the
Prophet, the name of the city where he prophesied, and then it follows, that
he was a Prophet of that city. When a Prophet is mentioned without the name of
the city, then he is thought to be a Prophet of Jerusalem.

2. Wisemen: This title though in it self it be general and common to all
Doctors, and teachers of the law, yet for many years before our Saviors
incarnation, Gorionid. lib. 4. cap. 29.
it was either arrogated by the Pharisees, or else by the ignorant multitude
appropriated unto them, from an opinion of their extraordinary wisdom, in
teaching of traditions, which they preferred beyond the law. Hence the Pharisees
were called, Drus. de trib. sect. p. 86.
Masters of the traditions. And hence was that counsel of R. Eleezar to his
Scholars, Buxtorf. Recens. operis Talmud. p. 195.
That they should forbid their children from the study of the Bible, and place
them between the knees of their Wisemen. Hieronym. ad Algasiam quaest. 10.
Likewise, hence when any of their Doctors did read lecture, their saying was,
(...). Our Wisemen do teach traditions. The like ambition we shall find among
the Gracians, all of them striving to be entitled (...), Wisemen. And hence,
whenever the chief of them had pleased the people in the performance of
their orations, or any other public business, they were honored with a
Grande (...), that is, with a loud acclamation of (...), Well done, or Wisely
done, until Pythagoras in dislike of such swelling titles, styled himself
Philosophus, a Lover of wisdom, which kind of modesty was afterward practiced
by the Hebrew Doctors, for they in after times, to avoid the suspicion of
arrogance, refused the name of (...) Chacamin, Wisemen, Elies Thisbit.
and styled themselves (...) Discipuli sapientum, Learners of wisdom.

3. Scribes, This name was given to two sorts of men, some merely Laics,
other Clergy men. The body of the Laick Scribes, were those, to whom was
committed the instruction of young children in their minority, especially to
teach them to write, we may English them Scriueners. This office was
appropriated to the Tribe of Simeon. In this sense we read not of Scribes in
the Scripture, although the ground of their first institution have been taken
thence, namely, from those words which Jacob used unto Simeon and Leui. I will
divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Genesis 49. 7. So that as Leui
had no portion, but lived dispersed among the other Tribes by the benefit of
the altar: Solom Iarchi Genesis 49. vide Ambros. Tom. 4. cap. 3. and Targum.
Hierosolymit.
In like manner, Simeon had no portion, in the judgment of the Hebrews, but
lived scattered among the other Tribes, getting their maintenance by teaching
and schooling little children: whether this office of teaching children was
appropriated to them, I leave to the enquiry of others; certain I am, that the
Simeonites had their o^ne inheritance by lot, Josh. 19. 1. and the prophecy
concerning their being scattered, is thought to have been accomplished in
this, that the inheritance of the Simeonites, was taken out of the portion of
the children of Judah, Josh. 19. 9. Furthermore it is certain, that if not all
Scriueners, yet those public notaries who were employed in drawing deeds, and
writing contracts (be they of what Tribe they will) they were called by the
name of Scribes. Unto this there is allusion, Psalm. 45. 1. My tongue is as the
pen of a swift writer, or ready Scribe. Out of the body of these I conceive
certain choice men to have been elected for public employments, some to
attend the King, as his Secretaries, termed (...), the Kings Scribes, 2 King.
12. 10. Such were Sheia, 2 Samuel 20. 25. And Shaphan, 2 Kings 22. 3. Others to
attend the public courts, and consistories: they much resembled our Clerks
of Assizes, these were termed (...), the Scribes of the people, Mat. 2. 4. It.
1 Maccab. 5. 42.

The second sort of Scribes, belonged to the Clergy, they were expositors of
the law, and thence are they called (...), and (...): Scribes of the Law, Esr.
7. 6: Expounders of the Law, Luke 7. 30. and Doctors of the Law, Luke 5. 17.
Their office was to write, read, and expound the law of Moses to the people.
The name was a name of office, not of sect. Of this sort was Esdras, Esr. 7. 6.
who though he were a a Leuite, yet Drusius de trib^^ sectis lib. 2. cap. 12.
ex Chaldaes paraphrast.
others there were of the Tribe of Judah, and, as it is thought, they might
indifferently be of any Tribe. The name was of the like esteem among the
Hebrews, as the Magi were among the Chaldeans; the Quindecimuiri among the
Romans, for expounding Sibyllaes Oracles: or the Canonists in the Church of
Rome. The word (...), Sopherim, translated Scribes, signifies Numberers, or
Computers, and is applied to the Masorites, because they spent their time in
reckoning, and numbering, not only the verses, but the words also, and letters
of each book throughout the Bible; which as it is an argument of their
industry: Augustine. in Psalm. 40.
So likewise of Gods providence, in the preservation of his truth unviolable.
As the Wisemen in their preaching pressed traditions: so the Scribes claue to
the written word, whence they were Drusius de trib. sectis lib. 2. ca. 13.
termed Text-men, or Masters of the Text. And to this purpose it is worth our
observing, that whereas both the Scribes and the Pharisees, sought to fasten
accusations upon our Savior, Matthew. 9. The Scribes accused him of blasphemy,
Verse. 3. The Pharisees, of eating with Publicanes, and sinners, Verse. 11. The
Scribes accusation, was a breach of the law; the Pharisees, a breach of
traditions.

3. The Disputer, Vide Thisbit. in (...)
He insisted upon allegories, and searched out mystical interpretations of
the Text. Hence himself was termed Darschan, and his exposition, or homily,
Midrasch. And their school, Beth Hammidrasch. They were counted the
profoundest interpreters, whence that of the Psalmist, Psam. 84. 7. They go
from strength to strength, Targum Psalm. 84. 7.
is interpreted, from their Temple, to their Beth Hammidrasch, from an inferior
to an higher school. Hereby we see the difference between those three sorts
of predicants mentioned by Saint Paul. The wise men were teachers of
traditions, the Scribes teachers of the Text according to the literal
interpretation, and the Disputers teachers of allegories and mysteries; which
fabulous expositions, because they breed questions and disputations, (...), 1 Timothy 1. 4. Hence is it that such an expositor, is termed (...), A Disputer.
These three sorts of preachers, which Saint Paul terms, the Wise man, the
Scribe, and the Disputer, 1 Cor. 1. 20. are by the Hebrews named, (...) Chacam,
(...) Sopher, (...) Darschan.

CHAP. VII.
Of their title Rabbi.
ABout the time of our Savior Christ his nativity, titles began to be
multiplied, and amongst the rest, these of Rab, Ribbi, Rabbi, and Rabban, were
in especially use: they all are derived from (...), Rabab, signifying
Multiplicatus fuit, and they sound as much as (...), that is, a Master, or
Doctor eminently gifted with variety of knowledge. Concerning these titles,
they write thus, Aruch in voce (...).
that Rabbi, is a more excellent title, than Rab; and Rabban more excellent
than Rabbi; and the simple name without any title, as Haggi, Zachari, Malachi,
was more excellent than Rabban. About this time they used a set form of
discipline in their Schools. The Scholar was termed (...), Talmid, a Disciple
in respect of his learning, (...), Katan, a Junior, in respect of his minority;
(...), Bachur, that is, one chosen, or elected, in respect of his election or
cooptation, into the number of Disciples. After he had proved a good
proficient, and was thought worthy of some degree, then was he by imposition
of hands made a Graduate, (...), Chaber, a companion to a Rabbi. This
imposition of hands, they termed (...), vel (...), Semicah, or Semicuth, which
ceremony they observed in imitation of Moses toward Joshua. The Lord said unto
Moses, Take thou Joshua the son of Nun, in whom is the spirit, and Put thine
hand upon him, Number. 27. 18. At which time he that imposed hands on him, used
(...) Id est, Scaligero interpret: Ego tibi impono manum, et manus tibi
imposita esto. Tribaeres. c. 5. p. 264. vide etiam Cunaeum de Rep. Heb. lib. 1.
cap. ^^.
this form of words, I associate thee, and be thou associated. After this,
when he was worthy to teach others, then was he called Rabbi; and whereas in
his minority, his own name being suppressed, he was called only by his
Fathers name, the son of N. When he was made Graduate by imposition of hands,
then was he called by his own name, N. the son of N. And afterward, when
he was thought worthy to teach, then was the title Rabbi prefixed, after this
manner; Rabbi N. the son of N. For example, Maimonides, at first was termed
only Ben Maimon, the son of Maimon: after his degree, then was he called by
his own name added to his Fathers, Moses Ben Maimon, Moses the son of
Maimon: at last being licenced to teach, then was he called (...) Rambam,
which abbreuiature, consisting of Capital letters, signifies, Rabbi Moses ben
Maimon, Rabbi Moses the son of Maimon. So Rabbi Leui, the son of Gersom, in his
minority was called the son of Gersom, afterward Leui the son of Gersom; at
last, (...), Ralbag, Rabbi Leui the son of Gersom. This distinction of
Scholars, Companions, and Rabbis, appears by that speech of an ancient
Rabbi, saying, Vide P. Fagium in Scholiis suis ad cap. 4. Pirke Aboth.
I learned much of my Rabbis or Masters, more of my Companions, most of all of
my Scholars. That every Rabbi had disciples, and that his own disciples, and
other well-wishers styled him by the name of Rabbi, in the days of our
Savior, needs no proof. Judas came to Christ and said, God save the Rabbi,
Matthew. 26. 49. In like manner John's Disciples came and saluted John, by the
name of Rabbi, John 3. 26. And Christ by the name of Rabbi, John 1. 38. But
whether there was such a formal imposition of hands then in use, I much doubt.
The manner of their meetings, when Disputations were had in their Synagogues,
or other Schools, was Philo Iud. Quod omn^s probus, p. 679.
thus. The chief Rabbis sat in reserved chaires, these are those chief
seats in the Synagogues, which the Scribes and Pharisees so affected, Matthew. 23.
6. Their Companions sat upon benches, or lower forms, their Scholars on the
ground, at the feet of their Teachers. Saint Paul was brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, Acts 22. 3. And Mary sat at Jesus feet, and heard his word, Luke 10.
39. The positure of their body, differed according to their degrees. The
Scaliger in Tribaeres. cap. 5. ex cap. 1. Beracoth.
Rabbi is described to be (...), Ioscheb, one that sits: The Companion,
(...), Mutch, the word signifies a kind of leaning upon a bed, or bench, ones
head lying in the others bosom, in manner of the ancient sitting at table, and
it was a deportment of the body, inferior to that of Pirke Aboth. cap. 4.
sitting: The Scholar was termed (...), Mithabek, one that does lie along in
the dust, and this was a token of the Scholars humility, thus humbling and
subiecting himself, even to the feet of his Master: Ambros. 1. cor. 14.
This same custom it is thought, Saint Paul labored to bring into the
Christian Church, 1 Cor. 14. Their Scholars were not all of equal capacity,
whence Pirke Aboth. cap. 5.
they said, some had conditionem spongiae, others clepsydrae, others sacci
foecinacei, and others Cribri. Some resembled the sponge, and sucked in all that
they heard without judgment; others the Houre-glasse, they took in at one
ear and let out at the other: others the Winesacke, through which wine is so
drained from the dregs, that only the dregs remain behind: lastly, others
the rying seiue, which in winnowing lets out the courser seed, and keeps in
the corn.

CHAP. VIII.
Of their Nazarites, and Rechabites.
THere are two sorts of Votaries mentioned in the old Testament, Rechabites,
Ierem. 35. and Nazarites, Numbers 6. I find scarce any thing warrantable
concerning these two, more than what the Scripture delivers in the forequoted
places: therefore concerning the matter of their vows, I refer the reader to
the foresaid texts of Scripture, here only we will note the distinction of
Nazarites. The first are these Votaries, termed so from (...) Nazar, to
separate, because they separated themselves from three things: First, from wine
and all things proceeding from the Vine. Secondly, from the razor, because they
suffered no razor to come upon their head, but let their hair grow all the
days of their separation. Thirdly, from pollution by the dead: this separation
again was twofold, either for a set number of days, or for a man's whole life:
that, they termed Naziraeatum dierum, this, Naziraeatum seculi: of that sort
was Saint Paul and those four with him, Acts 21. 24. Of this sort was Sampson,
Judge 13. and John Baptist. The just number of days, how long the former of
these two separated themselves, is not expressed in Scripture, but the
Sheindler in Pentaglot.
Hebrew Doctors determine them to be thirty, because it is said, Number. 6. 5.
Domino sanctus (...) erit; which word (say they) containing thirty, expresses
the just number of days to be observed in this voluntary separation. The
second sort of Nazarites, were so termed from (...), Natsar, from whence
comes Natsereth, or Nazareth, the name of a certain village in Galile, where
Christ was conceived and brought up: Hence our Savior himself was called a
Nazarene, or Nazarite, Matthew. 2. 23. and those that embraced his doctrine
Nazarites, Act. 24. 5. Afterward certain Heretics sprung up, who, as the
Samaritanes joined Jewish Ceremonies with Heathenish rites: so Hieronym. Isaiae
8. Idem refert Epiphanius lib. 1. Tom. 2. haer. 29.
they joined together, Christ and Moses; the Law, and the Gospel; Baptism and
Circumcision: of the beginning of these we shall read, Acts 15. 2. Then came
down certain from Judea, and taught the brethren, saying; Except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved. These Heretics
were called Nazarites, either of malice by the Jews, to bring the greater
disgrace upon Christian religion; or else because at first they were true,
though weak Nazarites, that is, Christians misled by Peter's Iudaizing at
Antioch, Gal. 2. 11. And hence it is Franscisc. Iun. parall. lib. 1. 8.
thought, that the Church at Antioch, in detestation of this new bred heresy,
fastened upon them by the name of Nazarites, forsook that name, and called
themselves Christians, Act. 11. 26. Symmachus that famous interpreter of the
old Test. was a strong defender of this heresy, and Augustine. lib. 19. contra
Faustum Manichaeum, c. 4.
from him in after times they were named Symmachiani. The Jews had them in as
great hatred, as the Samaritanes, whereupon, Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 2. haeres.
29.
three times every day, at morning, noonetide, and evening, they closed their
prayers with a solemn execration, Maledic Domine Nazoraeis. Lastly, another
sort of Nazarites there were, so termed from (...), Nasar, signifying to
abolish, or cut off, Epiphan. lib. 1. Tom. 1. haer. 18.
because they did abolish and cut off, the five books of Moses, rejecting them
as not Canonical.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Assideans.
IT is much controuersed, whether the Assideans, were Pharisees or Essens, or
what they were? Were I worthy to deliver my opinion, or, as the Hebrews
proverb is, to thrust in my head amongst the heads of those wise men: I
conceive of the Assideans thus. Before their captivity in Babylon, we shall
find the word (...), Chasidim (translated Assidaei, Assideans) to signify the
same as (...), Tsadikim, Just, or good men: both were used promiscuously, the
one for the other, and both stood in equal opposition to the (...),
Reschagnim, that is, ungodly, or wicked men. At this time the whole body of the
Jews, were distinguished into two sorts, Chasidim, and Reschagnim: Good and Bad.

After their captivity, the Chasidim began to be distinguished from the
Tsadikim. D. Kimchi Psalm. 103. ^7.
The Tsadikim. gave themselves to the study of the Scripture. The Chasidim
studied how to add unto the Scripture. Pirke Aboth cap. 5.
Secondly, the Tsadikim would conform to whatsoever the law required: The
Chasidim would be holy above the Law. Thus to the repairing of the Temple, the
maintenance of sacrifices, the relief of the poor, etc. they would
voluntarily add over and above, to that which the law required of them. Whence
it is noted, that those were Chasidim, who would say, What is mine, is thine;
and what is thine, is thine own; those Reschagnim, which would say, What is
thine, is mine; and what is mine, is mine own; and it is probable, that that
middle sort mentioned in the same place, who would say, What is mine is mine,
what is thine is thine own, were the very Tsadikim.

At this time the body of the Jews, were distinguished into three sorts, in
respect of holiness. 1. Reschagnim: (...), Wicked and ungodly men. 2.
Tsadikim, (...), Just, and righteous men. 3. Chasidim, who are sometimes
translated, (...), Holy men, and that for the most part: Assidaei de quibus
agitur. 1 Macab. 7. 13. vocantur a Iosepho lib. 12. c. 16. (...).
but sometimes also (...), Good men: These of all others were best reputed, and
beloved of the people. The Apostle showing the great love of Christ, dying for
us, amplifieth it by allusion unto this distinction of the people: Christ died
for the ungodly. Scarcely for a righteous man, will one die, yet peradventure
for a good man some would even dare to die, Romans 5. verses 6, 7. The gradation
stands thus: Some peradventure would die for one of the Chasidim, a good man:
Scarcely any for one of the Tsadikim, a just, or righteous man: For the
Reschagnim, or ungodly, none would die; yet Christ died for us ungodly, being
sinners, and his enemies.

Now as long as these works of supererogation remained arbitrary, and
indifferent, not required as necessary, though preferred before the simple
obedience to the law: so long the heat of contention was not great enough to
breed sects and heresies: But when once the precepts and rules of
supererogation, were digested into Canons, and urged with an opinion of
necessity; then from the Chasidim issued the brood of Pharisees; Joseph
Scaliger. Trihaeres. cap. 22.
and also from them (as it is probably thought) the heresy of the Essens, both
obtruding unwritten traditions upon the people, as simply necessary, and as a
more perfect rule of sanctity than the Scripture: At this time the Tsadikim in
heat of opposition rejected not only traditions, but all Scripture, except
only the five books of Moses; for which reason they were called Karaim
Joseph. Scalig. ibid.
. Some are of opinion, they rejected only traditions, and embraced all the
books of Scripture: Which opinion soever we follow, they had their name
(...), Karaim; Textuales, Scriptuarij, (i.) Text-men, or Scripture readers,
because they adhered to Scripture alone, withstanding and gainesaying
traditions with all their might. And if we follow the latter, then all this
while the Karaim were far from heresy: but in process of time, when from
Sadok, and Baithus, these Karaim learned to deny all future rewards for good
works, or punishment for evil, or resurrection from the dead; now the Karaim
became complete Sadduces, and perfect Heretics, taking their denomination
from their first Author, Sadok. The time of each heresies first beginning,
shall be more exactly declared in their several chapters.

CHAP. X.
Of the Pharisees.
THere are Quartam etymologiam (cutus fundus and author putatur Hieronymus
Praefat. in Amos) refellit scriptura Hebraica, si enim Pharisaeus diceretur a
verbo (...) Diuidere, scriberentur Pharisaei (...). non
three opinions concerning the Etymology of the name Pharisee. The first, are
those which derive it from (...), Parash, Expandere, Explicare; either from the
enlarging and laying open their phylacteries, or from their open performance of
good works in public view of the people, as being ambitious of man's praise.
Secondly, from (...), Parasch, Exponere, Explanare; because they were of chief
repute, and counted the profoundest Doctors for the exposition of the law, so
that they were termed Gorionides, cap. 29.
Peruschim, quia Poreschim; Pharisees, because they were expounders of the law.
Thirdly, others derive the name from the same verb, but in the conjugation
Piel, where it signifies Diuidere, Separare, to separate. Suidas.
In this acception, by the Greeks they were termed (...), we may English them
Separatists. Their separation is considerable, partly in the particulars unto
which; partly in those from which they Separated.

1. They Separated themselves to the study of the Law, in which respect they
might be called, (...), Separated unto the Law. In allusion unto this, the
Apostle is Drusius de trib. sect. lib. 2. c. 2.
thought to have styled himself, Romans 1. 11. (...), Separated unto the
Gospel: when he was called from being a Pharise, to be a Preacher of the
Gospel: and now not separated to the Law, but to the Gospel.

2. They separated themselves, or at least pretended a Suidas.
separation to an extraordinary sanctity of life above other men. God I thank
thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, etc.
Luke 18. 11.

The particulars from which they separated themselves, were these:

1. From commerce with other people, as afterward will appear in their
traditions, whence they called the common people by reason of their ignorance,
(...) populum terrae, the people of the earth. In the Gospel of S. John 7. 49.
they are called (...): This people who knows not the law are cursed.

2. From the apparel and habit of other men: for they used peculiar kinds of
habits, whereby they would be distinguished from the vulgar. Hence proceeded
that common speech, Vestes populi terrae, conculcatio sunt Pharisaeorum.

3. From the Thisbites.
customs and manners of the world.

This heresy of the Pharisees seems to have had its first beginning in
Antigonus Sochaeus. He being a Pharise succceeded Simeon the Just, who was
coetanean with Alexander the great: he lived three hundred years before the
birth of Christ.

The Pharisees were Chrysostom. Matt. 15.
not tied to any particular Tribe or Family, but indifferently they might be
of any. S. Paul was a Beniamite; Flauius Joseph. lib. 13. c. 18.
Hyreanus was a Leuite.

Each sect had his Dogmata, his proper Aphorisms, Constitutions, or Canons: so
the Pharise had theirs. My purpose is, both concerning these and the other
sects, to note only those Canons, or Aphorisms, wherein chiefly they were
heretical, and one differing from the other.

First, the Pharisees Joseph lib. 13. cap. 9.
ascribed some things to Fate or Destiny, and some things to man's Freewill.

2. They confessed that there were Angels and Spirits, Act. 23. 8.

3. Concerning the resurrection of the dead, they acknowledged it, and Joseph.
de bello lib. 2. cap. 12.
taught that the souls of evil men deceased, presently departed into
everlasting punishment, but the souls, they say, of good men, passed by a
kind of Pythagorean (...) into other good men's bodies. Hence it is S^rar.
Trihaeres. lib. 2. cap. 3. It. Drus. in graeter.
thought, that the different opinions concerning our Savior did arise; Some
saying that he was John Baptist, others Elias, others Ieremias, Matt. 16. 14.
As if Christ his body had been animated by the soul either of John, Elias, or
Ieremias.

4. They did stiffly maintain the traditions of their Elders. For the better
understanding what their traditions were, we must know that the Jews say the
Law was Moses Kotsensis in praes. lib. praecept.
twofold, one committed to writing, which they called (...) (...) Thorah
schebichtab, The written Law; the other delivered by tradition, termed by them
(...) Thorah begnal pe. They say both were delivered by God unto Moses upon
mount Sinai, the latter as an exposition of the former, which Moses afterward
delivered by mouth to Joshua, Joshua to the Elders, the Elders to the Prophets,
the Prophets to those of the great synagogue, from whom successively it
descended to after ages. These traditions were one of the chief controversies
between the Pharisees and the Sadduces. Gorionidu^c: 29.
The Pharisees said, Let us maintain the Law which our forefathers have
delivered into our hands, expounded by the mouth of the wise men, who expounded
it by tradition. And lo, the Sadduces said, Let us not believe or hearken to
any tradition or exposition, but to the Law of Moses alone. The traditions
which chiefly they urged were these.

1. They would not eat until they washed their hands. Why do thy disciples
transgress the tradition of the Elders? for they wash not their hands when
they eat bread, Matthew. 15. 2. This washing is said to have been done (...),
Mark. 7. 3. that is, often, as some translate the word, taking (...) in this
place, to signify the same as (...) in Homer, frequenter. Others translate the
word accurate, diligenter, intimating the great care and diligence they used in
washing: with this the (...) i. (...), Luc. 1. 39.
Syriacke text agrees. Joseph. Scaliger Trihaeres. c. 7.
Others think that there is in that phrase, allusion unto that rite or manner
of washing in use among the tewes, termed by them (...) Netilath iadaim, the
lifting up of their hands. The Greek word (...) is thought to express this
rite, because in this kind of washing, they used to join the tops of the
fingers of each hand together with the thumb, so that each hand did after a
sort resemble (...), i. a fist. This ceremony was thus performed: First they
washed their hands clean. Secondly, they composed them into the forementioned
form. Thirdly, they lifted them up, so that the water ran down to the very
elbowes. Lastly, they let down their hands again, so that the water ran from
off their hands upon the earth. Munster. in Deuteronomy. 8.
And that there might be store of water running up and down, they powered fresh
water on them when they lifted up their hands, and powered water twice upon them
when they hanged them down. Unto this kind of washing Theophylact seems to
have reference, when he says that the Pharisees did Theophylact. in Marc. 7. 3.
cubitaliter lauare, wash up to their elbowes. Lastly, Bezain maioribus suis
annotationibus, Marc. 7. 3.
others interpret (...), to be the fist, or hand closed, and the manner of
washing hereby denoted to be by rubbing one hand closed in the palm or hollow
of the other. All imply a diligent and accurate care in washing: the
ceremonious washing by lifting up the hands and hanging them down, best
expresses the superstition, which only was aimed at in the reproof, though
all these sorts of washing, to the Pharisees were superstitious, because they
made it not a matter of outward decency and civility, but of religion, to eat
with washed or unwashed hands, urging such a necessity hereof Drusius praeterit.
Matt. 15. in addend. and Buxtorf. synag. Iuda^. ca. 6. pa. 193. ex Talmud.
, that in case a man may come to some water, but not enough both to wash and to
drink, he should rather choose to wash than to drink, though he die with
thirst. And it was deemed amongst them, as great a sin, to eat with unwashed
hands, as to commit fornication. This tradition of washing hands, though it
were chiefly urged by the Pharisees, yet all the Jews maintained it, as
appears by the places quoted.

We may observe three sorts of washing of hands in use among the Jews. 1.
Pharisaicall and superstitious, this was reproved. 2. Ordinary for outward
decency, this was allowed. The third in token of innocence, this was
commanded the Elders of the neighbor cities in case of murder, Deuteronomy. 21. 6. It
was practiced by Pilate, Matt. 27. 24. and alluded unto by David, I will wash
my hands in innocence, so will I compass thine altar, Psalm. 26. 6.

2. When they came from the market they washed, Marc. 7. 4. The reason thereof
was, because they there having to do with diverse sorts of people, unawares
they might be polluted. The word used by S. Mark is, (...), they baptized
themselves: It implies the washing of their whole body. And it seems that
those Pharisees who were more zealous than others, did thus wash themselves
always before dinner. The Pharise marvelled that Christ had not first washed
himself before dinner, Luke 11. 38. Unto this kind of superstition S. Peter
is thought to have inclined, when he said, Lord not my feet only, but also the
hands and the head, John 13. 9. Thus finding his modesty disliked, when he
refused to have his feet washed by his Lord and Master; now he leapeth into the
other extreme, as if he had said, not my feet only, but my whole body. Hence
proceeded that sect of the Hemerobaptistae, i. Daily-baptists, so called Epiph.
lib. 1. Tom. 1. cap. 17.
because they did every day thus wash themselves.

3. They washed their cups, and pots, and brazen vessels, and tables, Mark. 7.
4.

4. They held it unlawful to eat with sinners, Matt. 9. 11. yea they judged it
a kind of pollution to be touched by them, Luke 7. 39. If this man were a
Prophet, he would surely have known who, and what manner of woman this is
which touches him, for she is a sinner. Of such a people the Prophet speaks:
They said, Stand apart, come not near to me, or (as the words may be rendered)
(...) Ne attingas me.
Touch me not, for I am holier than thou, Esaias 65. 5. Scalig. de em^nd. temp.
lib. 7. Idem refert Epiphan lib. 1. Tom. 1. c. 13.
The like practice was in use among the Samaritans, who if they met any
stranger, they cried out, (...), Ne attingas, Touch not.

5. They fasted twice in the week, Luke 18. 12. Theophylact. in Luc. 18. 12.
It. Epiphan. haeres. 16.
namely, Mundayes and Thursdayes, Drusius in Luc. 18. 12.
because Moses (as they say) went up into mount Sinai on a Thursday, and came
down on a Monday.

6. They made broad their Phylacteries, and enlarged the borders of their
garments, Matthew. 23. 5. Here three things are worthy our consideration. 1. What
these Phylacteries were. 2. What was written in them. 3. Whence they were so
called. Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 1. cap. 15.
Epiphanius interprets these Phylacteries to be (...), purple studs or
flourishes wouen in their garments: as if Epiphanius had conceived the Pharisees
garment to be like that which the Roman Senators were wont to wear, termed, by
reason of those broad studs and works wouen in it, Laticlauium: but seeing that
these phylacteries were additaments and ornaments, whereof there were Moses
Kotsensic. praec. affir. 22.
two sorts, the one tied to their foreheads, the other to their left hands;
hence it follows, that by these phylacteries could not be meant whole
garments, or any embossments, or flourishings wouen in the cloth. Generally
they are thought to be schedules or scorlles of parchment, whereof, as I noted,
there were two sorts, phylacteries for the head, or frontlets, reaching from
one ear to the other, and tied behind with a thong; and phylacteries for the
hand fastened upon the left arm above the elbow on the inside, that it might
be near the heart. Both these sorts were worn, not by the Pharisees only,
Maimon. in Tephillim c. 4.. 3.
but by the Sadduces also, but with this difference; The Pharisees happily for
greater ostentation wore their hand phylacteries above their elbowes: the
Sadduces on the palms of their hands. Scaliger. Trihaeres. p. 258.
Nay all the Jews wore them, our Savior Christ not excepted. The command was
general, Exodus 13. 9. It shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and
for a memorial between thine eyes. So that it is not the wearing of them
which our Savior condemned, but the making of them broad, whereby they would
appear more holy than others.

In these parchments they wrote Chrysostom. and Hieronym. in Mat. 23.
only the Decalogue or ten Commandments, in the opinion of Chrysostom and
Hierome: but generally and upon better grounds it is thought they wrote these
four sections of the Law.

1. The first began, Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, etc. Exodus 13. 2.
to the end of the 10. verse.

2. The Second began, And it shall be when the Lord shall bring thee, etc.
Exodus 13. 11. to the end of the 16 verse.

3. The third began, Hear O Israel, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. 4. and continued to the end
of the ninth verse.

4. The fourth began, And it shall come to pass; if you shall hearken
diligently, etc. Deuteronomy. 11. 13. to the end of the 21. verse.

These four Sections written in Scrolles of parchment, and folded up, they
fastened to their foreheads, and their left arms: those that were for the
forehead, they wrote in four distinct pieces of parchment Moses K^tsens. fol.
104. col. 3.
especially, and if they wrote it in one piece, the length of every section
ended in one column, and they did put them into one skin, in which there was
the proportion of four housen or receptacles, and not into four skins:
every receptacle was distinct by it self; and those that were for the hand,
were written in one piece of parchment principally, the four sections in four
columns, but if they wrote them in four pieces, it was at length, and they
put them in a skin that had but one receptacle. Munster. de praecept. affirm.
In time of persecution when they could not openly wear these Phylacteries,
then did they tie about their hands a red thread, to put them in mind of the
blood of the covenant and the law.

Touching their name, Moses calls them, (...), Totaphoth, which word has
almost as many Etymologies, as interpreters; the most probable in my opinion,
is that they should be so called per antiphrasin, from (...), Incedere, to go,
or move, because they were immovable: Hence the Septuagint translates them,
(...), Immovable ornaments. The Rabbines call them Tephillim,
Praier-ornaments: Hieronym. in Mat. 23.
Others call them Pittacia, and Pittaciola, from (...), which signifies a
piece or parcel of cloth. In the Gospel they are called (...), Phylacteries,
from (...), to conserve or keep. First, because by the use of them, the Law
was kept and preserved in memory. Secondly, because the Pharisees
superstitiously conceited, that by them as by Amulets, Spells, and Charms,
hanged about their necks, themselves might be preserved from dangers. The word
(...), signifies a Spell, and Hierome testifies, that the Pharisees had such a
conceit of these ornaments: In which place he compares the Pharisees with
certain superstitious women of his time, who carried up and down upon the like
ground, paruula euangelia; and crucis ligna, Short sentences out of the
Gospel, and relics of the cross. The same superstition has prevailed with
many of latter times, who for the same purpose hang the beginning of Scaliger.
Trihaeres. cap. 7.
Saint John's Gospel about their necks. And in the year of our Lord, 692.
certain Sorcerers were condemned for the like kind of Magic, by the name of
Council. quini Sexti, Canon. 61.
(...), that is, Phylacterians.

Thus much of their Phylacteries; in the same verse is reproved the enlarging
of their borders. Vide D. Kimchi Radic.
That which we read borders, in the Gospel, is called, Number. 15. 38. (...),
Tsitsith, Fringes: and (...), Gedilim, Deuteronomy. 22. 12. which word we likewise
translate in that place, Fringes. They were in the forequoted places commanded,
and our Savior Christ himself did wear them, Luke 8. 44. The latter Hebrew
word signifies a large fringe, which aggrauateth the superstition of the
Pharisees, in making their fringes larger, when the law had allowed them large.
This literal exposition I take to be most agreeable with the Text, though to
enlarge, in (...) apud Euripidem in Bacchis, valet, Magnifice iactare, Efferre.
Magnificare apud Varronem and Plinium cadem significatione vsurpatur. Theodor.
Beza in Mat. 23.
Greek, and Latin, sometimes signifies to boast, vaunt, or brag of a
thing, and in this sense it may very well fit a Pharise. The reason of this
command was, to put them in mind of the commandments, Number. 15. And for the
furtherance of this duty, Hieron. in Matt. 23.
they used sharp thrones in their fringes, that by the often pricking of the
thrones, whether they walked, or sat still, they might be the more mindful of
the commandments.

There were Talmud: tract. Suta. cap. 3.
seven sorts of Pharisees. 1. Pharisaeus Sichemita, He turned Pharise for
gain, as the Sichemites suffered themselves to be circumcised.

2. Pharesaeus truncatus, so called as if he had no feet, because he would
scarce lift them from the ground when he walked, to cause the greater opinion
of his meditation.

3. Pharisaeus impingens. He would shut his eyes when he walked abroad, to
avoid the sight of women, insomuch that he often dashed his head against the
walls that the blood gusht out.

4. Pharisaeus quid debeo facere, and faciam illud. He was wont to say, What
ought I do? and I will do it. Of this sort seems the man in the Gospel to
have been, who came unto Christ, saying, Good Master what shall I do? etc.
and at last replied, All these have I done from my youth upward, Luke 18.

5. Pharisaeus mortarius. So called because he wore a hat in manner of a deep
Mortar, such as they use to bray spice in, insomuch that he could not look
upward, nor of either side; only downward on the ground, and forward or
forthright.

6. Pharisaeus ex amore. Such a one as obeyed the law for the love of virtue.

7. Pharisaeus ex timore. Such a one obeyed the law for fear of punishment. He
that conformed for fear, had respect chiefly to the negative Commandments;
but he that conformed for love, especially respected the affirmative.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Sadduces.
TO omit other Etymologies of the name, there are two only which have show of
probability. Epiphan. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Some derive it from Sedek, Iusticia, as if they had bin Iusticiaries, such as
would justify themselves before Gods tribunal. (...). Theophylact.
There are that derive it and that upon more warrantable grounds: from Sadoc,
the first Author of the heresy; so that the Sadduces were so called from
Sadoc, as the Arians from Arius, the Pelagians from Pelagius, the Donatists
from Donatus, etc.

This Sadoc lived under Antigonus Sochaeus, who succeeded Simeon the Just. He
was Antigonus his Scholar, and by him brought up in the doctrine of the
Pharisees, but afterward fell from him, and broacht the heresy of the Sadduces,
which heresy because it had much affinity with that which the Heretic
Dositheus taught, hence are the Sadduces, said to Epiph. haeres. 14. It.
Tertullian. de praescript. c. 45.
be a branch or skirt of the Dositheans, though in truth Dositheus lived not
till Origin. contrae Celsum lib. 2.
after Christ; and although these two heresies did agree in many things, yet in
a maine point they differed. Epiph. haeres. 13.
Dositheus believed the resurrection, the Sadduces denied it, and by
consequence the Dositheans believed al other points necessarily flowing from
this.

The occasion of this heresy was this. When Aboth cap. 1.
Antigonus taught that we must not serve God as servants serve their masters
for hope of reward, his scholars Sadoc and Baithus understood him, as if he
had utterly denied all future rewards or recompense attending a godly life, and
thence framed their heresy, denying the resurrection, the world to come,
Angels, spirits, etc.

Their Dogmata, Canons, or Constitutions were, 1. They rejected Joseph. Antiq.
lib. 13. c. 18.
the Prophets, and all other Scripture, save only the five books of Moses.
Therefore our Savior when he would confute their error concerning the
resurrection of the dead, he proves it not out of the Prophets, but out of
Exodus 3. 6. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
Mat. 22. 32.

2. They rejected Elias in (...)
all traditions. Whence as they were called (...) Minaei, i. Heretics, in
respect of the general opposition between them and Pharisees; First, because
the Pharisees were in repute the only Catholics; Secondly, because in their
doctrine, the Pharisees were much nearer the truth than the Sadduces: So in
respect of this particular opposition, in the ones rejecting, the others urging
of traditions, the Sadduces were Drusius de trib. sect. c. 8. lib. 3. p. 130.
termed (...) Karaim, Biblers, or Scripturists.

3. They said there was no reward for good works, nor punishment for ill in the
world to come. Hence S. Paul perceiving that in the Council the one part were
Sadduces, the other Pharisees, he cried out, Of the hope, i. of the reward
expected, and of the resurrection of the dead, I am called in question, Act.
23. 6.

4. They denied the resurrection of the body, Act. 23. 8. Matt. 22. 23. Luke
20. 27.

5. They said the souls of men are Joseph. de bello lib. 2. c. 12.
annihilated at their death.

6. They denied Angels and spirits, Act. 23. 8.

7. They wholly denied Joseph. lib. 13. cap. 9.
Fate or Destiny, and ascribed all to man's Free Will.

The Samaritanes and the Sadduces are of near affinity: but yet they differ.
1. Epiphan. Tom. 1. lib. 1. haeres. 14.
The Samaritanes sacrificed at the temple built upon mount Garizim; but the
Sadduces sacrificed at Jerusalem. 2. The Samaritanes allowed no commerce with
the Jews, Ioh. 4. 9. yea the mutual hatred between the Samaritanes and the
Jews was so great, that it was not lawful for the Jews to eat or drink with
the Samaritans. How is it that thou being a Jew, ask drink of me which am a
woman of Samaria? Ioh. 4. 9. Nay whereas liberty was granted unto all nations
of the earth to become Proselytes to the Jews, so did the Jews hate the
Samaritans, that they would not suffer a Samaritan to be a Proselyte. This
appears by that solemn Drusius de trib. sect. lib. 3. cap. 11. ex Ilmedenu.
Excommunication termed Excommunicatio in secreto nominis tetragrammati: the
form thereof, as it was applied (say they) by Ezra and Nehemiah unto the
Samaritans, was thus. They assembled the whole congregation into the temple of
the Lord, and they brought 300. Priests, and 300. trumpets, and 300. books of
the Law, and as many boys, and they sounded their trumpets, and the Levites
singing cursed the Samaritans by all the sorts of Excommunication, in the
mystery of the name Iehoua, and in the Decalogue, and with the curse of the
superior house of judgment, and likewise with the curse of the inferior
house of judgment, that no Israelite should eat the bread of a Samaritan,
(whence they say, he which eats a Samaritans bread, is as he who eats
swines flesh) and let no Samaritan be a Proselyte in Israel, and that they
should have no part in the resurrection of the dead. R. Buxtorf. epist. Hebr.
p. 59.
Gersom forbade the breaking open of the letters, under the penalty of this
Excommunication. This proves what formerly was said, namely, that between the
Jews and the Samaritans there was no commerce; but the Sadduces familiarly
conuersed with the other Jews, even with the Pharisees themselves, yea both
sat together in the same Council, Act. 23. 6. Now the Samaritans and Sadduces
agreed. 1. In the reiection of all traditions. 2. In the reiection of all other
Scriptures save only the five books of Moses. 3. In the denial of the
resurrection and the consequencies, as future punishments, and rewards
according to men's works: but the Samaritans held that there were Angels, which
the Sadduces denied. For the proof of these agreements and disagreements
between them, read Epiphanius haeres. 9. and 14.

Touching the Samaritans, there are three degrees, or alterations in their
religion obseruable. 1. The strange nations transplanted by Shalmanesar into
Samaria, when Israel was carried away captive into Assyria, worshipped every
one the God of their own countries, 2 King. 17. Secondly, when they saw they
were devoured by lions, because they feared not the Lord, the King of Assyria
sent one of the Priests which was taken captive, to instruct them in the true
worship of God; which manner of worship though they received, yet they would
not lay aside their former idolatry, but made a mixture of religions,
worshipping the living God, and their own dumb Idols. Thirdly, Manasses
brother to Iaddus the high Priest in Jerusalem, being married to Sanballet the
Horonites daughter, by reason of Nehemiahs charge of putting away their strange
wives, being driven to that exigent, that he must either put away his wife, or
forgo the hope of the Priesthood; by Sanballets means he obtained leave from
Alexander the Great, to build a Temple Joseph. Antiq. lib. 11. cap. 8.
upon mount Garizim, one of the highest mountains in Samaria, whither many
other apostated Jews fled, together with Manasses being made their high
Priest; and now the Sect of Samaritanes (between whom and the Jews there was
such hatred) began, now all those forementioned errors were maintained: And of
this Hill it is, that the woman of Samaria speaks, John 4. 20. Our fathers
worshipped in this mountain, etc.

By comparing the Dogmata of the Pharisees, with these of the Sadduces, we may
perceive a manifest opposition between them, yet both these joined against
Christ, Mark 12.

This heresy though it were the grossest amongst the Jews, yet was it embraced
and maintained by some of the high Priests themselves: Gorionides cap. 29.
Ioannes Hyrcanus was a Sadducee, so were his sons Aristobulus and Alexander,
Eusebius. hist. lib. 2. c. 23. Ex Joseph. antiq. lib: 20. c. 8.
and likewise Ananus the younger, so that Moses chair was not amongst them
exempted from error, no nor heresy.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Essenes.
THe etymologies of the names Essaei, or Esseni, (i.) Essenes, are diverse; that
which I prefer is from the Syriak (...), Asa, signifying (...), to heal or
cure diseases. Joseph. de bello l. 2. c. 12. p. 786.
Hence are the men so often termed, (...), and the women amongst them, (...),
that is, Physicians. For though they gave themselves chiefly to the study of
the Bible, yet withal they studied Physic.

Of these Essenes there were two sorts, some Theorikes, giving themselves
wholly to speculation; others Practicks, laborious and painful in the daily
exercise of those handy-crafts in which they were most skillful. Of the latter
Philo treats, in his book entitled Quod omnis vir probus: Of the former, in
the book following, entitled, De vita contemplatiua.

Their Dogmata, their ordinances, or constitutions, did symbolize in many
things with Pythagoras his; where they do agree therefore, my purpose is first
to name Pythagoras his, and then to proceed on with the Essenes. They follow
thus.

The Aul. Gell. l. 1. c. 10. It. Laert in Pythag. (...).
Pythagoreans professed a communion of goods: So the Essenes, Joseph. lib. 18.
cap. 2.
they had one common purse or stock, none richer, none poorer than other; out
of this common treasury every one supplied his own wants without leave, and
administered to the necessities of others: only they might not relieve any of
their kindred without leave from their overseers. They did not buy or sell
among themselves, but each supplied the others wants, by a kind of commutatiue
bartring: yea liberty was granted to take one from another what they wanted,
without exchange. They performed offices of service inutually one to another,
for mastership and service cannot stand with communion of goods: and servants
are commonly injurious to the state of their masters, according to that, saying
of R. Gamaliel, (...) Marbe gnabad^m, Marbe gezel. (...) Aboth. c. 1.
He that multiplieth servants, multiplieth thieves. When they traveled,
besides weapons for defense, they took nothing with them; for into whatsoever
city or Village they came, they repaired to the fraternity of the Essenes, and
were there entertained as members of the same. And if we do attentively read
Josephus, we may observe that the Essenes of every city joined themselves into
one common fraternity, or College; every College had two sorts of officers:
1. Treasurers, who looked to the common stock, provided their diet, appointed
each his task, and other public necessaries. Secondly, Others who
entertained their strangers.

2. The Pythagoreans shunned Justin. lib. 20.
pleasures. Joseph. de bello lib. 2. c. 12.
So did the Essenes: to this belongs their avoiding of oil, which if any
touched unawares, they wiped it off presently.

3. The Pythagoreans Suidas It. Aelian. de varia hist. l. 12. c. 32.
garments were white: Joseph. de bello l. 2. c. 12.
So were the Essenes white also, modest, not costly, when once they put on a
suit, they never changed till it was torn or worn out.

4. The Pythagoreans forbade Laert. in vita Pythagorae.
oaths. Philo Iudaeus.
So did the Essenes, they thought him a noted liar, who could not be believed
without an oath.

5. The Pythagoreans had their Suidas, It. Laertius.
Elders in singular respect. Joseph. de bello lib. 2. c. 12.
So had the Essenes: the body, or whole company of the Essenes, were
distinguished, (...), into four ranks or orders, according to their
Senioritie, and if happily any of the superior ranks, had touched any of the
inferior, he thought himself polluted, as if he had touched an Heathen.

6. The Pythagoreans drank Suidas.
water. So did the Philo de vita contemplatiua.
Essenes only water, wholly abstaining from wine.

7. The Pythagoreans used Laertius in vita Pythag.
(...), Inanimate sacrifices: So did the Joseph. Antiq. l. 18. c. 2.
Essenes: they sent gifts, to the Temple, and did not sacrifice, but preferred
the use of their holy water before sacrifice, for which reason the other Jews
forbad them all access unto the Temple.

8. The Pythagoreans ascribed Suidas.
all things to Fate or Destiny. So did the Joseph. Antiq. lib. 13. c. 9.
Essenes. In this Aphorism all three Sects differed each from other. The
Pharisees ascribed some things to Fate, other things to man's Free Will. The
Essenes ascribed all to Fate, nothing to man's Free Will. The Sadduces wholly
denied Fate, and ascribed all things to the Free Will of man.

9. The Pythagoreans the Quinquenne hoc silentium a Pythagora auditoribus suis
indictum vocabant (...), a cohibendo sermon.
first five years were not permitted to speak in the school, but were
initiated per quinquennale silentium, Laertius in Pythagor.
and not until then suffered to come into the presence or sight of Pythagoras.
To this may be referred the Essenes silence at Table straightly observed, so that
December simul sedentibus, nemo loquitur inuitis nouem. Drusius de trib. sect. l.
4.
Drusius renders it, that ten of them sitting together, none of them spoke
without leave obtained of the nine. When any did speak, it was not their
custom to interrupt him with words, but by nods of the head, or beckonings, or
holding their finger, or shaking their heads, and other such like dumb signs
and gestures, to signify their doubtings, disliking, or approving the matter
in hand. And to the time of silence amongst the Pythagoreans, that it must be
for five years, may be referred the initiation of the Essenes, for amongst
them none were presently admitted into their society with full liberty, but
they underwent four years of trial and probation. The first year they
received Dolabellam, Joseph. de bello lib. 2. c. 12.
Perizoma, and vestem albam, a spadle with which they dug a convenient place
to ease nature, a pair of breeches, which they used in bathing or washing
themselves; a white garment, which especially that sect affected. At this time
they had their commons allowed them, but without, not in the common dining
hall. The second year they admitted them to the participation of holy waters,
and instructed them in the use of them. Two years after, they admitted them in
full manner, making them of their corporation, after they had received an oath
truly to observe all the rules and ordinances of the Essenes. If any brake this
oath, an hundred of them being assembled together expelled him, upon which
expulsion commonly followed death within a shorttime, for none having once
entered this order, might receive alms or any meat from other; and themselves
would feed such a one only with distasteful herbs, which wasted his body, and
brought it very low; sometimes they would re-admit such a one being brought
near unto death, but commonly they suffered him to die in that misery.

10. The Essenes Philo item Joseph.
worshipped toward the Sun rising.

11. The Essenes bound themselves in their oath, to Joseph. de bal. l. 2. c. 12.
preserve the names of Angels: the phrase implies a kind of worshipping of
them.

12. They were above all others strict in the observation of the Joseph. ibid.
Sabbath day; on it they would dress no meat, kindle no fire, remove no
vessels out of their place, no nor ease nature. Philo de vita contemplat.
Yea they observed (...), every seventh week a solemn Pentecost, seven
Pentecosts every year.

13. They abstained from marriage, not that they disliked marriage in it self,
or intended an end or period to procreation; but partly in wariness of women's
intemperance, partly because they were persuaded that no woman would continue
faithful to one man. This avoiding of marriage is not to be understood
generally of all the Essenes, for they disagreed among themselves in this
point. Some were of the opinion before noted: others married for propagation.
Nihilominus autem cum tanta ipsi moderatione conueniunt, vt per triennium
explorent valetudinem foeminarum, and si constanti purgatione apparuerint
idoneae partui, ita eas in matrimonia asciscunt. Nemo tamen cum praegnante
concumbit, vt ostendant quod nuptias non voluptatis, sed liberorum causa
inierint. Thus the latter sort preserved their sect by the procreation of
children: The former sort preserved it by a kind of adoption of other men's
children, counting them as near kinsmen, and tutoring them in the rules of
their own discipline, as Josephus witnesses. Plin. hist. lib. 5. cap. 17.
Pliny adds also, that many other of the Jews when they began to be struck
in years, voluntarily joined themselves unto them, being moved thereunto,
either because of the variable state and troubles of the world, or upon
consideration of their own former licentious courses, as if they would by this
means exercise a kind of penance upon themselves.

Concerning the beginning of this sect, from whom, or when it began, it is hard
to determine. Serarius Trihaeres. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Some make them as ancient as the Rechabites, and the Rechabites to have
differed only in the addition of some rules and ordinances from the Kenites,
mentioned Judge. 1. 16. And thus by consequence the Essenes were as ancient as
the Israelites departure out of Egypt; for Iethro, Moses father in law, as
appears by the text, was a Kenite: But neither of these seems probable. For
the Kenites are not mentioned in Scripture as a distinct order or sect of
people, but as a distinct family, kindred, or nation, Number. 24. 21. Secondly,
the Rechabites, they neither did build houses, but dwelt in tents, neither did
they deal in husbandry, they sowed no seed, nor planted vineyards, nor had
any, Ier. 35. 7. The Essenes on the contrary, they dwelt not in tents, but in
houses; Joseph. antiq. l. 18. c. 2.
and they employed themselves especially in husbandry. One of the Ios.
Scaliger in Trihaeres. c. 23.
Hebrew Doctors says, that the Essenes were Nazarites; but that cannot be,
because the law enjoined the Nazarites when the time of the consecration was
out, to present themselves at the door of the Tabernacle or Temple, Number. 6.
Now the Essenes had no access to the Temple. When therefore, or from what
Author this sect took its beginning, is uncertain. The first that I find
mentioned by the name of an Essene, was one Joseph. lib. 13. c. 19.
Judas who lived in the time of Aristobulus the son of Ioannes Hyrcanus,
before our Saviors birth about one hundred years: howsoever the sect was of
greater antiquity; Joseph. lib. 13. c. 9.
for all three, Pharisees, Sadduces, and Essenes, were in Ionathans time, the
brother of Judas Maccabaeus, who was fifty years before Aristobulus. Certain
it is, that this sect continued until the days of our Savior, and after; for
Philo and Josephus speak of them, as living in their time. What might be the
reason then, that there is no mention of them in the New Testament? I answer:
First, the number of them seems not to have been great, in Philo and Josephus
his time, Philo lib. Quod omnis probus. p. 678.
about four thousand, which being dispersed in many cities, made the faction
weak, and happily in Jerusalem when our Savior lived, they were either few, or
none. Secondly, if we observe histories, we shall find them peaceable and
quiet, not opposing any, and therefore not so liable to reproof as the
Pharisees and Sadduces, who opposed each other, and both joined against Christ.
Thirdly, why might they not as well be passed over in silence in the New
Testament, (especially containing themselves quietly without contradiction of
others) as the Rechabites in the Old Testament, of whom there is mention only
once, and that obliquely, although their order continued about 300. years,
before this testimony was given of them by the Prophet Jeremy, for between
Iehu (with whom Ionadab was coetanean) and Zedekiah, Chronologers observe the
distance of so many years. Lastly, though the names of Essenes be not found
in Scripture, Vide Chemnic. exam. conc. Trident. part. quart. p. 120.
yet we shall find in Saint Paul's Epistles many things reproved; which were
taught in the school of the Essenes. Of this nature was that advice given unto
Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 23. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine. Again,
1 Timothy 4. 3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, is a
doctrine of Devils: but especially, Coloss. 2. in many passages the Apostle
seems directly to point at them. Let no man condemn you in meat and drink,
verse 16. Let no man bear rule over you, by humbleness of mind and
worshipping of Angels, verse. 18. (...); why are ye subject to ordinances?
verse. 20. The Apostle uses the word (...), which was applied by the Essenes to
denote their Ordinances, Aphorisms, or Constitutions. In the verse following
he gives an instance of some particulars. Touch not, taste not, handle not,
verse 21. Now the Junior company of Essenes might not touch their Seniors. And
in their diet, their taste was limited to bread, salt, water and hyssop. And
these ordinances they vntertooke, (...), says Philo, for the love of wisdom;
but the Apostle concludes, verse. 23. That these things had only, (...), a
show of wisdom. And whereas Philo terms the religion of the Essenes, by the
name of (...), which word signifies religious worship, the Apostle terms it
in this same verse, (...), Voluntary religion, or Will Worship: yea, where he
terms their doctrine, (...), a kind of Philosophy received from their
forefathers by tradition, Saint Paul bids them beware of Philosophy, verse
8.

We formerly observed two sorts of Essenes; Practicks, and Theoricks, both
agreed in their Aphorisms, or Ordinances; but in certain circumstances they
differed.

1. The Practicks dwelt in the cities; The Theoricks shunned the cities, and
dwelt in gardens, and solitary Villages.

2. The Practicks spent the day in manual crafts, keeping of sheep, looking
to bees, tilling of ground, etc. they were (...), Artificers; The Theoricks
spent the day in meditation, and prayers, whence they were by a kind of
excellency, by Philo termed, (...), Supplicantes.

3. The Practicks had every day their dinner and supper allowed them; the
Theoricks only their supper.

4. The Practicks had for their commons, every one his dish of Water-gruell,
and bread; The Theoricks only bread and salt: if any were of a more delicate
pallat than other, to him it was permitted to eat hyssop; their drink for
both, was common water.

Some are of opinion that these Theoricks were Christian Monks, but the
contrary appears, for these reasons:

1. In that whole book of Philo, concerning the Theoricks, there is no mention
either of Christ, or Christians, of the Evangelists, or Apostles.

2. The Theoricks in that book of Philo's, are not any new Sect of late
beginning, as the Christians at that time were, as is clearly euidenced by
Philo his own words. First, in calling the doctrine of the Essenes, (...), A
Philosophy derived unto them by tradition from their forefathers. Secondly, in
saying, Habent priscorum commentarios, qui huius sectae autores, etc.

3. The inscription of that book, is not only, (...), but also, (...): Now
Philo Philo in principio. lib. de legate. ad Caium.
elsewhere calls the whole Nation of the Jews, (...), which argues that
those Theoricks were Jews, not Christians.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Gaulonitae, and the Herodians.
OTher factions there were among the Jews, which are improperly termed Sects.
Of these there were principally two. 1. Gaulonitae. 2. Herodiani. The
Gaulonitae had their names from one Judas, who Joseph. antiq. l. 18. c. 1.
sometimes was called Judas Gaulonites, Joseph. lib. 18. c. 2.
sometimes Judas Galilaeus, of whom Gamaliel speaks, Acts 5. 37. After this
man arose up Judas of Galile, in the days of the tribute. The tribute here
spoken of, was that, made by Cyrenius, sometimes called Quirinius, the name in
Greek is one and the same, but differently read by expositors. This Cyrenius
was sent from Rome by Augustus, into Syria, and from thence came into Iudaea,
where Coponius was President, and there he raised this tax, which taxation is
unadvisedly by some confounded with that mentioned, Luke 2. 1. Both were raised
under Augustus, but they differed. First, this was only of Syria and Iudaea;
that in Saint Luke was universal of the whole world. Secondly, this was when
Archelaus, Herod's son, was banished into Vienna, having reigned nine years;
that under Herod the Great: whence there is an obseruable emphasis, in that
Saint Luke says, it was the first taxing, having reference unto this second.
Joseph. loco superius citato.
The occasion of this faction was thus, When Cyrenius leauied this tax, and
seized upon Archelaus Herod's sons goods, then arose this Judas opposing this
tribute, and telling the people, that tribute was a manifest token of
servitude, and that they ought to call none Lord, but only him who was Lord of
Lords, the God of heaven and earth. Whence those that adhered unto him, were
called Gaulonitae: they were also called Galileans. Oecumenius, Act. 5. 37. It.
Theophylact. Luc. 13. 1.
It was their blood that Pilat mixed with their sacrifices, Luke 13. 1. For
Pilat had not authority over the nation of the Galileans. The Theophylact. in
Luc. 13.
reason of this mixture is thought to be, because the Galileans forbad
sacrifices to be offered for the Roman Empire, or for the safety of the
Emperor, whereupon Pilat being incensed with anger, slew them, whiles they were
Joseph. lib. 7. de bello cap. 28. p. 985.
sacrificing. To this faction belonged those murderers termed (...), mentioned
Act. 21. 38.

Concerning the Herodians, those that number them among Heretics, make the
heresy to consist in two things. First, in that they took Herod the Great for
the promised Messiah, because in his reign, he being a stranger, the Scepter
was departed from Judah, which was the promised time of the Messiah his
coming. Secondly, they honored him with superstitious solemnities, annually
performed upon his birthday. Of Herod his birthday the Poet speaks -- Cum
Herodis venere dies, vnctaque senestra
Dispositae pinguem nebulam vomuere lucernae,
Portantes violas, rubrumque amplexa catinum,
Cauda natat thynni, tumet alta fidelia vino.
Pers. Sat. 1.

Now whether this latter may be referred to Herod the Great, I much doubt,
because I find not any author among the ancients to speak of Herod the great
his birth day: It was another Herod, Tetrarch of Galile, otherwise called
Antipas, whose birth day, we read celebrated Mark 6. 21. The former point,
that the Herodians received Herod as their Messiah, though it has Epiph.
haeres. 20. and Theophylact. Matt. 22. 16. and alij plures.
many grave Authors auouching it, yet Hieronym. Matt. 22. 17.
others justly question the truth thereof; for if the Herodians were Jews, (as
most think) how then could they imagine, that Herod a stranger, could be the
Messiah, seeing that it was so commonly preached by the Prophets, and known
unto the people, that the Messiah mu^ be a Jew borne, of the tribe of Judah,
and of the house of David?

Others say, Theodor. Beza. Matt. 22. 16.
that the Herodians were certain flatterers in Herod his Court, varying and
changing many points of their religion with Herod their King.

To omit many other conjectures utterly inprobable, I incline to Saint Hierome,
whose opinion is, Hieronym. Matt. 22. 17.
that the Herodians were those, who stood stiffly for tribute to be paid to
Caesar. It concerned Herod, who at first received his Crown from Caesar, to
further Caesar's tribute, not only in way of thankfulness, but also it way of
policy, to prevent a possible deposing or disceptring, for it was in Caesar's
power to take away the Crown again, when pleased him. Now in respect that
Herod sought to kill Christ, and the Herodians with the Pharisees took counsel
against him, unto this our Savior might have reference, saying, Mark. 8. 15.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod, viz. of their
contagious doctrine, his foxelike subtilties.

THE SECOND BOOK treats of Places.
CHAP. I.
Their Temple.
WHen the Israelites came out of Egypt, Moses was commanded to build a
Tabernacle for the place of Gods public worship. Afterward when they were
settled in the promised land, then Solomon was commanded to build a Temple.

These two shadowed the difference between the Jews Synagogue, and the
Christian Church. The Tabernacle was moveable, and but for a time; The Temple
fixed, and permanent: the state of the Jews vanishing, to continue in their
generations; the state of Christians durable, to continue unto the worlds end.
More principally it shadoweth forth the state of the Church militant here on
earth, and triumphant in heaven: unto both the Prophet David alludeth* Lord who
shall soiourne in thy Tabernacle? Who shall rest in thine holy mountain? Psalm.
15. 1.

There were in the same tract of ground three hills, Sion, Moria, and mount
Caluarie. On Sion was the City and Castle of David, on Moria was the Temple,
and on mount Caluarie Christ was crucified. Genebrard. in Chronog. lib. 1. Anno
Mundi 3146.
But all these three were generally called by the name of Sion, whence it is,
that though the Temple were built on Moria, yet the Scripture speaks of it
commonly as if it were on mount Sion.

In the Temple there are these three things considerable: 1. The Sancta
Sanctorum, the Holy of Holies, answerable to our Quire in our Cathedral
Churches. Secondly, the Sanctum, the Sanctuary, answerable to the body of the
Church. Thirdly, the Atrium, the Court, answerable to the Churchyard.

In the Holy of Holies there were the golden censer, and the Arc of the
Testament, Heb. 9. 4.

In Sunt qui illud (...) apud Apostolum Heb. 9. 4. referunt ad (...), vt dicant
in tabernaculo secundo, quod appellant Sancta Sanctorum, fuisse vrnam mannae,
and virgam Aaronis, tabulasque foederis, videl. vrnam and virgam ante Arcam
(ita Moses Kotsensis 210. 1.) tabulas autem in Arca.
the Arc there were three things: 1. The pot of Manna; 2. Aarons rod that
budded; 3. The tables of the Testament, Heb. 9. 4. Thus they were in Moses his
time, but afterward in the days of Solomon only the tables of the law were
found in the Arc, 1 King. 8. 9.

The cover of this Arc was called (...), the Propitiatory, or Mercy seat,
because it covered and hid the law, that it appeared not before God to plead
against man. It was a type of Christ, who likewise is termed (...), our
Propitiatory, Romans 3. 25. and (...), our propitiation, 1 John 2. 2. At each end
of the Mercy seat stood a golden Chenub, each Cherub stretched forth his wings,
and from between them as from an Oracle, God gave his answer, Exodus 25. 22.
Hence it is, that the Lord is said to sit between the Cherubims, Psalm. 99. 1.
The positure of the Cherubims was such, that their faces were each toward the
other, but both looking down toward the Mercy seat; they fitly shadowed out
the people of the Jews, and Christians, both looking toward each other, but
both expecting salvation in Christ only.

In the Sanctuary, there was the incense altar in the middle, and the table,
with the twelve loaves of shewbread on it, on the one side, and the
candlestick on the other. The incense altar was a type of our prayers, Psalm.
141. 2. And that this Altar must be once every year sprinkled with the blood
of the sacrifice by the high Priest, Exodus 30. 10. it teaches that our very
prayers, except they be purified by the blood of Christ, they are unavailable
before God. The twelve loaves were a type of the twelve Tribes, and the
candlestick a type of the word of God. In them all we may see the necessity
of both ordinances required, Prayer and Preaching, if we would be presented
acceptable unto the Lord: The Candlestick, was a type of Preaching; Incense,
of Prayer.

In Moses his Tabernacle, there was but one table, and one candlestick: in
Solomon's Temple, there were ten Tables, and ten Candlesticks; as likewise in
the Court of the Tabernacle, there was but one brazen Lauer, in the Court of
the Temple there were ten, and another great vessel wherein the Priests
washed; in the Tabernacle there were but two Silver Trumpets, in the Temple
there were an hundred and twenty Priests sounding Trumpets.

The Courts of the Temple at first were but two, Atrium sacerdotum, the Priests
Court; and Atrium populi, the Peoples Court.

In the Priests Court, were the brazen Altar for sacrifices, and the Lauer for
the washing, both of the Priests, and the sacrifices. The Lauer, and the Altar
situated in the same court, signified the same as the water and blood issuing
out of Christ's side, namely, the necesary concurrence of these two graces in
all that shall be saved, Sanctification, and Justification: Sanctification
intimated by the Lauer and Water: Justification by the Altar, and blood.

The Court for the Priests, and the Court for the people, Joseph. l. 8. cap. 3.
were separated each from other, by a wall of three Cubits high.

The Court for the people was sometimes called the outward court, sometimes the
Temple, sometimes Solomon's Porch, because it was built about with porches, into
which the people retired in rainy weather, it had Solomon's name, either to
continue his memory, or because the porches had some resemblance of that porch
which Solomon built before the Temple, 1 Kings 6. 3. Jesus walked in the
Temple, in Solomon's porch, John 10. 23. All the people ran unto the porch,
which was called Solomon's Act. 3. 11. That is, this outward Court.

In the midst of the peoples Court Solomon made a brazen skaffold for the
King, 2 Chronicles. 6. 13.

This Court for the people went round about the Temple, and though it was one
entire court in the days of Solomon, yet afterward it was divided by a low
wall, so that the men stood in the inward part of it, and the women in the
outward. This division is thought to have been made in Iehosaphats time, of
whom we read that he stood in the house of the Lord, before the new Court, 2 Chronicles. 20. 5. that is, before the women's Court.

There was an ascent of fifteeene steps or staiers between the women's Court,
and the men's, R. David Kimchi. Psa. 120.
upon these steps the Levites sung those fifteen Psalms immediately following
the one hundred nineteenth, upon each step one Psalm, whence those Psalms are
entitled Psalmi graduales, Songs of degrees.

In the women's Court stood their treasury, or alms box, as appears by the
poor widows casting in her two mites into it, Luke 21. 1. In Hebrew it is
termed (...), Korban, the chest of oblations, the word signifies barely an
oblation or offering, and accordingly Saint Luke 21. 4. faith, they all have of
their superfluities cast into the offerings, that is, into the Korban, or chest
of offerings. In Greek it was termed (...), when (...) comes the Latin. word
Gazophylacium, A Treasury. That set up by Iehoiada, 2 King. 12. 9. seems to
have been different from this, and to have been extraordinary, only for the
repairing of the Temple, for that stood beside the Altar in the Priests Court,
and the Priests, not the parties that brought the gift, put it into the Chest.
Sometimes the whole Court was termed Gazophylacium, a Treasury. These words
spoke Jesus in the treasury, John 8. 20. It is worth our noting, that the
Hebrew word (...), Tsedaka, signifying alms, signifies properly Justice; and
thereby is intimated, that the matter of our alms, should be goods justly
gotten; and to this purpose they called their alms box (...), Kupha Schel
Tsedaka, the chest of justice, and upon their alms box they wrote Buxtorf. de
abbreu. in (...).
this abbreuiature, (...), A gift in secret pacifieth anger, Prou. 21. 14.

In Herod's Temple there were Joseph. lib. 2. contra Apion. p. 1066.
four Porches, the meaning is four Courts, one for the Priests, another for
men, another for women, and a fourth for such as were unclean by legal
pollutions, and strangers. This outmost court for the unclean and strangers,
was separated from the women's court, with a stone wall of three Cubits high,
which wall was adorned with certain pillars of equal distance, bearing this
inscription: (...). In locum sanctum transire aliemgena non debet. Joseph. de
bell. lib. 6. c. 6.
Let no stranger enter into the holy place.

The Temple at Jerusalem was thrice built. First, by Solomon: Secondly, by
Zerobabel: Thirdly, by Herod. The first was built in seven years, 1 Kings 6.
37. The second in 46. years: It was begun in the second year of King Cyrus,
Esr. 3. 8. It was finished in the Joseph. antiq. lib. 11. c. 4.
ninth year of Darius Hystaspis. The years rise thus, Years. Cyrus reigned
30 Cambyses 08 It was finished in the year of Darius Hystaspis 09



One year deducted from Cyrus his reign, there remain 46.

Herod's Temple was finished in Joseph antiq. l. 15. cap. vlt.
eight years. It is greatly questioned among Divines, of which Temple that
speech of the Jews is to be understood, John 2. 20. Forty and six years was
this Temple a building: Many interpret it of the second Temple, saying, that
Herod did only repair that, not build a new: but these disagree among
themselves in the computation, and the Scripture speaks peremptorily, that
the house was finished in the sixth year of the reign of King Darius, Ezr. 6.
15. and Josephus speaks of Herod's building a new Temple, plucking down the
old. Vid. Hospinian. de Orig. Templ. c. 3.
It seems therefore more probable, that the speech is to be understood of
Herod's Temple, which though it were but eight years in building, yet at this
time when this speech was used, it had stood precisely forty six years, Vide
supputationem Funccianam anno 3947.
for so many years there are precisely between the eighteenth year of Herod's
reign (at which time the Temple began to be built) and the year of Christ
his Baptism, when it is thought that this was spoken, all which time the
Temple was more and more adorned, beautified, and perfected, in which respect
it may be said to be so long building.

The ancient men are said to weep, when they beheld the second, because the
glory thereof was far short of Solomon's, Ezr. 3. 12. It was inferior to
Solomon's Temple; First, in respect of the building, because it was lower and
meaner. Hospinian. ex Talmudistis de Orig. Templ. cap. 3.
Secondly, in respect of the vessels, being now of brass, which before were of
pure gold. Thirdly, in respect of five things, lost and wanting in the second
Temple, all which were in the first. First, there was wanting the D. Kimchi in
Hagg. 1. 8. Eadem scribit Rabbi Solomon ibid.
Ark of God; Secondly, Vrim and Thummim, God gave no answer by these two, as
in former times; Thirdly, fire, which in the second Temple never descended from
heaven to consume their burnt offerings, as it did in the first: Fourthly, the
glory of God appearing between the Cherubims, this they termed (...),
Schecina, the habitation, or dwelling of God, and hereunto the Apostle
alludeth, In him dwells the fullness of the godhead bodily, Coloss. 2. 9.
Bodily, that is, not in clouds and ceremonies as between the Cherubims, but
essentially. Lastly, the Holy Ghost, namely, enabling them for the gift of
Prophecy; for between Malachie and John the Baptist, there stood up no
Prophet, but only they were instructed per filiam vocis, which they termed
(...), Bath Kol, an Echo from heaven, and this was the reason why those
disciples, Acts 19. 2. said, We have not so much as heard whether there be an
Holy Ghost.

Here it may be demanded how that of the Prophet Haggai is true; The glory of
this last house shall be greater then the first, Hag. 2. 10. I answer, Herod's
Temple which was built in the place of this, was of statelier building than
Solomon's, and it was of greater glory, because of Christ his preaching in it.

Herod's Temple was afterward so set on fire by Titus his soldiers, Genebrard.
Chro. lib. 2. anno Christi 69.
that it could not be quenched by the industry of man: Theodoret. l. 3. cap.
11. Sozomenus l. 5. cap. 19, 20, 21.
at the same time the Temple at Delphi, being in chief request among the
heathen people, was utterly overthrown by earthquakes and thunderbolts from
heaven, and neither of them could ever since be repaired. The concurrence of
which two miracles evidently shows, that the time was then come, when God
would put an end both to Jewish Ceremonies, and Heathenish Idolatry, that the
kingdom of his Son might be the better established.

CHAP. II.
Their Synagogues, Schools, and Houses of Prayer.
THe word Synagogue is from the Greek (...), to gather together, and is
applied to all things whereof there may be a collection, as (...), copia
lactis; (...), collectio eorum quae sunt ad bellum necessaria. God stands in
synagoga Deorum, in the assembly of Judges; but Synagogues are commonly taken
for housen dedicated to the worship of God, wherein it was lawful to pray,
preach, and dispute, but not to sacrifice. In Hebrew it was called (...), Beth
Hacueseth, the house of Assembly. The Temple at Jerusalem, was as the
Cathedral Church; The Synagogues, as petty parish Churches belonging thereunto.

Concerning the time when Synagogues began, it is hard to determine. It is
probable that they began when the Tribes were settled in the promised land: The
Temples being then too far distant for those, which dwelt in remote places,
it is likely that they repaired unto certain Synagogues in stead of the
Temple. That they were in David's time appears; They have burnt all the
Synagogues of God in the land, Psalm. 74. 8. And Moses of old time had in every
city, them that preached him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day,
Act. 15. 21.

In Jerusalem there were Sigonius de rep. Hebr. l. 2. c. 8.
four hundred eighty Synagogues, beside the Temple, partly for Jews, partly
for strangers; one for strangers was called the Synagogue of the Libertines,
Act. 6. 9. Whence it had that name, whether from the Roman Libertines, such as
had served for their freedom, being opposite to the Ingenui, those that were
freeborn (for many of those Libertines became Proselytes, and had their Philo
in legate. ad Caium.
Synagogues) or whether it were from Vide Tremel. Act. 6. 9.
Lubar, signifying an high place (for as their Temple, so their Synagogues and
Schools were bu^t on hills, and high places) because it is said, Proverbs 1.
21. Wisdom calls in high places. I leave to the judgment of the Reader.

Out of Jerusalem, in other cities and provinces were many Synagogues: there
were Synagogues in Galile, Mat. 4. 23. Synagogues in Damascus, Acts 9. 2.
Synagogues at Salamis, Acts 13. 5. Synagogues at Antiochia, Acts 13. 14. Yea
their tradition is, that Maimon. in Tephilla c. 11.. 1.
Wheresoever ten men of Israel were, there ought to be built a Synagogue.

Their Synagogues had Buxtorf. de abbreuiatur. page 73. 181. 174.
many inscriptions: over the gate was written that of the Psalm. 118. 20. This
is the gate of the Lord, the righteous shall enter into it. In the walls these,
and the like sentences, Remember thy Creator, and enter into the house of the
Lord thy God in humility. And, Prayer without attention, is like a body
without a soul. And, Silence is commendable in time of prayer.

As the Courts of the people before the Temple, were distinguished by a wall
into two rooms, the one for men, the other for the women: so in the
Synagogues, the women were separated from the men, Talmud. in tract. Suta cap.
vlt. vide Buxtorf. Synag. c. 9. p. 240.
by a partition of lattice, or wireworke.

In the Synagogues the Scribes ordinarily taught, but not only they, for
Christ himself taught in them, etc. He that gave liberty to preach there, was
termed (...), The Ruler of the Synagogue. There was also a Minister who gave
the book unto the Preacher, and received it again, after the text had been
read. Christ closed the book and gave it again to the Minister, Luke 4. 20.
This is probably him whom they called (...), Sheliach Tsibbur, the Minister, or
Clerk of the Synagogue.

Their Schools were different from their Synagogues. Paul having disputed for
the space of three months in the Synagogue, because diverse believed not, but
spoke evil of that way, he departed from them, and separated the disciples,
disputing daily in the School of one Tyrannus, Act. 19. 8, 9, 10.

Their School sometimes is called (...) Beth, an house simply, as appears by
that saying, Drusius de tribus sect. l. 2. c. 10.
Octodecim res de quibus contentio fuit inter donum Sammai, and domum Hillel,
ne Elias quidem abolere posset. Those eighteen matters controuersed between
the house of Sammai, and the house of Hillel, Elias himself could not decide:
that is, between their two Schools. Sometimes it is called (...) Beth
hamidrasch, an house of subtle and acute exposition. Here points were more
exactly, and punctually discussed, than in the Synagogue, or Temple; whence
they held it a profounder place for exposition, than the Temple: to this
purpose tend those sayings, Maimon. Tephilla. c. 11.. 14.
They might turn a Synagogue into a School, but not a School into a
Synagogue, for the sanctity of a School, is beyond the sanctity of a
Synagogue. And that grouth from virtue, to virtue, Psalm. 84. 7. Paraphrast.
Chal. in hunc locum.
They interpret, a kind of promotion or degree, in removing from their Temple
to their School. In their Temple, their Sermons were as it were Ad populum, in
their Schools, Ad clerum.

As they had Synagogues, so likewise Schools, in every city, and province,
and these were built also upon hills. There is mention of the hill Moreh,
Judges. 7. 1. that is, the Hill of the Teacher.

The Masters when they taught their Scholars, were said to give; Give unto the
wise, and he will be wiser, Prou. 9. 9.

The Scholars when they learned any thing, were said to receive it: Hear my
son and receive my words, Prou. 4. 10. Hence is that of the Apostle, This is
a true saying, and by all means worthy to be received, 1 Timothy 1. 15. that is,
learned: the like phrases of speech are in use among the -- Da si grave non
est. Hor. l. 2. satyr. 8. Sed tamen iste De^^s qui sit, da Tytere nobis. Virg.
Bucol. Accipe nunc Danaum infidias. -- Virg. Aeneid. l. 2.
Latins.

Whether their Oratories, or places of prayer called Proseuchae, were different
places from their Schools, or Synagogues, I have not yet learned. That some of
these were without the city, that proves nothing, for so might Synagogues,
and Schools too. Epiphanius treats of these Epiphan. Tom. 2. l. 3. c. 80.
Oratories, but there he speaks not one word to show the lawfulness of
civil businesses to be done in them: could that be proved, a difference would
easily be shown. Some say they were Beza Act. 16. 13.
Synagogues, others Philo Iud. de vita Mosis. p. 530.
Schools. Of this house of prayer, mention is made Acts 16. 13. in which Saint
Paul sat down and spoke unto the women, which gesture intimates rather
preaching than praying: true, all gesture was in use for prayer, standing,
kneeling, sitting; Abraham stood before the Lord, Genesis 18. 22. that is, he
prayed. The Publican stood a far off and prayed, Luke 18. 13. whence by way
of proverb they said, R. Judah in lib. Musar. vid. Drus. praet. Mat. 6. 5.
Sine stationibus non subsisterit mundus, Were it not for standing, the world
could not stand. Steven kneeled, Acts 7. 60. David sat before the Lord and
said, 2 Samuel 7. 18. yet sitting, when the speech is to the people, not to the
Lord, implies preaching, not prayer. It is probable that as at the gate of the
Temple, so at the gate of these Oratories, the poorer sort of people assembled
to expect alms, whence some use the word Qua te quaero proseucha? Iuuen. Sat.
3.
Proseucha, to signify an hospital.

The Caninius de locis N. Testam. c. 5. p. 38.
Talmudists taxed the peoples negligence in prayer, saying, they used three
sorts of Amen, and all faulty. A faint Amen, when prayed without feruency. A
hasty Amen, when they said Amen before the prayer was done. A lazy Amen, when
they pronounced it at length, as if they were a sleep, dividing the word
A-men. The first they termed (...), Iethoma, pupillum. The second (...),
Chetupha, Surreptitium. The third (...), Ketugna, Sectile, quasi in duas parts
sectum per oscitantiam.

CHAP. III.
Of the Gates of Jerusalem.
THe gates of the whole circuit of the Sheindler. pentaglot.
wall about Jerusalem were 9. The sheepe-gate, Nehem. 3. 1. This was near the
Temple, and through it wear lead the sheep which were to be sacrificed,
being washed in the poole Bethesda near the gate. The fish-gate, Neh. 3. 3.
before this Judas is thought to have hanged himself: Stukius conuiu. lib. 2.
c. 11.
Some think that these two gates, and likewise the horse-gate, Nehem. 3. 28.
were so called, because they were in manner of three several market places,
and at the one gate, sheep, at the other, fish, and at the third, horses were
sold. The oldgate, was so called, because it was supposed to have remained from
the time of the Iebusites, and not to have been destroyed by the Assyrians, it
was near Caluarie, and without this gate Christ was crucified. Concerning the
other gates little is spoken.

Touching the gates of the Temple, there were R. Judah in l. Musar. vid. dru^^i
praeterit. Joan. 9. 22.
two of principal note, both built by Solomon, the one for those that were new
married; the other for mourners, and excommunicate persons. The mourners were
distinguished from the excommunicate persons, by having their lip covered with
a skirt of their garment: none entered that gate with their lip uncovered, but
such as were excommunicate. Now the Israelites, which on the Sabbath days sat
between those gates, said unto the new married, He, whose name dwells in
this house, glad thee with children; unto the mourner, He, which dwells in
this house, glad and comfort thee; unto the excommunicate, He, which dwells
in this house, move thy heart to hearken to the words of thy fellows.

Among the Jews, the gates were places of chiefest strength, so that they
being taken, or defended, the whole city was taken or defended: and they were
chief places of jurisdiction, for in them, Judges were wont to sit, and to
decide controversies, hence proceeded those phrases: The gates of hell shall
not prevail against etc. And Thy seed shall possess the gates of his enemies.

CHAP. IV.
Of their groves, and high places.
THe ancient Heathens did not only not build Temples, Hospin. de Orig. Templ.
p. 1.
but they held it utterly unlawful so to do. The reason of this might be
because they thought no Temple spacious enough for the Sun, which was their
chief God. Hence came that saying, Alex. ab Alex. l. 2. c. 22.
Mundus vniuersus est templum Solis; The whole world is a Temple for the Sun.
Moreover they thought it unfit to streighten, and confine the supposed
infiniteness of their fancied Deities, within walls, and therefore when after
times had brought in the use of Temples, yet their God Terminus, and diverse
others of their Gods were worshipped in Temples open roofed, which were
therefore called (...); This I take to be the reason, why they made choice of
hills, and mountains, as the conuenientest places for their Idolatry. These
consecrated hills, are those high places, which the Scripture so often forbids.
Afterward, as the number of their Gods increased: so the number of their
consecrated hills was multiplied, from which their Gods and Goddesses took
their names, as Mercurius Cyllenius, Venus Erycina, Jupiter Capitolinus. At
length to beautify these holy hills, the places of their idolatrous worship,
they beset them with trees, and hence came the consecration of groves, and
woods, from which their Idols many times were named. Populus Alcidae,
gratissima vitis Iaccho, Formosae myrtus Veneri, sua Laurea Phoeb^. Virg.
Eclog. 7.
. At last, some choice and select trees, began to be consecrated. Plin. not.
hist. lib. 16. cap. 44.
Those French Magi, termed Dryadae, worshipped the Oak, in Greek termed
(...), and thence had their names. The Etrurians worshipped an Holme tree: And
Maximus Tyrius Sermon. 38. fol. 225. edit. Steph.
amongst the Celtae, a tale Oak was the very Idol, or image of Jupiter.

Among the Israelites, this Idolatry began under the Judges, Othniel, and Ehud,
Judges 3. 7. and at the last it became so common in Israel, that they had
peculiar Priests, whom they termed Prophets of the grove, 1 King. 18. 19. and
Idols of the grove, that is, peculiar Idols, unto whom their groves were
consecrated, 2 King. 21. 7. 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. As Christians in the consecration
of their Churches, make special choice of some particular Saints, by whose
names they call them, as Saint Peter's Church, Saint Paul's, Saint Andrews, etc.
So they consecrated their groves unto particular Idols, whence in profane
authors, we read of Diana Nemorensis, Diana Arduenna, Albunea Dea, all
receiving their names from the groves in which they were worshipped: yea the
Idol it self is sometimes called by the name of a grove: Josiah brought out
the grove from the house of the Lord, 2 King. 23. 6. It is probable, that in
this Idol was pourtraied the form and similitude of a grove, and thence was
called a grove, as those silver similitudes of Dianaes Temple, made by
Demetrius, were termed Temples of Diana, Act. 19. 24.

CHAP. V.
Their cities of Refuge.
THese places of Refuge, appointed by God, differed from those of Hercules, and
Romulus, and other Heathens; because God allowed safety only to those, who
were guiltless in respect of their intention: but the others were common
sanctuaries, as well for the guilty as the guiltless. If any man did
fortuitously, or by chance kill another man, in such a case liberty was granted
unto the offender to fly; at first unto the Altar, for refuge, as is implied by
that text of Scripture, If any man come presumptuously upon his neighbor, to
slay him with guile, thou shall take him from mine Altar, Exodus 21. 14. Yea we
may conjecture this custom of refuge, to have continued in force always by
the practice of Ioab, 1 Kings 2. 28. Notwithstanding, least the Altar might be
too far distant from the place, where the fact might be committed, it is
probable, that therefore God ordained certain Asyla, or cities of refuge,
which for the same reason, are thought to have been R. Salom. Iarch^ Deuteronomy. 19.
3.
equally distant one from the other in Canaan. These cities were in number six;
Bezer of the Reubenites country; Ramoth in Gilead of the Gadites; and Golan in
Bashan, of the Manassites: These three Moses separated beyond Jordan, Deuteronomy. 4.
41. 43. The other three appointed by Joshua, in the land of Canaan, were Cadesh
in Galile in mount Naphtali; Shechem in Ephraim; and Kirath-arba (which is
Hebron) in the mountain of Judah, Josh. 20. 7. Three other cities of like
nature, God promised the Israelites, upon condition of their obedience, after
their coasts were enlarged, but it seems their disobedience hindered the
accomplishment thereof, for Scripture mentions not the fulfilling of it.

Concerning these cities, the Hebrews note from these words, Thou shall prepare
the way, Deuteronomy. 19. 3. That the Senate, or Magistrates in Israel, were bound to
prepare the ways to the cities of Refuge, and Maimon. in Rotsach. c. 8.. 5.
to make them fit, and broad, and to remove out of them all stumbling blocks
and obstacles; and they suffered not any hill or dale to be in the way, nor
water-streames, but they made a bridge over it, that nothing might hinder him
that fled thither. And the breadth of the way to the cities of Refuge, was not
less than thirty two Cubits, and at the partitions of the ways, they set up
in writing, Refuge, Refuge: that the manslayer might know and turn
thitherward. On the fifteenth of the month Adar, or February, every year, the
Magistrates sent out messengers to prepare the ways.

Furthermore it was provided, that two or three wise men should be employed,
to persuade the Auenger of blood, if happily he did pursue the manslayer on the
way, that he should offer no violence, until the cause were heard and
examined. The manner of examination was thus, the consistory or bench of
Justices who lived in that quarter, where the murder was committed, Paul. Fag.
Number. 35. 6.
placed the party being brought back from the city of Refuge, in the court or
judgment Hall, and diligently enquired and examined the cause, who if he were
found guilty of voluntary murder, then was he punished with death, but if
otherwise, the fact were found casual, then did they safely conduct the party
back again to the city of Refuge, where he enjoyed his liberty, not only
within the walls of the city, but within certain territories and bounds of the
city, being confined to such and such limits, until the death of the high
Priest, that was in those days, at what time it was lawful for the offender
to return and come unto his own city, and unto his own house, even unto the
city from whence he fled, Josh. 20. 6. By this means the offender, though he
was not punished with death, yet he lived for the time a kind of exile for his
own humiliation, and for the abatement of his wrath, who was the Auenger of
blood. Masius in Ios. cap. 20.
The Areopagitae had a proceeding against casual manslaughter, not much
unlike, punishing the offender (...), with an years bannishment: why the time
of this exilement was limited to the death of the high Priest at that time, is
not agreed upon by expositors. But it is most probably thought, that the
offender was therefore confined within that city, as within a prison, during
the high Priests life, Masius ibid.
because the offense did most directly strike against him, as being amongst men
(...), ac princeps sanctitatis, the chief God on earth.

THE THIRD BOOK TREATS OF DAYS, and Times.
CHAP. I.
Their Days, Hours, Weeks, and Years.
BEfore we treat of their feasts, it will be needful by way of Preface, to
understand somewhat concerning the divisions of their days, hours, weeks,
etc.

Their day was twofold: Natural, containing day and night, and consisting of
twenty four hours: or Artificial, beginning at Sun rising, and ending at
Sun set. Of this is that, Are there not twelve hours in the day? Ioh. 11. 9.

The Natural day was again twofold. Civil, a working day, which was destined
for civil businesses and works: this began at Sun rising, and held till the
next Sun rising, Matt. 28. 1. or Sacred, a festival or holiday, destined for
holy exercises: this began at Sun set, and continued till the next Sun set.

Their night was divided into four quarters, or greater hours, termed four
watches, each watch containing three lesser hours. The first they called Caput
vigiliarum, the beginning of the watches, Lament. 2. 19. The second, was the
middle watch, Judges 7. 19. not so termed, because there were only three
watches, as Drus. Iudic. 7. 19.
Drusius would persuade, but because it dured till midnight: The third watch
began at midnight, and held till three of the clock in the morning. If he come
in the second, or third Watch, Luke 12. 38. The last, called the morning Watch,
Exodus 14. 24. began at three of the clock, and ended at six in the morning.
In the fourth Watch of the night, Jesus went out unto them, Matt. 14. 25. These
watches also were called by other names, according to that part of the night
which closed each watch. The first was termed (...), The Enen. The second
(...), Midnight. The third, (...), Cock-Crowing. And the fourth, (...), The
Dawning. Ye know not when the Master of the house will come, at Even, or at
Midnight, or at Cockcrowing, or at the Dawning, Mark. 13. 35.

The day was likewise divided into four quarters, as appears by the parable
of the Laborers hired into the vineyard, Mat. 20. The first quarter began at
six of the clock in the morning, and held till nine. The second quarter ended
at twelve of the clock. The third quarter at three in the afternoon. The
fourth quarter at six of the night. The first quarter was called the third
hour, verse. 3. The second quarter the sixth hour, verse 5. The third quarter
the ninth hour, verse. 5. The last quarter the eleventh hour, verse. 6.

Where note, that the three first quarters, had their names from that hour of
the day, which closed the quarter (for they began the count of their lesser
hours, from six a clock in the morning, and our 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. was their 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.) only the last
was called the eleventh hour by our Savior Christ; whereas among the common
people, it either was called, or should have been called by proportion with
the rest, the twelfth hour; to intimate unto us, that though God in his mercy
accept laborers into his vineyard eleven hours of the day, yet he seldom
calls any at the twelfth, for that is rather an hour to discharge servants
than to admit new.

Some expositors finding mention of the dawning of the day in this parable,
verse 1. Erat autem primus ternarius a prima vsque ad tertiam, and dicebatur
prima hora, secundus erat a tertia vsque ad Sextam, and dicebatur hora tertia,
tertius erat a sexta vsque ad nonam, and dicebatur sexta; quartus a nona vsque
ad v^imani quae (...), and diceb tui nona. Resellit hanc opinionem Tol. tus,
receptam licet a multis recentiorum (vt ipse ait; quoniam de vndecima cuiua
memi^^t parabola, altum apud hos sil^n^um. Iure vapu^a^t a te Tol^te qui
excludunt vndecimam, constanter tamen asserenda est contra te q^adripartita
dici diuisio, in hoc potissimum illorum error consista, quod horam primam
faciunt, non inueniunt, horam vndecimam inueniunt, excludunt tamen, nihil a
mente Euangelistarum magis alienum, quam vt (...), verteretur hora prima diei,
quae in illerum scriptis sonat quartam noctis vigiliam. vid. Tolet. in Joan.
cap. 19. Annotat. 8.
They reckon the four quarters of the day after this manner. Hora prima, Hora
tertia, Hora sexta, Hora nona. Where first they err, in taking the Dawning of
the day, for the first hour of the day; for (...), the Dawning, sygnifieth the
last quarter of the night, called the Morning watch. Secondly, they err, in
making the last quarter of the day to be the ninth hour, for what then shall
become of the eleventh hour mentioned in the same parable?

By this division of the day into these four quarters, or greater hours, the
Evangelists are reconciled touching our Saviors passion. He was crucified at
the third hour, Mark. 15. 25. Saint John intimates his examination before
Pilat, to have been Hora quasi sexta: About six a clock, John 19. 14. In the
first place understand by his crucifying, not his hanging on the cross, which
was not till the sixth hour, Luke 23. 44. nor his expiration, which was not
till the ninth hour, Mark 15. 34. but his examination under Pilat, at which
time the people cried out, Crucify him, Crucify him; and then the third and
sixth hour will easily be reconciled, for these two hours immediately
following one another, what was done on the third hour, might truly be said
to be done about the sixth.

Lastly, this shows that the hours among the Jews were of two sorts: some
lesser, of which the day contained twelve: others greater, of which the day
contained 4. as has been above shown: the lesser are termed hours of the
day, are there not twelve hours in the day? John 11. 9. The greater some term
hours of the Temple, or hours of prayer: Peter and John went up into the
Temple, at the ninth hour of prayer, Act. 3. 1. But in truth there are but
three hours of prayer, the third, the, sixth, and the ninth. Drusius in
praeterit. Act. 3. 1. Non fuisse vltra tres horas precationis in die apud
Iudaeos clare testatur Dau^d. Kimchi.
The third instituted by Abraham, the sixth by Isaac, and the ninth by Jacob.
The third hour the Holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, Acts 2. 15. About
the sixth, Peter went up to the house top to pray, Act. 10. 9. At the ninth,
Peter and John went into the Temple, Act. 3. 1.

From these greater hours of the day and night, the Canonical hours in use
in the Roman church, had their beginning; Vid. Bellarmin. de bonis oper. in
part. c. l. 1. c. 10.
each Canonical hour contains three lesser hours, so that in the whole
night and day, there are eight Canonical hours. At six of the clock in the
evening began the first, and that is termed Hora vespertina, or vespertinum
simply ( officium being understood) their Vespertine. At nine of the clock at
night began the second, and that is termed Completorium, their Completory. At
midnight began the third, Nocturnum, their Nocturne. At three of the clock in
the morning, being their Matutinum, their Matines. The Ca^^nicall hours for
their day-seruice were named, Hora prima, tertia, sexta, nona. Their first
hour began from six of the clock in the morning, and held till nine; the
third from nine till twelve; the sixth from twelve till three; the ninth from
three till six at night.

The dial in use among the ancient Jews, differed from that in use among us:
theirs was a kind of stairs, the time of the day was distinguished not by
lines, but by steps, or degrees, the shade of the Sun every half hour moved
forward to a new degree. In the dial of Ahaz, the Sun went back ten (...),
Magnoloth, degrees, or steps, not lines, Isa. 38. 8.

Their weeks were twofold: the one was ordinary, consisting of seven days:
the other extraordinary and Prophetical, consisting of seven years, Dan. 9.
24. The first is termed Hebdomas diaria, a week of days: the second, Hebdomas
annalis, A week of years.

The Hebrews at first measured their months according to the course of the
Sun, whence they are called Menses Solares: and then every month consisted
of thirty days. The waters prevailed from the seventeenth day of the second
month, Genesis 7. 11. unto the 17. day of the seventh month, Genesis 8. 4. that is,
full five months. If we will number the days, they were an hundred and
fifty, Genesis 7. 24. Whereby it appears, that every month contained full
thirty days. After the Israelites departure out of Egypt, then they measured
their months by the course of the Moon; they are termed Menses Lunares: they
contained either thirty days, and then they were called Menses pleni, Full
months: or twenty nine days, and then they were called Menses caui, Deficient
months.

The Sun exceeds the Moon, in her course eleven days, Vid. Kalendarium
Hebraicum Munsteri page 62.
hence every third or second year, one month was inserted. Now because the
twelfth month in the Hebrew calendar was called Adar, hence when a month was
inserted, the last was called Veadar, the second Adar.

Before their captivity in Babylon, they counted their months without any
name, according to the number. The First, Second, Third month, etc. After
their return from Babylon, they called them by these names: 1. Nisan, it was
also called (...), Abib, which signifies an ear of corn, in this month
barley began to be eared. They answered to part of 1 March. April. 2. Iiar, it
was also called (...), which signifies beauty, then the trees began to be
beautified with buds, and blossoms. 2 April. May. 3. Sinan. 3 May. June. 4.
Thamuz. 4 June. July. 5. Ab. 5 July. August. 6. Elul. 6 August. September. 7.
Tisri, otherwise called Ethanim. 7 September. October. 8. March suan, it was
also called Bull. 8 October. November. 9. Cisleu. 9 November. December. 10.
Tebeth. 10 December. January. 11. Schebeth. 11 January. February. 12. Adar.
Veadar. 12 February. March.

Before their coming out of Egypt they (...). Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Mendose ponitur (...) pro (...), qui mensis erat olim secundus apud Hebraeos,
sicui and Dius apud Macedones.
began their year in the month Tisri, and thus they continued it always
after for civil affairs, for their date of buying, selling; their Sabbaticall
years, years of Iubile, etc. After their coming out of Egypt, they began
their year in the month Nisan, and so continued it for the computation of
their greater feasts.

CHAP. II.
Of their Feasts.
BEfore we descend to their particular feasts, first we will see the manner of
feasting in general. Their ordinary meals as they were not many in a day, so
neither were they costly. They were called ab (...) Iter facere, significat
viaticum.
Aruchoth, which word signifies properly, such fare as travelers and
waifaring men use on their iourneys. The word is used, Ierem. 40. 5. So the
chief steward gave him vittailes, and a reward, and let him go, likewise,
Prou. 15. 17. Better is a dinner of green herbs, where love is. The
extraordinary and more liberal kind of entertainment by way of feasting, was
commonly called (...) Conuiuium, Compotatio Dicitur a potando, sieve bi^endo vt
Graece (...), ab altera eius part.
Mischte, from their liberal drinking at such meetings. There was also another
kind of feasting, wherein they made merry together, eating the remainders of
their sacrifices; this they termed (...), Festum, celebris solennitas a radice
(...), Festum celebrauit.
Chag. From this custom of having a feast at the end of their sacrifices, the
Christians of the Primitive Church instituted their love feasts to Chrysostom.
1 Cor. 11. Hoc autem praecipio.
succeed the Lords Supper: In both these greater and more solemn feasts, there
were some Ceremonies used by them as preparatory to the feast; others in their
giving thanks; others in their gesture at Table.

The ceremonies preparatory were principally these three. 1 Salutation. 2
Washing the feet of the guestes. 3 pouring oil on them.

Their Salutations were testified, either by words, or some humble gesture of
the body. By words, and then these were the usual forms. The Lord be with
you, or the Lord bless you, Ruth 2. 4. From the last of these, blessing is
often taken in scripture for saluting. If thou meet any Tertul. lib. 4. adu.
Marc^^.
bless him not, and if any bless thee, answer him not again, says Elisha to
Gehazi, 2 King. 4. 29. The sense is as our English renders it, Salute him not.
Sometimes they said, Peace be unto thee; Peace be upon thee; Go in peace, and
such like: When ye come into an house, salute the same; and if the house be
worthy, let you peace come upon it, but if it be not worthy, let your peace
return to you, Matt. 10, 12, 13. By gesture; their salutations were signified
sometimes by prostrating the whole body; sometimes by kissing the feet, Luke 7.
38. commonly by an Xenophon. de institut. Cyr. lib. 1. p. 17. It. lib. 5. p.
113.
ordinary kiss. Moses went out to meet his father in law, and did obeisance
and kissed him, Exodus 18. 7. Moreover Joseph kissed all his brethren, and wept
upon them, Genesis 45. 15. This Saint Paul calls, an holy kiss, 1 Cor. 16. 20.
Saint Peter, A kiss of charity, 1 Pet. 5. 14. Tertul. de orat. c. 14.
Tertullian calls it, osculumpacis, A kiss of peace. These were kisses which
a Cato might give, and a Vestall receive: Of this sort the Jews, had Vid.
Drusium ad difficiliora loca, Exodus c. 12. 1 (...), Neshikoth pharukim, Oscula
propinquorum. 2 (...) Neshikath pharishuth, Oscula separati^is. 3 (...)
Neshikoth gedola, Oscula magnitudinis.
three kinds. 1. A kiss of salvation, which has been specified by some of
those former instances. 2. A kiss of valediction; Wherefore have thou not
suffered me to kiss my sons and my daughters, Genesis 31. 28. 3. A kiss of
homage; the word signifies a kiss of state or dignity, but it was to testify
their homage, and acknowledgment of their Kings souereignty. Then Samuel took
a vial of oil, and powered it upon Saul's head, and kissed him, 1 Samuel 10. 1.
And unto this they refer that in the second Psalm, Kiss the son lest he
be angry. These salutations, howsoever they were such as were used mutually,
sometimes in their meetings abroad upon the way, yet were they such as were
used also in their entertainment, as clearly appears by many of those
forequoted examples.

The second Ceremony preparatory was Lotio pedum ante d^scubit^m non s^lum
Iudaeis, sed and gentibus ipsis erat vsita^a: lucus hic Iuus est, hic accumbe,
ferte aquam pe^^bus. P^au^us Per^.
washing their feet. And the man brought the men unto Joseph's house, and gave
them water, and they did wash their feet, Genesis 43. 24. The office was commonly
performed by servants, and the meanest of the family, as appears by our
Savior Christ, who to leave an example of humility behind him, washed his
Disciples feet, Ioh. 13. 5. And Abigail, when David took her to wife, said,
Behold let thine handmaid be a servant, to wash the feet of the servants of my
Lord, 1 Samuel 25. 41. For this purpose had they certain vessels in readiness,
for such imploiments: that which our Savior used, we translate a Basin, Ioh.
13. 5. He powered out water into a Basin. The word (...) there used, signifies
in general a washpot, and is there used for that which in strict propriety of
speech, the Grecians termed (...), (i.) A washpot for our feet: Some may here
make the question, whence this water was powered? I see no inconvenience, if we
say that there were usually in their dining rooms, greater vessels, from which
they powered out into lesser, according as they needed, of which sort it is not
improbably Stukins lib. conuiu.
thought, that those water-pots were mentioned, John 2. 6. There were set there
six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews. By
purifying there, understand this complementall washing of which we treat: Now
if we consider the washing of their hands, usual and commendable in it self,
though superstitiously abused by Scribes and Pharisees; and the washing of their
feet before, and after meal (for our Savior washed his Disciples feet after
supper) which second washing, the Hebrews say it was in use only at the
Passover, there must needs be use of great store of water in their greater
feasts, and therefore no marvel, if many and capacious vessels stood in
readiness. Farther, we are to note that as the office was servile and base, so
the vessel: which observation gives light to that, Psalm. 60. 8. Moab is my
Wash-pot; that is, the Moabites shall be basely subject unto me, as the pot in
which I wash my feet.

The third Ceremony preparatory, was pouring out of oil. A woman in the city
brought an Alabaster box of ointment, and stood at his feet behind him weeping,
and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of
her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment, Luke 7.
37, 38. It was also powered upon the head, whence in the same place Christ
challenges the Pharisee which entertained him. Mine head with oil thou
did not anoint, verse. 46. Psalm. 23. 5. Thou annointest my head with oil.

After these ceremonies of preparation had been performed, then they proceeded
to giving thanks. The master of the house sitting down together with his
guestes, took a cup full of wine in his right hand, and therewith began his
consecration, after this manner. (...) Benedictus sis tu Domine Deus noster rex
mundi, qui creas ^^^ctum vitis.
Blessed be thou O Lord our God, the King of the world, which createst the
fruit of the vine. Having said thus, he first lightly tasted of the wine, and
from him it past round the table. Th^s grace or thanksgiving, they call (...)
Bircath haiaijn, the blessing of the cup. With this Christ himself seems to
have begun his supper; He took the cup, and gave thanks, and said. Take this,
and divide it among yourselues, for I say unto you; I will not drink of the
fruit of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come, Luke 22. 17. 18.
After the blessing of the cup, the master of the house took the bread, which
they did Scindere, but not Abscindere, lightly cut for the easier breaking
thereof, but not cut in sunder, and holding this in both his hands, he
consecrated it with these words. Blessed be thou, O Lord our God, the King of
the world, which bring forth bread out of the earth. This consecration of
bread, they termed, (...) Benedictionem panis. Drusius in N. T. part altera, p.
78.
Bircath halechem. After the consecration, he broake the bread, (whence the
master of the house, or he who performed these blessings in his stead, was
termed (...)
Habotseang (i) the breaker; the bread being broken, he distrbuted to every one
that sat at the table a morsel, which being done, then they began to feed
upon the other dishes that were provided. This rite of blessing both the cup
and the bread, they observed only in their solemn festiualls, otherwise they
consecrated the bread alone, and not the cup. In their feast time, they
seasoned their meat with good conference, such as might either yield matter of
instruction, or exercise their wits; which practice was also observed in their
Christian love Non tam coenam coenant quam disciplinam. Tertul. Apolog. c. 39.
feasts. Of the first sort, was that parable proposed by our blessed Savior at
a feast, Luke 14. 7. Of the second, was Sampsons riddle, which he proposed unto
his companions, Iud. 14. 12. At the end of the feast, they again gave thanks,
which was performed in this manner, either by the master of the house himself,
or by some guest, if there were any of better note at the table: he taking a
cup of wine in both his hands, began thus, Let us bless him who has fed us
with his own, and of whose goodness we live: then all the guests answered,
Blessed be he, of whose meat we have eaten, and of whose goodness we live.
This grace they call (...)
Bircath Hamazon. Vid. P. Fag. in praec. Hebr.
And this is thought to be the cup wherewith Christ after Supper commended the
mystery of his blood to his disciples: after this, he which began the
thanksgiving proceeds; Blessed be he, and blessed be his name, etc. annexing
a long prayer, in which he gave thanks. First, for their present food; 2. For
their deliverance from the Egyptian servitude. 3. For the covenant of
circumcision. 4. For the law given by the ministry of Moses. Then he prayed
that God would have mercy, 1. On his people Israel, 2. On his own city
Jerusalem, 3. On Sion the tabernacle of his glory, 4. On the Kingdom of the
house of David his anointed, 5. That he would send Elias the Prophet; Lastly,
that he would make them worthy of the days of the Messiah, and of the life of
the world to come.

This prayer being ended, then all the guests which sat at the table, with a
soft and low voice, said unto themselves in this manner; Fear the Lord all ye
his holy ones, because there is no penury to those that fear him; the young
Lions do want and suffer hunger, but those that seek the Lord want no good
thing. Afterward he which began the thanksgiving, blessed the cup in the same
form of words as he used at the first sitting down; saying, Blessed be thou O
Lord God, the King of the world, which createst the fruit of the Vine: And
therewith he drank a little of the wine, and so the cup passed round the
table. Thus they began and ended their feasts, with the blessing of a cup: this
cup they termed, (...) Cos hillel. Poculum (...), A cup of thanksgiving: and
both these cups are mentioned by Saint Luke, and which is worth our
observation, the words of consecration, whereby it was instituted, as part of
the blessed sacrament in the New Testament, were added only to the last cup.
This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. After all
this, they sung Scaliger. de emend. temp. l. 6. p. 273.
Hymns and Psalms, which also was practiced by our most blessed Savior,
Mark 14. 26. So that howsoever he used not any superstitions, either then
practiced, or since added by after Jews (as the drinking of Moses Kotsensis
fol. 118. col. 1.
4. cups of wine, Sebastian. Munster. Matt. 26.
or the breaking of the bread with all ten fingers, in allusion to the ten
commandments, etc.) yet in the beginning, and ending, we see his practice
suitable with theirs. If any desire a larger discourse of these blessings, noted
out of the Rabbines, let him read It. prec. Hebr. per Fagium editas
P. Fagius his comment on Deuteronomy. 8. 10. From whom I have borrowed a great part
of what I have herein delivered. If any shall here object, that I seem to make
the blessed Sacrament of our Lords body and blood, a Jewish ceremony, I answer
no; For as a kind of initiatory purification by water, was used before by the
Jews of old, and no Proselyte was admitted into the Church of the Jews,
without this purification: yet it was no more a Sacrament to them, then
Circumcision was to Turks and Saracens. Thus neither was breaking the bread
sacramental to the Jew, but then it became a Sacrament when Christ said of it,
This is my body. This cup is the New Testament in my blood, etc. Luke 22. 19.
The Jews could not say, The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? 1 Cor. 10. 16.

The last thing considerable in their feasts, is their gesture. In the days of
our Savior, it is Voces quibus vsi sunt Euangelistae sonant accubitum non
sessionem. (...), Luc. 22. (...), Matt. 26. (...), Luc. 14. (...), Mat. 14.
apparent that the gesture of the Jews was such as the Romans used. The table
being placed in the midst, round about the table were certain beds,
sometimes two, sometimes three, sometimes more, according to the number of the
guests; upon these they laid down in manner as follows. Each bed contained
three persons, sometimes four, seldom or never more. If one lay upon the bed,
then he rested the upper part of his body upon his left elbow, the lower part
lying at length upon the bed: but if many lay on the bed, then the uppermost
did lie at the beds head, laying his feet behind the seconds back: in like
manner, the third or fourth did lie, each resting his head in the others
bosom. Thus John leaned on Jesus bosom, Ioh. 13. 23. This, first, is an
argument of special love toward him, whom the Master of the house shall take
into his own bosom, John he was the beloved disciple. Secondly, an argument
of parity amongst others, resting in one another bosom. Many shall come from
the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob,
Matthew. 8. 11. And where shall they sit? In Abraham's bosom, Luke 16. 22. That
is, they shall all sit at the same table, be partakers of the same glory. Thus
Christ he was in the bosom of his Father, John 1. 18. that is, in the
Apostles phrase, He thought it no robbery to be equal with his father. Their
tables were perfectly circular or round, whence their manner of sitting was
termed (...) Discubitus cuius radix est (...), circumiuit, Ambiuit.
Mesibah, a sitting round; and their phrase of inuiting their guests to sit
down, was, sit round: We will not sit round until he come hither, 1 Samuel 16.
11. Again, Thy children shall be like olive plants, round about thy table,
Psalm. 128. 3. This custom of lying along upon a bed, when they took their
meat, was also in use in Ezekiels time; Thou satest upon a stately bed, and a
table prepared before it, Ezekiel. 23. 41. Philo. Iud. p. 388.
And whether this were the custom of the ancient Hebrews, I leave to be
discussed by others. But unto this also does Amos allude; They lay themselves
down upon clothes laid to pledge by every Altar, Amos 2. 8. That is, the
Vetustissimus mos erat super lanatis pellibus discumbere. Qui poterat pelles
addere, dives erat. Ovid.
garments taken to pledge they use in stead of beds, when at their Altars they
eat things sacrificed to Idols: Yea, the plucking off their shoes when they
went to table, implies this custom of lying at the table, to have been very
ancient. The plucking off their shoes seems to have been generally
received, when they were in Egypt, for this cause is it, that they had a strict
charge in eating the Passover, to have their shoes on their feet for greater
expedition. The reason why they usually plucked them off, was, for the clean
keeping of their beds, on which they lay. Here seeing the rule of observing the
Passover requires that it should be eaten with their shoes on their feet,
which argues rather standing than lying upon a bed: it may be demanded whether
Christ transgressed not against the first institution thereof, in the manner of
his sitting at the table? Tremelius answers thus, and in my mind fully:
Tremel. in Matt. 26. 20.
We must know, says he, that Exodus 12. it was commanded after what manner,
they ready to depart out of Egypt, should eat the Passover at that time, for
the necessity of that time so required, namely, an hasty eating thereof: But
afterward in the law, where it is commanded that this ceremony of the Paschal
should be renewed every year, those words are not added. Wherefore all the
Hebrew Doctors, both ancient and modern, do teach with one joint consent,
that the commandment of sprinkling the doore-posts with blood, of having on
their shoes, of girding their loins, of taking staves in their hands, and
eating the Lamb in haste; did not extend it self to the generations
following, but only to have concerned that very night, wherein they departed
out of Egypt: Talmud. tract. de Paschate. vid. Tremel. loco superius citato.
Yea, it was an ancient tradition amongst them, that when they did in after
times eat the Passover, they would sit down or lean upon a bed as our
Savior and his Disciples did, in token of their deliverance obtained.

The parties that gave entertainment at their feasts, were two. 1. Vid.
Casaubon. exercit. p. 274.
the master of the house. 2. the master of the feast; They differed thus, the
master of the house was termed (...) Baal habeth (...) Pater familias. The
master of the feast was termed, (...) Baal mischte, (...), Triclinij
Praefectus; The master of the feast was the chief servant attending the master
of the house in time of the feast. Others add a Gaudentius Erixtanus. vid.
Casauban. ibid.
third sort whom they would have to be Praefectimorum; in Greek they were
termed (...). Their office was thought to have been the inspection of the
guests, that none should disorder themselves by drinking too much, whence they
were called (...), the eyes of the feast. Such kind of officers were in use in
Ahasuerosh his court, Ester 1. 8. and likewise amongst the Athenaeus l. 10.
Athenians, but whether any such belonged unto the Jews is justly doubted.

The ancient Jews, they were both hospital, ready to entertain, and also
liberal in their entertainment; their hospitality is commended throughout the
Scripture, though now it be grown out of use amongst them, as appears by
that prouerbiall speech concerning the entertainment of a friend: (...) Hospes
(...) Onus (...) Profugus Buxtorf. Synag. cap. 32. p. 493.
That the first day he is Oreach, a guest: the second Toreach, a burden: the
third, Bariach, a runnagate. Their liberality appeared by remembering the poor
at their feasts, by sending them portions. Send portions unto them for whom
nothing is prepared, Nehem. 8. 10. This was afterward practiced by Heathens,
who in their solemn feasts did not only entertain their guests for the
present, Moris erat veteribus in conuiuijs (...) mittere absentibus amicis.
Theophrastus cap. (...). Idem testatur Plut. in Agesilao. (...). Eundem morem
Iudaeis in vsu fuisse testantur sacrae literae, Nehem. 8. 10. (...).
but did also allow them certain iunkets to carry away with them. These they
termed (...): and likewise unto their friends who were absent, they sent
portions, which they termed (...). This observation gives light to that Canon
in the Laodicean council, which forbids Christians in their love feasts
(...) to send portions, the reason of which prohibition, I conceive to be
threefold. First, That Christians might not symbolize with Heathen people.
Secondly, That none presuming that their portions should be sent them, might
absent themselves. Thirdly, That those present (especially the poorer sort as
it often falls out) might not be injured, by having the best of their
provision sent away in such portions.

Here we may note for conclusion, that as the time of their supper was toward
the evening, and then they gave greatest entertainment; So the time of their
dinner was about the sixth hour of the day, that is, as we count, about noone.
Kill meat and make ready, for the men shall eat with me at noone, Genesis 43. 16.
Peter went up upon the house to pray about the sixth hour, then waxed he an
hungered, and would have eaten, but whiles they made something ready, he fell
into a trance, Acts 10. 9, 10.

Moreover we may here note the difference between those three cups mentioned
in Scripture, (...), 1 Corinthians. 10. 16. The cup of blessing, and this is
applied to those several cups used in their solemn feasts, because of those
blessings or thanksgiuings annexed. Secondly, (...), Ier. 16. 7. The cup of
consolation, this was so called because it was sent by special friends in time
of mourning, as intending by this drinking to put away sorrow and grief from
the mourner. Thirdly, (...), Psalm. 116. 13. The cup of salvation, this was used
commonly after their peace-offrings, which were vowed in way of thankfulness
for benefits obtained. Whence the Seventy Elders commonly translate a
peace-offring (...), a sacrifice of salvation, or salvation is it self.

CHAP. III.
Of their Sabbath.
THE word (...), Schabbath, from whence our English word Sabbath is derived,
signifies rest, and is applied to all solemn festiualls. They polluted my
Sabbaths, Ezekiel. 20. 21. That is, my feasts. Sometimes it is applied to the
whole week. Ieiuno bis in Sabbato, I fast twice in the week. Sometimes, and
that most frequently, it is used for that seventh day which God had set apart
for his own service. This last was holy, either by a simple holiness which
belonged unto it, as was the seventh day; or else by a double holiness
occasioned by some solemn feast upon the same day, and then it was called,
Sabbatum magnum, A great Sabbath, John 19. 36. For on that Sabbath day of which
Saint John speaks, the Feast of the Passover happened that year.

The week days are termed by the Hebrews (...), Cholim, profane days, by
the Greeks (...), Working days: but when they speak of them all together,
(...), the space of time between the two Sabbaths. Scaliger de emend. temp.
lib. 6. p. 26 1. Item Beza in hunc locum.
This was the time upon which the Gentiles desired to hear Paul, Act. 13. 42.
In respect of the different degrees of holiness on days, the Sabbath day is
not unfitly compared to a Queen, or rather to those whom they termed Primary
wives; other feast-dayes to concubines, or halfe-wiues; working days to
handmaids.

The Sabbath began at Scaliger. de emend. temp. l. 6. p. 269.
six a clock the night before, this the Grecians called (...), the Hebrews
(...)
Biath haschabbath, the entrance of the Sabbath.

The preparation to the Sabbath began at Joseph. Antiq. l. 16. c. 10.
three of the clock in the after noone, the Hebrews called this (...), Gnereb
haschabbath, the Sabbath-eue. By the ancient Fathers it was called In ritibus
Paganorum coena pura appellabatur coena illis apponi solita, qui in casto erant
quod Graeci dicunt (...), vel (...). Isaac. Casaubon. Exercit. 16. p. 662.
coena pura, the phrase is borrowed from Pagans, whose Religion taught them in
their sacrifices to certain of their Gods and Goddesses, to prepare themselves
by a strict kind of holiness, at which time of their preparation they did
partake of a certain supper, which as it consisted of choice meats, such as
those Heathens deemed more holy than others: so it was eaten with the
observation of holy rites and ceremonies; hence they themselves were said at
this time of their preparation, to be In casto, and their preparatory supper,
termed Coena pura. Thus we see the reason why the Fathers called the
Sabbath-eue, Coenam puram. By the Evangelists it was called (...), A
preparation, Mark. 15. 42. For distinction sake, we may call that fore-time of
the day (...), A fore preparation. For the whole day was a kind of
preparation, as will appear by the particulars then forbidden. First, on this
day they might go no more than three Parsath; now a Parsa contained so much
ground as an ordinary man might go ten of them in a day. Secondly, Judges
might not then sit in judgment upon life and death, as is shown in the
chapter of Translation of Feasts. Casaubon. Exercit. 16. page 477. ex Michlol
Kimchi.
Thirdly, all sorts of artificers were forbidden to work, only three
accepted, Shoomakers, Tailors, and Scribes, the two former for repairing of
apparel, the other for fitting themselves by study to expound the law the next
day, and these were permitted but half the preparation time to work.

The best and wealthiest of them Buxtorf. Synagog. Iud. cap. 10. ex Talmud.
even those that had many servants, did with their own hands further the
preparation; so that sometimes the masters themselves would chop herbs, sweep
the house, cleave wood, kindle the fire, and such like.

In old Buxtorf. Synaegog. Iudaic. Ibid.
time, they proclaimed the preparation with noise of trumpets, or horns; but
now the modern Jews proclayme it by the Sexton, or some under officer of the
church, whom they call (...), Scheliach isibbur, The messenger of the
Congregation.

Concerning the sanctification of the Sabbath day it self, in corrupter times
some things the Jews added over and above that which God commanded. In other
things they took liberty where God granted none. In the first, they were
superstitious; in the second, sacrilegious.

They took liberty. There were two thousand cubits between the Arc and the
camp, when they marched, Josh. 3. 4. and in probability, the same proportion
was observed when they rested: this distance of ground some interpret to be one
mile, some two: some measuring it according to a lesser, others according to a
longer cubit, which they term a Geometrical cubit: but all agree in this,
that these two thousand cubits were a Sabbath days journey, though none, as I
know, have observed the reason why it was so called, which I take to be this;
On the Sabbath day they were all to repair to the place of Gods public
worship, which was two thousand cubits distant from those who camped nearest:
Hence follow four propositions. 1. That two thousand cubits any where, by
proportion might be called a Sabbath days journey. Secondly, that to those
who dwelt in the Camps more remote from the Arc, a Sabbath days journey was
more than two thousand cubits. Thirdly, That it is now lawful on the Sabbath
day, to join with the congregation in the place of Gods public worship.
Fourthly, That it was unlawful for the Jews, hereupon to take liberty to
walk idly whither they would, if it were not more than two thousand cubits,
pretending it to be but a Sabbath days journey.

They added unto that which God commanded 1. God said, Remember to keep holy a
seventh day: In which words God sanctified one day to be Sabbathum, Hospinian.
de Orig. fest. cap. 3.
they added Sabbatulum, so they termed that additament of time which they
annexed to the Sabbath. This addition of time was twofold: some began the
Sabbath sooner than others; this was done by the Jews dwelling at Tyberias,
because they dwelling in a valley, the Sun appeared not to them, so soon as
it did to others. Some again continued the Sabbath longer than others, this
was done by those dwelling at Tsepphore, a city placed upon the top of a
mountain, so that the Sun shined longer to them than it did unto others;
thus both of these did Addere de profano ad sacrum; Add somewhat of the
working-day immediately going before, or immediately following after: none
diminished of the Sabbath. Buxtorf. comment. Masoret. c. 4. ex Musar.
Hence R. Iose wished that his portion might be with those that began the
Sabbath with those of Tyberias, and ended it with those of Tsepphore.

2. God said, to morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, bake
that ye will bake, and sees that ye will sees, Exodus 16. 23. This command
was proper to the time of Manna, Iun. and Tremel. in Exodus 16.
the reason is there alleged, why they should prepare that day for the morrow,
because upon the Sabbath day they should not find it in the field. The Jews
extend this command to all ages, and therefore they dressed no meat this day;
this happily was the reason, that the heathen people thought they Sueton. August.
c. 76. de^eiun. sabbat. vid. Martial. l. 4. Epig. 4.
fasted on the Sabbath; though I deny not but this error might be occasioned in
part from that phrase, Ieiunobis in Sabbato.

3. God said, ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations on the
Sabbath day, Exodus 35. 3. This commandment was only concerning fire for the
furtherance of the work of the Tabernacle, Vatablus in hunc lo^um. Item
Tremel. and Iunius.
for therefore is the Sabbath mentioned in that chapter, to show that the work
of the Tabernacle ought to give place to the Sabbath. The Jews hence gather
that it is unlawful to kindle any fire at all on this day.

4. God said, In it thou shall do no manner of work. This the Jews
understood without any manner of exception. Hospinian. de Orig. fest c. de
Sabbato.
Hence they held it unlawful, to roste an apple, to tucke an herb, to climb
a tree, to kill or catch a flea. Hence they thought it unlawful, to defend
themselves being assaulted by their enemies on the Sabbath day, by this means
twice they became a prey unto the enemy. Joseph. l. 12. c. 8.
First, unto Antiochus, whereupon Mattathias made a decree, that it should be
lawful upon the Sabbath to resist their enemies, which decree again they
understanding strictly, as if it did only give leave to resist, when they were
actually assaulted, and not by any labor that day to prevent the enemies
raising of rams, settling of engines, underminings, etc. they became a prey the
second time to Pompey. For the right understanding therefore of this command,
we are to know that three sorts of servile works were allowed.

1. Works of charity. God that allowed them to lead their ox and ass to
water on the Sabbath, Luke 13. 15. to make their lives more comfortable, much
more allowed man liberty to dress convenient food for himself, and his
family, that they might the more comfortably perform holy duties. Christ
healed on the Sabbath; therefore visiting the sick, and the use of the
Physician, was both then, and now lawful.

2. Works directly tending to Gods Worship, not only killing of sacrifices,
and circumcising of children on that day was allowed, but the Priests might
lawfully blow their trumpets and horns on the Sabbath day, for the assembling
of the people, Numb. 10. 2. And the people might warrantably go from their
houses, to the place of Gods public worship. By proportion it is now
warrantable for Christians, to ring bells to assemble the people together on
the Lords day, and to take iourneys to join with the public congregation, or
to preach the word. Of these we may say, though they are in their own natures
bodily labors, yet the Temple which was sanctified did change the nature of
them, and make them holy, Matthew. 23. 17. Or as the Jews say concerning the
overthrow of Jericho, which according to their writings fell on the Sabbath
day: (...), K. D. K^^chi in Josh. 6.
He which commanded the Sabbath to be sanctified, commanded it also to be
profaned.

3. Works of absolute necessity, as the defending ones self against his
enemy, and others of like nature: concerning which the Jews have a saying,
(...).
Peril of life drives away the Sabbath. And the Christians with a little
change of a more common proverb, say, Necessitas non habet ferias; Necessity
has no holidaies.

CHAP. IIII.
Of their Passover and their feast of unleavened bread.
SOme of the Fathers have derived the word Tertullian adu. Iud. cap. 10. It.
Ambros lib. de Myster. pasch. cap. 1.
Pascha, from a Greek verb signifying to suffer, because the sufferings and
passion of our Savior are celebrated about that time. August. in titul. Ps. 68.
This opinion Augustine justly confuteth, for the word is originally an Hebrew
word, signifiing to pass by, to leap, or pass over. The Etymology is Gods
own. It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, which passed over, etc. Exodus
12. 27.

The word Passover in scripture has three acceptions. First, it is taken for
that yearly solemnity, which was celebrated upon the E^ Theologis non pauci,
omnia quae ad 14^^ nectiem pertinent 15ae (...); quem errorem hauserunt ex
turbidis Rabbinorum lacunis, qui hodie eundem errorem errant, test Scalig. de
emend. temp. l. 6. p. 270.
fourteenth day of Nisan, otherwise called Abib; you may call it the Passover
of the Lamb, because on that day toward the evening, the Israelites were
commanded according to their families to roste a Lamb, and eat it in their
private houses. Secondly, it signifies that yearly festiuitie which was
celebrated on the fifteenth of Nisan, it may be called the Passover of sheep
and Bullocks, Deuteronomy. 16. 2. Otherwise we may call it the Feast of the Passover;
as the foureteenth of Nisan, was called simply the Passover. In the
foureteenth day of the first month, is the Passover of the Lord, and in the
fifteenth day of this month, is the Feast, Number. 28. 16, 17. Toward this Feast
we are to understand that Josiah gave unto the people such a multitude of
sheep, lambs, kiddes, and bullocks. Thirdly, It is taken for the whole
solemnity, beginning the fourteenth of Nisan, and ending the one and twentieth
of the same month. Now the Feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is
called the Passover. Luke 22. 1. So that in this acception it contained the
Feast of unleavened bread also, notwithstanding, in proper speaking, the Feast
of unleavened bread, was a distinct Feast from the Passover.

First, the Passover was to be kept on the fourteenth day of the first
month, at Even: This was their second sacrament, in which, although they were
enjoined to eat unleavened bread with the lamb, yet the feast of unleavened
bread began not till the morrow following, being the fifteenth day of the same
month, and lasted seven days, of which only the first and last were holy
conuocations, wherein in they might do no servile work, Leuit. 23. 5, 6, 7, 8.

Secondly, the Passover, in the ages following its first institution, might
not be killed and eaten in any other place, save only where the Lord did choose
to place his name, which afterward was at Jerusalem: but the feast of
unleavened bread, the Hebrews thought themselves bound to keep in every place
wheresoever they dwelt, if they could not be at Jerusalem; and the (...)
Maimon. de fermento and Azymo. c. 6.. 1.
eating of it, they say, depended not upon the eating of the Passover, but it
was a commandment by it self.

The rites and ceremonies observed by the Jews in the eating of this sacrament
their Paschal Lamb, agreed with those general ceremonies used in their
solemn feasts. They blessed the cup, and blessed the bread, and divided it
amongst the guests, and washed the feet of those that sat at the table, as is
shown in the chapter of feasts. The particulars in which it differed from
other feasts, are delivered in those interrogatories, or questions proposed in
way of Catechism, by some child at the time of eating their Passover, or
rather in the answer made unto the child by him that blessed the table. The
question was thus, What means this service? The form of the answer was,
Scalig. de emend. temp. l. 5. p. 270.
How different is this night from all other nights? for all other nights we
wash but once, in this twice; (thus Christ when supper was ended, washed his
disciples feet) in all other nights we eat either leauened or unleavened bread,
in this only unleavened; in other nights, we eat any sort of herbs, in this
night bitter herbs: in all other nights we eat and drink either sitting or
lying, but in this we lie along. Then he proceeds to declare, that the
Passover was in respect that the Lord passed over the houses of their fathers
in Egypt. Secondly, he held up the bitter herbs in his hand and said, These
bitter herbs which we eat, are in respect that the Egyptians made the lives of
our Fathers bitter in Egypt. Thirdly, he held up the unleavened bread in his
hand, and said, This unleavened bread which we eat, is in respect that the
dough of our fathers had not time to be leauened, when the Lord appeared unto
them, and redeemed them out of the hand of the enemy. This kind of
Catechizing they say is commanded, Exodus 12. 26. They called it (...) Haggada,
(i.) Annunciatio, the declaration, or showing forth of the Passover. Hence the
Apostle borrows his phrase; As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink
this cup, ye shall declare, or show forth, the Lords death, 1 Cor. 11. 26.

Concerning this Lamb they are charged thus, Upon the tenth of Abib every one
shall take a Lamb for an house, a male of the first year, without blemish,
and this he kept until the fourteenth day of the same month, Exodus 12. 3,
etc. The Lamb: it was either of sheep, or goats. For an house: the whole body
of the Israelites was divided into twelve tribes, the tribes into families, the
families into houses; if the house were too few for the eating of the Lamb,
then the next neighbor joined with them in the eating thereof. The whole
company was termed (...), in the same sense Saint Mark uses (...), and (...),
Mark the 6th. All these words signify a society, or company of guests, so
many as can sit at the same table: the latter word properly signifies, a bed
in a garden, and thus in the Gospel, the whole multitude sitting on the
grass, seem to be compared unto a Garden, and their several societies or
companies, unto so many beds in the garden. The number of communicants in this
Paschall society Joseph. de bello Iud. lib. 7. c. 17.
was never less than ten, nor more than twenty. It follows in the text, A
male, to note the masculine and peirlesse virtue of our Savior, whom it did
typically shadow forth. He^ra^ce (...) Filium anni. Sunt qui distinguilit inter
Filium anni and Filium anni sut, Filium anni interpretantur, qui annum vnum
agit, nec minor, nec mayor. Filium vero anni sui, qui est in anno primo, licet
eum nondum absob erit. Sed Aben Esra negat absque Cabala posse (...) quis sit
fili^^ anni sui, nam fieri potest, inquit, vt sit Vau adduitium sieve
paragogitum, quale in (...) and similibus.
Of the first year; which phrase they interpret thus, That the Lamb, after it
was eight days old and forward, was allowable to be offered for the Passover,
but not before; because it is said, When a Bullock, or a Sheep, or a Goat is
brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the damme, and from the
eighth day and thenceforth, it shall be accepted for an offering made by fire
unto the Lord, Leuit. 22. 27. And the reason of this law, some of the Hebrews
have thought to be, Vid. Munster. ad Leuit. 22.
because in their opinion nothing in the world was absolutely perfect, until a
Sabbath had past over it: Moreover, if it were an hour elder than an year, it
was unlawful, because it is said, A male of the first year. Without blemish;
as well to admonish the Israelites of their own personal integrity, as to
signify the absolute perfection of him who was in truth the Lamb of God. And
this he kept till the fourteenth day of the same month. The Rabbines
Hospinian. de Orig. fest. cap. 5.
affirm four causes of this: First, because otherwise through the multitude
of businesses, at the time of their departure, they might forget the Paschall
Lamb. Secondly, that in this four days space they might have the more
certain knowledge of the Lambs perfection. Thirdly, that by beholding the
Lamb so long before their eyes, they might have the better occasion in that
space both to recount with themselves, Gods mercy in their deliverance from
Egypt, and also to instruct and Catechize their children in that point; for
which respect it was a received tradition amongst the Jews, that during the
space of these four days, the lamb was tied to their bed-posts. Lastly, that
in this time of preparation, they might thoroughly fit and address themselves
for the oblation.

The time when the Paschall lamb was to be slain, was at the Evening, Exodus
12. 6. or as the original reads, between the two euenings. Here Divines move
the question what part of the day should be understood by this phrase. Some
distinguish the two Euenings thus; That there was Aben Esra Exodus 12.
Vespera Solis, the Evening of the Sun, namely, when the body of the Sun
sets; And Vespera luminis, the Evening of the light, when the beams and
shining of the Sun is also gone from off the earth: The space or interim
between these two Euenings, is thought to be one hour, and the third part of
an hour; in which space of time, they say, the Paschall Lamb was slain. R.
David. in radic. Hoc etiam colligi potest ex Pi^ke Aboth. cap. 5.
Others admit a greater latitude, and distinguish thus; There is, say they,
Vespera declinationis, the Evening of the Sun declining; and Vespera occasus,
the Evening of the Sun setting; and their meaning is, that the Passover was
offered in this inter-mediat time, between noone and night. This latter answer
seems most agreeable to the truth. First, because by this speech we must
understand a latitude of time, wherein might be offered not only the
Passover, but the daily Evening sacrifice also, for even that likewise was
commanded Inter duas Vesperas, Between the two Euenings, Numb. 28. 4. Now this
might be offered in the former part of the afternoon. Talmud. tract. de
paschate cap. 5. in initio.
The manner of their sacrificing in regard of the time we find thus registered,
if we count the hours according to our usual computation; the daily
sacrifice of the Evening Lamb, was usually slain between two and three, it
was offered between three and four: upon the Passeouer-eue it was slain
between one and two, it was offered about half an hour before three: But if
their Passeouer-eue happened to be the same with their Sabbath-eue, then the
daily Evening Sacrifice was slain between twelve and one, it was offered
half an hour before two; and afterward the Passover. Secondly, this agrees
with the oblation of the true Paschall Lamb, for as the time of his crucifying
began in the third hour of the day, with the daily morning sacrifice, Mark
15. 25. So it ended at the ninth hour, Mark 15. 34. which was the time of
their ordinary evening sacrifice; but upon their Passeouer-eue it was the time
when their Paschall Lamb was slain.

Furthermore, the Lamb was to be eaten with bitter herbs: the reason of this
command, is, that thereby they might be moved to thankfulness toward God,
for their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage, in which their lives were made
bitter unto them, Exodus 1. 14.

These bitter herbs they did dip in a certain sauce, thick like mustard,
called (...)
Charoseth, Moses K^^sensis fol. 118.
which thick sauce (say they) was a memorial of the clay, wherein they
wrought in Egypt. Scaliger. de emend. ten p. lib. 6. p. 272.
This is thought of some to be that wherein Christ dipped the sop, which he
gave to Judas. Of this sauce the Hebrews write thus; Maimon. de fermento. c.
8.. 7.
They used to dip the unleavened bread in that sauce Charoseth, and to eat,
then they dipped the bitter herbs in the Charoseth, and did eat them. Maimon.
in (...) c. 7.. 11.
It was made of the palm tree branches, or of dry figs, or of raysens, which
they stamped and put vinegar thereto, and seasoned it, and made it like clay,
and brought it unto the table in the night of the Passover.

The other seven days following the fourteenth of Nisan, were in strictness
of speech, a distinct feast, as is above showed, namely, the feast of
unleavened bread, because in that space of time, Huius moris vestigia quaedam
sunt reperta in Roman. Flamine Diali. A. Gell. noct. A^c. l. 10. c. 15.
no leauened bread ought to be found in their houses. Buxtorf. Synagog. Iudaic.
cap. 12. p. 317.
Their degrees of preparation to this feast are four. 1. Expurgatio fermenti,
the cleansing of all their housholdstuffe and vessels unto which leaven might
happily cleave; and this was done two or three days before the Passover. 2.
Inquisitio fermenti, the searching after leaven throughout all the rooms of
their houses even to the mouse-holes: this they did with a waxen candle, and as
Buxtorfius notes, upon the night before the Passover; and Scalig. de emend.
temp. ia proleg^m.
Scaliger delivers it in other words to the same purpose, namely, that this
search was made, Ineunte quartadecima vsque ad quartam horam post ortum Solis
(i.) At the beginning of the fourteenth day until the fourth hour after the
rising of the Sun. Now the beginning of the fourteenth day was the night going
before, for the Jews in the computation of their holidays, counted their day
from even to even. 3. There was Exterminatio, or, Conflagratio fermenti, A
burning of the leaven, and this was done from the fourth to the sixth hour,
about dinner time; at which time followed the last degree, which Scaliger has
omitted, namely, Execratio fermenti, the cursing of the leaven, in this form:
Buxtorf. Synagog. c. 12. p. 325.
Let all that leaven, or whatsoever leauened thing is in my power, whether it
were seen of me, or not seen, whether cleansed by me, or not cleansed, let
all that be scattered, destroyed, and accounted as the dust of the earth.

In case any did eat leauened bread those seven days, the penalty was, that
such a soul should be cut off from Israel, Exodus 12. 15. Which penalty has
amongst expositors a Vid. P. Fag. in Exodus 12.
threefold interpretation. Some understand thereby such a man to be cut off
from his heavenly inheritance: others, that God would cut off such from the
living by an untimely death: Others, that he should die without children,
leaving no posterity behind him: to this purpose their proverb is, Vid. P.
Fag. ibid.
A man childlesse, is lifelesse.

Of these three the first is most probable in this place, though the same Text
may admit the second interpretation in other places of Scripture, as is
declared in the chapter of circumcision. Notwithstanding here let the judicious
reader determine, whether these words do not imply besides the secret action
of God touching the soul of such a delinquent, a direction unto the Church,
how to deal with parties thus offending, by censuring them with
excommunication, which kind of censure elsewhere the Scripture calls A
casting out of the Synagogue, John 16. 2. A speech much like this, A cutting
off from Israel.

Three things may be here demanded. First, who killed the Paschall Lamb.
Maimon. in Korban Pesach. c. 1.. 6.
Secondly, Where it was killed? Thirdly, Where it was eaten? First, It was
killed by the Priests, 2 Chronicles. 35. 6. Secondly, it was killed after the first
time in the Court of the Temple, the place which God had chosen, Deuteronomy. 16. 6.
Maimon. in Korban Pesach. c. 1.. 6.
Thirdly, The owner of the Lamb took it of the Priest and did eat it in his
own house at Jerusalem. Christ with his disciples kept the Passover in an
upper chamber at Jerusalem.

It may further be demanded, Whether the Passover consisted of two suppers,
one immediately succeeding the other? Some affirm it, and their reasons are
these: First, say they, the Passover was eaten standing, but Christ used
another gesture. This argument of all other is the weakest, for Christ used the
gesture of lying on his body, as well in the eating of the Passover, as at the
consecration of the sacrament, and the Jews generally after the first
institution, in all their Passeouers, used rather this positure of their body,
than the other of standing, in token of rest and security, as appears in the
Chapter of feasts. Secondly, they say, the Paschall lamb was wont to be
roasted, but in the last Passover, which our Savior celebrated, there was Ius
cui intingebatur panis, Brothint o which he dipped the bread. This reason is
as weak as the former, because though there was a command to eat the Paschall
Lamb roasted, yet there was no prohibition to join their ordinary supper with
the eating thereof, and that might admit broth: but as it is shown above, the
matter into which the sop was dipped, was thought to be the sauce Charoseth.
Thirdly, they urge, John 13. 2. That the first supper was done, when Christ
arose and washed his disciples feet, and after that he gave Judas the sop,
which must argue a second sitting down. This foretelling his Disciples, that
one of them should betray him, is likewise by Saint Luke recited after the
consecration of the sacrament. This is the strongest argument, and yet not of
sufficient validity, because by a kind of prolepsis or anticipation of time,
it is not unusual in the scripture to relate that first, which, according to
the truth of the history, should be last. Thus John 11. mention is made of Mary
which anointed the Lord, yet her anointing of him follows in the next
chapter. And this same history of betraying Christ, Saint Matthew and Saint
Mark recited before the consecration of the Sacrament. Whence the Jews have a
proverb, (...) Salom. Iarchi in Genesis 6. 3.
Non esse prius aut posterius in scriptura. That first and last, must not be
strictly urged in scripture. Together with these answers, consider how
improbable it is, that ten persons (for sometimes they were so few) should eat
a second supper, after they had eaten A Lamb of the first year; which might
be an year old. It is evident also, by that of Barabas, that it was a
received custom on the Passover to let loose and enlarge one prisoner or
other. Concerning the reason hereof the conjecture is threefold. Some think
this custom to have been used in memory of Jonathan the son of Saul, when
the people rescued him from the hands of his Father: Others say that the reason
hereof was, that the feast might be celebrated with the greater joy and
gladness: Others more probably think, it was done in remembrance of their
deliverance from the Egyptian bondage.

Again, here is to be observed, that the Jews speaking of their Passover, did
sometimes speak according to their civil computation, wherein they measured
their days from sunrising, to sunrising; sometimes according to their sacred
computation, which was from sunset to sunset. This serves for the
reconciliation of that, Numb. 12. 18. which seems to make the fourteenth day
of the first month, the first day of unleavened bread. Joseph. Antiq. l. 2. c.
5. p. 65.
And Josephus tells us that they numbered eight days for that feast. In like
manner the disciples are said to come unto Christ the first day of unleavened
bread, saying unto him, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the
Passover? Matt. 26. 17. as if the first day of unleavened bread, were before
the Passover. All these are true according to the computation of their civil
days, though according to the computation of their holy days, the feast of
unleavened bread began the fifteenth day, and continued seven days only, and
the Passover was before the feast of unleavened bread.

In the last place we must know, that there was permitted a second Passover
to those who could not be partakers of the first, by reason either of their
uncleanness by a dead body, or of their far distance from the place where it
was to be offered. This was to be observed in the second month, the
fourteenth day thereof, according to all the ordinances of the first Passover,
Numb. 9. Touching that permission of a second Passover, to those that were in
a journey far off: The Hebrew of this word far off, has extraordinary
pricks over it, for special consideration. Hereby the Lord might intimate
that we Gentiles which were unclean, even dead in trespasses and sins, and
far off, Ephesians. 2. 13. should be made nigh by the blood of Christ, and so
partakers of him the second Passover. Of this legal ordinance the Hebrews
say; Maimon. in Korban Pesach. c. 5.. 8, 9.
What is this journey far off? fifteen miles without the walls of Jerusalem,
who so is distant from Jerusalem on the fourteenth day of the first month,
fifteen miles or more, when the Sun rises: lo, this is a journey far
off; if less than this, he is not in a journey far off; if less than this,
he is not in a journey far off, for he may come to Jerusalem by after
midday, though he go on foot, easily. The agreement between the Pascall lamb
and Christ stands thus.

Christ is our Passover, 1 Cor. 5.
The Paschall Lamb was,
1 One of the Flock. 2 Without blemish. 3 To be sacrificed and roasted. 4 His
bones being not broken. 5 About the evening. 6 Their door posts were to be
sprinkled with the blood. 7 That the punishing Angel might pass over them. 8
It was eaten in their several families. 9 The whole Lamb. 10 Without leaven.
11 With bitter herbs. 12 In haste, and in the manner of Travelers. 13 Only by
the Circumcised.
Christ was,
1 Perfect man, Ioh. 1. 2 Without sin. 3 Suffered and died. 4 They brake not
his legs, Ioh. 19. 33. 5 In the end of the world, Heb. 9. 26. 6 The blood of
Christ purges our consciences. 7 That sin and death might not prevail against
us. 8 He is applied by faith. 9 According to all the Articles of the Creed. 10
Without hypocrisy, 1 Cor. 5. 11 With patience under the Cross. 12 With an
earnest and longing expectation of life eternal. 13 Only by the faithful, 1
Cor. 11.
CHAP. V.
Of their Pentecost.
THis Feast was called (...), the Pentecost; which word signifies the fiftieth
day; because it was observed upon the fiftieth day after the second of the
Passover, which was the sixteenth of Nisan. Here in the first place we must
note, that the fourteenth of Nisan was (...), the Passeour, the fifteenth
(...), the Feast of the Passover, or Seniores appellant hunc diem, (...),
Leuit. 23. 11.
(...), the first of the Passover: the sixteenth was (...), the second of the
Passover, or the morrow after the Passover, Leuit. 23. 11. Which is all one,
as if it had been said, the morrow after the feast of the Passover; for in
those feasts which consisted of many days, the first and the last were termed
Sabbaths. Now these fifty days were in truth the appointed time of their
harvest, their harvest being bounded, as it were, with two remarkable days,
the one being the beginning, the other the end thereof: the beginning was
(...), the second of the Passover; the end was (...), the fiftieth day after,
called the Pentecost. Upon the (...), then they offered a Scalig. de emend.
temp. lib. 6.
sheafe of the first fruits of their harvest, Leuit. 23. 10. Upon the
Pentecost, then they offered two waue-loaues, Leuit. 23. 17. the sheafe being
an oblation offered in the name of the whole Congregation, whereby all the
after fruits thorowout the land were sanctified, (...), Joseph. Antiq. lib. 3.
cap. 10.
it being from thence afterward lawful, and not before, to reap the corn,
the two loaves being not only an Eucharisticall oblation, but also a token of
the harvest finished and ended. In the second place we are to know, that they
did count these 50. days, by numbering the weeks from the (...), whence it was
called a feast of weeks. The manner how they counted the weeks was according
to the number of the Sabbaths following the (...). Thus the first Sabbath
following, they called (...), the second (...), the third (...), etc. So that
Scalig. lib. 6. de emend. temp. page 260.
all the weeks and Sabbaths, during the time of the Pentecost, as the first,
second, third, and fourth, etc. took their denomination from the (...); which
observation gives light to that of St. Luke 6. 1. where there is mention of a
Sabbath termed (...), that is, the second-first Sabbath, and by it is meant the
Sabbath next after the sixteenth of Nisan, which was the (...). Seeing that
these fifty days did measure out the time of their harvest, it will not be
amiss to observe the difference betwixt their harvest and ours, which chiefly
consisted in their anticipation of time; for both the Canaanites and the
Egyptians began their harvest about the Plin. lib. 18. cap. 18. Illud ipsum
confirmat Leo Aser testis (...), Descript. Afric. lib. 8. cap. 4.
first of April, and it was quite finished in May.

CHAP. VI.
The Feast of Tabernacles.
THe Iansen. Concord. cap. 73. Item Tollet in Joan. 7. (...), non (...).
Greek word used to express this festiuitie, properly signifies the making
of Tabernacles. The (...) Chag hasuccoth.
Hebrew word a feast of Tabernacles. The reason of both is, because all the
time of this feast, which was full seven days (from the fifteenth of Tisri
until the one and twentieth thereof) the people remained in tabernacles, and
boothes made of boughs, in manner of arbours or bowers, yet so that the first
day of those seven, and the last, were after a more special manner to be
observed as holy conuocations.

Concerning these boothes, the Jews write thus: Munster. Leuit. 23.
They ought to be made in the open air, not within doors, or under the
shelter of a tree, they ought not to be covered with clothes, nor to be made
too close with the thickness of the boughs, but with such holes that the Sun
and the Stars might be seen through them, and the rain likewise descend
through them. In these they ought to dwell those seven days, as in their
houses; they ought to furnish them with household stuff, to lay under them and
sleep under them; only in rainie weather then they had liberty to eat and
sleep in their houses, until the rain was ouerpast. Feeble persons also,
which could not endure the smell of the earth, were permitted to stay at home.
In Nehemiahs time they made their boothes, some upon the roof of their houses
(for their houses were made flat above,) Deuteronomy. 22. 8. Some in their courts,
some in their streets, Nehem. 8. 15.

Plutarch making mention of this festiuitie, says, that Plutarch. Sympos. 4.
problem. 5.
these boothes were made principally of iuie boughs, but the Scripture
reckons up four distinct kinds, Leu. 23. 40. which are thought to be, 1.
The Citrine tree. 2. The Palm tree. 3. The Myrtle tree. 4. The Willow of the
brook. P. Fag. Leuit. 23.
The Rabbines teach, that every man brought every morning his burden of the
boughs of these four trees, otherwise he fasted that day. And this burden
they termed Elias Thisbit.
Hosanna: in allusion unto this the people cutting down branches from the
trees, and strewing them in the way when our Savior did ride into Jerusalem,
cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David, Mat. 21. 9. Plutarch scoffing the
Jews, compares this feast with that drunken festival in the honor of
Bacchus, in which the Bacchides ran up and down with certain iauelins in
their hands, wrapped about with iuie, called (...), and in this respect he
terms this feast of the Jews (...), A bearing about of these Thyrsi. That
feast which the Athenians term (...), was not much unlike.

Moreover, on the next day after this feast, they compassed the altar
Hospinian. de orig. fest. cap. 7 It. Munster. in Calendar. p. 150.
seven times with Palm boughs in their hands, in the remembrance of the
overthrow of Jericho: for which reason, or else because that Palm branches
were the chief in the bundle, it was called Dies palmarum, Palm feast.

Concerning the reason of this feast: Some are of opinion, that it was
instituted in memory of that protection, which the Lord vouchsafed the
Israelites by the cloud, when they traveled through the wilderness, under the
shadow of which they traveled, as under a safe boothe or tent. Onkelos in his
Chaldee Paraphrase, seems to incline to this opinion. Where the Hebrew
reads; That your posterity may know, that I have made the children of Israel
to dwell in boothes, Leuit. 23. 43. The Chaldee renders it, That your
posterity may know, that I have made the children of Israel to dwell (...)
in the shadow of clouds. Theophylact. Johan. 7.
Others think it was instituted as a solemn thanksgiving unto God for their
vintage, which was gathered in at that time of the year, thence is it that
they conceive those Psalms of David, which are entitled (...), pro
torcularibus, to have been composed for this Feast. Others speak more
probably, who assign the cause to be in memory of their forefathers dwelling
in tents and tabernacles; the text is clear, Leuit. 23. 43.

The sacrifices which were offered these seven days, are prescribed Numb. 29.
from the thirteenth verse to the thirty fourth, where we shall read every
day the like sacrifice, but only with this difference, that upon the first day
they offered thirteen young bullocks, upon the second twelve, upon the third
eleven, and so forward, ever diminishing the number by one. Hospinian. ^ de
^rig. huius fest.
The reason of which diminution, the Jews deliver to be thus: the whole
number of bullocks to be offered at this solemnity was seventy, according to
the languages of the seventy Nations, (for whom, as they teach, these
sacrifices were performed) signifying thereby, that there would be a diminution
of those Nations, until all things were brought under the government of the
Messiah, who was the Expectation and Hope of the Gentiles.

The two and twentieth of the month Tisri, was in truth a distinct feast, as
appears, Nehem. 8. 18. but yet because this immediately followed the feast of
Tabernacles, it has been always counted the last day of that Feast. And not
only the boughs, but the Talmud. tractat. de festo Tabernaculorum, cap. (...)
Vid. Tr^m^l. Ioh. 7 37.
days of this whole feast of Tabernacles were termed Hosannoth, from the
usual acclamations of the people, whiles they carried the boughs up and down.
And this eighth day was called Hosanna Rabba, the great Hosanna, or the great
day of the feast, Ioh. 7. 37. Buxtorf. in abbreuiatur, p. 253.
Upon this day they did read the last Section of the Law, and likewise began
the first, lest they might otherwise seem more joyful in ending their
sections, than willing to begin them. Tremel. Ioh. 7. 37. ex Talmud.
Upon this day also, by the institution of the Prophet Haggaeus, and Zachary,
and such like Prophetical men, they did with great solemnity and joy, bring
great store of water from the river Shiloah to the Temple, where it being
delivered unto the Priests, it was powered upon the Altar together with wine,
and all the people sung that of the Prophet Es. 12. 3. With joy shall ye draw
waters out of the wells of salvation. Our Savior is thought to have alluded
unto this, in that speech which he used on this very day, Ioh. 7. 38. He that
believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of waters of life.

It is worth our noting also, that whereas God commanded the observation of
this feast on the fifteenth of the seventh month Tisri; Jeroboam, that he
might work in the people a forgetfulness of the true worship of God,
appoints the celebration of a feast in the eighth month on the fifteenth day
thereof, Hospinian. de orig. huius fest. p. 24.
which is thought to be this very feast of Tabernacles.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Feast of Trumpets and their New-Moones.
FOr the understanding of the time when this Feast was to be observed, we
must note the month Tisri was the seventh month, according to their sacred
Computation, and therefore it is commanded to be celebrated the first day of the
seventh month, Leuit. 23. 24. But according to their civil Computation, it was
their first month, so that this feast may be termed their New-yeares day.

The first day of every month had its solemnities. First, they then repaired
to the Prophets for the hearing of the word as on other Sabbaths. Wherefore
will thou go to him to day? It is neither new Moon nor Sabbath day, 2 Kings
4. 23. Secondly, it was then unlawful to buy and sell: When will the new Moon
be gone that we may sell corn? Amos 8. 5. Thirdly, they had then special
sacrifices over and above their daily sacrifices.

Notwithstanding, this feast of Trumpets differed from other New moons. First,
in respect of their sacrifices; in their ordinary New moons, they offered
(besides the daily sacrifice) two bullocks, one ram, seven lambs for burnt
offerings; with their meat and drink offerings, and a goat for a sin
offering, Number. 28. 11. 15. But at this New Moon which was the beginning of
their year, they offered all the foresaid sacrifices, and over and besides
them, one bullock, one ram, and seven lambs for burnt offerings, and a goat
for a sin-offering, Numb. 29. 1. 6. Secondly, in other new Moons they blowed
no Trumpets: In this they blowed Sheindler. invoce (...)
from the Sun rising till night: Whence we learn what new Moon it is that
David speaks of, Psalm. 81. 3. Blow the Trumpet in the new Moon, in the time
appointed at our feast day.

The reason in general of this blowing and great noise of Trumpets, I take to
have been, to make their New years day the more remarkable, because from it
all their deeds and contracts bore date, and their Sabbaticall years and
Iubiles were counted thence: but why it should be made remarkable by the sound
of Trumpets or Cornets, there are three conjectures.

First, the P. Fag. Leuit. 23.
Hebrews think it was done in memory of Isaak his deliverance, and that they
did therefore sound rams horns, because a ram was sacrificed in stead of him.
Secondly, Bas. l. in Psalm. ^0.
Basil is of opinion that the people were hereby put in mind of that day,
wherein they received the law in mount Sinai with blowing of Trumpets. Thirdly,
others think it was to put them in remembrance of the resurrection, which
shall be with the sound of Trumpets, He shall send his Angels with a great
sound of a Trumpet, Matt. 24. 31.

There are Scalig. de emend. temp. page 26. It. page 105.
three things considerable in new Moons. First, (...), the conjunction of the
Moon with the Sun. Secondly, (...), the waxing of the Moon. Thirdly, (...),
the prime of the Moon. In the first it was quite dark: in the second it did
open it self to receive the Sunne-beames: In the last it did appear
corniculata, horned.

Because in all these three degrees of the change there was a kind of mutual
participation both of the old and new Moon; Hospin. de Orig. (...) 4. p. 15.
(...).
Hence the Jews observe two days, namely, the last of every month, and the
first day of the next following. Now because the thirtieth was the last in
their longest months; Hence Horace calls these last days, Tricesima
Sabbata: The first days they termed Neomenias, New Moons.

For certain reasons the Jews used a kind of change or translation of days,
which translation though it were of use in other months also, yet the greatest
care was had in translating the beginning of their year, or their first day in
their month Tisri, and he that shall diligently calculate these changes, shall
find that all other translations depended on this first.

Translation of days was (...) temp. l. 2. p. 85.
threefold. First, Lunary: Secondly, Politic: Thirdly, Mixed.

The reason of Lunary translation, was, that they might not observe the feast
of the new Moon, until the old were quite ouerpast. For the understanding of
this, note these three rules.

First, the Hebrews counted their holy days from night to night, beginning at
six of the clock; so that from six of the clock the first night, till the
next noone, were just eighteen hours.

Secondly, always before the new Moon there is a conjunction between the
Sun and the Moon, during this conjunction she is called Luna silens, by
reason of her darkness, and all this time there is a participation of the old
Moon.

Thirdly, when the conjunction was ouerpast before noone-tide, namely, in any
of those first eighteen hours, then the new Moon was celebrated the same
day. Munster. Calend. Heb. p. 46.
But if it continued but one minute after twelve of the clock at noone, then
the feast was translated to the day following, because otherwise they should
begin their holy day in time of the old Moon. And this translation they
noted with this abbreuiation (...), that is 18. because of those 18. hours
which occasioned it.

The reason of Politic translation, was, that two Sabbaths or feast days
might not immediately follow each other, Munster. Calend. p. 139.
because, say they, it was unlawful those two days, to dress meat, or bury
the dead, and it was likewise inconvenient to keep meat dressed, or the dead
unburied two days. Yet here two exceptions must be remembered, when the meeting
of two Sabbaths could not be avoided.

First, when the Passover, or the fifteenth day of Nisan fell on Satturday,
for then the Pentecost must needs fall on Sunday.

Secondly, when the Passover fell on Sunday, for then their Passover
immediately followed their weekly Sabbath.

The first Hospinian. de Orig. fest. p. 6.
Author of this Politic translation, was a certain chief man amongst them
named Eleazar, three hundred and fifty years before Christ his Nativity.

The several species or kinds of Politic translation were five. The first,
(...) Adu. The second, (...) Badu. The third, (...) Gahaz. The fourth, (...)
Zabad. The fifth, (...) Agu.

For the understanding of these abbreuiatures, we must know that in these made
words the letters only stand for numbers, and are applied to the seven days of
the week thus, (...) 1. Sunday. (...) 2. Monday. (...) 3. Tuesday. (...) 4.
Wednesday. (...) 5. Thursday. (...) 6. Friday. (...) 7. Saturday: which was the
Jews Sabbath.

Their rules touching Politic translation stood thus. Adu.
First, that neither their Newyeares day which was the first of the month
Tisri; neither their feast of Tabernacles which was the fifteenth day of the
same month, should be celebrated on Adu; that is, on Sunday, or Wednesday, or
Friday. Not on Sunday or Friday, because then the weekly Sabbath must needs
concur with it, either going immediately before, or following after: not on
Wednesday, because then the feast of Expiation, which is the tenth of that
month, would fall on Friday, the day going immediately before their Weekly
Sabbath. This instance is only concerning the first of Tisri which is called
the feast of Trumpets: but it holds also by way of consequence in the
fifteenth day, which is the feast of Tabernacles, because the fifteenth must
always necessarily be the same day of the week that the first is. Therefore
if the first be not Adu, the fifteenth cannot be Adu.

The Badu.
second rule, was, that the Passover should not be observed on Badu; that is,
on Monday, Wednesday, or Friday.

The Gahaz.
third rule is, that Pentecost was not observed on Gahaz; that is, on Tuesday,
Thursday, or Saturday.

The Zabad.
fourth rule, is, that the feast of Purim, or casting lots was not observed on
Zabad; that is, on Monday, Wednesday, or Saturday.

The Agu.
fifth rule, is, that the feast of Expiation was not observed on Agu; that is,
on Sunday, Tuesday or Friday.

Mixed translation, is, when both the Lunary and the Politic meet in the
changing of days. And the translation occasioned by this mixture or meeting of
both these two, is twofold. First, Simple: And secondly, Double.

Simple translation, is, when the feast is translated to the next day
following. For examples sake; If the Moon changed after noonetide on Sunday,
here the feast must be translated for two reasons: the first is Lunary, because
the point of the change was after eighteen hours; the second, Politic,
because the rule Adu forbids Sunday to be kept; notwithstanding in as much as
the very next day, namely, Monday, was observed; I term this translation
simple. Of this sort was that translation which they called Batu takphat.

(...) Batu takphat.
Batu takphat, is a word invented for help of memory, each letter is a
numerall, and may be thus resolved, (...) 2. (...) 15. (...) 589. The meaning
is, that in the year following Annum Embolymaeum (wherein one whole month was
engrafted) if the point of the change happened upon the second day of the week,
that is, Monday, not before the fifteenth hour and the 589. moment, the feast
of the new Moon was translated unto Tuesday. How both the Lunary and the
Politic translation work in this change, read Scaliger de emend. lib. 2. p.
87.

Double translation, is, when the feast is translated not to the next, but to
some farther day: as if the first day of the month Tisri should happen upon
Saturday, here if the Moon has not ouerpast her conjunction before the
afternoon, Lunary translation remooueth this feast till Sunday, because of
(...) that is, the eighteen hours: Politic translation remooueth it till
Monday, as appears by the rule Adu, forbidding Sunday. Of this sort is Gatrad.

(...) Gatrad, is a made word, each letter is a numerall, and it may be thus
resolved, (...) 3. (...) 9. (...) 204. The meaning thereof is thus: In their
common year (when an whole month is not inserted) if the point of the change
happen upon the third day of the week, that is, Tuesday, not before the ninth
hour, and the 204. moment of an hour, then the new Moon shall be translated
to Thursday.

Note in the last place, Munster. Calend. p. 45.
that 1080. moments make an hour.

The feast of Tabernacles was observed in the month Tisri, and therefore that
could not be observed the morrow after the Sabbath, as appears by the rule
Adu. The Passover was observed in the month Nisan, and therefore that might
be observed the morrow after the Sabbath, as appears by the rule Badu. If any
ask the reason why the Passover might be observed the next day after the
Sabbath seeing the feast of Tabernacles might not? I take it to be thus; All
the after translations depended upon the first translation of the first new
Moon in Tisri, but that could not be so changed as to prevent all concurrence
of two feasts, and thus to have their Passover sometimes to follow their
Sabbath, they thought the most conuenientest ordering of the year, because
though not all meetings of two Sabbaths, yet most were hereby prevented.

This tract of translation of feasts, it serves partly to open the customs of
the Jews: partly to give light for the understanding of that great dispute
among Divines, whether our Savior did anticipate the Passover. The Greek
Church Epiphan. l. 2. Tom. 1. cap. 51. p. 147.
holds, that he kept a Passover by himself with his Disciples, on the
thirteenth day of the month, when unleavened bread was not yet to be used; and
hence they do both use and urge a necessity Vsum fermentati panis in coena
Dominica Ecclesia Romana olim non damnauit. Casaubon. exercit. 16. p. 465.
of leauened bread in the Lords Supper: But this opinion we reject; First,
because it accords not with the truth of Evangelical history. Secondly,
because it plainly makes Christ to be a transgressor, not a fulfiller of the
Law. Munster in Matt. c. 26.
Others say, that because that year their Passover fell on Friday, hence the
feast was translated unto Saturday by the rule Badu. Their inference is, that
Christ kept the fourteenth day of the month, which was Friday, and the Jews
kept Saturday. He kept Gods command, they the tradition of their Elders.
Joseph. Scaliger. de emend. temp. lib. 6. p. 266.
Lastly, others more probably hold, that both Christ and the Jews did eat the
Passover the same day and hour, namely on Friday, or the fourteenth day of
the month, if we count the beginning of Friday according to the manner of the
Jews; from six a clock at night on Thursday. Friday morning he was judged,
and crucified; and in the afternoon, about three of the clock, when the
preparation of the Sabbath began, he was buried. There laid they Jesus,
because of the Jews preparation, Ioh. 19. 24.

For reconciling the Evangelists in this point, we must note these particulars,
which are more at large proved in the chapter of the Passover. 1. The
fourteenth day of the month, on which the Paschall Lamb was eaten, was called
the first day of unleavened bread, the feast of unleavened bread drew near,
which is called the Passover, Luke 22. 1.

The fourteenth day was not holy, but the fifteenth was. In the fourteenth day
of the first month is the Passover of the Lord, and in the fifteenth day of
this month is the feast, Numb. 28. 16, 17. Some of them thought, because Judas
had the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy those things that we have need
of against the feast, Ioh. 13. 29.

The sheep and bullocks offered upon this day are called the Passover, Deuteronomy.
16. 2. And of this we are to understand St. John 18. 28. They themselves went
not into the common hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat
the Passover. So that this eating of the Passover is not understood of the
Paschall Lamb. But some may question, how they should have been defiled by
entering into the common hall? The answer is, that upon (...) Moses ben Ma^mon.
lib. vlt. Iad. c. Sanedrin.. 11.
Holy day eues, which they term days of preparation, they held it unlawful
for their Judges to sit on life and death. Hence it is, that they brought Jesus
to Pilat the Roman Deputy. Secondly, they withdrew themselves out of the
common hall. Thirdly, for this reason they said, It is not lawful for us to
put any man to death, Ioh. 18. 31. August. Tract. 114. in Ioann. Ita hunc locum
exponunt etiam Cyrill. lib. 12. in Joan. cap. 6. Chrysostom. homil. 82. in
Joan. Beda in cap. 18. Joan.
that is, upon this, or such like day; for though their high Court of Sanedri^^
were put down at this time, yet all power in cases of life and death was not
taken from them, as is implied in the words following. It was that the word of
Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying what death he should
die, verse. 32. Which text intimates, that that unlawfulness was urged by the
special providence of God, that he might be crucified, being judged by Pilat:
for if the Jews had judged, they used no such kind of death toward
malefactors. Again, Steven was condemned by them to be stoned, Acts 7. And
they complained before Felix, that when they were about to proceed against Paul
according to their own Law, the chief Captain Lysias with violence took him
out of their hands, Acts 24. Which argues, that all power in causes capital
was not taken from them: But of this see the Chapter of their capital
punishments.

CHAP. VIII.
The feast of Expiation.
Upon the tenth day of the month Tisri, answering to September with us, the
feast of Expiation was commanded to be celebrated, Leuit. 13. It was called the
feast of Expiation, because the High Priest did then confess unto God, both
his own sins and the sins of the people, and by the performance of
certain rites and ceremonies expiate them, and make an atonement unto God for
them.

The Ceremonies at this time to be performed, concerned either the people and
the Priest, or the Priest alone. Those which concerned the people and the
Priest, consisted in the afflicting of their souls by fasting. Whence this
feast was also called Josephus de bell. Iud. p. 43.
Dies ieiunij; The fasting day, Ier. 36. 6. Which serves for the understanding
of that, Acts 27. 9. Sailing was now dangerous because the Feast was already
past; that is, the feast of Expiation was now past, and winter was at hand.

Those Ceremonies which concerned the Priest alone were two. First, then the
High Priest entered into the Holiest of Holies, which was peculiar unto this
day. Secondly, he being about to sacrifice for himself and his house, he took
unto him a young bullock for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering,
putting on his Priestly robes: after he had washed himself in water, he took
of the Congregation two he-goats for a sinne-offering, and a ram for a burnt
offering. The two he-goats he presented before the Lord at the door of the
Tabernacle, casting lots which of them should be sacrificed, which let escape
alive. This last was termed the (...) Gnazazal, ex (...) Gnez, capra, and (...)
Azal, ab^j^. K. D. Kimchi, in radic.
Scapegoat, because the other being slain, this was sent alive into the
wilderness. The Greek Interpreters call this goat (...), Malorum depulsorem,
A defender from evils; which name the Heathens applied to their Tutelar Gods.
They intimated, that when this Scapegoat carried away the sins of the people
into the wilderness, he likewise carried away all those evils, which belonged
unto those sins. And for the securing the people in this point, the Lord
commanded the High Priest to confess in the name of all the people, and to
disburden the sins of the whole Congregation upon the head of the Scapegoat.
The form of Confession, according to the relation of the Hebrew Doctors, was
this: P. Fag. Leuit. 16.
O Lord, thy people, the house of Israel, they have sinned, they have done
wickedly, they have transgressed before thee, I beseech thee now, o Lord,
pardon the sins, iniquities, and transgressions, with which the people, the
house of Israel have sinned, done wickedly, and transgressed before thee, as it
is written in the Law of thy servant Moses: That in that day he shall make
atonement for you, that he might cleanse you, and that you might be clean
from all your iniquities before the Lord.

The modern Jews now (because there can be no proper sacrifice, the Temple of
Jerusalem being destroyed) the men they take a white cock on this day, the
women an hen. Buxtorf. Synagog. c. 20.
This cock they swing three times about the Priests head, saying; Gallus
Gallinaceus hic commutatio erit pro me; That is, This cock shall be a
propitiation for me. After that they kill the cock, acknowledging themselves
worthy of death; and then they cast the intralls upon the top of the house,
that some Raven or Crow might carry both them, and together with them, their
sins into the wilderness. And lest they might seem to be mad without
reason, they assign the cause why they make choice of a cock, at this time,
to be this. This word (...)
Gebher in the holy language signifies a man, in their Talmud it signifies a
cock. Now, say they, the justice of God requires, that as Gebher sinned, so
Gebher should make satisfaction. From this feast of Expiation it is probable,
that the Grecians used an yearly Expiation of their cities, which was
performed on this manner: Certain condemned persons were brought forth with
garlands upon their heads, in manner of sacrifices, these they would tumble
from some steep place into the sea, offering them up to Neptune, Suidas in
voce (...).
using this form of words, (...), Sis pro nobis peripsema: As if they had
said, Bethou a reconciliation or propitiation for us. The like kind of
expiation was used among them in time of any pestilence, or contagious
infection; for the remouall of such diseases, they then sacrificed certain men
unto their Gods, (...), Vetus Scholiast. in Aristophan. Plut. page 48.
such men they termed (...). These two words are used by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.
13. and they are translated filth and offscouring: we are made as the filth of
the world, and as the offscouring of all things. The words signify properly
the filth or dirt scraped off men's shoes, or from the pauement of the ground:
But in Budaeus annot. reliq. in Pandect. De poenis, p. 334.
Budaeus his opinion, the Apostle had allusion unto those kinds of expiations
in use among the Heathens. As if he had said; We are as despicable and as
odious in the sight of the people, as much loaded with the reuilings and
cursings of the multitude, as those condemned persons, who were offered up by
way of public expiation.

Now seeing at this feast principally the High Priest was a type of Christ, it
will not be amiss to note the agreement between the type and the truth.

Aaron.
1. The High Priest went into the Holiest of all, Leuit. 16. 3. 2. He went
once a year, Exodus 30. 10. 3. He with the blood of goats and calves, Heb. 9.
12. 4. He alone, Heb. 9. 5. He clothed with his Priestly robes, Leu. 16. 4.
6. He took two goats, Leu. 16. 7. The goat did bear the peoples iniquities.
Christ.
1. Christ our High Priest went into the holy place, namely, the heavens, Hebr.
9. 12. 2. He entered once, Heb. 9. 12. 3. He by his own blood, Heb. 9. 12. 4.
He alone has trodden the wine press, Is. 63. 3. 5. He ordained and sealed to
this office, by his father from all eternity. 6. He took two natures: the
impassibilitie of his Godhead was shadowed by the Scapegoat: his sufferings in
his manhood, by the goat that was sacrificed, Theodoret. Quaest. 22. in Leuit.
Christ was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 22.
CHAP. IX.
The Sabbaticall year, or Seventh years rest.
AS every seventh day was a Sabbath day, so every seventh year was a
Sabbaticall year, Leuit. 25. And as the Sabbath day signified that they
themselves were the Lords, and therefore they abstained from their own work
to do the Lords: So the Sabbaticall year was to signify, that both they and
their land was the Lords.

The observation of this feast consisted chiefly in two things. First, in the
not tilling or manuring of their ground, whence it was called (...).
Schabath Haarets, the Sabbath of the land, Leuit. 25. 6. Secondly, in the
Creditors discharging their debtors, and releasing their debts, and thence it
was called (...)
Schemita laihoua, The Lords release, Deuteronomy. 15. 2.

Seeing they were that year forbid to till their ground, here question might
be made what they should eat then in the time of this intermission?

Answ. I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall
bring forth fruit for three years, Leu. 25. 20, 21. says the Lord.

Seeing every seventh year, debts according to Gods command were to be
remitted, some might demand, whether this might not much endamage their estates
if they did lend? or, harden their hearts not to lend?

Answ. It could not endamage their estates, for it is a most infallible Maxim:
No man is a loser by serving God. Whence the Hebrews themselves interpret this
to be rather Mandatum probationis, A command of trial, such as Abraham's
offering up of Isaak was, which God commanded, not intending that he should be
sacrificed, but that Abraham's love might be tried; rather than Mandatum
obedientiae, A command of obedience. To this purpose speaks Aben Esra,
interpreting these words; Save when there shall be no poor among you, Deuteronomy.
15. 4. Aben Esra. Deuteronomy. 15. 4.
That is, says he, as if the Lord had said, Know that that which I have
commanded thee, that thou should not exact of thy brother, will be
needless. If all Israel, or the greater part obey the voice of God; then there
shall be no poor amongst you, to whom it shall be needful for thee to lend:
yea all of you shall be able to lend to many nations.

The reasons why this feast was instituted, are thought to be, First, to teach
the people to depend upon Gods providence by faith; for though the owner of the
field might gather even on that year for the maintenance of himself and his
family, Leuit. 25. 6. yet he was neither to sow his field thereby to make his
harvest the greater; nor to hedge his field, or lock up his cornyard, thereby
to enjoy the propriety, but to let all be common, and every man's hand equal
in every place. Secondly, they were hereby put in mind of that happy estate,
which Adam enjoyed in his innocence, when the earth brought forth her increase
without manuring. Lastly, it shadowed forth that everlasting Sabbath which we
expect in the heavens. Vid. Hospinian. de Orig. huius festi.
And some conjecture this to be the ground of Rabbi Elias his opinion, Talmud
in Sanedrin. c. Helec.
that the world should continue for six thousand years, but the seventh
thousand should be the great Sabbaticall year. The six thousand years
answered the six working days of the week, the seventh answered our Sabbath,
according to that, A thousand years are but as one day with the Lord, 2 Pet.
3. 8. Elias his words are these; Six thousand years the world shall be, and
again it shall be destroyed: (...). Duo millia inamtatis, duo millia legis,
duo millia dierum Messiae. Talmud in Sanedrin. c. Helec.
Two thousand shall be void, two thousand under the law, and two thousand
under the Messiah. The substance of this prophecy howsoever we reject as too
curious, yet seeing that a Jew spoke it, it may serve to prove against them,
First, That the Messiah is already come: Secondly, That Moses his law ceased at
his coming.

CHAP. X.
Of their Iubile.
THis is the last festival which God commanded the Jews; it was celebrated
every fiftieth year. It is commanded, Leuit. 25. 8. Thou shall number seven
Sabbaths of years unto thee, etc. The English word Iubile is derived from the
Hebrew (...) Iobel, signifying a ram; it signifies also a rams horn. Seven
Priests shall bear before the Arc seven Trumpets of rams horns, Josh. 6. 4.
where the word Iobelim is used, and is expounded by the Chaldee Paraphrast,
rams horns. Marbachius is of opinion, that this year was called their Iubile,
Marbach. in Leuit. 25.
from Iubal, the first inuenter of musical instruments, of whom we read, Genesis
4. 21. Iubal was the Father of all such as handle the Harp and Organ: Other
Authors deliver other reasons of the name; but it is most probable, that this
year was termed the year of Iubile, from Iobelim, the rams horns then
sounded. There were five maine uses of this feast.

First, for the general release of servants. Secondly, for the restoring of
lands and tenements unto their first owners, who formerly sold them. Thirdly,
hereby a true distinction of their Tribes was preserved, because lands returned
unto their owners in their proper Tribe, and servants to their own Families.
Hospinian. de Orig. fest. c. 9.
Fourthly, Some are of opinion, that as the Grecians did compute their times by
the number of Olympiads; the Romans by their lustra; the Christians by their
Indictions: So the Jews by their Iubiles. Lastly, it did mystically shadow
forth that spiritual Iubile, which Christians enjoy under Christ, by whose
blood we have not only a reentry into the Kingdom of heaven, which we had
formerly forfeited by our sins (and this was happily signified by the
Israelites reentry upon their lands formerly sold) but also the sound of the
Gospel which was in this feast typed out unto us by the noise of Trumpets, is
gone throughout the world. And thus the Lord God has blown the Trumpet, as
Zacharies phrase is, Zach. 9. 14. But neither this release of servants, nor
restoring of lands, was Moses Aegyptius in Halacha Schemita Veiobel. c. 10.
until the tenth day of the first month Tisri, at which time it was
proclaimed by the sound of Trumpets, or rams horns; the nine first days of
this month the servants feasted and made merry, and wore garlands in token of
their liberty approaching.

CHAP. XI.
The Feast of Purim and the feast of consecration or Dedication.
PVr is a Persian word, and signifies a lot, whence this feast of lots is
called Purim, (i.) (...), A lottery: it began on the fourteenth of Adar, and
continued till the end of the fifteenth, Ester 9. 21. It was instituted by
Mordecay, in remembrance of the Jews delivery from Haman, before whom lots
were cast day by day, and month by month, for the destruction of them. In
these two days they read the history of Esther in their Synagogues, and as
often as they hear mention of Haman, Hospinian. de fest. fol. 33. ex Antonio
Margarita in lib. de ceremoniis Iudaeorum.
they do with their fists and hammers beat upon the benches and boords, as if
they did knock upon Hamans head.

The feast of Dedication, is termed in the N. T. (...), (...). Suidas.
a feast wherein something is renewed; because those things only are reputed
consecrated, which are separated from their common use, and dedicated to some
new and holy use. We shall read of many things consecrated in the old
Testament; the Tabernacle, the Temple, Priests, Altars, Vessels, and Garments:
but there was no anniuersary or yearly solemnity appointed, to be observed in
remembrance of their consecration. The consecration therefore which we now
speak of, being an yearly festival, was the consecration of the Altar
appointed by Judas Maccabaeus to be observed from year to year, for the space
of eight days, from the five and twentieth of the month Caslew, which
answers in part to our December, 1 Macab. 4. 59. Of this Saint John speaks,
and as he mentions our Saviors presence there, so he intimates the time to
be about December. It was at Jerusalem, the feast of the Dedication, and it
was winter, John 10. 22, etc.

The reason of this feast, was in remembrance of that great mercy which God
showed unto his people, in delivering them from the tyranny of Antiochus, and
the Idolatry which he had forced upon them, setting up the Idol of Jupiter in
the Temple of God, and abolishing the true worship of God.

These two feasts are of humane institution, and others might be added unto
them, but little is to be added or nothing at all to that which is delivered
concerning them, in the places of Scripture where they are mentioned.

THE FOVRTH BOOK. Of their Idolatry.
CHAP. I.
The beginnings of Idolatry.
THe infiniteness of Gods majesty far transcendeth the capacity of created
natures, and if we consult not with Gods own Oracles, though the sense of a
Deity may be imprinted even in an Atheists heart, yet so far shall he be from
all right understanding of God, that he will adore the creature in stead of
the Creator, and when he has multiplied the number of his gods, according to
the number of the stars in heaven, and creeping things on earth, yet still
his heart will be doubtful, whether he has worshipped the true God, nay
whether the true God be not utterly unknown. For this reason the mariners in
(...) ship cried every man unto his god, (...) 1. 5. Every man to his own god,
and lest they might all mistake the true God, they awaken Jonah to call upon
his God. This Seru. in Georgic. lib. 1.
uncertainty attending Idolatry, caused the Heathens to close their petitions
with that general, Dij deaeque, omnes. Gyrald. Syntagm. 17.
The Arabians perceiving the insufficiency of their known gods, dedicated
their altars, Ignoto Deo, To the unknown God. At Athens, Saint Paul found an
Altar with the same inscription, Act. 17. 23. Hence other neighbor countries
were wont to swear (...). Lucian. in Philopatride.
by him that was unknown at Athens. From this doubt and distrust among the
Athenians, what God was? and who he was? sprang another uncertainty amongst
them, as dangerous as the other, dividing and sharing that vndiuidable unity of
the Godhead, between I know not what comp^irs and equals, so that they had
other altars mentioning a plurality of gods: Pausanias in Atticis.
the inscription being (...), The altar of the unknown Gods; yea the complete
and entire inscription of that altar which Saint Paul saw, is thought to have
been thus, (...). Theophyl. in Act. Apost. 17. 23. It. Hieronym. Tit. 1. 12.
To the Gods of Asia, Europe, and Africa, to the unknown and strane God. Which
observation implies their practice to have symbolised with other Heathens in
that forementioned closure, Dij Deaeque omnes; O all ye Gods and Goddesses
help. This distrust I think to be the chief reason why they worshipped the
unknown God; though I deny not but the altars might bear this title, to
conceal the name of their Tutelar god, unto whose protection they had
committed themselves, Alex. ab Alex. lib. 6. cap. 4. Tyraquell. in illu^. locum.
because the Heathen people generally conceited, that if the gods name, to whom
they dedicated a city, were known, then the enemies might by some magical
incantation or charm, call him forth, and cause him to forsake the city: For
the better preventing of which manner of euocations, the Tyrians, the
Lacedaemonians, and other Macrob. Saturn. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Nations, fettered and chained their gods, that they might not depart. Again,
it might be done in imitation of the Jews, who about the time of our Savior
his incarnation, held it unlawful to pronounce that essential name of God,
Iehoua, and in stead thereof would read Adonai. The occasion of this
concealment of the name Iehoua, I take to have been originally, to prevent
the blaspheming of that holy name among the Heathens, who had learned from that
name to denominate their Idols, Vid. Macrob. Satur. lib. 1. cap. 18. It.
Irenaeum, lib. 2. cap. vlt. Item Origin. contra Cells. lib. 6. fol. 76. col. 3.
love, (...), Iaoth, (...), etc. Hence afterward the forbearing the name became
superstitious, and so far prevailed, that they corrupted the text for the
defense thereof, Exodus 3. 15. This is my name (...), legnolam, for ever: Vid.
P. Galatin. lib. 2. cap. 10.
they read (...), legnalam, to be concealed. Though I deny not but that name
was always in some sense ineffable; namely, as Plin. in Prooem. lib. 5. hist.
nature.
Pliny says, the names of the Affrican people and towns were ineffable, that
is, such as other languages could not express without circumlocutions.

As those forementioned Idolatrous names, were nothing else but so many
deprauations of the name Iehoua: so the Original of many other ensuing kinds
of Idolatry, proceeded at first from a misconstruction of Scripture. They
having learned by tradition, that the Sun, Moon, and Stars, had a kind of
Lordship and rule over day and night, times and seasons: Hence the
superstitious ignorance of those people deified those lights of Heaven, and
worshipped them as gods. Afterward corruption prevailing, their Apotheosis, or
godmaking Ceremonies, were extended to sublunarie creatures, partly as Symbola,
or representative signs of those greater and more glorious lights; for this
reason the Chaldeans worshipped fire: (...), and Vr of the Chaldeans, mentioned
Genesis 11. which signifies fire or light, is thought to be the very god of the
Chaldeans, though in that place the name Vr, be applied to some chief city,
from the name of the Idol. Yea, the god of Nabor, Genesis 31. 53. is thought to
be no other; partly also the inferior creatures were canonized for gods, in
way of thankfulness for the benefits received from them; for which reason the
sea; the winds, the air, the earth, and fruits of the earth became deified.
At last, well-deseruing men, nay Crocodiles, Serpents, Rats, Cats, Dogs,
Garlic, and Onions, were reputed gods.

CHAP. II.
Of Moloch, Adram-Melech, Anam-Melech, Baal, The Tabernacle of Molech, Chiun,
Remphan, Horses consecrated to the Sun, Thamuz.
OF the Idol Moloch we read in diverse places of Scripture, 1 King. 11. 2
King. 23. 10. Leuit. 18. 21. He is sometimes called Moloch, sometimes Molech,
sometimes Milcom. He was the reputed god, not only of the Ammonites, but of
the Lorinus in ^ ex Oecumenio.
Moabites also. He had his name from (...) Malac, signifying to rule or
reign. The seventy Elders translate him, (...), a Prince, or King. Such
King-Idols were Adram-Melech, and Anam-Melech, the Gods of Shephernaim, unto
whom that people burnt their children in fire.

I take Moloch and Baal to be one and the same Idol; they were both names of
supremacy and rule; (...) Baal signifies a Lord or Master: And (...) Molech, a
King or Prince. They had both the same manner of sacrifice, they burnt their
sons for burnt offerings unto Baal likewise, Ier. 19. 5. yea they built the
high places of Baal, which are in the valley of Benhinnom, to cause their sons
and their daughters to pass through the fire unto Molech, Ier. 32. 35. In which
text, the place of sacrifice is noted to be one and the same, common to both
Idols, and Molech put in the end of the verse, to explain Baal in the
beginning thereof.

Some think them to be different, because the Augustine. super Iudic. quaest.
16. Vide sis Eusebium de praepar. lib. 1. cap. 7.
planet Jupiter was worshipped under the name of Baal; but the planet Saturn
is probably thought to have been worshipped under the name of Moloch. If we
diligently observe histories, we shall find such a confusion of the planets,
that the Sun, as it was sometime called Baal, sometimes Moloch: so it was
sometimes called Plato apud Macrob. Satur. lib. 1. cap. 23. vbi mendose citatur
e Timaeo Platonis, quod est in Phaedro.
Jupiter, sometimes Assyrios Saturnum (quem and Solemn dicunt) Iunonemq,
coluisse constat. Seruius in Aen^id. 1.
Saturn; and concerning Baal, this is evident: hence Jupiter was called by the
Phenicians, Baal-samen, which name is derived from the Hebrew, and sounds as
much as Jupiter Olympicus, the Lord of Heaven: For Baal signifies Lord, and
Shamaim, Heaven. And what is this Lord of Heaven in the theology of the
Heathens, other than the Sun? who may as well be styled the King of Heaven,
as the Moon the Queen. Yea Sanchoniatho, as Eusebius in the forequoted place
relates him, takes all these three for one, namely the Sun, Jupiter, and
Baal-samen.

Concerning Saturn, it is apparent that the Sun was worshipped under his
name; but I find some Expositors, to interpret Moloch to be (...), Molech dici
volunt quasi (...) Malach. (i.) Angelus, Nuncius. Proinde interpretantur Molech
Mercurium Deorum nuncium.
Mercury, others R. Leui. Leuit. 18. 21.
Mars: these are but few, and the grounds weak. It is therefore more generally
and more probably thought, that he was Saturn, because as to Moloch, so to
Saturn, the Heathen people did sacrifice their Macrob. Saturn. lib. 1. c. 7.
Sons and Daughters. Secondly, Saturnes Image differed not much from Molochs.
Of Saturnes thus we read; Eusebius. de praepar. lib. 4. cap. 7.
It was made of brass, wonderful for its greatness, whose hands reaching
toward the earth, were so hollow (ready to claspe) that the youths which were
compelled to come unto him, did fall as it were into a mighty ditch full of
fire. You shall read in a manner the same description of Moloch. Ialkut
commenting on Jeremy writes thus; Ialkut Ierem. 7. fol. 97. column. 1.
Though all other houses of Idolatry were in Jerusalem, yet Moloch was without
Jerusalem, in a place apart. How was he made? He was an image of brass: He had
seven chapels, and he was placed before them, having the face of a bullock,
and hands spread abroad, like a man that opens his hands to receive somewhat
from some other: and they set it on fire within, for it was hollow; and every
man severally entered, according to his offering. After what manner? whosoever
offered a foul, went into the first chapel; he that offered a sheep, into
the second; a lamb, into the third; a calfe, into the fourth; a bullock, into
the fifth; an ox, into the sixth; and whosoever offered his son, into the
seventh. Thus Moloch and Saturn agree: First, in their sacrifice: Secondly, in
the form of their Images. Now these seven chappells built for Moloch, may well
resemble those Orig. contra Celsum, lib. 6. fol. 74. col. 4. It. Gyrald. in
Deorum Syntagm. 7. p. 223.
seven gates with which the Persians honored the Sun; and as the seven gates
did, so might the seven chapels mystically express the seven planets, whereof
the Sun was Molech, (i.) the King and Prince. When they sacrificed their
sons unto this Idol, they did beat upon tabrets and drums, that the cry of
the child might not be heard by the father. Thereupon was the place called
(...) Tophet, from (...) Toph, signifying a drum, as likewise from the cry of
the children it was called Gehenna, (...) signifying a valley, and (...)
roaring or crying. Some may make the question, whether that the phrase, The
fire of Gehenna, Matthew. 5. 22. had its original from this fire, wherewith the
children were burnt unto Moloch? I answer, that in this phrase there was not
respect only unto this fire; though by the bitter cries and eiulations of
poor infants, the restless torments of hell might be shadowed, yet the
perpetuity and euerlastingnesse of hellish pains, I take to be signified
herein, by allusion unto that D. Kimchi, Psalm. 27. 13.
other fire kept continually burning, for the consuming of dead carcasses, and
the filth brought out of Jerusalem. For Gehenna was reputed a contemptible
place without the City, in the which they burnt, by means of a fire
continually preserved there, the carcasses, filth, and garbidge of the City.
The Cap^io de Kabala, p. 644.
Kabbalists treating of Gehenna in this metaphorical sense, as it is applied
to the pains of hell, do distinguish of it, saying; That there is Gehenna
superior, and inferior: By the first they understand bodily torments inflicted
upon the bodies of sinners in this world: By the second they understand the
pains of the soul in the world to come. P. Galatinus lib. 12. c. 6.
They say likewise, that there are Septem Gehennae mansiones: Seven degrees or
mansion places in Gehenna. 1. Infernus. 2. Perditio. 3. Profundum. 4.
Taciturnitas. 5. Vmbra mortis. 6. Terra inferior. 7. Terra sitiens. Of these
seven receptacles, he that will mis-spend his time may read according to the
quotation.

It is much controuersed among expositors, whether the children in this
sacrifice were burnt in the fire, or only initiated and consecrated to Moloch,
passing in the midst of two fires in sign of their consecration? It is
probable, that both were in use. First, the scripture speaks of both.
Secondly, the Hebrew Doctors show the manner of both. That they were burnt,
Ialkut expressly teaches, and with him Aben Esra. Leu. 18. 21.
others accord, saying, That Molech is the name of an image, and the wise men
of blessed memory interpret Molech to be an universal name, denoting any whom
they have made to rule over them; and it is agreed upon, that this is the
abomination of the sons of Ammon, and this phrase to cause to pass through,
is as much as to burn. Others say, This Idols name was Molech, and Rabbi
Solomon Leuit. 18. 21.
this was his worship: That he, (namely the Father) delivered his son unto
the Priests, and they made two great fires, and they made his son pass on
his feet between both these fires.

Notwithstanding, we must not think that there were no other oblations unto
Molech besides sacrificing of children: For what use then served those other
six chappells? No, I take this oblation of children,not to have been forced on
them by any superstitious law or tradition, binding them thereunto: but to have
been reputed a work more meritorious, because it was merely voluntary. This
I note, because otherwise there were an apparent difference between Baal and
Molech. For the Baalites offered unto their fancied deity a bullock in that
contention between them and Eliah, 1 King. 18. Bullockes, and Calves, and
Lambs, were their ordinary sacrifices, the sacrificing of their children
extraordinary. Yet their ordinary sacrifices, were not always altogether void
of man's blood, but sometimes the Priests would lance and cut their own flesh:
which custom, whence it had its original, I find not; only we find the
like to have been practiced by the Heathenish Priests in their sacrifices to
Bellona: Tertul. Apolog. c. 9.
Tertullian touches it; but Lactantius p. 40.
Lactantius treating of Bellona and her Priests, speaks more clearly,
saying, They sacrificed not with any other man's blood, but with their own,
their shoulders being lanced, and with both hands brandishing naked swords,
they ran and leaped up and down like mad men. Who would not take these
Bellonites to be the very Baalites spoken of, 1 Kings 18. They leapt upon the
Altar which was made -- and cut themselves as their manner was with knives and
launcers, till the blood gushed out upon them.

That the opinion of pleasing God by sacrificing their children sprang from
Abraham's offering of Isaak, seems very probable, and is intimated by R.
Solomon, who brings in God speaking concerning Molech after this manner. I
never commanded that they should offer up their sons for an oblation, and I
never spoke it unto any of my Prophets, Solomon Iar^h^. Ier. 7. 31.
and when I spoke to Abraham to sacrifice his son, it entered not into my
heart that he should sacrifice him, but to make known his righteousness. Yea
Eusebius. praepar Euang. l. 1. c. 7 p. 27.
Porphyry treating of Saturn, (who seems to have been this very Molech)
says that the Phoenicians called him Israel, and that he had by Anobreth one
only son, called Ieud in the Phoenician language (no doubt from the Hebrew
Iechid, signifying an only begotten, and applied to Isaak, Genesis 22. 2.) which
he offered upon an altar purposely prepared. Who sees not the history of
Abraham and Sarah under the names of Israel and Anobreth? and the immolation of
Isaak, under the name of Ieud? and the original of this Sonne-sacrificing
divinity, to have been the unwarrantable imitation of Abraham?

But what! was the Sun worshipped Idolatrously, no otherwise? Yes, except I
am deceived, we find another manner of worship described by Amos, chap. 5. 26.
But ye have borne the tabernacle of your Moloch, and Chiun your images the
star of your God which ye made to your selves. This translation I prefer
before others. First, because the (...)
Hebrew word signifies a Tabernacle. Secondly, it is rendered the tabernacle of
Moloch, not Siccuth your King, (...).
by the seventy. Thirdly, it is so repeated by Saint Steven, Act. 7. 43. Ye
took up the Tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your God Remphan, figures
which ye made to worship them.

Three things are to be enquired for the understanding of this parallel. First,
what the bearing or taking up of this Tabernacle is. Secondly, what Idol was
pointed out by these names of Chiun and Remphan. Thirdly, what is meant by the
star of this God.

The taking up of this Tabernacle denotes their worship which they exhibited
unto their Idol, by carrying him up and down in Tabernacles and Pageants,
after a solemn manner of procession; by the Romans, this solemnity was termed
Pompa; and the tent or Pageant in which the Idol was carried, Theusa,
according to that, Theusa Deorum vehiculum. This kind of Idolatry may seem to
have had its original among the Heathens, from an unwarrantable imitation of
Moses his Tabernacle, which was nothing else but a (...) Joseph. antiq. l. 3.
c. 5.
portable Temple, to be carried from place to place as need required. For it
cannot be denied, but that many superstitions were derived unto the Heathens
from the true worship of God, which he himself had prescribed unto his people.
Thus as God had his Tabernacle, Priests, Altars and Sacrifices, so the Devil
had his Tabernacles, Priess, Altars, and Sacrifices. As God had his fire ever
burning upon the Altar, Leuit. 6. 3. So had the Devil his fire preserved
burning by those Vestall Votaries. As God had his propitiatory or mercy seat:
So had the Devil his Sacros tripodas, his Oracles from which he would speak
unto them that served him. This solemn procession was performed by the Romans,
in the honor of the Solis honor (...) grati specta^ula C^rci. Antiqui d^^^re
patres. Corip. Afric. lib. 1. number. 17. vid. Demps^er.
Sun: It was performed by the Israelites in honor of their Moloch who
formerly was interpreted the Sun. To add unto the pomp and state of this
solemnity, both the Romans, and the Israelites caused great horses and chariots
to be lead up and down. Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 12.
Horses were consecrated to the Sun by the Romans, and their Cirque-place was
sometimes called (...), and (...), An Horse-race. And that chariots were
commonly used in those pompous shows is -- Hic illius arma, Hic currus s^it.
Virgil. Aeneid. 1.
evident. Concerning the people of Judah, does not the like practice plainly
appear? 2 King. 23. Josiah did put down the Horses given to the Sun, and
the chariots of the Sun. This kind of idolatrous worshipping the Sun
seems to have had its beginning from the Persians; who also accounted horses
holy to the Sun, Coel. Rhodigin. antiq. l. 8. c. 2.
and the Persian King when he would show himself in great state, caused an
exceeding great horse to be lead up and down, the which was called Equus Solis.

The second enquiry is, what Idol was meant by Chiun, and Remphan, otherwise
in ancient copies called Repham. Not to trouble the Reader with the various
interpretations of expositors, much less with the bold adventures of others in
correcting the text: By Chiun we are to understand Hercules, who in the
Egyptian language was called Chon: by Repham we are to understand the same
Hercules, for (...) Rephaim, in the holy tongue signifies Giants. By Hercules
we may understand the planet of the Sun: there are Etymologists which derive
Hercules his name from the Hebrew (...) Heircol, Illuminauit omnia: the Greek
Heracles quid aliud est quam (...) (i.) aeris gloria: quae porro alia est aeris
nisi solis illuminatio? Macrob. Satur. l. 1. c. 20.
Etymology, holds correspondency with the Hebrew, and both signify that
universal light which flows from the Sun, as water from a fountain. Add
hereunto, that Eusebius. de praep. l. 3. c. 4. p. 71.
Porphyry interprets Hercules his twelve labors so often mentioned by the
Poets, to be nothing else but the twelve signs of the Zodiak, through which
the Sun passes yearly. But some may question whether the name of Hercules
was ever known to the Jews? It is probable the name was, for Hercules was the
god of the Tyrians, from whom the Jews learned much Idolatry, as being their
near neighbors: Yea it is apparent that in the time of the Macchabees the
name was commonly known unto them: for Jason the High Priest sent three
hundred drachmes of silver to the sacrifice of Hercules, 2 Maccab. 4. 19.

Thirdly, it follows that we should enquire what this star of Remphan was;
It is probably Oecumenius, Act. 7. 43.
thought that it was a certain star painted in the forehead of Molech:
Neither was it unusual for the Heathen people to paint their Idols with such
Symbolica additamenta. Sueton. in Iul. c. 88. It. Plin. hist. l. 2. c. 25.
Horat. l. 1. Ode 12.
Julius Caesar his image had a star depicted on the Crown of his head.

The Sun was also worshipped by the house of Judah, under the name Tamuz; for
Hieronym. comment. 3. in Ezekiel.
Tamuz, says Hierome, was Adonis, and Pier. hierogl. l. 9. p. 68.
Adonis is generally interpreted the Sun, from the Hebrew Adon, signifying
Dominus, the same as Baal, or Moloch formerly did, namely, the Lord, or Prince
of the Planets. The month which we call June, was by the Hebrews called
Tamuz, and the entrance of the Sun into the sign Cancer, was, in the Jews
Astronomy, termed Tekupha Tamuz, the revolution of Tamuz. Concerning Adonis,
whom sometimes ancient Authors call Osiris, there are two things remarkable,
(...), the death or loss of Adonis: and (...), the finding of him again. As
there was great Nunquamque satis quaesitus Osiris. Semper enim perdunt, semper
and inueniunt. Lucan.
lamentation at his loss, especially amongst the Plutarch. in Alcibiade.
women: so was there great joy at his finding. By the death or loss of Adonis,
we are to understand the departure of the Sun; by his finding again, we are
to understand his return. Now he seems to depart twice in the year: First,
when he is in the Tropicke of Cancer, in the farthest degree northward.
Secondly, when he is in the Tropicke of Capricorn, in the farthest degree
southward: answerable unto these two departures which may be termed (...),
disparitions, or losses of the Sun, there are two returns immediately
succeeding, which may be termed likewise (...), the findings or new appearings
of the Sun. Hence we may note, that though the Egyptians celebrated their
Adonia in the month of November, when the Sun began to be farthest
Southward; and the house of Judah theirs, in the month of June, when the Sun
was farthest Northward; yet both were for the same reasons, and in substance
they agreed. And of this, the Prophet Ezekiel is thought to have spoken, Ezekiel.
8. 14. There sat women weeping for Tamuz.

Th^se solemnities were chiefly observed, between the Byblienses and the
Alexandrini, Procopius in Isaiam ad c 18. It. Cyrillus l. 2. Tom. 2. in Isaiam.
the manner was thus: When the Byblienses solemnised the death or loss of
Adonis, at that time the Alexandrini wrote a letter, this letter was enclosed
in an Arc of bulrushes, therein they signified that Adonis, whom they lamented
was found again, this arc being after the performance of certain rites and
ceremonies committed to the sea, forthwith it was carried by the stream to
Byblus, upon the receipt whereof, the lamentation of the women was turned into
joy. Julius Maternus Firmicus. l. de errore profan. religion.
Others say that this lamentation was performed over an Image in the night
season, and when they had sufficiently lamented, a candle was brought into the
room (which ceremony might mystically signify the return of the Sun) then
the Priest with a soft voice muttered this form of words. (...) Firmicus ibid.
Trust ye in God, for out of pains salvation is come unto us. (...) R. Dan.
Kimchi in radic.
There are likewise of the Jews, that say their Tamuz was an image whose eyes
they filled with Lead, which Lead being molted by the means of fire under it,
the image it self seemed to weep.

There Procop. in Isai. 18.
are, that think the Prophet alludeth unto those letters enclosed in those
forementioned bulrush arkes, Is. 18. 2. when he speaks of Ambassadors sent
by the sea even in vessels of reeds upon the waters. But I rather approve the
literal sense, for by reason of the shelfes, and dangerous rocks in the river
Nilus, it was not unusual for men to sail in hulkes and vessels made of a
kind of great bulrush, which by the Egyptians was termed Papyrus, and these
kind of ships Plin. hist. lib. 6. c. 22.
Papyraceae naues.

CHAP. III.
Of Baal-Peor, Baal-Tsephon, Baal-Zebub Baal-Berith, Bell, and the Dragon.
WHom the Hebrews called Baal, the Babylonians called Bell, and although the
Planet of the Sun only at first might be worshipped under that name, yet at
last it became a common name to many other Idols, according to that, There are
many gods, many Baalims or Lords, 1 Cor. 8. 5. As the same Idol Jupiter had
different names, and different rites of worship, occasioned sometimes from the
different places, as Jupiter Olympius, from the hill Olympus; Jupiter
Capitolinus, from the Capitol hill; Jupiter Latialis, from that part of Italy
which is called Latium. Sometimes from the different benefits which he was
supposed to bestow on men, as Jupiter Pluuius, because he gave rain; Jupiter
Lucetius, because he gave Light; Jupiter Altitonans, from thundering: So Baal
had his distinctiue titles, and different rites of worship, sometimes
occasioned by the place, as Baal-Peor, Numb. 25. 3. sometimes from the benefit
obtained, as Baal-Tsephon, Exodus 14. 1. and Baal-Zebub, 2 King. 1. 2. sometimes
for some other reason, as Baal-Berith, Judge. 8. 33.

Baal-Peor is thought to be that Hieronym. ad Hos. c. 9. Idem prodidit Isidor.
Orig. lib. 8.
Priapus, that obscene Idol, so famous in profane authors. He was called
Peor, from the hill Peor, mentioned, Number. 23. 28. as likewise his Temple
wherein he was worshipped, standing upon the same hill, was called Beth-Peor,
Deuteronomy. 3. 29. He was worshipped by the Moabites, and Midianites: the Idol
Chemosh, Ier. 48. 7. is thought to be the Hieronym. in Isai. l. 5. c. 15.
same, and I take it to be applied to Baal-Peor, by way of contempt, as if one
should say, their blind god, according to that in the Psalm, They have eyes,
and see not. For the first letter Philo Iud. l. 2. Allegoriar. p. 79.
Caph, signifies, quasi; and (...) Musch, palpare, to groape or feel about in
manner of blind men.

Baal-Tsephon is thought by the ^^. Fag. Exodus ^^.
Hebrews, to have been an Idol made by the Egyptian Magicians, and placed in
the wilderness, to observe, and stop the Israelites in their departure from
Egypt, whence it was termed (...) Tsephon, from (...) Tsapha, signifying to
watch, and observe in manner of a watchman: we may call him Baal speculator,
as among the Romans, because Jupiter stayed the Romans when they were flying,
he was called Rosin. lib. 2. antiq. Romans cap. 5.
Jupiter stator.

Baal-zebub, sounds as much as the Lord of the flies, or a (...). Gregor.
Nazianz. orat. 2. contr. Julian. p. 102.
Master-flie, which has power and authority over the rest, in which respect
the Prince of the Devils in the Gospel is termed Beelzebub, (...) Zebub
signifies a fly. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 28.
This Idol was worshipped by the Cyrenians, but principally by the Ekronites,
because whenever they sacrificed unto him, the swarms of flies, which at
that time molested the country, dyed. But it is certain, that this was not the
alone reason, for they were wont to repair to him, as to an Oracle, 2 King. 1.
2. we may call him Jupiter muscarius, or Hercules muscarius, Clemens Alexandr.
in protreptic.
for the inhabitants of the city Elis, sacrificed to Jupiter under the name of
(...) (i.) A driuer away of flies; and the Romans to Hercules, under the same
name. Some Greek copies in the Gospel read (...), Beelzebul, which change is
interpreted to be, for to show the greater contempt of the Idol, as if they
should say, Jupiter stercoreus, (...) Zebel signifies stercus, and Beel or
Baal signifies Dominus.

Baal-Berith was the Idol of the Shechemites, of his Temple we read, Judge. 9.
4. (...) Berith signifies a covenant, so that Baal-Berith may be translated
Jupiter foederatus. (i.) (...). Septuaginta interpr. Iud. 8. 33.
The God unto whom they bound themselves by covenant. Concerning Bell and the
Dragon, little is spoken, besides what we read in that of the Apocrypha, where
the History is described.

CHAP. IV.
Of Dagon.
THe R. David. 1 Samuel 5
Hebrew Doctors say, that this Idol Dagon was made from the nauill downward
in form of a fish, but from the nauill upward, in form of a man. This they
collect from the 1 Samuel 5. 4. The two palms of his hands were cut off upon the
threshold. And furthermore they say, the Idol Dagon had his name from the
Hebrew (...) Dag, signifying in the holy language, a fish, according to which
description we may english him the Philistims Neptune or Triton non absimilem
habuisse figuram singitur. Frons hominem praefert, in pristim desinit aluus.
Pier. Hierogl. lib. 31. page 218.
Triton. Others derive the name from (...) Dagan, signifying corn, and they
Philo Byblius apud Eusebius. de praepar. lib. 1. cap. 7.
say, that he first invented the use of the plough and corn, whence they
translate him Jupiter aratrius. In this respect we may call him the Philistims
Saturn, because antiquity makes Pier hieroglyph. lib. 32. p. 228. idem lib. 56.
Saturn the first inuentor of husbandry, and therefore paints him with an
hook or sith in his hand, as being the fittest hieroglyphick for husbandry.
Both opinions have their Authors, and no sufficient proof has been produced
to overthrow either. R. Leui. 1 Samuel 5.
Yea their are not wanting among the Jews themselves, that say this image of
Dagon was made in the form of a man. Notwithstanding Scaliger his conjecture
is not improbable, that those who interpret Dagon, Jupiter aratrius, or (...),
might mistake and read (...) Shadai signifying Ager, A field; for (...)
Schaddai being the very name of God, signifying Omnipotens, Almighty.

CHAP. V.
Of the molten calfe.
THe history of the molten calfe is at large set down, Exodus 32. where we
read, that by reason of Moses his long absence, the people desired of Aaron,
Gods to be made, whereupon Aaron made for them the molten calfe. The reason why
they worshipped God rather in the similitude of a calfe, then of any other
creature, is generally by expositors conceived to be, from the corruptions
learned among the Egyptians who worshippped their Idol Plin. not. hist. l. 8.
c. 46. Herodot. l. 2. Solin. c. 35. aut aliorum distinctione 45.
Apis, otherwise called Alex. Genial. dier. lib. 6. c. 2.
Serapis, in a living Ox, and likewise in an image made in the form and
similitude of an Ox with a bushel on his head. This Ox was remarkable for
certain notes and marks, whereby it was differenced from all others. It was
black bodied, it had a white forehead, a white spot behind, and a knot under
his tongue; for the more curious fashioning and polishing of these marks in
the molten calfe, Aaron may seem to have made use of his (...) stylo
sculptorio.
grauing tool. Plin. hist. lib. 8. c. 46. It. Alex. G^nial. dier. l. 6. c. 2.
The Egyptians repaired unto this Ox for the resolution of matters doubtful,
as to an Oracle, and the manner of consulting with him was thus. The party that
repaired unto him, tendered a bottle of hay or grass, which if he received,
then it betokened a good and happy event; if otherwise he refused it, then it
did portend some evil to come. Thus they turned their glory into an Ox that
eats grass, Psalm. 106. 20. The Hebrew word in the Psalm, translated an Ox,
is, (...)
shor, which I note, because, in my opinion, it gives light to one of the
names by which this Idol was denoted. Sometimes it was called Apis, from the
Hebrew word vultus, Facies (...)
Ap, signifying a face: sometimes Serapis, quasi Shor-apis, which is nothing
else but Bouis caput, an Ox head, the very name used by the Cyprian. de bono
patient. p. 318. vid. etiam August. p. 73. It. Tertullian. adu. Iud. cap. 1.
Fathers to express this Idolatry. It is commonly known, that this Idolatry
was derived to Israel from the Egyptians, but whence the Egyptians first
learned it, few have taught: They do not conjecture amiss, who interpret the
first institution hereof to have been in the memory of Joseph, who by his
providence relieved both Egypt, and other neighbor countries in the seven
years of famine. Beside the testimony of no slight Suidas in (...). Ruffinus
lib. 2. hist. Eccles. c. 23. Pier. hierogl. lib. 3. p. 25.
Autors, there are strong inducements to persuade it. First, both the years of
plenty and famine were foresignified by the apparition of Oxen. Secondly, what
fitter emblem, (if it had not afterward proved an Idol) to continue the
remembrance of a Joseph, (by whose alone care and industry, corn and victual
was provided in an extreme famine,) than an Ox, the true and lively
hieroglyphick of an industrious husbandman? Thirdly, in this, Suidas agrees
with others, that this Ox was pourtrayed with a bushel on his head, though
others do more clearly express the reason of this portraiture, namely,
because of the great quantity of corn measured out by Joseph in that extreme
dearth. Concerning the sin of the Israelites in making this calfe or Ox, the
modern Jews do transfer the fault upon certain proselyte Egyptians who came
forth with them; and they say, that when Aaron cast their jewels into the
fire, these Egyptians, contrary to his expectation, by their art Magic
produced a calfe, to which purpose they urge Aarons own words, Exodus 32. 34. I
did cast the gold into the fire, and thereof came this calfe; as if his art or
will went not with the making thereof, but of it self it made it self. But
this answer of his shows rather, how vain the wit of man is in the excuse of
sin; and as his engrauing instrument writes down Aarons sin: so the
confession of other more ingenuous Jews, proclaims the Israelites, saying
that (...) Moses Gerund. vid. Munster. Exodus 32.
no punishment befalls thee Israel, in which there is not an ownce of this
calfe. I conclude this, with the analogy between the Egyptian Apis, and the
molten calfe: and this consisted in three things. First, as there were some
special marks in the Egyptian Ox: so is it probable that Aaron, with his
engrauing tool, made the like. Secondly, as the Egyptians in honor of their
Ox Suidas in voce (...).
celebrated a solemn feast, with much singing and mirth: so the Israelites
proclaimed a feast in honor of their calfe. The people sat down to eat, and
drink, and rose up to play. Thirdly, as the Egyptians Ox was at last drowned
in the river: so Moses burnt the molten calfe, and beat it to powder, and cast
it upon the face of the water, Exodus 32. 20. Deuteronomy. 9. 21. Jeroboam afterward,
though upon other inducements, committed the same sin; he thought in his
heart, that if the people did go up to Jerusalem and do sacrifice in the
house of the Lord, they would revolt from him, and return to the King of
Judah: whereupon he set up two calves of gold, the one in Bethel, the other in
Dan; saying unto the people, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, 1
King. 12. 28.

CHAP. VI.
Of Astaroth, Ammonia, Juno, the Queen of heaven, Diana of the Ephesians.
AS the Sun was worshipped under many names: So likewise the Moon. Astaroth
was the Idol chiefly of the Zidonians, 1 King. 11. 5. 2 King. 23. 13. she had
her Temple called the house of Astaroth, in which the Philistims hanged up
Saul's Horum Anathematum oblationem primo didicerunt ab Israelitis. Number. 7. 1 Samuel 21.
armor after his death, 1 Samuel 31. 10. That the Moon was worshipped under
this name needs not (...). Astarten lunam esse opinor. Lucian. de Dea Syria.
proof: only August. super Iudic. quaest. 16.
some say that Astarte was Juno: and why may we not say that Juno is often used
to express the Moon? Astarte Vrunia idem omnino valet apud Phaenicas, quod
Juno Lu^^na apud Latinos. Deducitur Urania ab Hebraeo (...) Nun in sine ad^ctie
aut persesolum, aut cum Iod quod passim fit a S^ris, qua^^ (...) vel (...) in
foeminino vero (...) (i.) Lucidus and Lucida, aut Lucinus and Lucina. Et hinc
Graeci suum (...) mutuatisunt.
Both the Moon and Juno are often called by the name of Urania. And as the
Moon in respect of her light is called Urania: so in regard of the lesser
lights in the heaven, she is called Astroarche, that is, the (...) dicitur,
(...), ab imperio quod in aftra exercet. vid. Herodian. lib. 5.
Queen of the planets; or as Horace speaks of the Moon; Siderum regina, The
Queen of the stars; or lastly, as Virgil speaks of Juno; Diuum incedo
regina, The Queen of the gods. It seems very probable, that this is that
Queen of Heaven, of which the Prophet speaks, Ier. 7. 18. Ier. 44. 17.
Again unto whom may we imagine those ancient heathens to have performed that
solemn worship, which they did on the Calends, or first day of every month?
was it not to the Moon? And yet notwithstanding it is ascribed to Juno,
Macr^b. Sat. lib. 1. c. 15.
whence she is called Juno Calendaris. Lastly, as Jupiter Macrob. Sat. lib. 1.
c. 21.
Ammon was no other than the Sun, and worshipped in form of a ram: so for
ought I see, the Moon might be called Juno Cael. Rhodigin l. 18. c. 38.
Ammonia, and worshipped in the form of a sheep. Sure I am, that the Hebrew
Doctors describe the images of D. Kimchi. 1 Samuel 31. 10. It. Iud. 2. 13.
Astaroth, to have been made in the form of sheep, and the word Astaroth in
the original signifies a flock of sheep, and the Moon might as well be
called Ammonia, as the Sun Ammon, both being so called from their heat, which
in the holy tongue is called (...) Calor, Sol.
Hammah, and from thence likewise those images (of which we read, Leuit. 26.
30. Isay 17. 8. Isay 27. 9.) are called R. Solomon in Leuit. 26. 30.
Hammanim, because they were certain Idols placed upon the housetop, and so
always exposed to the Sun. Furthermore, as Jupiter -- stat corniger illic
Jupiter. Lucan. l. 9. verse. 514.
Ammon was painted with horns, so likewise was the Syderum regina bicornis
audi. Luna puellas. Horat. car. saecular.
Moon: why they should be thus painted, many reasons might be produced, but
chiefly three; the first peculiar to the Sun, the other common both to Sun
and Moon. First, the Sun was painted with rams horns, because with the
Astronomers the sign Aries in the Zodiak is the Pier. hieroglyph. l. 10.
beginning of the year. Secondly, because as the strength of horned beasts
consist in their horns: so the virtue and influence of the Sun and Moon, is
derived unto sublunary creatures by their beams. Thirdly, because the light of
the Sun, and Moon, makes the reflection cornute or hornelike. When Moses
came down from God, Aaron and the people saw that his face shined, Exodus 34.
the Latin reads it, Facies eius erat cornuta: and hence it is, that Moses is
painted with horns, which some of the Rabbines have interpreted (...) cornud
magnificantie. R. Solemn. porio Hebraicum (...) (vnde (...) and co^nuemanarunt)
significat in morem cornuum splendorem radiose^ emittere.
horns of magnificence: The error grew from the doubtful signification of the
Hebrew word, signifying splendour or brightness, and also horns.

Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 1. c. 15.
The Moon was also worshipped under the name of Diana, who although she were
worshipped throughout all Asia, yet she was had in principal esteem among
the Ephesians, whence arose that cry, Great is Diana of the Ephesians, Act. 19.
28. Her greatness among the Ephesians appears partly by her Temple, which in
Plin. lib. 36. 14.
one place Pliny says was two hundred and twenty years building, but Plin.
16. 40.
elsewhere he says four hundred years: partly from the great gain procured
unto the silver Smiths in making and selling silver Temples of Diana, Act. 19.
24. It is much disputed what those silver temples were; some think them to be
little housen, or shrines (such as were for their smalnesse portable) in form
representing the Temple of Diana, and within having the image of Diana
enclosed, and in this sense (...) is sometimes used, to signify closets, or
shrines wherein images were kept: others think certain coins or pieces of
money, to be called by the name of Dianaes Temple, from the similitude of
Dianaes Temple, engraven or stamped upon those coins: as in England we call
some pieces of gold the George, others the Angel, others the Thistle, from the
impression which they bear. The like custom of naming coins from their
sculpture or impression, was not unusual among the Simili prorsus ratione.
Atheniensium numos quosdam, boues: eorundem Atheniensium alios quosdam, (...)
(i.) puellas: alios Corinthiorum (...), pullos: alios Peloponnesioram, (...),
testudines: alios Romanorum naues vocabant.
ancients; neither were such coins unusual on which the Temple of Diana was
engraven, and these capital letters added, DIAN EPHE. Theodorus Beza, in his
mayor annotations upon the Acts, reports, that he has seen two of these
himself.

We read of another kind of idolatrous worship toward the Moon, to have
been Macrob. Saturnal. lib. 3. cap. 8. Non absimilem idololatriam in cultu
Veneris prodidit Julius Firmicus de errore profan. religion. cap. 4.
that men sacrificed to her in women's apparel, and women in men's apparel,
because they thought the Moon to be both male and female, whence the Moon is
called by old Authors as well Lunus, as Luna: And Venus, whom Philochorus
affirms to be the Moon, is termed Deus Venus, as well as Dea Venus. Maimonid.
in more Nebochim part. 3. cap. 38.
Some have thought that God had respect unto this kind of Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 22.
5. where men are forbidden to wear women's apparel, and e contra, but it is
more generally and upon better grounds thought that the promiscuous use of
apparel (whereby the distinction of sex is taken away) is there forbidden.

CHAP. VII.
Of other Gods mentioned in Scripture.
THe Sun and Moon, which are the greater lights in the Heaven, I take to
have been the chiefest Idols worshipped by the Heathen people.
Notwithstanding, their blind devotion deified also the other Planets, and that
numberless number of lesser lights, called in Scripture Militia cael^, The
host of heaven, whose several natures, properties, and influences, are not
distinctly known. In like manner there is an host of Idols mentioned in holy
writ, of whom little or nothing is spoken to the purpose by Autors, more than
their very names. Of this nature are those chambers of imagery, wherein all
forms of creeping things were pourtrayed on the walls, Ezekiel. 8. It may be
termed their Pantheon.

In those Colonies which the King of Ashur transplanted into Samaria, every one
worshipped the god of his own Nation. The men of Babel made Succoth Benoth,
the men of Cuth made Nergal, the men of Hamath made Ashima, the Auims made
Nibhaz and Tartak, the Shepharuims burnt their children in the fire to
Adrammelech and Anammelech the gods of Shepharuaim, 2 Kin. 17. 30. 31. R.
Iarchi. 2 King. 17. R. David non dissentit.
The Hebrew Doctors say that Succoth Benoth was the picture of an hen with her
chicken; Nergal they interpret Gallum syluestrem; Asima a Goat; Nibhaz a dog;
Tartak an ass; Adrammelech a mule; Anammelech an horse: that such bruit beasts
should be worshipped as gods may seem ridiculous; but the like to have been
practiced among the Heathens, profane Authors abundantly testify. The Lucian.
lib. 16. de Sir. Dea.
cock was worshipped as a God among the Syrians; Herodotus in Euterp.
A goat by the Mendesij; Cic. de legib. lib. 1. vid. Traquell. in Alex. ab
Alex. lib. 6. It. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 1. 18.
A dog by others: yea they have adopted into the number of their gods, Alex.
Neopolit. lib. 6. cap. 26.
Oxen, Lions, Eagles, Wolves, Crocodiles, Cats, Rats, etc. Nay they have dug
their gods out of their gardens, Porrum and cepe, nefas violare and srangere
morsu. O sanctas gentes, quibus baec nascuntur in hortis Numina. Iuuenal.
satyr. 15.
Garlic, leekes, onions, etc. To these may be added Nisroch which was the god
of the Assyrians, and as it seems had his Temple at Nineue, 2 King. 19. vlt.
and Esaias 37. vlt. Secondly, (...) Rimmon, the word signifies a Pomegranat.
Concerning this Idol it is much controuersed, whether Naaman sinned not in
saying, The Lord be merciful unto thy servant, that when my Master goes into
the house of Rimmon, etc. 2 King. 5 18. Read the words in the Praeter tense:
When my Master went into the house of Rimmon, the sense appears to be a pardon
craved for sins past, not afterward to be committed. The same word (...)
Bebho, in going, is put to express the time past, in the titles of the Psalms
52. and Psalm. 54. Thirdly, Nebo, otherwise called Nabo, an Idol of the
Assyrians, Ier. 48. 1. He had his name from prophecy, (...) Nabhi signifying
a Prophet, he seems not much to differ from (...), or (...), so often
mentioned in Homer. Diodor. Sicul. l. 5. 72.
Diodorus Siculus makes them both one, and we may render Nebo, the Assyrians
Ammon, or Jupiter Vaticinus: the god of their Oracles.

CHAP. VIII.
The several manners of divine Revelation.
AS Idolatry originally sprang from mistaking of Scripture: so witchcraft and
sorcery, (which holds near affinity with Idolatry) seems to have had its
first beginning from an imitation of Gods Oracles. God spoke in diverse manners,
Heb. 1. 1. By dreams, by Vrim, by Prophets, 1 Samuel 28. 6, 7. when the Lord
would by none of these answer King Saul, then he sought to a Witch. To these
might be added Gods speaking from between the Cherubims, his answering by
Visions, Angels and voices: but the chief manners of revealing himself,
observed by the Hebrew writers, are four, which they term P. Fagius in Exodus
28.
four degrees of prophecy, or divine revelation: somewhat therefore being
spoken of these, I purpose to explain the several sorts of unlawful
diuinations mentioned in Scripture.

The first degree was (...) Nebuah, Prophecy. This was, when God did by
certain visions and apparitions reveal his will.

The second, was (...) Ruach Hakodesch, The inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
whereby the party was enabled, without visions or apparitions, to prophecy:
some showing the difference between these two, D. Kimchi praefut. in Ps.
add that the gift of prophecy did cast a man into a trance or extrasie, all
his senses being taken from him: but the inspiration of the Holy Ghost was
without any such ecstasy, or abolition of the senses, as appears in Job,
David, Daniel. Both these degrees, as likewise Vrim and Thummim, ceased in the
second Temple, whence their ancient Doctors say, Talmud in Sanhedrin. c. 1.
that after the latter Prophets Haggai, Zachary, and Malachie were dead, the
holy Ghost went up, or departed from Israel. Howbeit they had the use of a
voice or Echo from heaven. In which speech we are not to understand that the
Holy Ghost wrought not at all upon the creatures, or that it wrought not then
in the sanctification of men as in former times, but that this extraordinary
enabling men to prophecy by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost then ceased; and
in this sense, the Holy Ghost was said to have departed from Israel. Unto this
common received opinion, that passage might have reference, Acts 19. We have
not so much as heard whether there has been an holy Ghost or no. That they
did not doubt the distinction of persons, appears clear, if that be true
which P. Fagius in Exodus 28.
some have noted, that the ancient Jews before Christ were so catechized in
that point, that they observed the mystery of the Tranity in the name (...)
Jehovah, for though the name consisted of four letters in number, whence it
was called (...), Quadriliterum, yet there were but three sorts of letters in
the name, (...) Iod signified the Father, who was the beginning of all things:
(...) Vau, is a conjunction copulative, and denoted the third person in
Trinity, which proceeds from the Father and the Son. (...) He signified the
Son of God. The Rabbines have a saying, that God made all things, In litera
(...) He. They may allude to this, that he made all things by his word: he
said, Let there be thus, and thus, and it was so: but they may also allude to
the second person in Trinity. And furthermore they note that (...) He, is
doubled in this name, to demonstrate both natures of our blessed Savior.

The third degree, was Vrim and Thummim. Vrim signifies light, and Thummim
perfection. That they were two ornaments in the Highpriests breast plate, is
generally agreed upon: but what manner of ornaments, or how they gave answer,
is hard to resolve. Joseph. antiq. l. 3. cap. 9.
Some think them to be the four rows of stones in the breast plate, the
splendour and brightness of which foreshewed victory, and by the rule of
contraries, we may gather, that the darkness of the stones not shining
presaged evil. R. Solomon que^admodum refort D. Kimchi in radic.
Others say it was the name Jehovah, put in the doubling of the breast plate,
for that was double, Exodus 28. 16. Talmud in Jonah cap. 6. vid. P. Fagium in
Exodus 28.
Others declare the manner of consulting with Vrim and Thummim thus. First,
they say that only the King, or else the Abbeth din.
Father of the Consistory had power to consult, or to propose the matter unto
the Priest, and the Priest only had power to resolve. Secondly, that the
matter proposed must not be triuiall, but of moment and great difficulty.
Thirdly, that this holy writing, termed Vrim and Thummim, consisted of all the
Tribes names, and likewise of the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, so
that no letter of the Alphabet was wanting. The question being proposed; Some
say that the letters which gave the answer were (...) (i.) they did arise and
eminently appear above the others. An example they take from the 2 Samuel 2. 1.
When David asked the Lord, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? The
Lord answered (...) gnaleh, go up. Here, say they, (...) appeared out of the
name of (...) Schimeon, (...) out of the name of (...) Leui, (...) out of the
name of (...), Iehudah. Others say, that the letters which represented the
Oracle were (...) (i.) that they did after a strange manner join themselves
into perfect syllables and entire words, and made the answer complete. Many
other opinions might be reckoned up, but R. David in radic.
he spoke best, who ingenuously confessed that he knew not what Vrim and
Thummim was.

The fourth degree was (...) Bath Kol, Filia vocis, the daughter of a voice, or
an Echo; by it, is meant a voice from heaven, declaring the will of God; it
took place in the second Temple, when the three former degrees of prophecy
ceased: it gave testimony of our Savior; Lo a voice from heaven, saying, That
is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3. 17. It was in truth
the prolegue, preface, or type of that true voice of the Father, that eternal
word which revealed his Fathers will unto mankind.

These were the extraordinary means by which God revealed himself to his
people of old: ordinarily, he revealed himself by his written word.
Notwithstanding the Hebrews say, that the law, even from the first time of its
delivery unto Moses, was twofold: the one committed to writing, which they call
(...) Thora Schebictab, the written law: the other delivered by tradition,
(...) Thora begnal pe, it was also termed their Kabbala, from (...) Kibbel,
signifying Accipere, To receive or learn. They say both were delivered by God
unto Moses in mount Sinai; but this latter was delivered from Moses to Joshua,
from Joshua to the Elders, from the Elders to the Prophets, from the Prophets
to those of the great Synagogue, and so successively to after-ages, till at
last it was digested into one book, containing principally precepts, and
directions for those Israelites, which inhabited the Holy Land. It is called
Talmud Ierosolymitanum. It was composed in the year of our Lord 230. This
because it contains but a few constitutions, is but of little use. About 500
years after Christ, then was there a more full and exact collection of their
constitutions, for direction of those Jews which dwelt in Babylon, and other
foreign places; this is termed Talmud Babylonicum, and is of greatest use
among Authors, it contains the body of their civil and canon law. This
traditionall law, they hold to be as authentic, as their written word, and
that Moses received it from God, when he received the law, for, say they, were
it not for this exposition, the Decalogue it self might have been delivered
(...) Moses Kotsens. in praefat.
In hora veloci, In less than an hour.

Here we must know that the word Kabbala, when it is applied to the Kabbalists,
to difference them from the Talmudists, is taken in a stricter sense, and
signifies these subtilties, or mysteries, which are observed from the
different writing of some letters in the Scripture, from the transposing of
them, from a mystical kind of Arithmetique, etc. This was never wholly
committed to writing. Some instances we have, Genesis 23. 2. Abraham came (...) to
weep for Sara. Here Baal Turim.
because the letter Caph is less than the rest, they note that Abraham wept
but a little for Sara, because she was old. Again the letter Aleph is found
six times in the first verse of Genesis; hence R. Elias collected, that the
world should endure but six thousand years; because Aleph in the Hebrews
computation stands for a thousand. From the transposition of letters they
conclude after this manner; (...) Cherem signifies an Anathema or
excommunication; by a Metathesis or transposition of the letters, it is made
(...) Rachem signifying mercy; by another transposition it is made (...)
Ramach, which letters in the Jews computation make 248. which in their
anatomy, they find to be the just number of members in a man's body. Their
conclusion hence is, that if an excommunicated person do truly repent, then
his Cherem is turned into Rachem; his curse turned into a blessing: if he do
not repent, then his Cherem enters into Ramach, the curse enters into all
his members, to the utter destroying of the whole man. Again, (...) Isch,
signifies a man, (...) Escha, A woman. Hence they note, that in the name of
the man there is (...) Iod, which is not in the name of the woman; in the name
of the woman there is (...) He, which is not in the name of the man: both these
make (...) Iah, one of the names of God: these being taken away, in both names
there remain (...) Esch, signifying fire, to show, that as long as man and
wife agree, God is with them, but when they disagree, fire is between them.
Thus we see what vain mysteries their Kabbalists observe.

CHAP. IX.
Their Teraphim.
COncerning the Teraphim, two things are especially to be enquired. First,
what they were? Secondly, for what use? The word (...) Taraph, signifies in
general the complete Image of a man Michal took an image, (a Teraphim) and
laid it in the bed, 1 Samuel 19. 13. More particularly, it signifies an Idol, or
image made for men's private use in their own houses, so that these images
seem to have been their Penates or Lares, their household Gods; wherefore
have thou stolen my Gods? my Teraphim? Genesis 31. 30. And this man Micah had an
house of Gods, and made an Ephod and Teraphim, Iud. 17. 5. Because of the
worship exhibited to these Idols, hence from the Hebrew Taraph, or as some
read it Tharaph, comes the Greek -- (...). Hesiod. (...).
(...), To worship. The manner how these Images were made, is fondly conceited
thus among the Rabbis; They R. Eliezer. vid. Eliam Thisbit.
killed a man that was a first borne son, and wrung off his head, and
seasoned it with salt and spices, and wrote upon a plate of gold, the name of
an unclean spirit, and put it under the head upon a wall, and lighted candles
before it, and worshipped it. With such Laban spoke, say they. But without
controversy, the Teraphim which Michal put in the bed, was a complete statue
or image of a man. The use of these Images, was to consult with them as with
Oracles, concerning things for the present unknown, or future to come. To this
purpose they were made by Astrologers Aben Esra. Genesis 31.
under certain constellations, capable of heavenly influences, whereby they
were enabled to speak. The Teraphims have spoken vanity, Zach. 10. 2. And
among other reasons, why Rahel stole away her Fathers Images, this is thought
to be one, That Laban might not by consulting with these Images discover what
way Jacob took in his flight.

CHAP. X.
The several sorts of Divination forbidden.
WE shall find, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. those Diuiners, which are by the Law
forbidden, distinguished into seven kinds, not because there were no other,
but they were the most usual. 1. An obseruer of times. 2. An Inchanter. 3. A
Witch. 4. A Charmer. 5. A consulter with familiar spirits. 6. A Wizard. 7. A
Necromancer. To these we may add an eight out of Hos. 4. 12. consulting with
the staff. And a ninth out of Ezekiel. 21. 21. A consulter with intrals. 1. The
first is (...), An obseruer of times, Iarchi Leuit. 19. 26.
one that distinguishes times and seasons, saying, such a day is good, or such
a day is naught, such an hour, such a week, such a month is luckie, and such
and such unlucky, for such and such businesses: D. Kimchi in rad.
whence those that derive the word from (...) Gnaijn, signifying an eye (as if
hereby were meant a Iugler, or Impostor who deceives the eyes of his
spectators, by casting a mist before them) utterly mistake: more pertinently
they speak, who derive it from (...) Gnona, signifying Time. But of all I
approve those, who derive it Aben Esra Leuit. 19. 26.
from (...) Gnanan, A Cloud, as if the original signified properly a
Planetary, or Starre-gazer. Hereby he is distinguished from the second sort of
unlawful Diuiners, for he also was an obseruer of times; the first drawing
his conclusions from the color or motion of the clouds: the second, from his
own superstitious observation of good and evil events, happening upon such
and such days, such and such times: the first seems to have drawn his
conclusions a priori, from the clouds or Planets, causing good and bad events:
the second, a posteriori, from the events themselves, happening upon such and
such times. This Planetary, when he observed the clouds, seems to have stood
with his face Eastward, his back Westward, his right hand toward the South,
and his left hand toward the North: except it were from this positure of the
Starre-gazers body in time of observing, I find no reason why the Hebrews
should term the Eastern part of the world (...) Kadim (i.) The former part
of the World; the Western part (...) (i.) The back part; the South part (...)
Iamin (i.) The right hand: The North part (...) Shemol (i.) The left hand: that
the reason of these denominations is, because Adam was created with his face
toward the East, is as vain, as hard to prove.

2. The second is (...) Menachesch, rendered an Inchanter; it imports rather
an Augur, or Soothsayer. The original signifies such a one who out of his
own experience draws observations, to foretell good or evil to come, as
Soothsayers do by observing such and such events, by such and such flyings of
Birds, screechings, or kawings. The Rabbines speak in this wise: D. Kimchi in
radic.
He is Menachesch a Soothsayer, who will say, because a morsel of Bread is
fallen out of his mouth, or his staff out of his hand, or his son called him
back, or a Crow kawed unto him, or a Goat passed by him, or a Serpent was on
his right hand, or a Fox on his left hand, therefore he will say, do not this
or that to day. The word is used, Genesis 30. 27. I have learned by experience,
says Laban, that the Lord has blessed me for thy sake. Again, Genesis 44. 5.
Is not this the Cup in which my Lord drinks? and whereby indeed he diuineth?
That is, proves and makes trial or experience what manner of men ye are:
the Heathen people were very superstitious in these observations: some days
were Atri, others Albi, some unlucky, others luckie; on some days they
counted it unfortunate to begin battle, on some months unfortunate to marry.
Mense malum Maio nubere vulgus ait.
Ovid. Fast.

And as they were superstitious in observing unlucky signs, so likewise in
the means used to auert the evil portended: the means were either words or
deeds. Plura istiusmodi (...) vid. apud Theophrastum Character. (...).
Deeds; thus, if an unlucky bird, or such like came in their way, they would
fling stones at it: and of this sort is the scratching of a suspected Witch,
which amongst the simpler sort of people is thought to be a means to cure
Witchcraft. By words, they thought to elude the evil, signified by such
signs, when they said, (...), In caput tuum recidat hoc omen; This evil light
on thine own head.

The third is (...) Mecascheph, A Witch, properly a Iugler. The original
signifies such a kind of Sorcerer who bewitcheth the senses and minds of
men, by changing the forms of things, making them appear otherwise than
indeed they are. The same word is applied to the Sorcerers in Egypt, who
resisted Moses, Exodus 7. 11. Then Pharoh also called Mecaschphim, the
Sorcerers. Now the Magicians in Egypt, they also did in like manner with their
enchantments. This latter part of the text explaineth what those Sorcerers
were. In that they are called Magicians, it implies their learning, that they
were wise men, and great Philosophers: the word enchantments declares the
manner of the delusion, and it has the signification of such a slight, whereby
the eyes are deluded, for (...) Lahatim, there translated enchantments,
imports the glistering flame of a fire, or sword, wherewith the eyes of men
are dazeled. The Greek version does not unfitly term them (...),
Vnguentarios, seplasiarios, compounders of medicines, or if you please (...).
Suidas.
complexion-makers, such artisens who maskemen and womens-faces with paintings
and false complexions. Hence it is, that the Apostle compares such false
teachers, who under a form and show of godliness, lead captive silly women,
to the Egyptian sorcerers Iannes and Iambres, who resisted Moses, 2 Timothy 3. 8.
These two were of chief note. In the Talmud tract. Menachoth cap. 9.
Talmud they are called Iohanne and Mamre; by Oxigen. contra Celsum lib. 4.
Numenius a Pythagorean, Iannes and Mambres; by Plun. not. hist. lib. 30. cap.
1.
Pliny, Iamnes and Iotape.

The fourth is (...) Chober, A Charmer. The Hebrew word signifies coniyning,
or consociating; either from the league and fellowship which such persons have
with the Devil, or as Bodine thinks, Bodin. Mag. demon. lib. 1. cap. 6.
because such kind of Witches have frequent meetings, in which they dance and
make merry together. Onkelos translateth such a charmer (...) Raten, A
mutterer, intimating the manner of these witcheries, to be by the muttering, or
soft speaking of some spell or charm. The description of a charmer is thus
delivered: Maimon. tract. Idolol. cap. 11.. 10. 12.
He is a charmer who speaks words of a strange language, and without sense,
and he in his foolishness thinks that these words are profitable: that if
one say so, or so, unto a Serpent, or Scorpion, it cannot hurt a man, and he
that says so or so unto a man, he cannot be hurt, etc. He that whispereth
over a wound, or reads a verse out of the Bible, likewise he that reads
over an Infant, that it may not be frighted, or that lays the Book of the
Law, or the Phylacteries upon a child that it may sleep, such are not only
among Inchanters, or Charmers, but of those that generally deny the Law of God,
because they make the words of the Scripture medicine for the body, whereas
they are not, but medicine for the soul. As it is written, Prou. 3. 22. They
shall be life unto thy soul. Of this sort was that, whereof Bodin. Mag.
demon. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Bodinus speaks, That a child by saying a certain verse out of the Psalms,
hindered a woman that she could not make her butter; by reciting the same verse
backward, he made her Butter come presently.

The fifth is, (...) Schoel Ob, a consulter with Ob, or with familiar spirits.
Ob signifies properly a Bottle, and is applied in diverse places of Scripture
to Magicians, because they being possessed with an evil spirit, speak with a
soft and hollow voice, as out of a Bottle. The Greek calls them (...),
Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 12. Tertullian. adu. Marcion. lib. 4. cap. 25.
Ventriloquos, such whose voice seems to proceed out of their belly. Such a
Diuiner was the Damsel Acts 16. 16. in August. 2. de doctr. Christ. ca. 23.
Saint Augustins judgment, and is probably thought so by most Expositors, who
are of opinion, that the spirit of Python, with which this Damsel was
possessed, is the same which the spirit Ob was amongst the Hebrews. Hence the
Witch of Endor, whom Saul requested to raise up Samuel, is said in Hebrew to
have consulted with Ob; but among the Latin Expositors, she is commonly
translated Pythonissa, one possessed with the spirit of Python.

The sixth is (...) liddegnoni, A wizard; in the Greek, he is translated
sometimes (...), a cunning man. In both languages he had his name from
knowledge, which either the wizard professed himself to have, or the common
people thought him to have. The Rabbis say he was so called in Hebrew, from a
certain beast named by them P. Fag. Leuit. 19. Verum Athenaeus bestiam hanc
vocat (...). vid. Bodin. Mag. demon. lib. 1. cap. 6. p. 89.
Iadua, in shape resembling a man, because these wizards when they did utter
their prophecies, held a bone of this beast between their teeth: This happily
might be some diabolical Sacrament or ceremony, used for the confirmation of
the league between Satan and the wizard. Perer. de Mag. p. 57.
Profane history mentions diuinations of the like kind, as that Magicians
were wont to eat the principal parts and members of such beasts, which they
deemed prophetical, thinking thereby that by a kind of (...), the soul of
such beasts would be conveyed into their bodies, whereby they might be enabled
for prophecy.

The seventh is (...) Doresch el hammethim, the Greek answers word for word,
(...), An inquirer of the dead, a Necromancer. Such diuiners consulted with
Satan in the shape of a dead man. A memorable example we find recorded, 1 Samuel 28. There King Saul about to war with the Philistims, ( God denying to
answer him either by dreams, or by Vrim, or by Prophets) upon the fame of the
Witch of Endor, he repaired to her, demanding that Samuel might be raised up
from the dead, to tell him the issue of the war. Now that this was not in
truth Samuel, is easily euinced, both by testimonies of the learned, and
reasons. First, it is improbable, that God who had denied to answer him by any
ordinary means, should now deigne him an answer so extraordinary. Secondly, no
Witch or Devil can disturb the bodies or souls of such as die in the Lord,
because they rest from their labors, Reu. 14. 14. Thirdly, if it had been
Samuel, he would doubtless have reproved Saul for consulting with Witches.

The eighth is, (...) Scoel maklo, A consulter with his staff, Hos. 4. 12.
Jerome says the manner of this divination was thus: That if the doubt were
between two or three cities, which first should be assaulted; to determine
this they wrote the names of the cities upon certain staves, or arrows, which
being shaked in a quiver together, the first that was pulled out, determined
the city. Vid. Drus. in Deuteronomy. page 592.
Others deliver the manner of this consultation to have been thus: The
consulter measured his staff by spans, or by the length of his finger, saying
as he measured, I will go, I will not go: I will do such a thing, I will not
do it, and as the last spanne fell out, so he determined: This was termed by
the Heathens (...), or (...), Divination by rods, or arrows.

The ninth was (...) Roebaccabed, a diuiner by intralls, Ezekiel. 21. 21.
Nebucadnezar being to make war both with the Jews and the Ammonites, and
doubting in the way against whether of these he should make his first onset;
First, he consulted with his arrows and staves, of which has been spoken
immediately before: Secondly, he consulted with the intralls of beasts. This
practice was generally received among the Heathens, and because the liver was
the principal member observed, it was called (...), Consultation with the
liver. Three things were observed in this kind of divination. First, the
color of the intralls, whether they were all well colored. Secondly, their
place, whether none were displaced. Thirdly, the number, whether none were
wanting; among those that were wanting, the want of the liver or the heart
chiefly presaged ill. That day when Julius Caesar was slain, it is storied,
that in two fat Oxen then sacrificed, the heart was wanting in them both.

THE FIFTH BOOK. Of their Consistories.
CHA. 1.
Their courts of judgment, especially their Ecclesiastical Consistory.
THere were in Israel distinct courts, consisting of distinct persons, the one
principally for Church businesses, the other for affairs in the common wealth,
the one an Iunius analyt. expos. Deuteronomy. 17.
Ecclesiastical Consistory, the other a Civil iudicatory: of these, and their
several censures, and punishments, it remains now to be spoken.

These different Consistories or Courts o justice, we find first distinguished,
Deuteronomy. 17. 12. He which will not hearken unto the Priest or unto the Judge.
Where the people of Israel are directed, in what cases, and to what persons
they should make their appeals from inferior courts; Namely to the Priest in
matters spiritual, or ceremonial; and to the Judge in matters civil, or
criminal. These two Courts are more plainly distinguished, 2 Chronicles 19. where
Iehosaphat reforming many abuses in Church and Commonwealth, first appointed
throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, secular Judges, to determine
criminal causes, verse. 5. And at Jerusalem he appointed a spiritual Court
consisting of Leuits, Priests, and the chief Fathers of Israel, verse. 8. And
in causes spiritual for the Lord, Amariah the high Priest was chief: in
causes criminal for the King, Zebediah was chief, verse. 11. likewise the
Prophet Jeremiah is condemned to die, by the consistory of Priests, Ier. 26. 8.
But by the consistory of the Princes, or secular Judges, sitting in the gate,
he was absoluted and discharged, verse. 16. yea although the tyranny of
Antiochus, and the troublesome times ensuing, had bred such a confusion in
matters of government among the Jews, that an evident distinction can hardly
be found in the new Testament: yet some footsteps and imperfect tokens of both
courts are there obseruable. Principally, Matthew. 21. 23. It Matthew. 26. 3. The
chief Priests, and the Elders of the people, are named as two distinct
Consistories: and each Consistory seems to be differenced by its proper
name; the secular Consistory termed (...), A council: the spiritual termed
(...) a Synagogue. They will deliver you up to the counsels, and they will
scourge you in their Synagogues. Mat. 10. 17. Hence that great assembly of
Prophets and holy men, called together by Esra for the reformation of the
Church, after their return from Babylon, is called Synagoga magna, Their great
Synagogue.

The office of the Ecclesiastical Court, was to put a difference between
things holy and unholy, and between clean and unclean, Leuit. 10. 10. and to
determine appeals in controversies of difficulty. It was a representative
Church. Hence is that, Dic Ecclesiae, Mat. 18. 16. Tell the Church, because
unto them belonged the power of Excommunication, the several sorts of which
censure follow in the next Chapter.

Only here take notice, that as in the civil Consistories, consisting of
seventy Judges, which was the supreme Court, there were two sat as chief,
namely one whom they termed Nasi, the Lord chief Justice; and the other, whom
they termed, Ab beth din, the Father of the Senate: so in the Ecclesiastical
Consistory, the high Priest and his Sagan, or second high Priest, sat chief
there, 2 King 23. 4. Moses Kotsens. in Sanhedrin.
That the high Priest sat in the Sanhedrim necessarily is an error, for he was
not elected into that company, except he were a man of extraordinary wisdom.
Again, note that sometimes both Consistories assembled together, as often as
the matters to be determined, were partly Ceremonial, partly Civil, partly
belonging to the Church, partly to the Commonwealth: which being not noted,
causes the Courts not to be distinguished by many Expositors. This meeting
and joining of both Consistories often appears in the Gospel. The chief
Priests and the Elders meet together.

CHAP. II.
Of their Excommunication.
THey had three degrees of excommunication. The first was called in the N. T. a
casting out of the Synagogue, Ioh. 9. 22. by the Jews (...) Significat haec
vox Separationem, Elongationem, deducitur a verbo (...) Separauit, Hinc etiam
proscriptus, profligatus, aut separatus quispiam dicitur (...).
Niddui (i.) a separation, or putting away. Buxtorf. ex Rabbinis Epistol. Hebr.
p. 55.
It signified a separation from all commerce or society with any man or woman,
for the distance of four cubits; also from eating or drinking with any; from
the use of the marriage bed; from shauing, washing, or the like, according to
the pleasure of the Judge, and the quality of the offense: It was offorce
thirty days, yet so that they might be shortened upon repentance. He that
was thus excommunicated had power to be present at Divine service, to teach
others, and learn of others; he hired servants, and was hired himself, but
always on condition of the foresaid separation. If he remained impenitent,
according to the pleasure of the Judge, his punishment was increased, either to
the doubling or the tripling of the time, or to the extending of it to his
lives end; his male children were not circumcised; if he died without
repentance, then by the sentence of the Judge, a stone was cast upon his
coffin, or beire, to show that he was worthy to be stoned. They mourned not for
such a one with solemn lamentation, they followed him not unto the grave, nor
buried him with common burial.

The second was called in the N. T. a giving one over to Satan, 1 Cor. 5. 5. By
the Jews (...) cherem. For the better understanding of this word, we must
know, that it is not used in this sense in the Old Test. There we shall find
it applied to persons, or to things; if to persons, then it signifies a
deuoting of them to God by their death, Leuit. 27. 29. If to things, then it
signifies a deuoting of them unto God, by separating them from ordinary use:
hence it is, that Achan is punished for stealing the devoted thing, Josh. 7.
Budaeus (...) dicitradit, homines sacros,
Persons thus devoted were termed by the Greeks (...), and devoted things
(...). Notwithstanding, in the Apostles time, both Cherem, and (...), signified
a second degree of excommunication, differing from the former, First, because
it was not done in a private court, but published in the audienee of the whole
Church, Secondly, maledictions, and curses were added out of the law of Moses.
At the publishing hereof candles were tinned, and when the curses were ended,
they put out the candles, in token that the excommunicate person was deprived
the light of heaven. This kind of excommunication was exercised against the
incestuous person, 1 Cor. 5. 5. And against Hymenaeus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.
20.

The third was called in the N. Test. by the Syriake name Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16.
That is, the Lord comes. Maran signifies the Lord; and Atha, comes, and
this they say was instituted by Enoch, Judge. 14. The Jews called it
Schammatha, the etymology of which word I find to be twofold. Some say it
sounds as much as Maran-atha, the Lord comes, (...) Dominus, (...) venit.
Schem signifying the Lord; and Atha, comes: Elias Thisbites in radice (...).
others say it sounds, There is death, Scham signifying there; and Mitha,
death. Hence we may render it an excommunication to death. Bertram de Politia
Iudaic. cap. 2. p. 21.
And this is thought to be the reason of that phrase, 1 Ioh. 5. 16. There is a
sin unto death, (i.) which deserves excommunication to death. Buxtorf.
Epist. Hebr. p. 59. in dorso epistolae subjici solebat haec abbreuiatura (...)
i. prohibitum est per an. ithema K. Gersom luminis capitiuitatis (scil.
resignare has literas.)
R. Gersom forbad the breaking open of letters, under the penalty of all three
sorts of excommunication. And this was termed Excommunication in secret
nominis tetragrammati: see the form hereof in the Chapter of the Sadduces.

In the Greek Church there were Vid. Iustelli notas in cod^cem canonum Eccles.
universe ad canon. 25. Bellarminus de poenit. l. 1. c. 22. and Casubon. Exercit.
p. 552. obseruant qumtum gradum, quem ille (...), alter (...) appellat.
four degrees of this censure. 1. (...). Those were censured with this degree,
who were only barred the Lords Table: as for entrance into the Church, hearing
the Word, praying with the congregations, they enjoyed equal liberty with
other Christians, they might stand by and behold others receive the sacrament,
but themselves did not partake thereof, whence they were called Stantes. 2.
(...), concerning this censure, all that I read of it is thus; That he, that
is thus censured, has admittance into the Church, Vid. Iustel. loco citato.
but his place must be behind the pulpit, and he must depart with the
Catechumeni, (that is, such Pagans who were gained to the Christian faith, but
not fully admitted into the Church, because they wanted baptism) and
therefore, that they might not pray promiscuously with other Christians, there
was a place behind the quire of the Church, in manner of cloisters, allotted
to them, and was from them called Hospin. de Templis p. 88.
Catechumenium: This I take to be the place for this second degree of
excommunication, so that the force of this censure I think to consist in these
three things. First, they were barred the Lords Table. Secondly, they might not
stand by at the administration of the Lords supper, (which was allowed in the
first degree) and this appears clearly, because the Catechumeni departed
always at the celebration of the communion; for to them principally, it was
said, Ite missa est. Thirdly, though they might (...), fall down on their
knees and pray, and were thence called Succumbentes, yet this they might not
do in the congregation, but only in that place behind the quire or pulpit,
which was allotted to the Catechumeni, and in this also this second degree
differs from the first. The third sort of censure was (...), the party thus
censured was permitted to come no farther than the Church porch, where it was
lawful for him to hear the Scriptures read, but not to join in prayer, nor
to approach the Lords Table, whence such were termed Audientes. The fourth and
last sort was (...); persons under this censure, stood quite without the
Church, requesting those that entered in, with tears and weeping to petition
the Lord for mercy toward them, whence they were called Plorantes.

Seeing it is commonly thought, that Cain was censured by the first degree of
excommunication called Niddui, and that the last called Schammatha was of
Enochs institution; both these being of such antiquity, I dare not say, that
the three degrees of Excommunication were borrowed from the three sorts of
uncleanness, which excluded people out of the three De quibus P. Fagius in
number. 5. 2.
camps, though there was an obseruable poportion between them. Niddui, may be
paralleld with the exclusion out of the camp of God alone, which befell those
that were defiled by touch of the dead. Cherem, may be compared to the
exclusion out of the camp of God, and the camp of Leui, which befell those
that were defiled of an issue. Schammatha, may be compared with the exclusion
out of all three camps, the camp of God, the camp of Leui, and the camp of
Israel, this befell those that were defiled of leprosy, and from the Jews it
is probable that the Greek and Latin Churches borrowed their degrees of
Excommunication.

CHAP. III.
Their civil Consistories, what persons were necessarily present in them.
IN many things, men might be sinful in respect of Gods law, though not liable
to punishment, in respect of man's; Thou shall not avenge, nor be mindful of
wrong, Leuit 19. 18. which the Hebrews explain thus, To avenge, is to deny a
good turn to one who formerly denied him. To be mindful of a wrong, is to
do a good turn to one who formerly would not do so much for him; but at the
doing thereof, to vpbraid the other of his unkindness. They illustrate it
thus: when Ruben says to Simeon, Lend me thy hatchet; he answers, I will not
lend him: Afterward Simeon has need to borrow an hatchet of Ruben, and says
unto him, Lend me thy hatchet; Simeon says unto him, I will not lend him, thou
would not lend me thine: this is (...) Nekima, Auengement. Now when Ruben
says to Simeon, lend me thy hatchet; he answers, I will not lend him;
afterward Simeon borrows an hatchet of Ruben, Ruben says, Lo I will lend it
thee, I will not deal with thee, as thou dealtest with me, this is (...)
Netira, Mindefulnesse: both these were sinful, but not liable to man's
judgment.

In all civil Courts, five forts of persons were always present. 1. Judges.
2. Officers. 3. Pleaders. 4. Notaries. 5. Witnesses. In the supreme Court,
there was one that was chief over all the other Judges, they called him in
Hebrew, Nasi; in Greek, (...), The Prince. His leave was craved for the trial
of actions: The witnesses were at least two, Deuteronomy. 19. 15. If they were false,
they punished them with a Talio, the same punishment which he intended against
his brother, Deuteronomy. 19. 19. The Notaries were two, Moses Kotsens. in Sanhedrim.
one stood on the right hand, to write the sentence of absolution, and what was
spoken in defense of the party; the other stood on the left hand, to write the
sentence of condemnation, and the objections against the party. Drus.
praeterit. Mat. 25.
Drusiu^ thinks that Christ speaking of the last judgment, had reference to
this. He shall set the sheep on the right hand, and on the left the goats,
Matthew. 25. 23. The Officers were in manner of Shreiffes, they were present to
execute what the Judges determined, whence they carried up and down Moses
Kotsens. in Sanhedrim.
their staves and whips, as the Consulls at Rome had rods and axes carried
before them, for the readier execution of justice. In Hebrew they are called
(...) Schoterim, by the septuagint sometimes (...); in our English translation,
commonly Officers, and by Saint Luke (...), for doubtless there is allusion
unto them, Luke 12. 58. When thou go with thine adversary ((...)) to the
Magistrate, as thou art in the way, give diligence that thou may be
delivered from him, lest he hale thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee
to the Officer, etc. The Pleader was called (...) Baal rib, he stood on the
right hand of the party cited into the Court, whether he pleaded for, or
against him. The Lord shall stand on the right hand of the poor, to save him
from those that judge his soul, Psalm. 119. 31. that is, the Lord shall plead
his cause. And Satan stood at the right hand of Joshua, Zach. 3. 1. that is, to
accuse him, or plead against him. When Saint John speaks, If any man sin,
we have an Advocate, 2 John 2. 1. he alludeth unto this Baal rib, or Pleader.
The Judges, they examined and determined matters, and after examination,
sentence was pronounced by the Judge in this manner; Tu N. iustus. Tu N. reus.
Thou Simeon art just. Thou Ruben art guilty: at the pronunciation of which, the
guilty person was dregged to the place of execution: When he shall be judged,
let him be condemned, Psalm 109. 7. the Hebrew is, Let him go out wicked.

The manner of sentencing persons, varied in most countries. The Jews by a
simple pronunciation of sentence, both absoluted men, and condemned them. The
Rosin. Antiq. Romans l. 9. ^. 24.
Romans gave sentence by casting in tables, into a certain box, or vrne
prepared for the purpose: if they absolved any, they wrote the letter A, in the
table, it being the first letter of Absoluo: if they would condemn any, they
cast in a table with C, written in it, which is the first letter of Condemno:
If the matter were hard to determine, they would cast in other tables with N.
L. signifying, Non liquet. The Erasm. Adag. TH praefig.
Grecians in like manner used three letters, was a token of condemnation, which
occasioned that of Persius, Et potis es nigrum, vitio prafigere theta.


T was a token of absolution; L of ampliation. Others signified condemnation,
by giving a black stone; and absolution, by giving a white stone. Mos erat
antiquis, niueis atrisque lapillis,
Hos damnare reos, illos absoluere culpa.
Ovid. Metamor. 15.

To this there seems to be allusion, Reu. 2. 17. To him who overcomes, I
will give a white stone, that is, I will absolve and acquit him in the day of
idgement.

Note these three phrases, (...), to rise up to judgment; (...), To rise up in
judgment, (...), To depart guilty. The first, is applied to the Judge in the
execution of justice. When God rose up to judge, Psalm. 76. 10. That is, to
execute judgment. The second, is applied to the party prevailing in judgment.
The men of Niniuie shall rise up in judgment with this generation, Matthew. 12.
41. That is, shall be justified before this generation. The last, is applied to
the party condemned, Psalm. 109. 7. Let him depart guilty or wicked. The
ungodly shall not stand in judgment, Psalm. 1. The like phrases were in use
among the Romans. Stare in Senatu, To prevail in the Senate. Causa cadere. To
be cast in ones suit. But these phrases among the Romans, I think to have
been taken out of their fense-schooles, where the set positure of the body, by
which a man prepares himself to fight, and graple with his enemy, is termed
Status, or Gradus, as Cedere de statu, To give back; Gradum, vel statum
seruare, To keep ones standing: and from thence have those elegancies been
translated into places of judgment.

CHAP. IV.
The number of their civil Courts.
THeir civil Courts were two, (...) Sanhedrim gedola, the great Consistory, or
supreme Senate, (...) Sanhedrim Ketanna, the lesser and inferior Court. Thus I
find them divided generally by the Rabbines, and although the latter was
subdivided as will after appear; yet in old time, there were only two first
branches, which division our Savior Christ seems to have followed, calling
the lesser court (...), by the name of Judgment: the greater (...), by the
name of a Council. Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be
culpable of Judgment. Whosoever says unto his brother Raca, shall be worthy
to be punished by the Council: whosoever shall say fool, shall be worthy to
be punished with the fire of Gehenna, Matthew. 5. In which words, as there is a
gradation of sin. 1. Anger, a passion of the mind. 2. Raca, Raca non grandis
alicuius est sermo conuicij, sed magis e contemptu natum est, and neglectu
dicentis. Chrysostom. homil. 16. in Mat.
scornful or sleighting speech, as, Tut, Tush, etc. 3. Fool, reproachful and
opprobrious names: So likewise there is a gradation of punishment. 1.
Judgment, a lesser court. 2. A Council, the greater court. 3. The fire of
Gehenna: Now Gehenna was a valley, terrible for two sorts of fires in it;
First, for that wherein men burnt their children unto Moloch. David Kimchi
Psalm. 27. 13.
Secondly, for another fire there continually burning, to consume the dead
carcasses, and filth of Jerusalem; partly for the terriblenesse of the first,
and partly for the contemptiblenesse of the place by reason of the second fire,
it was a type of hell fire it self. We may resolve that text thus, Anger
deserved the punishments of the lesser court. Raca, the punishments of the
greater: And Fool, deserved punishments beyond all courts, even the fire of
Gehenna.

The greater court by way of excellency, was called the Sanhedrim, which word
came from the Greek (...), a place of judgment: It was also called (...) Beth
din, the house of judgment. It was distinguished from the other Courts, First,
in respect of the number of the Judges, which were Moses Kotsens. fol. 186.
col. 2.
seuenty-one; according to the command of God to Moses at their first
institution, Number. 11. 16. Gather unto me seventy men of the Elders of Israel,
whom thou know that they are the Elders of the people, and governors over
them, and bring them unto the tabernacle of the congregation, and let them
stand there with thee. From the latter words of this Text, it is observed that
there were seventy besides Moses, and therefore after his decease, they
always chose one chief Judge in his room, not reckoning him among the
seventy, they called him (...) Nasi, the Prince, or chief over the seventy.
These seventy are Franc. Iunius Analytic. expos. Number. 11.
thought to be chosen six out of every Tribe, save the Tribe of Leui, out of
which only four were chosen. Solom. Iarchi.
Others think the manner of their choice was thus, Six of every tribe had
their names written in little scrolles of paper, in seventy of these scrolles
was written (...) Zaken, Senex, an Elder; in the two other (...) Chelek, Pars,
A Part; these scrolles they put in a pitcher or vrne, and those that plucked out
a scrolle wherein Elder was written, were counted amongst the number of the
Judges: those that plucked out the other scrolles, in which a Part was written,
they were rejected, Number. 11. 26. The senior of these seventy was called (...)
Ab beth din, the Father of the judgment Hall. Number. 11. 26.
The Moses Kotsens. fol. 186. col. 2.
whole seat or bench of Judges, sat in manner of an half circle, the Nasi
sitting in the midst above the rest, the others sitting round about beneath,
in such manner that the Father of the Judgment Hall sat next to the Nasi, on
the right hand. The lesser consistory was subdivided into two sorts, one
consisted of twenty three Aldermen and two such Consistories there were in
Jerusalem, the one at the door of the Court before the Temple, the other at
the door of the Mountain of the Temple: yea, in every City throughout
Israel, where there were sixscore householders, such a Consistory was erected:
the other sort of lesser Courts consisted only of a Triumuirat, three
Aldermen: and this was erected in the lesser Cities, which had not the number
of sixscore householders.

The Moses Kotsens. ibid.
second difference between the greater Consistory and the lesser, was in
respect of the place. The seventy sat only at Jerusalem within the Court of
the Temple, in a certain house called (...). Lischath hagazith, The paued
chamber, because of the curious cut stones wherewith it was paued: by the
Greeks it was called (...), the pauement. Pilat sat down in the judgment
seat, in a place called the pauement, Ioh. 19. 13. The other Consistories sat
all in the gates of the Cities. Now because the gates of the City are the
strength thereof, and in their gates their Judges sat; hence is that, Mat. 16,
18. The gates of hell shall not overcome it, that is, neither the strength, nor
policy of Satan.

Lastly, they differed in respect of their power and authority: the Consistory
of seventy received Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
appeals from the other inferior Courts, from that, there was no appeal:
again, the Consistory of three sat not on life and death, but only on petty
matters, as whipping, pecuniary controversies, and such like; the other of
twenty three sat on life and death, but with a restrained power, they had not
authority to judge an whole tribe, the high Priest, false Prophets, and other
such weighty matters: this belonged only to the seventy in Jerusalem: Cunaus
de rep Hebr. page 109.
Hence is that, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, Luke 13.
34. The means how they tried a false Prophet was thus, they observed the
judgments which he threatened, and the good which he prophesied to a place, if
the judgments took not effect, this did not argue him a false Prophet,
because God was merciful, as in the case of Ezekiah; and the people might
repent, as the Nineuites did: but if he prophesied good, and that came not to
pass, they judged him a false Prophet. The ground of this trial they make the
words of Jeremiah, The Prophet which prophesies of peace, when the word of the
Lord shall come to pass, then shall the Prophet be known, that the Lord has
truly sent him, Ier. 28. 9.

The College or company of these seventy, exercised judgment, not only under
the Kings and Judges, P. Galatin. lib. 4. cap. 5.
but their authority continued in times of vacancies, when there was neither
Judge nor King to rule Israel, and it continued until Joseph. Antiq. lib. 14.
cap. 17.
Herod put them down, and destroyed them, to secure himself of the Kingdom.

Here some may object, that there were no such Courts, or their liberty much
infringed in Samuels time: For he went from year to year in circuit to
Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places, 1 Samuel
7. 16. To which, I take it, we may say, that as the Emperors of Rome had power
to ride Circuits, and keep Assizes, which was done without any infringement of
the liberties of their Senate: So the Kings and Judges in Israel, had the like
power, and yet the authority of their Courts stood firm. This kind of judging
by keeping of Assizes, the Romans termed (...), the other (...).

CHAP. V.
Properties required in Judges, and the manner of their election.
THe Law of God required these properties in Judges. 1. Wisdom. 2.
Understanding. 3. Integrity. 4. Courage. Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Other are reckoned, Exodus
18. 21. namely, 5. The fear of God. 6. Love of truth. 7. Hating of
covetousness: to these may be added the eighth, namely, having no respect of
persons, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. These two last especially, the Heathens required in their
Judges: whence the Plutarch. de. Iside.
Thebans painted Justice without hands, and without eyes, to intimate that
Judges should receive no gifts, nor be swaied with sight of persons.

The Moses Kots. i^ Sanhedrin.
Jews add many more. 1. That they should be free from all blemish of body. 2.
That they should be skilled in the seventy languages, to the intent that they
might not need an Interpreter in the hearing of Causes. 3. That they should not
be far strooken in years; which likewise was required by the Romans in their
Judges, as appears by that common adage, Sexagenarius de ponte. 4. That they
should be no Eunuchs, because such commonly were cruel. 5. That they should
be Fathers of children, which they thought was a special motive to mercy. 6.
That they should be skillful in Magic, without the knowledge of which, they
were not able to judge of Magicians.

That there might be a sufficient supply of able men to succeed in the room of
the Judges dying, there sat Moses Kotsens. ibid.
three benches of others beneath, whom they called (...) Discipu^ sapientum.
Talmidi Chacamim; Scholars of the wisemen: out of these they made their
election, and two of these always accompanied the condemned person to the
place of execution.

Their inauguration of Judges was twofold. At first, by imposition of hands
upon the head of the party, after the example of Moses laying hands on Joshua:
this imposition of hands was not held lawful, Petr. Galatin. lib. 4. cap. 5.
except it were in the presence of five or three Judges at the least.
Afterward it was by saying a certain verse; (...) Maimon. in Sanhedrin. cap.
4.
Lo thou art associated, and power is given thee to judge of penalties. Hence
is that saying of Galatinus out of the Talmud. Institutie iudicum, aut manu
fiebat, aut nomine tantum.

Observe here that Samuc, which I render associated, does not always signify
a man licensed to the discharge of some public office by the imposition of
hands; for here it is applied to those, who were not admitted by imposition of
hands. No, the reason why these words Semica and Semicuth, are generally by all
expositors, Jews, and Christians, translated the imposition of hands, is
because this solemn kind of licensing termed Semica or Semicuth, was in old
time used only toward two sorts of men in their admission, toward Rabbis,
and toward Judges; which kind of permission, because it was not performed
toward either of them without this ceremony of imposing hands; hence these two
words have been translated the imposition of hands, whereas properly they
signify nothing else, but an association, an approximation, or conioyning of
one into the same corporation or company, of which he that does associat and
give admission, is a member.

CHAP. VI.
Ceremonies common in all capital judgments.
IN their greater punishments which deprived of life, some ceremonies were
common to them all.

First, the Judges were to use deliberation in all causes, but especially in
matters capital. There were four causes, says Targum Ionath. Number. 9. 8.
Jonathan in his Targum, that came before Moses (he names none in particular,
but what they were, we shall presently learn out of other records) two of
these were not weighty: in these he hastened; two more material, concerning
life and death; in these he delaied. (...) Ionath.
Caeterum tam de his, quam de illis dicebat, Non audiui. Of both the lighter,
and waightier causes, Moses said, I have not heard, to wit, from the Lord: to
show, that a deliberation and consultation as it were with God, ought to be in
all judgments, before sentence be pronounced, these four causes are named in
Targum Hierosol. Number. 9. 8.
other Records. The two lightest are. 1. The matter of uncleanness, debarring
the people from the Passover, Numb. 9. 9. Secondly, the case of Zelophehads
daughters, Numb. 36. 10. The two weightier are. 1. The cause of the blasphemer,
Leu. 24. 13. Secondly, the case of him that gathered sticks on the Sabbath,
Numb. 15. 35. In all these judgments there is, The Lord spoke unto Moses. And
in the first, which was counted among the lighter causes (because it was not on
life and death) even there does Moses in a solemn manner bespeake the people
to stand still, Et ego audiam, And I will hear what the Lord will command.
Notwithstanding wilful delays in justice makes the Judge unrighteous. In
that unrighteous Judge, from whom the Widow wrested sentence by importunity,
we read not of any other fault in him, but delay, Luke 18. 6.

Secondly, the party accused was placed on some high place, from whence he
might be seen and heard of all the people: Set Naboth, In capite populi, on
high among the people, 1 Kings 21. 9.

Thirdly, Drus. praeterit. Mat. 27.
the Judges and the Witnesses did (when sentence was pronounced) put their
hands upon the condemned persons head, and said, Sanguis tuus super caput tuum,
Thy blood be upon thine own head: unto this the people had reference, saying;
His blood be on us, and our children, Mat. 27. 25.

Fourthly, the place of execution was without the gates, the malefactors were
had thither by two executioners termed by the Moses Kotsens. in Sanhedrin. It.
Talmud lib. Maccoth, cap. 3. in Mischna.
Rabbis, (...) chazani hacceneseth, Spectators of the congregation, which is a
periphrasis of those, whom Saint Mark calls (...), Mark 6. 27. which word,
though it be used by the Greeks and (...) Vzielid. et Targu^ Hierosolym. Genesis
37. 36.
Chaldee Paraphrasts, yet it is a mere Latin, derived a speculando; because
in the Court the Executioners were only spectators, to behold and attend what
the Judges would command them.

Fifthly, when the malefactor was led to execution, a Moses Kotsens. in loco
superius citato.
public crier went before, saying, such a one is going to be punished with
such a death, because he has committed such, or such an offense, at such a
time, in such a place, and these N. N. are witnesses thereof: If any therefore
knows any thing which may do him good, let him come and make it known. For
this purpose one was appointed to stand at the door of the Consistory, with an
handkerchiefe or linen cloth in his hand, that if any person should come for
his defense, he at the door swinged about his handkerchiefe; upon the sight
whereof, another standing in readiness a pretty distance off with an horse,
hastened and called back the condemned person: yea, if the malefactor had any
farther plea for his own purgation, he might come back four or five times,
except he spoke vainly, for the discerning whereof, two of those, whom they
termed Scholars of the wise men, were sent with him to observe his speech on
the way.

Sixthly, he was exhorted to confess, that he might have his portion in the
world to come. Thus Joshua exhorted Achan, Josh. 7. 19. My son give, I pray
thee, glory unto the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him: unto
whom Achan answered Verse 20. Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of
Israel, and thus have I done.

Seventhly, in the time of execution, they gave the malefactor, (...) Korat
lebona beco^ schel iaijn. Maimon. in Sanhedrim. cap. 13. It. Moses Kotsen. in
Sanhedr.
Granum thuris in calyce vini, A grain of frankincense in a cup of wine: this
they did give to cause a giddiness in the condemned persons head, that thereby
he might be less sensible of the pain. Saint Mark calls this cup (...),
wine mingled with myrrh, Mark 15. 23. This was done after the manner of the
Jews, but the soldiers in mockery mingled Vinegar and Gall with it, Mat. 27.
34. As likewise they gave him a second cup in derision, when they took a
Sponge, and filled it with Vinegar, and put it on a reed, Mat. 27. 48. Saint
Mark in the first cup, mentions the custom of the Jews, which in it self
had some show of compassion; for the ground of this custom was taken from
that, Prou. 31. 6. Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish. Saint
Matthew mentions only their wicked mixture, contrary to the received
custom, so that one Evangelist must expound the other. This first cup was so
usually given before execution, that the word Calyx, a Cup, is sometimes in
Scripture put for death it self. Father, if it may be, let this Cup pass
from me.

Lastly, Casaubon. exercit. page 654. ex Maimonid.
the tree whereon a man was hanged, and the stone wherewith he was stoned, and
the sword wherewith he was beheaded, and the napkin wherewith he was
strangled, they were all buried, that there might be no evil memorial of
such a one, to say: This is the tree, this is the sword, this the stone, this
the napkin, whereon, or wherewith such a one was executed.

CHAP. VII.
Their capital punishments.
THe Jews of old had only Paraphrast. Chald. Ruth. 1. 17. Mikkotsi fol. 188.
col. 3.
four sorts of death in use amongst them. 1. (...) Sekila, Lapidatio.
Lapidatio, stoning. 2. (...) Sheripha, combustio.
Combustio, burning. 3. (...) Hereg, Decollatio.
Decollatio, beheading. 4. (...) Chenek, Suffocatio.
Suffocatio, strangling. Of these, stoning was counted the most grievous,
burning worse then beheading, beheading worse then strangling, and strangling
was the easiest of all.

They have a (...) Omnis mors quae absolute in lege vsurpatur, strangulatio
est. R. Solom. Exodus 21. 16.
rule, that wheresoever the Scripture says of an offender, Morte plectetur, He
shall be punished with death, not expressing the kind of death, there it ought
to be interpreted of strangling. For example, the Law says of the Adulterer,
Leu. 20. 10. Morte plectitor, Let him be punished with death: because the kind
of death is not here mentioned, they interpret it strangling. The reason of
this rule is, because strangling was the easiest death of the four, and where
the Law determines not the punishment, there they say, Ampliandi fauores, The
fauourablest exposition is to be given.

This rule is not generally true, for in former times Adultery was punished
with stoning. I will judge thee after the manner of them that are harlots,
says the Lord, Ezekiel. 16. 38. And in the fortieth verse the judgment is named;
They shall stone thee with stones: likewise the Scribes and Pharisees said unto
Christ, Moses in the Law commanded us, that such should be stoned, John 8. 5.

Before we treat in particular of these four punishments, it may be
questioned, Whether the Jews had any power to judge of life and death, at that
time when they crucified our blessed Savior? The Jews said to Pilat, It is
not lawful for us to put any man to death, John 18. 31. Latter Jews say, that
Moses Kots. in Sanhedrim.
all power of capital punishments was taken from them, forty years before
the destruction of the second Temple, and of this opinion are many Divines.

Answer. First, the Jews speech unto Pilat, that it was not lawful for them
to put any man to death, cannot be understood, as if they should have said, we
have not power to put any man to death; for admit, that power in criminals
were, in the general, taken from them, yet in this particular, power was
permitted them at that time from Pilat, Take ye him, and judge him according
to your Law, Ioh. 18. 31. Neither can it be said, that their Law could not
condemn him, if he had been a transgressour thereof; or that they had not
out of their Law to object against him: for they say, They had a Law, and by
their Law, he ought to dye, John 19. 7. It was not then want of power, but the
holiness of that time, made them say, it was unlawful. For they held it
unlawful upon their days of preparation to sit on life and death, as has
been shewene in the Chapter of translating feasts. And Friday, on which our
Savior was condemned, was the preparation of their Sabbath.

Secondly, in the question, Whether power of judging capital crimes were taken
from them by the Romans? We are to distinguish between crimes. Some crimes
were transgressions of the Roman law, as theft, murder, robberies, etc. power
of judging in these was taken from them: other crimes were transgressions only
against the law of Moses, as blasphemy, and the like; in these, power of
judging seems to have remained with them. When Paul was brought by the Jews
before Gallio, Gallio said unto them, If it were a matter of wrong or wicked
lewdness, O ye Jews, reason would, that I should bear with you: but if it
be a question of words, and names of your Law, look ye to it, Acts 18. 14.

In handling these four punishments; first observe the offenders, whom the
Jews make liable to each punishment; and then the manner of the punishment.

The persons to be stoned were Moses Kotsens^^ fol. 188. col. 4.
eighteen. 1. He that lies with his own mother. 2. Or with his fathers wife.
3. Or with his daughter in law. 4. Or with a betrothed maid. 5. Or with the
male. 6. Or with the beast. 7. The woman that lies down to a beast. 8. The
blasphemer. 9. He that worshippeth an Idol. 10. He that offers of his seed
to Moloch. 11. He that has a familiar spirit. 12. The wisard. 13. The private
intiser to idolatry. 14. The public withdrawer to idolatry. 15. The witch.
16. The prophaner of the Sabbath. 17. He that curses his father or his mother.
18. The rebellious son. The manner of stoning was thus, The offender was led
to a place without the gates, two cubits high, his hands being bound; from
hence, one of the witnesses tumbled him by a stroke upon the loins; if that
killed him not, the witnesses lifted up a stone, being the weight of two men,
which chiefly the other witness cast upon him; if that killed him not, all
Israel threw stones upon him. The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon
him, to put him to death, and afterward the hands of all the people, Deuteronomy. 17.
7.

Hence the opinion of Paul. Fagius Deuteronomy. 17. 7.
R. Akiba is commonly received, that such an idolater (it holds in all others
condemned to this death) was reserved until one of the common feasts, at which
all the multitude of Israel came to Jerusalem. The party thus executed being
quite dead, was afterward, for greater ignominy, hanged on a tree, till toward
the Sun set, at which time he and the tree were both buried.

Malefactors adjudged to burning were Moses Kotsens. loco superius citato.
ten, 1. The Priests daughter which committed whoredom. 2. He which lies
with his own daughter. 3. Or with his daughters daughter. 4. Or with his
sons daughter. 5. Or with his wives daughter. 6. Or with her sons daughter.
7. Or with her daughters daughter. 8. Or with his mother in law. 9. Or with the
mother of his mother in law. 10. Or with the mother of his father in law.

The manner of burning was twofold. Some they burnt with wood and fa^gots; this
was termed R. Leui Leuit. 20.
by them Combustio corporis, The burning of the body: others they burnt by
pouring inscalding hot Lead in at their mouths, which descending into their
bowels, killed them, the bulk of their body remaining whole, and this was
termed therefore Combustio animae, The burning of their soul. This last was
most in use, and alone described by most of their writers.

Malefactors condemned to beheading, were Moses Kotsens. in Sanhedr.
two sorts. 1. The murderer. 2. Those of any City, who were drawn unto
idolatry. The manner thereof is at this day in use.

Malefactors strangled were Moses Kotsens. ibid.
six. 1. He that seniteth his father or his mother. 2. He that steals a
soul of Israel. 3. An Elder which contradicts the Consistory. 4. A false
Prophet, and he that prophesies in the name of an idol. 5. He that lies
with another man's wife. 6. He that abuses the body of the Priests daughter.

The manner of strangling was thus. The malefactor was put in dung up to the
loins, a to well being cast about his neck, which two executioners, one on
each side, plucked to and fro until he was dead.

CHAP. VIII.
Punishments not capital.
THe lesser punishments, not capital, in use among the Hebrews, are chiefly
four. 1. Imprisonment. 2. Restitution. 3. Talio. 4. Scourging.

Imprisonment. Under this are comprehended the prison, stocks, pillory,
chains, fetters, and the like: all which sorts of punishment, seeing they
differ very little or nothing at all, from those which are now in common use
with us, they need no explication.

The Keepers of the prison, if they let any committed unto them escape, were
liable to the same punishment, which should have been inflicted on the party
escaped. This is gatherable from that, 1 King. 20. 39. Keep this man; if by
any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his life.

Concerning that Libera custodia, which Drus. praeter. 2. Tim. 1. 18.
Drusius proves to have been in use among the Romans, I much doubt whether
any such custom were in use among the Hebrews. That some kind of prisoners
at Rome did go abroad with a lesser kind offetters in the day time to their
work, and so return at night to their prison, has elsewhere been observed
by me. And Senec. epist. 5. Non in lib. de tranquil. cap. 10. que^admodum
citatur a Drusio.
Eadem catena and custodiam and militem copulabat; The same chain tied both
the prisoner and the keeper. Observe the unusual significations of these two
words; Custodia, a prisoner; and Miles, a keeper. So that Drusius delivered
Seneca his meaning, but not his words, when he repeats them thus: Eadem catena
tam reum quam militem tenet. Observe further, that the prisoner was tied by his
right arm, and the keeper by the left, because the right arm is the stronger,
and therefore justly remains free rather to the keeper, than to the prisoner.
Hence is that, Senec. de tranquil. cap 10.
Tuforte leuiorem in sinistra putas catenam; Because the keeper tied himself
unto the same chain, not in way of punishment, but voluntarily for the saftier
keeping of the prisoner.

Restitution. This was commanded when goods were unjustly gotten, or wrongfully
detained, Exodus 22. It was Thom. Aquin. secunda secundae. q. 62.
threefold.

Restitution is threefold. Secundum idem, in identity, when the very same thing
is restored which is wrongfully gotten. Secundum aequale, when there is so much
for so much in quantity restored, the goods unjustly gotten being sold, or
lost. Secundum possible, when restitution is made according to that which a man
has, not being able to satisfy the whole.

Restitution in identity; was and is principally required. Whence it is, that
if the theft, whether Ox or sheep, were found alive upon a man, he restored
but double, Exodus 22. 4. but if they were killed or sold, then five Oxen were
restored for an Ox, and four sheep for a sheep, Exodus 22. 1. The Jews were
so precise in this kind, that if they had built an house with a beam or piece
of timber unjustly gotten, they would pull down the house, and restore the
David Kimchi.
same beam or piece to the owner. From this the Prophet Habbakuk does not much
dissent: The stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
shall answer it, Habbak. 2. 11.

Among the Jews he ought to be sold that was not of sufficient worth to make
restitution, Exodus 22. 3. Augustine. epist. 54.
And Augustine says of Christians, that he which does not make restitution
according to his ability never repented. And, Non remittetur peccatum, nisi
restituatur ablatum.

Talio. This was a punishment in the same kind, an eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth, hand for hand, and foot for foot, Deuteronomy. 19. 21.

Talio is twofold, Talio identitatis, or Pythagorica, which was according to
the letter of the law, when the offender was punished with the loss of an eye
for putting out another eye, etc. Talio similitudinis, or analogica, which was
when the price of an eye, or some proportionable mulct is paid for an eye, put
out, or any other member spoiled.

The Oculum pro oculo, id est, pretium oculi. Targum Ionath. Deuteronomy. 19. 21. It.
R. Solomon ibid.
Hebrews understand Talio similitudinis, that the price of a maime should be
paid, not Talio identitatis, not that the offender should be punished with the
like maime. Because to punish like for like in identity, is in some cases
impossible, as if a blind man put out another eye, or one toothlesse strike
out another tooth.

In case of bodily maimes therefore, the Vid. Munster. Exodus 22. ^.
Hebrew Doctors say that the party offending was bound to a fiuefold
satisfaction. First, for the hurt in the loss of the member. Secondly, for the
damage in loss of his labor. Thirdly, for his pain or grief arising from
the wound. Fourthly, for the charge in curing it. Fifthly, for the blemish or
deformity thereby occasioned. Munster renders those five thus, Damnum, sessio,
dolor, medicina, confusio. The A. Gellius lib. 11. cap. 1.
Romans likewise had a Talio in their law, but they also gave liberty to the
offender, to make choice whether he would by way of commutation pay a
proportionable mulct, or in identity suffer the like maime in his body.

Scourging. This was twofold; either virgis, with rods; or flagellis, with
scourges. This latter was more grievous than the former, as appears by that
Ironicall speech; Cic. pro. Rabirio.
Porcia lex virgas ab omnium ciuium corpore amouit, hic misericors flagella
retulit. Both were in use among the Romans, but only the latter among the
Hebrews. This beating or scourging was commanded, Deuteronomy. 25. 2, 3. where the
number of stripes was limited, which the Judge might not exceed. Forty stripes
shall he cause him to have, and not past. The Jews in many things labored to
seem holy above the law. For example, where the Lord commanded a Sabbath to be
sanctified, they added their Sabbatulum, that is, they began their Sabbath
about an hour sooner, and ended about an hour later then the law required:
where the Lord forbade them to eat or drink things sacrificed to Idols, they
This bites in (...)
prohibited all drinking with Heathens, because it is doubtful whether it were
offered to Idols or no. The Lord commanded them in the time of the Passover to
put away leaven out of their houses, they would not take the This bit. in (...)
name into their mouths all the time of that feast. The Lord commanded them to
abstain from eating swines flesh, they would not so much as name it, but in
their common talk Elias This bit. ibid.
would call a Sow, (...) Dabar acher, Another thing. In like manner, the Lord
commanded chief malefactors which deserved beating, to be punished with forty
stripes; they in their greatest corrections, would give but thirty nine. Of the
Jews five times received I forty stripes save one, 2 Cor. 11. 24. For this
purpose t he scourge consisted of three thongs, so that at each blow he
received three stripes, and in their greatest correction were given thirteen
blows, that is, forty stripes save one. Whether Talmud lib. ma^aeoth, cap. 3.
in Mischna.
these thongs were made the one of a bulls hide, the other two of an ass hide,
or Baal turim. vid. Drus. 2 Cor. 10. 24.
all three of a calves hide, the matter is not material, both opinions have
their Authors.

The manner of correcting such was thus. The malefactor had both his hands tied
unto a post, one cubit and half high, so that his body bowed upon it. The
Judge shall cause him to bow down, Deuteronomy. 25. 2. This post or stake on which
the malefactor leaned in time of whipping, was termed (...) Gnammud, Columna, a
pillar. His clothes were plucked off from him downward unto the things, and
Talmud ibid.
this was done either by renting, or tearing of them. The Governors rent Paul
and Silas their clothes, and commanded them to be beaten with rods, Act. 16.
22.

That the Beadle should inflict a number of stripes proportinable unto the
transgression, this correction was performed in the sight of the Judge. The
Judge shall cause him to be beaten before his face, Deuteronomy. 25. 2. Talmud ibid.
The chief Judge of the three, during the time of the correction, did either
read or recite, Deuteronomy. 28. 58, 59. If thou will not keep, and do all the words
of this law, etc. Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, etc. The
second Judge he numbered the stripes; and the third he bade the Beadle smite.
The chief Judge concluded all, saying, Yet he being merciful, forgave their
iniquity, etc. Psalm. 78. 38.

Sometimes in notorious offenses to augment the pains, they tied certain
hucklebones or plummets of Lead, or sharp thorns to the end of the thongs,
and such scourges the Eustathius. Item. Athenaeus lib. 4.
Greeks termed (...), Flagra taxillata. Tholosan. synt. iur. universe. lib. 31.
In the Scripture they are termed Scorpions; My Father has chastised you with
rods, but I will correct you with Scorpions. 1 King. 12. 12.

CHAP. IX.
Punishments borrowed from other Nations.
THe punishments borrowed from other Nations are principally six. 1. Crux, the
death on the Cross. 2. Serra dissectio, the cutting one asunder with a saw.
3. Damnatio ad bestias, the committing one to fight for his life with wild
beasts. 4. (...) the wheel. 5. (...), drowning one in the sea. 6 (...),
beating one to death with cudgels. The first, and the third, were merely Roman
punishments; the second was likewise used by the Romans, but whether originally
taken from them is doubtful; the fourth and the last were merely Greek
punishments; the fifth was for the substance in use among Hebrews, Greeks and
Romans, but in the manner of drowning them, they differed. It will be needful
to speak somewhat of all these.

1. Crux. This word is sometimes applied to any tree or stake on which a man is
tortured to death, but most properly it is applied to a frame of wood
consisting of two pieces of timber compacted crosse-wise. The first is termed
Crux simplex, the last, Crux compacta. This latter is threefold. 1. Decussata.
2. Commissa. 3. Immissa.

Crux decussata. This was made of two equal pieces of timber obliquely
crossing one the other in the middle, after the manner of a Roman X. and thence
it is called decussata. Hieron. in Ierem. cap. 31.
Decussare est per medium secare, veluti si duae regulae concurrant ad speciem
literae X. quae figura est crucis. This kind of cross is by the common people
termed Crux Andraeana, Saint Andrews cross, because on such a one he is
reported to have been crucified.

Crux commissa. This was when a piece of timber erected, was joined in the
middle to a trauerse or overthwart top, somewhat shorter then the piece erect,
in manner of a Roman T. This is called Crux Antoniana, Saint Antony his
Cross, because he is often painted with such a Cross.

Crux immissa. This was when a short trauerse somewhat obliquely crossed the
stake erect, not quite in the middle, as Crux decussata; nor quite on the top,
as Crux commissa, but near the top in this manner Lipsius de cruce lib. 1.
cap. 10.
This is thought to have been Crux Christi, the Cross on which our Savior
Christ suffered.

The ceremonies used by the Romans toward those whom they crucified were
these: First they Joseph. excid. lib. 5. cap. 32. Philo contra Flaccum. It.
Liu. lib 1.
scourged them, and sometimes tied them to a pillar in time of scourging.
Artemidorus is clear in this, (...). That is, being tied to the pillar he
received many stripes. Plaut. Bacch.
Plautus is thought to have alluded to the same. -- Abducite hunc
Intro, atque adstringite ad columnam fortiter.


The ancient Fathers Prudentius. Hieronym. Beda. vid. Lips. de cruce lib. 2.
cap. 4.
report that our Savior was whipped thus ad columnam, but the Scripture is
silent, both touching the place and manner of his whipping, only that he was
whipped it testifies. He scourged Jesus, and delivered him to be crucified, Mat.
27. 26.

Secondly, they caused them to bear their own Cross. Plutarch. de sera number.
vindict.
Malefici cum ad supplicium educuntur, quisque suam effert crucem. Thus Christ
bore his own Cross, Ioh. 19. 17. To this there is allusion, He that takes
not his Cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10. 38.

Thirdly, that the equity of the proceeding might clearly appear, the Eusebius.
Eccles. hist. lib. 5. cap. 1. It. Sueton. Domit. cap. 10.
cause of the punishment was written in a Table, and so carried before the
condemned person, or else it was proclaimed by a public Crier. This cause was
termed by the Romans commonly Titulus, by Tertullian Apolog. cap. 2. Sueton. in
Calig.
some it is called Elogium. Thus Pilat wrote in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
Jesus of Nazaret the King of the Jews.

Fourthly, they Artemidor. lib. 2. 58.
plucked off their clothes from such as were to be crucified. Thus Christ
suffered naked.

Serra dissectio, A sawing one in sunder; They sawed them from the head
downward. The Sueton. in Calig. c. 27.
Romans they used this kind of punishment, so likewise did the Hebrews. Thus
Manasses is thought to have punished the Prophet Isaiah, and the Apostle to have
alluded unto it. They were sawen a sunder, Heb. 11. 37.

Damnatio ad bestias. Those who were condemned to wild beasts, are properly
termed Bestiarij. Whether Saint Paul did according to the letter, fight with
beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. 32. is much controuersed. Theophylact. Ans^lm.
Some understand by beasts, Demetrius, and others that opposed him at Ephesus,
Chrysostom. Ambros. (...).
others more probably understand the words literally; and this kind of
punishment was commonly exercised against Christians in the Primitius Church,
insomuch that Heathens imputing the cause of all public calamities unto the
Christians, would call out; Tertullian. Apolog. c. 40.
Christianos ad Leones, Let the Christians be halled to Lions: Yea the literal
interpretation of the words, is a stronger argument that Saint Paul believed
the resurrection (which is the scope of the text) than to understand the words
of a metaphorical fight, against the enemies of his doctrine.

(...), The wheel: A wise King brings the wheel over the wicked, Prou. 20.
26. I take the words to imply no more but this, That as the wheel turns
round, so by the wisdom of a King, the mischief intended by wicked men, is
brought upon their own head. That hereby should be understood, the grinding
of wicked men under a cart wheel, as the husbandman brake some sort of grain
under a wheel, is the mere conceit of Expositors on this place, for no
records make mention of any such punishment in use among the Jews. Among the
Greeks there was a punishment went under this name: (...). Aristoph. in Iren.
De eadem poena loquuntur Demosth. 3. in Aphob. and Suidas.
It was called (...), A Wheel, not because a wheel was brought over the
wicked, but because they bound fast the offender to the spokes of a wheel, and
there scourged him to enforce a confession.

(...), Drowning one in the sea. This was in use among many nations, but the
manner differed. The Senec. l. 5. controu. 4. Iuuenal. Satyr. 8. Modestus
Digest. l. 48. ad leg^m Pomp. de parric. vid. Cael. Rhod. l. 11. c. 21.
Romans they sowed up a paricide into a leather budget, sowing up together with
him into the same budget, A Serpent, a Cock, and an Ape, and so cast them all
into the sea. The Athenaeus l. 14.
Grecians when they judged any to this kind of punishment, they wrapped him up
in Lead. The Hebrews tied a millstone about his neck. Thus in respect of the
manner, Hier. Mat. 18. 6.
those are to be understood, who say this kind of punishment was peculiar to
the Jews.

(...). It is rendered by the general name of torturing, Heb. 11. 35. 2 Macc.
6. 19. But the word signifies a special kind of torturing, by beating one
with cudgells unto death. It has its denomination from (...), which signifies
a drum usually, and hence Magius in lib. de equuleo. vid. Drus. praeterit. l.
8.
some have paralleld this torture with that among the Romans termed Equuleus,
as if the person thus tortured, were rackt and stretched out in manner of a
drum head: but it signifies also a drum stick, and S^holtastes
Aristophanis (...) scribit esse (...). In P. u^o page 50.
thence comes the punishment to be termed Tympanismus, that is, a tabering
or beating one to death with cudgells, as if it were with drum sticks. This
is evident by Eleazar; He came willingly (...), to this kind of torment, 2.
Maccab. 6. 19. and in the thirtieth verse, where he gave up the ghost, there
is mention of his strokes, not of his racking or stretching.

Iunius reckons Iunius Ier. 29. 26.
another kind of punishment, termed by the Hebrews (...) Tsinok, which he
would have to be a compound word: doubtless his meaning is, that it should be
compounded of (...) Tsi, Nauis, a ship or boat; and (...) Ianak, Sugere, To
suck, for he says that thereby is meant a certain punishment termed
Manicula sugentis, which Plutarch. in Artax^rxe.
Plutarch describes in this manner; That the offender should be enclosed
between two boats as in a prison, or as his phrase is (quasi in vagina) as in
a sheath, and to preserve life in him, milk and honey tempered together, was
forcibly put into his mouth, whether he would or no. And hence, from this
sucking in of milk and honey, this punishment has been termed Nauicula
sugentis. But the (...) Instrumentum constringens manus. D. Kimch. Ier. 29 26
Hebrews say that Tsinok was nothing else, but manacles, or cords, wherewith
prisoners hands were tied. I leave it indifferent to the reader, to follow
which interpretation he please.

THE SIXTH BOOK. OF Miscellaneous rites.
CHAP. I.
Of Circumcision.
THeir Sacraments were two. 1. The Passover, of which there has been a set
chapter. Secondly, Circumcision, of which now.

Circumcision, was a cutting off of the foreskin, as a sign and seal of Gods
covenant, made with the people of the Jews. It is called a sign by God in its
first institution, Genesis 17. and a seal by the Apostle, Romans 4. 11. Yea it is
called a sign, and a seal, by a Zohar. Genes. 17.
Doctor of the Jews more ancient then their Talmud.

It was used (though not as a sacrament) by many other nations: Alex. ab Alex.
l. 2. c. 25. Herodot. l. 2. Diodor. Si^ul. l. 2. c. 1. It. l. 4. c. 3.
by the inhabitants of Colchis, the Ethiopians, the Troglodytae, and the
Egyptians.

In a figurative sense, alluding unto this sacramental rite, we read of three
other sorts of circumcision in the scripture, so that in all there are four
mentioned. 1. This of the flesh. 2. Another of the heart. 3. A third of the
lips. 4. And a fourth of the ears. We are to consider it in its proper
acception, and here to observe, First, the time when it was administered.
Secondly, the manner how. Thirdly, the penalty in case it was omitted.

The time was the eighth day, yea the eighth day was so precisely observed,
that if it fell on the Sabbath, yet they circumcised the child; whence arose
that saying among them, Circumcisio pellit sabbatum, Circumcision drives away
the sabbath; or, the Sabbath gives place to circumcision. And with this
accords that of our Savior, Ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man, Ioh. 7.
22. The Jews superstitiously conceiting that each creatures perfection
depended upon the sanctification of one Sabbath day at least, say that God did
therefore inioyne the eighth day, that one Sabbath might first pass over each
male, before he should be partaker of this sacrament. But more probably we may
say, that the reasons why God would not suffer them to anticipate the eighth
day, were, first to show, that God in the matter of salvation, neither was, nor
is simply tied to sacraments, for then there had been no less cruelty in
forbidding Circumcision until the eighth day, than there was love in
permitting it upon the eighth. Secondly, because in this time of the Mosaicall
paedagogie, there was a kind of legal uncleanness, in which the creatures
were thought to be, as remaining in their blood, for the first seven days
after their birth, Leuit. 22. 27. It. 12. 2, 3. Notwithstanding, God thought it
not convenient to defer it longer than eight days, for the comfort of the
parents, which they received by a mature and seasonable initiation of their
children.

The manner how Circumcision was administered, I find thus recorded; Some of
those that were present Paul. Fag. Deuteronomy. 10.
held a vessel full of dust, into which they did cast the foreskin being cut
off. Again, they prepared in the room, a certain Christoph. Cast. in Malac.
3.
void chair for Elias; which was done, partly in honor of him, for which
respect also, as often as they fell on any difficult place in scripture, they
would say, Mercerus in abbreuiaturis, (...)
Veniet Elias, and omnia enodabit; We know that Elias will come, and he will
tell us all things: but chiefly it was done because they thought Elias to be
present there in spirit, whose bodily coming they did, and do daily expect.
These ceremonies are merely Jewish, practiced by the latter Jews, but utterly
unknown in our Savior Christ his time, and as it appears by the Samaritane
woman her speech, that prouerbiall saying applied now unto Elias, was of old
applied to Christ, John 4. 25. Thirdly, he which supplied the place of the
witness, or as we phrase it, of the Godfather, (...) E^^as Thisb. (...). (...)
held the child in his arms whiles it was circumcised: this Godfather they
called Baal Berith, and Sandak, that is, the Master of the covenant. Vriah the
Priest, and Zachariah the son of Ieberechiah, are Iun. and Tremel. Es. 8. 2.
thought to have been Godfathers at the circumcision of Maher-shalal-hash-baz,
Es. 8. 2. and from them the custom of having Godfathers in Baptism, to have
taken its original. Fourthly, the parents named the child, and in Zaccharies
time, it seems that in the naming of the infant, they had respect to some
name of his ancestors. They said unto her, there is none of thy kindred that is
named with this name, Luke 1. 61. Other nations, had their set days also after
the birth, for the naming of their children. Plutarch. probl. 102. Macrob. Sat.
l. 1. c. 16.
The Romans gave names to their male children on the ninth day, to the female
on the eighth. The ^ael. Rhodig. l. 22. c. 12.
Athenians gave names on the tenth. Aristotel. hist. an^^. l 7. c. 12.
Others on the seventh. These days Tertul. de Idol. c. 16.
Tertullian calls Nominalia. The Grecians besides the tenth day on which they
named the child, they observed also the fifth. S^bolisist. Ari^^^an. in
Lusi^rat. p. 886. It. (...) in (...).
on which day the midwines took the child, and ran about a fire made for
the purpose, using that ceremony as a purification of themselves and the
child; on this day the neighbors also sent in gifts, or small tokens, Munera
natalitia; Stukius de conuin. l. ^. c. 16.
from which custom, that among Christians of the Godfathers sending gifts to
the baptized Infant, is thought to have flowne. But to return again to the
rites of the Jews. After the child had been circumcised, the father said;
(...) Moses Kotsens. in tractat. Circumcis. fol. 115.
Blessed be our Lord God, who has sanctified us with his precepts, and has
commanded us, that we should cause this child, to enter into the covenant of
Abraham. After this, the whole Church or company present replied in this
manner; (...) Moses. Kots. ibid.
As thou have made him to enter into the Covenant, so make him also to enter
into the Law, into Matrimony, and into good Works.

The penalty for the omission of Circumcision runs in this form; That soul
shall be cut off from his people, Genesis 17. 14. I understand the penalty to be
pronounced against such an omission, which proceeded either from contempt, or
wilful neglect. In this case, the question is, what is meant by this phrase?
His soul shall be cut off from the people: secondly, who ought thus to be
punished? Whether the child, or the parents, and such who supply the place of
parents? For the first, besides Gods secret action in punishing such
delinquents, me thinks there is a rule of direction for the Church, how to
proceed against such in her discipline: if any understand here, by cutting off
such a man's soul from his people, the sentence of Excommunication, or casting
him out of the Synagogue, I shall not oppose it; though I rather incline to
those, who understand hereby a bodily death inflicted upon such an offender; in
which sense the phrase is taken, Exodus 31. 14. Whosoever does any work in the
Sabbath, that soul shall be cut off from amongst his people. And it is very
remarkable, that when Moses his child was uncircumcised, the Lord sought to
kill Moses: which, as it intimates the punishment for this fault to be a
bodily death: so it clearly euinceth, that not the child till he comes to
years of discretion, but the parents were liable to the punishment. The
opinion of the Rabbines, concerning this latter point, is thus delivered: Moses
Kots. tractat. circumcis. fol. 114. col. 4.
If the Father circumcise him not, then the Judges are commanded to circumcise
him, and if it be unknown to the Judges, and they circumcise him not, when he
is waxen great, he is bound to circumcise himself, and every day that passes
over him, after he is waxen great, and he circumciseth not himself, lo he
breaks the commandment.

Here it may be demanded, how it is possible for a man, after once he has
been marked with the sign of Circumcision, to blot out that character, and
become uncircumcised? for thus some Jews, for fear of Antiochus, made
themselves uncircumcised, 1 Mac. 1. 16. Others for shame, after they were
gained to the knowledge of Christ, and to the entertainment of the Christian
faith, uncircumcised themselves, 1 Cor. 7. 18. Epithan. lib. de men's. and pond.
p. 415. It. Celsus l. 7. cap. 25.
The answer is, that this was done by drawing up the foreskin with a Surgeon
his instrument; and unto this, the Apostle in the forequoted place alludeth,
(...), Neattrahat praeputium. This wicked invention is ascribed unto Esau, as
the first author, and practiser thereof.

CHAP. II.
Of their first fruits, and their firstlings, or firstborn.
THe use and end of their first fruits, was that the after fruits might be
consecrated in them. To this purpose they were enjoined to offer the first
fruits of their trees, which served for food, Leuit. 19. 23, 24. In which this
order was observed; the three first years after the tree had been planted,
the fruits were counted uncircumcised, and unclean: it was unlawful to eat
them, sell them, or make any benefit of them: on the fourth year, they were
accounted holy, that is, either (...) Sacerdos ea comedebat. Aben Esra in hunc
locum.
they were given to the Priests, Numb. 18. 12, 13. or the owners did eat them
before the Lord at Jerusalem, as they did their second tithe: and this Talmud
Bab. in Magnasher sheni. cap. 1.
latter is the common opinion of the Hebrews. After the fourth year, they
returned to the use of the owner: we may call these (...), simply the first
fruits.

Secondly, they were enjoined to pay yearly the first fruits of every years
increase; and these we may call (...), and of them there were many sorts.
First, first fruits in the sheafe, Leuit. 23. 10. Secondly, first fruits in two
wave loaves, Leuit. 23. 17. These two bounded their harvest, that in the sheafe
was offered in the beginning of harvest, upon the fifteenth of Nisan; the other
of the loaves at the end, upon their Pentecost: and Leuit. 23. they are both
called (...) Thenuphoth, that is, shake offerings. Thirdly, there was a first of
the dough, Numb. 15. 20. namely, a (...) Vzziel. Number. 15. 20.
four and twentieth part thereof given unto the Priests: which kind of
offering was observed, even when they were returned out of Babylon, Nehem. 10.
37. unto this Saint Paul has reference, Romans 11. 16. If the first fruit be
holy, the lump is also holy. Fourthly, they were to pay unto the Priests, the
first fruits of the threshing floor, Numb. 15. 20. These two last are called
(...) Therumoth, that is, heaue-offrings; this the heaue-offring of the
threshing floor; the other, the heaue-offring of the dough, Numb. 15. 20.
Under the name of first fruits, commonly authors treat of no other, but this
last, and wholly omit all the former sorts: before we proceed to the
explaining of the last, note with me the difference of these two words,
Thenuphoth, and Therumoth; both signify shake-offrings, heaue-offrings, or
waue-offrings, but with this difference; P. Fag. in pentat.
The Therumoth, was by a wauing of elevation, lifting the oblation upward and
downward, to signify that God was Lord both of heaven and earth. The
Thenuphoth, was by a wauing of agitation, wauing it to and fro, from the right
hand to the left, from the East to the West, from the North to the South: by
which kind of agitation, they acknowledged God to be Lord of the whole world.
Now, that we may know what these first fruits of the threshing floor were, the
Rabbis, and others following them, distinguish them into two sorts: the first
of these, was first fruits of seven things only, 1. Wheat. 2. Barley. 3.
Grapes. 4. Figs. 5. Pomegranets. 6. Olives. 7. Dates. For all which, the
promised Land is commended, Deuteronomy. 8. 8. R. Solom. Deuteronomy. 26. 2. It. Mos.
Kotsens. fol. 201. col. 4.
These the Talmudists term (...) Biccurim; and when they treat of first
fruits, they treat of them under this name, and understand by the name of
Biccurim no other. These, they say, are the first fruits, which the people are
so often in the Law commanded to bring up unto the Sanctuary, at the feast of
Pentecost, which was the end and closure of their harvest, as was signified,
both by this oblation, and likewise by that of the two wave loaves, Leuit. 23.
17.

The second, was paid of Corn, Wine, Oil, and the Fleece, Deuteronomy. 18. 4. Numb.
18. 12. yea, of all things else that the earth brought forth for man's food.
Thus their Doctors are to be understood, where they say, Moses Egypt. in Iad
part. 3. tract. de Therumoth. cap. 2.
Quicquid eduliorum ex terra incrementum capit, obnoxium est primitijs,
Therumae, and decimis. This they call (...) Theruma, an heave offering, the
Greek renders it (...), A separation, because this was a consecration, or
setting apart of the Lords portion. In allusion unto this, I take Saint Paul to
have termed himself (...), separated unto the Gospel, Romans 1. (...), Aaron
shall separate the Levites, so the Greek renders it, but the Original is,
Aaron shall wave the Levites, Numb. 8. 11. Again, (...), Separate me Barnabas
and Saul, Acts 13. 2. Drusius delivers another reason, as has been said in
the Chapter of the Pharisees. But to proceed: the Hebrews called this second
payment, not only Theruma simply, but sometimes (...)
Theruma gedola, the great heave offering, in comparison of that tithe which the
Levites paid unto the Priests: for that was termed Theruma magnasher, the heave
offering of the tithe, Numb. 18. 26. which, though it were one of ten, in
respect of that portion which the Levites received; yet it was but one of an
hundred, in respect of the husbandmans stock, who paid the Levites: and thus
was it a great deal less, then the great heave offering, as will presently
appear. This (the Hebrews say) the owners were not bound to bring up to
Jerusalem.

The Law prescribed no set quantity to be paid, either in the Biccurim, or in
the Theruma; but by tradition, they were taught to pay at least the sixtieth
part in both, even in those seven things, also paid under the name of Biccurim,
or first fruits, as well as in their heave offering termed Theruma, or Theruma
gedola.

Thus the Talmudists do distinguish the Biccurim, from the Theruma gedola; but
in my opinion, the Biccurim may be contained under Theruma gedola, and in
truth, both of them are nothing else but the heaue-offring of the floor,
formerly mentioned out of Number. 15. 20. My reasons are these; 1. Scripture
gives no such leave to keep any part of their first fruits at home; if that
could be proved, the distinction were warrantable. 2. Scripture does not limit
first fruits unto those seven kinds, which alone go under the name of
Biccurim. 3. Themselves confound both members; for in their Biccurim, they say,
they paid, 1. Wheat. 2. Barley. In their Theruma, they say, they paid corn; as
if under corn, wheat and barley were not contained. Some may say they paid
their Biccurim in the ear, whiles the harvest was yet standing: and their
Theruma in wheat and barley ready threshed and winnowed. My reasons why it
cannot be so, are these: 1. Because then they should pay twice a sixtieth part
in their corn. 2. Because the corn offered in the sheafe was but a little
quantity, and it was offered, not at their Pentecost when their harvest ended,
but at their Passover when their harvest began, Leuit. 23. 10. Whereas their
Biccurim, or first fruits, were always offered at their Pentecost.

But omitting farther proofs, I proceed to show the ground, why in this
heaue-offering of the floor, at least a sixtieth part was prescribed: it is
grounded upon that of the Prophet Ezekiel, This is the oblation that ye shall
offer, the sixth part of an Ephah out of an Homer, Ezekiel. 45. 13. that is, the
sixtieth part of the whole, because an Homer contains ten Ephahs. Hence they
took that distinction of these offerings. Solom. Iarchi. Deuteronomy. 18. 4. Item
Hieronym. in Ezekiel. 45. Fol. 260
Some, say they, gave the fortieth part of their increase: this, because it was
the greatest quantity given in this kind of oblations, they termed (...)
Therumagnaijn iapha.
Theruma Oculi boni, the oblation of a fair eye: others, (though they were not
so liberal as the former, yet that they might not be reputed niggardly) gave a
fiftieth part, and this they termed, (...) Theruma benonith.
Theruma mediana, the oblation of a middle eye: others, whom they reputed
sordid, gave just the sixtieth part, less than which they could not give, this
they termed (...) Theruma gnaijn ragna.
Theruma oculi mali, the oblation of an evil eye; so that the payment of these
was bounded by the tradition of the Elders, between the sixtieth and the
fortieth part: but the Epiphan. contr. Pharis. page 11.
Pharisees, that they might be holy above others, made their bounds the
fiftieth, and the thirtieth part; so that he was reputed sordid with them, that
paid the fiftieth part; and none liberal, except he paid the thirtieth. The
manner how these first fruits termed Biccurim were paid, is at large set down,
Deuteronomy. 26. But in time of the Prophets, other Ceremonies seem to have been
received, of which the Hebrew Doctors say thus: Maimonid. in Riccurim. cap. 4..
16.
When they carried up their first fruits, all the cities, that were in a
County, gathered together to the chief city of the County, to the end that
they might not go up alone; for it is said, In the multitude of people is the
Kings honor, Prou. 14. 28. And they came and lodged all night in the streets
of the city, and went not into houses for fear of pollution: and in the
morning the Governor said, Arise, and let us go up to Sion, the city of the
Lord our God. And before them went a bull, which had his horns covered with
gold, and an Olive garland on his head, to signify the first fruits of the
seven kinds of fruits. There was likewise a pipe struck up before them, until
they came near to Jerusalem, and all the way as they went, they sang, I
rejoiced in them that said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord,
etc. Psalm. 122. Unto this, and other like manner of solemn assemblies, the
Prophet has reference, saying, Ye shall have a song, as in the night when an
holy solemnity is kept, and gladness of heart, as when one goes with a pipe
to come unto the mountain of the Lord, Esa. 30. 29.

The first-lings or firstborn of man and beast, the Lord challenged as his
own, Exodus 13. The ground of this law was, because God smote all the
firstborn in Egypt, from man to beast, but spared the Israelites; for a
perpetual memory of which benefit, he commanded them to sanctify all their
firstborn males unto him. Now the firstborn of men, and unclean beasts,
were redeemed for five silver shekels of the Sanctuary, paid unto the Priests
for each of them, Number. 18. 15, 16. Unto this Saint Peter alludeth, saying, We
are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1. 18. The
firstlings of clean beasts ought to be sacrificed, their blood to be
sprinkled on the altar, their fat to be burnt for a burnt offering, and their
flesh to return to the Priests.

Observe how God would be honored by the firstlings of men, and cattle; by
the first fruits of trees, and of the earth, in the sheafe, in the threshing
floor, in the dough, in the leaves; All which teach us to consecrate the first
and prime of our years unto the Lord.

CHAP. III.
Of tithes.
WE are here to enquire; First, what things in general were titheable?
Secondly, how many kinds of tithes there were? Thirdly, the time when each
sort of tithe began to be titheable.

First, their yearly increase, was either cattle, fruits of the trees, or
fruits of the land; of Vid. Sixtin. Amama de decimis.
all these they paid tithes even to mint, anise, and cummine. These things
they ought not to leave undone, Mat. 23. 23.

Secondly, the sorts of tithes paid out of the fruits, both of the trees, and
the land, by the husbandman, were two, paid in this manner: When the harvest
had been ended, and all gathered, then the husbandman laid aside his great
Theruma, otherwise called the first fruits of his threshing floor, of which it
has been spoken in the Chapter of first fruits. This being done, then out of
the remainder he paid a tenth part unto the Levites, and this they termed
(...)
Magnasher rischon, the first tithe, Tob. 1. 7. this was always paid in
kind, and as it seems to me, it was not brought up to Jerusalem by the
husbandman, Decimae primae necissario aut a colono ipsoa aut eiu^ vicari^
Hieroso^ymas deport. n^ae erant. Sixtin. Amama de decimis.
(others think otherwise) but paid unto the Levites in the several cities of
tillage, Nehem. 10. 37. out of this first tithe, the Levites paid a tenth
portion unto the Priests, this they termed (...).
Magnasher min hammagnasher, the tithe of the tithes, Nehem. 10. 38. and Decima
sanctitatum, the tithe of holy things, 2 Chronicles. 31. 6. this the Levites brought
up to the house of God, Nehem. 10. 38. When the Levites had paid this tenth
portion unto the Priests, then the Levites and their families might eat the
remainder of the first tithe, in any place, even out of Jerusalem, Number. 18. 31.

This first tithe being paid, the husbandman paid out of that which remained
a second tithe; this the husbandman might pay in kind if he pleased, or if he
would, he might by way of commutation pay the worth thereof in money; but when
he paid in money, he added a fifth part, so that what in kind was ten in the
hundred, that changed into money, was twelve in the hundred. This the
husbandman brought up unto Jerusalem, and made a kind of louefeast therewith,
unto which he invited the Priests and Levites, only every third year he
carried it not to Jerusalem, but spent it at home within his own gates, upon
the Levites, the fatherless, the widows, and the poor, Deuteronomy. 14. 18. Moses
Kotsens. tract. de ceci^ a secunda, Fol. 199.
They reckoned their third year from the Sabbaticall year, on which the land
rested; so that the first and second tithe was paid by the husbandman, the
first, second, fourth, and fifth years after the Sabbaticall year; but upon
the third and sixth years, only the first tithe was paid to the Levites, and
the second was spent at home. Hence in respect of the kinds, this is called
(...)
Magnasher scheni, the second tithe, Tob. 1. 7. in respect it was paid to the
poor every third year, it is called Magnasher gnani, (...), the poor man's
tithe, and (...)
Magnasher schelischi, the third tithe, Tob. 1. 8. On those years on which it
was carried up to Jerusalem, it ought of necessity to be eaten within the
court of the Temple, Deuteronomy. 14. 26. and by the third tithe, we are to understand
the poor man's tithe on the third year, which year is termed an year of
tithes, Deuteronomy. 26. 12.

They likewise tithed their cattle. Of their bullackes, and their sheep, and
all that passed under the rod, the tenth was holy to the Lord, Leuit. 27. 32.
Some Expositors understand by this phrase of passing under the rod, that all
cattle are titheable which live under the custody of a keeper, as if there
were allusion to the shepherds staff, or keepers rod which they use in
keeping their cattle. The Hebrews, more probably understand hereby, the
manner of their decimation or tithing their cattle, which was as follows.
Solomon Iarchi Leuit. 27. 32. and Maimonid. de primogenit. cap. 7.. 3. 5.
He that has lambs (or bullockes) thus separateth his tenth, he gathers all
his lambs, and all his bullockes into a fold, to which he makes a little
door, that two cannot go forth together: their dammes are placed without the
door, to the end that the lambs hearing them bleating, might go forth one
after another in order. Then one begins to number with his rod, one, two,
three, etc. and the tenth which comes forth, whether it be male or female,
perfect or blemished, he marketh it with a red mark, saying, This is for
tithe. At this day the Jews though they are not in their own country,
neither have any Leuiticall Priesthood, yet those who will be reputed
religious among them, do distribute in lieu of tithes, the tenth of their
increase unto the poor, being persuaded, that God does bless their estates
the more: for their usual proverb is, (...)
Thegnasher, bischbil sche thegnasher, that is, Pay tithes that thou may be
rich.

The time of the year from which they reckoned tithes, was different. For
Talmud tract. de nono anno ad initium. Buxtorf. Synag. Iud. cap. 12.
beasts they counted the year from Elul to Elul, that is, from August to
August; Moses Kotsens. in praecept. affirm. 136.
for grain, pulse, and herbs, from Tisri to Tisri, that is, from September to
September: for the Fruit of trees, from Schebat to Schebat, that is, from
January to January.

In this Synopsis following (which Sixtinus Amama has taken out of Scaliger)
the manner of Isreal's tithing is set down.

The husbandman had growing 6000 Bushels in one year. 100 Bushels was the
least that could be paid by the husbandman to the Priests, for the first
fruits of the threshing floor. 5900 Bushels remained to the husbandman, out of
which he paid two tithes. 590 Bushels were the first tithe to the Levites. 59
Bushels the Levites paid the Priests, which was called the tithe of the
tithes. 5310 Bushels remained to the husbandman, out of which he paid his
second tithe. 531 Bushels were the second tithe. 4779 Bushels remained to the
husbandman as his own, all being paid. 1121 Bushels are the sum of both
tithes joined together, which is above a sixth part of the whole, namely,
nineteen out of an hundred.

We are to know moreover, that through the corruption of the times, in time of
Hezekiahs reign, tithes began generally to be neglected, insomuch, that then
Overseers were appointed to look to the true payment thereof, 2 Chronicles. 31. 13.
Notwithstanding, partly through the negligence of the Overseers, partly through
the covetousness of the people; about one hundred thirty years before our
Saviors Incarnation, corruption so prevailed, that the people in a manner
neglected all tithes, yea none or very few paid, either their first, second, or
poor man's tithe, only they paid the great heaue-offring justly. For this
reason (says Moses Kotsers Fol. 199. col. 3.
Moses Kotsensis) in the days of John the Priest, who succeeded Simeon the
just, (I take it he means Johannes H^rcanus) their great court termed their
Sanhedrim, made a decree, that more faithful Overseers should be appointed for
the tithes. At this time many things became questionable, whether they were
titheable or no? whence the high court of their Sanhedrim decreed, that in the
things doubtful (which they termed (...) Demai) Moses Kotsens. ibid.
though they paid neither first, nor poor man's tithe, yet they paid a second
tithe, and a small heaue-offering; namely, (...) One part of an hundred: Mint,
Anise and Cummine, seems to have been of these doubtful things, in which,
though the decree of their Sanhedrim required but one in the hundred, yet the
Pharisees would pay a just tenth, Matt. 23. 23. and hence it is that they
boasted, They gave tithes of all that they possessed, Luke 18. 12. In which
they outstripped the other Jews, who in these paiments, took the liberty
granted them by the Sanhedrim.

CHAP. IV.
Of their marriages.
IN this chapter of their marriages, we are to consider; First, the distinction
of their wives. Secondly, the manner of their betro-things. Thirdly, the rites
and ceremonies of their marriage. Lastly, the form of their divorce. The
Patriarchs in the old testament, had many of them two sorts of wives, both of
them were reputed lawful, and true wives, and therefore the children of both
were accounted legitimate. The Hebrews commonly call the one (...) Naschim,
Primary wives, married with nuptial ceremonies and rites requisite. Some derive
the word from (...) Nascha, Oblitus fuit, quasi obliuiosae dictae, because for
the most part, Women's memory is not so strong as men's: but they think not
amiss, who say, that women are so called from oblivion, or forgetfulness,
because the fathers family is forgotten, and in a manner extinct in their
daughters, when they are married. Hence proceeds that common saying of the
Hebrews, (...) Aben Esra Number. 1. 2.
Familia matris, non vocatur familia: and for the contrary reason, a male
child is called (...) Zacar, from his memory, because the memory of the father
is preserved in the Eandem prolis masculae rationem habitam apud Graecos
testatur Euripides. (...).
son, according to that speech of Absalom; I have no son to keep my name
in remembrance, 2 Samuel 18. 18.

The other sort of wives, they call (...) Vxor secundaria, vocem compositam
esse aiunt ex (...) Diuidere, and (...) Vxor, quasi vxor diuisa and dimidiae.
Pillagschim, Secundary wives, or halfe-wiues; the English translates them
Concubines, and that not unfitly, for sometimes the Hebrew word it self
denotes an infamous strumpet, or common harlot.

The differences between these Concubines, and the chief or primary wives,
are many. 1. A disparity in their authority, or household government: the Wife
was as mistress, the Concubine as an handmaid, or servant: She had only Ius
tori, a true and lawful right unto the marriage bed, as the chief wife had;
otherwise she was in all respects inferior. And this appears in the history
of Sarah, and Hagar. Secondly, the betrothing was different: the chief wife,
at her espousals, received from her husband certain gifts and tokens, as
pledges and testimonies of the contract. Thus Abraham's steward (who is probably
thought to be Eliezer, of whom we read, Genesis 15. 2.) gave in Isaaks name unto
Rebecca, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, Genesis 24. 53. This
custom was in use also among the Grecians, who called these gifts (...).
Homer. Iliad. 9. vid. etiam Suid. in (...).
(...). D. Kimch. 2 Samuel 5. 13.
Moreover, the chief wife likewise received from her husband, a bill of
writing, or matrimonial letters; whereas the Concubine received neither such
gifts, nor such letters. Thirdly, only the children of the chief wife
succeeded the father in his inheritance; the children of the Concubine received
gifts or legacies: Abraham gave all his goods to Isaak: but unto the sons of
the Concubines which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, Genesis 25. 5, 6. And here
by the way, we may take notice, that the firstborn, by right of
primogeniture, received a double portion of his fathers goods: The father shall
give him a double portion of all that he has, for he is the first of his
strength, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. Unto this custom the Prophet Elishaes speech alludeth,
when the prays Elijah, that his spirit might be double upon him, 2 King. 1.
9. that is, that he might have have a double portion of the spirit, in
comparison of the other Prophets, or rather the sons of the Prophets, amongst
whom he obtained the place of an elder brother, and therefore prays for the
right of primogeniture: so that we are not to understand him, as if he did
ambitiously desire a greater measure of the spirit, than rested upon his
Master, but that he desired to excel the other remaining Prophets, unto whom
afterward he became a Father. The (...) partem duorum.
Hebrew phrase is in both places the same.

Secondly, in their betrothing we are to consider, 1. The distance of time
between the espousals, and the confirmation of their marriage, which some have
conceited to have been a full year, at least ten months, and this they
observe from Rebecca, her brother and mothers answer unto Abraham's servant,
desiring that the maid might not depart presently, but remain after the
espousalls at least ten days, Genesis 24. 55. Which text they interpret, Ork^los,
and R. Solomon.
ten months, understanding thereby, that which elsewhere is phrased an (...)
D^orum annorum d^erum.
year of days, Genesis 41. 1. But if we should yield this interpretation,
(although our English at least ten days, is more agreeable unto the Septuagint
and the Original) yet it follows not, that this time was craved for the
fulfilling of any prescribed distance between the espousalls and the marriage,
but rather, it implies the tender affection of the mother toward her
daughter, as being loath so suddenly to part with her: Notwithstanding, it is
not unlikely, that there was a competent distance of time, between the first
affiancing and the confirmation of the marriage, though not prescribed, or
limited to any set number of days, weeks, or months. The second thing
considerable in their betrothing, is to enquire the manner of their
contracting, which might be done in Israel, three ways: 1. (...) Moses
Kotsens. fol. 124.
By a piece of money. Secondly, By writing. Thirdly, By copulation, and all
these in the presence of witnesses: by a piece of money, though it were but a
faithing, or the worth thereof, at which time, the man used this, or the like
form of words; (...) (...) 3.. ^.
Lo thou art betrothed unto me: And he gave her the money before witnesses.
By hill, and then he wrote the like form of words; Be thou betrothed unto me:
which he gave her before witnesses, and it was written with her name in it,
else it was no betrothing. By copulation, and then he said likewise, Lo thou
shall be betrothed unto me by copulation, and so he was united unto her
before two witnesses, after which copulation, she was his betrothed wife. If
he lay with her by way of fornication, and not by the name of betrothing; or if
it were by themselves, without the fore-acquainting of witnesses, it was no
betrothing; howeuer he might not lie with her the second time, before the
marriage was accomplished. And though the betrothing might be any of these three
ways, yet usually it was by a piece of money; and if they would, they might
do it by writing: but betrothing by copulation was forbidden by the wise men
of Israel, and who so did it, was chastised with rods; howbeit the betrothing
stood in force. These solemnities in betrothing, were performed by the man and
woman, under a tent or canopy made for the purpose, called in their language
(...) Elias ^hisbit.
Chuppa, A Tabernacle or Tent: to this the Psalmist alludeth, Psalm 19. 4, 5.
In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which as a Bridegroom,
coming out of his chamber, rejoices as a strong man to run a race.

Thirdly, the rites and ceremonies of their marriage were performed, in the
assembly of ten men at least, with blessings and thanksgiuings unto God, whence
the house it self was called (...)
Beth hillula, the house of praise: and their marriage song (...)
Hillulim, praises. The bridegroomes intimate friends which accompanied him,
and sung this Epithalamium or marriage song, were termed (...), Children of the
bride-chamber, Matthew. 9. 15. Such I conceive those thirty companions to have
been, which Sampson associated to himself, Judge. 14. 11. The form of this
praise, or blessing, is at large described by Genebrard, and the sum thereof
is this: the chief of these companions takes a cup, and blesses it, saying,
Blessed art thou, O Lord, our God, the King of the world, which createst the
fruit of the vine: Afterward then he says; Blessed be the Lord our God, the
King of the world, who has created man after his own image, according to the
image of his own likeness, and has thereby prepared unto himself an
everlasting building, blessed be thou O Lord, who have created him. Then
follows again; Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, who have created joy and
gladness, the bridegroom and the bride, charity and brotherly love, rejoicing
and pleasure, peace and society: I beseech thee, O Lord, let there suddenly be
heard in the cities of Judah, and the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of joy
and gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the bride: the voice of
exultation in the bride-chamber is sweeter than any feast, and children sweeter
than the sweetness of a song: and this being ended, he drinks to the married
couple.

This custom of praising God at such times, was not needless, or superfluous,
for the fruit of the womb was expected as a special blessing from God, and so
acknowledged by them in that saying: That four keys were in the hand of him,
who was the Lord of the whole world, which were committed neither to Angel,
nor Seraphim; Namely, (...) Targum Hierosol. Genesis 30. 21.
Clauis pluuiae, clauis cibationis, clauis sepulchrorum, and clauis
sterilitatis. Concerning the key of rain, thus speaks the Scripture; The
Lord will open to thee his good treasure, Deuteronomy. 28. Concerning the key of food;
Thou openest thy hands, Psalm. 145. Concerning the key of the grave; When I
shall open your sepulchers, Ezekiel. 37. Concerning the key of barrenness; God
remembered Rachel, and opened her womb, Genesis 30. Whereby is intimated, that
these four things, God has reserved in his own hand and custody; Namely,
Rain, Food, the Raising of our bodies, and the Procreation of children.

The time of the marriage feast, appears clearly to have been, usually Vid.
Thisbit. in (...)
seven days. Sampson continued his feast seven days, Iud. 14. 10, 11. And of
this seven days feast, Augustine. quaest. super Genes. 88.
Divines do understand that speech of Labans unto Jacob, concerning Leah:
Fulfill her week, and we will also give thee this, Genesis 29. 27. In which
speech, it is thought that Laban did desire Jacob, not to reject and turn away
Leah, but to confirm the present marriage, by fulfilling the usual days of
her marriage feast. From this custom, together with the practice of Joseph,
mourning seven days for his father, Genesis 50. 10. arose that usual proverb
among the Jews; Septem ad conuiuium, Septem ad luctum. The chief governor of
the feast was called (...)
Baal mischie; which name is fitly expressed by being called the (...)
Ruler of the feast, John 2. 9. The modern Jews in Italy, when they inuit
any to a marriage feast, use this form of words; Such a one, or such a one
entreats you to credit his daughters marriage, with your presence at the
feast, etc. Then he which is invited replieth, (...) Stakius de conuin. l. 2.
c. 3.
Mazal tob: which some interpret to be the wishing of good luck in general;
but I rather think, that hereby was wished to the married parties, a special
blessing in the procreation of children: whence the wedding ring, given unto
the Bridewife, had Munster. Genesis 30.
this inscription or posie, Mazal tob; and the Hebrews call the Planet Jupiter,
Mazal, whose influence, they thought to be of great efficacy and force for
generation: but in truth, Mazal signifies any other Planet or Star in the
heaven, according to that Hebrew proverb; Non est tibi vlla herba inferites cui
non sit Mazal in firmamento, and ferit ipsam (...) Mazal, and duit ei, Cr^sce.
There is no herb in the earth, which has not a Mazal, or Star, in the
firmament answering it, and striking it, saying, Grow. Now tob signifies good,
so that the phrase sounds as much as, Be it done in a good hour, or under a
good Planet.

At the time of the marriage also, the man gave his wife a dowrie-bill, which
the Scriuener wrote, and the bridegroom paid for, whereby he endowed his
spouse, if she were a virgin, with two hundred deneyrs (that is, fifty
shekels) and if she had been married before, with an hundred deniers (that is,
twenty five shekels) and this was called the root or principal of the dowry:
the dowry might not be less, but more, so much as he would, though it were to
a talent of gold. There is mention of a contract between Tobias and Sarra, and
that was performed, not by a Scriuener, but by Raguel, the woman's father; where
we may observe, that before the writing of this bill, there was a giving of
the woman unto her husband. The form of words there used is, Behold, take her
after the law of Moses, Tobit. 7. 14. A copy of this dowry-bill is taken by
Bertram, out of the Babylon Talmud. The words thereof are thus; Talmud Bab.
vid. Buxtorf. Grammatic. Chald. p. 389.
Upon the sixth day of the week, the fourth of the month Siuan, in the year
five thousand two hundred fifty four of the creation of the world, according
to the computation which we use here at Massilia, a City which is situate
near the Seashoare, the bridegroom Rabbi Moses, the son of Rabbi Iehuda,
said unto the bridewife Clarona, the daughter of Rabbi David, the son of
Rabbi Moses, a Citizen of Lisbon; Be unto me a wife according to the law of
Moses and Israel; and I, according to the word of God, will worship, honor,
maintain, and govern thee, according to the manner of the husbands among the
Jews, which do worship, honor, maintain, and govern their wives
faithfully. I also do bestow upon thee, the dowry of thy virginity, two
hundred deniers in silver, which belong unto thee by the law; and moreover, thy
food, thy apparel, and sufficient necessaries, as likewise the knowledge of
thee, according to the custom of all the earth. Thus Clarona the virgin
rested, and became a wife to Rabbi Moses, the son of Iehuda, the bridegroom.

After the marriage was finished, then the wife might challenge from her husband
three things as debt. 1. Food. 2. Apparel. 3. Cohabitation, or the right of
the bed; which they note from Exodus 21. 10. where it is said, If he take him
another wife, her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage shall he not
diminish. And unto this the Apostle alludeth, calling it, Due benevolence, 1
Cor. 7. 3.

The wife, when she was first presented unto her husband, covered her head with
a veil, in token of subjection. Rebecca took a veil, and covered her self,
Genesis 24. 65. and for this cause (namely in sign of subjection) ought the woman
to have power on her head, 1 Cor. 11. 10. where by power, the Apostle
understands a veil. Do any ask the question, why he should denote this
veil by the name of power, especially seeing it was in token of subjection?
The Apostle being an Hebrew of the Hebrews, might have respect unto the Hebrew
word (...) Velamen multeris, a verbo (...) Subiecit.
Radid, signifying a veil, which comes from the root Radad, to bear rule
and authority, and so might use the Greek word, signifying (...).
power, in the same sense as the Hebrews did. And in truth, what was this
subjection to the husband, but a kind of power and protection derived unto the
wife, in comparison of her former state, being a virgin? and therefore in case
her husband was ^ealous of her, amongst other tokens of sorrow, she was
commanded to stand at her trial with her (...) Sine Radid. (...). Sic ego
interpretor verba Maimon. in Sota c. 3.. 5.
head uncovered, Numb. 5. 18. intimating thereby, that, if she could not then
clear her self, she was, from thence forward, deprived of all power, which
heretofore she enjoyed by the means of her husband.

After the marriage was finished, sometimes there was permitted a bill of
divorce; this, the Hebrews called (...) Grace (...).
Sepher Kerithuth, A bill of cutting off, because the woman is by this means
cut off from her husbands family. Maimon. de diuort. c. 1.. 1.
Ten things were thought requisite as the root and foundation of a divorce. 1.
That a man put her not away, but of his own will. 2. That he put her away by
writing, not by any other thing. 3. That the matter of the writing be to
divorce her, and put her away out of her possession. 4. That the matter of that
diuorcement be between him and her. 5. That it be written by her name. 6. That
there be no action wanting, after the writing thereof, save the delivery of it
unto her. 7. That he give it unto her. 8. That he give it her before witnesses.
9. That he give it her by the Law of divorces. 10. That it be the husband, or
his deputy, that delivers it unto her.

The form or copy of this bill of diuorcement was, as it follows; Haec forma
reperitur opud Mosem Kotsensem fo. 1. 33. Aliud exemplar ibidem habetur. It. in
Mose Aegyptio part. 2. fol. 59. vnde desumpta est haec testium subscriptio quam
apposuimus.
upon such a day of the week, such and such of the month N. such or such an
year of the creation of the world, according to the computation which we use
here in this City N. situate near the river N. that I of the Country N. the
son of Rabbi N. of the Country N. But now I dwelling in such or such a place,
near such, or such a river, have desired of mine own free will, without any
coaction, and have divorced, dismissed, and cast out thee, thee I say, thee my
wife N. of the Country N. the daughter of Rabby N. dwelling in such or such a
Country, and dwelling now in such or such a place, situate near such or such a
river, which have been my wife heretofore; but now, I do divorce thee,
dismiss thee, and cast thee out, that thou may be free, and have the rule
of thy self, to depart, and to marry with any other man, whom thou will; and
let no man be refused by thee for me, from this day forward for ever. Thus be
thou lawful for any man, and this shall be to thee from me, a bill of
separation, a bill of divorce, and a letter of dismission.

According to the Law of Moses and Israel. N. the son of N. witness. N. the
son of N. witness.


This bill was written by a Solomon Iarchi. Hos. cap. 1. 10.
Scriuener, or public notary. And Maimon. de diuort. cap. 11.. 18.
furthermore, a woman being divorced, or otherwise a widow, it was not lawful
for her to marry again, till she had tarried ninety days, besides the day of
her divorce, or of her husbands death, and her last espousals: to the end that
it might be known whether she were with child or no, and that there might be
proof, whether it were the seed of her first husband or of her second.

It was a common custom among the Romans, about the time of our Saviors
birth, even for the women to divorce their husbands, and to marry again at
their pleasure. Of this, Heathen Authors speak: -- Sic fiunt octo mariti.
Quinque per autumnos.
Iuuenal. Satyr. 6. verse. 230. Et nubet decimoiam Thelesina viro.
Martial. lib. 8.

Senec. 3. de Ben. f. 16.
Non consulum sed maritorum numero annos su^s computant, etc. The bill tenderd
by the woman, was termed Plutarch. in Alcibiade.
(...), Letters of forsaking, not letters of cutting off, or putting away. This
same practice was in use also among the Hebrews. Hence is that saying of our
Savior: If a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to another,
etc. Mark. 10. 12. Now although, at that time humane laws forbad not marriages
renewed with others upon such divorces, yet Gods law condemned both such
divorces, and such marriages, and before God, persons marying after such
diuorcements, were reputed digamites, that is, to have two husbands, or two
wives. For this reason, a Minister above others is commanded, to be (...), The
husband of one wife, 1 Timothy 3. 2. And the woman, she is commanded to be (...),
The wife of one husband, 1 Timothy 5. 9. In which texts second marriages (in case
of the husbands or wives death) are no more forbidden, then the Poet forbade
them in the like phrase: Vnico gaudens mulier marito.
Horat carmin. 3. 14.

Note in the last place, that among the Jews the bridewoman also brought a
dowry to her husband; it was sometimes more, sometimes less; it was called by
the Elias Thi^bit. It. Solomon Iarchi Genesis 31. 15.
Rabbis (...), Nedunia. Raguel gave with his daughter Sarra, half his goods,
servants, and cattle, and money, Tob. 10. 10.

CHAP. V.
Of their Burials.
AT the time of a man's death, before his burial, many ceremonies were
observed. First, the next of the kin closed the eyes of the deceased body.
Joseph shall put his hands upon thy eyes, Genesis 46. 4. This was likewise
practiced both by the Romans, and the Grecians. Ille meos oculos comprimat,
ille tuos.
Ovid. (...).
Homer. Iliad. II.

Secondly, they washed the body being dead. Tabitha died, and when they had
washed her, they laid her up in an upper chamber, Acts 9. 37. The Baptization,
or washing at such a time, was threefold. The first was (...), Eccles. 34. 26.
A washing from the pollution contracted by the touch of a dead carcass: so
that if happily any ignorantly and unawares became thus unclean, then was he by
a kind of washing to be made clean again. The second was (...), A
baptization, or washing of the dead corpse it self; thus Tabitha was washed:
neither is the word (...) vnusually applied to common washings, as Mark 7. 4.
we read of the washing of cups, pots, vessels, tables; the Greek is (...). The
first of these washings was proper to the Jew: this second, in use with Jews,
Tertullian Apolog. c. 47. It. Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. cap. 17.
Christians, and Corpusque lauant frigentis and vngunt. Virg. lib. 6. Aeneid.
Heathens: the third (which was (...), A baptization for the dead, 1 Cor. 15
9.) proper to some amisseled Christians. It may be demanded, what manner of
Baptism this was? With submission of my judgment, I understand this place
with Ambros. 1 Cor. 16. 29.
Saint Ambrose, of a Sacramental washing, applied unto some living man, in the
name and behalf of his friend, dying without baptism, out of a superstirious
conceit, that the Sacrament thus conferred to one alive, in the name of the
deceased, might be available for the other dying unbaptized. As if the
Apostle did wound those superstitious Corinthians with their own quils, and
prove the resurrection of the dead from their own erroneous practice, telling
them in effect, That their superstitious custom of baptising the living for
the dead, were vain and bootlesse, if there were no resurrection. And
therefore the Apostle uses an emphaticall distinction of the persons, in the
next immediate verse, saying; Why are we also in ieopardie every hour? He
infers the resurrection by force of a double argument; the first, drawn
from their superstitious baptization for the dead: the second, from the hourly
ieopardy and peril wherein we, that is, himself and other Christians are. So
that, as that Father notes, the Apostle does not hereby approve their doing,
but euinceth their hope of the resurrection, from their own practice, though
erroneous. That there was Tertullian. lib. de resurrect. carnis.
Vicarium tale baptisma (as Tertullian calls it) in use among the
Marcionites, is evident, yea and amongst the Epiphan de Cerinthianis haeres. 28.
Cerinthians also: the manner thereof is thus described; Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 15.
When any Catechumenist died, some living person placed under the bed of the
deceased, they came unto the deceased party, and asked him, whether he would
be baptized? then he replying nothing, the party under the bed answered for
him, saying, that he would be baptized: and thus they baptized him for the
dead, as if they acted a play upon the stage.

The third ceremony used by the Jews toward the dead party, was the enbalming
of the corpse, which for the maine thereof, it is probable they learned from the
Egyptians, for we find Joseph to be the first that practiced it, Genesis 50. 2.
The Egyptian manner of enbalming was thus: Herodot. Euterp.
They took out the bowels of the dead, they cleansed them and washed them with
the wine of Dates, and after that again with Odours: then filled they the
bowels with pure Myrrh beaten, and Cassia, and other odours (except
Frankincense) and sowed them up. After this, they seasoned the corpse hidden in
nitre, seventy days, not longer: after seventy days they washed the corpse,
and wrapped it in fine linen cloth gummed, which gum the Egyptians often
used in stead of Glue. The Greeks termed this (...). And the use thereof was
for the preservation of the body, that it might not putrify, and therefore
when the funeral obsequies were not long delaied, they used another kind of
enbalming, namely an external and outward application of Spices and Odors,
without the vnbowelling of the corpse. This the Greeks termed Vsurpatur tamen
(...) in scripturis, lata significatione, ad denotandam vtramque condituram.
(...) occurrit, Genes. 50. 26. pro eo, quod in Hebraeo (...) Et aromatibus
condicuerunt.
(...). This was used toward our Savior Christ, John 19. 40.

Sometimes they did use to burn the corpse. preserving only the bones in some
vrne or pitcher, Amos 6. 10. But commonly they enterred the whole body, and
buried it in the earth. The ancient Jews, if they received not from their
ancestors, then would they purchase a burial place themselves, for the burial
of them, and their family. The form of that place was thus; It was a vault
hewed out in a rock, (...) Talmud Seder Nezikin. Baua Bathra. c. 6.
six cubits long, and four broad, in which, eight other cells or lesser holes
(or as some say thirteen) were made, as so many distinct receptacles, or tombs
for the dead bodies to be laid in: As often as they buried any, they were wont
to role a great stone to the mouth of the cave. The cave or vault it self they
termed from the act of burial, (...)
Keber, which signifies a place of burial; or from its form, (...)
Magnara, a den, or cave. The several cells or receptacles in which the body
was laid, they called (...)
cucim, graves, toombes; and the stone they named (...)
Golel, A roling stone. This gives great light to that in the Gospel, Joseph
took the body of Christ, and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and put it
in his new toombe, which he had hewn out in a rock, and rolled a great stone
to the door of the sepulcher, Mat. 27. 59, 60. These caves or vaultes, the
welthier sort would paint, garnish, and beautify at the mouth or entrance of
them: hence comes that phrase, Sepulchra dealbata, Painted toombes. As often
as they had occasion to mention or speak of any friend deceased, they used
that in the Proverbs, The memory of the just is blessed, Pro. 10. 7. Hence the
Rabbis, in their quotations of any worthy Author deceased, usually subioyne
this honorable commemoration, (...). Memoria tius sit inbenedictions.
Benedictae memoriae N. Such, or such a one of blessed memory.

But their usual epitaph or inscription upon their sepulchers, was, (...)
Sheindler i^ (...)
Let his soul be bound up in the garden of Eden, Or in the bundle of the
living. Amen, Amen, Amen, Selati.

The latter Jews, have been strangely conceited concerning the place of
burialls, and are persuaded, that if an Israelite be buried in any strange
Country out of the promised land, he shall not be partaker so much as of
resurrection, except the Lord vouchsafe to make him hollow passages under the
earth, through which his body by a continual volutation and rolling, may be
brought into the land of Canaan. The ground hereof, is taken from the charge of
Jacob unto his son Joseph, that he should not bury him in the land of Egypt,
but in Canaan. Solom. Iarchi, Genesis 47. 29.
For which charge they assign three reasons. First, because he foresaw by the
spirit of Prophecy, that the dust of that land should afterward be turned into
lice. Secondly, because those who died out of the holy land, should not rise
again without a painful roling and tumbling of their bodies, through those
hollow passages. Thirdly, that the Egyptians might not idolatrously worship him.

They made a feast at their burials, which is styled The bread of men, Ezekiel.
24. 17. And a cup of consolation, Ier. 16. 7. because it was administered to
comfort those that were sad of heart. It much resembled the Roman Silicernium.

From those two places last quoted, we may observe that at the burial of their
friends, they used these ceremonies which follow, some to testify, some to
augment their grief. 1. Cutting themselves, that is, wounding or cutting any
part of their body, with any kind of instrument. Gentes quasdam corporis
parts acu vulnerabant, vel alias incidebant, atramentumque super ponebant,
quod in cultum daemonum suorum fiebat, praecipitur ergo, ne vllo pact sicut
gentes ferirent carnes suas: quemadmodum sacerdotes Cybeles and Deae Syrorum,
vt refert Lucianu^. P. Fag. Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Vnguibus orasoror faedans, and pectora
pugnis. Virg. lib. 4. Aeneid.
This practice was learned from the Heathens, who were wont not only to
scrarch their face, but to punch and prick certain parts of their body with an
needle, and then cover it over with ink, which they used as a special
ceremony in their superstitious worship, and therefore it is forbid, Deuteronomy. 14.
1. Secondly, making themselves bald, which was done diverse manner of ways;
either by shauing their hair, or plucking it off with their hands, or by
empoysoned plasters to make it fall of. Other nations were wont to shave of
the Sectos fratri imposuere capillos. ^uid. met. 3.
hair of their head, and to offer it in the behalf of the dead: they did
sometimes shave their cheeks, sometimes their eylids: and this also being an
Heathenish custom, was likewise forbidden in Israel, Deuteronomy. 14. 1. Thirdly,
going bare headed, that they might cast dust or ashes upon their heads,
signifying thereby, that they were unworthy the ground on which they went.
Fourthly, going bare footed, for their greater humiliation. Fifthly, the
covering of their lips, for that was a special sign of sorrow, and shame.
The Seers shall be ashamed, etc. they shall all cover their lips, for they
have no answer of God, Mich. 3. 7. If it be demanded, how they covered their
lips? It is thought they did it D. Kimchi and Aben Esra. p. Fag. Leuit. 14.
45.
by casting the skirt of their cloak, or garment over them. Sixthly, Scissaque
Polyxena palla. Iunenal, Satyr. 10.
renting their clothes. Seventhly, putting sackloth about their loins, Genes.
37. 34. These were general tokens of grief, used upon all extraordinary
occasions of sorrow. Two other there were, more proper to burialls, to augment
their grief. First, minstrels, who with their sad tunes inclined the
affections of the people to mourning, Maioris aetatis funera ad tubam proferre
solebant: minoris vero aetatis ad tibias. Seruius Aencid. lib. 5.
Of these there were two sorts: Some playing on pipes, others sounding
trumpets. At the funeral of Noble men, or old men, they used a trumpet: at the
funeral of the common people, or children, they used a Tibia cui tenero^
suetum deducere manes, Lege Phryg^ maesta. Statius, Theb. lib. 6. verse. 121.
pipe. In this respect spect it is said; That Jesus when he raised Iair^us his
daughter, cast out the minstrels, Mat. 9. 23. Secondly, women hired to sing at
burials for the same purpose, and likewise by outward significations of sorrow,
to move the company, and more strongly to affect them; Call for the mourning
women, etc. and send for skillful women, Ier. 9. 17. These the Romans called,
Preficas, quasi in hoc ipsum praefectas. Chief or skillful mourners.

CHAP. VI.
Of their oaths.
THe manner of swearing, was sometimes by lifting up their hands toward
heaven; Abraham said to the King of Sodom; I have lift up my hand unto the
Lord; that is, I have sworn, that I will not take from a thread even to a
shoe latchet, Genesis 14. 22. Unto which custom the Psalmist seems to allude,
Psalm. 106. 26. He lifted up his hand; that is, he swore. Sometimes he that
took the oath, did put his hand under the others thigh, which administered the
oath. We read this manner of administration, to have been used by Abraham,
Genesis 24. 2. and Jacob, Genesis 47. 29. Which ceremony, Aben Esra. Genesis 24. 2
some interpret to be, as a token of subjection: Solomon Iarchi ibid.
others, as a mystery of circumcision, the sign whereof they bore about that
place of their body: Augustine. quaest. super Genesis 62.
others more probably, think it to be a misterious signification of Christ
the promised seed, who was to come out of Abraham's loins, or thigh; as the
like phrase is used, Genesis 46. 26. the souls that came out of Jacobs thigh.
Sometimes also the manner of deposing, was to stand before the Altar, 1 King.
8. 31. Which was also the custom of the Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. c. ^o.
Athenians, the Liuius dec. 3. lib. 1 It. valor. Max. lib 9. cap. 3.
Carthaginians, and the Lareslicet and Samothracum and nostorum aras. Iu^enal.
Satyr. 3.
Romans.

The object of a lawful oath, was, and is, only the Lord: whence he that
took the oath, was said to confess unto God. Compare Esaias 45. 23. with Romans
14. 11. And the ancient form of imposing an oath, was this, Give glory to God,
Ios. 7. 19. John 9. 24. Now God was glorified by an oath, because thereby there
was a solemn confession and acknowlegement of Gods omnipresence, that he is
present in every place; of his omniscience, that he knows all secrets; of
his truth, that he is a maintainer of truth, and an auenger of falsehood; of
his justice, that he is willing, and his omnipotency, that he is able to
punish those, that by swearing shall dishonor him. And as the object of a
lawful oath was only God: So it is employed that it was not rashly or
unadvisedly to be undertaken, but by a kind of necessity imposed, for the
Hebrew word (...) is a passive, and signifies to be sworn, rather than to
swear.

In corrupter times they were wont to swear by the Allium, porrum and cepas
inter Deos iureiurande babuerunt Aegyptij. Plin. lib. 19. c. 6. Item Iuuenalis
Sat. 15.
creatures, but the Jews chiefly by Jerusalem, by the Temple, by the gold of
the Temple, by the Altar, and the gift on the Altar. This gift in Hebrew was
termed Corban, and it was one of those (...). Inter quae sacramenta cum
quibusdam alijs, etiam iusiurandu^ quod Corban appellatur, enumerat. Joseph.
contra Apion. lib. 1. p. 147.
oaths, which in our Savior Christ's time the Scribes and Pharisees accounted
principally obligatory. If any swore by the Altar, it was nothing: but if any
swore by the oblation of the Altar, he was bound to perform it, Mat. 23. 18.
yea although Gods law, enjoined honor, and relief toward parents, yet if
they had bound themselves by this oath Corban, that they would not help or
relieve their parents, they taught they were discharged. Whence says their
Talmud Hierasolymit. tract. de votis cap. 10.
Talmud, Every one ought to honor his Father and Mother, except he has vowed
the contrary. And it is evident, that the Jews did often, by solemn vows and
(...) Iureiurando se obstringunt, huic vel illi homini nihil se commodi
praestituros. Philo Iud. de specialibus legib. p. 595.
oaths bind themselves, that they would never do good to such, or such a
man. We must furthermore know, that usually to their oaths there was an
execration, or conditional curse annexed, which sometimes was expressed, as,
If I do not do thus and thus, then the Lord do so to me, and more also, 1 Samuel 14. 44. Also, 1 King. 20. 10. Sometimes it is understood, as, I have
sworn, if I take from a thread to a shoe latchet, Genesis 14. 22. Then let the
Lord do so to me and more also, this, or the like is understood, and makes
the former part of the oath, to sound negatiuely; as if Abraham had said, I
have sworn, I will not take from a thread to a shoe latchet. In like manner,
Psalm. 95. I have sworn if they shall enter into my rest. that is, They shall
not enter into my rest, Heb. 3. 18. This helpth the exposition of that
difficult place, Matt. 15. 5. which we read, (...). Per Corban, si quicquam
tibi prodero. Interpretor (...) Si quisquam, quemadmodum (...) Mat. 10. 14. and
Matt. 23. 18. Et execratione subaudita sensus emergat. Per Corban nihil tibi
prodero. Caeterum, si quis vrgeat, quod in font sit (...), non per Corban, vel
(...); sciendum, quod similis ellipsis in iurandi formulis non est inusitata,
hinc (...) valet (...) per domicilium hoc. Vid. Dru^um de tribus sectis. l. 2.
cap. 17.
By the gift that is offered by me thou may have profit: but if we conceive
it thus, according to the form of the oath Corban. By Corban if thou receive
any profit by me: and understand the execration implied, Then let God do thus
and much more to me. The sense will be thus; By Corban, thou shall receive no
profit by me. This exposition is as agreeable to the scope of the place, as it
is to their form of swearing, and plainly shows how the Pharisees, by their
traditions, transgressed the commandment of God. For God commanded, saying;
Honor thy father and thy mother. But the Scribes and Pharisees said: Whosoever
should say to father or mother, seeking relief, By corban thou shall receive
no profit from me, he was discharged.

CHAP. VII.
Of their writing, their Masorites, and their work.
WRiting, in no nation came to its perfection on a sudden, but by degrees: The
opinions of the ancient, concerning the authors and inuenters of letters, are
different. Some say Plin. lib. 7. cap. 56. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 6. cap. 15.
^admus brought the use of letters into Greece; others say, Seruius lib. 2.
Aeneid.
Palamedes: Alex. Genial. l. 2. c. 30.
some say, Rhadamanthus brought them into Assyria: Memnon into Egypt: Hercules
into Phrygia: and Carmenta into Latium. Likewise some say the Phenicians had
first the knowledge and use of letters. Phaenices primi (famae si credimus)
ausi,
Mansuram rudibus vocem signare figuris.
Lucan.

Others say the Diodor. Sicul. l. 4.
Ethiopians: Plin. l. 7. c. 56.
others the Assyrians. But upon better grounds, it is thought, that Eusebius.
praepar. Euang. l. 18.
Moses first taught the use of letters to the Jews, and that the Phenicians
learned them from the Jews, and the Grecians from the Phenicians.

In like manner, the matter upon which men wrote, in ruder times was different.
Some wrote on rindes of trees, whence Liber, signifying originally a rind of a
tree, is now used for a book: Diogen. Laert. in vita Cleanthis.
some wrote on tile-stones with a bone in stead of a pen: some on tables; this
last was chiefly in use among the Jews, the Decalogue was written in two
tables of stone. Again, write these things upon a table, Es. 30. 8. (...)
says the Septuagint, as if the writing tables at that time were made of box
tree. They used not then pens or quills, but a certain instrument or punch,
made of iron or steel, called stylus, it was sharp at one end, for the more
convenient indenting or caruing of the characters; and broad at the other, for
the scraping or blotting out what had been written; whence sprang that
prouerbiall speech: Erasm. in Adag.
Inuertere stilum, To unsay what he has said, or to blot out what he has
written: Scribe stylo hominis; write with the pen of man, Es. 8. 1. Afterward,
before they came to bind up books in manner as now we have them, they wrote
in a roll of paper or parchment, which sometimes was ten cubits broad, and
twenty long, Zach. 5. 2. This they called (...) Megilla in Hebrew, from Galal,
To role; Volumen in Latin; in English, a volume, from voluo, To role. In the
volume of the Book it is written, Ps. 40. 7. And Christ closing the Book,
gave it to the Minister. Luke 4. 20. the word is (...), complicans, folding, or
rolling it up. And verse. 17. (...), Explicans, unfolding, or opening it.
Buxtorf. institut. epist. p. 4.
These volumes were written, not with one entire continued writing, but the
writing was distinguished into many spaces, columns, or platformes, like unto
so many Areae; these platformes filled with writing, were in stead of so many
pages in a book: and thus we are to understand that, Ier. 36. 23. When Iehudi
had read three or four leaves, he cut it with the penknife, etc. These
leaves, were nothing else but such spaces and platformes in the roll. After
this manner the Jews reserve the law written in such rolls, and with such
spaces in their Synagogues at this day.

It is much controuersed, whether the Jews did from the beginning write with
vowels and accents, or whether they were added by the Masorites; for the
understanding of which, it will be needful, first, to enquire who the
Masorites were? Secondly, what their work was? and then to deliver in a
proposition, what may be probably thought in this point.

First, concerning the Masorites, we are to know that (...) Masar signifies
Tradere, To deliver: and Masora a tradition, delivered from hand to hand, to
posterity without writing, as the Pythagoreans and Druides were wont to do;
but by the figure Synecdoche, it signifies those Critical notes, or Scholion,
written in the margin of the Bible, and those that were the authors of those
critical observations were termed Masoritae, Masorites. Concerning these
authors who they were, there are two opinions. Some Ahen. Esra. vid. Buxtorf.
comment. Major. c. 3.
think that they were certain learned Jews, living in the city Tiberias,
they termed them Sapientes Tiberiadis, The wisemen of Tiberias. These wise men,
are thought to have added these marginall notes unto the Hebrew Bibles, Elias
Leuita in praesat. tertia. l. Masoreth ^ammasoreth.
sometime after the finishing of the Babylon Talmud, which was about the year
of our Lord, 506. This opinion is unlikely for these two reasons. 1. Buxtorf.
in comment. Masor. c. 7.
Because we cannot find in histories, the continuance of any college or
school in Tiberias so long, but rather that degrees in learning ceased there,
within four hundred years after our Savior his birth. 2. Buxtorf. in
comment. Masor. c. 8.
In both Talmuds mention is made of the Masora, and the things contained
therein. Others therefore more probably say, R. Asarias. R. Gedalia. Buxtorf.
in comment. Masor. c. 11.
that the Masorites were that Ecclesiastical Senate or Council, held by Esra,
Haggi, Zachary, Malachie, and diverse others assembled for the reformation of
the Church, after their return from Babylon; they are called, Viri Synagogae
magnae. This Council continued at least forty years; for Simeon the just, who
went out in his Priestly robes, to meet and pacify Alexander the Great,
coming in hostile manner against Jerusalem, Pirke Aboth. c. 1.
was the last of that Council, and that was above three hundred years before
the birth of our Savior. Esra was the President or chief of this Council, he
was of such repute among the Jews, that they paralleld him with Moses, saying,
Talmud l. Sanhedrim. c. 2. f. 21.
Dignus erat Esra, quod data fuisset lex per manus eius Israeli, si non
praecessisset eum Moses.

In the second place, we are to consider the work, what the men of this great
Synagogue being the true Masorites did; their work may be reduced to these
particulars. 1. When this great Council was assembled, they, among whom Esra
was chief (who was assisted with the inspiration of Gods spirit) Buxtorf. in
comment. Masor. c. 11.
determined what books were Canonical, what spurious and Apocryphal.
Secondly, Tertullian. l. de habit. muliebr. Chrysostom. hom. 8. ad Hebraeos.
Irenaeus aduers. haeres. lib. 3. c. 25. Augustine. de mirab. sacrae script. l.
2. circa finem.
the authentic and canonical books were purged by them, of all errors crept
into the Text in time of their captivity. Thirdly, they Genebrard. l. 2.
Chronolog.
digested the old Testament into twenty two books, according to the number of
the Hebrew letters. Fourthly, they distinguished it into great sections and
verses: for though the law was not so confusedly written, without any space or
note of distinction between word and word, that it seemed all one continued
verse, or as the Kabbalists speak, (...) Theba achath, one word, until the
time of the Masorites; yet it was not so distinguished into Sections, and
Verses, as now we have it. Fifthly, They added their censures and critical
observations, concerning the irregularity of many words, in respect of the
vowells and accents. Sixthly, they numbered the verses, words, and letters of
every book, to prevent all possibility of corrupting the Text in future times,
for now they saw the gift of prophecy should cease. Lastly, they noted the
different writing, and different reading: for the understanding of which we
must know, that in the Hebrew text, many words are written with more, many with
fewer letters, than they are pronounced; Sunt octo voces, quae scriptae sunt in
textu, sed non leguntur, quas adducit Masora Ruth. 3. 12.
many words written in the text, which are not pronounced, etc. In the margin
the difference is expressed, whence the difference in the text they term (...)
Cethib, Scriptionem, the writing; the difference in the margin they term
(...) Keri, Lectionem, the reading: because they do read according to that in
the margin. Contra hos disputat Elia^ Leuita in praefat. 3. l. Masoreth
hammasoreth.
This difference is thought by some to be a correction of the Bible, according
to several copies after their return from Babylon, but that it is of divine
authority, containing many mysteries known to Moses, and the Prophets
successively (though many of them unknown to our age) and that it was not any
correction, but the difference it self primarily and purposely was intended by
the Prophets, and holy penmen of the Scripture, evidently appears by the
diversity of readings in those books, which were written by Haggi, Zachary,
Malachie, Daniel and Esra, they being the Authors of their own books, needed
no correction at that time, themselves being present, yet in them this
different reading is used.

In the third place, the proposition follows, namely, Seeing that the
Masorites passed their censure on many words, for their irregularity in their
vowels and accents; therefore, The vowels originally were not from the
Masorites, but of the same antiquity with their words; and in truth, otherwise
they had been a body or carcass without a soul.

CHAP. VIII.
Isreal's pitching of their tents, or of their camps.
WHiles the Israelites wandered through the Wilderness, their Church was a
Tabernacle, and their habitations Tents, so that their whole Camp might be
termed a moveable City. It was divided into three parts. In the center or
middle of all, was the tabernacle it self, with its courts, this they termed
the Camp of the Divine Majesty. Next round about, pitched the Priests and
Levites, to whom the charge of the tabernacle belonged, (and therefore the
nearest adjoining place of habitation, might be the conuenientest for them)
this was called the Camp of Leui. In the utter parts round about Leui, the
twelve Tribes pitched their tents, this they termed the Camp of Israel. The
first Camp resembled a great Cathedral Church with its Churchyard. The
second, a priuileged place about the Church, as it were for Colleges for the
habitation of the Clergy. The third, the body of a city, wherein the townsmen
or laity dwelt. The form of the whole, is probably thought to be fouresquare,
Vz^clid. Number. 2. 3.
some say twelve miles long, and twelve miles broad.

In the Eastern part pitched these three tribes, Judah, Issachar, and Zabulon.
On the Southside, Ruben, Simeon, and Gad. On the West, Ephraim, Manasses, and
Benjamin. On the North, Dan, Asher, and Naphtali: and these made up the outward
Camp, termed the Camp of Israel. Between each tribe, in every one of those
four quarters, there were distant spaces like streets, where there was buying
and selling as in a market, and tradesmen in their shops, in (...). Joseph. l.
3. Antiq. c. 11. p. 97.
manner of a city leading to and froe. This Camp is Tradunt Hebraei, filios
Israelita castrametatos fuisse in circuitu tabernaculi, vt vnum milliare
interfuerit (i.) spacium mill passum, et hoc erat iter Sabbati. P. Fag. Number.
2. 3.
thought to be round, a mile distant from the tabernacle, that is, a Sabbath
days journey, and this is gathered from, Ios. 3. 4. where the distance
between the people and the Arc, is commanded to be two thousand cubits.

After this, pitched the Camp of Leui: In the Eastern part Moses, Aaron, and
the Priests: in the South, the Cohathites: in the West, the Gershonites: in the
North, the Merarites.

In the middle was the Camp of the Divine Majesty. Unto this David alludeth;
God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved, Psalm. 46. 5.

After the same manner, the parts of the City Jerusalem were distinguished,
when the common wealth was settled. Maimon. in Beth. habechirah cap. 7.. 11.
From the gate of Jerusalem, to the mountain of the Temple, was the camp of
Israel: from the gate of the mountain of the Temple, to the gate of the Court
(which was otherwise called Nicanors gate) was the Camp of Leui: from the gate
of the Court, and forward, was the Camp of the Divine Majesty.

Furthermore, we are to know, that the twelve Tribes had between them four
principal banners or standards, three Tribes to one standard, for which
reason, the Church is said to be terrible as an army with banners, Canticl. 6.
4. The Hebrew word Banner, Number. 2. 2. The Greek translateth (...).
Order; and so the Chaldee calls it (...) quisque iuxta ordinatam suam aciem.
Tekes (a word borrowed of the Greek (...)) order: Whence the Apostle takes
his phrase, Every man in his own order, 1 Cor. 15. 23.

Every banner was thought to be of three colors, Jonathan Vzid. Number. 2. 3.
according to the colors of the precious stones in the breast plate, bearing
the names of their Patriarchs. But this proportion will not hold in all, seeing
Leui (who is not here among the other Tribes) was in the brestplate one of the
twelve; and Joseph there graued on the Berill, has here two Tribes, Ephraim
and Manasses, unto whom two colors cannot be allowed from the breast plate.

Each banner had his several motto, or inscription. In the first standard was
written, from Numb. 10. 25. Rise up Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered,
and let them that hate thee, flee before thee. Dicunt in vexillo Rubenfuisse
imaginem hominis: in vexillo Iehudah, imaginem leoni^; in vexillo Ephra^m,
imaginem bouis: in vexillo Dan, imaginem aquilae. P. Fag. Number. 2. Aben Esra
ibid.
It is moreover taught by the Hebrews, that each standard had a distinct sign
engraven in it. Rubens standard had the image of a man: Iudahs the image of a
Lion: Ephraims the image of an Ox: and Dans the image of an Eagle.

These same four creatures, are used by Ezekiel 1. 10. to describe the Angeli
ex hoc versudefiniri possunt. Sunt enim spiritus intelligentes vt homo,
potentes vtLeo, ministratorij vt Bos, and celeres vt Aquila Tremel. in Ezekiel. 1.
nature of Angels. Every Cherubim is said to have four faces; the face of a
man, to show his understanding; of a Lion, to show his power; of an Ox, to
show his ministratory office; of an Eagle, to show his swiftness in the
execution of Gods will. The same description of Angels you may find, Revel. 4.
6.

By the same four, in the opinion of many of the Hieronym. ad initium sui
commentarij in Mat. It. Gregorious homil. 4. in Ezekiel. Ab Hieronymo dissentit D.
Augustinus in Matthaeo, and Marco, nam in leone Matthaeum, Marcum in homine
putat adumbratum. Augustine. de consensu Evangelist. lib. 1. c. 6.
Fathers, are shadowed forth the four Evangelists. The man shadowed Saint
Matthew, because he begins his Gospel, with the generation of Christ,
according to his humanity: The Lion Saint Mark, because he begins his
Gospel, from that voice of the Lion roaring in the wilderness, Vox clamantis
in deserto: The Ox Saint Luke, because he begins with Zacharias the
Priest: And the Eagle Saint John, who soaring aloft, begins with the
Divinity of Christ.

Thus have we seen how they pitched their Camps, their marching follows: and
here we are to consider. First, their marching in their iournies through the
wilderness. Secondly, their marching in their battles.

Concerning their marching in their iournies, they either moved forward, or
abode still, according to the moving or standing of the cloud, which conducted
them: The manner thereof is described, Number. 10. and summarily we may view it
thus: when God took up the cloud, Moses prayed, and the Priests with their
trumpets blew an alarm, then Judah the first standard rose up, with Issachar
and Zabulon, and they marched foremost; then followed the Gershonites and
Merarites, bearing the boords and couerings of the Tabernacle in wagons. The
trumpets ^ounded the second alarm, then Ruben, Simeon and Gad rose up, and
followed the Tabernacle; and after them went the Cohathites, in the midst of
the twelve Tribes, bearing on their shoulders, the Arc, Candlestick, Table,
Altar, and other holy things. At the third alarm, rose up the standard of
Ephraim, Manasses, and Benjamin, and these followed the Sanctuary; unto this
David has reference, when he prays, Psa. 80. 2. Before Ephraim, Benjamin,
and Manasses, stir up thy strength, and come and save us. At the fourth
alarm, arose the standard of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali; and to these was
committed the care of gathering together the lam^, feeble, and sick, and to
look that nothing was left behind: whence they were called the gathering
host, Josh. 6. 9. unto this, David alludeth; When my Father and my Mother
forsake me, the Lord will gather me, Psalm. 27. 10.

Concerning their marching in war. First, the Priests sounded the alarm with
trumpets, Number. 10. 9. this they termed (...) Clangor, Vociferatio. Hebraei
duplicem clangore^^ esse statuunt, alterumque vocari (...) alterum (...) quorum
ille aequabilis est vox, hic citus concisusque fragor: ille ad conuocandos
caetus, hic ad ^ccende^dos militum animos facit.
Terugnah. Sec^ndly, one Priest was selected out of the rest, to stir up the
hearts of the people, and by a kind of hortatory Oration, to encourage them
for the war, Deuteronomy. 20. 2. him they called Vnctum belli, The anointed of the
battle. Thirdly, they marched on by five and five in battle array, Exodus 13. 18.
so the (...)
original signifies in that place.

In the last place, we are to consider how they were to deal in besieging a
Town, for the conceiving whereof, note these two propositions.

1. They were to offer peace unto all forreiners, and Canaanites, Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
And this is clearly signified, Josh. 11. 19. There was not a City that made
peace with the children of Israel, save the Hiuites, the inhabitants of Gibeon,
all other they took in battle. For it was of the Lord to harden their hearts.
Yet here Moab and Ammon are excepted, Israel must not seek their peace, Deuteronomy,
23. 6.

2. They were to make a covenant with none of the seven Nations, Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
Exodus 23. 32. and. 34. 14. With forreiners they might, Josh. 9. 7. peradventure
you dwell among us, and how shall we make a covenant with you? Not, how shall
we make peace with you?

Some may question, what the difference was between making peace, and making a
covenant? I answer twofold. 1. The making of peace was a naked stipulation, or
promise mutually made, for the laying aside of all hostile affections toward
each other, whereby life on both sides might be secured: Making a covenant, was
a solemn binding of each other to performance of this mutual promise, by
outward ceremonies of Haec est causacur Hebraei Faedus faecere, dicant (...)
(i) Diu^dere, aut dissecare faedus: quemadmodum apud Latinus, dicitur Percutere
faedus, quae locuti^ fl^xit abantiq^o faederis faciendi more. Sacerdos
e^imfer^ebat porcum sil^ce, dicens. Sic a Jove fertat^^ is, qui sanctum hoc
fregerit faedu^, vt ego hunc p^r^um ferio. Liuius Decad. 1. lib. 1. p. 7.
cutting a beast in twain, and passing between the parts thereof, Ier. 34.
18. as if they would say; Thus let it be done to him, and thus let his body be
cut in two, who shall break this covenant. Secondly, peace was not concluded
by the Israelites, but only upon these terms, that the people should become
tributary unto them, Deuteronomy. 20. 11. The making of a covenant was upon equal
terms, without any condition either of tribute or service, as is gatherable
from the covenant made by Joshua with the Gibeonites, where there is no mention
of any condition at all, Josh. 9.

This difference seems to me warrantable, and serves to reconcile many
places of Scripture, as where God says; offer peace to all: and make a
covenant with none. Secondly, it shows the fraud of the Gibeonites to be
greater than is commonly conceived, for they sought not peace simply, but a
covenant. Make a league with us, Josh. 9. 6. Thirdly, it salueth that common
objection, made in defense of unadvised oaths, to prove them obligatory,
though unlawful. The argument is framed thus: The covenant which Joshua made
with the Gibeonites unadvisedly was unlawful: but that was observed by him,
and the breach thereof, when Saul ^lew the Gibeonites, punished by God, 2 Samuel
21. 1. Therefore, etc. I say it salueth that objection, because if we
diligently observe Ioshuahs practice, we shall find unadvised oaths to be so
far, and only so far binding, as they agree with Gods word. Gods word
required, that the Gibeonites should have their lives secured, because they
accepted peace; thus far therefore the covenant was still of force: Gods word
required, that the Canaanites after the acceptance of peace should become
tributary; here the covenant was not of force, and therefore Joshua made them
hewers of wood, and drawers of water, which is a kind of tribute in the
language of the Scripture, a tribute of the body, though not of the purse, in
which sense the Egyptian taskemasters, are in the original called
tribute-masters, Exodus 1. 11.

CHAP. IX.
Their Measures.
MEasures in use among the Hebrews, and so among all other Nations, they are
of two sorts: some Mensurae applicationis, Measures of application, as a span,
a cubit, a yard, and the like. Secondly, Mensurae capacitatis, Measures of
capacity, as pints, quarts, pecks, bushels, etc. Measures of application
mentioned in Scripture, are these that follow; in which that there might be no
deceit, the ground of these measures, was the breadth of so many, or so many
barley corns middle sized laid by one another. (...) Etsbang, Digitus, A singer,
an inch. Arias Monta^ Thubal Cain.
It contains the breadth of six barley corns joined together where they are
thickest: though in round reckoning, it goes for an inch, yet in accurat
speaking Quatuor digiti constituunt tres pollices Franc. Iumus in Ezekiel. 40. 5.
four fingers make three inches. Of this there is mention Ier. 52. 21.

Palmus, this was twofold; Palmus minor, and Palmus mayor. The lesser
contains the breadth of four fingers (i) three inches: the Hebrews term it
(...) Tophach, the Greeks (...), the greater is termed (...) Zereth, by the
Greeks (...); in Latin, Spithama, and Dodrans. It contains the measure that
is between the thumb and the little finger stretched out, A spanne.

(...) Pagnam, Pes, A foot. It contains Quatuor palmos scil. minores. Pet.
Martyr. 1 Reg. c. 6.
twelve inches.

(...) Amma, Cubitus, A cubit. We shall find in Authors, mention of four
kinds of cubits* 1. Cubitus communis, this was the measure from the elbow to
the fingers end; it contained a foot and half, or half a yard, it is called
the commmoncubit. 2. Cubitus sacer, An holy cubit, this was a full yard,
containing two of the common cubits, as appears by comparing 1 King. 7. 15.
with 2 Chronicles. 3. 15. In the first place, the pillars are reckoned each of them
eighteen cubits high: in the second place, they are reckoned five and thirty
cubits high, which together with the basis, being one ordinary cubit high,
doubleth the number; so that the first text, is to be understood of holy
cubits: the second, of common cubits. 3. Cubitus regis, the Kings cubit; this
was Herodot. lib. 2. in descript. Babyl.
three fingers longer then the common cubit: Whereas the common cubit is termed
cubitus viri, the cubit of a man. Deuteronomy. 3. 11. Onkelos does improperly term it
cubitus regis, the Kings cubit. Lastly, there was cubitus geometricus, A
Geometrical cubit, it contained six common cubits, Origin. hom. 2. in Genes.
It. August. de ciuitat. Dei lib. 15. cap. 27.
and according to these cubits, it is thought that Noah's Arc was built.

Some make the difference between the cubit of the sanctuary, and the common
cubit, to be thus: The common cubit, they say contained Quinos palmos.
fifteen inches; the holy cubit Sex palm^s.
eighteen inches. But that the holy cubit contained two common cubits has
been evidently proved, and it is probable, that those who make the difference
to be only three inches, have mistaken the Kings cubit, for the holy cubi^.

(...) Chebel, Funiculus, A line or ro^e. The just length thereof is unknown,
the use thereof, was to measure grounds, whence it is sometimes taken for the
inheritance it self. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, Psalm. 16.
6. That is, mine inheritance.

(...) Kanch, Arundo, the reed. The use of this, was to measure buildings; the
length thereof was six cubits and an hand-breadth, Ezekiel. 40. 5. The cubits in
this place, are Tremelius in hunc locum.
interpreted Kings cubits: it was less liable to deceit then the rope, because
it could not be shortened, or lengthned, by shrinking or stretching; hence the
canon or rule of the holy Scripture is mystically typed out by this reed,
Ezekiel. 40. And Reu. 21. 15.

To these may be added other measures, wherewith they measured their ways,
and walks. The least of these was (...) Tsagad, Passus, A place.

(...), stadium, A furlong. It is often mentioned in the New Testament, not at
all in the Old. Isidorus.
It contained one hundred twenty five paces, which is the eighth part of our
mile. Some think it to be called so (...), from standing, because Hercules ran
so much ground in one breath, before he stood still.

Milliarium, A mile: It contains with us a thousand paces, but much more
among the Hebrews. Their word (...) Barah, translated often Milliarium,
properly signifies A dinner or meal; and being applied unto iourneyes,
walks, or ways; it signified so much ground as usually is gone, or
conveniently may be travailed in half a day, between meal and meal, or bait
and bait. The word is read, Genesis 35. 16. When there was ((...) Cibrath haarets)
about half a days journey of ground. The Greek in that place, has an
uncouth word (...), doubtless it was made from the Hebrew Cibrath, and
signifies half a days journey.

Their measures of capacity, termed Mensurae capacitatis, were of two sorts.
Some for dry things, as corn, seed, etc. Some for liquid things, as* Wine,
Oil, etc. In both that there might be a just proportion observed, all their
measures were defined by a set number of hen egg shells of a middle size.

In my paralelling of them with our measures, where I speak of Bushels,
Halfe-bushels, Pecks, etc. I am to be understood according to Winchester
measure, as we phrase it, such a bushel contains eight gallons. Where I
speak of Gallons. Pottles, Quarts, etc. I am to be understood according to our
Ale measure, thereby I avoid fractions of number.

(...) Kab, Kabus, A Kab. Arias Montan. T^ubal Cain.
This contained twenty four eggs, it held proportion with our quart. The least
measure mentioned in Scripture, is the Fourth part of a Kab, 2 King. 6. 25. The
famine in Samorta was so great, that a fourth part of a Kab of doves doung was
sold for five pieces of silver. The Rabbines have a Proverb. That (...) Via.
Buxtorf. (...) in (...)
ten Kabs of speech descended into the world and the women took away nine of
them.

(...) Omer. It contained Alsted. praecog. theol. lib. 2. page 588.
one Kab and an half, and a fifth part of a Kab. That is, Three pints and an
half pint, and a fifth part of an half pint. It was the tenth part of an
Ephah Exodus 16. 36.

(...) Seah, (...), Satum, the Latin interpreters commonly render it by
Modius. It contained Vid. Buxtorf. Lexic. in (...) ex opere ^. Alphes, tractat.
de pasch. cap. 5. fol. 176.
six Kabs, that is, A gallon and half. We translate the word in general A
measure: To morrow this time a measure (that is a Satum) of fine flower shall
be sold for a shekel, 2 Kings 7. 1.

(...) Ephah, It contained Arias Montan. Thu^al cain.
three Sata, that is, half a bushel and a potle.

(...) Lethec, It contained Epiphan. de mensur. and ponder^^
fifteen Modios (i.) Sata. That is, two bushels, six gallons and a potle.
Mention of this is made, Hos. 3. 2. It is there rendered in English, half an
Homer.

(...) Homer. It is so called from (...) Chamor, Asinus, an Ass; because this
measure contained so much grain, or corn, as an ass could well bear. It
contained ten Ephahs, Ezekiel. 45. 11. that is, Forty five gallons, or five
bushels and five gallons.

(...) Cor, Corus. The Cor and the Homer were of the same quantity, Ezekiel. 45.
14. It was not only of liquid things, Luke 16. 7.

These measures of which we have spoken hitherto the Hebrews used in measuring
of dry things: Three other measures there were, which they used for liquid or
moist things.

(...) Log. It contained Buxtorf. in loco superius citato.
six eggshels. It was of the same quantity as the fourth part of a Kab. Half a
pint.

(...) Hin. It contained the quantity of Buxtorf. ibid.
seventy two eggshels, so that it was of our measure three quarts.

(...) Bath, (...), Bathus, the Bath. It was of the same capacity with the
Ephah, the tenth part of an Homer, Ezekiel. 45. 14. The Latin interpreters
commonly render it Cadus. Hieronym. Ezekiel. 45.
Hierome writing upon Ezekiel, renders it Vadus. Decima pars Cori, inquit, in
speciebus liquidis vocatur bathus, fine vadus. I sometimes thought there had
been some error in the print, namely Vadus put for Cadus: But now I find the
Greeks to use both (...), and (...) for this measure, and from the last of
these Greek words, that ancient Father reads it Vadus. Sometimes our English
renders it in general A measure, Luke 16. 6. It contained four gallons and an
half.

All these measures were proper to the Hebrews, I find three others mentioned
in the N. T. taken from other nations.

(...) Sextarius. We English it in general, A pot, Mark 7. 4. Alsted.
praecog. Theol. p. 561.
It was of the same quantity with the Log, if we understand it of the Roman
Sextarius. It was somewhat more, if we understand it of the Attick Sextarius.
Vndecim Attici sextarij aequabant Romanos duodecim. In probability we are to
understand the Roman measure, so that it contained six eggs, that is, half a
pint.

(...), Chenix. A measure, Reu. 6. 6. It signifies properly that measure of
corn, which was allowed servants for their maintenance every day. Whence was
occasioned that speech of Pythagoras; Super Chaenice non sedendum. That is, We
must not rest upon the provision which suffices for a day, but we must take
care for the morrow. It contained Budaeus de ass lib. 5.
four Sextarij; that is, A quart.

(...), Metreta, Ioh. 2. 6. It is translated A strkin. It was a measure in use
among the Athenians, Budaeus de ass lib. 5.
It was of the same quantity with Cadus, and Cadus (as before was noted) was
equal to the Hebrew Bath, so that it contained four gallons and an half.

CHAP. X.
Their coins, first of brassen coins.
THat they might have just coins and weights, they weighed both them and their
weights by barley corns.

(...), Minutum, A mite, Luke 21. 20. Mark 12. 42. The latter Hebrews call it
(...), the Syriak (...) (i.) Octaua, the eighth part of Assarium, (...) Moses
Kotsens. fol. 124. Col. 4.
It weighed half a barely corn. It valued of our money, three parts of one c.

(...), Quadrans, A farthing. It was a Roman coin, weighing a grain of barley,
it consisted of two mites. The poor widow threw in two mites, which make a
farthing, Mark 12. 42. by consequence it valued of ours. c. 1/2

(...), Assarius, vel Assarium. It was a Roman coin weighing four grains.
The Rabbin* call it (...) Isor, and say that it contains Drusius in praeter.
Luc. 12. 59.
eight mites. Of this we read, Matthew. 10. 29. Are not two sparrowes sold for
(an Assarium) our English reads it for a farthing? It valueth of ours in
precise speaking. qa -- q

Their silver coins.
(...) Gerah. It was the twentieth part of the shekel of the Sanctuary; A
shekel is twenty Gerahs; Exodus 30. 13. It was the least silver coin among the
Hebrews; It valued of ours 1 d. ob.

(...) Agorah. We English it in general, a piece of silver, 1 Samuel 2. 36. But
it appears by the Chaldee Paraphrase, that it is of the same value with
Gerah, that Paraphrase renders both (...) Megna, by the Greek they are both
rendered (...), the value thereof, therefore is 1 d. ob.

(...) Keshita. The word signifies a lamb, and is used for a certain coin
among the Hebrews, on the one side whereof the image of a lamb was stamped,
our English reads it in general a piece of money. Jacob bought a parcel of a
field for an hundred pieces of money, Gen 33. 19. In the original it is for an
hundred lambs. But it is apparent, that Jacob paid money; for S. Steven says,
he bought it for money, Act. 7. 16. In the judgment of the Rabbis, it was the
same that K. Solom. Genesis 33. 19 It. K David in lib. radic. It. (...) Gers. Genesis
33. 19.
Obolus, Daus. ad (...) loca Genesis p. 119.
twenty of them went to a shekel; So that the value thereof was 1 d. ob.

(...) Ceseph, (...), Argenteus. A piece of silver; as the Romans numbered their
sums by Sesterces, insomuch that Nummus is often times put absolutely, to
signify the same as Sestertius; so the Hebrews counted their sums by shekels,
and the Grecians by Drachmae, hence Argenteus, A piece of silver, being put
absolutely in the Bible, if mention in that place be of the Hebrew coins, it
stands for a shekel, and valueth 2 s. 6 d. if it stand for the shekel of the
Sanctuary: if it stand for a common shekel, then it valueth 1 s. 3 d. But if
mention be of the Greek coins, as Act. 19. 19. Then it signifies the Attick
Dram, which valueth of our money 7 d. ob.

(...) Luke 15. 8. Brecr^wood, de number
It was a quarter of a shekel, and thus by consequence it valued of ours 7 d.
ob. (...)


(...), Didrachmum, Mat. 17. 24. We English it Tribute money: The Syriak
reads Duo zuzim, now that coin which was termed Zuz by the Hebrews, was
answerable to the Roman denair, whence it appears that it valued of ours 1 s.
3 d.

(...), stater. We English it a piece of money at large, but it contained
precisely two Didrachma. For the Tribute money to be paid for each person, was
Didrachmum, as is evident, Mat. 17. 24. and this stater was paid for two,
namely for Christ and Peter; the value of it therefore was 2 s. 6 d.

(...), Denarius, A penny. This was their Tribute money, Mat. 22. 19. There
were Tremel. Mat. 22. 19.
two sorts of pence in use among them; the common penny, which valued of ours,
7 d. ob. And the penny of the Sanctuary, which valued, 1 s. 3 d. For it was
answerable to their Didrachmum, and of this last we must understand Saint
Matthew in this place, for their Tribute money was Didrachmum, as before has
been noted out of Mat. 17. 24. This Didrachmum, or half shekel, was formerly
paid by the Israelites, Aben Esra Nehem. 10. 32.
every year after they were twenty years old, toward their Temple, Exodus 30.
13. Caesar by taking away this money from the Temple, and changing it into a
Tribute for his own coffers, did in truth take away from God that which was
Gods. Hence in that question proposed unto Christ, Is it lawful to give
Tribute unto Caesar or not? Christ answers, Render unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. Joseph. de bello lib.
7. cap. 26.
This very Tribute afterward was paid by the Jews toward the Roman Capitol,
by virtue of a decree made by Vespasian.

(...) Zuz, It was the (...) Elias This bit.
fourth part of a Shekel of silver; It valued therefore of ours 7 d. ob.

(...) Shekel, Siclus, A Shekel. It was twofold; Siclus regius, The Kings
Shekel, of common use in buying and selling, it valued, 1 s. 3 d. And Siclus
Sanctuarij, The shekel of the Sanctuary, it valued, 2 s. 6 d.

The Shekels of the Sanctuary were of two stamps. The one was always in use
among the Jews: the thirty pieces of silver which Judas received, are thought
to be thirty Shekels of the Sanctuary. It had stamped on the one side, the pot
of Manna, or as others think Aarons censer, or Incense cup: the inscription on
this side was (...) Shekel Israel, The Shekel of Israel: on the reuerse side,
was stamped Aarons rod budding, with this inscription about the coin, (...)
Ieruschalaijm hakeduscha. After the coming of our Savior, the Jews which
were converted to the Christian faith, Alsted. praecog. Theol. p. 550.
changed their Shekel, and on the first side stamped the image of Christ with
(...) at the mouth of the image, and (...) in the pole, which three letters
made his name Jesus. On the reuerse side, there was no picture, but the whole
rundle was filled with this inscription (...) (i.) Messiah rex venit cum pace,
and lux de homine facta est vita. In some coins, for the latter clause of that
inscription is read, (...) (i.) Deus homo est factus.

The Kings Shekel in David and Salomons time, had stamped on the one side, a
kind of tower standing between (...) and (...) and underneath was (...). The
whole inscription was, Jerusalem vrbs sanctitatis: On the reuerse side, the
rundle was filled with this Hebrew (...) i. David rex, and filius eius Solomon
rex.

The Shekel again was divided into lesser coins, which had their denomination
from the parts thereof. Thus we read of the half shekel, Exodus 30. 13. The
third part of a Shekel, Nehem. 10. 32. The quarter of a Shekel, 1 Samuel 9. 8.

Their gold coins.
(...) Zahab. The English reads it, A piece of gold, 2 King. 5. 5. By it is
meant, that which elsewhere is called Siclus auri, A Shekel of gold, 1 Chronicles.
21. 25. Hence the one thousand seven hundred pieces of gold mentioned, Judge. 8.
26. The Greek renders 1700. (...), etc.
Shekels of gold. Breerewood de nummis.
The weight of this coin was two Atti^drams, the value 15 (...).

(...) Adarcon, of this we read, Esr. 8. 27. It was also called (...) Drakmon,
of which we read, Esr. 2. 69. Both these names seem to denote the same coin,
if not, yet both were of the same weight. The Greek interprets them both by
(...), and our English accordingly renders both A Dram: which must be
understood of the drams in use among the Hebrews, weighing two Attick drams.
From the Greek (...), Drakmon seems to have had its name. Brcer^woo^ de
n^mmit.
He coniectureth not amiss, who thinks that Adarcon was so called, quasi
Daricon, which was a certain coin of gold in use among the Persians, and from
King Darius (whose image one side thereof bore) was named Daricon, and (...)
amongst the Chaldeans, i^ often prefixed before a word, as (...) is amongst the
Hebrews. The value of this coin was of ours 15. ^.

Their sums.
Their sums were two (...) Maneh, (...), Mina, a Pound. In gold it weighed
one hundred Shekels. This appears by comparing these texts, 1 King. 10. 17.
Tres (...) Manim, Three pound of gold went to one shield. Now we read, 2 Chronicles. 9. 16. Three hundred Shekels of gold went to one shield. The name
Shekels, is not expressed in the original, but necessarily understood, as
appears in that which was spoken of Zahab. For it is a received rule, that
inscripture, Aurum being put with a numerall, signifies so many Shekels of
gold: and so Argentum in like manner. The weight thereof then being one hundred
Shekels, it follows that the value was 75. l. In silver their Manch we^ghed
sixty Shekels, Ezekiel. 45. 12. so that it valued 7. l. 10. ^. Note, that
Sheindler. in (...)
Sheindler was deceived, in saying that the price or value of the Man^h was
changed in Ezekiels time, because it then valued but 60. Shekels, whereas
before it valued 100 Shekels, for it was the Shekel of gold which valued an
hundred, but the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of the Shekel of silver.

The second sum was (...) Cicar, Talentum, A Talent. This if it were of
silver, it contained in weight three thousand shekels. For those two verses
being compared together, Exodus 38. 25, 26. shows, that six hundred thousand
men, paying every man half a shekel, the whole sum amounts to an hundred
Talents; whence it follows, that A Talent of silver amongst the Hebrews, was
375 l. But a Talent of gold (the proportion of gold to silver being observed)
was twelve times as much, so that it valued of ours 4500 l.

In this tract of their coins, we are to know three things. First, that as the
Romans in the former ages, used Aes grave, Bullion money vnstampt, which in the
Mass or Billot they weighed out in their paiments; and afterward Aes signatum,
coined metalls: So the Hebrews, though at last they used coined money, yet at
first they weighed their money vncoined; Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver,
Genesis 23. 16. Hence the shekel had its name from (...) Shakal, Ponderare,
librare, To weigh, or put in the balance. Secondly, as the coined Shekel was
twofold; one for the use of the sanctuary; the other for the use of the
Commonwealth, and that of the sanctuary, was double the price of the other:
So the weight of the shekel is to be distinguished after the same manner; the
shekel of the sanctuary, weighed half an ounce Troy weight; the common shekel,
weighed a quarter of an ounce. For example, Goliahs spears head weighed six
hundred shekels of the sanctuary. 1 Samuel 17. 7. that is, twenty five pound
weight: Absoloms hair weighed two hundred shekels after the Kings weight, 2 Samuel 14 26. that is, f^ure pound weight and two ounces. Yea the sums, which I
have reckoned only according to the sanctuary, in common use according to the
Kings weight, they aba^e half their value.

Thirdly, the lesser coins were in general termed (...), or in the singular
number (...), John 2. 15. The word signifies properly, a small quantity, or
little piece of metal, such as may be clipped off from coins. Moses Kotsens. de
Siclis fol. 122. col. 2.
Upon the first of the month Adar Proclamation was made throughout Israel,
that the people should provide their half shekels, which were yearly paid
toward the service of the Temple, according to the commandment of God, Exodus
30. 13. Moses Kotsens. ibid.
On the twenty fifth of Adar, then they brought tables into the Temple (that
is, into the outward court where the people stood) on these tables lay these
(...) or lesser coins, to furnish those who wanted half shekels for their
offerings, or that wanted lesser pieces of money, in their payment for oxen,
sheep, or doves, which likewise stood there in a readiness in the same court,
to be sold for sacrifices: but this supply of lesser coins, was not without an
exchange for other money, or other things in lieu of money, and that upon
advantage. Hence those that sat at these tables is chief bankers, or Masters
of the exchange, they were termed (...), in respect of the lesser coins which
they exchanged; in respect of the exchange it self, they were termed (...);
for (...), inq^^ P^llux, est (...) vid. D^^s. Anno:. in (...). part. alter.
(...) signifies the same in Greek, as Cambium in Latin, whence those
letters of exchange, which the Latins call Literas cambij, the Greeks call
(...), Tickets of exchange; in respect of the tables at which they sat, they
are termed by the Talmudists (...) Schulchanim, ^from (...) Schulchan, Mensa;
for the same reason they are sometimes termed by the Greeks (...), and by the
Latins Mensarij. These are those changers of money, which our Savior drove out
of the Temple.

FINIS
THE NAMES OF AVthors cited in this Book.
A
ABen Esra. Aboth. vid. Pirke aboth Aeschines. Alexander Neopol. Alstedius.
Ambrosius. Aquinas. Aristoteles. Arias Montanus. Aristophanes. Aureliae
Allobrogum 1607 Artemidorus. Athenaeus. Augustinus. Coloniae Agrippinae. 1616
B
BAal turim. Beda. Bellarminus. Bertramus. Beza. Bodinus. Brerewood.
Buxtorfius. Budaeus.
C
CAninius. Capnio. vid. Reuchli^. Carrion. Casaubonus. Coelius Rhodiginus.
Chazkum. Chemnitius. Chimchi alias R. David Kimchi, Chrysostomus. Clemens
Alexandrinus. Cicero. Concilium quinum sextum. Cyrillus. Cyprianus. Cunaeus.
Lugduni Batauorum. 1617
D.
DEmosthenes. Venetijs 1554 Diodorus Siculus. Dionysius Halicarnass. Drusius de
tribus sectis. Franekerae 1619
E.
ELias Thisbites. Epiphanius. Erasmus. Euripides. Eustathius. Eusebius.
F.
FVnccius. Fagius. Firmicus.
G.
GAlationus. Francofurti 1612 Gellius. Genebrardus. Gorionides. Gregorius
Nazianzen. Gyraldus.
H.
HErodianus. Herodotus. Hesiodus. Hieronymus. Basileae 1516 Homerus. Horatius.
Hospinianus. Tiguri 1611
I.
IAlkut. Cracouiae 1595 Iansenius. Josephus. Aureliae Allobrog. 1611 Jonathan.
Iunius. Justin. Martyr. Justin. histor. Iuuenalis. Ilmedenu.
K.
KImchi. vid. Chimchi.
L.
LActantius. Laertius. Leui ben Gersom. Lipsius. Liuius. Lucanus. Lucianus.
Lyranus.
M.
MAcrobius. Magius. Maimonides lib. Iad. Venetijs 1574 Masius. Maximus Tyrius.
Montacutius. Moses Kotsensis. Venetijs 1557 Munsterus. Musar. Modestus.
O.
OEcumenius. Onkelos. Origenes. Ouidius.
P.
PHilo Iudaeus. Colonia Allobrog 1613 P^rke Aboth. Plautus. Plinius. Pierius.
Basilea 1575 Plutarchus. Procopius. Prudentius.
R.
REuchlinus (pro quo citatur Capnio perperam) Francofurti 1612 Rosinus.
Ruffinus.
S.
SEder olam minus. Septuaginta interpretes. Serarius. Scaliger Deemend. temp.
Lutetiae 1583 Trthaeres. Franekerae 1619
Sheindler. Sigonius. Scholiastes Aristophanis. Solomon Iarchi. Solinus.
Sozomenus. Statius. Stukius. Suetonius. Suidas. Syrus interpres.
T.
TAlmud Babylonicum. Talmud Hierosolymitanum. Targum Vzielidis, sieve
Ionathanis. Targum Onkelos. T^rgum Hierosolymitanum. Tertullianus. 1609
Theophylactus. Theodoretus. Theophrastus. Tholosanus. Thisbites. Tiraquellus.
Toletus. Tremelius.
V.
VAtablus. Valerius Max. Varro. Virgilius.
X.
XEnophon. Basileae 1569
Z.
ZEpperus. Zohar.

