THE REGIment of life, whereunto is added a treatise of the pestilence, with the
book of children, newly corrected and enlarged by T. Phayre.

ANNO 1545

The preface to the book of children.
Although (as I doubt not) every good man will enterpret this work to none
other end, but to be for ye comfort of them yt are dyseased, and will esteem
no less, of me by whom they profit, then they will be glad to receive the
benfeytes: Yet forasmuch as it is impossible to avoid the teeth of malicious
envy, I thought it not unnecessary to prevent ye furies of some* which are
ever gnawynge and bytynge upon them that further any godly sciences. To those I
proteste, yt in all my studyes, I never intended nor yet do ente^d to satisfy
ye minds of any such pikfaultes (which will do nothing but detract and judge
other, snuffynge at all that offends the noses of their momishe affeccions,
howsoever laudable it be otherwise:) but my purpose is here to do them good
that have most need, yt is to say children: and to show the remedies that
god has created for the use of man, to distribut in English to them that are
unlearned, part of ye treasure that is in other la^guages, to provoke them that
are of better lerni^g, to utter their knowledge in such like attemptes: finally
to declare that to the use of many, which ought not to be secret for lucre of
a few: and to communicate the fruit of my labors, to them that will gently and
thankefully receive them, which if any be so proud or supercilious, that they
immediately will despise, I shall friendly desire them, with the words of Horace:
Quod si meliora nouisti, Candidus imparti, si non, his vtere mecum. If they
know better, let us have part: if they do not, why repine they at me? why
condemn they the thing that they cannot amend? or if they can, why dissimule
they their co^nyng? how long would they have the people ignorant? why grutch
they phisike to come forth in English? would they have no man to know but
only they? Or what make they the^ selves? Merchants of our lives and
deaths, that we should bye our health only of them, and at their pryces? no
good physician is of that mind. For if Galene the prince of this art being a
Grecia^ wrote in ye Greek, king Auicenne of Arabie in the spech of his
Arbyans: If Plinius Celsus, Serenus and other of the Latins wrote to the
people in the Latyne tongue: Marsilius Ficinus (whom all men assente to be
singulerly learned) disdayned not to write in the language of Italy: generally,
if the intent of all that ever set forth any noble study, have been to be
read, of as many as would: What reason is it that we should huther muther here
among a few, the thing that was made to be common unto all? Christ says: no
man lyghteth a candle to cover it with a bushel, but sets it to serve every
man's need: and these go about, not only to cover it when it is lyghted, but to
quench it before it be ki^dled (if they might by malice:) which as it is a
detestable thing in any godly science: so me thinks in this so necessary
an art, it is exceeding damnable and deuylyshe, to debar the fruycion of so
inestimable benefytes, which our heavenly father has prepared for our comfort
and innumerable uses, wherwyth he has armed our impotent nature against the
assaults of so many sicknesses: whereby his infynyte mercy and aboundaunte
goodness is in nothing else more apparauntly confessed, by the which benefits,
as it were with most sensible arguments spoken out of heaven, he onstraineth
us to think upon our own weakness, and to knowledge, that in all flesh is
nothing but myserye, sycknesse, sorrows, sin, affliccio^, and death, no not
so much strength as by our own power, to relyeue one member of our bodies
dyseased. As for the knoweledge of medicines, comfort of herbs, maintenance
of health, prosperytie, and life, they be his benefits, and proceed of him, to
the end that we should in common, help one an other, and so live together in
his laws and commandments: in the which doing we shall declare our selves,
to have woorthelye employed them, and as fruitful servants, be liberallye
rewarded, Otherwise, undoubtedly the talente which we have hidden, shall be
dygged up, and distributed to them that shall be more diligente: a terrible
confusyon before so hie a justice, and at such a court where no wager of law
shall be taken, no proctoure lymytted to defend the cause, none excepcion
allowed to reprove the wytnes, no council admytted to qualifye the gloses, the
very bare text shall be there alleged. Cur non posuisti talentum in fenus. Why
haste thou not bestowed my talent to the vau^tage. These and such other
examples, have enforced me being oftentimes exercysed in the study of phisike,
to derive out of the purest fountains of the same facultye, such wholesome
remedies, as are most approved, to the consolacion of them that are afflicted,
as far as God has given me understanding to perceive: following therein, not
only the famous and excellent authors of antiquitye, but also the me^ of
high learning now of our days, as Manardus, Fuchsius, Ruellius, Musa,
Ca^pegius, Sebastia^ of Austrike, Otho Brimfelsius, Leonellus. etc. with diverse
other for mine opportunity, not omyttyng also the good and sure experimentes
that are found profitable by the daily practyse. And where as in the regimente
of life, which I translated out of the french tongue, it has appeared to
some, more curyouse than needs, by reason of the strange ingrediens, whereof
it often treats: Ye shall know that I have in many places amplyfyed the
same, with such common things, as may be easelye gotten, to satisfye the
minds of them that were offended: or else consyderyng that there is no money
so precious as health, I would think no spice to dear, for maintenance
thereof. Notwythstandyng I hope to fre ye time, when ye nature of Simple^
(which have been hitherto incrediblie corrupted) shall be read in English,
as in other la^guages: that is to say, the perfect declaracion of the
qualyties of herbs, seeds, roots trees, and of all co^modytyes that are here
amongst us, shall be earnestely and truly declared, in once own natyue
speech, by the grace of god. To (...) which I trust all learned men (having a
zele to the common wealth) will apply their dilligent industries, surely for my
part, I shall never cease, duri^g my breath, to bestow my labor to the
furtherau^ce of it (til it come to pass) even to the vttermoste of my simple
power. Thus fare ye well gentle readers,

Londini, Mense Iunii. M.D.xlvi,
Here begins he Regiment of life, and first of the nature of man's body.
The humors which be in nature, and how they are divided,
THe body of man is co^pact of four humors, that is to say: Blood, Phlegm,
Choler, and Melancholye, which humors are called ye sons of the Elements,
because they be complexioned like the four elements. For like as the air is
hot and moist: so is the blood hot and moist. And as fire is hot and dry:
so is choler hot and dry. And as water is cold and moist: so is phlegm
cold and moiste. And as the earth is cold and dry: so mela^choly is cold
and dry. Whereby it apereth that there be nine complexions. Whereof.iiii, be
simple, yt is to wete hot, cold, moist, and dry: and.iiii. co^plexions
compounde: that is, hot and moist, which is the complexion of the air and of
blood. Hot and dry, which is the complexion of the fire, and of cholere.
Cold and moist, which is the co^plexcion of the water and of phlegm: and
cold and dry, that is the complexion of earth and of melancholy. The nynth
complexion is temperate, neither to hot nor to cold, nor to moist nor to
dry, which yet is a thing very seldom seen among men. After the phisicions,
the said four humors govern and rule every one in his place and enduce me^
to be of the complexions following.

The complexion of the phlegmatyke.
Phlegm enclyneth a man to be well fourmed. a sleper. dull of understanding.
full of spattle. full of color.

The co^plexcions of the sanguyne.
Blood causes one to be full of flesh. liberal. amyable. curtyse. merye.
inuentyue. bold. lecherous. of red color

The co^plexcions of the cholerike.
Cholere causes a man to be hastye. enuyous. covetous. subtyle. cruel. a
watcher. prodigal. lean, and of yelowe color.

The complexions of the melancholyke.
Melancholy makes one, Solytarye. Soft spirited. Fearful. Heavy. Curyous.
Envious. Covetous. Black of color.

These be the four humors whereof the bodies are compounded, and every one of
them has a special dominion in respect of all the other, according to the age,
that is to say, from a man's nativity, til he come to.xxv. years, the blood
has most power, and from that time to the year of his age.xxxv. raygneth the
Choler, for then commethe heat into the veins, and the choler begins to
arise and be strong. Then comes myddle age, and brings forth melancholye,
an humor cold and dry, and has his endurau^ce till fyfty years, or there
about, at which time all the humors of the body begin to diminyshe, and the
natural heat by little and little does abate. And the^ succedeth old age unto
death, in the which age phlegm has ye pri^cipal power and dominion. Wherefore
it shall be necessary for all that be of ye age, to comfort their bodies with
some natural heat and meats of good noryshyng, as yolks of eggs potched,
good and young flesh, wheat bread, and good wine, and all such things as
engendre good blood and spirits, whereof we entende (by the sufferaunce of
God) to declare more aboundauntly hereafter.

Here follows the descripcion of inward and outward diseases, with the
most wholesome and expert remedies for the cure thereof, appropriat to every
membre thoroughout the body.
The first chapter, of the sickness and remedies of the heed.
HEad ache chances often times of diverse and sundry causes, as of blood,
cholere, fle^^e or melancholy, or of ventositye, and sometimes of heat of the
sun, or of to great cold of ye air.

Ye may know head ache when it comes of blood, for in the face and eyes
there appears a dark redenes, prickyng, and heaviness with heat.

Remedy. Ye must let him blood on the head vein, on that side that the peine
is on, then lay upon the place oil of roses, vinegar, and rose water, or a
bag with roses sprinkeled with rose water. And here is to be noted, as well i^
this cause as all other, that if his belly be hard and bound, first ye must
give him an easy glister, or else half an ounce of Cassia newly drawn out
of the cane, or some other easy laxatyue to provoke the duty of the womb, else
al applicacions of medicines, will be nothing worth at all.

One may know head ache that proceeds of cholere, when in the face there is a
clear rednes, enclining somewhat toward yelowe, holownesse of ye iyes, and the
mouth dry and hot: And sometimes bytternesse, small rest, great heat with
sharp pain, chief^y on the right side of the head.

Remedy. Ye must give him morn and even to drink, sirupe of violettes, or
pomegranades with a mean draught of endive water in a glass, or of comin
water sodden and cooled again. And in stead of these sirupes ye may drink
water of endive, succorye, purcelane and nenuphar myngled together, or one of
them by them self, two or.iii. days at euenyng and morning. Then give a dra^me
of pillule sine quibus, at night to bedwarde, or about midnight, and the day
following keep you i^ your chamber. Instead of those pills, it is good every
morni^g to take an hour before su^ne a medicine to drink, yt shall be made of
half an ounce of Succo rosarum, mixed with two ounces of water of endive. In
stead of the said succo rosarum, ye may take half an ounce of diaprunis
laxatiue, and ye must take heed in gyuyng such purgacions, that the pacient be
strong, for if he be weak, ye may give him but the half of ye said pylles or
of the other laxatyues. And if in diminishyng the quantity of the said
medicines, it works not with the pacient as it should, it is convenient to
give him a common glister.

An other remedy for the same pain. Ye must lay thereon a lynnen clothe
moysted in rose water, plantayne water, morel water, and vinegre, or else take
the juice of lettuce and roses, and a little vinegar, and warm it together, and
dippe therein a linen clothe, and lay it to the pain.

An other. Ye must take the whytes of.ii. eggs, with rose water, and beat it
well together: and with towe or flax, lay it to ye grieved place. Also ye must
shave his heed, and milk thereon woman's milk, that nourysheth a wenche, or
wasshe his heed with warm water, wherein have been sodde vine leaves, sage,
flowers of water lilies, and roses. Also it is necessary to wash his feet and
legs with the said water, so that the pacient have no reume: for if there be
reumatike matters, ye ought nether to shave his heed, wash his legs nor to
lay any cold thing or moist to his heed. Ye may know that fleume is cause of
the peine in the heed, when ye feel coldness with great heuinesse: specially
in the hyndre part: when one spytteth often, and has his face like sun
brent.

Remedy. Ye must drink.iii. or.iiii. morninges sirupe of sticados with water
of fenel, or sirupe of wormwood, with a decoction of sauge and maiorym. Then
ye must pourge the head from the said fleume, with pillule cochie, and with
pills of agarici, or pillule auree made with one of the said sirupes, five in
a dram, and take.iiii. or.v. at night to bedwardes, or about midnight. Or in
stead of those pylles ye may take a pocion in the morning.v hours before meat,
made of half an ounce of diacartami dissolved i.ii. or iii. ounces of betonye.
After that ye ought to comfort the head, by wering of a coife, made of double
linen cloth, and sowed like a cotton quilt, wherein ye must put flowers of
camomil, maiorim, cloves, nutmygges, maces, grains of Paradyse and synamome in
powder, for such things digest ye fleume, so that a purgacion be given of the
said pills, or of pills assagareth, or pills of hierapicra, which are not
so laxatyue as the other are.

After the said purgacion, ye must put in the nose of the paciente, powder of
pellitorye of Spain or other, to make hi^ to nese Also it is good to gargarise
his mouth, with water wherein sage has been sodden, and then to annoynte his
head with oil of lilies, camomil, or of rue.

Beside this, it is good to give the pacient every morning to drink,
sage-wine with water, to consume ye fleume and to coumfort the brain and the
synowes. The said wine is thus made.

Put a little bag full of good sage bruised, in a quart of new wine, and let
it stand so a night, then wring it out and use it. Such wine of sage the
inhabiters of Parise and France, use to drink after harueste all the winter
long.

When peine of the head proceeds of melancholy, the pacie^t feleth heuines of
ye heed, and has terrible dreams, with great care and thought, or fear, and
his peine is specially upon ye left side.

Remedy. Take sirupe of borage, hearts tou^ge or fumytorye, with water of
buglosse, and hartestonge, or with the decoccio^ of sage or time, for by these
sirupes ye shall digest and correct the said melancholyke humors, and within a
while the pain will be released. And if it cease not for these medicines,
after ye have used.ii. or.iii. days one of ye said sirupes, or two or three of
the^ together, take a dram of pylles, half auree: and half sine quibus: or
else half of hiera, and half of pills of fumytory: or instead of pylles,
ye may take in ye morning five hours before meat.iii drammes and an half of
diasene, tempered in water of borage or hoppes, or in the decoccion of sage,
licorice, great reysins, and cordial flowers and fruits. Heed ache comes of
wind or ventositie, when the paciente thinks that he hears sound or noise
in his heed, and the pain is flytteryng from one place to an other, without
heaviness or descendyng humor.

Remedy. Lay unto his head hot lynnen clothes, and make a bag of Gromel
seeds and bay salt dried together in a pan: so proceed with stronger
things, if need require, as is bags made of maiorym, rosemarye, rue,
barberies, and juniper beries, laid to ye pained place: or with the decoccion
of the foresaid things, make fomentacio^ or embrocacion upon his heed.

An other remedy. Ye must take oil of Camomil, oil of Dyll or Lylies, and
annoynte the head with one of the^, or with.ii. or.iii. or all together. If that
help not, take oil of Rue, Spike, and of Castor, and anoint it therwyth: and
add thereto alytle Pepper, and mustard seed, if ye would have it sore chafed
or hette. Also it is good to draw up by the nose, water of Honey, the juice of
Maiorim, and of Fenell, aromatised with a Nutmygge and lignum aloes.

Rasis a great practicioner among phisicions says: yt whosoever often times
puts into his nose the juice of maiorim, shall never be diseased in ye head.
I think he means of the great maiorim.

If pain of the head come of heat of the sun, ye must apply to the places
diseased, as it is said in the remedies of cholere.

But if the said pain proceed of coldenesse of the air, then use as it is
said before in the remedies of fleume.

Here follows a regimente against all dyseases of the head. THe pacient that
is diseased i^ ye head, whether it be of blood or of cholere, may not dri^ke
wine nor eat much flesh, whitmetes, nor things that give any great
nourishement. But must be contented to drink p^isane, barley water, or iulep
o^ roses, and to eat roasted apples, damask prunes, almon milk, hulled
barely, and pottage made with lettuse, sorell purcelane, in broth of peason, or
with a chicken, or veale, if the paciente be feeble,

When pain proceeds of a cold humor, the pacient ought to drink no wine in
three of the first days, but to drink only peniale, or such small drink,
for although the wine be very comfortable, as concerning natural heat, yet it
is contrary and hurteful unto the spirits animal of the brain, and also of
the sinnowes.

And the paciente ought what pain soever it be of the head, to forbear all
vaporous meats, as garlyke, onions, leekes, pease, beans, nuttes
milke-meates, spyces, mustard, great colewortes, salt meats, and meats of
ill dygestion. Also he must abstain from sleep of the day, and after supper
by the space of two hours.

Travail of the mind is very contrary, because of ye co^mocion that happens
unto ye lively spirits, which are instruments of understanding, as Auice^
that noble phisicien says, in the chapter de soda temporali. Nihil est adeo
conuenie^s sode temporali, sicut tranquilitas et dimissio totius quod commouet
sicut su^t fortes cogitatio^es. etc. There is nothing that is so convenient for
the meygrym, as tranquillity and rest, and let all things pass that move the
virtue animal, as great musinges and all labor of the spyrites. And chefely
one ought after dinner to keep him from al things that trouble the memory, as
studyinge, readyng, writing, and other like.

And for the better understanding of the sickness chauncing in the heed, ye
shall know, that sometime it chances because of other diseased me^bres, as
of the stomach, or of the mother of the reins, of the liver, or of the spleen
and not of any cause in the heed it self. Therefore ye ought to cure such
sickness by helpyng of the same me^bres, as it shall be showed in the chapiters
following.

And ye may know, that the head ache comes of diseases of ye stomach, when
the pacient has great pain at the stomach. Of the mother, when the woman
feleth great pain in her belly. Of the reins, when their is a great pain in
the back. Of the spleen, when he feleth pain and heuinesse therabout, under
the lift side. Of the liver, when the pain is in the right side, about the
liver which is beneth the rybbes*

Remedies appropriate to the head of what cause soever the pain be. TAke an
handful of Betony, an handful of Camomyle, and a handful of veruayne leaves
piked, stamp them and sees them in black worte, or in ale for lack of it,
and in the later end of the seethyng, put to it a little Common braied, ye
powder of a hearts horn, and the yolks of two eggs, and safro^ a little,
stir the^ well about and lay a plaster hot over al his forehead and temples.
This is an excellent remedy also for the meygryme. It shall perce the better if
ye add a little vinegar,

An other. Make a plaster of bean flower, lineseed and oil of Camomylle, or
in lack of it, goose greece or duckes greece, and rub the place with Aqua
vite, and after lay the plaster hot upon it.

An other. Take a sponeful of mustardseed and another of Bay buryes, make them
in powder and stamp them with a handful of earth worms, splitte and skraped
from their earth, and a little oil of Roses, or of Camomyll, or capons greece,
and lay it on the grefe.

Also it is good to take the iuce of I^ie leaves mixed with oil, and vinegre,
and to rub therwyth your temples, and your nosethrilles.

Also the chestwormes that are found between the barks of trees, which will
turn them selves together like a beade when they be touched, if they be taken
and sodden in oil it makes a singular ointment for the meigryme.

The second chapter, how to cure diseases chauncyng in the face.
First as touching a disease called Gutta rosacea, or copperface in english,
it is an excessive redness about ye nose, or other places of the face,
coming of burnt humors, or of salt phlegm, which can not be helped, if
it be rooted and old.

Remedy for the same if it be curable. YE must give him a purgacion, as is
said in ye pain of the head, coming of cholere: the^ dippe lynnen clothes in
alume water, which shall be made thus. Take a pound of alumeglasse, ye iuce of
purcelane, of pla^tain, and vergiouce of grape or crabbes, of each a pint and a
half, with ye whites of.xx. eggs and beat them well together with ye said
juice, the^ mix all together and distill it in a commune stillatory, and keep
the water for to use against all pymples, scurses, wheales, chafinges, and
heates that chance in the skin. The clothes dipped as is aforesaid, must be
laid to the redness, and oftentimes renewed with other fresh cloutes dipped
in the same.

Another remedy. Take lytarge of silver, and brymstone, of each like much, and
sees the^ in rose water and vinegar, and then with a lynnen clout wette in the
said vinegre, lay it to the sore.

Remedy to pallifye the coppred face that is incurable. MAke a bath with the
flowers of camomyll, violettes, roses, and flowers of water lillies, the^
anoint ye place with vnguentum album ca^phoratum, and mixed that ointment with
a little yelowe brymstone, and quycksyluer killed with fasting spitle, and
annoint the place withal.

A water for the same. A water called lac virginis, is very good, and rose
water mixed with sulphur, oil of tartare, and oil of wheat. Also these
things are good for tetter^ and other ruggedness of the skin. The said lac
virginis claryfieth the face, and dryethe up moist pymples, and takethe away
frekels of the vysage, and is thus made. Take.iii. ounces of litarg of silver
fine poudred, half a pint of good white vinegre, mixed them together, and
distylle them by a fyltre, or through a little bag, or by a piece of cloth.
Then take of the same water, and myngle it with water of salt, made with one
ounce of salt poudred, and half a pound of rain water, or well water, and
mingle these waters together, and it will be white like milk, and with this
rub the corrupt place. Some add a little ceruse with the litarge which is
good for all redness of the face.

Here follows a general diete for all copperous faces. Abstain from all salt
things, spices, fried meats, and roasted meats. Also from drinking of wine,
for it is very evil. Also onions, mustarde, and garlycke, are very naught.
Instead of which, ye must take purcelane, sorel, lettuce, hoppes, and
borage, with succory or endive, in porrige or otherwise. Also it is necessary
to be laxatiue, and in slepi^g, to lay your head hye.

For redness of the face that is not copperosed. TAke a pynt of goats milk,
the cromes of one whyt lofe hot, the white of six eggs, camfere two dra^mes,
and the juice of six cytrons, mixte all these together with the said milk,
then take all the three kinds of plantayne, and put them in the stylle under the
said drugges, and after it an other bed of the same.iii. sorts of
plantayne, and distylle them with an easy fire as ye would distille rosewater,
and keep it in a glass vessel. And after.xv. days take a white lynnen cloth,
and dippe in the said water, and lay it to the redness.

An other for the same. Water of lylyes stylled, with the blood of an ox, and
a little camphere, is very good.

For chopped or skabbye lyppes. Annoynte them with vugentu^ album ca^phoratum,
and if there be any corrupt blood, or matter, ye must wash the place with water
of Plantayne, wherein has been sodde a little alume before ye put on the said
ointment.

For the same. Vnguentum de tutia and oil of yolks of eggs, be very good
for it. Also it is good to wash ye place with pla^tain water, and barley water
together

For cankers, ulcers, and Noli me tangere. FOrasmuch as Noli me ta^gere
chances often in the n^se or about the face, beginning of a little hard and
round kirnel, or knobbe, and full of pain, declyning toward a pale and leady
color, ye may judge that disease very perilous, notwithstanding it is good to
annoynte it as hereafter follows, and also to apply thereto other remedies, as
thus.

Take Vnguentum album two or three ounces, the iuce of plantayne and nightshade,
of each half an ounce, Tutie the weight of half a crown, mingle them
together, and make an ointment which is good for ye same disease.

For worms in the face. ALthough that worms in ye face may not be had out,
but with great difficulty: and by long process, because of the cold humor
whereof they come, nevertheless, forasmuch as oftentimes they happen unto poor
folks, here shall be recited a receipt proved for the same disease, which is
an ointment of a singular operacion: and is thus made.

Take the leaves and roots of lekes, and iuce them all together, and take
thereof a pint and a half, and put it in a glass with an ounce of powder of
pellitory, and a scruple of verdegrece, and stir them all together, and every
day bath the said worms and wheles, with cotton moisted in the said iuce, and
stir it often in the glass: this is good also for worms in any other
me^bres, and breedynge in the syckenesse called in France the kings evil.

A purgacion which ye ought to take before the said bathyng. Take half a
dram of good turbyth, and a scruple of gynger, half an ounce of sugar, and a
little white wine, mixed all together, and drink it in the morning twyse a week
warm, and renew it every three wekes.

For an vlcered face through worms. Ye must first mundifie the dead flesh
with Vnguentum egyptiacum, or the powder called precipitatus, and for the
perfect curacion ye must dry it well, wherefore it is good to wasshe the place
often with alume water, and put therein lynte, and if there be great moistnes at
the time of desiccation, ye must dippe the same lynte in vnguentum apostoloru^
or ceraseos, with a little of the oyntme^t yt follows, which ye may safely
apply from the beginning to the end of ye cure, for it has virtue to cleanse
and incarnate, with a gentle mundificacion and dryeng.

A singular ointment for worms that matter. Take oil of lyllyes, oil of
linseed, ana. ounces.iii. oil of roses, oil of myrtylles, ana. ounces.ii.
litarge of gold and silver, and read lead, ana, i. ounce, diaquilon white
with gummes, iiii. ounces, goats tallowe, hogs greece, of each two ounces and
a half, black pytche, and colophonye, of each ii. ounces, of the iuce of
hou^destonge* iiii. ounces. Sees al together til they be black and the juice
be clean consumed, then streyne it through a thycke canua^e, and after sees it
again til it be exceeding black in color, and then add to it clear
turpe^tine.iii. ounces, gu^me oppoponax.ii. ounces and an half, white wax as
much as shall suffice to make a plaster not over hard, and put the turpe^tine
and oppoponax in when ye take it from ye fire. This is an excellent plaster
also both for wou^des and ulcers.

For the same. It is very good to lay upon them the herb called houndstong
sta^ped with a little honey.

Regyment or diete for the same sickness. The pacient in all diseases of ye face
must endure hunger as much as is possible, and eat not much at ones. Also he
must hold his head vpryghte, and sleep not on his knees nor elbowes, nor with
his face bowed down. Also he must forbear much laughing, speaking, and
great anger.

For the eyes. Hereafter follows diverse medicines for the eyes, which are the
windows of the mind, for both joy and anger, and the most of our affections,
are seen and known openly through them, and they are ordained and made to
lyghten all the body, where unto nature has given brows and eye lyddes, to
defend them and keep them in safetye, and the better to resist things
contrary and hurtful unto them.

Yet notwythstandyng, beside many other chau^ces, there happens so^tymes a
debilitye in the sight, which must be helped as herafter follows. Take fenell,
verueyne, celydone, rue, eyebryght, and roses, of every one of them a like
much, and distylle them as ye would distille rosewater, and use a little thereof
in your eyes, both in the morning, and when ye go to bed.

A water proved to clarifye the dymnes of the sight. Take the juice of fenell,
of celydonye, rue and eyebryght, of each.ii. ounces, honey an ounce and a half,
aloes, tutye, and sarcocolle, of each half an ounce, the galle of a capon,
cheken or cock two drammes, nutmygges, cloves, and safron, of each a dram,
sugar candy.vi. drammes, put al in a le^bike of glass and distille it. And of
this water put in your eyes ones i^ the day. And if ye could get the liver of
a he goat, and mixed with the said things in the distyllacion, the water will
be of much greater virtue, and all most with out comparison.

For the same. Ye must use every day to eat nutmygges, and to take ones in a
weke a mirabolane condyte.

For the same. Take a pie and burn her, and beat her to powder, and mingle it
with fenel water, and put it in your eyes. Also water of young pyes stilled,
is very good. Likewise water of rotten apples, put.ii. or.iii. drops in ye
eyes helps very much.

A singular water for diseases in the eyes, and to clarifye the sight. Take the
grene walnuttes, husks and al from the tree, with a feawe walnut leaves and
distylle thereof a water to drop within your eyes.

Pylles good for the sight. The pylles sine quibus, assagareth, with trosciskes
of agaryk, and pillule lucis, are excellent good to purge the brain and
comfort the sight.

For pain of the eyes. Somtymes pain of the eyes comes of blood, and then
the veins of the eyes are read and swollen, wherefore it is convenient to be
let blood of the head vein on the side where the pain is.

For bloodeshoten eyes. The blood of a stockedoue or in lack of it an other
dove or pigeon dropped a little in the eye, and a wete cloute thereof laid upon
the same, heals bloodshote^ eyes whether it be of stroke or any other cause.

Sometime the said pain comes of cholere, and then the pacie^t feleth great
heat, sharp prycking, and much peine, and commonly there appears no gum in
the eyes, and if it do, it is yelowe. Therefore ye ought to give him a purgacion
purging cholere, as has been said in the remedy of the head procedyng of the
cause of cholere.

For swellynge of the eyes. Take a quynce and sees it in water till it be
soft, then pare it and bruise it and myxe it with the yolke of an egg and the
cromes of wheaten or white bread steped in the said water, and put thereto a
little woman's milk, and two penny weight of safron, braye them all together and
lay it over the forehead and the eyes. Sometimes such pains chance because of
fleume, and the^ the pacyente feleth great heaviness in his eyes, with
abundaunce of gummye matter, or water descendyng into the eyes. And in this
case, ye must purge the fleume, as it has been said in the remedy of the
head grieved by the excess of fleume.

To resolve the gum ye shall use to wash your eyes often times with the
juice of housleke, otherwise called senegrene.

And some times the same pain comes because of ventositye or wind, and then
the pacient feleth such peynes as if one beat on his ear with an hammer, for
which it is good to make a decoccio^ of camomille flowers, mellilote, and
fenell seed, in water and white wine, and therein wette a four double line^
cloth and the licour well pressed out, lay it often upon the eye.

Otherwhyles there chau^ceth peine of the eyes because of exterior things, as
of wynd, duste, or heat of the su^ne, and then it is mete to lay thereto
womannes milk, well beaten with the white of an egg.

And sometime the said pain comes by percussion or strykynge, and then ye
must drop into the eye, of ye blood of a pigeons winge, or of a partryche,
which blood has like virtue to take away spots, marks, and rednes of the
eyes.

For very great pain of the eyes. Take an ounce and a half of oil of roses,
the yolke of an egg, and a quarter of an ounce of barley flower, and a little
saffron, mix all together and put it between two linen clothes, and lay it to
the pain.

An other. Take of cro^mes of wheaten bread white, an ounce, and sees it in
night shade or morel water, then myxe with the said bread.ii, yolks of eggs,
oil of roses, and camomil, of each an ounce and an half, muscilage of
lineseede an ounce, and use it as is aforesaid.

An other. Take six leaves of henbane, and roste them, then beat them very
well in a mortar, and lay them to the pain.

For rednes of the eyes. In the beginning of the rednes lay upon the eyes towe
dypped in ye white of eggs, but let ye whites be well beaten first with
rosewater, or with pla^tayne water.

An other. Take red roses, and sees them, and let them be set warm to your
eye. This takes away spots of blood, that sometime chances in the eyes.
Also it is good for all diseases of the eyes. And it is good for rednes of the
eyes, that comes by stryking or any such vyolence. If at any time there
happen a spot or blemishe in the eye by a stroke, ye must lay to it by and by
towe wet in rosewater and in whytes of eggs, and after that the peine be
mitigate, ye must lay a playstre upon the eye, made of a raw egg, barlye
flower, and the juice or muscilage of mallows, and then if the eye be not
helped of the said blood, ye must lay to it a plaster both dissolutiue,
defensive, and partlye appeysyng the peine, which must be made of whete flower,
ye juice of mallows, mintes, and smalach, and the yolke of an egg,

Of hardenesse that has been long in the eye. Take a scruple of aloes
succotrine and melt it in water of celydony at ye fire, then receive the fume
of it, and afterward wash the eye with fenel water.

An other. Take poudre of cumyne myxt with wax like a plaistre, and lay it
upon the eye.

An other. Take red roses, sage, rue, celedonie, of each a like much, with a
little salt, and distill a water, and put thereof a drop or two in your eye,
euenyng and morning. In stead of that water, it is good to take juice of
verueine, rue, and a little rosewater.

For all redness of the eyes. Take the bygnesse of a nut of white copperose
and a scruple of yeros, and poudre it, and mixed it with a glass full of well
water, then put two or three drops in your eyes.

For the same. Water of strawburies made and put in the eye is good.

A singular poudre that dries and takes away redness of the eyes. TAke
tutie preparat an ounce, and timonie half an ounce, perles, two drammes, red
coral a dram and an half, pouldre al these things very fine, and keep them
in a box of tynne, and use it.

For to stop wateryng of the eyes. MAke a plaster of poudre of mastike, fine
frankensence, boole armoniake, and gu^me dragagante, with whites of eggs myxte
together, and laid to the foreheade and temples. Also it is good to set
ventoses on the nape of the neck. Also it is good to make a co^rie to put into
the eyes, as follows. Take tutie preparat and the stone called lapis
hematites, of each a dra^me, aloes half a dra^m, perles and camphore, of each a
scruple, powder them all very fine, and myxe them in three ounces of water
distilled of the knoppes of rooses, and thereof make a collirie.

Also for to stop al humors descendyng to the eyes, these things
aforesaid are very good myxte with rain water, wherein olibanum or
fra^kenscence has been sodden.

For webbes of the eye. IT may be casylye helped in young folks, but in
aged persons it is veraye hard. And in the beginning ye must mollifye them
with a decoction of the flowers of camomyl, mellilote, and cole leaves,
receiuyng the fume of the said decoction within the eyes, and then put therein a
little powder made with sugercandye, sall gemme, and eggs shelles burnt, and
afterward distyl into them woman's milk with the decoction of fenugreke.

An other singular receate for webbes in the eyes Take snayles with the shelles
on, and wash them eight times, and distill them i^ a commune stillatory, then
take hares galls, read coral, and sugercandye, with the said water,
dystylle them again, and put every morning and euenyng a drop in your eye.

An other water. This water is made of white coperose, sugar candy, and
rosewater, with whites of eggs that are sodden hard, all streyned through a
linen cloth, and put into your eye, after diner and all night to bedwarde.

Regiment for them that have any sore eyes. Ye must always keep your belly
lose and abstain from fire, smoke, wind dust, and over hot or cold air,
and from weeping, and long readyng of a small letter, from over long watchyng,
over much drinkyng of wine, and eatinge late, for all these are very noisome to
ye eyes and syghte. Also all euaporatiue things, as onions lekes, garlike
mustard, pease, and beans, are very dangerous. Ye must keep your fete clean
and forbear the day sleep. Behold grene things, clear water, precious
stones: and to keep you from long holdyng down your face, socoureth the
syghte very much, and is very good for the eyes.

Likewise use meats of good and quick digestion, as to eat senel often, and
after meat take coriander comfites prepa^ated, and drink not after them. But
above al keep away your hands, for the rubbing of them makes them worse and
worse.

Remedy for dyseases of the ears. TAke oil of roses and a little vinegar, and
put it into the ear, the^ make a bag of camomill and mellilote, and lay it
thereunto.

For noise and soundyng of the ears. Take pullule cochie* or fetide, because
the sound proceeds of ventositye, or of phlegm, and before ye take the said
pylles, it is good to drink three ounces of fenell water.ii. hours before
meat.iiii. or.v. days. After the operacion of the said pylles, ye must dippe
a tente in oil of rue castor or of salt, with the juice of lekes, and often
in the morning fasting to hold his ear over the warm decoction of maiorim,
rue, wormwood, camomil, and mellilote.

For pain in the ears. Gose greece with a little honye swageth the pains of
the ears.

Also the chestwormes sodden in oil of roses upon hoate ashes in the rynde of
a pomegranate, and dropped in the ears.

Item oil of almondes, specially of the bitter almondes, hoate.

Item if there be water in the ears it shall be had out with a little gose
greece and the juice of onyons

Also earth worms with gose greece soden is good for pain in the ears. Item
an adders haine sodden in wine and ye ear bathed in it, and a little thereof
put into the pain is good to take a way the gryefe, and it helps also to
the ears that are rennynge with stinking matter and corrupcio^, but in that
case ye must have boiled in the wine a little myrre.

Regiment. The pacjent must eat and drink little, and sweat in bathes, or
whote houses, and sometimes to provoke nesynge. He must forbear garlic,
onions, leekes, pease, beans, and nuttes, nor drink wine without water.

For deafenes. Sometime there chances deafnes by wind, which is in the
ear, the which causes tinklynge in the head, and then one must put a little
aloes in hot water, or in white wine, and distyll into the ear. Then put a
little euphorbium in powder into his nose, to make him to nese, and avoid
as much humors as ye can.

Sometime deaffenesse comes of fleume, which when it is old is incurable. But
when it begins, it must be purged as has been said i^ ye remedy of ye
sound of the ears. The^ take powder of bay beries, and sees it in oil of
lilies, and put it warm into your ear, and a little black wolle to stop
the ear with, that no air enter.

Remedy for stinkyng of the nose, TAke cloves, ginger, and calamynte, of each
a like, and sees the^ in white wine, and therewith wash thy nose. After put in
powder of piretrum to provoke you to nese, and if there be replecio^ of fleume
in the head, first ye must purge it with pills of cochie or of hirea picra.
Also if the cause of stinkyng come from the stomach, first help the stomach,
as shall be said hereafter in the remedies of the stomach.

Medicines for bledynge of the nose. Take a dram of boole armoniake washed,
and myxe it in rose water or plantayne water, and drink it. Then bind the
extreme parts, as hard as ye may, and after make a tente of greek nettels,
and put into his nose.

Moreover, it is good for the paciente to hold in his hand egremony, with the
root and all, and drink the juice of knotgrasse, and without doubt the blood
shall staunche anon.

For the same. Set a boxyng glass upon his liver, if the blood come from the
right side, or on the spleen if he blede on the left side, and lay unto the
stones a good quantitye of towe or linen dipped in vinegre, and for a woman
lay it upon her breasts.

An other singular medicine for to staunche blood, and it is a thing expert of
all the good practicioners. Take swynes dounge, even as hot as ye can have it
from the swyne, and when ye have cleansed the congeled blood out of ye nose,
wring it through a cloute and let the juice perce into the side from whence the
blood comes, and by the grace of God ye shall see it stanche anon.

Moreover it is good to bind the fete and arms as hard as can be suffered,
with a cord or a lace, the stronger they be bound the better.

Remedy for the tothe ache. Pain of the tethe (as Galene says) amongeste
other pains that are not mortal is ye most cruel and grievous of them al. It
may come diverse ways, of a cold or hot cause. If it come of a hot cause his
gomes are read, and very hot, wherefore it is very good to hold in his mouth
water of camphore or to sees a little camphore in vinegre, and hold it in his
mouth.

An other synguler remedy that takes away al kinds of tothe ache, specially
if it come of a hot cause.

Take henbane roots, and sees them in venegre, and rosewater, and put the
decoction in your mouth.

Remedy for the toth ache that comes of cold causes.

Forasmuch as in such cases oftentimes there distelleth abundance of water
into the mouth, pourge it with pillule cochie, and afterward keep i^ your
mouth warm wine, wheri^ has been sodden pellitorie, mintes and rue.

An other remedy for the same. Take sage, pellitorye, and seth them in vinegar,
and keep it in your mouth as hoate as ye may suffer.

An other for the same. Take pellitorie, staue sacre, and the three kinds of
pepper of each one part, macis, galingale, half part of ye other, make a
powder, and with a little white wine rub the teeth and then lay on ye foresaid
powder where the pain is.

An other. Take the middle bark of an elder, salt, and pepper, of each a like
much: and stamp them together, and lay it to the sore teeth.

An other remedy. Take a little cotton, and dyp it in oil of spike, then put
it on the sore tothe. If the tothe be hollow, it is good to draw it out,
for it will eueryedaye waste whatsoever ye do unto it.

To make the teeth white. Take white marble, cuttle bone, white coral, sal
gemme, bay salt, mastike, and pills of a citron, of each like much, make them
in very fine powder, and rub the teth therewith, every morning* And afterward
wasshe your mouth with white wine, wherein has been sodden a little camomil and
dyll.

For the same. Take vinegar of squilles and dippe a little piece of cloth in it,
and rub the teeth and gummes withal. The said vinegar fasteneth the gummes,
coumforteth the rotes of the teeth, and makes a sweet breath.

An other remedy to make the teeth white. Distille a water in a lembik, of two
parts of sal gemme, and ye third part of alume, and rub the teth with a linen
cloute dipped in the same.

To take away stinking of the mouth. Ye must wash his mouth with water and
vinegar, and chewe mastike a good while, and then wash thy mouth with the
decoction of anysesedes, mintes, and cloves sodden in wine. If the stinking of
the mouth comes of a rotten tooth, the best is to have it drawn out.

Regyment for toth ache, and stinkyng of the mouth. Ye must wash your mouth
before and after meat with warm water, for to cleanse the mouth, and to purge
the humors from ye gummes, which descend out of the head. It is good every
morning fasting, to wash your mouth and to rub the teeth with a sage lefe,
pills of citron, or with powder made of cloves and nutmigges. Ye must forbere
lettuce, raw fruit, al tarte meats and the chewing of hard things. Also al
meats of evil digestion, and vomityng.

The third chapter treats of remedies for dyseases of the breaste.
First for hoarcenesse of the voice, that makes a man to speak low, and
with great pain, ye must avoid al egre, salt, and sharp things, and sleping
by day, to much watching, great cold, much speakinge, and to loud cryinge.
All sweet things are very good as apples sodde^ with sugar, great raysins,
figs, almond milk, hulled barlye, pignolate, penedies, white pills, sugar
candye, and the juice of licorice

Remedy for a hoarce voice. Take the broth of read colewrote and mingle with
it.vii. or.viii. penidies, and an ounce of sirupe of maiden hear, and give
unto the pacient, when he goes to bed.

An other medicine. Take diayris simple, and eat a lozeng of the same at morn
and also at night.

An other remedy for horcenesse of a long continuance. Take raysons, fygges,
sugar, cinamome, and cloves, of every one a little. Sees them in good wine, of
the which ye shall give to drink morning and eueninge.ii. ounces at a time,
except he has a fever.

For the same. It is good to take morning and euenyng, a sponeful of the syrup
of iu^bes myxte with a root of liquirice, in manner of aloc. If with the said
horcenes, there descend aboundau^ce of water to ye mouth, it is good to make an
electuarye of half diayris, and half diadragantum, and to use it first and
last, after perfumyng with stoupes of flax, fumed with frankinse^ce, mastike,
sandrake, and storax calamite, laid upon the head warm.

Remedy for the cough. Take ysope, great raysins, and fygges, of each a little
handefull, licorice one ounce, boil them in water til the third part be
wasted, then give it him for to drink twyse a day, in the morning two hours
before meat, and at night one hour before supper, and immediatlye after, it
is good to eat a lozenge of diayris, or diapenidion. If ye will have it
stronger, put to them in the decoction a little cool woortes, anyse, and
fenell, with the seeds of nettelles, of each two drammes.

An other remedy. Take sugercandy, white pills dyayris, and diadragagant, of
every one.i. ounce, licorice.ii. dra^mes, make a pou^er, and let him eat
thereof a sponful, morning and evening, and drink after it three ounces of
water of Isope, or of scabious, with sugar or without sugar.

Instead of those waters, ye may take the broth of read colewoortes without
salt.

An other remedy. Take sirupe of liquirice, and of ysope, and drink it even
and morn, with a ptisane or one of ye same sirupes, with a sponefull of
ptisane is good.

An other. Take powder of diayris simple, and liquirice of each a dram
weighte, and with four ounces of sugar make an electuarye, to be eaten first
and last, and after meat.

An other. It is good to take loc sanum, with a stycke of liquirice, at the
coughynge, and after meat. And there is an other loc called loc de pino, as
good at all times as ye other is. And it is good to annoint the breast morning
and evening, with oil of lylyes, sweet almons, and may butter without salt.

Here is to be noted, that commonly ye coughe proceeds of cold humors that
greueth the longes, and for that cause all things the which be hot, sweet,
and do poruoke spittel, are very good and wholesome, for the same as be the
things before rehearsed.

And sometime it proceeds of heat, and the^ it is known by the great
alteration or fever, and then ye must forbid the pacient drinkyng of all wines,
and to use the things yt hereafter follows.

Remedy against the coughe coming of a hot cause. Take syrup of violettes,
and of iuiubes, and drink thereof morninge and eueninge, with a little ptisane
sodden.

For the same. It is good to take first and last, a lozenge of diadragagant,
and afterward to drink a draught of good ptisane.

A good receite against the coughe. Take the rote of Enula campana, horehounde,
holihock, of each a like much, sees them altogyther in white wine with a dosen
of fat fygges, and a little liquirice, drink of it a draught, every day
twyse,

Regiment or diet for them that have the cough. Ye must abstain from vinegre,
veriuce, all salt meats, fruits, and raw herbs, fyshe, lymons, gross
meats, and to much repletion. Also ye may drink no wine between meals, and
beware of day sleep, and specially after meat.

The wind, the cold, and much talking, are very unnatural for ye coughe,
and so is all labor as well of the body as of the mind, and some time it is
good to hold your wynde^ little, and let it go again.

Remedies against shortness of the wind. Shortness of the wind proceeds often
times of fleume, that is coughe and cla^mishe, hangyng upon ye longes or
stopping the condites of ye same, being in the holowenes of the breast, or of
catarrous humors yt droppeth down into the longes, and thereby comes
straitness in drawing of the breath, which is called of phisicions, dispnoca,
or asthma, and when ye pacient can not bend his neck down for dread of
suffocacio^, it is called orthopnoca. For every one of these diseases there be
very wholesome medicines declared here before.

The receyte for Asthma. Take an ounce of great raisins picked from the
kernelles, two figs, the meat of a date, dry isope, maydenhere, licorice, and
the longes of a fox washed in wine, water of scabiouse, of every one a
dram, penidies.ii. ounces with sirup of licorice, let al be i^ corporated,
and make a loc, to eat a good while after meat, with a stick of lycorice.

An other receyte. Take horehounde, maydenhere, and ysope, of every one a
ha^dful, liquirice, dates, fygges, seed of smalache, and of fenel of every one
half an ounce: boil them in a pint of water and an half till the third part
be consumed. After give him the said decoccion to drink a good draught every
morning two hours before meat. And before it, or inco^tinently after it, it is
good to take asmoche as a chestnut of conserve of colewortes, or a lozeng of
diaysopi or diairis Salomo^is. Also loc de pulmone vulpis, is exceeding good
for the said disease,

An ointme^t for shortness of breath. Take.ii. ounces of oil of sweet almo^des,
one of may butter unsalted, a little saffron, and of new wax, and make an
ointment, wherewyth ye shall annoynte the breast morn and even.

Regiment. Considering ye said disease comes of to great abundance of
fleume in the lo^ges, it is good to observe the things that are showed in ye
remedies of the cough. And to dwell in a dry place far from water pooles, or
marshes, and to sleep in a moist chamber, in the which ye must have a fire
of wood without smoke. The bread must be light and pleasant, for sour bread,
brown bread, and crustes, are to be avoided. Also ye may eat no pease, benes,
nuttes, chestnuttes, nor any thing that stops or engenders wind. Fysshe
roasted upon the grydyron may well be suffered, for they be not so evil. Hulled
barley, rise, broth of colewoortes, and broth of an old cock with Isope and
saffron, are special good meat for the longes, and so are fat figs,
raysins of alican, dates, graynes of ye pyne, pignolate, and sweet almondes.
Great mouinges and chafynges, and sudden labor is very evil, yet moderat
exercise before meat is good and profitable.

Rennynge, anger, and such other passions that inflame ye heart, are in this
case utterly to be avoided.

Remedies for the pthisycke. PThisis is an vlceration of the longes, by the
which all the body falls into consu^ption, in such wise that it wastes al
save the skyn Ye may know him that has a pthisicke, for from day to day he
waxes ever leaner and drier, and his hear falls, and has ever a cough, and
spitteth sometime matter and bloody stri^ges wythall. And if ye which he
spytteth be put into a basi^ of water it falls to the bottom, for it is so
heavy

Galene speaking of this disease, says it is incurable. But when he was in
Rome, he gave counsel to the^ that had the pthisickes, to dwell in the
mountains and hye places, far from waters, and watery grou^des, and so their
life should be prolonged, but at the last they dyed of the same disease.
Nevertheless, it is good to release the pain and to help the^ as much as it
is possible. And the thing that is most wholesome for the same, is to drink
every morning a draught of asses milk.iii^ hours before meat, in the place
when of one may take the milk of a goat, newlye milked, and mix them every
time with a sponeful of poudre, made of sugre of roses. And it is good every
time to use co^serue of roses, pignolat, diadragagantum, and annoi^t the breast
before and behind, with oil of sweet almondes, may butter, and salt.

An other remedy proved by a religious man. Take two ounces of pimpernell in
poudre, and thereof make an electuary with sugre, and use it every morning.ii.
drammes with pimpernell water.iii. ounces. Water of snailes distilled is proved
good to them that be pthisike, every morning in drink, and for all the^ that
are dry and lean.

An other. Take the.iiii. cold seeds, seed of ^uinces, of each.iii. dra^mes
and a half* white popye seed.v. dra^mes, the iuce of liquirise, ysope, amidum,
gu^me arabike, and dragante, of each a dram and an half, penidies, the
weyghte of them all, make a poudre, and use every morninge.ii. drammes, and
after take two sponefulles of syrup of iuiubes or i^ stead of it drink ye
ptisan of water of vngula caballina, otherwise called horsehofe. The poudre
whereof is good for ye pthisike, wherewith Haly says, yt he healed a monk, of
ye same sickness.

Regiment for pthisyke. Ye ought to do as has been said in regimente of
Asthma, and to abstain from all spices, save saffron. Ye must likewise
abstain from al sour things, sharp things, and tarte, nor be not hungry,
nor dry: but cherysh you well with meats of easy digestion, and good
norishment, such as is coleys of capons, hulled barlye, almon milk, eggs
yolks, veale, kidde, lamb, shepes fete, and small birds living in wodes and
bushes, creauises and fyshe of sweet runnyng water, having scales. Snayles in
the shelles sodde with fenel and ysope, is very good. Ye must live merrily, and
play at some pastime for pleasure, without labouringe. He ought to abstain
from laxatiue medicines, because that it is said. Cum ^uor excedit, mors
intrat, vita recedit, which is contrary to asthma, for therein it is good ever
to be lose bellyed.

For the pleuresye. Hereafter shall be spoken of medicynes for diseases of the
ribs. And for plainer knowledge of the same, ye shall understand that sometime
in the skins that cover the rybbes, there gathers to gether blood and
cholerike humors, which enge^dre apostemes called pleuresie, and it may be
known by iiii. manner of signs. First the pacient has a great burning fever.
Secondly the ribs are so sore within, as if they were pricked continually with
nedilles. Thyrdly, the pacient has a short breathe. The.iiii. sign is a
strong cough, wherewyth the sick is vexed, and by these signs may ye surely
know a right pleuresie, that is i^ the skin under the rybbes within the body.

But there is an other kind of pleuresie without upon the rybbes aposteined,
but in that is nothing so greatte danger nor the fyeuer is not so strong as is
the other before rehearsed.

Remedy. The pacient ought to be let blood on the liver vein, in ye contrary
arm from ye side that is diseased. After the beginning of the sore, till the
third day, and after that if the pacyente be not feeble, let him blood again
upon ye same side, that the sore is. Moreover, the pacient ought to lay upon
ye sore side, every day an earthen bottel full of warm water, and to annoynte
his ribs with oil of camomyl warm. And he ought to take a glister of
chickynes brothe, milk, cassia, oil of violettes, and honey of roses, if his
bellye be hard. And instead of that glister, it is good to take an ounce of
cassia.i. hour before diner, in a lozenge, or destempered with a ptisane, or
else with water of scabiouse.

An other remedy. Take of brom flowers, of scabiouse and the great thistle
called cardo benedictus, of every one a like porcio^, meddle them together, and
let him every morning and evening, receive a good draught, and annoint the
ribs with oil of bromfloures, and it shall be good.

An other singular remedy. Take.iii. ounces of water of our lady thystle, one
sponefull of white wine, and six inner whytes of eggs well brayed, myngle all
together, and lay them playsterwyse upon the ribs, as hot as ye may suffer,

An other expert. remedy. Take.ii. good ha^dfulles of horsedong, two racis of
ginger in powder, and the^ wrappe well the donge and the ginger together in a
clean linen cloth, the^ put them in a new pot to boil with.i^ pintes of
white wine, until ye third part be consumed, and drink a draught of the
said drink every morning, and after ye have drunk the said wine, cover ye
as well as is possible and sweat.

Regyment for the pleuresy. The pacie^t ought not to drink wine* nor eat
flesh, but must be content to drink ptisane, barley water, and weak drink,
and to eat barley hulled, and milk of almons clarified, roasted apples and
great raisins as long as ye fever does last. And for to help him to spit, it
is good to use often white pills, diadragagantu^, sugar candye, and other
things said in the remedy of the cough.

For diseases in the ribs which is not pleuresie. There chances often
times a disease in the rybbes, which they call a bunch, which comes of
ventositie, wherefore it is good to apply thereto hot things, as a tossed of
bread very hot and a little bag of otes, and baye salt fried together, or of
honey which is better. Also it shall be good to put there a sponeful of hot
ashes and herbs of horehounde, rue, wormewode, margerym, ysope, bays, and
camomylle

Another remedy for the same. Take the rotes of colewort and hoppes of each an
ounce, verueyne, mugworte, sage, myntes wormwood, ta^say, and motherworte, of
each a handful, put al in a commen still and disti^ them.

Keep that water to drink, euery^ morninge.ii. or.iii. ounces, while the pain
does last.

Another remedy. Take the said herbs and roots, and beat the^ with white
wine, and str^ine them through a linen clothe, and give unto the pacient a
small draught.ii, or.iii. hours before meat.

The fourth Chapter of the weakness of the heart.
Weakness or feebleness of heart is caused when the body fails his virtue
vital, without any evident cause* or when the body is consumed, and waxes
out of color, and that the operacions vital are weak, without sensible
hurtynge of any other member, but the heart. And it may chance of an
aposteme, for the which there is no manner remedy, for all apostemacion ^f the
heart is mortal. And debilitye ^f the heart may come of heat accedental, which
one may know when there is great heat in the breast, and veheme^te thirst, and
is quenched better in drawing cold air, the^ in drinking cold water.

Remedy. Give him yt has a feeble heart, and ready to faint, either for fever or
for extreme heat, the weight of a french crown of trosciske of ca^phore,
with wine of pomegranades, and lay upon his breast toward the left side a
sendal or linen water of roses, purcelane, succorye, and sorelle. Moreover the
pacie^t ought to smell things cold and sweet, as dried roses, water lilies,
violettes and vinegre of roses.

Also it is good to take an infusion or laxe of rubarbe, ordained of some good
physician, after the which it shall be good, to apply upon the left pappe, a
lynnen cloth dipped in pla^taine water, roses, sorell, and a little vinegre.

For tremblyng of the heart without a fever, a remedy. The paciente must
take.ii. drammes of the electuary of diamargariton calidum, and the third part
of electuarium de gemmis, then drink.ii. or.iii ounces of water of buglosse
and bawme mixed together.

An other remedy. Take mastyke, lignum aloes, cloves, cinamome, nutmigges, and
cubebes of each a scruple, pills of citrons half a dram, doronici romani,
and perles, of each.xv. graynes, basile seed, ten graynes, amber greece, and
musk, of each two grains, with co^serued buglosse or colewoorts and sucket of
citrons, of each half an ounce, make an electuarye with.iiii. ounces of sugar
dissolved in white wine, and buglosse water, and use of the same every
morning.ii. drammes, and drink a little good wine after it.

Another remedy. Take water of buglosse, bawme, and borage, of all three
together a pound, of white wine half a pound, powder of cinamome, cloves and
nutmigges, of each two drammes, mingle them al well together, and then heat it
a little, and dippe a linen cloth in it, or else a scarlet, and lay it to the
left pappe.

Another remedy. Ye must make a bag of sendalle, of the said sweet spices,
or other cordyall pouders and lay it hoote upon the left pappe.

Another remedy. Take pomaunders made of lapdanum, lignum atoes, and citron
pills, maces, cloves, borage flowers, storax calamite, amber of greece, and a
little wax, and let the pacient bear that and smell it often.

An other medicine. The mawe of an old cock dried and made in powder, is
excedyng good to drink in red wine, or sweet wine with a little saffron.

For the same. It is good to drink every morning three ounces of water of
buglosse, wherein has been sodden cloves. And it is good to drink in a
morning.iii. ounces of iulep, made of half a pound of bawme water, and three
ounces of sugar. The confection of diaiacincthi, is singular and excellent for
tremblinge of the heart, but it is for noble men, not for poor folk,

For swownyng. SWownyng is a taking away of the feelyng and moving of the
body, by weakness of the heart, thorough to much auoidans of ye spirits.

Remedy. In somer for sownyng, sodainelye ye ought to cast into his face
cold water myngled with rosewater or vinegre. And if ye stop his mouth, and
nose, and bow his face unto his knees, so long as ye stop your wynd your
self, ye shall forthwith recover him. But if the said swownynge come of the
mother, ye must lay to the nose all stynkyng things, and abominable
savors, as partriches feathers burnt, castor, and assafetida, or the snuffes
of candelles. Moreover ye ought to give the pacient a little good wine, which
is the chief thing that quicklyest restores him, as says Auerrois in his
seventh colliget. Afterward rub his arms and legs, and bind them hard,
then provoke him to nese, putting a little powder of long pepper, euphorbium,
or castor, into his nose. And if by the said medicines the pacient does not
amend, this disease is incurable. And here ye may note that if swowning come
by great resolucio^ of spirits, as after great euacuacio^, other by swette,
flux of blood, or laxe, ye ought not to cast cold water on his face, nor to
bind his members, for yt should do hi^ hurt, but keep him in a place without
moving, and give him to drink a little good wine, and nourishe him with good
light metes, as pullettes, chickins, capons partriches, veale, mutton, and kid.
Whereof ye may make him good porrege, coleyses or restoratiues, distilled or
otherwise as ye shall think convenient.

The.v. Chapter of remedies for dyseases of the stomach.
THe cheste of the body does receive the meat necessary for all the members
in the stomach which is situate in the mids of the body for to digeste
the same meat into al ye members, to the which chau^ceth debilitie, or
hi^derau^ce of appetite, sometimes by error of ye eater in quality or
quantitye, and sometimes by reason of the fleume that descends from the head
like a reume.

Remedy. Keep abstinence, and eat soberlye light meats, and drink good
wine, and but little. Purge the stomach, i^ taking pylles of simple hyera
before meat.iii. or four of the said pills at four of the clock in the
morning. If the repletion be great, slepyng in the night he must lay his
hand on his stomach, or else lay a little pillowe of feathers on it, or a bag
of wormwod and margerim. Sometimes there chances such debilitye, not for
reume, or meat or drink, but by viscouse and slymy fleume, i^ the mouth of ye
stomach, which causes to engender abou^dau^ce of ventositye, and makes the
meat to swymme with little thirste. And sometimes with sour belchinges, and
inflations, such debilitye may not perfectlye be cured, but for a time mended
with the remedies that follow.

Remedies for weakness of the stomach. First ye must take pillule stomatice ii.
or.iii. hours before meat, more or less according to ye quantitye of the
fulness of the stomach, and after give him every morning.ii. hours before meat,
and one hour after supper, at every time a lozenge of a lectuary called
diagala^ga, or an other called diacimino^ which lectuaries do consume
ventosities, and with their comfortable heat, drive away the cold and the
windye complexion of the stomach.

For the same. Grene ginger is very good taken as is said before of
electuaries. And it is wholesome to eat before your meat, anyse seeds and
fenel, and when ye begin to eat, take a tossed dipped in sodden wine, or good
maluesye without drinking of the same wine, except it be a very little after
meat.

An other. Take mastike and lapdanum, of every one an ounce, mintes, and
wormwood poudred, of each a dram, turbentine, as much as shall need to
encorporate them together, make a plaster and spread it upon lether, and lay
it to the stomach. Instead of the said plaster, it is good to annointe the
stomach with oil of spikenard, and mastike, or to lay on it hoote bread
steped in good wine, on the which bread strowe powder of cloves and nutmigges.

Sometimes such debilitye of stomach comes of hot causes, and the^ it is
known by the little appetite to meat, and great thyrst, and head ache before
meat, and after, it comes stinkyng belchyng, whereof sometime follows
vomiting, and is helped on this wise.

Remedy. In such debilitye if there be great quantity of spittle, and much
desire to vomit, it is good to take.x. drammes of hiera picra, with the
decoction of cicers, or with two or three ounces of water of wormwood, and
after your meat use coriander seed prepared, and beware ye drink not
thereafter, nor sleep in the day time,

To the same. Mirabolanes condite are very good for the same purpose, to be
given once in the weke, at four of the clock i^ the morning, half an ounce, or
a hole ounce every time, and take away the stone that is within. If in the
said debilitie of stomach of hot cause, there be not abundance of spittle,
but dryness of mouth, with thrist and vomiting, stinking and fumishe, it is
good to take every morning syrup of sorell, syrup of roses, or sirupe of
quinces with endive and succorrye water, or water sodden and cooled again, and
then drink hiera picra, as before is said, or take a purgacion as is declared
in the pain of the head, coming of cholere. It is to be noted, that for such
debilitie of the stomach, ye may not wear any cerote plaster, nor bag,
wherein is hot medicines lest ye should augme^te ye cause* but it is
conueniente to annoynte the stomach with cold oils, as be oils of roses, and
quinces, and if ye will have a plaster, make it of red roses and saunders.

For abhorryng of meat. SOmetime there chances in the stomach, a disease
called fastidium, or abhorrynge of meat, whereby the person against his will
takes in hate and abhominacion all manner of meats, that is offered unto him:
likewise as a hole man takes pleasure and delight in his meat. The cause of
this disease, is replecio^ of choleric humors or phlegmatike, gross and
viscouse, which are in the stomach, and the pacie^t has great thriste, a dry
tongue, the mouth bitter, and sometime does vomit yelow cholere

Remedy. Ye must purge the cholere as has been said before, and if the
veins be great and full of blood, ye ought to let him blood on the right arm,
and on that vein which appears most: and to quicken the appetite it is good
to give him to eat or drink, such as the pacient demau^deth, although it be
not always of the best, And also it is good to give him ye iuce of
pomegranades.

For belchyng. Belchyng is a ve^tositye instatiue expulsed out of the stomach
to the mouth, and comes by feebleness, and little heat of the stomach, which
engenders wind, wherefore it signifies a cold complexion, which is cause
of such ventositie after meat. And for this disease ye shall do as follows.

Remedy for windiness of the stomach. Abstain from al fruits, and raw
herbs, pease, beans, garlike, onions, leekes, chesnuttes, course meats,
great repaste, and sleep on the day. Ye ought to take fasting, comfites made
of aneys, fenel, cummine, and carreway seeds, or else powder of the said
things myxte with sugar. Also it is good to take in a morning two hours
before meat, a lozenge of aromaticum rosatum, and if ye have an aching stomak
and cold, it is good to take every morning a lozenge of dianisi, or diaciminu^
or some other comfortable lozenge, and to drink after it a sponful of good
wine.

Another remedy. Ye may take a little galingale, with a little wine, or powder
of cumine with some good wine.

Another remedy. Drink every morning fasting, two ounces of wine wherein has
been sodden baye beries, anyse, and carraway seeds, of each a little. And if ye
put to it a little pure frankensence, it would be ye better. And without, it is
good to lay a bag full of camomyl flowers, rue, wormwood, and maiorim made
in powder, or for to annoynte the stomach with oil of wormewoode, rue,
spikenard, or bays.

Sometimes such belching and ve^tositie comes before meat, and it is caused
of fleume viscouse, or watrish, that is in the stomach.

Remedy. Ye must purge the fleume with pillule cochie, or electuariu^ of
diacartamy as has been said in the remedy of peine of the heed caused of
fleume. And ere ye give the purgacion, ye ought.iii or.iiii. morninges two
hours before meat, to take two little sponefulles of sirupe of wormwood or of
mintes. After the which purgacion, it is good to annointe the stomach with oil
of mastike, nardine, wormewod or lilies and for to wear upon the stomach a
cerote being made like a plaster, which ye may bye at the Apotecaris, called
cerotum Galeni, or a bag made of maiorim, and camomil flowers, and take every
morning a lozenge of the electuary above named, or of diagalanga.

Item ye shall note, that if the person can not take a purgacio^, to avoid
sufficiently the fulness of the stomach, which hyndreth the digestion of meat,
he must take a glister, and afterward pills of elephangine, or of hiera
simplicis, before diner or supper. Moreover, if before dynner ye feel an
heuines in the stomach, ye ought to take one of the said pills, half an
hour before meat.

For the hicket. Hicket or yeaskyng, is an evil moving of the virtue expulsive
of the stomach provoked by the virtue se^sible, to expulse that that does
anoye. The said hicket does sometimes happen by reason of emtines, by debilitie
of the stomach after long sickness, or by flux of blud or laxe, or by some
other strange euacuacion, which is very perilous and oftentimes mortal.
Therefore it is good to give restoratiues to the pacient, and to give him soft
eggs, almo^ milk, hulled barlye, culleyes of capons, or other things of good
norishmente, and of easy digestion.

Also ye ought to stop the laxe, and to make the pacient to sleep long and
annointe the stomach with oil of sweet almons. Sometimes hicket proceeds of
repletio^ of matter humorous, or of drink and meat which enge^der gross
ventositie, and not very easy to consume. If ye stomak be ouercharged with
meats, keep a long abstine^ce til digestio^ be done, or else vomit and anoint
thy stomach with oil of dil, mastike, wormwood and castor. If humors contained
in ye stomak be cause of ye said hicket, take an ounce of hierapicra with water
of wormwod or else pills a^te cibu^.3. or 4 hours before meat, and eueri
morni^g folowi^g ye operacio^ of ye said hierapicra, take a lozenge of dianisi
or diaciminu^* or else a few anise seeds and carawaies.

Regiment for all manner hicket. It is good to keep long and often his breath,
to nese, to travail much, to endure great thyrste and also to sleep long.
And it is good to cast cold water in the face of him that has the hicket, and
to threaten him, and so put him in fear, and to anger him, or else to provoke
him to heaviness, for by these things the natural heat is revoked and
fortified within, and causes the hicket to cease.

For vomityng. Vomiting comes sometimes without great violence, and thereby
one gets health, wherefore ye need not give him any remedy, for it is a good
accio^ of the natural virtue of the stomach. Sometime vometinge comes by a
great violent mouinge of the virtue expulsive of the stomach, for the evil
things contained in the same.

Remedy. One may well help a man to vomit, geuyng him warm water with a
little oil to drink, or else to put the finger in his mouth very low, or a
fether wetre in oil, the better to vomit and mundifye the stomach, if so be
the person have a wide throat, and that vomityng do not hurt him much, as be
they that have but small and strayte throtes, and long necks and lean, and he
that has an evil sight, for all these it is evil to vomit,

Sometimes vometing comes by weakness of the stomach, caused of a hot and
evil complexion, ye shall heal it after this manner.

Remedy. Take sirupe of roses, quynces, myrtylles, with water sodden, and cold
again, or else water of purcelane for to refresshe and quench the thirst that
chances commonly in such a case. And it is good to anoint the stomach before
dynner and supper, with an ointment made of oil of roses, and quinces, with
iuce of myntes* and a little wax, or else to make a plaistre of mintes, roses,
wormwood, and oil of roses and lay it to the stomach

An other. Take frakensence, mastike, of each half an ounce made i^ powder, and
me^gle them together, with the white of an egg, and a little barlye flower,
then sprede it on a little towe, and lay it to the mouth of the stomach. At ye
latter end of diner, it is good to take a morsel of marmalade without drink.

Sometime vometyng proceeds of eiul and cold complexion of ye stomach.

Remedy. Anoint the stomach with oil of spikenarde and mastike, or else make
an ointmente of the said oils, with a little mastyke, coral, and wax, and
anoint the stomach morning and evening.

An other medicine. Make a bag of wormwood, maiorym, and dry myntes, of
each a little handful, cloves, galingale, and nutmiges, of each half a dram,
the said things poudred, and put betwyxt.ii. linen clothes with cotton
enterbasted and applied upon the stomach, are of wonderful operacion. Instead
of this ye may take the said herbs dried on an hot tilestone, and put them
in two linen cloutes upon the stomach.

An other manner. Ye may take a toste of breed and stepe it in the iuce of
myntes, and cast upon it powder of mastyke, then lay it upon the stomach, and
from three hours to three hours let it be renewed,

Otherwise. Take two handfulles of myntes, and a handful of roses sodde in
wine, tha^ take two ounces of tosted breed, and moist it in wine, and
incorporate it with powder of mastike, and the said roses and myntes, and make
a plaster whereof one part must be laid to the stomach when the pacient would
eat any meat. The said plaster is also good in all hot causes, if for the
said wine, ye sees the myntes and roses, and stepe the toste in vinegre.

To comfort the stomach after vomytynge. It is good to give unto the pacient
every morning an ounce of sirupe of wormwood, or myntes, in stead of which
it is convenient to take a loze^ge of aromaticu^ rosatum, or diagalanga.

For the same. Take evening and morning.iii. hours before meat.ii. cloves in
powder, with a sponefull of the iuce of mintes, or half a sponefull of rue,
dried, with a little wine,

Also it is good to take poudre of cloves, and lignum aloes the weight of a
crown, with wine.ii. hours before meat.

A glystre for the same. And here ye must note, that in all vomiting, if the
pacient be hard bellied, it is good to take a le^itiue glistre made of the
decoccion of march mallows, mallows, violettes, and, barley with oil of
violettes, home of roses, and a little cassia. And if the vomiting come of
coldness of the stomach, or of cold water contained in it, add unto ye said
glister, wormwood, ysope, rue, and cammomylle in the sethyng. And for oil of
violettes, take oil of camomil or of lylyes, and give the pacient a pil of
mastyke before meat. And ye shall understand, that myntes brayed, and myngled
with oil of roses, and applied upon the stomach, is very good for all
vomiting.

For pain of the stomach. Ache or pain of the stomach comes somtymes of
wind, and it is called dolor extensiue, the which is helped with applyi^g
thereto a sponge wet i^ wine, wherein has been sodde^ wormwood, rue and camomyll.

Also ye may help it as has been said in the remedy of hycket or yeaskynge,
and as shall be said hereafter in the remedy for all peynes of the stomach.

Sometimes the said pain comes of repletio^ of humors, and it is called
dolor aggrauatiuus. Which ought to be cured by purgacion, in giving of cassia
newly drawn out, hiera picra, or pylles stomaticas, or of hiera simple, taking
some syrup before the purgacio^, as is showed in the remedy of debilitie of
stomach.

Somtymes pain of the stomach comes of cholere, or salt fleume very
sharp, and ye pacient has bitter taste or salt with great thirst, and he
fealeth heat and mordycatio^. Wherefore it is good to drink sirupe of roses,
or occisaccaru^ simple with sodde^ water and coled. Instead whereof ye may
take endive water, succory and purcelane with one part of wormwood water, and
then take an euacuatyue that purges cholere, as is said in the remedies for
pain of the head coming of cholere, or let the pacient vomit, in giving a
sharp syrup of sorelle, with warm water, tha^ put his finger in his mouth so
that he may vomit.

Sick folks often diseased in the stomach, demand nothing else, but to
take away the pain, not regardinge ye time while the matter may be purged by
vomiti^g, glister or other laxes.

Also there caunceth sometime so great pain and sharp, that for debilytie of
virtue it is good to leave ye cause and stick to the swaging of the pain*
wherefore it behooves to proceed in manner following.

Remedy for all pains of the stomach. TAke camomil, melilote, wormwoode,
mallows with their roots, leaves of bays, parietary and peyryalle, of each a
handful, lineseed a pound, fenugreke half a pound, anees, and fenel seed, of
each half an ounce.

The said things bruised and well sodden in water, wet therein* sponges, and
the licour well pressed out, and applied unto ye stomach, one after an other,
and warmyng them again, when they begin to cole, swage all manner pains of
ye stomach, And afterward ye must annoi^t the stomach with oil of dylle and
camomylle.

An other remedy. Take an hogs bladder, and fyl it of the said decoction,
and lap it in a linen cloth, and lay it to the stomach and warm it again
when it is cold. But after ye have made diverse such applicacions. Ye must
annoynte the stomach with the oil aforesaid. If the pain be removing from
place to place, it signifies it comes of ventositi. Therefore lay unto it a
bagfull of meal, salt, and commin dried together.

An other remedy. Take a sponeful of hot ashes, dew them with good wine,
and cover the^ with a linen cloth: that it go round about the spoone, and
lay it to the stomach.

An other remedy. Take a sheue of breed metely thycke, toste it, and wete it
in hot oil of camomyl, as hot as it comes from ye oven, or in oil of
spyke, and wrappe it in a linen, and lay it upon ye pain.

An other remedy. Put a great boxyng glass upon the nauyll, and let it be
there.i. hour.

An other remedy for pain of the stomach. Take two drammes of diaciminon, of
dianisi, of diagalanga, and drink it with a little good wine, an hour or.ii
before meat. To drink two ounces of maluesye, with a little of one of ye said
electuaries, is very good for such pains as proceed of coldness or ve^tosite

An other remedy. Take, a dra^me of galingale in powder, and give it to drink
with a little hot wine, and above al things for pain of ventositie, a
singular remedy is to drink a little Castor, with good wine.

An other. Likewise to drink two hours before meat three or four ounces of
the decoction of mi^tes, anneis seeds, comyne and fine frankensence.

Also it is good to drink an electuarye called aromaticum, whereof ye may
receive one lozenge every morning fasting.

An other special medicyne. Take half an ounce of iuce of mintes, and two
dra^mes of ye juice of wormwoode, lignum aloes, and cloves and xilo balsamum,
of each in poudre half a scruple, all myxt together, and drunk warm.ii. or
three hours before meat, are excedyng profitable.

The syxt Chapter, of remedies for diseases, of the liver.
THe liver is one of ye principal me^bres and chief instrumente of generation
of blood and of other me^bres, it lies on the right side under the short
rybbes, ye which is ordained to digest the meat the second time, and thereof
to make humors that nourysheth al ye members of man's body, by his natural
heat, comforted by heat of the heart. But somtymes it is grieved by blood in to
much aboundau^ce, or by cholerik humors, which cause to great heat, or else
by fleume that does diminysh the same*

A remedy for an hot liver. If the liver be to hot, because of to much
blood, the person has red urine, hasty pulse, his veins great and full, and he
feleth his spattle, mouth and tongue sweter then it was wont to be, wherefore it
is good to be let blood of the liver vein on the right arm, and to use
letuse, sorelle, purcelane, and hoppes in pottage, and sometimes to drink of
ye waters of the said herbs fasting, or else endive water to refreshe ye liver.

Regiment for disease of the liver coming of blood. YE must abstain from
drinkyng wine, and eating of flesh, and if at meat or dri^k ye must
otherwise, ye wine ought to be watered, and the flesh boiled with lettuse and
sorel. It is better to drink ptysan, or stale cydre, and eat brothe of
peason, almon milk, hulled barlye, or roasted apples, and damask prunes,
whiles ye heat be diminysshed. And ye ought every day to provoke the duty of
ye womb, either by means of suppositorie, or else other wise.

If the liver be over hot by cholere, the pacient has his vryne clear and
yelowe, without measure, great thirst without appetyte, and feleth great
burning in his body, and commonly has his bellye bound, and has the face
yelowe.

This disease of the liver chances most in somer, and for it ye must take
twyse a day an ounce of syrup of endive, or violettes, with a good draught of
ptisane, drink it two or three hours before meat, and also at night to
bedwarde, and so continue three or four days.

Instead of the said syrupes ye may take three ounces of ptisane, or three
ounces of water of endive, cicorye and sorell meddled together, for each time.
Then the fyfth day in the morninge early, it is good to drink a purgacio^
that pourgeth cholere, which shall be made as follows.

An excellent purgacion for to avoid cholere, and may be given to men of al
ages. TAke half an ounce of cassia newly drawn, a dra^me of good rubarbe
infused a night in water of endive with a little spikenard, and an ounce of
syrup of violettes, mix all the said things with three ounces of ptisane or
whaye, and drink it warm as before is said in the other.

Boles for the same. Instead of the said medicine (which is to costlye for
poor folks) ye may make boles of half an ounce of cassia, and three drammes
of electuarium de succo rosarum, and eat them three hours after mydnyght, and
sleep after it, but all the day ye must keep ye chamber, and if ye had rather
drink it tha^ eat it, mixed the said boles with whay, or endive water, and
dri^ke it at v. of the clock in ye morning, but sleep not after it.

Other medicines laxatyue. Take half an ounce of diaprunis laxatyue, mixed
with.iii. ounces of decoccio^ of french prunes, water of succorie, and drink
it warm at five of ye clock in the morning, or else six hours before meat.
In stead of the said diaprunis, ye may take half an ounce of electuarium de
succo rosarum, and make a laxe as before is said.

And it is to be noted, if the pacyente be very weak or easy to work upon,
ye may take away a dra^me both of ye diaprunis, and also of succo rosaru^.
After the said purgacio^, it is good to refresh the liver with laying to
without on the right side, under the nether ribs, a plaster of cerotum
scandalinu^, spread upon a linen clothe of the bygnesse of.iiii. fyngers, or
bath the said place with a lynnen cloth wet i^ water of endyue, plantayne and
roses, warmed together. Moreover it is good to take every morning before meat,
a lozenge of triasandaly, and to drink after it endive water.iii ounces.

Regiment for heat in the liver. The pacient must abstain from flesh and salt
fish, strong wine, garlike, onyons, mustarde, and such other hot meats. It is
good to use broth of pease and veriuce, lettuce, popie, spinach, and borage,
and sometime a little vinegre if he be not grieved in the stomach. This
regimente is good also in time of pestilence, and of to great heat.

A Iulep for the heat of the liver. TAke half a.li. of rosewater, one quarter
of water of endive, and v. ounces of sugre, make a iulep, of which ye shall
drink fasting a good draught. And if ye will needs drink for thyrst between
meals, let it be myngled with.ii. parts of water of the well. And if ye will
have it more colynge, add unto it two ounces of vinegre or the iuce of a
pomegranade.

If the liver be cold, for the phlegmatike matter that is in it, the person
has his water white, and out of color, the face pale, and his mouth watery,
little blood, and feleth heaviness about his liver.

Remedy. He ought to drink in the morning earlye.iii. or.iiii. times a
sirupe called oximell diureticum, with the decoccio^ of smalache and perselye,
or with waters of smalache, and fenell, and after he must take to purg the
fleume a medicine made as follows. Take six drammes of diafinicon, if the
person be strong, or half an ounce if he be weak, and distemper it in.iiii.
ounces of the decoccion of the roots of smalache, percely, fenell, and drink
it luke warm v. or.vi. hours before meat.

In stead of the said medicine one may give.ii. drammes of agaryke in
trosciskes with water of smalache, or else good fenel.

An other medicine laxatiue. Take half an ounce of diacarthami, or half an
ounce of diaprunis laxatiue or as much of electuarium dulce, with three ounces
of percely water, smallach ysope, or fenell, take it five hours before meat.

Regiment. The pacient must drink good wine, and use ginger, cinamome, graynes
of paradyse, anyse and fenelle, and hot herbs in pottage, as sage, ysope,
time maiorym, and avoid all raw fruits, and also raw herbs.

Moreover it is very good to make a plaster of smallache, wormewoode,
spikenarde in powder, with oil of dil myngle it, and lay it upon the liver.

Against stoppyng of the liver called oppilacion. OPpilation or stopping
comes sometime in the holownesse of the liver, and it is known by compassion
and pain of the stomach, and is healed by medicines laxatiue, as it is
declared before.

And sometime the oppilacion is in the veins of the holowe part of the liver,
and is perceived the^ by ye grief which the pacient feleth in his back, and
in his reins. And it is healed by things that open, as by sirupes of the
three roots, sirupes of bisantius, syrupes of maydenheere, and by drynking ye
decoction of raysins, fenel, percely, smallache, cicory, or waters stilled of
the same herbs. Also roots of alisaunder is good for the same. etc. Sometimes
the said oppilacion comes of gross blood, earthy, and melancholic, which
the members send unto the liver, and because that such engendered blood can
have no issue, nor has any way to depart to any other members, therefore be ye
veins of the liver stopped up by the grossenes of the said blood. And it is
known by the water, yt is very hie colored, and clear.

Remedy. Give the pacie^t medicines that perce, and subtle, as is wine of
pomegranat^s, syrup of endive, with the decoction of cicers. The^ let him
blood on the liver vein, and eueri morning eat a lozenge of triasandaly.
Sometime ye said oppilacion comes of aboundau^ce of some humor viscouse,
cold and flegmatike, stoppyng the veins of the liver, and the^ ye urine is as
clear, as clear water.

Remedy. The pacient must drink every morning the sirupe of oximel squilityke,
with half a draught or more of the decoctyon of roots of smallache, fenel and
percely. Sometimes unto women comes oppilacions of ye liver, by reteynyng of
their pu^gacio^s. Wherefore it is good to let them blood on the vein called
saphe^, which is above on the hyer side of the ^steppe.

And let them take after the change of the ^one, seven or eight morninges any
p^ate called Trifera magna: eueri time an ounce. And after drink three ounces
of waters of mugwort, hysope and fenell, or the decoction of these ^erbes, or
else the roots aperityue, which be smallache, percely, fenel, alisaunder and
asperage, boiled in water with the third part of odoryferous white wine.

Medicines for the liver that may be easily had at al times. Take a good
handeful of liuerworte that grows upon the stones, and an other of fumetorye,
with as much of hartestonge, and sees them in whaye clarefyed, and drink
them every day twyse.

The liver of an hare dried and made in powder, is good for all diseases of ye
liver, as affirms Auicenne and other of the Arabians.

Also for heat in the liver sees barberies in whey, and drink them.

The.vij chapter, against the dyseases of the gall.
THe gal is placed in the holownesse of the liver, to receive the superfluitye
of cholere, and to send it to the bowels to be avoided with the grosser
excrementes, to thintente to cleanse the blood of the said cholere.

To the which there comes oftentimes oppilacions in the parties about by the
liver, or beneth in it self next the bowels, causyng great pain, by reason
whereof the cholere turns again unto the liver, and there is me^gled with ye
blood, and spread abrod into all the veins of the body, and bredeth a disease
named iaundis (ictericia in latin) whereof be three kinds* yt is to say, yelowe
iaundis that proceeds of cholere called citrine or yelow, grene iau^dis which
proceeds of grene cholere, and black iaundis that proceth of black choler,
which is called melancholy, and commonly comes of the oppilacion of the
spleen.

Remedy for iaundis. If the iaundis happen in an ague, before the seventh
day, the pacient is in great danger of his life, as Hipocrates says. But if
it appear in the sixth day, being a day judicial or cretike of the ague, or
after, it is a very good sign.

And then ye must succoure nature, in refreshyng and digesting the choler, with
sirupe of violettes, given in the morning with water of morel, or syrup of
endive, with water of cicorye.

After this purge the cholere as is said in remedies of the liver. And tha^
give him a lozenge of triasa^dali, with reubarbe, every morning two hours
before meat, and drink a little waters of endive, and cicorye, before the said
lozenge.

Moreuer, it is good to bathe the liver as it is said before, and wash the
pacientes eyes with vinegre, and woman's milk, and drink a ptisane made of
barley, liquirice, prunes, and ye roots of fenel. And if (when the fever is
paste) the iaundis tarieth still, the paciente must drink water of fenel, and
morelle, with the syrup of occisaccarum compost, and it is good to lay a
quick tenche upon the liver.

Iaundis sometime comes without fever, and may be healed by the things
that I declared here before, or thus.

An other Remedy for the Iaundis. Take four ounces of radisshe, and give it
the sick to drink five morninges.iii. hours before meat. Instead whereof it
is good to drink eueri morning four ounces of the decoction of horehounde,
made in white wine, or as much of the decoction of celidonie and barberies,
with a little honye and saffron.

An other remedy. Take worms of the earth called angle twitches, and wash
them in white wine, then dry them and drink them a sponful at a time, with
white wine.

An other. Ye may let him drink.vii. or viii. days together in the
mornings, a good draught of the decoccion of politrichon, or of maydenheare.
The decoction also of woodbynd, or ye wa^es of it distelled in a commune still,
is a sovereign medicine for ye said disease.

An other synguler remedy. Take cowes milk and white wine of each a pint,
and distill them in a still* keep that water a monethe, and then give it to the
paciente three ounces in the morning two hours before meat, and likewise after
supper* when he goes to bed.

The eight Chapter, for diseases of the spleen.
THe spleen is a me^berlo^g^ soft, and spongy, being in the left side joined
unto the holownesse of the stomach, and to the thycke ends of the ribs, and
to ye back, ye which is ordained for to receive the melancholy humors, and to
cleanse the blood of the same, for by ye mean ye blood remaneth pure and net.
Wherefore it is good nourishyng for all the members, and is ye cause that makes
a body merye, but oftentimes there happens oppilacio^ or debilitie whereof
comes the black iaundys.

And sometimes it is greater, fuller, or grosser then it ought to be, by
overmuch melancholy that is not natural, caused of the dregs of the blood
engendered in the liver, and does hindre generation of good blood, wherthrough
the members become dry for defaute of good nourishyng. And therefore the
pacient is called splenetike, which ye may know by that, that after meat
they have pain in their left side, and are always heavy, and has their faces
somewhat enclining unto blaknes.

Remedy. In oppilacions and apostemes of the spleen, whether it be of hot
humors or of cold, he ought to be let blood on ye spleen vein called
saluatella, which is in thee left hand, between the little finger, and the next
finger which they call medicus. And ye must draw out but a little blood.

And if the pacient feel a burning on the left side, and has a dry tongue
without appetite, it signifies that such disease of the spleen, is caused of
an hot humor. Wherefore ye must give the pacient four or.v. morninges
fasting, syrup of endive water, and hartestong, then a purgacion made as
follows, thus.

A goodlye purgacion to avoid melancholy. Talk half an ounce of succorosaru^
and three ounces of the decoction of the roots of capparus, and hartestonge,
and make a drink the which ye may mynister in a good day to take purgacyons,
six hours before meat.

An other. Instead of that drink ye may temper half an ounce of cassia, and
three drammes of diaseny, in three ounces of whey, or hartestong water, and
drink it as is aforesaid. After the said purgacion, ye ought to annoint the
spleen with oil of violettes, or oil of lyneseed, or to make a plaster of
the s^de oil and lineseede, and the roots of capparis, and lay upon the
spleen.

Also after the said purgacion, it shall be good to lay upon the spleen,
nyghtshade, purcelane seed, and powder of plantaine, myxte with vinegar like a
plaster, and if the pacient have more appetite then he can digeste, and that
he have belchinges of the stomak sometimes sour in the mouth, it signifies yt
the passion splenetike comes by a cold humor melancholic.

Remedy. Ye must drink sirupe of sticados, or hartestong, or oximel
diureticum, with water of the decoction of hartestonge, epithime, smallache
roots, percelye rotes, tameriscus, and mintes, or else only with the decoction
of hartestong, and roots of cappars. And then after purge it from such
melancholy humor, with an ounce of diacatholicon, and two drammes of dia^ene,
dissolved in three ounces of the said decoction, or water of wormwood, or
hartestonge.

And after this ye must annoynte the side of the spleen, with oil of lilies,
oil of dyll, fresh butter, marye of an ox, and hens greece, or of a dog,
meddled together, or annoint the said side with dialthea.

And the pacie^t ought to drink white wine, and the decoction of hartestong,
evening and morninge, taking two fygges, with powder of ysope, peppe^ or
ginger, but he may put no water in his wine, and oftentimes he must ea^
cap^ars, with a little oil and vinegar.

If for the oppilacions of the spleen, the pacie^t has a pale color, or
leady in the face, and a whitenes of eyes, taking away of appetite, pain in
the left side with hardness, and has his excrementes black, it is a sign
of the black iaundys,

An expert medicine for all diseases of the spleen. Take the leaves and coddes
of ^eny^ the bark of an ash tree skraped and cut, maydenheere, hartstong and
liquirice, seth them all in clear whaye, and after they be strayned, drink of
it twyse or thrice a day till ye be amended.

Remedy for the black iaundis. Ye must give sirupes and purgacions as before
is said, and to be let blood of the vein saluatella, and afterward diverse
times evening and morning, to apply ve^toses upon the spleen with out
scaryfyinge. Afterward ye must lay on it a list, wette in good veniger, and
keep it there so long as the heat remains in the said list, and warm it
three or four times.

Afterward annoint the spleen with dialthea, and so continue four or five
days, and other four or five days lay upon it a plaster made of two
ounces of gum armoniake, dyssolued in veniger, and spread upon lether.

And if by the foresaid things the paciente be not eased, the doctors of
physic say, that he must receive the medicines again, at the least once in
every month, for half a year together.

Regiment for all oppilacions. The pacient ought to use things of easy
digestion, and in small quantyty, and ought to abstain from bread to little
leuened, cakes, tartes pasties, pies, hogs flesh, beafe, and poudred meats,
and fumishe. Fish, limmons, peason, beans milk, chese, rise, and firmentie,
all fried meats, drink after supper, wine and apples, which with all other
like trouble the body. Also ye must abstain from much mouyng or exercise by
and by after meat.

It is good to use capars, asparage, hoppes, brothe of dried peason, with
perselye, or his roots, small birds of the field, kyddes flesh, young mutton
lamb, chickins, feysauntes, snytes, partriches, scaled fyshe, of sweet runnyng
water, with percelye, and vynegre. New laid eggs potched in water, are very
wholesome, and ye may drink white wine or claret, only at meals.

Also it is good to use cresses, sage, isope, mintes, fenell, and percelye,
succorry, scariole, and beetes, and singulerly, to take fasting half a
sponefull of read colewortes sodden, and to eat often anyse seeds, and fenel.

The nynth Chapter, for diseases of the bowelles.
IN a person be six guts, three small, which are situate over ye nauil, and
three great, which are placed under the nauil.

The first is called dudenum, because it is.xii. inches long.

The second is called iei^num, for that nothing remains in it.

The third is called ylis, because it is long and small.

The fourth which is the first of the great ones, is called monoculus,
because it is like a sack, and has but one mouth and in that same sometimes
are worms engendered or ventositye, that causes pain of the belly on the
right side, which is not the very colicke. The.v. they call colon, because it
has many holowe places, and it proceeds from the right side under the liver,
and it makes his reuolucion unto the left side, wherein is engendered the
colyke which is despersed by all the bellye more then any other disease.

The.vi. is called rectum, because it is nigh unto the left kydney, and goes
even right down into the foundament.

Hipocrates calls the three bowels that are next the stomach, ilia, that is
to say small guts, and the peyn of one of them is called yliaca passio, a
very sharp pain. Rasis calls it domine miserere. Likewise also colica
passio, is called of the gutte colon, which.ii. dyseases are sisters,
forasmuch as they come oftentimes both of one cause, yt is to say of ye
oppilacion of ye bowels.

Remedy for the collike and of yliaca passio. Forasmuch as those diseases are
exc^dynge egre, sharp, and almost importable of pain, whereof many times
follows defeccion of the strength, with variety of medicines, ye ought in
continently for to help them.

First when the said peynes come by the stoppyng of the belly, ye must give
him a glister mollificatiue, made of the decoction of mallows, violetes,
beetes, anyse seed and fenugreke, with cassia, and common honey, and oil olive,
and afterward, the herbs of the said glister bruised and fried, and laid hot
betwixt.ii. linins, and applied to the belly.

And if by this means the peine cease not, let the pacient sit unto the
buttockes, in the said decoction, and after with dialthea* and butter anoint
the nauyl.

And if the said glister do not work sufficiently, make another of the same, or
else give him a suppositorie which is long enough, made of pure honey, and ^al
gemme.

For the wyndy collyke. Through wyndines oftentimes, comes the colica passio,
or iliaca, and then it appears that the pain is chau^geable, and mouyng from
place to place, and is known also by the romblynge which is a noise in the
bowelles, with grypynges, and great pain.

Remedy. Take mallows, beetes, and mercury of each a good handful, margerim,
rue, bays, and camomyll, of each a little handeful, anyse seeds, common* of
each an ounce, make a decoccion, and take thereof a pynt and a half, and
dissolve in it an ounce of cassia, half an ounce of triacle, and.iii. ounces
of oil olive or of camomyl, and make a glister, the which must be given warm
unto the pacient, long before or after meat. Instead of the said glyster, ye
may give him a pound of oil of lineseede, which is a synguler thing to take
away al diseases of the belly. Also it is good to make a myxture with oil of
hemp seed.

For to appease the pain caused of wind. First make a glyster of maiuesaye,
oil of camomyl, or dyl. If for the said glysters the pain cease not, or else
the pacient will not take the^, take a great spong or else a felt of a hatte, and
stepe it in wine of ye decoccion of rue, camomyl, maiorym, anyse seeds, and
commyn. And afterward lay it upon the pain, as hot as ye pacient can
suffer, and.iiii. times in ye day, it is good to let him drink wine wherein
has been sodden rue seeds, careawayes, and comyne. Drink at every time a
little draught, and each day keep abstinence from eating and drynkyng much of
other things til ye be perfectly hole.

A supppsitorye for the wyndye colyke. Take a dram of rue, in fine powder,
and half a dra^me of comyne dried and poudred, and with honye sku^med, make a
suppository.

A plaster for wyndye colycke. Take two handfulles of rue, in fine powder,
myrre, and comine poudred of each half an ounce, four eggs yolks, and make
two playsters with honye, and lay on the one at night, and the other in the
morning, upon the belly. Water of camomyl, or a decoccion of the same dronken,
is good for them that have such diseases. Also a dried acorne in powder, and
given to drink with white wine, is very good.

If ye know that the pain of the bellye comes thorough wind, apply upon
it a great ventose without incisyon, for by that means the said pain will
surely go away, or dymynyshe. If not, it shows that there is some humors
that causes the said pain, as fleume or cholere.

If by fleume it comes, ye must make a glister of a pint of the decoction of
camomyll, rue, wormwood, maiorim, mellilote, centaurie, anise seeds* and
fenell, and in the same decoccion put half an ounce of hiera picra, or half
an ounce of diafinicon, and.iii. ounces of oil of dil, or of lillies.

Also ye ought to give to the pacient sirupe of wormwood, and to make
applicacion upon his belly as has been said before, or to lay unto it
gromyll seed and baye salt dried together, which laid upon the belly, is
likewise good for the wyndye collicke.

If after the said things the said peine continues, ye must make a
purgacion as follows.

A purgacion for colike coming of fleume. Take.v. drammes of diafinicon.iii.
ounces of wormwood wat^r, and make a drink, the which received fasting, iiii.
or.v. hours before meat, is very profitable.

For pain of the colicke coming of choler. If the said pain comes of
choler, which is known when by the applicacion of hot things ye peine
increases, ye must make a glister of violets, or give him half an ounce of
succorosarum with ptisan, endive water or wine. And the next morning let him
drink a ptisane of the decoction of prunes, and violet flowers, and anoint ye
belly with oil of violettes, or wete a lynnen cloth in cold water, and lay it
thereupon. If it do continue still, the patient must be set in warm water up
to ye hanches, and if the pain come of cold, ye must annoi^t his belly with
oil of bays, and gosegrese.

For the wyndy colyke. If it be wind, make a glister of new milk with a little
oil, and the yolke of an egg, for it is very good. Also it is good to let
him drink a dram of hiera picra simplex, with.ii. ounces of water of cardo
benedictus, or purcelane or wormwood, and to make a plaster of leeke leaves
fried in oil and vinegre, and laid upon the bellye. Like ward the back.

Also nephretica is paynefuller before meat, and the colicke is ever more
grievous after. And often ye colicke chau^ceth sodenlie, but nephretica
contrary, for commonly it comes by little and little, for evermore before,
one shall feel pain of the back with difficulty of urine. Item there is more
difference, for the colicke shows vrynes as it were colored, but nephretica
in the beginning is clear, and white like water, and after waxes thycke, and
then appears in the botome of the vessel like red sand or grauel.

Remedy for pain of the reins. YE must use things aperitiue to cause you
make water, but before ye ought to loce ye belly in taking an ounce of cassia,
an hour before meat* but if your belly he hard bound, ye must take a glister
made as hereafter follows* before ye take the said c^ssi^.

A glister for nephretica passio. Take of march mallowe roots two ounces,
mallows, violettes, beetes, and march mallowe leaves, flowers of camomylle and
mellilote, of each a ha^dfull, melon seed and anyse seed, of each half an
ounce, wheat branne an handful, and decocte it, and take thereof half a pound,
and distemper in it an ounce of cassia, and an ounce of course sugar.ii. ounces
of oil of violettes, and an ounce of oil of lilies, make a glyster. Instead
thereof ye may take cowes milk, with two egg yolks, in manner of a glyster.

And it is to be noted, that in such a disease, the glystre must be great in
quantity, or else ye should make wrestynge and roumblyng in the bellye, which
should be an occasion of more ^aine. After this operacio^, if the pain be not
apeased, ye must give another glister, after the operacio^ of which, the
patie^t ought to go into some bath, vp^ to the nauyl, wherein must be sodden
mallows, march mallows, beetes, pellitary, lyneseed, fenugreke, and flowers
of camomil, with mellilote, al put in a bag in the said water, and ^ubbe him
with it: and at his going out of the said bath, ye must take two ounces of
sirupe of maiden hear, and radishe, with iii. ounces of the decoccion of
lyquirice. Moreover after the said bath, ye must ^aye upon the pain, a
^ultes made of herbs, and flowers, with one of almondes, being in ye said
bag, and.ii or iii. morni^ges take* v. or ^i. ounces of ye broth of cicers,
sodden with lycorice, or else drink water of ^itory, of ^esses, or of rotes
aperi^, the which waters are very good for to purge the grauel and the stone*
(...) a very good electuary for the skins* ^alled electuarium ducis, or
iustinum, philantropos, or liontripon, if one take a dra^me or two after
opera^ion of a glister, or o^ cassia, or a pille (...) ante cib^, and after to
drink o^e of the said waters, or else a little white wine warmed.

Regiment as well for the colyke, as for the reins of the back. HE must fly
from al evil qualities of the air, as wind, rain, great heat, and great
cold, specially to keep him from warming the r^nes against the fire, nor to
heat it by any other means. Also he must abstain from great repletion at
one meal, and to long abstinence from meat, for all these ^ille the body full
of ill humors. Also sleep not on the day, specially after meat, nor lie not
on the romes, when ye are aslepe.

And ye ought to eat no ^alt^ysh, no^ no b^efe, nor other gross meats. Lik^
wise one ought for to beware (...) ^o^les bredde up in the water, spice^ ^
pastrye, and bread not very well leuen^d* specially tartes, cakes, and other
pasti^ made of flower. But above al, ye must bewar of white meats, as milk,
chese raw fruits, hard eggs, and as much as is possible, keep your self from
ire, envy, melancoly, and other like affeccio^s.

For the flux of the womb. IN all fluxes of the ^elly, cause ye excreme^tes to
be dulye serched, for if the disease be such, that the meat comes out, even
as it was received, or not half digested, ye said flux is called lienteria.
If great aboundau^ce of watery humors have their issue by low, the said
flux is named diarthea, which is as much to say as flux humorall. And if
blood or matter appear with the excrementes in the syckenesse, then they call
it dissenteria, which is a great disease and a dangerous for to cure.

Remedy for the flux lienteria* FOorasmuch as this flux comes for ye most
part of great debilitie of virtue rete^tiue of ye stomach, for ye great
moistnes of ye same, it is good to give ye sirupe of wormwood, and honye of
roses, taki^g of it with a spone, or drink the with the water of betonye,
fenel, and wormwood, and if it so be the paciente do desire to vomyte, it
would be good for him, or let him take half an ounce of hiera simple, with two
ounces of water of wormwood, and if the pacient be strong enough, add thereto
two drammes of diafinicon.

And after this ye must comfort the stomach with oil of mastyke, spike,
mynt, wormwood, or nardine, or with a plaster called cerotu^ Galeni, spread
upon lether, and after laid upon the stomach, or make a bag of wormwood,
myntes, and maiorim dried, and lay it upon the stomach.

In the morning take a lozenge of aromaticum rosatum, and a little rind of
citron co^fit, and before every meal take a morsel of conserua quynces.

Remedy for the flux humoral called diarthea. THe said flux ought not to be
restrained before the.xiiii. day, if nature be not very much enfebled. And
sometime it comes of hot causes, as of cholere, and then one ought to give
unto the pacient to drink before his meat syrup of ribes, syrup of roses, or
syrup of quinces, with smythes water, and in ye stead of those sirupes* ye
may make a iulep thus.

A iulep for the flux humorall. Take rosewater, buglosse, and plantayne,
every one half a pound, of all the saunders two drammes, and with a quartro^
and an half of sugre, make a iulep. In the morni^g two hours before meat, it
is good to give the pacie^t old conserve of roses, or a dram of trociskes of
roses, after he has drunk one of the said syrupes, or of iulep of roses with
a little of smythes water, whereof the pacient ought to drink at every time when
he is a thyrst.

If in the said flux there be egre matter, and the strength of the pacie^t any
thing constaunt, ye may minister the ^a^atorie that hereafter ensues.

Take red roses, barley, plantayne, of every one a handful, seth them, and in
the streynyng add.ii. ounces of oil of roses, one ounce of honey of roses,
and the yolke of an egg, and give it in the manner of a glister.

Sometime it is expedient to take a medicine by the mouth, and it is made as
thus,

A medicine for the flux Take the ryndes of myrabolane citrine bake^, one
dram, reubarbe a little dried upon a tile, half a dram, syrup of quinces
one ounce, water of plantaine.iii. ounces, myngle al together, and let the
pacient drink the^ four hours before meat, and tha^ give him a glister
retentiue made as thus.

A glyster for the flux. Take oil of roses, of quinces, of mastike, of every
one three ounces, bo^e armoniak in powder.ii. dra^mes, meddle al together and
give it as a glyster.

Another. Take the iuce of plantayne, of popye, of bursa pastoris, and oil of
quinces, of every one.iii. ounces, myngle them together, and give it for a
glister. And if the bowels be excoriat, ye shall give this peculiar remedy. Take
half one pound of milk, the water wherein gaddes of steal has been
quenched, ye iuce of plantaine, and oil of quinces, of every one.ii. ounces,
bole armenye one dra^me, goats tallowe one ounce, and make them in a glister,
but without upon the stomach, ye must lay this oyntmente that here follows.

An ointment for the flux. Take oils of roses, quinces, and mirtilles, of
each an ounce, oil of mastik, half an ounce, powder of coral, and nuttes of
cipresse, of every one a dram, myngle all with wax, and make an oyntme^t.
Here is to be noted, that the glisters that are given for to stop a flux,
must be very little in quantity. Ye may heal the flux of dis^enteria with
gyuyng things before declared for the flux humorall, and take before your
repast.ii. drammes of co^serue of quinces, or of marmelade of quinces. And he
ought to drink water, wherein has been quenched gaddes of stele, and ye must
avoid diversity of meats, and give your self to ease, and to quiet, and
sleep a great while. And it is good to use grewel, clean barlye, and almon
milk, with a little amidum* and set ventoses upon the bellye without cutting,
which thing is also good in all fluxes of the body. If the said flux
humorall proceeds of fleume, it shall appear of the excrementes yt are watery
and flegmatike, and than ye ought to give.iii. or.iiii. morninges, sirupe of
wormwood, or of mint, after purgacion as is here following.

A purgacion for the flux humoral. Take.ii. dra^mes of mirabolanes dried on a
tile, half a scrupule of agarike in trociske, half an ounce of sirupe of
mynt, or.ii. ounces of water of bawme, and make a pocion that shall be
received.iii. or four days, before meat.

If ye will make a iulep, take water of mynte, and of bawme, of every one half
a pound, sugar a quarterne, and make a iulep, of the which one may drink
evening and morning after meat every time a draughte. Every morning it is
good to take a lozenge of the electuary that follows.

A noble electuary for the flux, Take powder of diagalanga a dram and a
half, of read coral and mastik, of every one a scruple, trociskes of terra
sigiliata half a dram, the barks of citrons comfit, and quinces, of every
one three drammes, sugar dissolved in water of mintes.iiii. ounces, make an
electuarye.

Oils of wormwood, minte and of narde, and mastike, are very wholesome to
annoint withal the bellye, and the stomach, for the said flux.

And the things declared of the flux lienteria, be very good in this case,
t^king ever after meat, a morsel of marmalade. Red wine is very good in this
flux, to drink at meat with the water of a smyth, and likewise a^ spyces are
good for the same purpose.

Medicines to restrain the flux, of whatsoever cause it be. TAke the peysil
of an heart, and dry it into powder, and drink it. The water of oken buddes,
or the very acornes dried and made in powder, and dronken in red wine, is
very good.

Item the mawe of a young leuerette, with the juice of plantaine, is exceeding
profitable.

The tenth chapter of diseases of the matrice.
First against superfluous flux of ye mother, in the which ye must consider
whether it do come of to great quantitye of blood, and then it is good for to
open the vein saphena, and abstain from al things that multiplye the blood,
as eggs, wine and flesh. Or whether it comes of cholere, and then ye must
receive a little sirupe of roses, pomegranates, or ribes with water of plantain.
Than purge ye choler yt gives such sharpnes to ye blood, by.x. drammes of
trifera sarracenica, with two ounces of plantayn water, or the medicine of
reubarbe, written in the treatise of the flux humorall.

After purgacion ye may give every morning a lozenge of triasandaly, or a
dram of trosciskes of roses, in powder, after drink two ounces of plantayne
water. And if such flux of the matrice, happen of the watrinesse of blood,
give her to drink four or.v. morninges, honey of roses with a little water of
wormwod, afterward purge her with a dram and a half of agarike in trosciskes,
and half an ounce of trifera sarasenica, myxte with water of minte, and of
wormwood.

Ye may know the causes of the said flux, by anointing a threde or cloute in
the said blood, for if it has the color of vermilon, it sygnifyeth that the
flux comes of to much blood. If it appear a little yelowe, it sygnyfyeth that
the disease comes of ye subtilytye and sharpenes of the blood, overcome with
choler. And if it has a color like the water in which new flesh is
washed, it betokens the blood is much watrye.

And after ye have purged the principal cause of the disease, your second
intencion shall be, by and by to staunche the said issue. Wherein also one thing
is to be noted, yt if nature be accustomed to avoid any superfluites, by
continual course of the said flux, it would perchance be inconvenient for to
stop it, wherefore if ye see no ieopardye, ye may restrain the said flux this
wise.

Remedy for to stop the said flux. Take trociskes of white amber, and make
them in powder, and give a dra^me every morning, and anon after, drink an
ounce, or.ii. of water of plantayne.

In stedde of these trociskes, ye may make a powder of sanguis draconis, bole
armeni, white amber, and red coral, drinking one dram thereof, with
plantaine water as is aforesaid.

An other medicine to staunche the said flux. Take two ounces of old
conserve of roses, of the seed of plantaine, two drammes, sa^guinis draconis,
bole armeny, of every one a dram and a^ half, white coral and read, ana
one dram, make a confeccion with syrup of myrtilles, and give it to drink,
morning and euenyng two hours before meat, at every time the quantity of a
mean chesnutte.

For the same. Apply ventoses under the breasts twyse a day, before dinner
and supper, and use to bear about your neck or hold always in your hand,
red coral, ^aspis, or a stone called hematites, which is a singular remedy for
to stop every kind of bloody fluxes, if it be borne, or tempered in wine and
drunk, or make thereof a powder, and use of it every morning with a little wine.

For reteyning of the flowers. Sometimes there chances unto women when they
can not have their due purgacions, to fall in grievous kinds of sickenesses,
for ye auoydaunce whereof, it is good to help the^ and provoke the said
purgacions by such things as open, which must be given at such time of the
moon, as the said women were wont to have the same.

And if ye see the woman's blood to be to gross and thick, so that she can
not have any such purgacion, ye must every monethe give her the syrup of
fumetorye, with the decoction of borage, and buglosse, and let her bathe her
self, with fresh water hot.

And when she goes out of the bath in to the bed, she must receive the
foresaid syrup and decoction of the herb called rubea tinctoru^ or madder,
sodden in clear water. In stead of syrupes ye may take the very juice or
decoction of the herbs.

And if the woman's blood be slimye, cold, and flegmatike, then she must
drink sirupe of sticados, and of oxyniel diuretike, and afterward take the
pills called setide, and of agarik. And every morning after that, she must
take a dra^me of trosciskes de mir^ha* with two ounces of ye decoction of
Juniper beries, or two drammes of trifera magna, and thereupon drink two ounces
of water of Mugworte.

And if perchance ye can not have these things at need, ye may take.iii
ounces of the decoction of alisaunders, the root of smallache, cinamome, and a
little saffron, and let her drink thereof two times a day, and eat no meat
thereafter during four hours.

Moreover it is a proved and expert medicine, to give the first day of ye new
moan a dram of powder made of borax, which the goldsmithes do occupy, with
as much cinamome, and a little water of smallache. Also it is very good to have
the vein opened, which is called saphena, that lies outward between the
insteppe and the heel. And if case so be, that the said retention come of
superfluitye, or to much abundance of fat, then the chief remedy is to
suffer much hunger, and to eat very little, much exercise and labor to
provoke sweat, and to sleep as little as may be possible.

But if it come of great debility and weakness of the body, when the natural
strength is overcome by reason of some sickness, or after a long ague, in
this case ye may not go about to provoke the said purgacion, but with all your
endeavor seek to restore nature, and give the pacient things of much
nourishmente, as potched eggs, good flesh, and good wine, with other like.

Sometime the said retencion comes of the excessive heat of nature, in some
women, specially such as be valiant and strong as men, and those that are
wont to much labor, by reason whereof the heat of their bodies is so strong,
that they need none of the said purgacions, for the superfluities of their
bodies, are sufficientelye consumed of the heat alone, therefore they have no
need of the said remedies.

For chokyng or suffocacion of the matrice THe matrice or mother in a woman,
oftentimes mounteth up, toward the midrefe and the stomach, with intolerable
pains, and is called, suffoca^ion, because that it is choked, or ouercharged
with some evil and superfluous matter, as by stoppyng of the due purgacions,
or to much abstinence of Venus, whereby is often chanced shortness of breath,
pain of the head, swownynge, tremblinge of the heart contraccion of members,
and otherwhyles death without remedy.

A medicine for the said disease. Ye must rub the legs and wrestes of the
arms vehementlye, and bind them with cords or with garters, till they wax
sore, then set ventoses upon the legs, and al to chafe the stomak^ specially
beneth round about ye nauill.

And then ye must constrain her to smell stinkyng things as assa fetida,
galbanum, pertriche feathers brent, and the quenchyng out of candels, with other
such, but beneth ye must apply things of swet odor, as gylofloures
maiorim, lignum aloes, amber, ciue^, and a trociske of gallia muscata, and let
her drink a draught of this receyt, that follows.

A drink for pain of the mother. Take one dram of mithridatum, and dissolve
it in an ounce and an half of water of wormewod, and give it to her to drink,
before she go to meat.iiii hours,

Diverse goodly medicines for diseases of the mother whatsoever be the cause.
Take the rasing of iuery, and the rasing of an hearts horn, with the hear of
an hare, dried and made in powder, and as much of goats claws burnt and
poudred if they may be gotten, or instead of it shepes claws, take all these
and use to eat them in your potage or otherwise, to stop the fluxes of the
matrice.

An other to provoke them. Sees marigoldes, nept and sauyne in good ale, and
drink it with a good quaintitye of saffron, and a little honey or sugar.

Item.xv. black seeds of pionie, dronken in wine with saffron, purges the
matrice of humors, and other.xv. of the red seeds, stauncheth it again, or any
other flux of the mother.

An other. These herbs are good to purge the matrice, Rue, peony, sauyne,
betonye, nept, vale^ian, maidenheere, horehounde, sauery, percely, gromel,
alisaunder, marygoldes, smallache and time.

The.xi. Chapter of the cure of the stone in the reins, and in the bladder.
Pain of ye stone is one of ye most enormous pains that the body of man is
vexed with, for by it many times ye natural virtues are distroied, women lose
their fruit before ye time, cruel and perilous accidents commonly do increase,
yea and oftentimes death without remedy.

Wherefore it shall be expedient to the comfort of the poor folks, and other
that be grieved, to write some good and wholesome medicines for avoiding of the
stone,

And seeing that all authors do affirm the stone to be engendered by reason
of the great heat that is about the reins, streitnes of the condites, and
abundance of gross and slimy fleume, or of brent choler, which by the said
excess of heat, is as one would say, baken or dried as claye is in the
furneis, and so at last becomes an hard stone, therefore it is chiefly to be
noted that without amendyng of the forsaid causes, all that ye do minister
for to break the stone is either hurtefull to the pacient, or else of small
effect. For the which cause it is very necessary that the pacient keep a
sober diet.

And for the better understanding, ye shall know, that all wynes (whether they
be sweet or sharp, gross or subtyl, white or read) are in this case utterly
re^ected.

Pulses also of what kind soever they be, as pease beans, and such, and al
gross flesh, and water fowls, and fowls of great bodies, as bustardes,
cranes, and such like, are in this case very dangerous and noisome.

Also ye may eat no kind of fruits, except it be a few melons, ripe prunes in
small quantity, and pomegranades, with a little sugar and coriandres.

Of herbs, ye may eat borage, buglosse, percely, lettuse, mintes* spinach and
succorye in broth of veale, or of a young chicken. Nepes also and rapes and
radyshe, in a small quantitye, may be well enough permitted.

Potched eggs are very good in this case, with a little vergeous, but in any
wise beware of hard chese for that is oftentimes the only cause of the said
stone. All shell fishes are to be avoided except it be a creuyshe, or a
shrympe, measurably taken.

Ye must, also take heed that ye eat no pepper nor hot spices* nor no meats
that are salt, sour or heavy of dygestion, and that ye lie not on your
back on nights when ye are aslepe. And ye ought to keep your raines cold and
moist, and to let your back be untrussed in the summer.

After ye have used this regiment or diet by a certain season, it shall be good
for you to take an ounce of cassia newlye drawn out of the cane, and eat it
with a little sugar in the morning.

This ye must use every second weke, til in time your reins be metely well
cleansed of the same, and every day eat a little cassia, upon a knifes
point, to keep your bellye moist: for that is one of the things that are
most required in the said cure.

And at diverse other times when ye be disposed, ye may take a little of this
receite hereafter, which has great virtue to mundifye the raines, and to
bring the humors to equalitye, with releasyng of the pain, and bringynge out
the gravel.

A goodly sirupe to mundifie the reins. Take the broth of a young chicken
sodden till the bones fall a sondre, three pound, melon seeds a little bruised an
ounce, percelye roots, and alisaundre rotes.iii. ounces, damask prunes,
sepesten, of each.vi. in nombre, great raysyns half an ounce, clean licorice
x. dra^mes, waters of borage, endive, and hoppes, of each.iii. drammes, and
with sufficient white sugar, boil the^ al unto the consumpcion of the half
and more, and afterward streine the^, and make a goodly sirupe.

This is a thing of excellent operation, and an hye secret in mundifying of
the reins, if ye keep the diete as is before described. The dose of it is one
cyath or a little cupful in the morning earlye, and sleep after it a little. If
ye would have the foresaid sirupe to purge more choler, then put in it a dram
of fine reubarbe, with a little cassia.

Hereafter follows a powder of excellent operacion in breaking of the stone*
TAke the kernels that are within sloes, and dry the^ on a tyle stone, then
make of them a powder by it self: after that take the rotes of alisa^der,
percely, parietarie, and hollihocke, of every one a like much, and sees the^
al in white wine or else in ye broth of a young chicken, then streine them out
into a clean vessel, and when ye drink of it, add as much of the said powder
as ye think conuenyent, half a silver spoonefull or more, for without doubt
it has great effect in bryngyng out the gravel.

An other expert medicine for them that have the stone. There grows in the
galls of some oxen, a certain yelowe stone, some times in bygnesse of a
walnut, somewhat long and bryttle. If ye take that stone and make of it a
powder, and eat it in your pottage, the weight of one scrupule or more
according to your strength, it is a singular medicine to them yt can not piss
for stopping of ye conduites.

An other singular medicine. for the stone. Take the seeds of smallache,
percely, louage, and saxifrage, the rotes of philipendula, chery stones,
gromell seed, and brom seed, of every one a like much, make them in fine
powder, and when ye be diseased with ye stone, eat of this powder a sponefull
at ones in pottage, or in brothe of a chycken, and eat nothing after.ii.
or.iii. hours.

The.xii. chapter of remedies for the gout.
THe pain in ye ioi^tes of a man's body, as in ye hands and feet, is
generally called arthritis, or gout, which proceeds some time of debility of
ye synowes being lasshe and unable, to consume the humors, that continually do
flow unto them.

And for the most part they are all derived from the membre mandant, yt is
to say the brain, for he is very gross, and engenders ever humors in him
self, by reason whereof, much of the said humors are derived into the nuke
and muscles of the back, and fro thence they descend into ye feet, and then
it is called podagra, or to the huckle boon, and the^ it is sciatica, or else
into ye hands, and there it is chiragra.

Remedy. Forasmuch as all the said kinds comes of one beginning, as is
showed before, and for the better expedicio^ in that we will be brefe, ye shall
first take away the superfluous moisture of the brain, which is the root
and fountain of all the said diseases, and that ye may do four manner of ways.
The first is obseruaunce of dyete inclynyng toward dryness, and to avoid all
fullness of meat and drink, and not to sleep in any wise shortly after
meat. And ye must beware yt ye eat no vaporous meats, nor thyn wine, nor
drink much after supper. And if perchance ye pain be very sharp, it shall be
much wholesome to the pacient, to abstain from all kinds of wine, and to use
him self to small drink, which thing if he can not do, then let him drink
claret wine mixed with a good quantitye of water.

The second is to purge the brain ones a month, with the one half of pills
of cochies, and an other half of pylles assagareth. And in time of harvest,
and of somer, with pills sine quibus, and pills imperial, whereof ye shall
give one dram ye night before the full moon, and the day following ye may
give him to eat a little broth of cicers, with a little quantity of raisins of
the sun.

The third is to repress the fumes that ascend into ye brain after meat,
which thing may well be done by eating of a little dredge* made of anis seed
and coriander.

The fourth is to perfume the brain with certain things confortatyue, as for
example thus.

A good perfume against moistures of the brain. Take fine frankensence,
sandrake and mastike, of every one an ounce, lignum aloes, a dram, make them
all in gross powder, and perfume therewith stoupes made of flax or of cotte^,
and lay upon the head.

And when ye have by this means well and duly comforted the brain, and
de^ended of, the original cause of the said disease, ye shall proceed to take
away the matter conioynt, that is descended unto the synowes, and ye shall
begin thus.

First ye must preserve the body from engendring of humors, in taki^g every
morni^g next your heart a conserve made of akornes, and of flowers of rosemary,
mengled with a little nutmigge and mastike, and if ye be of power, ye may dri^ke
a good draught of ypocras or other spyced drink, after meat at dynner and at
supper.

Secondarily, ye shall understand, yt whosoever does entend to be helped of
the gout, he must every year be purged two times, preparing first ye matter to
digestion with sirupe of sticados, and duabus radicibus, with the one half of
waters of sage, prymroses and margerim, in manner of a spiced iulep with
cinnamon, taken.v. continual mornings.ii. hours before ye eat any other meat.
And after yt, ye must receive a dram of pylles called arthretikes, or
hermodactiles, or of both together egal porcions. Or take half an ounce of
diacartami two hours after night, and of diaturbith, of every one two
drammes, with a little syrup of hisop.

The rest of the said curacion shall be accomplished with the applyinge of
diverse local remedies, whereof there be sundry kinds and sorts here declared.

Ye ought to rub the place that is sore with oil of roses and a little
vinegre, and after sprinkle upon the same, fine powder of myrtylles. Another
plaster also as hereafter follows.

A plaster for the gout. Take of the emplayster called mellilote.ii. ounces,
populeo^ an ounce and a half, red roses, mirtilles, and flowers of camomyl,
of every one a dram, make a plaster and lay upon the goutye ioynte.

An other. Take the juice of colewortes and of walworte, and with bean flower,
and powder of red roses, and the flowers of camomyl, make a plaster and lay
it to the sore.

An other. Take oil of roses, cru^mes of bread, yolks of eggs, and cowes
milk, with a little saffron, sees the^ together a little as ye would make a
pudding, afterward sprede them upon cloutes and lay upon the sore.

An other. Make lie of the ashes of rosemarye, or of oak, or of bean stalks,
and boil in it, sauge, moleyne, prymrose, camomil, and mellilote, and receive
ye fume upon ye sore place, or wette cloutes in ye said decoccion, press them
and lay them upon the pain.

All the said remedies are very good to swage the pain of the gout, after the
which done, it is necessary to go about the comforting of iointes and sinowes,
and to that intent ye may apply the grese of pyes, oil of camomil and of
althea or holihocke, oil of a fox, oil of earthwormes, oil of prymroses,
turbentine, oil of gromel brayde, wherwythall, or with one or two of them ye
may annoynte the sore place, and comfort both the synowes and ye joints
marvelously. Also this ointmente that follows is synguler good for the same
purpose.

Take five or six handfulles of walworte, and sees them well in wine: then
strain them, and with a little wax, oil of spike and aqua vite, make an
ointment wherewith ye must annoynte the place morning and euenyng every day.

An other ointment for the gout. Take a fat goose, and pluck her, and
trymme her as if she should be eaten, then stuff the belly within with two or
three young cattes, well chopped in small gobbettes, with an handful of baye
salt, then sow her up again, and let her roste at a small fire, and keep the
dryppyng for a precious ointment against all kinds of goutes, and other
diseases of the iointes.

Medicines for the gout appropriate in all cases. Take cowes donge, and sees it
in sweet milk, and lay a plaster to the gout hot.

Also the yolks of eggs, woman's milk, lyneseede, and saffron al together in
a plaster, swageth the diseases of the gout.

And if ye be disposed to brake thee skin, and to let ye humors issue (as by
such many one is eased) ye shall make a little plaster of black soap, and
aqua vite, which will blister it without any great pain.

Also very old hard chese cut and sodde^ in the broth of a gambon of bakon,
and afterward stamped with a little of the broth, and made in manner of a
plaster, is a singular remedy for diseases of the gout, and was first
practiced of Galene the prince of all phisicians,

A prayer to God for help, against the perturbacions of the mind. O Lord my
God almightye father, and ruler of my life, my health, my strength, my redemer,
and protectoure, se^de unto me the heavenly beams of thy holy spirit, to
illumine the darkness of my sinful heart, and to guide me to thy holy place.
Show me ye light of thine aboundau^t mercy (O Lord) that I may no longer
sleep in deedly sin. O only father of light which in very deed do lighten
every man that comes into this world, for thy great mercies sake it may
please thee, to lyghten the eyes of mine heart, and to endue me with the spyrite
of grace, that I may look upon mine own sin, the great offenses wherewith I
have offended thee, and to know yt in my self there is no manner strength, for to
wythstande* the death, but only through thee. And I beseech thee, o lord, to
cover these my carnal eyes, yt they se no vanity, and give me thy grace, yt I
fall not into concupiscence, to thend I may eschew al evil things, and give my
mind hollye to the obseruacion of thy commandments. Lord God I beseech the,
that syn may neither raygne nor tarry in me, and that I be not subject to mine
own fleshly appetytes, but yt I may expel out of my thoughts as unlawful
lusts, so that my soul and al my mind, may be set holy upon the. Lord God
suffer not my soul to be oppressed* but receive me into the proteccion of thy
holy hand, and despise not me thy simple creature, whom thou haste redeemed with
ye preciouse blood of thine only son Jesus Christ. Thy mercy O lord is above
al yt thou haste made, for thou do differ the punyshme^t of the wicked, if
perchance they would amend at last, thou love all that thou haste made, and
hate none but for their own iniquities. And when the wicked turn again to
the, and cry unto thy holy name with all their hertes, by and by thy mercy
is ready to receive the^, eue^ as I most detestable si^ner come with heart
co^trite unto thy mercy this day: that I may obtain remission of my sins. To
the I cry out of ye very depth and botome of mine heart, go not away from me my
maker and redemer, but hear the supplicacio^ of my prayer. For thou art mine
only hope and mine enheritaunce in the land of livers. I have sinned, I have
sinned (O Lord) and heaped up iniquity even against heaven, and before the.
But I knowledge mine offenses, and desire mercy according to thy goodness.
Destroy me not (O Lord) among siners, nor let me not descend into the lake of
death, that I unworthy creature being made worthy only by the bounteousnesse
of thy grace, may from henceforth live in thy commandments, love, honor,
and praise thee. For all heavenly powers, angels, thrones, and dominacions,
laud and praise thy holy name* world without end. Amen.

Thus ends the Regiment of life.
Here begins a goodly brief tretise of the Pestilence, with the causes,
signs, and cures of the same: composed, and newly recognized by Thomas Phayer
studious in Philosophy and Physic, to the aid, comfort, and utility of the
poor.
To the good reader a preface of the author.
AFter that God almightye, father and creatoure of all things, had by his
unsearchable providence, ordained mankind to eternal felicity, and joy at
the beginning, he thought it not enough to have created him of nothing, a
body most excellent, perfect and ^ure both in me^bres and senses, above al
other his creatures here in earth, but also of his inestimable goodness
endewed him with diverse and sundry gifts of grace, as wi^te, understanding,
mind and reason, whereby he might not only (as nere as is possible) approach
unto him in the knowledge of his heavenly majesty (as concerning soul) but
as well ymagine, search and find out, by all manner ways, aids, comfortes and
remedies, whereby also the body might be saved and defended, against all
assaults of any thing that should anoy it: so bounteous and plentiful are his
gifts impla^ted in our nature, that o^ al creatures we might have been the
happiest. But after that sin had entered into ye world, and by sin death (as
saint Paul says) our corrupt lyuynges have made us more corrupt, (...) yt
now the life which we lead here is not only not very pleasant unto ^ most
of men, and if it be to some, ye it is uncertain, mutable, and short: but to
many other it is excedyng grievous, sorrowful, and tedious, subject to
dyseases, infortunes, and calamytyes innumerable, which for the most part do
increase daily, ever the just vengeance of God falling upon us for our
great abhominacions, and without doubt will evermore endure, unless we do
repent, and live in his commandments.

And to pass over all the hole swarms of so many, both old and new dyseases,
wherewith the body of man (alas for our sins) is continuallye tourmented and
vexed, to speak nothing of these common and familier infyrmytes, as lepryes,
agues, cancars, pockes, goutes, palseys, dropsyes, rumes, phtisys, and other
out of number, which as if they had conspyred to fight against phisicions, can
scantly be appeased with any cure of medicine, what pain or punishment can
there be imagined to put us i^ remembrance of our own wickedness, cause us to
detest our abominable liuinges, and to call for mercy with lamentable hearts,
more then this only plage and scourge of god commonly called the pestilence? Is
there any syckenesse that is half so violent, so furious and so horrible, as
this sickness is? What disease is there in the world, so venomous i^ infecting,
so full of pain in sufferynge, so hastye in deuouryng, and so di^ici^e in
curing, as the plage is? And yet are we now a days, so stubburne and so
froward, or else so drowned in the mire of fylthy and carnal appetites, that
we nothing do regard these open and manifest tokens of our condemnacyon in
the syghte of God, but apply our hole studyes to persevere in our sins ever
worse and worse: wherefore it is no marvel though the said disease
increases, but rather to be feared, that almyghtye God will pour his
indignacion upon us with some other kind of plage, more violente and terrible
then the same is.

But to them that do repent, and put their only trust in him, who can do
but wonder at his infinyte benygnitie, and goodness, that even in the middeste
of all the said affliccions, prouydeth them of remedies lest they should
dyspayre: cures and amendeth all their grievous sores, languours and diseases:
he created medicine even out of the earth, and of the wise manne it shall not
be despised. And surely among all other sickness, is there none so
dangerous* as is the foresaid plage, for any man to cure by the way of
medicine: for it turns it self in so many manner of kinds, likenesses and
fashions, yt they yt are infected, are many times dead, before it can be known,
that they have ye same disease. Which thing although many noble and most
excellent learned men have in times paste worthily considered, and therevpo^
according to their singular knowlage and industries given to them of God, have
written upon the causes, signs and cures of the said disease, so exactly, so
learnedly, and with so great eloquence, and cunnyng, that there seems nothing
either to be omitted, or possible to be added, to the perfect curacion of
the same: and so it would be hard for a man of my slender wit, to invent the
thing that they have not invented, much more in vain should I go about to
write the same things yt they have written already: Yet notwythstandyng
forasmuch as this disease when it once beegynneth, enfecteth none so much, as
the common people, among whom it is not given to all men, to understand the
foresaid volumes, if they had them present, much less can they get their
health by their own imaginacions or experimentes, specially when almost no
physician will vouchesafe to visit any such infected of the common sort (so
great is the danger of this cruel syckenes) by reason whereof, the pacientes
cast themselves oftentimes into despair, and so many of the poor people,
creatures of God, which by good medicines might well enough recover, for
lack of such knowelage are utterly destroyed and cast away, to the great
pitye of al christian hearts, continual ruin of the common weal, with
diverse other grievous and huge incommodityes, as is daily seen where the
said disease reigns.

I therefore at the reverence of almyghtye God, and for the love that I bear
unto mine even christen, according to the talent wherewith the lord has
endewed me, under the correccion of my friends the phisicians, have taken out
of diverse and sundry volumes, of the most famous authors, that have most
exactly written of the said disease, one peculier, certain and compendeous
treatise, addinge thereunto such wholesome and singular remedies, as I my self
have proved and know to be effectual, in curyng of the same.

Desyring god almighty, the only author and restorer of all health, so to
gyde the hearts of his suppliauntes, that the said medicines may take effect
in them, according to his gifts: and as for my labor, I do nothing desire,
but the love and favor of the gentle readers, whom I pray God continuallye
to increase in all goodness.

A treatise of the pestilence. What is meant or signified by this word
pestilence,
PEstilence is none other thing but a venomous infeccio^ of the air, enemy to
the vital spirits, by a certain malicyouse and evil property (and not of any
quality elemental that is within it self.) For even as pure triacle is a
coumforter of life, not because of heat, cold, moistnes or drynes, but
forasmuch as out of al his co^posicion there redoundeth a certain form
agreing to the form of the vital spyrites of our body: so is the foresaid
vapor enemy to our natures, not for any quality, as is said before, but for
that, yt his proporcion is direct eue^ contrary to our vital spirits,
consisting in ye heart, which vital spirits, if by ye will of god, and ordinary
diet, be stronger in the pacie^t tha^ ye foresaid vapor is, they drive it from
the body, and will not be infected. And if it happen that the foresaid
spirits be weaker then the venim, or the body full of humors apt to
putrefaccion, then it does incontinent assaut the liuelye members, and except
remedy, bring the body quickly to destruction. But when we do say the vapoure
to be venemouse, we mean not that it is a poyso^ of it self in deed, for then
should every creature be indifferently infected, and none should escape that
draws it in breath: but I call it venemouse, for that it is of such a naughty
qualitye, yt it may be lightlye converted into venime, that is to say, apt to
burning and corosion, as do mercury sublimed, quick lime or ratten bane, and
other such like kinds of venims. Thus ye may perceive that all the great
danger that is in this disease, comes of the noughtines of humors, which are
made apt to receive the said vapors, and not by violence of ye infected air
only.

Of the.iiii. rotes, or causes princypal of the said disease, whereof it does
arise and grow, and why it raygneth in one time more then in another.
THe first root superior and cause of the pestilence is the will of god,
ryghtfullye punyshynge wicked men, of which root the holy scripture
treats in many places, as in Deu. the xxviii. chapter. If thou wylt here the
voice of thy Lord God, and work and fulfill al his commandments, yt which I
command to the this day, thy god shall make the more excellent then all the
people that be upon the earth. etc

And in diverse other places, he gives many blessings to them that keep his
laws.

And likewise to the people rebellinge and breaking his commandments, he
threateneth many curses, as where he says.

If thou will not here the voice of thy lord God, to keep and work all his
commandments, which I command the this day* there shall come upon the
these curses, and catch the. Thou shall be cursed in the city, and in the
fyelde, thy barn shall be cursed, thy living shall be cursed, the fruit of thy
womb shall be cursed, the fruit of thy ground shall be cursed, the heardes of
thy sheep and cattle, shall be cursed, thou shall be cursed at thy commyng^ in,
and cursed at thy goinge out. Also a little after he says: The lord shall ioin^
to thee the pestilence, till he has consumed the out of ye earth, to the which
thou shalt go to take possession. The lord shall strike the with pouertye,
fevers and cold, burning and heat, an^ with a corrupt air. etc,

Also in an other place. The Lord shall strike thee with the pestilence o^
Egypt, and the part of thy body b^ the which thou auoydeste thy donge, with
a scabbe and itche, and shalt not be able to be cured thereof: and let the
heaven that is over thee be as hard as brass by cruel constellacions, and the
earth on which thou do tread, be like iron that ever wastes, and waxes
worse and worse.

There be many other malediccions which our lord has threatened the re^ellious
people wythall, expressed in many places of holy scriptur, but these may be
sufficient as touching our entente, to show that many times the cause of this
disease is the vengeance of almightye god, rightfully punishinge men for their
offenses.

The second root of the pestilence, which does depend of the heavenly
constellacions. NOow that we have spoken of the first rote superior, of the
which this disease proceeds, it is also convenient that we declare somewhat of
the second root or cause superior, that is to wete, of natural influences of
the bodies above.

And ye shall understand, that according to the saying of Marsilius Ficinus (a
man of excellent knowlage, and no less learning) in his book De triplici vita,
and in an other which he writes also of the pestilence: that among al other
heavenly dodyes, there be two bodies called evil and malicious, that is Saturn
and Mars, which oftentimes by their unwholesome influences, are cause of
manyfolde infyrmityes, specially of the pestilence. Saturn^ through cold, and
Mars by excess o^ heat. Saturn through cold, is the cause of reumes, of
the leprye called elephancia, and al dyseases commyn^ of cold matter.

Mars by reason of his heat, brings forth fevers pestile^cial, spitting of
blood, water under the mydrife, and the pleuresye, the which is a disease
engendered like an apostome of choleryke matter in a thick panicle, or f^me
underneath the ribs.

A provident physician among many other things, ought to consider the entering
of the su^ne into Aries, by true equacion of the houses and planetes, for that
influe^ce has more dominacion, the^ have all the other influences of the hole
year beside, except the superior coniuncions of the planetes, or else some
great eclyps. And this entryng of the sun into Aries, passes all the
entringes of the sun into any other sign.

Therefore you must consider how the lord of the.vi. house in the figure is
disposed, for he is lord of sickness, that is to say, you must consider
whether he be impedite or no, and if he be impedite, there shall be many
sickenesses, according to his nature and his house, that is the.vi. house, as
by example thus.

Be in case that Saturn is the lord of the.vi. house, and some earthy sign is
in the same house, then most commonly the sickness of that year, shall be of like
nature, that is, cold and dry.

And over this thou must consider, whether that the lord of the.vi. house has
any aspecte with the lord of the house of death, or the lord of the house of
death to him, then most commonly the end of those sickenesses that are cold
and dry shall be death.

And likewise as it is declared of the entering of the sun into Aries, so it
must be said of the coniunccions of ye sun and moon, through all the year,
marking ever the nature of the planet being in the.vi. house, if there be any,
and the aspectes to those two houses aforesaid. etc.

Also he must consider, whether this entryng of the sun into Aries, or any
of the coniuncions of the luminaries, be in the eighte house or no, for then
it should be much worse.

And note, that if the eclipse of the sun or moan, be in any of the angles of
the nativity of any person, or in any of the angles of the reuolucion of his
natiuitye, then he shall suffer sickness according to the nature of the same
angles. And if the said eclypse be in the myddeste of heaven, he shall suffer
hurt in his honor and fame: and if it be in the ascendente, he shall be
grieved in his body, and so forth of other houses, but it shall be the worser,
in case the eclipse be in the ascendent, specially if it be the eclipse of the
sun, for yt is the more dangerous of the two, for as much as the effect of ye
eclipses of ye moan, is always finished in the space of one year at the most,
sometime in less, and for the most part in three months. But ye effect of
the eclipses of the sun, is very long or it come to pass, sometime.12. years,
as witnesses Ptolome in his centiloquio.

The Astrologians take the judgment of the year, by the entryng of the sun
into Aries, in the first minute, and if it then happen that all the ill planetes
be in the eight house, which is the house of death, they say that year shall
rise a pestilence, and diverse other sickenesses, according to ye nature and
condition of those planetes.

And if the moon in the same entryng be nere unto the conjunction of ye son,
as sometime happens, within.ii. or three, or four degrees, that year shall be a
death and pestilence universal and that shortly after that coniunccicion,
specially at the coming of the moon and the evil planetes to infortunes, and
as ye infortunes be, yt effects shall so appear, be they more or less.

Furthermore, ye must consider the great coniunccio^ of ye.ii. hier planetes,
as was the coniunccion of Saturn and Jupiter, the year of our
lord.M.ccccc.xxv. in the last day of Auguste, and ye.xiii. degree of Scorpio:
which coniunccion changed from an ayrye triplicitie to a watery, and it was in
a watery sign, whereof there chanced very much rain, and thereupon followed
the excessive humectacion or moystyng of man's body, which by and by turned to
putrefaction, and thereupon ensued peryllous and corrupt fevers, pestilences,
and agues, specially because in the coniunccio^, Saturn was exalted, in the
north above Jupiter, which Saturn is of ill influence.

Of the third root or cause of this outrageous sickness. THe third rote or
cause being inferior, is the stynch and filthy savors that corrupt that air
which we live in: for we can not live without drawing of the breath, and we
have none other breath but of the air round about us, which if it be
stinking, venymous and corrupt, and we by necessity draw the same unto us,
immediately corrupts and enfecteth the heart, and the lively spirits of the
same, and after yt inuadeth all the other members of the body to enfect them in
likewise, by reason whereof is engendered a corrupt and venymous fever of
pestilence, very contagious to all yt are about the^, for the venymous air it
self, is not half so vehement to enfect, as is the conversation or breathe of
them that are enfected already, and that by reason of the agreyng of the
natures, which is the very cause why our bodies be infected by contagyon of
men, more then any other beasts.

Of the fourth root or cause of the said disease. THe fourth rote is, the
abuse of things not natural, that is to wete of meat and drink, of sleep and
watching, of labor and ease, of fullness and emptynesse, of the passions of
the mind, and of the immoderate use of lechery, for the excess of al these
things, be almost the chief occasion of all such diseases as reign among us
now a days.

For all that of our meat and drink is not digested, turns anon to
putrefaction and to evil qualities.

And to much sleep replenisheth the body with to great abundance of humors,
but over much watching does dry up the natural humidities.

And as watching does, so does immoderate labor, and as sleep does, so does
rest and ease out of measure, put the body in great distemper, and makes it
apt unto this siknes, as is daily seen.

And whosoever will be ruled as becomes him in this case, shall never be lightly
infected, and if chance he be, he shall easelye with a little help, ye sometime
by very nature only, save him self and overcome the sickness.

Now seeing that the causes of this said disease be so great as is before
rehearsed, it is not to be wo^dered, though the thing it self be very huge
and dangerous, and of hard curacion* wherefore says Auisen in his first of
methaphisikes (although he were no christian:) we must with good and virtuous
living mitigate the wrath of god, and by continual prayers keep our selves
still in the state of grace. Therefore would I counsel every christen man, that
is in dout of this disease, to cure first the fever pestilentiall of his soul,
calling for ye wholesome water, ye well of life, whereof it is written. Omnes
sitientes venite ad aquas. etc. Which waters he only gives, that said to his
disciples. Qui biberit ex aqua quam ego dabo illi: erunt in ventre eius aque
viue salientes in vitam eternam. And this done undoubtedly the syckenesse of
the body shall be the easyer to be cured,

And for because the other sovereign remedy preservative is to fly the corrupt
air, according to the proverb, Long, cito, tarde. Fly be times, fly far,
and come slowelye again.

Yet for so much as every man can not, nor is of abilitye so for to do, it is
good for them to look upon this little regiment, wherein with the aid of
almyghtye god the hye Physician, if the venyme be not to outragyouse, he shall
find how to preserve him self well enough from it.

And for the better knowledge and understanding of this treatise, ye shall
know yt it is divided into.ii. parts.

The first is of ye manner of preserve a man from the pestilence only by
dyete, in such things without the which, one can not be long alive in
health.

The second treats of the cure of the said disease by the way of holsom
medycine.

The first part is distribute into.vii little chapters, The first chapter
treats of the election of the air. The.ii. of meats and drinks. The.iii.
treats of sleaping and of waking. The fourth treats of excercyse. The
fifth of emptynes and fulness. The syxt speaks of the accidents of the mind.
The.vii. of medicines preparatiue.


The second part is divided into.vi, chapters.

The first, how to know when a man is infected. The second, of the cure of
the pestilence by the way of dyete. The third, of the cure of the pestilence
by the power of medicines. The.iiii. of cure thereof by lettynge of blood,
ventoses, and purgacions. The.v. of the cure of the same by outward
applicacions. The.vi. how to cure the botch called a Carbuncle, or Anthrax.
The first chapter of the first part, treating of the election of the air.
ALthough the disposicio^ of the aier cold and dry, or else moderately moiste,
be much commendable in ye time of pestylence, yet there must be moderation in
the same, as well as in the.vi. things not natural heretofore declared. For ye
must have a good respect unto the complexio^, the age, the custom of living,
the region, composicion of the body, strength, sickness time, and many other
things. For some require an air more hot, than other some do, and likewise
in other things, the which I do remyt unto the good discreacion of every well
learned man, and to such other as have any knowledge of natural things. For the
more suerty, it is good for the^ yt may, to dwell in high or hylly grou^des,
having in the morning when the sun is up, a wyndowe open toward the east,
and when the son goethe down, an other window open toward the west, and
close up al ye windows on the south side, for that wi^d is very ill in time
of pestilence.

Also it is good to rectify the air within the house, if it be in somer, by
sprynklyng in the chamber vynegre, and water of roses: if it be winter or cold
make a lusty fire of clean wood, and put in it encence, mirre, laurel tree, or
juniper, or cipres: and in time temperate, mingle the hot things with ye
cold aforesaid.

Which sprincklinges, and burninges, ye may make at all times when ye will,
but specially in the morning, to correct the vapoures of the night.

I read in Plotyne, that the egiptians were wont to fume their houses and their
bodies in the day with turpentine or rosin, and in the night with mirre cast
upon the coals, and so resisted al venomous airs and contagions.

The first has so great virtue against the pestilence, that we read how
Hypocrates preserved the hole country and city of Athenes, by making of great
fyres in the streets, and al about the town by night, and so delivered them
from the certain death yt should have comen among them. For which cause the
citizens of the said town, made unto him an image al of gold, and honored
him alive as if he had been a god.

And it is good in hot time, to s^we the chamber full of wyllowe leaves, and
other fresh boughs, which must be gathered after the sun setting, and lay
about your bed and windows, vine leaves, quinces, pomegranades, orenges,
lymons, citrons, and such other fruits, that are odoriferous, as roses,
flowers of nenuphar, violettes, and other like. And in cold times, take sage,
laurel, minte, wormwood, nept, bawme, rue, and galingale, which things ye
may sometime carry about with you in a cloth to take the air of them. And in
time of heat, temper a sponge or a cloute in water of roses, and vinegre. And
in time of cold ye may add to it a little cinamome, and thus he that is
disposed to have precious savors, as pomeaunders, or other such, may co^pose
them according to necessity, and as ye co^plexio^ of his body shall require.
Always taking head ye women which are with child, and they that have ye
suffocation of the mother or else catarres, take no such odor, as shall put the^
selves to any danger, or displeasure.

In a cold time it is good to hold in the mouth, zedoary, enulacampana,
cinamome, cloves, the rind of a citro^, lignum aloes, or any one of them. But
if the season of the year be hoote, then take corianders prepared, grains of
paradyse, saunders, seeds of orenges, or of lymons. And in te^per at wether
myngle the one with the other. But it is good in all times, to bear about you
preciouse stones, (if ye have the^) specially a iacincte, a rubie, a garnet,
an emeralde, or a saphyre, which has a special virtue against the pestilence,
and they be the sto^ger, if they be borne upon your naked skin, chieflye
upon the fourth finger of the left hand, for that has great affinity with
the heart above other members.

And as touching them that are contynually among the sick of this disease,
they must take heed in any wise, to keep them from their breathe, and that
they do not stand between them and the fire, nor receive the odoure of their
swettes, vrynes, vomites, and other excrementes of the body nor to eat and
drink with the^, nor in their vessels, nor to lie in their couches, nor
wear any of their apparel, except they be well sunned, or wethered in the
clean air.

It is also good to fly from al pla^es that be corrupt, or stynkyng, and to
keep the streets and houses very sweet and clean. And the rulers ought so to
provide, that no filthy donge, nor any dead caryons, be cast into the streets,
for that should sore enfecte the air, and bring many me^ to death. And during
all the time of this disease, there ought to be no hot houses used, but
forbidden and locked up, till such time they se no further danger,

The second Chapter, of eating and drynkyng.
THe meats ought to be of very light digestion, more in somer then in
winter, having always an eye unto the co^plexions, customs and other things
aforesaid. The hour what time ye shall receive your meat, is when your
appetyte cu^meth upon you, after the first digestio^ made. Great repletion
ought to be abhorred, but a sufficient meal is very wholesome. Neither is
diversity of meats allowed of any phisike, but if ye will have diverse sorts,
then begin with them that are the lyghtest to digest, and that best
nourishes ye body.

Your bread must be of pure corn, kept in good air, and not fusty, metely
well salted, with sufficient leven, and baken in a place where none evil* air
is, and it must be of a day or two days old, or there about.

Wheat is best among al other corns, even as wine among al other licours,
although the ba^lye bread be good for them yt mind to keep them lean. Meats
of evil taste, after they be long dead, and stynkyng fish in like manner, and
the fattes of al fishes, and meats that have been twice sodden, thick wine
and troublous, or otherwise corrupt, waters of ma^ishes, and black grounds,
and al such corrupt meats and drinks, be very peryllous. But good wine,
sauoury, and clear, and good meats taken with an appetyte are cause of
health, and preservation from the pestilence.

Vinegre is a noble thing in time of pestilence, if ye have none other
impediment to let you to receive it, and ye may correct it according to the
nature of ye cause, in such wise, as may be comfortable to the vital sprites
of the heart.

Borage and buglosse, are very good preseruatyues in this case, and so is a
little quantity of saffron, orenges, lymons, pomgranades, citrons, prunes of
damask, and other such, in good conueniente quantity, addyng to them a little
sugar, and cynamone for correccion,

A nutte is called the triacle of fish, shaled and sugered with a little rose
water: and as says Isaac, a nut and a fig dry taken before dynner,
preserves a man from al manner of poisons.

The third Chapter, of slepynge and watchyng.
TO much sleep engenders many humors in the body, specially if it be in the
day time; and it dulleth the memory, and makes a man unlusty and apt to
receive the pestilence. Therefore* created almighty god ye night, wherein we
should rest, and the day for to keep us waking that we fall not into sin and
sloth. Surely, to sleep on the day time is exceadyng hurtful, for when the
sun ryseth, he opens ye poores of the body, and brings the humors and
spirits from within, to the outward parties, which provoke a man to
watching, and excercyse or works.

And contrary wise when the sun goes down, al things are closed and
coacted, which naturally provoke a man to rest.

Moreover, the stomach by the vehement heat of the day is naturally dilated and
spredde abroad: so ever against (...)

The.v. Chapter, of emptiness and fulness.
IT is wholesome for you, every day once to procure the duty of the womb, if ye
can not naturally, yet at ye least ways seek some other means, as by a
glister or suppository, for the long witholding of any superfluities, is in
this time very dangerous and hurtful. And all the time the said disease
endures, they that have any fistules, ought not to be cured.

And they that have any yssues by their hemoroides, may not be restrained
without the flux be sore excessive, and they that had ye foresaid hemoroides
and were cured before, let them open the^ again for fear of further danger.
Also they that are disposed to be scabbye, having great ytche, and such
dyseases of the skin, ought to bring the matter out by rubbyng, and vehement
clawing with their nales.

Excess of women, is exceadyng perilous, but if ye can not rule your self,
take good head, ye do nothing before the first digestion, and till nature does
provoke you, for every such excess weakeneth more ye body, the^ if ye should
be let blood.xl. times somuche, as witnesses Auicenna, and is cause many times
of pestilence, and of death.

The.vi. Chapter, of accidents of the mind.
YE must beware of a^ things that should make you to be pensife, heavy,
thoughtful, angry or melancholic, for all such things are inoughe to enfecte
a man alone.

Pass the time joyfully i^ good things honest and decent, every manne
according to his own heart, and the estate that God has called him unto.

The.vii. Chapter, of medicines preservatives.
ALl they that are of good complexio^ and of wholesome dyete, need not to be
purged. For an hole body and void of all humors, is not lightly taken of the
pestilence, as the other are.

But if it be a body full of humors, or a great eater without any exercise or
travail, such ought to let themselves be purged, and they that have to much
quantity of blood, or if ye blood be any thing corrupt, they ought to ask
counsel of some good expert phisicions, and not to put their trust in any
vain bosters that detracte other, which in all cases and at al times, give them
mercury precipitant, and other medicines corrosiue, which for ye most part
are venime of themselves and under coulor of an other medicine do disceyue the
pacient, a wonder to behold, how craftily they cover it, some time in sirupe,
sometimes in sugar, otherwhiles in figs, lozenges, or raisins, lest it
should appear (as it is in deed) that they give the pacientes very
quickesiluer. Some other affirm that the mercury is quenched, or thoroughly
mortified, and works none otherwise but by secret quality against all
dyseases in the body of man: for the excess of elements say they, is
clearly corrected in precipitacion and adustio^ of the fire. How comes it to
pass (if this be true) that when a little of it is set upon a cole and a piece
of fine gold adjoined to it, we may se plainly the very quicksiluer, cleuing
to the gold, and will make it as brittle as if it had lien in very raw
mercurye? Yea how chances it that when it is mingled with hot cream, it
will be crude again as it was before. And to say the truth the quick silver
raw, is better to be dronken, then such as is sublymed, for yt has been
permitted, both of Dioscorides and of diverse other: But we never read of any
good physician yt ever gave counsel to take the precipitate, because of the
copporose and other venomous ingredience being with it.

And although that for the time peradventure some escape, and feel not their
effect in deed as mani other do (that is to say, debility of the virtue
radycall, of the stomach and other members principal, purging of the good
humors and leaving the evil within the body, whereof ensues many times
death) yet they leave a certain evil qualitye or impression of the bodies in all that do receive them, and so they make work for good phisicions, to the
great hurt of them that have believed them. Such galauntes should go prove
their powder made of quicksiluer, among ye Turks and Sarisins, and not upon
their even christen, and their neighbors. But now to our entente.

The pylles called pylluse communes, above other pylles preservatives, are
allowed to be of highest operacion, by reason of a certain propertye that they
have within them, as Rufus the composer of them says, that he never saw any
manne that used them, but he was preserved from the pestilence.

There goes into their composicion* myrre and aloes, which have great virtue
to keep the body from putrefaction, and are made thus.

Take of aloes epatik well washed* it drammes, myrre washed, and saffron, of
each a dram, make them up with white wine, or the juice of lymons, or of
orenges and sugar.

Some take them every third day, the weight of half a dram, in the
morning.iii. pylles, and every day one before supper. Let eueri man do
according to his need, and as his body is replete with humors, but it is good
to drink after the^ a good draught of wine, tempered in a little water of
roses, or of wormewoode, and if they be to hard, let them be resolved in the
sirupe of limons, or a little wine.

Some doctors join unto them other spyces, after the complexion of ye person,
and the humor that they need to purge. And they wash the aloes and the myrre,
in an hot season, and for him that has an hot liver, in water of roses and
of endive, but in that let every manne be his own judge: yet I would counsayl
them to stick rather to the good experymentes that have been accustomed, than
the fantasies of their own imaginacions.

The Apoticaries ought to have in store both the two sorts, and to see that
they be sufficiently leuened, and that the foresaid aloes be elect and pure.

They which have the hemoroydes and would use the foresaid pylles, let them
add a little mastike, or the gum that is called bdellium. If any have a
bloudye flux, or excoriacion of the bowels, let him not receive the^ without
a better counsel. Women also great with child, and they that are subject to
any flux of blood ought not to receive them.

Among other things, it is a good preservative, and a thing well expert and
commended, to eat in the morning fasting one dry fygge, one walnutte, and
four or.v. leaves of rue, chopped all together, and afterward to drink a
draught of good wine. But it shall be sufficient for them that are with child to
take the said things, leuyng out the rue.

In an hot season it is good to temper the said wine with a little rosewater or
of violettes. Some other take.v hours before diner, three times a weke, the
weight of half a crown of mithridatum, or of fine treacle, tempered in a little
good wine. But in time of heat and for hot complexions, it is good to put in
it a little conserua roses, and to mingle them with water of sorell, or of
borage, or of buglosse.

Mithridatum is a great medicine against al kind of venime, for we read that
the founder of it, king Mythrydates, who did use to eat thereof, could
never be hurt by any kind of poison. The Same Mithridates being overcome in
battle of ye Romans, would have killed himself with the most swyftest
poison that could be devised, but when he had dronken many sorts of
such, and never a one wroughte any thing to purpose, he caused himself to
be slain of his servants, after whose death Pompeius, the graund captain of
the host, found in his secret coffers, a certain byll written of his own
hand, in effect thus.

Twenty leaves of rue.ii. fat figs, two walnuttes, and a little salt,
whosoever eats of this shall be sure from al kind of venime that day.

The good triacle also has a great virtue, but there ought to be a punishment
of them that do abuse it with counterfaicted stuff, which deceives many
people and causes them to dye, that put their trust in it.

Some other take in time of cold, a cloue or.ii. of garlike, which is called
ye housebandmans triacle, and after drink a draughte of good wine, and in hot
time take and eat a few leaves of sorell, and drink a draughte of the water
thereof distilled, for it is excellent and good in all complexions, times and
ages. Also it is good to drink every morning a draughte against the
pestilence that is thus made.

A drink for the pestilence. Take in the month of June or at any other
convenient time, our lady thistle, burnet, scabious, ge^tiane, sorel, of every
one a like much, flowers of buglosse, red roses, herb dragons, and matfelon or
marsus diaboli, twice as much as all the other, stepe them al in white wine and
rosewater, during one night, then set them al in a common stillatory, waying
in for every pound of herbs, half an ounce of bole armeny poudred, augmentynge
the proporcion, according to the quantitye of the herbs: then still a water,
and for every pynte of it, take the weighte of a crown of saffron, half an
ounce of yelowe saunders finelye poudred, and put them all in a violle with the
foresaid water stopped, and set them in the sun one month. This is a noble
water for a man which has the pestylence, to drink.

And he that will, may put a little sugar, and powder of cinamome in it, that it
may be more pleasant in the taste. He that can not find the said herb
called matfelon, or morsus diaboli in latin, let him take the double weight of
dragons. It has a root as it were half eaten of by the mids, and it is so
called, because the fable is, the devil bit it of, for thenuy he has to man,
lest we should obtain the great virtues of the same.

The horn of an unicorn put in the drink, whole or i^ powder, has a great
effect against the said disease, and against all kinds of poison.

Here follows a very good preservative for the common people, ready at al
times and of small cost. Take an ounce of leaves of rue, half an ounce of good
figs, one ounce of Ienuper buries, two ounces of walnuttes piked.iiii.
ounces of vinegar, and a good quantitye of saffron, stamp all the foresaid
things together, and reserve them in an earthen cup, or a glass fast
stopped, that no air issue, whereof if ye receive in the morning upon a knifes
point, the quaintity of a bean, or more, ye shall be sure by the grace of god
not to be infected in four and twenty hours after.

An other powder for the same. Take pure and elect bole armonyacke, not
counterfaict, but such as is without grauel, smoth, somewhat shinynge, and to
the eye a far of most like a very stone, not to brittle, nor to hye
coulored, for such is commonly sophisticate. Take I say, the said bole
armoniake, and grynde it unto fine powder, than wash it in white wine or in
rosewater, or water of buglosse, sorell, or wormewoode, or scabious, afterward
dry it and powder it again, and do so.v. or.vi. times, ever washinge, drying
and pouderyng the same, and at last set it up in a clean vessel, till ye
need to use it.

Men of hot complexion, if they will receive it, must take of it a sponefull
with vinegar, or water of sorel.

And they that be of cold complexion, may take it in a little wine, or
scabiouse water in the morning. For it preserves the body, from all
corrupcion, consumes the superf^uous humors, and drives away the venym from
the heart.

An other singular remedy preservative for rich men and delicate of
complexion. TAke zedoarie, lignum aloes, agrimoni, saffron, aristologia
rotunda, if it may be gotten, white dyptanye, gentian, the rind of a citron,
the sede of citron, of every one a scruple, corianders preparate, turmentil,
red sau^ders, red coral, red roses, iuori, mirabolanes, emblike, of eueri one a
dram, terra sigillata, two drammes, bole armonyake three drammes, powder all
these, and with fine sugar, and sirupe of acetositate citri, make a noble
electuarye, and keep it as a treasure of man's health, in the time of pestilence.

An other sovereign and goodly receite both preservative and curatyue. TAke a
he^nes egg, newly laid, and make a hole in the crown, by the which ye shall
draw out all the white thereof, and leave the yolke within the shell, which done
fill the same egg, with good englysh saffron whole, as much as may be stuffed
in the shell, than dry this egg against the fire, or in an oven, when the
bread is out, so long till the shell be utterly black and brent, and the
rest sufficiently brittle and dry, make it in powder in a mortar, and add to
it as much powder of mustarde sede as shall weye all the hole egg: than take
this ingredience at the apothecaries. Ditamy, turmentille, nux vomica, of each
a dram, powder every one of them by it self, then put them altogether, and
put to it rewe, pionie root, zedoarye, camphere, and fine tryacle, of each
equal portion, so that the weight of the^ v. be as much as all the rest, beat
them in a mortar by the space of.ii. hours, till all be incorporated together
in a lump, than put it in a glass, and keep it covered with a lefe of gold,
in a cold place, for it will last thus.xxx. years, without corrupcion, and is a
thing of inestimable value in this case: the dose of it to preserve, is but one
half penny weight, or less, yea the weight of one barlye corn, has in it a
marueylouse strength, in defendyng the body.

But if one were infected already, than he must receive before lettyng blood ii.
or.iii. graynes, after his bleedynge give him in the name of god, an hole
scruple, or, ii. or, iii. (if his strength will serve) tempered with wine for
a hot taking, and in great cold with a little aqua vite, and thereupon sweat.
I have known when the sick has been utterly desperate, and could retain
nothing, yet by the grace of god, thorough ye means of two scrupules hereof,
myxte with a little aqua vite, both the vomyte immediately ceased, and nature
recovered, escaped the danger of death.

AS concerning sweet waters to sprinkle upon your clothes and things of
pleasant odoure, to be cast upon the coals when ye arise on mornings, and
also the making of good and wholesome pomaunders, to smell upon in time of
pestilence, for the contentacion of them that are desirous, I shall here
rehearse i. or.ii. of every sort, to the intent ye may (when ye be disposed)
either use them, or devise other of the same making: as it shall be requisite
according to necessitye.

First a sweet water that is made thus. TAke water of roses, violettes or
nenuphar, or one of them, or of al together one pound, good vinegre two ounces,
ma^ueseie, muscadyne, or other pleasau^te wine, three ounces, of both the
saunders, of each one dram and an half, ^amphore, one scruple, and if ye
have any gallia muscata, add thereto half a dram, mingle them together, and
sprinkle upon your clothes, when ye be disposed. The right excellent, and
famous doctoure Johannes Manardus also, in the third epistle of his fyfth
book, does show, how to make in time of Pestilence, two sovereign perfumes,
the one for to serve in summer which is made thus.

A Fumigation for Somer. TAke read ambre.ii. parts, the leaves of mirte,
f^oures of nenuphar, roses, vyolets, saffron, maces, and yelowe saunders, of
either of them.i. part, camphore, ambre, benjamin, half a part, musk the
tenth of one part, myngle al together, this is a pleasant and comfortable
savor in the time of somer.

But in winter season ye may use this. TAke storax calamita, yreos, mastyke,
of each two parts, cloves, maces, nutmigges, cinamome, saffron, of each one
part, aumbre the fyfthe of one part, mushe the tenthe of one part, mingle
all together and make a fumigacion.

And of these pouders ye may make little balls or pomau^ders, to bear about
with you at al times, but the last receyte must be well incorporate with a little
storax liquida, and lapdanum, and the other with lapdanum, gum, dragagant,
and rosewater.

An other goodly pomaunder for gentlewemen and ladies. TAke the rind of an
orange, cloves, lignum aloes, of each, one dram, calamus aromaticus half a
dram, alipta muscata one dram, roses, myrtylles, of every one half a
dram, nutmigge, cinamome, benjamin, of every one a scruple make it up in a
mortar, with Storax liquida, with sufficient wax, and maluesey addinge in the
end, of camphore half a scrupule or more.

ANd in the time of pestilence, ye ought to keep the house every day til the
son be up, and if it chance that ye go among a great multitude of people,
where is any danger to be feared: ye may chew a little zeddary in your mouth,
ones in an hour or two, but hold it not co^tynuallye for hurtynge of the
gummes, zedoarie (as says Auicenne in his book de viribus cordis) comforts
the heart, and engenders good blood, it is wholesome for the stomach (as
affyrmeth Pliny) makes good digestyon, and provoke appetyte.

Constantyne in his book of degrees, says it has a great power against
venyme, and the stynkyng of the mouth, it breaks wind, and cures ye
bytinges of venomous beasts and serpents.

When the sun shinethe in a clear day, ye may walk in gardeynes, meadows,
hills and by rivers, but beware of lakes, standing pooles, and fennes, for
oftentimes the enfection of the air, aryseth of the corrupt vapoures, boylyng
out of such unwholesome places.

The second part, of the cure of one that is enfected with the pestilence
already.
How to know a man that is infected, the first chapter.
WE said in the beginning, how ye pestilence was engendered of the corrupt and
noughtie air, turning all the humors of the body quycklye to corrupcion and
to venyme. Wherefore we must take heed be times, lest the vital me^bres be
infected of the said poison, for it ever seeks to the heart, and if it come
unto the heart, before the medicine, then is there no recovery, for not one among
an hundred lives. For the said venyme is so swyfte, so fearce, and so
boystous of it self, that it will not (without great difficulty) be put out
of possession, but dryueth away the medicine from the heart again.

But if the medicine come unto the heart before the venym has the vpperhande,
then he dryueth it out, by the help of the virtue expulsyue, of the
spyrituall members, and that expulsio^ commonly is by swette.

And for because sometimes a man is poisoned, and can not tell him self, nor
none that is about him, whereof many dangers does arise, for as ye proverb is,
one scabbye sheep enfecteth a hole flock, therefore it shall be necessary that
every man take heed unto him self, and consydre all the signs and tokens that
shall be said herafter: for the more care that he has about that, the sooner
shall he escape out of the danger.

And if a man feleth him self infecte, above all thing let him remember god,
for it is a sycknesse yt in a twinkli^g of an eye may bring a man to death.

First let him look whether in his arm holes, fla^kes, or under his neck
there be any aposteme or swellyng, or whether in any other parts of his bodi
there appear any grene, black, or evil coulored sore, for that is the sign
that never fails, but the person certainly is enfected, Notwithstanding every
man enfected with ye pestilence has not such ulcers, botches or sores,
wherefore ye must take heed of the other signs hereafter, that ye be not
deceived for lack of ye said apostemes. But what is the cause yt such
apostemes sometimes does appear, and sometimes does not? no doubt, but because
that when the venim is so vehement and so furious, and has gotten hold in the
body of man, nature by reason of the swyftenesse of the infeccio^, is so
troubled, let, and entangled, that she cannot tell which way to succoure,
and so can drive out none apostemes, and that is more perilous, the^ if there
were many sores. But again, when ye venim is but meanly furious, and the
nature of ye pacient strong enough by reason of good humors, the^ it defends
itself and drives the venim from the heart and principal members, to such
places as it may be best avoided at, which breaks forth by comuvlsion in
botches, carbuncles and other sores.

The second sign is, if ye feel a great pryckyng and shotyng in your
body, and specially in any of the.iii. clensyng places, yt is to say the
neck, the armeholes and the flanks.

The third sign is when ye feel an outrageous heat within you, as if ye were
in the fire. Which heat sometime spreads it self abroad through all the hole
body, and otherwhyle there aryseth such a cold, that it makes a man to shake
as if he were in a fever. Wherein al ye that be infected, must take heed: for
some there be yt in the beginning feel not such a fervent heat outwardly, but
it is within as great as if they burned, with much heaviness of ye head,
dryness of ye mouth, and extreme thirst. Whereby many one are compelled for to
sleep even for very labor of the spirytes, and some other watch, and are so
out of quyete that a man would think they were fallen in to a phrenesye.

The fourth sign is, if great vapors and fumes arise out of the body, when a
man is in a bathe, and would feign sweat, but he can not.

The fifth sign is if the paciente can not draw his breath easily, for many
one is so strayte wynded, that he can not speak, and when he breaths it is
with great labor and difficulty.

The sixth sign is vehemente pain of the heed, such as is wont to be in a
frenesy. But there be some for all that, that in the beginning of the infeccion,
feel nothing so great pain as we have spoken of in the heed. Notwithstanding
this is a general rule, yt the pestilence can not be in the body, without some
pain, or heuinesse in the heed* The.vii. sign is great desire to sleep, from
ye which many one can not abstain him self in any wise, nor can not be kept
waking of the^ yt are about him. The.viii. sign is chaungynge of the sight,
for sometimes there comes to the pacientes eyes, as it were a yelowe color,
sometimes all that he beholds he thinks it to be grene.

The.ix. sign is peine of the mouth, or an unnatural taste, bitter, sour,
orstinkinge. The tenthe sign is often ^omiting, bitter, and of diverse colors.
The.xi. is heuinesse and dulnes of all the hole body, and swownynge, and
weakness of the limbs, These be ye principal signs and tokens whereby ye
may perceive when any man is infected. Notwithstanding all these signs are not
ever manifest, for somtymes it is seen, that one has had the pestilence, and
felt nothing at all, yea and sometimes the urine will be as fair and as good to
sight, as in a hole man, because the humors come not at the liver, and the
fever wylbe small or none, for that the venime is not in a hot humor, and so
drives out no heat, and yet the pacient by and by dies.

Somtymes also he shall think him self hole, because that nature in the first
brunt drove the venom from the heart, and yet anon after his life passes from
him, for that nature was not strong enough at the next assult, either by reason
it was vexed and weried in the first, or else the venime peradventure
multiplied or changed into more malignitie or nerer to the heart than it was
before. Every one in the beginning seem lightly to be better, for then the
strength of nature is gathered al together to stand against his enemy, but it
is not so in other evil sickenesses. The paciente also many times thinks
him self strong enough, because the venime works not so cruellye upon the
other me^bres as it does upon the heart.

Wherefore in time of pestilence, when ye feel your self in any thing diseased,
drive not forth ye time in loking when the signs aforesaid should appear, nor
stand not in examining or doubtyng whether ye be infected or no, for ye may
be sure, that so long as this disease reigns in ye country where ye are, ye
shall have few sicknesses, but either is pestilence already, or else will be
within a while: and so give your self to ye cure of the Pestilence, for while
the noughty influence of that infeccio^ dureth, al superfluous humors may
lghtly be enfected, and that is the only cause, why in time of pestilence,
there is so few of other infirmities. For as soon as many sorts of other
syknesses do arise, the pestilence abateth and is gone.

And here is to be noted, that whatsoever child in the time of pestilence, be
vexed with the worms, ye may safely affirm yt he is infected, for it is a
matter so disposed to the pestilence, even as is brymstone, to be kindled of
the fire. This have many phisicions not considered, and because of that, have
been deceived in their cure. Here I have declyned by occasion, but now to our
intent.

When one or two, or more of these signs aforesaid are known to be in a
body, let him not despise them, nor put any foolyssh trust in the strength of
his co^plexio^, as many one have done, and by and by dyed, nor let no man trust
ye color of his vryne, or moving of the pulse: for somtymes the strength is so
excessyue in the venyme, that a man is deed before the natural virtues are able
for to succor him, or to drive away the venim from the heart. And herein have
many wise phisicions also ben deceived, and have evil judged of the pacientes
pronostyke.

Therefore by and by without delay, ye must admynystre some good and wholesome
medicine, as shall be said herafter, or else the stylled water that we spoke of
in ye former Chapter, or some other valiant medicine against the pestilence,
that it may descend unto the heart before the venyme have the vpperhande of
nature.

For if it be once settled at the heart, I affirm plainly, there is no hope at
al. Yet there be some fools, that tarry till the twelueth hour, or the four
and twentye, after the infeccion, and they boost them selves that they will
heal the pacient, but that is a manifest and a a shameful error, for if any
by chance is so recovered, it comes of God, and not of any medicine, for
where as one so escapes, an hundred other perisshe.

Notwithstanding if the case so be that ye be not called, or can get no
remedy before the said time, cast not your self into despair, or put not the
pacie^t in discomfort, take or give your medicine in ye name of God, and if ye
can not brook it, take as much again and do so many times til ye may retain
it, the^ lay ye down to sweat, and lift up your heart to God, calling upon
him, without whom there is no health, and by the grace of Jesus, ye need not to
be fearful of death, for that ye is impossible to man, is easy enough with
God, yea many times nature works it self, above al natural expectacio^. But
I counsel at the first beginning to receive the medicines, when any of the
forsayde signs appears, or when ye feel your self diseased, for the venyme
perceth sooner to the heart, of the cholerike, the^ either of the sanguyne or
the melancholyke, although the sanguynes are apter to infeccion, then the other
are, chefelye if the sycknesse be in somer.

They that are of melancholy be not lightly taken, but in case they be, the^
the cure is very dau^gerouse and hard.

Therefore I say take heed at the beginning as the proverb is. Pri^cipiis
obsta, sero medicina paratur Lu^ mala per longas inualuere moras.

Take the medicine quickly, and let thy self blood, and remember god the
physician of thy soul, and without doubt, thou shall well enough recover.

Now we have declared the signs by which ye may easily know when a person
is infected, and we said it was conueniente to take the medicyne as soon as
any of them appears, without any longer tarying, before the venime comes to
the heart, here we will enfourme you, how ye shall perceive whether the
said venime be settled in the heart or no.

Take a dram of bole armeny made in powder according to the doctrine of ye
last chapter in the first part, and if ye can not get it, take some other
excellent medicine against ye pestilence, namely one of the receites that shall
be said hereafter, and give it to ye pacient, but there can nothing be
better, then the foresaid powder if ye have it at hand.

Take I say thereof one dram, and an ounce of white wine, and odoriferous,
with two ounces of water of roses, mingle them, and give them to the pacient.
The black receipt declared in the Chapter of preservatives, may be well used instead of the bole.

And if he may retain the drink within his stomach, it is a good sign that
the venime was not at the heart before he took the medicine, and therefore he
may be let blood well enough.

But if the pacient cannot broke the said drink, but cast it up and vomit,
then ye may be sure, that the venyme has been at ye heart before ye medicine.

Therefore by and by wash his mouth with wine, or with water of scabious, of
sorel, or of roses, and it ought to be very well mundified and cleansed.

Then give him an other dose of the said drink, and heat a cruste of bread,
and hold it to his nose, that he may the better keep the foresaid pocion* And
if the second time he cast it up again, and is not able to retain it, wash
his mouth as is said before, and give it him the third time, with a little
vinegar, that it may perce the better, and so.vi. or.vii. times, if he do not
hold it, give it him again, and then whether he retayneth it, or retayneth it
not, by and by ye ought to let him blood.

But in case the paciente were infected xxiiii. hours before ye give the
drink, never let him blood, for ye can nothing help him, but rather make him
feeble, but administer a medicine ordained for the pestilence, as is said
before, or such as shall be spoken of hereafter, and that done provoke him to
sweat.

Now to our purpose as concerning diet.

The second Chapter, of the cure of pestilence, by the way of diet.
First as soon as ever the pacie^t feleth himself infected, it is very good
to avoid ye corruptaire, by chaunginge into some other place: or else if he can
not so, let him rectifye the air of his own house, or of his chamber, with
water of roses and vinegar, or else with fumigacions as is spoken of before,
according to the quality of ye time, and the complexion of his own body.

Moreover it is good for him to shiften his bed out of one chamber into
another, and from that to the first again the next day, ever rectifying the
air, of them both, as is aforesaid.

And as touching meat and drink, he ought not to abstain, or yet to take
any superfluities, for to eat good meats measurablye (though it be against
his stomach) yet in this disease it shall do him much good; Let him eat the
brothe of chickens, capons, or coleyses of rabbettes, and such like meats,
with a little sorell sauce, or vyneger, and rosewater, or wine of pomegranades,
(if they may be gotten) or wine of barberyes, and such other.

If ye will have other kind of sauces, or a powder to strowe upon your meat,
ye may make it after this sort.

Take graynes of paradise, white dyptanye, of each an ounce, fine poudre of
cinamome, and cloves, of each half an ounce, make them al in powder, and
mingle it with sugar. In this disease ye may eat no quesye meats, as eles,
gese, duckes, and other such as be evil.

I call them evil meats, which (according unto Galene De differentiis
febrium) are either evil of their own nature, or else if they be naturallye
good, yet by reason of some putrefaction, are as much or more unwholesome, as
the other are, partelye so, because of long keeping, unclean and naughty
dressyng, or when they be laid up in a filthye or stinking place, and partly
by some ill infeccion, when they were alive: for he that uses such kind of
meats, is oftentimes accoumbred with many naughtye sycknesses, as corrupt
and pestilencial fevers, scabbes, pustles, lepries, and other evil infirmytyes.

All fyshe in this case are to be avoided. Brothe or gruell, made with borage,
buglosse, endive, succorye, sorell, purcelane, and other like herbs, with a
little saffron, and clean wheat flower, or the crommes of bread in a broth of
chickyns, or without a broth, may be well administered.

Potched eggs also with sorell sauce and cinamome, vinegar and rosewater, are
marvelous good in this case.

And if the heat be very vehement, as well after meat, as before, he may well
drink a draughte of sodden water with the juice of orenges, limons, citrons,
or of sour apples, well mi^gled together, to quench ye venomous fumes, that
might rise up to the brain. And if the paciente be young, and strong having
a good stomach, hole winded, hoate of complexion, and in time of heat, not
subject to the colike, nor to none hydropsye, nor apostomes in the bowelles,
he may drink a good draughte or two of clear and cold water coming out
of a rock, or of a runnynge water, or of a fair spring. For when nothing
else can mytygate the thyrste, yet will clear water by little and little,
dymynishe all the heat. But ye must beware ye take no great excess.

Aptisane with sugar of roses, is very good to drink between meals.

The pacient ought not for to sleep duringe the first.xxiiii. hours, and in
the time yt he receives his medicines. Afterward he may sleep a little at once,
to comfort the weakness of the spirits, and he ought every day to go to
syege once.

And above al other things let him not despair, but bid him be of good
comfort, and doubt not of his health, so he take no thought, but as much as is
possible, make him to reioise, as well by communicacion as by music, and
bringyng in unto him good and wholesome herbs, fruits, boughs and other
things of coumforte, but yet notwithstanding see that he remember God, and
notforget his own conscience, for in this sickness the worst is ever to be
feared.

The third Chapter, of the cure of pestilence by the way of medicine.
AS soon as ever ye feel your self infect, take of ye poudre of bole
armoniake, in manner and form before declared, or of ye black receite the
weyghte of half a crown, more or less according to the virtue of the pacient,
myngled with the water of roses, and a little vinegar, as is said before, and
drink it all at one draught.

And if ye can not get the foresaid powder, or paraduenture ye will abhor to
take it, the^ drink a little pocion of ye receipt following, which is very
excellent.

A receipt against the pestilence. TAke ye rote of turme^tile dried in the
shadow, of saffron, and of mustarde sede as much of one as of an other, make of
them a powder, and incorporate it with the third part of mithridatum, or of
fine triacle, with a little strong venyger, i^ manner of an opiate, keep it in
an earthen vessel close, and in time of need use it. The weighte of it at once
is from half a dram upward*

This receite woorketh more upon the venime then it does upon the fever. And
every day following it is good to take a little sirupe of limons, with water of
sorell, or of matfelo^, or of our lady thistle.

And he that has none of the said sirupes, let him use the waters of the
same herbs, or the good water that I have discribed in the chapter of
medicines preservatives.

Auicenne says that whosoever takes an onyon and drynketh it in milk
fasting in a morning, he shall be safe that day from all infeccyons of the
pestilence. Therefore some are wont to roast two or three onions, and to eat the^
with vinegar and brown bread next their heart before they enter into any
suspecte air. And have found health in their so doing.

Johannes Manardus, ^ man of hye knowlage in the art of medicine, and of
great auctorytye among al learned men, describes in his book of Epistles, a
very good receipt as well preservative as curatiue devised by himself for lack of
good triacle, and is of merueilous operacion, as well in this disease, as in
healing all manner venymous wou^des, both of adders, snakes, and other kind of
serpents. The receipt of this noble medicine is this.

Manardus medicine for the pestilence. TAke the dried blood of a drake, and of
a ducke, of a gose, and of a kid, rue, fenell seed, the seed of cumine,
dylle, and of wild nepes, or garden nepes, or rapes, of every one.iii.
drammes, the root of ge^tiane, trifoile, squinantum, franke^sence, roses
dried, of each.iiii, drammes. White pepper and long, cost, valerian, anyse,
cinamome of each.ii. drammes, myrrh, nard, of each.vi. dra^mes, benjamin,
assarum, gum armoniake, of each three drammes, aloes, agarike, of each two
drammes, carpobalsami.xx. graynes, ireos, saffron, reubarbe, and reupontike,
gynger, mastike, of each one dram, sticados, five drammes.

Make a fine powder of these, and with four times as much of claryfied honye,
mingle all together, and keep it in a silver vestel or a glass stopped, for it
is an hie treasure, i^ such a case. The dose of it is two drammes in wine or
water of sorel.

Here follows an electuarye of a wonderful virtue, in the time of pestilence,
THis electuarye is of so great virtue, in the^ that do receive it once
in.xxiiii. hours, that they may be sure from all evil infeccions of corrupt
airs and contagious, all the day after.

But in them that are infecte already, and are taken with the pestilence, if
they drink of it but one sponefull, as shall be said hereafter, (specially
after letting blood if it be conuenyent to the pacient) and lay him down and
sweat upon the same, if the venim has not utterly overcome the heart, he shall
undoubtedly recover.

It has been lately proved, that after drinking of the same medicine when ye
pacient made his water in an vrinal, the glass has bruste in pieces, by
reason of the venime that it purged out.

This is the making of the said electuarye Take cinamome elect, one ounce,
terra sigillata.vi. dra^mes, fine mirrhe iii. dra^mes, unicorns horn.i,
dra^me the sede and rind of citron, roots of diptany, burnet, turmentille,
zedoary, read coral, and, drammes.ii. yelowe saunders.iiii. scrupules, red
saunders, ii. scruples, white ben and red, flowers of marigoldes, ana. one
dram, iuerye raced, scabiouse, beronici tunici, anyse, cinamome of each.ii.
drammes, myrrh, nard, of each.vi. dra^mes, benjamin, assarum, gum armoniake,
of each three drammes, aloes, agarike, of each two drammes, carpoba^sami.xx.
graynes, ireos, saffron, reubarbe, and reupontike, gynger, mastike, of each one
dram, sticados, five drammes.

Make a fine powder of these, and with four times as much of claryfied honye,
mingle all together, and keep it in a silver vestel or a glass stopped, for it
is an hie treasure, i such a case. The dose of it is two drammes in wine or
water of sorel.

Here follows an electuarye of a wonderful virtue, in the time of pestilence,
THis electuarye is of so great virtue, in the^ that do receive it once
in.xxiiii. hours, that they may be sure from all evil infeccions of corrupt
airs and contagious, all the day after.

But in them that are infecte already, and are taken with the pestilence, if
they drink of it but one sponefull, as shall be said hereafter, (specially
after letting blood if it be conuenyent to the pacient) and lay him down and
sweat upon the same, if the venim has not utterly overcome the heart, he shall
undoubtedly recover.

It has been lately proved, that after drinking of the same medicine when ye
pacient made his water in an vrinal, the glass has bruste in pieces, by
reason of the venime that it purged out.

This is the making of the said electuarye Take cinamome elect, one ounce,
terra sigillata.vi. dra^mes, fine mirrhe iii. dra^mes, unicorns horn.i,
dra^me the sede and rind of citron, roots of diptany, burnet, turmentille,
zedoary, read coral, ana, drammes.ii. yelowe saunders.iiii. scrupules, red
saunders, ii. scruples, white ben and red, flowers of marigoldes, ana. one
dram, iuerye raced, scabiouse, beronici tunici, sede of basile, ye bone of a
stagges heart, saffron, ana.ii. scruples, make a fine powder, and add unto it
of bole armoniake preparate two ounces, white sugar three pound, and with a
sirupe of acetositate citri, make a goodlye electuary, and keep it in a glass.

If the pestilence comes with great excess of heat, drink it upon
rosewater, and vinegar, but if ye feel it cold, take it in a draught of wine,
and cover ye with clothes, so that ye may sweat as long as is possible, for
without dout, it is a present remedy as I my self have oftentimes proved.

An other divine medicine, in a liquide form. TAke rue, wormwood and bawme
the herb, of each a like portion, of celidony, both herb and rote as much as
all the other, so that ye have of them.iii^ a good big handful, wash the rote
of celidony, very clean and purely, in wine or in fair clear water, than put
them all into a new pot of earth neled within, and pour upon the herbs, half
a pound of the most strongest vinegar ye can gettte, cover them just, and
lute the mouth of the pot, with luto sapiencie, which is made of wheat
flower and ye white of an egg, that no breath may issue, and sees it eyghte
or.ix. hours, with a soft fire, than let it ^ole by little and little, and
after strain the herb, and set the licoure in the son to rectifye.

When a person is infected with the pestilence: First as I said before, let
him bleed in a due vain, than give him a sponefull of this lycoure, with as
much as a nutte of triacle, if so be ye have any, luke warm, by and by let a
cruste of bread all hot, be dipped in vinegar, and holden to his mouth, that
he may the better broke the medicine.

And if he chance to vomit, incontinente wash his mouth with wine, and cause
him to receive again an other sponful, and so if need be.v. or.vi. times, til
ye se that he retain it, which is a very good sign, if he so do.

After this set him in a warm bed covered, that he may sweat out ye resydue
of the venime, and by the grace of God he shall escape the danger. This is a
medicine of infinite virtue. But if the pacient have a great heat give him no
triacle, or else very little.

The.iiii. chapter of the cure of pestilence, by lettyng of blood, ventoses,
and purgacions
ALthough phlebotomy or lettyng of blood, be one of the chief things that are
required to the cure of the pestilence, yet for lack of understanding, and
letting blood otherwise than behooves, many one is cast away: and therefore
every good barboure ought for to take heed, yt he hurt not them, which come
unto him for help (for that were a greatte shame) which he shall never do, if
he ponder well ye things, yt shall be said herafter.

This is a general rule. IN the time of pestilence wha^ a body is infect, ye
may not have respect either to ye sign, ye day or ye hour: but whether the moon be there or not, or what aspectes so ever be in ye planettes let him
blede forth with in the name of God.

Young men and sanguine, and they that have abundance of ^^e^, and of blood
mingled with other ^ors, ought to blede somewhat more in quantity, but always
keep a moderacion, that ye take not out to gre^^ qua^titye at once.

It is better to let him blood twyse, leaving the wonde of the first stroke
open, and annoint it with a little oil, and after four or five hours, let him
blede in the same wound again, but without strykyng if it be possible.

But always give an eye, to the strength of the paciente, that it be not
enfebled, and again beware that ye have taken away the rankest, and the
stro^gest venime, wherein if ye be doutful, take the counsel of some good
expert physician.

Also ye must note, that ye may not let blood, to any children within the age
of.xiiii. year, nor to old men above fyftye year old, nor to women great with
child, specially nere unto their time, nor when their due purgacions is upon
the^, nor to the^ that are newly brought to bed, or within a wekeor, ii. after
she is purified, generally to none which is weak and feeble in his body. Ye
shall also note, that there are some old men of better strength and
complexion, than many young are of, and again diverse young children often or
twelve years old, are of higher courage, and of as good strength, as they that
are many years elder. In such cases, a little euentacio^ of the enfected blood,
may be ye saving of their lives, so that all things be done with good
discretion.

It is wisdom also to let them blood liyng upon their backs, who^ ye think
would fainte in standing or in syttyng. And if the case do require the letting
of blood, and the paciente be not able to bear it for any of the causes before
rehearsed, it is good to apply ventoses, in manner and form as I shall declare
hereafter.

And here we should say somewhat of the great error that many do commyt in
taking one vein for an other, for by such errors is the venym drawn many
times unto the heart, and so procures death unto the pacient.

Wherefore that ye may not be dis^eyued, ever in the pestilence let him blood
on that side that the sore is on, and not on the contrary side, in any wise,
for that should draw the venim ouerthwarte the members spirytuall, and so
destroy the man.

But or ever ye let him blood, it is good to give some good and wholesome
medicine against the venyme, such as is declared in the chapters herbefore.

If the botche appear underneath the ears, let him blood in the head vein of
ye same arm, or else in the branch of the same vein, which is upon the hand,
between the myddle finger and the next that is adioynynge,

If it appear under the throat, take the same vein, and within a while after,
it is good to open the.ii. veins underneath the tongue.

If the sore be set within the armeholes, take the vein called me^^ana,
which is between the foresaid head vein, and the vein coming from the
lyue^.

If the sore be set within the stankes, than ye must open the vein called
saphena, which is about the ancle of the foot, on the inner side: and if ye
can not find it there, take the branch of it, yt is between the great too,
and the next unto him, but the lettyng of blood in that vain is forbidden
unto women when they be in health.

And if there apere.ii. botches, one on every side, Manardus gives counsel to
take the right side and not the left. And in case there does appear no sign of
botche or swellyng, than he bids you to open both the veins saphenas on the
right side and the left.

Notwithstanding, Marsilius Ficinus is of a contrary opinion, and says that
it is best when there does no sore appear, to take the common vein on the
right arm.

I think herein Manardus council rather to be followed.

But if ye se the botche standing outward more toward the bounche, tha^ ye
must open the vein called sciatica, which is about the ancle of the foot on
the outsyde. The which opening of the veins must be done as soon as is
possible, always presupposed, that he has received one or other medicine
against the venym, and that he sleep not in any wise, as is before me^cioned.

And to them that can not lawfullye be letten blood, ye must in all have apply
many ventoses, with scarificatio^ or without scarifienge, as it semethe best
to your discretion, so ye take a reasonable order thus. If the soore be under
the ears, or about the throat, let your ventoses be applied behynd upon the
neck.

If the botch appear under the arms, set your ventoses behind upon the
shulders. If the sore be in the flank, or thyes, let your ventoses be set
upon the buttockes.

And if the pacient be replete with humors and strong, having no flux nor
other impediment, and ye think he needs to be purged: ye may give him in ye
morning.i. ounce of cassia, or of ma^na, with a little die aprunis laxatiue more
or less, according to ye pacientes necessity, tempered with water of
scabiouse, sorell, or endive, ever taking head, that he do receive some
medicine against the venim, during all the time of his disease.

The fifth Chapter, of applycation of outward medicines.
HEre is to be noted yt no manner plaster repercussiue, may be set upon any
botch of pestilence. But as soon as is possible, after lettinge blood, it is
good to take an onion, and to make an hole in the midst of it, the^ fill it
full of good triacle, after that stop it, and set it on the harth to roste, as
it were an apple. And when it is roast so long tylle it be tender, let it cole
a little: and set it hot upon the botche, and when it has been there by the
space of two hours, take it of, and lay an other on.

Or take a cock and pull the feathers of, about his foundamente, and put a
little salt in it, and set his foundamente upon the said botche, keeping him on
a good while, stoppyng many times his byll, that his breath may be retained, and
let him blow again. And if ye cock dye, it shall be good to take another
young cock, and splytte it quycke asounder, and lay it on ye botch, but ye
must command them that take them of, to cast the^ in ye fire, and not to
take the savor when it is removed: for that is very dangerous. Some there be
yt lay about ye sore, water leches called bloodsuckers, and it is very good,
so they be well prepared, and cleansed, from corrupcio^. Other apply ventoses
with scarificatio^, but they ought first to be applied withouten any
scarifying, so they shall ye better draw ye venym out.

Other lay thereto a plaster made of galbanu^, diaquilo^, and armoniake,
incorporate together, and some other lay on it a plaster made of figs, sour
leue^, and reisins without kernels, braied and incorporate altogyther in oil
of camomylle. There be also yt set upon the botche an herb called crowefoote,
which is very hot, and makes a blister on ye skin, and that same they
break, and keep the place open many days after. And in that case, if the
botch be in the very arm holes: it is best to set ye said herb a loft upon
the arm.

And some other break the forsayde botche with a strong ruptory, having part
of maturatio^, as for example thus. Take sour leven four ounces, mustarde,
rue, scabiouse, wormwood, of every one an handful, white lilly rotes, the
third part of all, grene copporose two drammes, cantharides in number.x.
galbani one ounce, old nuttes, and somewhat fusty, or else new if ye can not get
them, in nu^bre.iiii. oil of white lilles, as much as shall suffice, sees all the herbs and roots in oil, according to art, with a double vessel, that is
to say: the oil being in one pan may sees only by the boiling of the water
in an other great pan, and make a plaster with the residue of the stuff in
a good form. It has a great virtue to break a pestilence sore without much
pain, and before ye lay it on, wash the sore with a sponge dipped in the
straynyng of the foresaid herbs and rotes.

Other take oil olyue and seth it with oken ashes, adding unto it a little of
black soap, and quick lyme, and make a plaster of the same, it is not to be
used, but in strong complexions.

And all the forsaid ways are to be commended. But after one has used the^ a
while, and seyth they begin to come to maturation, let him take ye counsel
of a learned surgeon, or any other of good experience, and to set maturatiue
emplaysters, unctions, and bathes, according as becomes, percing the aposteme
in the softeste place, afterward proceed with mundificacio^ and incarnacion,
even as in other kinds o fappostemes: wherein I humblye desire them to have
some pytie of the poor, that be diseased, and not to favor the^ that have
enough, but rather take somoche of the rich, that they may the better have
wherewith to help ye nedy. And forbycause the sick may have some comfort, if
in case they should be destitute of surgeons, I will (besides the said medicines
which they may confidentlye use,) describe some maturatiue emplaysters that
are expert and proved in this cure of pestilence.

A plaster to ripe a botche coming of the pestilence. TAke mallows, and the
rotes of holyhocke, and onions, as much as shall suffice, wash them and sees
them in water, and afterward bray the^ in a mortar with poudre of ^ineseed, and
of fenugreke, and a good quantity of swines grese fresh, laying on the
plaster every day once.

An other for the same. TAke white diptany an ounce and an half, the rote of
walwort an ounce, the rotes of cresses half an ounce, white onions.ii. ounces,
sees the rotes in water, and roast the onyon upon the coals, then stamp the^
al together, addyng of oil of camomil.iii. ounces, rosyn one ounce, nettle
seed six drammes, wax, as much as shall suffice, and make a goodlye plaster
or an oyntmente at your pleasure, for it ripeth the said botch in a short
space and consumes ye venyme, and is good as well for young men as for old.

And before that it be thorough ripe, cause it to be perced as it is said before.
And if after the said percing there be great pain, take the yolke of an egg
well beaten, and a little oil of roses, and annoynte a tent therein, and put into
ye sore, for to cease the pain. Afterward mundifye the place with a salve made
of yolks of eggs, fine barley flower, and a little honey of roses. Last of al,
for the perfect incarnacion, take the juice of dayses, and with a little wax
make a soft oyntmente, and use it, or ye may lay thereto any other salve
incarnatiue as ye are wont to do in other clean sores. Provided always yt it
is better in this case, to break yt sore betymes than to tarry for the rypyng
long, lest perchance ye venym being included, gather strength by the
putrefaction, and so return again unto the heart: therefore open it, before it
come to rypyng, and after proceed with your maturatiues, and other wholesome
playsters.

THus much have I spoken of surgery, in the exterior cure of one that has the
botch, so far is god has given me understanding to perceive, according to
the minds of such famous clerks, as have most effectually written of the
same. Now will I declare a little of the exterior ^^re of him that has no botch
at all. and yet is sore infected with the pestilence. For the noble handy
work of surgery, is convenient to the^ both, as witnesses Marsilius Ficinus,
in his book of pestilence in the.xi. Chapter. And the form of it is this.

After that the pacient has received some good and wholesome medicine against
the pestilence, and swette (or after lettynge blood, if the case do so require)
by and by ye must apple your labor to take away the residue of the venyme,
that remains in ye body. And to that intent ye ought to make a ruptorie o^
sour leven and cantharides, or other above rehearsed, and set it on the muscule
of the right arm, under the cubite, o^ the part where as the pulse lies, bu^
not upon the pulse it self, and so procure a blystre, which ye shall
immediately cut of, and keep the sore runnin^ many days after, ye longer the
bette^ for the pacient.

An other issue ye may make in the same manner, upon his right leg, four
fi^gers above his heel toward the i^steppe, and keep it open likewise, til
month or two after he be recovered

The.vi. Chapter, of the cure of carbuncles and anthrax.
AS concerning the curation both of a carbuncle and the pestilence sore called
anthrax, ye may do every thing according as we spoke before in the general
cure of the pestilence, both as touching diete, medicines against the venyme,
cordialles, laxatiues, blood lettinges, and ventoses, ye shall heal them as ye
heal the botch, in all things. But as touching letti^ge blood, when ye se a
carbu^cle or an anthrax by him self without aposte me of ye emunctoryes, be it
upon the neck, or upon the throat, or the face, or the head, ye must let him
blood in the head beyne. If it be upon the shoulders, breasts, or arm or other
place above ye ^auyl, take the vein called mediana.

And if it be beneth the said places, down unto the knees, take the vein
saphena, but if it be on the outsyde of the thygh, take the vein sciatica,
ever upon the side that the sore is on, (as is said before) consyderyng the
complexion, the strength, the age, and the quality of the blood, even as is
said in the chapter of the botch, and likewise apply the ventoses upon them
that can not bear flebothomye.

Which things presupposed, it is good to set upon the carbu^cle, whether it
be with botch or without botch, the yolke of an egg, incorporate with as much
salt as ye ca^ te^per with it, renuyng it every hour during a hole day. Or else
apply the said leches or blood suckers round about the sore, and after they
have sucked out the blood, set thereon a cock as is said of the botch, or else
a dove al hot splitte in ye middle. And he that can not get the leches, yet
let him not fail to apply the residue of ye said medicines, every one after
other as before is said.

Or a hot lofe coming out of the oven, or take a sower pomgranad, an^ cut
and sees it in vinegre, or scabious bruised between two stones, or the rote of
daises, or good sour dough, incorporate with salt and a little oil olive: all
these medicines are good to kyl the carbuncle.

The precious stone called a saphyre has also great virtue against venime and
specially against a carbuncle, if ye touch it with the stone, and draw it
round about the sore by the space of an hour. But whatsoever medicine ye set
unto a carbuncle, ye must lay a defensive about the sore, which is made as
hereafter follows.

A good defensive. Take sanguis draconis, and bole armeni, of each a like much,
make them in powder and incorporate them with oil of roses, and a little
vinegar, and lay it in a cloth al about the sore, without touching any part of
it, and renew it when it is hard and dry. But if the person be of good
ability and the carbuncle very fearce and burning, cannot be quenched with
the means aforesaid, than ye must proceed with an actual or potencial
cauterie, and to remove the escare, lay on capons greece or a little butter, or
else a plaster made of mallowe leaves, holihokes, violettes, lily rotes sodden
in broth of netes fete or other flesh, and afterward stamped, streyned, and
upon the fire mingled with powder of lineseede, barley flower, bean flower,
fresh butter, and swines greece, adding in the end when ye take it of, two
yolks of eggs and a little saffron, and stir it well about.

This is good also to ripe the foresaid sore, afterward mundify and heal as
is said in the other chapter.

I could declare many other remedies, but I set the^ that have been often
proved, and that be most easy for to gett^ at need, desyring al them that
shall use these my simple labors, to accept my good will unto the best, and
to pray to God almyghtye for his grace, unto whom only be al laud glory and
honor, world without end, Amen.

A declaracion of the veins in man's body, and to what diseases and
infirmities the openyng of every one of them do serve.
IT is not unknown to any which have seen Anathomies, how there be in a man's
body.ii. hyndes of veins, general and special.

General or commune veins are iii. which appear in the midst of every
man's arm on the inner side, and of them the highest is called of learned me^
cephalica, or the head beine, and the lowest of al three, is called commonly
basilica or regia, in the right arm by an other name epatica, or the vein of
the liver, but in the left arm, it is called pulmatica, the vein of the
longes. The.iii. common vein, lies between the other.ii. in the mids, and
is named cordiaca, or the vein of the heart.

The first that we did speak of, that is to say cephalica, is a vein most
apt to be letten blood, in all ye hyer parts of man's body, and is opened for
the head ache, and the eyes.

This vein if by chance ye touch it, and if it blede not at the first stroke
ye may be bold to strike it once again, for there is no ieopardye of cutting of
any muscle. And if ye cannot find it out, take his hraunche that is about
the thombes end.

The vein epatica, emptyeth from the middle parts of all the body, and it is
ever opened against diseases of the stomach, and ye spleen, but ye ought therein
to be very dilygent, that there be no muscule perced.

If ye can not spy it in the arm, seek the branch of it between the little
finger and the fourth.

The cordiaca vein draws blood as well from beneth, as from above, for it is
co^pouned of cephalica and epatica. If any feleth a weakness at his heart, he
ought to take good head that he be not opened in yt vein cordiaca, but if
necessitye be of bleding, let him blede in the cephalica or else mediana.

So likewise of the other.ii. The cordiaca, is good to cure the passions of all the hole body, when they do proceed of heat, specially of the heart and of
the longes.

But in the percing of it, ye must excedyngly beware, for under it is a
certain muscle, which if it be very depelye cut, the pacient is in ieopardy
of his life.

When ye entend to let a person blood in any vein, ye must bathe the arm
wherein ye perce, in good hot water, and draw ye hole abrod, yt the gross
blood may the more easily pass. And here is to be noted, that in all
sickenesses and times (except only infeccion of ye pestilence) ye must take
the same vein of the.iii. that does appear fuller and bigger tha^ ye other
are, for by that ye may perceive that the members which belong unto it, are
full of superfluityes of to hot blood, and this shall be suffycient of the
foresaid veins general: now we will reherce ye veins special. The vein in
the higher part of the forehead, is good to be opened i^ al diseases of the
head, and of the brain, specially if they be of long continuance, and it
cures the new begone lepry. The.ii. veins that are behind the ears, are
opened to preserve ye memory, mundify the face, and to take away rumes and
distillacions from ye head, and are good generallye in all diseases of the
mouth, and of the gummes. The.ii. veins of the temples of the head, are good
to void humors from the eyes, and they serve also for all diseases of the
ears.

The.ii. veins in the corners of the iyes are opened in the cure of webbes,
spots, clouds, mistes, perles, rednes, corns, and other infirmityes and
weakness of the sight.

The.ii. veins in the holownesse of the ears, serve to heal the shaking of
the head, swymminge of the eyes, dosines, sounding of the ears, new deafnes,
and uncleanness of the mouth.

The vein in the tippe of the nose, is good against apostemes of the head,
reumes, and fluxes of the iyes, it pourgeth the brain, and comfort the
memory.

This vein must be sought very wisely, for it lies deep, therefore he yt
will be sure of it, shall find it even in the very mids between the two
sides of the nose end.

The two veins within the nosethrilles, are opened against the heauynes of the
head.

The vein of the lips, is good to take in all diseases of the mouth.

The.ii. veins within the mouth, are opened i^ diseases of ye head, toth ache,
pain of the jaws, mouth and throat, and against frecles of the face.

The four veins in the palate of the mouth, are good to be opened in the
toth ache, reuines and catarres of the head.

The two veins in the hinder part of the head, are good against the phrenesye,
swimming, astonying, and al other pains of the head.

The.ii. veins underneath the tongue are opened against the fluxes of the head,
palsies, quincies, scrophules, apoplexia, cough, pains of the mouth, teeth,
and gummes, against impedimentes of the speech, and generally in all diseases
of the breast, heart, longes and arteries. The vein that is between the chyn,
and the nether lip, is good to open in curyng of a stynkyng breath.

The vein that lies right underneath the chynne, is good against the same
disease, and also in diseases of the head and of the breaste, polipus in ye
nose, pains of the chekes, stinking of the nosethriles, scrophules and spots
about the face. The.ii, veins of ye neck (one before, another behind) are
exceeding good against the pleuresie, new lepry, shaking of the members,
humors, and distillacions of the head, and to much styfnesse of lymmes.

The.ii. veins under the arm holes, serve against ye straitnes of the breast,
pain of the mydryfe, and the longes, and against difficultye of breathyng,
called asthma.

The two veins above the elbowes are taken in all diseases of the breast,
swimming of the head, spasme, and epilepsia, commonly called the falling
evil. Vena purpurea, or the purple vein liyng in the right arm next
epatica, toward the hand, is opened against diseases of spiritual members,
and of the bowels.

The vein illiaca next unto the purple vein, if it be well taken, is good
to heal the pains of all the inward members.

Vena pulsatilis, or the beatyng vein is good against the trembling of the
heart, swowning, and cardiaca passio.

The.ii. veins of the thumbes, are opened in diseases of the head, bleared
eyes, and against the most part of all fevers.

The vein between the forefinger and the thombe, is good for stoppyng^ of the
head, and to purge the super^tuitye of choiere, is good in agues, and in all
diseases of the eyes.

The vein that is between the ring^ finger, and the little (if it be opened
takes away diseases of the head, the longes, and of the spleen.

The vein called saluatella in ye rygh^ hand, between the little finger and the
next adioyninge, is opened in opilac^ons of the breast, against the gummy
matter of the eyes, perbraking, yelo^ iaundis, pains and colikes in the ryg^
side of the belly. And in the left hand it is opened against all diseases of
the spleen coming of replecion and oppilacion, and is good to heal the
hemoroides, phrenesy, colikes in the left side, dyseases of the veins, and to
much abundance of the flowers.

The vein of the right side, if it be opened, is good in lyenteria, dissuria,
dropsyes and other infyrmities caused of cold matter.

The vein of the left side is good against apostemes and excoriacions of the
bladder, pains of ye loins, swelling and stoppyng of the spleen.

The vein of the belly is good against diseases of the reins, and purges out
the melancholy blood.

The.iiii. veins about the place called pecte^, on either side the privy
members, are good against super^tuous yssues of the hemoroides, and to swage
pain in ^l diseases of the bladder, and the secret places, they stop the
bledynge of the ^se, and of other members, and are good to heal the lienterye
and strangurye. The vein over the foreskynne of the yearde, is opened against
the dropsye and al dyseases of the same member. The vein underneath the said
skin is wholesome to be taken for the cramp, or spasme, colike, swelling of ye
coddes, strang^rye, dyssurye, and dyseases of the stone, both in the reins and
in the bladder.

The two veins of the thyghes have a synguler virtue in the curyng of diseases
in the bladder, and the reins. The two veins in the legs, do serve
against the dropsye, pain and a postemations of the bladder, and the reins,
and the privy members, and against gout and swelling of the knees. The vein
saphena on the inner side of the leg, is opened against retencion of the
flowers, and in all diseases of the matryce, reins, hyppes, pryuye places of
men and women.

The outward saphena, otherwise called sciatica, descendynge from the legs
on ye outside, is exceeding good in curing the pain of the huckle bone,
whereof it has the name sciatica, and over that it heals all dyseases of the
bladder, and the bowels, gout of the hands and of the feet, with other pain
of the joints, and the palsye. The two outward veins upon the ancles, are
good to be opened for retencion of the flowers, they take away the sickness of
the spleen, and ease the pain of the back, strangurye, and stone.

The two veins under the little too, are good to pourge the superfluitye of
the matrice, and to heal scrophules of the face and the legs.

The two veins adioynynge to the little too, cure the apoplexy, yelow colere,
palsye, and all dyseases of the ^eynes.

The two veins in the lesser ioynte of the little too, are opened in curing of
an old cough, pustles, and ophthalmia in the eyes.

The two veins in the middle too, are good against the scrophules, and
diseases of the face, spots, redness, and pimples, watring of the eyes,
cankers and knobbes, and against the stopping of the flowers.

The vein on the left ioynte in the great too, is good against ophthalmia of
the eyes, spots of the face and the legs, ytche, and ulcers of evil
complexion, and purges super^tuities of the matrice. Thus much I have declared
of the vtilitye of veins.

FINIS.
The book of children.
TO begin a treatise of ye cure of children, it should seem expedient, yt we
should declare somewhat of the principles, as of the generation, the being in
the womb, the time of procedynge, the manner of the birth, the byndynge of the
nauyl, setting of the members, lauatoryes, unctions, swathinges, and
entreatementes, with the cyrcumstaunces of these and many other: which if I
should rehearse in particles, it would require both a longer time, and
increase into a greater volume. But forasmuch as the most of these things are
very trite and manifest, some pertainyng only to the office of a midwyfe, other
for the reverence of the matter not mete to be disclosed to every vile person:
I entende in this book to let them all pass, and to treat only of the
things necessary, as to remove the sicknesses, wherewith the tender babes are
oftentimes afflicted, and desolate of remedy, for somuche as many do suppose
that there is no cure to be ministered unto the^, by reason of their weakness.
And by that vain opinion, yea rather by a foolish fear, they forsake many
that might be well recovered, as it shall appear by the grace of god
hereafter, in this little treatise, when we come to declaracion of the
medicines. In the mean season for confinitye of the matter, I entend to write
somewhat of ye nourc^ and of the milk, with the qualityes, and complexions of
ye same, for in that consists the chief point and sum, no^ only of ye
mayntenaunce of health, but also of the fourmyng or infectyng either of the
wit, or manners, as the Poet Vergyl when he would describ^ an vncurteys,
churlysh, and a rude condishioned tyrant, did attribute the fault unto the
gyuer of the milk, as in saying thus.

Nec tibi diua parens, generis nec Dardanus author,
Perfide, sed duris genuit te cautibus horrens
Caucasus, hircaneque admorunt vbera tigres.
For that divine Poet being thoroughly expert in ye priuities of nature,
understood right well how great an alteracion every thing takes of the
humor, by the which it has his alymente and nourishinge in the youthe^
which thing also was considred and alleged of many wise Philosophers: Plato,
Theophrastus, Xenophon, Aristotle, and Pliny, who did all ascribe unto the
nourcement as much effect or more, as to the generacyon. And Phauorinus the
Philosopher (as writes Aulus gelius) affirms yt if lambs be nouryshed with
ye milk of goats, they shall have course wolle, like the hear of goats: and
if kiddes in like manner suck upon sheep, ye hear of them shall be soft like
wolle. Whereby it does appear, that the milk and nouryshyng has a marvelous
effect in changing the complexio^, as we se likewise in herbs and in
plants, for let the seed or ympes be never so good and pure, yet if they be
put into an unkind earth, or watered with a noughty and unwholesome humor,
either they come not up at al, or else they will degenerat and turn out of
their kind, ^o ye scarce it may appear from whence they have been taken:
according to ye verse Pomaque degenerant, succos oblita priores.
Wherefore as it is agreing to nature, so is it also necessary and comely for
the own mother to nource the own child. Which if it may be done, it shall be
most commendable and wholesome, if not ye must be well advised in taking of
^nource, not of ill complexion and of worse manners: but such as shall be sobre,
honest and chaste, well fourmed, amyable and cheerful, so that she may
accustom the infant unto mirth, no dronkard, vyeyous nor sluttysshe, for such
corruptethe the nature of the child.

But an honest woman (such as had a man child ^ast before,) is best not within
two months after her delyueraunce, nor approchyng nere unto her time again.
These things ought to be co^sidred of every wise person, that will set their
children out to nource. Moreover, it is good to look upon the milk, and to se
whether it be thick and gross, or to much thin and watrye, blackysshe or
blewe, or enclynyng to redness or yelowe, for all such are unnatural and
evil. Likewise when ye taste it in your mouth, if it be either bitter, salt,
or sour, ye may we^ perceive it is unwholesome.

That milk is good, that is white and sweet, and when ye drop it on your
nail, and do move your finger, neither ^eteth abrod at every stering, nor will
hang fast upon your nail, when ye turn it downward, but that which is
between both is best. Sometime it chances that the milk wastes, so that ye
nource can not have sufficient to sustain the child, for the which I will
declare remedies leaving out the causes for brevity of time.

Remedies appropriate to ye encreasyng of milk in the breasts. PAsneppe
roots, and fenelle roots, sodde^ in broth of chickens, and afterward eaten
with a little fresshe butter, makes increase of milk within the breasts.

An other. The powder of earth worms dried and dronken in the broth of a
neates tongue, is a singular experiment for ye some intent.

Also the broth of an old cock, with myntes, cynamome and maces.

Ryce also sodden in cowes milk, with the cromes of white breed, fenell seed
in powder, and a little sugre is excedyng good.

An other good medicine for the same. Take Cristall, and make it in fine
powder, and myxe it with asmoche fenell seed and sugar, and use to drink it
warm with a little wine.

A plaster for the increase of milk.

Take fenell and hoorehounde, of every one two handefulles, ^ys seed four
drammes, Saffron a scruple in poudre, sweet butter three ounces, sees them in
water, and make a plaster to be laid upon the nurces breasts.

These things have property to augment the milk, dylle, anyse seed,
fenelle, cristal, horehounde, fresh chese, honye, lettuse, beetes, myntes,
carette roots, parsneppes, the dugges or ydder of a cow or a sheep, gootes
milk, blaunched almondes, ryce porrigge, a cowes tongue dried and made in
powder, poched eggs, saffron, and the iuce of roasted veale dronken.

Thus much of the nource, and of the milk: now will I declare the infirmities
of children.

Although (as affirms Pliny,) there be innumerable passions and diseases,
whereunto the body of man is subject, and as well may chance in the young as
in the old: Yet for most commonly the tender age of children is chefely vexed
and grieved with these diseases following.

Aposteme of the brain. Swellyng of the heed. Scalles of the heed. Watchyng
out of measure. Terrible dreams. The falling evil. The palseye. Crampe.
Styfuesse of lymmes. Bloodsho^en eyes. Watryng eyes. Scabbynesse and ytche.
Diseases in the ears. Nesyng out of measure. Bredyng of teeth. Canker in the
mouth. Duynsye, or swellyng of throat. Coughe. Sreaytnesse of wind. Feblenesse
of the stomach and vomiting. Yeaxyng or hycket. Colyke and rumblyng in the
guts. Flux of the belly. Stoppyng of the bellye. Worms. Swellyng of the
nauill. The stone. Pyssyng in bed. Bruslynge. Falling of the skin. Chafyng
of the skin. Small pockes and measels. Fevers. Swellyng of the coddes. Sacer
ignis or chingles. Burning and scaldyng. Rybbes. Consumpcion. Leanenesse. Gogle
eyes.
Of apostemes of the brain. IN the fylme that covers the brain chances
often times apostemacion and swellynge, either of to much crying of ye child,
or by reason of the milk immoderatelye hot, or excess of heat in the
blood, or of cold ^teume, and is known by these signs.

If it be of hot matter, the heed of the child is unnaturally swollen, read,
and hot in the ^eelyng: if it come of cold matter, it is somewhat swollen,
pale, and cold in the touching, but in both cases the child can not rest,
and is ever loathe to have his heed touched, cries and vexes it self, as it
were in a frenesye.

Remedy. Make a bath of mallows, camomylle, and lyllyes sodden with a shepes
heed, till the bones fall, and with a spong or soft cloutes, al to bath the
head of the child in a cold aposteme, with the broth hot as may be
suffered, but in a hot matter wete the broth luke warm, or in the cooling,
and after the bathe, set on a plaster, thus.

A playstre. Take fenugreke, camomill, wormwood, of every one an handful,
seethe them in a close vessel, till the third part be consumed, then stamp
the^ in a mortar, and stir them, to the which ye shall put of the same brothe
again enough to make a plaster, with a little bean flower, yolks of eggs
and saffro^, adding to them fresh butter or duckes grese sufficient, and
apply it. In a cold matter let it lie a day: but in a hot cause ye must
remove it every six hours.

Of swellyng of the heed. TNstation or swellynge of the heed, comes of a
wyndye matter, gathered between the skin and the flesh, and sometime between
the flesh and the boones of the sculle, the tokens whereof are manifest enough
to the sight, by the swellyng or puffinge up, and pressed with ye finger, there
remains a prynte, which is a sign of wind and viscous humors, ye shall
heal it thus.

Remedy. First let the nourse avoid al things that engendre wynd, salt or
slymy humors, as beans, peaso^, eles, sammon, saltfysshe, and like: then make
a plaster to the chyldes heed, after this fashion.

Take an handful of fenel, smallache and dylle, and sees them in water in a
close vessel, afterward stamp them, and with a little cumyne, and oil of
bitter almondes, make it up, and lay it often to the childs heed, warm. In
defaulte of oil of almons take gosegrese, adding a little vinegre. And it is
good to bathe the place with a soft cloute, or a sponge in the broth of these
herbs: Rue, time, maiorym, hysope, fenell, dylle, comyne, sal^itre, myntes,
radysh rotes, rocke^, or some of them, ever taking heed, that there drop no
portion of the medicines in the babes eyes, mouth, or ears.

Scalles of the head. THe heads of children are ofte^tymes vlcered, and
scalled, as well when they suck, and the^ most commonly by reason of sharp
milk, as also when they have been weaned, and can go aloone. Sometimes it
happens of an evil complexion of humors by eating of raw fruit, or other
evil meats, and sometime by long continuynge in the son, many times by
dropping of restye bacon, or of salt beef on their bare heads. Other whiles
they be so borne out o^ their mothers womb, and in all the^ is no great
difficulty til the here b^ grown: but after that, they require greater cure,
and a conning hand, not withstanding as God shall give m^ grace, here shall be
said remedies for the cure of them, such as have been of^tentymes approved:
wherein I have intended to omyt the disputacions o^ the dyfference of scalles,
and the humors whereof they do proceade, and will go straight to the
composicion o^ medicynes, following the good experyence, here ensuynge.

Remedies for scalles. If ye se the scalles like the shelle^ of oysters, black
and dry, cleauing^ upon the skin, one within an other ye may make a
fomentacion of hoot^ and moist herbs, as fenugreke, hol^ hocke, bears
breach, lyneseede, an^ such other, sodden al or some of the^ in the brothe of
netes feet, and so t^ bathe the sores, and after that apply a soft plaistre of
the same herbs, with gosegrese or butter, using this still, till ye se the
scabbe removed, and then wasshe it with the iuce of horehound, smallach and
betony, sodden together in wine, and after the wasshyng put upon it powder of
myrre, aloes and fra^^ensence, or hold his heed over a chasyngdisshe of coals
wherein ye shall put frankensence and saunders in powder. But if ye se the
scabbes be very sore and mattrye with great pain, and burning of the heed,
ye shall make an ointment to cool the matter thus.

An ointment to cool the burning of a sore head. Take white lead and
lytarge, of every one.v. drammes, lie made of the ^sshes of a vine.iii.
drammes, oil of ^ses, an ounce, wax, an ounce, melte ^he wax first, than
put to the oil and lie, with the rest, and in the end ^. yolks of eggs,
make an oyntme^t, and lay it to the head. This is the ^omposicion of Rasis.

An other ointment singular for the same purpose. Take betony, grounswel,
plantayn^ fumytorie, and dayses, of every or like much, stamp them, and
myng^ them with a pound of fresshe swin^ greece, and let them stand closed in
moist place.viii. days, to putrify, t^ frye them in a pan, and strain the^
into a clean vessel and ye shall have grene ointment of a singular operac^ for
the said disease, and to quenc^ all unkind heates of the body.

Also ye must use to shave the hea^ what so ever things ye do lai unto ^ If
there lacks the cleansi^g of the ^res, and the child weaned, ye shall d^ well
to make an ointment of a ly^ turpentyne, bulls gall, and honey, a^ lay upon the
sores.

Also it is proved, that the vryne o^ bulle, is a singular remedy to mu^di^ the
sores, and to loce the hears by the roots, without any pain or pille.

The juice also of morel, dayfye (...) and groundswel fried with greece and made
in an oyntmente, cools al unkind heates, and pust^es, of the head.

Here is to be noted, that during this disease in a suckynge child, the
^ourse must avoid al salt, and sower meats that enge^der cholere, as
mustarde, vinegre, and such: and al manner fruits, (except a pomegranate) and
she must abstain in this case, both from eggs, and from other kind of
white meats in general, and above al be may eat no dates, figs, nor
purcelane, for many hold opynion that purcelane has an evil propertye to
need scabbes and ulcers in the head. Moreover the childs head may not be kept
to hot, for that is oftentimes the cause of this disease.

Sometimes it chances that there ^readeth in the head of children as it ^ere
little wartes or knobbes somewhat hard, and can not be resolved by ^he said
medicines. Wherefore when ye se that none other thing will healpe ye shall make
a good ointment to remove it, in manner as herafter is decl^red.

An excellent remedy for wartes or knobbes of the head. Take lytarge and white
lead, of ec^ a like quantity, brymstome and quick^ silver quenched with
spittle, of eche^ less quantity, twice asmoch oil of roses, and a sponefulle
or.ii. of vinegr^ mix them al together, on a marble, t^ they be an ointment,
and lay it on the head, and when it has been dry an hour^ or.ii. wasshe it of,
with water, wheri^ was sodde^ maiorym, sauery and mi^tes, use it thus twyse a
day, morning and evening tylle ye se it hole. The thing is also good in all
the other kind of scalles.

Of watchyng out of measure. Sleep is the nouryshment and food of a suckyng
child, and as much r^quisite as the very tete, wherefore wh^^ it is deprived of
the natural rest, all the hole body falls in distemper, cruditie and
weakness, it proceeds commonly by corrupcion of the milk, or to much
abundance which ouerladeth the stomach, and for lack of good dygestyon,
vapors and fumes arise into the head, and infect the brain, by reason whereof
the child cannot sleep, but turns and vexes it self with crying. Therefore
it shall be good to provoke it to a natural sleep thus, according to Rasis.

Annoynte the foreheade and temples of the child, with oil of vyolettes and
vinegar, putting a drop or two in the nosethrylles, and if ye can get any
syrup of poppye, give it the child to lycke, and than make a plaster of oil
of saffron, lettuse, and the juice of poppye, or wette cloutes in it, and lay
it ouertwharte the temples.

Also the seades and the heads of poppye, called chessbolles, stamped with
rosewater, and myxte with woman's milk, and the white of an egg, beaten al
together and made in a plaster, causes the child to receive his natural
sleep.

Also an ointmente made of the seed of popy and the heads, one ounce, oil of
lettuse, and of popye, of each.ii. ounces, make an ointment and use it.

They that can not get these oils, may take the berbes, or juice of
lettuse, purcelane, houseleke, and popye, and with woman's milk, make a
plaster, and lay it to the forehead.

Oil of violettes, of roses, of nenuphar, are good, and oil of populeon, the
broth of mallowessodden, and the juice of water plantayne.

Of terrible dreams and fear ^the sleep. Oftentimes it happens that the
child is afraid in the sleep, and sometimes waketh soodainly, and sterteth,
sometime shriketh and trembles, which effect comes of the arysyng of
stynking vapors, out of the stomach into the fantasye, and senses of the
brain, as ye may perceive by the breath of the child: wherefore it is good to
give him a little honey to swallow, and a little powder of the seeds of peonye,
and sometimes treacle, in a little quantity with milk, and to take heed that
the child sleep not with a full stomach, but to bear it about wakyng, till
part be dygested, and when that it is laid, not to rock it much, for
overmuch shaking lets digestion, and makes the child many times to vomyte.

The falling evil called in the greek tongue epilepsia. NOt only other ages
but also little children, are oftentimes afflycted, with this gryeuouse
syckenes, some time by nature received of the parents, and tha^ it is
impossible, or difficile to cure, sometime by evil and unwholesome diet, whereby
there is engendered many cold and moist humors in the brain, whereupon this
infirmity proceeds, which if it be in one that is young and tender, it is
very hard to be removed, but in them that are somewhat strong, as of seven
years and upward, it is more easy.

I find that many things have a natural virtue against ye falling evil, not
of any qualitye elementall, but by a singular propertye, or rather an influence
of heaven, which almyghtye god has given unto things here in earth, as be
these and other.

Saphires, smaragdes, read coral, piony, mystletow of the oak taken in the
month of March, and the moon decreasynge, time, sauein, dylle and the stone
that is found in the bellye of a young swallow being the first brood of the
dame. These or one of them, hanged about the neck of the child, saves and
preserves it, from the said sickness. Now will I describe some good and wholesome
medicines to be taken inward for the same disease.

If the child be not very young, the mawe of a leueret, drunk with water and
honye cures the same.

A medicine for the fallinge syckenesse. Take the root of pionye, and make it
into powder and give it to the child to lycke in a little pappe and sugar. They
that are of age, may eat of it a good quantity at once and likewise of the
black seeds of the same piony. Item the purple violettes that creapeth on the
ground in gardeines with a long stalk, and is called in english and fried
meats, but abstain from milk and al manner fyshe. And it shall be good for
her, to eat a lectuary made after this sort.

Take nuntis, cinamone, cumine, rose leaves dried, mastike, fenugreke,
valerian, ameos doronisi, zedoarye, cloves, saunders, and lignum aloes, of
every one a dram, musk half one dra^me, make an electuary with clarified
honey, and let her eat of it, and give the child as much as half a nut every
day to swallow.

A plaster. Take an ounce of wax, and a dram of euphorbium, at the
potecaries, and temper it with oil olyue on the fire, and make a serecloth, to
coumforte the back bone, and the sinews.

A goodly lauatorye for the same purpose. Take lie of ashes, and sees therein
baye buryes, and as much piony seeds, in a close vessel to the third part and
wash the child often with the same.

Item a bathe of sauerye, maiorym, time, sage, nepte, smallage, and mintes, or
some of them is very good and wholesome.

Also to rub the back of the child and the limbs, with oils of roses, and
spyke, myxte together warm, and instead of it ye may take oil of baies.

Of the crampe or spasmus. THis disease is often seen among children and
comes very lyghtely, as of debilytye of the nerves and cords, or else of
gross humors, that suffocate the same: the cure of yt which is declared of
authors to be done by friccions and oyntmentes that comfort the sinowes and
dissolve the matter, as oil of floure-deluyce, with a little anyse, saffron and
the roots of pionie

Item oil of camomil, fenugreke, and mellilot^, or the herbs sodde^, betony,
wormwood, verueyne, and time, are exceeding good to wash the child in.

Item the plaster of exphorbium, written in the cure of palsy.

Of the stifnes or starknes of limbs. SOmetime it happens ^ the lymmes are
stark, ^ can not well come together, without the greater pain, which thyng^
proceeds mani times of cold, as when a child is found in the frost or in the
street, cast away by ^ wicked mother, or by some other chance, although I
am not ignoraun^ that it may proceed of many other causes, as it is said of
Rasis, and o^ Arnolde de villa noua, in his book of the cure of infantes.

And here is to be noted, a wonderful secret of nature, many times approved,
written of Auicenne in hy^ first Canon, and of Celius Antiquarium electionu^,
libro.xiii. capit.xxxvii* that when a member is utterly benum (...) and taken
thorough cold, so tha^ the paciente cannot feel his lymmes nor move them
according to nature, by reason of the vehement congelacio^ of ye blood, in
such case ye chiefest hel^ or remedy is not to set them to the fire to receive
heat, for by that means, lightly we se that eueri one swowneth and many dye
outeryghte, but to set the feet, legs, and arms in a payle of clear cold
water, which immediately shall dissolve the congelacio^, and restore the blood
to the former passage and fredome, after that ye man lay the pacient in a bed
to sweat, and give him hot drink and caudels or a coleis of a capon hot,
with a little cinamome and saffro^ to comfort the heart. An argument of this cure
ye may se thus.

When an apple or a pere is frosen in the winter set it to the fire, and it
is destroyed: but if ye put it into cold water it shall as well endure, as
it did before, whereby it does appear, that the water resolves cold, better
with hi^ moisture, than the fire can do by reason of his heat: for the water
relenteth and the fire draws and dries as affyrmeth Galene in his book o^
elements.

Hitherto have I declined by occasion, but I trust not in vain to the reader,
now to my purpose.

When a young child is so taken with a cold, I esteem it best for to bath the
body in luke warm water, wherei^ has been sodden maiorim and time, ^ soap,
sage, mintes, and such other goo^ and comfortable herbs, the^ to relieu^ it
with meats of good nourishment according to the age and necessity, and if
need be, when ye se the limbs y^ to be stark, make an oyntmente after this
form.

An ointment for styffe and stoyned limbs. Take a good handefull of nettles,
and stamp them, then seth them in oil ^ the third part in a double vessel,
kep^ that oyntme^t in a dry place, for it w^ last a great while, and is a
singular r^medy for the styfnes that comes of cold, and whosoever anoynteth his
hands and fete with it in the morning, shall not be grieved with cold all the
day after. The seeds of nettles gathered in harueste and kept for the same
entente, is excedyng good sodden in oil, or fried with swines greece, which
thing also is very good to heal the kybes of heels, called in latin
Perniones. The urine of a goat with the donge stamped and laid to the place,
resolves the stifnes of limbs.

When the cause comes not by extreme cold, but of some other affeccion of the
sinowes and cords, it is best to make a bath or a fome^tacio^ of herbs that
resolve and comfort the sinowes, with relaxacion of the gross humors, to open
the pores, as by example thus. Take malowes, holyhocke and dyl, of each a
handful or two, seth them in the water of netes fete, or in broth of flesh
without salt, with a handful of branne and comine, in the which ye shall bath
the child, as warm as he may suffe^ and if ye see necessity, make a plaist^
with the same herbs, and lay it to the grief with a little gosegrece, or duck^
greece, or if it may be gotten, oil of c^momil, of lylyes, and of dyll. Clout^
wette in the said decoccion, and la^ about the members, helps.

Of blood shotten eyes, and other infyrmityes. Sometime the eyes a^
bloudeshotten, and oth^ whiles increasing a fil^ and white humor, cou^ring the
sight, the cause^ often of to much crying, for the whi^ it is good to drop in
the eyes a little the juice of nighteshade, other w^ called morel, and to
anoint the for head with the same, and if the iye sw^ to wette a cloute in the
i^ice, and (...) white of eggs, and lay it to the gre^

If the humor be clammyshe a^ tough, and cleueth to the corners o^ eyes, so
that the child can not open them after his sleep, it shall be removed with the
juice of housleke dropped on the eye with a fether.

When the eye is bloudeshotten and ^edde, it is a singular remedy to put in
it, the blood of a young pigion, or a dove, or a partriche, either hoate from
the bird, or else dried and made in powder, as subtyl as may be possible.

A plaster for swellyng and pain of the eyes. Take quinces and cromes of
white head, and sees them in water till they be soft, then stamp them, and
with a little saffron and the yolks of two eggs, make a plaster to the
childs ^yes and forehead. Ye may let him al^ receive the fume of that
decoction. It is also good in the meigrim: if ye ^il have further, look in the
regiment of life, in the declaracion of pains of ^he head.

Of watryng eyes. IF the chyldes eyes water ouermuche without^ crying, by
reason of a distillacion coming from the head, Manardus teaches a goodlye
plaster to restrain the reumes and is made thus.

Hearts horn brent to powder, and washed twice, guaiacu^, otherwise called
lignum sanctum, corticum thuris, antimonie, of each one part, musk the iii.
part of one part, make a fine powder and use it with the juice or water of
fenel. These things have virtue to staunche the running of the eyes. The
shelles of snayles brent, the ticke tha^ is found in the dugges of kyne, phily^
pendula, frankensence and the white o^ an egg laid upon ye forehead, flewor^
or the water wherein it is steped, tutie ye water of duddes of oak stilled, bea^
flower finely sisted, and with the gu^m^ of a cheritree steped in vinegar, and
lay^ over all the temples.

Of scabbynesse and ytche. Sometime by reason of excess of heat, or
sharpness in the milk, through the nourses eating of salt and eygre meats,
it happenethe that a child is seen full of ytche by rubbing, fretyng, and
chafyng of it self, encresyng a scabbe called of the Greeks Psora: which
thing also chances unto many after they be weaned, procedinge of salt and
aduste humors, the cure whereof dyfferethe in none other, but according to the
difference of age, for in a sucking babe ye medicines may not be so sharp, as
it may be suffered in one that is alredye weaned. Against such unkind ytche,
ye may make an ointment thus. Take water of betony.ii. good handfulles, daysye
leaves, and alehofe otherwise called tu^nour or ground yuye, of each one
handful, the red docke rotes, two or three, stamp them al together, and grind
them well, then mingle the^ with fresshe grese, and again stamp them. Let them
so stand.viii. days to putrifye till it be hoar, then frye them out and
strain them and keep it for the same intent.

This ointment has a great effect, both in young and old, and that without
repercussion or dryuing back of the matter, which should be a peryllouse
thing for a young chld.

The herb water betonye alone, is a great medicyne to quench al unkind
heates without danger, or the sething of it in clear well water, to annoynte
the members. It is a commen herb, and grows by ryuers sides and small renning
waters, and wette places, arysi^g many times the heygth of a man out of the
ground, where he reioyseth, with a stalk four square, and many branches on
every side, and also it bears a whytysh blewe flower very small, and in
harvest it has innumerable seeds, black, and as fine as the seed of tutsone
or less, the leaves bygge and long, according to the ground, full of juice,
iagged on the sides like a saw, even as other betonye, to whom it approaches
in figure, and obtemeth his name of water betony. The sauoure of the leaf is
somewhat heavy, most like to ye sauoure of elders or walwort, but when it is
bruised it is more pleasant, which thing induces me to vary from the minds of
them that think this herb to be Galiopsis in Dioscorides, written of him that
it should stynke when it is stamped, but the more this herb is stamped, the
more sweet and herbelyke it sauoureth: therefore it can not be galeopsis: and
besides that, it is never found in dry and stony ground as the Galiopsis is.
Neither is this herb mencyoned of the new or old authors, as far as I can
see, but of only Vigo, ye famous surgion of our time in Italye, which writes
on it, that this herb exceadeth al other in a malo mortuo (so calls he a
kind of ^eprye elephantyk, or an universal and fylthy scabbe of all the body:)
and in like manner he says it is good for to cure a canker in the breasts. Ye
may read these things in his second book. Capitul.iii. and his fifte book
of the French pockes, in the third chapter: where he does describe this
aforesaid herb, with so manyfeste tokens, that no man will doubt it to be water
betony, conferryng the book and the herb duly together. Moreover he names in
Italye a bridge where it growethe in the water in great abundance, and is
called of yt nation Alabeueratore, which in deed the Italtons that come hither
and know both the place and the herb, do affirm plainly, it is our water
betony.

And where as he allegeth Dioscorides in climeno, which by co^templacio^ of
both has but small affiniti or none with this herb, it was for nothing else
but lack of the to^ges, which fault is not to be so highly rebuked in a man of
his study, applying him self more in the practyse of surgery, and to handye
operacio^, wherein in deed he was nere incomparable, then he did to search ye
variau^ce of tongues, and rather regarded to declare ye operacio^ of things
with truth, then to dispute upon the propertyes or names with eloquence.

Thus have I declyned again from my matter, partly to show ye descripcion of
this wholesome herb, partelye to satisfy the minds of ye surgions in Vigo,
which have hitherto read the said places in vain, and furthermore because
there is yet none that declares manyfestly the same herb.

An other remedy for scabbes and ytche. Take the roots of dockes, and frye
the^ in fresh grese, then put to it a quantity of brimstone in powder, and use
to rub the places twice or thrice a day. Brimstone poudred and souped in a
rere egg heals the scabbes, which thing is also very good to destroy worms.

A goodly sweet soap for scabbes and ytche. Take white soap half a pound, and
stepe it in suffyciente rosewater, til it be well soked, then take two drammes
of mercinye sublymed, dissolve it in a little rosewater, labor the soap and ye
rosewater well together, and afterward put in it a little musk or cyuette, and
keep it. This soap is exceeding good to cure a great scabbe or ytche, and that
without peril, but in a child it shall suffyce to make it weaker of the
mercurye.

An other approved medicine for scabbynesse and ytche. Take fumyterrie, docke
roots, scabiouse, and the root of walwort, stamp them al, and set the^ in
fresh greece to putrifye, then frye them and strain the^, in which lycour ye
shall put turpe^tine a little quantity, brymstone, and fra^kensence very fynely
poudred and sifted a porcio^, and with sufficient wax make an ointment on a
soft fire: this is a singular remedy for the same purpose. But i^ this cure ye
ought to give the child no eggs, nor any eygre or sharp meat, and the nurse
also must avoid the same, and not to wrappe it in to hoote, and if nedde be,
to make a bathe of fumitorye, centaurye, fetherfewe, tansie, wormwood, and
sauge alone, if ye se the cause of the ytche or the scabbe to be worms in ye
skin, for a bitter decoecion shall destroy the^ and dry up the moistures of
the sores.

Of diseases in the ears. MAny diseases happen in the ears, as pain,
apostemes swellynges, tynklynge and sound in the heed, stoppinge of the organes
of hearing: Water, worms, and other infortunes gotten into the ears, whereof
some of them are dangerous and hard to be cured, some other expelled of
nature without medicyne.

Remedy for pain in the ears. For pain in the ears without a manifest
cause, as often chances, it is a singular remedy to take the chest worms,
that are found under barks of trees, or in other stumpes in the ground and will
turn round like a pease, take of them a good quantytye, and sees them in
oil, in the rynde of a pomegranarde on the hot ymbres, yt it brenne not, and
after that strain it and put into the ears a drop or two luke warm, and
then let him lie upon the other ear, and rest. Ye may give this to al
ages, but in a child ye must put a very little quantity.

An other. The hame or skin of an adder or a snake, that she casts, boiled
in oil, and dropped into the ears, eases ye pain, and it is also good for
an ear that mattereth mingled with a litel honey, and put in luke warm. It is
also good to drop into the ears the juice of organye and milk.

For swellyng under the ears. Paynters oil, which is oil of lyneseed, is
excedyng good for ye swellyng of the ears, and for pain in the ears of all
causes.

Item a plaster made of lineseede and dille, with a little duckes grese and
honey, If ye se the aposteme break, and run, ye may cleanse it with the iuce of
smallach, the white of an egg, barley flour, and honey, which is a common
plaster to mundifye a sore.

When the ears have received water or any other licour, it is good to take and
stamp an onion and wring out ye iuce with a little gosegrese, and drop it
hot into the ear as it may be suffered, and lay him down on the contrary
side an hour, after that cause him to nese if his age will suffer, with a
little pellitorie of Spain, or nesinge powder, and then enclyne his ear
downewarde, that the water may issue.

For worms in the ears. Take myrre, aloes, and the seed of colocinthis,
called coloquintida of the apothecaries, a quantity of each, sees the^ in oil
of roses, and put a little i^ ye ear Myrre has a great virtue to remove the
stenche that is caused in the ears by any putrefaction, and the better with
oil of bitter almons, or ye may take ye iuce of wormwood with honye and salt
peter.

For wind in the ears and tinklyng. Take myrre, spykenarde, cumyne, dylle,
and oil of camomyl, and put a drop in ye ears. They that have not al these
may take some of them, and apply it according to discretion.

To amend deafness ye shall make an ointment of an hares galle, and the grese
or droppyng of an ele, which is a sovereign thing to recover hearing.

Of nesyng out of measure. WHen a child neseth out of measure, yt is to say,
with a long continuance, and thereby the brain and virtues animal be febled,
it is good to stop it, to avoid a further inconvenience.

Wherefore ye shall annoint the head with the juice of purcelane, sorel, and
nyghtshade, or some of them, and make a plaster of the white of an egg, and
the juice, with a little oil of roses, and emplayster the forhead and temples,
with the milk of a woman, oil of roses, and vynegre a little.

If it come of cold reume, ye shall make a plaster of mastyke, frankensens,
myrre, wine, and apply it to ye former part of the head. A fume of the same
received in ^axe, and laid upon the chyldes head, is wholesome.

Breedyng of teeth. ABout ye seventh month, sometime more, sometime less after
ye birth, it is natural for a child for to breed teeth, in which time many one
is sore bered, with so^dry diseases and peines, as swelling of ye gummes and
jaws, unquiet cryeng, fevers, crampes, palsies, ^tuxes, reumes, and other
infirmities, specially wha^ it is long or ye teeth come forth, for the sooner
they apere, the better, and the more eafe it is to ye child. There be diverse
things ye are good to procure an easy breeding of teeth, among whom the
chiefest is to anoint the gummes, with the brains of an hare, myxte with
as much capons greece and honey, or any of these things alone, is exceadynge good
to supple the gummes and the synewes.

Also it is good to wasshe the child two or three times, in a week, with
warm water, of the decoccion of camomyll, hollyhocke and dylle.

Fresh butter, with a little barley flour, or honye, with the fine powder of
fra^kinsence and liquirice, are commended of good authoures for the same
entente. And when the pain is greatte, and intolerable, with aposteme or
infla^mmacion of the goummes, it is good to make an ointme^t of oil of roses,
with the juice of morelle, otherwise called nyghtshade, and in lack of it,
anoint the ^awes within, with a little fresshe butter and honye.

For lack of the hares brain, ye may take the conyes, for they be also of the
kind of hares, and called of Plinye Dasypodes, whose mawes are of the same
effect in medicine, or rather more, than is written of authoures, of the mawes
of hares.

If ye se the gummes of the child to aposteme or swelle with soft flesh,
full of matter and paynefull, the best shall be to anoint the sore place with
the brain of an hare, and capons greece, equally myxt together, and after that
ye have used this, ones or twice, annoynte the gummes, and apostemacions with
honye.

Thyrdlye if this help not, take turpentyne myxte with a little honey in equal
portion: And make a bath for the head of the child, in this form. Take the
flowers of camomylle and dyl, of each an handful, sees them in a quarte of
pure rennyng water, until they be tender, and wasshe the head before any meat,
every morning, for se pourgeth the superfluytye of the brains, through the
seames of the skull, and wythdraweth humors from the sore place, finally
comforts ye brain and all the virtues animal of the child. To cause an easy
breedyng of teethe, many things are rehearsed of auctours besides the
premises, as the first cast tooth of a colte set in silver and borne, or read
coralle in like manner, hanged about the neck, where upon the child should
oftentimes labor his gummes, and many other like, which I leave out at this
time, to avoid tediousnes, only content to declare this of coral, that by
consent of al authors, it resists the force of lyghtenyng, helps the
children of the falling evil, and is very good to be made in powder, and
dronken against al manner of bleeding of the nose or fundament.

Of a canker in the mouth. MAny times by reason of corrupcion of the milk,
venomous vapoures arising from the stomach, and of many other infortunes there
chances to bread a ca^ker in ye mouths of children, whose signs are
manifest enough, yt is to say by stinking of the mouth, pain in the place,
contynual rennyng of spittle, swellynge of the cheke, and when the mouth is
opened against the son, ye may se clereye where the canker lies. It is so
named of the latter sort of phisicions, by reason of crepynge and eating
forward and backewarde, and spreadethe it self abroad, like the feet of a
creues, called in latin cancer, notwithstanding I know that the Greeks, and
ancient latynes, give other names unto this disease, as in calling it an
ulcer, other whiles ^the, neme, carcinomata, and (...) al in english, known
by the (...) of canker in the mouth, and although there be many kinds
according to the matter whereof they be engendered, and therefore require a
diversity of curing, yet for the most part, when they be in childerne, the
cure of them al differs very little or nothing, for ye chief intent shall be
to remove the malignitye of the sore, and to dry up the noisome matter and
humors, tha^ to mundify and heal, as in other kinds of vicers, sores, and
wounds.

Remedies for the canker in the mouth of children. TAke dry red roses, and
violettes, of each a like quantity, make them in powder, and myxt them with a
little honye, this medicine is very good in a tender suckynge child, and many
times heals alone, without any other thing at al. But if ye se there be great
heat and burning in the sore, with exceeding pain, ye shall make a juice of
purcelane, lettuse and nightshade, and wash the sore with a fine pyece of
sylke, or drive it in with a spoute, called of the surgions a spring.

This by the grace of God, shall abate the brennyng, aswage the pain, and kyl
the venime of the ulcer.

But if ye see the canker yet increase with great corrupcio^ and matter, ye
shall make an oyntmente after this manner.

Take mirre, galls wherewith they make ynke, or in defaute of them, oken
apples dried, frankincense, of each a like much, of the black buries growing
on the bramble, taken from the bushe while they be grene, the.iii. part of all the rest, make them al in powder, and mixed them with as much honey and saffron,
as is sufficient, and use it.

A stronger medicine for the canker in the mouth of children. Take the root of
celidonye dried, the rind of a pomegranate, read coral in powder, and the
powder of a hearts horn, of each a like, roche alume a little. First wash the
place with wine, or warm water, and honey, and afterward put on the foresaid
powder, very fine and subtyle.

An other singular medicine for the canker in the mouth of al ages.. ysope,
sage, rue, of each one good handeful, sees them in wine and water, to the
third part, then strain the^ out, and put in it a little white coperose,
according to necessitye: that is to say, when the sore is great, put in the
more, when it is small ye may take ye less, than add to it a quantity of
honey claryfied, and a sponeful or two of good aqua vite, wash the place with
it, for it is a singular remedy, to remove ye malice in a short while, which
done ye shall make a water incarnatiue and healyng thus.

. rybwoort, betonye and daysies, of each a handefull, sees them in wine and
water, and wash his mouth, two or three times a day with the same iuce.
Moreover some write yt crystal made in fine powder, has a singular virtue to
destroy the canker, and in like manner the powder of an hearts horn bre^t with
as much of the rind of a pomegranade, and the juice of nyghtshade, is very
good and wholesome.

Of quinsye and swellyng of the throat. THe quinsy is a dangerous sickness,
both in young and old, called in latin angina, it is an inflammacion of the
neck with swellyng and great pain, sometime it lies in the very throat,
upon the wesaunt pype, and than it is exceeding perilous for it stops the
breath, and stranguleth the paciente anon.

Other whiles it breaks out like a bonche on the one side of the neck, and
than also with very great dyffycultye of breathynge, but it choketh not so
sone as the first does, and it is more obediente to receive curacion. The
signs are apparaunt to syghte, and besides that the child can not cry,
neither swallow down his meat and drink without pain.

Remedy. It is good to annoint the grief with oil of dyll, or oil of
camomyll, and lylies, and to lay upon the head, hot cloutes dipte in the
waters of rosemary, lauender, and sauery.

The chiefest remedy commended of authors in this outrageous sickness, is the
powder of a swallow brent with feathers and all, and myxte with honey, whereof
the paciente must swallowe down a little, and the rest anointed upon the
pain. They praise also the powder of the chyldes dunge to the child, and of a
man to a man, burnt in a pot, and anointed with a little honey. Some make a
compouned oyntmente of both, the receite is thus.. of the swallow brent, one
portion, of the second powder another, make it i^ a thick form with honey,
and it will endure long for the same intent,

Item an other experiment for the quinsy and swellynge under the ears.

Take the musherun that grows upon an elder tree, called in englysh, Jews
ears (for it is in deed croncled and ^at, much like an ear) heat it against
the fire, and put it hot in any drink, the same drink is good and wholesome
for the quinsye.

Some hold opinion that whosoever uses to drink with it, shall never be troubled
with this disease, and therefore carye it about with them in journeys.

Of the cough. THe cough in children for ye most part, proceeds either of a
cold, or by reason of reumes, descending from the head into ye pipes of the
longes or the breaste, and that is most commonly by ouermuche abundance of
milk, corruptyng the stomach and brain: therefore in that case, it is good to
feed the child with a more slender dyete, and to annoynte the head over, with
honey, and now and than to press his toungue with your finger, holdyng down
his head that the reumes may issue, for by yt means the cause of the cough
shall run out of his mouth, and avoid the child of many noughty and slimy
humors: which done, many times the paciente am ends, without any further
help of medicine.

For the cough in a child. Take gum arabike, gum dragagant, quince seeds,
liquirice and peridies, at the pothecaries, break them al together, and give
the child to suppe a little at once, with a draught of milk newli warm, as it
comes from the cow.

Also stamp blaunched almons, and wringe them out with the juice of fenell, or
water of fenell, and give it to the child to feed with a little sugar.

Against the great cough, and heat in the body. The heads of white poppye,
and gum dragagant, of each a little much, long cucumer seeds, as much as al,
seth them in whaye, with raysons and sugar, and let the child drink of it
twyse or thryse a day luke warm, or cold.

Of straytnesse of wind. AGainst the straitness of breathyng which is no
quinsie, the consent of authors do attribute a great effect, to lyuesede
made in powder, and tempered with honey, for the child to swallowe down a
little at once. I find also yt the milk of a mare newly received of ye child
with sugar, is a siguler remedy for ye same purpose, Which thing moreover, is
exceeding wholesome to make the belly laxe without trouble.

Of weakness of the stomach, and vomitynge. MAni times the stomach of the child
is so feeble that it cannot retain either meat or drink, in which case, and for all debilitye thereof, it is very good, to wash the stomach, with warm water
of roses, wherein a little musk has been dissolved, for that by the odor
and natural heat gives a comfort to all the spiritual members.

And then it is good to roast a quince tender, and with a little powder of cloves
and sugar to give it to the child: to eat co^serua qui^ces, with a little
cinamome and cloves, is synguler good for the same intent. Also ye may make a
juice of quinces and give it to the child to drink with a little sugar.

An oyntmente for the stomach. Take gallia muscata at the pothecaries.xx.
grain weight, myrrh a very little, make it up in ointment fourine, with oil
of mastike, and water of roses sufficient, this is a very good ointment for the
stomach.

An other singular receipt. Take mastike, frankincense, and dry red roses, as
much as is sufficient, make them in powder, and temper the^ up, with the juice
of mintes, and a sponful of vinegar, and use it.

An other. Take wheat flower, and parche it on a pan, till it begin to
brenne and wax read, than stamp it with vinegar, and add to it, the yolks
of two^ eggs hard roasted, mastike, gum, and frankincense sufficient, make a
plaster and lay it to the stomach.

To recover an appetite lost.

Take a good handful of rank and lustye rewe, and seth it in a pint of
vyneger to the third part or less, and make it very strong, whereof if it be
a child, ye may take a tooste of brown bread, and stamp it with the same
vyneger, and lay it plaisterwyse to the stomach, and for a stronger age
besides the plaster, let him suppe morning and euenyng of the same vinegar.
This is also good to recover a stomak lost, by coming to a fire after a long
iourneye, and has also a singular virtue to restore a man that swowneth.

An experiment often approved of Rasis for the vomit of children. Rasis a
solemn practicioner among phisicions, affyrmeth that he healed a great
multitude of this disease, only with the practice folowinge, which he takes
to be of great effect in all like eases.

First he makes as it were an electuarye of pothecarye stuff, that is to
say, lignum aloes, mastike of every one half a dram, galls half a scruple,
make a lectuary with syrup of roses, and gallia muscata and sugar.

Of this he gave the children to eat a very little at once and often. Afterward
he made a plaster thus., mastike, aloes, sloes, galls, frankensence, and
brent bread, of each a like portion, make a plaster with oil and sirupe of
roses to be laid to the childs stomach ho^e.

An other ointment for the stomach, described of Wilhel. Placentino. Take oil
of mastike or of wormwood.ii. ounces, wax.iii. ounces, cloves, macis, and
cinamome of each three drammes, make an ointment, adding in the end a little
vinegar.

The yolke of an egg hard roasted, mastyke, frankincense and gum, made in a
plaster with oil of quinces, is excedyng good for the same purpose.

Of yeaxing or hicket IT chances ofte^tymes that a child yeaxeth out of
measure. Wherefore it is expedient to make the stomach eigre before it be fed,
and not to replenish it with to much at once, for this disease commonly
proceeds of fuines, for if it come of emptines, or of sharp humors in the
mouth of the stomach, which is seldom seen: the cure is then very di^ficill
and dangerous.

Remedy. When it comes of fullness that child yeaxeth incessauntlye without
measure and that by a long custom, i^ is good to make him vomit with a fe^ther
or by some other light means, yt the matter which causes ye yeaxynge may
issue and vncomber the stomach, yt done, bring it a sleep, and use to annointe
the stomach with oils of castor, spike, camomyll, and dyll, or two or, iii.
of them, joined together, warm.

Of colike and rumblyng in the guts. PEine in the belly is a common disease
of children, it comes either of worms, or of taking cold, or of evil milk,
yt signs thereof are to well known, for the child cannot rest, but cries
and fretteth it self, and many times cannot make their vryne, by reason of
wind, that oppresses the neck of the bladder, and is known also, by the
member in a man child, which in this case, is always stiff, and pricking,
moreover the noise and rumblinge in the guts, hither and thither, declares
ye child to be grieved, with wind in the belly, and colike.

Cure. The nourse must avoid all manner meats, that enge^der wind, as beans
peason, butter, hard eggs, and such.

Than wash the childs bellye with hot water wherein has been sodden comine,
dyll and fenel, after that make a plaster of oil and wax, and clappe it hot
upon a cloth unto the belly.

An other good plaster for the same intent. Take good stale ale and fresh
butter, sees them with an handful of comine poudred, and after put it all
together into a swines bladder, and bind the mouth fast, that the licoure
issue not out, then wind it in a cloth, and turn it up and down upon the
belly as hot as the pacient may suffer, this is good for the col^ke after a
sudden cold, in all ages, but in children ye must beeware ye apply it not
to hot.

Of flux of the bellye. MAny times it happens either by taking cold, or by
reason of great pain in breadyng of teeth, or else through salt and eiger steume
or cholere engendered in the body, that the child fa^^eth into a soodayne
laxe, which if it long continue and be not helped, it may bring the pacient
to extreme leanes, and consumpcio^: wherefore it shall be good to seek some
wholesome remedi, and to stop the runnynge of the flux thus.

Remedy for the flux in a child.

First make a bath of herbs that do restrain, as of plantaine, saint John's
weed called ipericon, knotgrasse, bursa pastoris and other such, or some of
them, and use to bath him in it as hot as he may well suffer, then wrap him in
with clothes, and lay him down to sleep.

And if ye se by this twice or thryse using, that the belly be not stopped: Ye
may take an eggs yolke hard roasted, and grind it with a little saffron,
myrrh and wine, make a plaster, and apply it to the nauyl hot. If this
succeed not, then it shall be necessary for to make a powder to give him i^ his
meat with a little sugar and in a small quantitye thus.

Take the powder of hearts horn bre^t, the powder of goats claws, or of
swines claws brent, the powder of ye sede of rose which remain in the bery
when the rose is fallen, of every one a portion, make them very fine, and with
good red wine or almon milk, and wheat flower, make it as it w^ a paste, and
dry it in little balls till ye se necessitye, it is a singular remedy in all
such cases.

Item the milk wherein has been sodden wh^te paper, and afterward quenched
many hot irons or gaddes of stele, is exceeding good for the same intent to
drink.

And here is to be noted, that a natural flux is never to be feared before
the seventh day, and except there issue blood, it ought not to be stopped
before the said time.

Powder of the herb called knotgrasse or the iuce thereof in a possette
dronke^, or a plaster of the same herb, and of bursa pastoris, bolearmeny, and
the juice of plantaine with a little vyneger, and wheat flower is exceeding
good for the same cause.

Also the rindle maw of a young suckynge kydde given to the child, the weight
of.x. grains, with the yolke of an egg soft roasted, and let the pacient
abstain from milk by the space of.ii hours before and after, instead whereof
ye may give a roasted quince or a warden with a little sugar and, sinamome to
eat.

Item an other goodly receipt for the same intent.

Take sorel seed and the kernelles of great raysyns dried, acorne cups, and
the seed of white popie, of each.ii. drammes, saffron a good quantytye, make
them in powder and tempre the^ with the iuce of quynces, or syrup of red
roses, this is a sovereign thing in all fluxes of the woumbe.

Many other things are written of authors in the said disease, which I here
leave out for brevity: and also because the before reherced medicines are
sufficient enough in a case curable: yet will I not omytte a goodly practice in
the said cure. The pesyl of an heart or a stagge dried in powder and dronken,
is of great and wonderful effect in stoppyng a flux. Which thing also is
approved in the liver of a beast called in English an otter. The stones of
him dronken in powder, a little at ones thirtye days together, has healed men
for ever of the sallyng evil.

Of stoppyng of the bellye. EVen as a flux is dangerous, so is stoppynge and
hardenesse of the bellye grievous and noyesome to the child, and is often cause
of the colycke and other diseases.

Wherefore in this case ye must always put a little honey into ye chyldes meat,
and let the nource give him honye to suck upon her finger, and if this will not
help, then the next is to myxe a little fine and clear turpentine, with
honye, and so to resolve it in a saucer, and let the child suppe of it a
little. This medicine is descrybed of Paulus Agineta, and recited of diverse
other as a thing very holsom and agreing to the nature of the child: for it
does not only losen ye bellye without grefe or danger, but does also purge
the liver and the longes, with ye spleen and kidneies, generally comforting all the spiritual members of the body.

The gall of an ox or a cow laid upon a cloute on the nauylle, causes a
child to be loose bellyed, likewise an emplayster of a roasted onyon, the gall
of an ox, and butter, laid upon the belie as hot as he may suffer. If these
will not help, ye shall take a little cotton, and roll it, and dypped in the said
gall, put it in the fundament.

Of worms. THere be diverse kinds of worms in ye belly, as long, short,
round, ^at, and some small as lyce, they be al engendered of a crude, gross,
or phlegmatike matter, and never of choler nor of melancholy, for all bitter
things kylleth them, and al sweet meats that engendre fleume, nourissheth and
fedeth the same. The signs dyffer according to ye worms. For in the long and
round, the pacie^t commonly has a dry cough, pain in the belly about ye
guts, sometime yeaxing and tre^bling in ye night, and starte sodaynely, and
fall aslepe again, other whiles they gnasshe and grynd their teeth together,
the eyes wax holowe, with an eygre look, and have great delight in slombryng,
and silence, very loath when they are awaked. The pulse is incertayne, and never
at one stay, sometime a fever with great cold in ye joints, which endures
three or.iiii ^oures in the night or day, many have but small desire to meat,
and when they desire, they eat very greedelye, which if they lack at their
appetyte, they forsake it a great while after, the hole body co^sumeth and
waxes lean the face pale or blewe: sometime a ^uxe, sometimes vomit, and in
some the belie is swollen as styffe as a taberet. The long and broad worms are
known by these signs, that is to say, by yelownesse or whittishnesse of ye
eyes, intolerable hunger, great gnawinge and grypyng in the belly, specially
before meat, water coming out at the mouth, or at ye foundament, continual
ytche and rubbing of the nosethrilles, sonken eyes and a stynkyng breath, also
when the person does his easement, there appears in the donge little flat
substaunces, much like the seeds of cucumers or gourdes.

The other less sort are engendered in the great gutte, and may well be known
by the excedyng ytche in the fundament within, and are oftentimes seen coming
out with the excrementes. They be called of phisicio^s, ascarydes.

Remedy for worms, in children. The herb that is found growyng upon oisters
by the seas side, is a synguler remedy to destroy worms, and is called
therefore of ye Greeks Scolytabotan^, that is to say, the herb that kylleth
worms: it must be made in powder, and given with sweat milk to the child
to drink. The Phisicions call the same herb coralino.

A singular receyte for to kill worms. Take the gall of a bull or ox, newlye
killed, and stamp in it an handful of good comyne, make a playstre of it, and
lay it over all the belly, removing the same every six hours.

Item the gall of a bull with seeds of colocinthis, called colloquintida of
the pothecaryes, and an handful of baye beries well made together in a
plaster, with a sponful of strong vinegre, is of great effect in the same
case.

If the child be of age or strong complexion, ye may make a few pills of
aloes, and the powder of wormeseed, then wynd them in a piece of a singing lofe,
and annoynte them over with a little butter: and let the^ be swalowed down hole
without chewyng.

Of swellyng of the nauill. IN a child lately borne, and tender, sometime by
cuttyng of the nauyll to nere, or at an inconueniente season, sometime by
swadlynge or byndynge amysse, or of much cryinge, or coughynge, it happens
otherwhyles, that the nauyll aryseth and swells with great pain and
apostemacion, the remedy whereof is not much differente from the cure of
ulcers, saving in this that ye ought to apply things of less attraction,
then in other kind of ulcers, as for an example, ye may make an oyntmente
under this form. Take spike or lauender, half an ounce, make it in powder,
and with three ounces of fine and clear turpentyne, tempre it in an oyntmente,
addyng a portion of oil of sweet almons. But if it come of cryinge, take a
little bean flower, and the ashes of fine lynnen cloutes burnt, and tempre it
with red wine and honye, and lay it to the sore.

A plaster for swellyng in the nauill. Take cowes donge, and dry it in
poudre, barlye flower, and bean flower of each a portion, the juice of
knotgrasse a good quantity, comine a little, make a plaster of all and set it
to the nauyl.

An other. Take cowes donge and sees it in the milk of the same cow, and lay
it on the grefe. This is also marueylouse effectual to help a soodayne ache,
or swelling in the legs.

Of the stone in children. THe tender age of children as I said before, is vexed
and afflicted with many grievous and peryllous diseases, among who^ there is
few or none so violente or more to be feared in them, then that which is most
feared in all kinds of ages, that is to say, the stone, an houge and a pityful
disease, ever the more encreasyng in days, ye more rebelling to the cure of
Physycke, Therefore is it excedyng daungerouse when it falls in children, for
asmoch as neither the bodies of them may be well purged of the matter
antecedent, called humor peccans, nor yet ca^ abide any vyolent medecyne having
power to break it, by reason whereof the said disease acquyreth such a
strength above nature, that in process of time it is utterly incurable.

Yet in the beginning it is oftentimes healed thus.

First let the nurse be well dyeted, or the child, if it be of age,
abstaining from al gross meats, and hard of digestion, as is beafe, bacon,
salt meats and cheese, than make a powder of the root of peonye dried, and
myngle it with as much honey as shall be sufficient, or if the child abhor
honey, make it up with sugar molten a little upon the cooles, and give thereof
unto the child, more or less, according to the strength, twyse a day,
tylle ye se the vryne pass easelye, ye may also give it in a rere egg, for
without dout it is a synguler remedy in children.

An ointment for the same. Oil of scorpions, if it may be gotten, is exceeding
good to anoint withal the members, and the nether part of the bellye, right
against the bladder, ye may have it at the pothecaries*

A singular bath for the same intent. Take mallows, holyhocke, lyly roots,
lynseed, and parietary of the wall, sees them all in the broth of a shepes
head, and therein use to bathe the child oftentimes, for it shall open the
straytnes of the condites, that the stone may issue, swage the pain, and
bring out the grauel with the urine, but in more effect when a plaster is
made, as shall be said herafter, and laid upon the raynes, and the belly,
immediately after the bathyng.

A plaster for the stone. Take parietarie of the wall, one portion, and stamp
it, doves donge an other portion, and grynde it, than frye the^ both in a
pan, with a good qua^titye of fresh buttyre, and as hot, as may be
suffered, lay it to the belly and the back, and from.iiii. hours to.iiii let
it be renewed.

This is a sovereign medicine in all manner ages.

Item an other powder which is made thus.

Take the kernels or stones that are found in the fruit, called openers or
mespiles, or of some, medlars.

Make them in fine powder, which is wounderfull good for to break the stone
without danger, both in young and old.

The chestwormes dried and made in fine powder, taken with the brothe of a
chycken, or a little sugar, helps them, that can not make their vryne.

Of pyssyng in the bed. MAny times for debility of virtue retentiue of the
reins or blader, as well old me^ as children are oftentimes annoyed, when
their urine issues out either in their sleep or waking against their wylles,
having no power to retain it when it comes, therefore if they will be helped,
first they must avoid al fat meats, til ye virtue retentiue be restored again
and to use this powder in their meats and drynkes.

Take the wesande of a cock, and pluck it, tha^ brenne it in powder, and use
of it twice or thryes a day. The stones of an hedgehogge poudred is of the
same virtue.

Item the claws of a goat, made in powder dronken, or eaten in pottage. If
the pacient be of age, it is good to make fine plates of lead, with holes in
them, and let them lie often to the naked back.

Of brustynge. THe causes of it in a child are many, for it may come of very
light occasions, as of great cryeng, and stopping the breathe, byndyng to
strayghte, or by a fall, or of to great rockyng, and such like, may cause the
filme that spreads over the bally, to break or to slack, and so the guts
fall down, into the cod, which if it be not utterly incurable, may be healed
after this sort.

First lay the paciente so upon his back, that his head may be lower than
his heales, than take and reduce the bowels with your hand, into the due
place, afterward ye shall make a plaster to be laid upon the coddes, and
bound with a lace round about the back, after this form.

Take rosin, frankynsence, mastyke, comyne, lyneseed, and anyse seed of every
one a like, powder of osmonde roots, that is to say of the broad fern,
ye.iiii. part of al, make a plaster with sufficient oil olyue, and fresshe
swynes greece, and sprede it on a lether, and let it continue (except a great
necessity) two or three wekes, after that apply an other like, till ye see
amendment. In this case it is very good to make a poudre of the hears of an
hare, and to temper it with sugre or conserua roses and give it to the child
twies every day.

If it be above the age of.vii. year, ye may make a singular receyte in drink
to be taken every day twyse, thus.

A drink for one that is brosten. Take matfelon, daysies, comfery, and
osmundes, of every one a like, seet them in the water of a smythes forge to
the third part, in a vessel covered, o^ a soft fire, than strain it and give
to drink of it, a good draughte at ones morning and evening, addyng evermore
in his meats and drinks, the powder of the hear of an hare, being dried.

Of falling of the fundament. MAny times it happens that the gut called of
the lati^es rectum intestinu^, falls out at the fu^dament, and can not be
gotten in again without pain and labor, which disease is a common thing
in children, coming oftentimes of a sudden cold or a long laxe, and may well
be cured by these subscribed medicines.

If the gutte has been long out, and be so swollen that it cannot be reposed,
or by coldness of the air be congeled, the best counsel is to let the child
sit on a hot bathe, made of the decoccion of mallows, holihocke, lineseed,
and the roots of lyllyes, wherein ye shall bathe the fundamente, with a soft
cloute or a sponge, and when the place is suppled thruste it in again, which
done, than make a powder thus.

A powder for falling of the foundament. Take the poudre of an hearts horn
brent, the cups of acornes dried, rose leaves dried, goats claws brent, the
rind of a pomegranate, and of galls, of every one a portion. Make them in
powder, and strowe it on the fundament. It shall be the better, if ye put a
little on the gutt, before it be reposed in ye place, and after it be settled, to
put more of it upon the fu^dament, than bind it in with hot lynnen clothes,
and give the child quynces, or a roasted warden to eat with cinamome and sugar.

An other good powder for the same. Take galls, myrre, frankensence, mastike,
and aloes, of every one a little make them in a powder, and strowe it on the
place.

A little tar with gosegrese is also very good in this case.

An other good remedy. Take the wolle from betwenethe legs, or of ye neck
of a sheep, which is full of sweat and fattie, than make a iuce of vnsette
leekes, and dippe the wolle in it, and lay it to the place as whotte, as may
be suffered, and when it waxes cold remove it and apply an other hot, this is
a very good remedy for falling of the fundament.

If the child provoke many times to seege, and can expel nothing, that
disease is called of the Greeks tenesmos, for the which it shall be very good
to apply a plaster made of gardeine cressis and a comine in like qua^titye,
frye them in butter, and lay it on the bellye as hot as he may suffer. It is
also commended, to fume the nether parts with turpentine and pitch, and to sit
long upon a bourd of ceder or juniper, as may be possible.

Chafyng of the skin. IN the flanks, armeholes, and under the ears, it
chances often times that the skin fretteth, either by the childs own vryne,
or for the defaute of washyng, or else by wrappyng and keeping to hot.

Therefore in the beginning, ye shall anoint the places, with fresh capons
greece, then if it will not heal, make an ointment, and lay it on the place.

An ointment for chafyng and gallyng. Take the root of the flower deluyce
dried, of red roses dried, galingale and mastike, of each a like quantytye,
beat them into most subtyle powder: than with oil of roses, or of lineseede
make a soft ointment.

Item the longes of a wether dried, and made in very fine powder, heals al
chafynges of the skin: and in like manner the fragmentes of shomakers lether,
brent and cast upon the place, in as fine powder as is possible, has the same
effect, which thing is also good for the galling or chafing of the fete, of
whatsoever cause it comes.

Item bean flower, barley flower, and the flower of fitches tempered with a
little oil of roses, makes a sovereign ointment for the same intent.

If the chafinges be great, it is good to make a bath of holihocke, dyll,
violets and lineseede with a little branne, than to wash the same places
oftentimes, and lay upon the sore, some of the same things. The decoction of
plantaine, bursa pastoris, horsetaile and knot-grasse, is exceadynge good to
heal all chafynges of the skin.

Of small pockes and measilles. THis disease is common and famil^er, called of
ye greeks by the general name of exanthemata, and of P^^nie, papule et pituite
erupciones, notwithstanding ye consent of writers, has obtained a distinction
of it in.ii. kinds: that is to say, varioli the measils, and morbilli called
of us the small pockes.

They be both of one nature, and proceed of one cause, sauinge that the
measils are engendered of the infla^macion of blood, and the small pockes of
the inflammacion of blood myngled with cholere.

The signs of them both are so manyfeste to syghte, that they need no farther
declaracyon, for at the first some have an ytche and a freting of the skin
as if it had been rubbed with nettles, pain in the head and in the back,
the face read in color and flecked, fear in the sleep, great thyrst,
redness of the eyes, beatynge in the temples, shotynge and pryckyng thorough
all the body, then anon after, when they break out, they be seen of diverse
fashions and fourmes, sometimes as it were a dry scabbe or a lepry spredyng
over all the members, other whiles i^ pushes, pimples, and wheles, rennyng with
much corrupcion and matter, and with great peine of the face and throat, drines
of the toungue, horcenes of voice, and in some quiuerynge of the heart with
swownyng.

The causes of these evil affeccions, are rehearsed of authors, to be
chiefly.iiii. First of the superfluities which might be corrupt in the womb of
the mother, the child there being, and receiuinge the same into the poores, the
which at that time for debility of nature, could not be expelled, but ye child
encresyng afterward in strength, be driven out of the veins into the upper
skin.

Secondarilye it may come of a corrupt generation, that is to say when it was
engendered in an evil season, ye mother being sick of her natural infyrmitye,
for such as are begotten that time very seldom escape the disease of leprye.

The third cause may be an evil dyete of the nourse, or of the child it
self, when they feed upon meats that increase rotten humors, as milk and
fyshe both at one meal, likewise excess of eating and drinking, and surfitte.

Fourthly this disease comes by the way of contagion, when a sick person
infecteth an other, and in that case it has great affinity with the
pestilence.

Remedy. The best and most sure help in this case, is not to meddle with any
kind of medicines, but to let nature work her operacion, notwythstandynge if
they be to slow in coming out, it shall be good for you to give the child to
drink, sodden milk and saffron, and so keep him close, and warm, whereby they
may the sooner issue forth, but in no case to administer any thing that might
either repress the swelling of the skin, or to cool the heat that is
within the members. For if this disease which should be expelled by a natural
accion of ye body to ye long health afterward of the pacient, were by force of
medicine cowched in again, it were eue^ enough to destroy the child Therefore
abide ye full breaking out of ye said wheales, and then (if they be not ripe)
ease the childs pain by making a bath of holihock, dyl, camomil and fenel:
if they be ripe and matter, the^ take fenel, wormwood and sage, and sees them
in water, to the third part, wherein ye may bathe him with a fine cloth or a
sponge. Always provided yt he take no cold during the time of his sickness.
The wine wherein fygges have been sod, is singular good in the same case, and
may be well used in all times and causes.

If the wheales be outrageous and great, with much corrosio^ and venime, some
make a decoction of roses and pla^taine, in the water of oak, and dissolve in
it a little english honey and camphore.

The decoction of water betonye, is approved good in the said diseases.
Likewise ye ointment of herbs, whereof I made mencio^ i^ ye cure of scabbes, is
exceeding wholesome after the sores are ripe.

Moreover it is good to drop in the pacientes eyes.v. or vi. times a day, a
little rose or fenell water, to coumforte the sight, lest it be hurt by
continual renni^g of matter. This water must be ministered in the summer cold,
and in the wi^ter ye ought to apply it luke warm.

The Same rose water is also good to gargle in his mouth, if the child be then
payned in the throat.

And lest the condites of ye nose should be stopped, it shall be very expedient
to let him smell often to a sponge wete in the iuce of sauerye, strong vinegar,
and a little rose water.

To take away the spots and scarres of the small pockes and measels.

The blood of a bull or of an hare is much commended of authors to be
anointed hot upon the scarres, and also ye licour ye issues out of shepes
claws or goats claws het in the fire. Item the dripping of a cignet or
swanne laid upon the places oftentimes hot,

Fevers. IF the fever use to take the child with a great shaking, and
afterward hot, whether it be cotidian or tercian, it shall be singular good
to give it in drink, the black seeds of Peony made in fine powder, searced
and mingled with a little sugar.

Also take plantain, fetherfew and verneine, and bath the child in it once or
twyse a day, binding to the pulces of the hands and fete a plaster of ye
same herbs stamped, and provoke the child to sweat before the fit comes.

Some give counsel in a hot fever, to apply a cold plaster to the breast,
made in this wise. Take the juice of wormwood, plantain, mallows and
housleke, and temper in them as much barley flower as shall be sufficient, and
use it. Or thus, and more better in a weak paciente.

Take dry roses and powder them, then temper the powder with the juice of
endive or purcelane, rose water, and barley flower, and make a plaster to the
stomach.

Item an ointmente for his temples arms and legs, made of oil of roses, and
populeon, of each like much.

A good medicine for the ague in children. Take plantaine with the root, and
wash it, then sees it in fair runnyng water to the third part: whereof ye
shall give it a draught (if it be of age to drink) with sufficient sugar, and
lay the sodden herbs as hot as may be suffered, to the pulses of the hands
and fete. This must be done a little before ye fit, and afterward cover it with
clothes.

The oil of nettles whereof I spoke in the title of stifnes of limbs, is
exceeding good to annointe the members in a cold shaking ague.

of the grief. If there be much infla^macion or heat in the coddes, ye may
make an ointment of plantaine, the white and yolke of an egg, and a portion of
oil of roses, stir them well about, and apply it to ye grefe twice or
thrice a day.

When the pain is intolerable, and the child of age, or of strong complexion,
if the premises will not help, ye shall make a plaster after this sort. Take
henbane leaves, an handful and an half, mallowe leaves, an handful, sees
them well in clear water, then stamp them and stir them, and with a little
of the brothe, bean flower, barley flower, oil of roses and camomyl
sufficient, make it up and set on the swelling luke warm. Henbane as Auice^ne
says, is exceeding good to resolve the hardness of the stones by a secret
qualitye. Notwithstanding, if it come of wind, it shall be better to use the
said plasters yt are made with comine, for that is of a singular operacio^ in
dissoluyng wind, as affirms Dioscorides writing of the qualities of cumine.

Of sacer ignis or chingles IN Greek herisipelas, and of the Latins Sacer
ignis, our English women call it the fire of Saint Anthony, or chingles, it
is an inflammacion of members with exceeding burning and redness, hard in the
feelyng, and for the most part crepeth above the skin or but a little deep
within the flesh.

It is a grievous pain, and may be likened to the fire in consuming. Wherefore
the remedies yt are good for burning are also very wholesome here i^ this case.
And first the grene ointment of herbs described in ye chapter of itche, is of
good effect also in this cure: more over ye medicines yt are here described.
Take at the pothecaries of vnguentu^ Galeni an ounce and an half, oil of
roses two ounces, vnguenti populeon one ounce, ye iuce of plantain, and
nightshade one ounce or more, the whites of iii. eggs, heat the^ altogether,
and ye shall have a good ointme^t for the same purpose.

An other. Take earthwormes and stamp them in vinegar, then anoint the grefe
every two hours.

Item ye donge of a swan, or in lack of it the donge of a gose stamped with
the white and yolke of an egg, is good.

Item doves donge stamped in salet oil or other, is a singular remedy for the
same purpose.

Of burning and scalding. FOr burning and scalding whether it be with fire,
water, oil, lead, pytch, lime, or any such infortune: Ye must beware ye set
no repercussiue at ye first, that is to say no medicine of extreme cold, for
that might chance to drive the fervent heat into the sinowes and so stoppethe
poores, that it could not issue, whereof should happen much inconvenience in a
great burning (but in small it could not be so dangerous:) wherefore ye best is
when ye see a member either brent or scalded, as is said before.

Take a good quantity of brine, which is made of water and salt, not to
excedyng eyger or strong, but of a mean sharpnes, and with a clout or a
sponge bathe the member in it cold, or at the least blood warm, three or four
hours together, the longer the better: For it shall assuage much of the
peine, open the pores, cause also the fire to vapor and give a great comfort
to the weak member. The^ anoint the place with one of these medicines.

Take oil of roses one part, sweet creme two parts, honey half a part, make
an ointment and use it.

Item all the medicines described in the last chapter, are of great effect in
this case, likewise the grene ointment made of water betonye.

Item a sovereign medicine for burning and scaldynge, and all unkind heates
is thus made. Take a dosen or more of hard roasted eggs, and put the yolks in
a pot on the fire by the^ self, without licour, stir them and braye them with
a strong hand, till there arise as it were a froth or spume of oil to the mouth
of the vessel, then press the yolks and reserve the licour, this is called
oil of eggs: a very precious thing in the foresaid cure.

Moreover there is an ointment made of sheep dounge fried in oil or in swines
greece, than put to it a little wax, and use it.

Also take quick lime and wash it in veriuce.ix. or.x. times, than mingle it
with oil, and keep it for the same intent. Item the juice of the leaves of
lylyes v. parts, and vinegar one part, honey a little, makes an excellent
medicine, not only for this intent, but for all other kind of h^ and runnyng
ulcers.

Note that w^^tsoeuer ye use in this case, it must be laid unto, blood warm.
Also for auoydyng of a scarre keep the sore always moist with medicine.

Of kybes. The kybes of ye heels, are called in latyne perniones, they proceed
of cold, and are healed with these subscribed remedies. A rape rote, roasted
with a little fresh butter, is good for the same gryefe. Item a dosen figs,
sodden and stamped with a little goosegrece, is good. Earth worms sodden in
oil, has the same effect.

Item the skin of a mouse clapped a^ hot upon ye kibe, with the hear
outward, and it should not be removed during.^ii. days.

A plaster for a kybed heel. Take new butter, oil of roses, hens greece,
of each, an ounce, put the butter and the greece in a bygge rape rote, or in
lack of it, in a great apple, or onion, and when it is roasted soft, braye it
with the oil, and lay it playsterwyse upon the kybe.

An oth^ Take the (...) of apples and rapes roasted on the coses, of each.iii.
ounces, fresh butter.ii. ounces, duckes grese or swannes greece, an ounce,
stamp the^ all in a mortar of lead if it may be had, or else grynde them on a
fair marble, and use it.

Of consumpcion or leanesse. When a child co^sumeth or waxes lean without
any cause apparaunt, there is a bathe commended of authors, to wasshe ye
child many times, and is made thus. Take the head and feet of a wether, sees
the^ til the bones fall a sunder, use to bath ye child in this licour, and after
annointe him with this ointmente following. Take butter without salt, oil of
roses and of violettes, of each.i ounce, the fat of raw porke, half an ounce,
wax, a quarteron of an ounce, make an ointme^t, wherewith the child must be
rubbed every day twyse, this with good fedinge shall increase his strength by
the grace of God.

Of gogle eyes. THis impediment is never healed but in a very young child, even
at the beginning, whereunto there is appointed no manner kind of medicine, but
only an order of keeping, that is to say, to lay the child so in his
cradelle, that he may behold direct against the light, and not to turn his
eyes on either of both sides. If yet he begin to gogle, than set the cradell
after such a form, that the light may be on the contrary side: that is, on
the same side from whence he turns his eyes, so that for desire of light he
may dyrect them to the same part, and so by custom, bring them to ye due
fashion, and in the night there ought to be a candel set in likewise to cause
him to behold upon it, and remove his eyes from ye evil custom. Also grene
clothes, yelowe, or purple, are very good in this case to be set, as is said
before. Furthermore a coyfe or a bigge^ stonding out besides his eyes, to
constrain the sight to behold direct forward.

Of lyce. Sometimes not only children but also other ages, are annoyed with
lyce, they proceed of a corrupt humor, and are engendered within ye skin,
crepi^g out alive thorough the poores, which if they begin to swarm in
exceeding number, that disease is called of the greeks Phthiryasys, whereof
Herod dyed, as is written in the acts of apostles: and among the Romans
Scilla, which was a great tyrant, and many other have been eaten of lice to
death, which thing, wha^ it happens of the plage of god, it is past remedy,
but if at proceeds of a natural cause, ye may well cure it by the means
following. First let the paciente abstain from al kind of corrupt meats, or
ye bread fleume, and among other, ^ygges and dates must in this case be utterly
abhorred. Tha^ make a lauatory to wash and scour the body twice a day, thus.
Take water of the sea, or else bryne, and strong lie of ashes, of each a like
portion, wormwood a handful, seth them a while, and after wasshe the body
with the same licour.

A goodly medicine for to kyl lyce. Take the grou^des or dregs of oil,
aloes, wormwood, and the gal of a bull, or of an ox, make an ointment which is
singular good for the same purpose.

An other. Take musterde, and dissolve it in vinegre, with a little salt peter,
and annoint the places, where as the lice are wont to breed.

Item an herb at the pothecaries called stauisacre, brimstone, and vinegre, is
excedyng good.

It is good to give the pacient often in his drink, powder of an hearts horn
burnt.

Stauisacre with oil is a marueilouse wholesome thing in this case.

An expert medicine to drive away lyce. Take the grou^des or dregs of oil,
or in lack of it, fresh swines greece, a sufficient quantity, wherein ye shall
chase an ounce of quicksiluer til it be al so^ken into the greece, than take
powder of ^a^^sacre serced, and myngle al together, make a gyrdyll of a woollen
list meet for the middle of ye patient, and al to annoynte it over with the
said medicine, than let him were it contynually next his skin, for it is a
singular remedy to chase away the vermyn. The only odor of quyckesiluer
kills lyce.

These shall be suffycient to declare at this time in this little treatise of
the cure of children, which if I may know to be thankefully received, I will by
gods grace, supplye more hereafter: neither desire I any longer to live, than I
will employ my studyes to the honor of god, and profit of the weal public.

Thus ends ye book of childerne, composed by Thomas Phayer, studiouse in
Philosophy and Physic.
The contents of the regiment of life.
Of diseases and remedies of the heed. Pain coming of choler. Pain caused of
fleume. Pain caused of melancholye. Regiment for all heedache. Remedy for
heedache of all causes. Of diseases in the face. To passifye a face incurable.
For redness of the face. For ca^kers, ulcers, and Noli me ta^gere. For worms
in the face. A purgacion for the same. Dyete for the same sycknesse. For the
eyes, and to quicken ye sight. For pain in the eyes. For bloodshoten eyes.
For swellyng of the eyes. For sore eyes. For great pain in the eyes. For
redness in the eyes. For hardness in the eyes. For all redness of eyes. To
dry the eyes. For webbes in the eyes. Regiment for diseases in the eyes. For
infirmities of the ears. For stynkyng of the nose. For nosebleadyng. Remedy
for tothache. To make teeth white. Remedies for diseases in the breest. For a
horce voice. For the cough. For shortness of wind. For asthma. An ointment
for the breath. Regiment for the same. Remedies for phthysyke. For the
pleauresye. For diseases in the rybbes. Weakness of the heart, and the cure.
Swownyng. For diseases of the stomach. For weakness thereof. For abhorryng of
meat. For belchyng. For wyndinesse thereof. For the hicket. Regiment for
hicket. For vomytyng. To comfort the stomach. Pain in the stomach. Remedies
for diseases of the liver. A singular purgacion for colere. Other medicines
laxatyue. For heat in the liver. For stopping of the liver. Remedy for
diseases of the galle. For Iaundies. For diseases in the spleen. A goodly
purgacion for melancholy. For the black Iaundies. For all oppilacions.
Diseases of the bowels. For colyke and yliaca passio. For the wyndye colyke. A
supposytorye. A purgacion for collike of fleume. A glyster for all colyke.
Pain of the raynes, and remedy. Diete for colike and pain of the reins.
Fluxes of the bellye. Remedy for the flux lienteria. For the flux diarthea
and other. Lectuaries for the flux. For flux of all causes. Diseases of the
matrice. To staunche the flux of women. For strangling of the matrice. For all
pains of the mother. Of the stone i^ the raines and bladder. with the perfect
cure and diete for the same. Of the gout, with the causes and remedies.
Finis.
The contents of the treatise of the pestilence.
In the first part.
A preface of the authore. What is signified by this word pestilence. The
first root or cause superior of the pestilence. The second root superior.
The third root, inferior. The fourth root, or cause intersor. Of eleccion
of the air. Of eating and drynkyng. Of slepyng and waking. Of exercise. Of
emptines and fulness. Of accidents of the mind. Of medicines preseruatyues. A
drink for the pestilence. A good preservative for ye common people A powder
for the same. An other singular remedy for rich me^. An other sovereign and
goodly receipt both preservative and curatiue. Of sweet waters. Perfumes
against the pestilence. Pomaunders for pestilence.
In the second part,
How to know a person infected. Of the cure of pestilence by the way of
diete. Of the cure of pestilence by the way of medicines. A receite against the
pestilence. Manardus medicine. A lectuary of great virtue. An other medicine
liquide. Of letting blood, ve^toses and purgacio^s. Of applicacio^ of outward
medicines. A plaster to ripe a botche coming of the pestilence. An other for
the same. The use of surgerye for him that has no botche. Of the cure of
carbu^cles and anthrax. A good defenciue. A declaracio^ of ye utility of
veins commonly to be let blood in ye body of man.
Finis.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the Sun over against the
condite, by Edward whitchurche.

i.5.50.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


