A Rumor of wars among the times and signs of peace.

A SERMON PREAched at Hamsted, in Middlesex, the 6. of September 1608.

By William Bailey.

Psalm. 37.37. Mark the upright man, and behold the just; for the end of that
man is peace. AT LONDON Printed by G. E. for Ed. Blount, and William Barret.

To the truly religious, and most virtuous Lady, the Lady ANNE WAADE, wife to
the Right-worshipfull, wise and learned, Sir WILLIAM WAADE Knight, Lieutenant
to the Kings most excellent Majesty, in his Highness Tower of London: grace,
mercy, and peace, from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
MADAME. The Princely Prophet co^plaineth in many of the Psalms, of the
prosperity and peace of wicked men. He set his eyes upon their outward
welfare, but considered not their woeful case, their inward fears and
torments; until he went into the Sanctuary of God, and then he understood
the estate, and end of such men, to be wretched and miserable. And surely,
howsoever a senseless security, and dullness (by the just judgment of God,
blinding their eyes, and hardening their hearts) ouer-layeth and smoothereth
them, as the Harlot her Child. 1. King. 3. chapter, so that they remain (as it
were) stark dead, without any prick of conscience, eating and drinking,
dancing and singing, laughing and sporting, as that lewd Generation immediately
before the flood; 2. Cor. 5.12.
yet their rejoicing is only in the face (as Paul speaks) not in the Heart,
and their conscience shall bark, (at farthest) in the unwelcome day of their
death, when the remembrance of their licentious and wicked life past, shall
sting them like a Scorpion. Well therefore may the judgment of the conscience
for a while, be suspended, but it can never be Semper virgins furiae.
corrupted; and well may wicked men, by their countenance, credit, and
authority, escape the hands of man in this life, but they can never be freed
from the fear of the wrath of God, that shall seize upon them in the life to
come. It is good therefore that every man (while it is to day) seek out, and
provide for his safety and best estate: for he is like to have an ill day of
it, that takes up arms against God. There is no wise man, going about to make
war against a King (says our Savior) that sits not first down, and
takes counsel whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him that
comes against him with twenty thousand. If a man could muster all his
sins, and set down the number of them, they would amount indeed to very many
thousands, but here is the mischief, they are all suspected and falsehearted
Soldiers, and even Martial Policy requires, that they be dismissed, and
discharged the field, and for his virtues, they are so few, and so
insufficient, that they shall never dare to abide the brunt: there remains
therefore unto him only this, that while this revenging GOD is yet a far
off, he send an Embassage, and desire conditions of peace.

Something (MADAME) I have delivered in this small Treatise, to this purpose.
I must not here enlarge it, least I be said, to pass the nature, and exceed
the measure of an Epistle. What ever it be, I humbly present it to your good
Ladyship, as an acknowledgement of my hounden duty, and service unto Master
Lieutenant, and your self. The Lord recompense your careful respect of my
weak estate, with eternal blessings: for I may say of you, as the Apostle
Saint Paul of Onesiphorus; 2. Tim. 1.16.
You have been a continual refreshing unto me, since the time of my great
distress, and exile (as I may speak) from the Stapleford Abbat in Essex
Place and People of my wishes and desires. I preached this Sermon (as your
Ladyship may understand) at the Baptizing of your younger Son Master IEAMES,
upon whom it pleased the Kings Majesty, to bestow his own name, that it
might always remain, as an undoubted token and pledge of his gracious favor
unto you both, and as a witness unto your Son for after times, that his
princely will and pleasure is, (if he shall carry and behave himself as is
fit for the Godsonne of so learned, gracious, wise, and valerous a Prince) to
advance him to such places of dignity, as shall serve both for the exercise and
employment of his virtues, as also for the reward of their deseruings. And now
I beseech the God of mercy, for ever to regard you and all your children
(Branches of excellent hopes) with the eyes of his tender mercy and compassion,
that the signs of his unspeakable love and kindness, may always rest upon
your souls and bodies in this life, to assure you more and more of that most
blessed, glorious, and immortallestate, in the life to come.

Your Lady ships most affected, and most humbly devoted in all duty and
service: WILLIAM BAILEY.

A Rumor of wars among the times, and signs of peace.
ISAIAH. 48.22. There is no peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked.


THey that wear soft clothing, Math. 11.8.
(says our Savior) are in Kings houses, Et mollibus vestiuntur (says
Gregory) qui adulationibus and laudibus delectantur, Gre: magnus.
they are softly clothed that love to be flattered and commended: I am not
this prophet, nor the son of this Prophet, if he have not well said, he is
old enough, let him answer for himself. Surely a bold Gloss it is, but he
was a great man, and an aged, therefore for once, let him go. But Amos.
7.12.13.
oh thou Seer, go far enough, into the land of Judah, and Prophecy there,
if thou will, Prophecy no more at Bethel, thou were best. Alas what a misery
were this, if I should find it thus? for Ier. 15.10.
woe is me my Mother, thou have borne me a contentious man, that cannot
flatter.

The Lord indeed Isai. 57.19.
creates the fruit of the lips to be peace: but shall I Ier. 6.14.
heal the hurt of Gods people with sweet words, and say, Peace, peace, when
there is no peace? God forbid! If Genesis 4.7.
thou do well, there is pardon, and a peaceable acceptance; but if wickedly,
flatter not thy self with the name of peace, for there is no peace says the
Lord unto the wicked. I have dug deep, and laid my foundation upon this
Rock, (GOD bless and prosper the rest of the building:) and thus (Right
Honorable) ye shall find it written in the eight and fortith Chapter of the
prophecy of Isay, and the last verse.

There is no peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked. When the Arc of the
covenant of the Lord, came into the Host of Israel, the people 1. Sam. 4.5.
shouted a mighty shoute, so that the earth rang again, and yet for all that,
there fell of Israel by the sword of ye Philistines thirty thousand footmen, in
that battle. The error, I take it was this: they could not, or would not
distinguish betwixt the figne, and the thing signified; between the favorable
assisting presence of God, and the outward and visible token thereof. The Arc
was there, and the Priests were there, and Verse 7.
woe unto us (said the Philistims) God is come into the Host; and yet the Lord
was not there.

Templum Domini, Templum Domini, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, say the Jews in the 7. of Jeremy the 4. verse: This is the Temple of
the Lord, as if all had been well, and so sure, that the Lord could not have
been displeased with them, so long as the Temple stood among them. This Leaven
of the Jews, is fallen unhappily into the Iumpe of the Gentiles and the Romans
11.17.21.
wild Olive tree that is graft in, has drunk of the unsavory licour of the
natural branches, that were broken off.

It is good, that we say, Lord, Lord, yet not Math. 7.21.
every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. It
may prove a good beginning to confess with the mouth, but Romans 10.9.
thou can not be saved, unless also thou believe with thy heart.

David, in the presence of Saul, calls Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.36.
an uncircumcised Philistin, and yet Saul's estate, was as wretched, and
desperate, though circumcised; so true it is, that Paul speaks, Galatians
6.15. neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature.

We have the word of God, (as it were) the Arc of his Covenant, the Preachers
also of this blessed word, the levites and the Priests. We have the Sacraments
of God, the Seals of this Covenant, and the Pleadges, of his reconciliation
and peace, toward us; and yet notwithstanding all this, the Lord God may have
a controversy with us, and we may be far from peace.

Thus have we made inquiry, and thus have we found it out, it is the doctrine
of the ancient, even of the Dan. 7.9.
Ancient of days, as Daniell speaks. Let us weigh it well, and search out
the causes: for that (in a time of peace, when the precious word of GOD, and
the holy Sacraments of GOD, which are the flagges (as it were) and Ensigns, of
his love and kindenes toward us) that there should be iarres (I say) and
contentions, and rumors of wars; this is strange in deed, and it concerns us
very much to understand it. This Text aims at this mark, and will guide us to
this knowledge, let us girde up the loins of our minds, and take our staves
in our hands, observe her foote-steppes and follow after her.

There is no peace, says the Lord. etc. This Prophet began to prophecy,
under the reign of Vzziah, or Azariah King of Judah; who (as we read in 2.
Kings 15. cap. 5. verse) was suddenly smitten with a leprosy, for usurping the
Priests office, He prophesied under four Kings, so we find in the first
Chapter of this book and other Stories of the Church do tell us, that he
died under the fifth, not a natural but a bitter, and violent death; being by
the bloody command of Manasses, sawne in sunder, with a wooden Saw, after he
had prophesied, unto the people of the Jews, Under, Iotham, 16. and under
Ahaz, 16. under Hezechiah, 29. these numbers make 61. how many years he
prophesied under Azariah the Scriptures tell us not, of his labors under
Manasses they are utterly silent.
threescore years, and more. His birth was noble, the Son of Amos, Brother
(as it is probale) of King Amazias, his eloquence admirable, in a high and
lofty phrase of speech, as he that can read him in the original may easily
perceive, and hence it is (says Hierome) Prolog. in Isaiam.
vt prae caeteris florem sermonis eius, translatio non potuerit conseruare,
that the translation could not retain the grace of the words of this Prophets
discourse.

There is not one, among the Prophets of the old Testament, that speaks so
evidently, and pleinely, of the Mosstah, and his sufferings, as this one does,
so that indeed (as the same father says) Non tam Propheta dicendus sit, quam
Euangelista, he may rather be named an Euangilist, then a Prophet: for he
(many hundredth years before CHRIST'S Incarnation) so clearly laid down, the
whole mystery of Christ, and our redemption, vt non putes de futuro
vaticinari, sed de praeteritis historiam texere, that he seemed, rather to
have published an history unto the world, of things past, then to have
prophesied of things to come.

The prophesies contained in this book, may (not unfitly) be distributed into
these two kinds, legal and evangelical; the legal prophesies are such, as
are denounced against the Jews, or against the enemies of the Jews. Against
the Jews, many afflictions for their rebellion, and namely, bondage and
captivity, under the Babilonians. Against the enemies of the Jews,
dissipation and perpetual destruction. The Evangelical Prophesies, consist
partly of their delivery from that Babilonian captivity, partly of the
election, counsel, and gracious covenant of GOD, of the sufferings of Christ,
and his glory, of the preaching of the Gospel, and the calling of the Gentiles.

This verse which I have read unto you, is part of a legal Prophecy,
denouncing a heavy judgment, against al wicked persons, as well Jews, as
Babilonians, and Gentiles, of what estate or condition soever. I will not
stand, in many words to declare, the coherence of this verse with the former.
Briefly, thus much I will teach of that point. It is the conclusion of one
entire Sermon of this Prophet, continued from the beginning of the 44. cap.
hitherto; the general subject whereof, is, the reuersion or return of the
Jews out of the captivity of Babylon.

These words the Prophet uses, as a forcing argument to that purpose, namely
to persuade the people to depart from thence with speed: exite a Babilonia,
fugite a Chaldaeis: go out of Babell, fly from the Chaldeans, says Isaiah,
in the twenty verse of this Chapter.

Now in as much as by that bodelie captivity, is signified there spiritual
servitude, and bondage under sin; therefore the Prophet with their departure
from that, would also, and principally intimate their flight from this; namely
from sin, and from the companions, or rather slaves of sin.

This the Prophet Jeremy in his 51. Chap. and 6. verse, delivers more
plainly, Flee out of the midst of Babel, and deliver every man his soul, be
not destroyed in her iniquity. Thus much of the words, as they have their
dependence of the matter that goes before: now we will consider of them
absolutely, without relation, and as they are in themselves.

There is no peace. etc. This Text has the virtue, and full force of a
Syllogism; for howsoever the parts of the Syllogism stand not here
distinguished, yet are they necessarily included, and the arguments that make
for the deduction of a sound conclusion, out of the Premises, plainly
expressed. For the better explanation of this, you must conceive the question
thus, An pax sit impijs, whether the wicked have peace; it is concluded in this
Text, that they have no peace, the medium concludendi, or proof of this, is an
argument a diuino testimonio, that is, from the witness or testimony of Gods
own mouth: the Lord has spoken it, therefore the wicked have no peace; there
is no peace, says the Lord unto the wicked. Ye see then that this conclusion
is negative, the extremes whereof are two perpetual contraries, and therefore
cannot possibly be affirmed one of another but denied. For as white cannot be
affirmed of blackness, nor light of darkness, no more can true peace, of
sin and wickedness.

The argument drawn from the divine testimony, is used here (...), that is to
say, by way of pre-ocupation, or prevention, and it argues the infidelity of
the heart of man, in this point, and his gross and beastly error. As if the
Prophet had thus said; How soever the wicked and carnal men of this world,
because they live in prosperity, and have of all things in abundance,
suffering no outward affliction, nor misery, do conceit themselves to be
seated in a kind of perfect peace, and therefore can hardly be drawn to
entertain an other doctrine, and to believe a contrary assertion: yet the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, who is wisdom it self, he knows it, and who is
truth it self, he has pronounced it, that they have no peace: and therefore
how be-it, they flatter themselves with outward shows and shadows, yet in
truth they have no part of the substance, there is no true peace unto them.

Sin is an ill Master that gives his servants no rest, an evil, and
ungrateful Guest, who the more he is welcomed, and the better enterteinment
he has, the more he vexes and disquieteth his Host: so that as Eliah said
unto Achab. 1. Kin. 18.18
It is thou that troublest Israel; so may every man reply upon his sin, it is
thou that troublest me: oh that I had peace in my soul! but alas thou will not
suffer me. Wicked men have no peace, not because they are men, for so the Lord
cherishes them, and favors them, but because they are wicked men, and this
is a maine reason, that the Spirit of God lays down in this Text, why there
can be no peace unto the wicked.

There is nothing but sin that makes a man unhappy; for there is nothing
that seperateth man from his God, but sin, and if man because of sin, be
separated from his GOD, the GOD and Prince of peace: how can there then be
peace unto that man? Man in the day of his innocence, had a two-fould peace,
says Bernard: Vt nec intus pugnae, nec foris timores, he had neither strife
within, nor fears without. The Flesh offered not to lay his foul hands upon
the Spirit, thence arose his inward peace, and hence (partly) was his peace
with GOD, and from this peace, sprange that outward, even peace with all the
creatures of GOD. But so soon as the Devil had corrupted him, and that he
had subscribed, with hand, and heart unto rebellion; he lost his peace with
the creatures, and hid himself from GOD. s Genesis 3.10.
I heard thy voice in the Garden, and was afraid, KI GNEIROM ANOKI, because I
was naked. The garment of righteousness, the robe of his former integrity and
holiness, was plucked from his back, and now there was nothing to be seen,
but a naked man, wounded with sin, and infected with the leprosy of
iniquity: no marvel then though he were afraid, Multa miser timeo (says
the Poet) quia feci multa proterue, I fear much, because I offend much: where
sin goes before, there fear follows, and where this fear has got the
place, there is no room for peace.

Caine, after he had bathed his hands in his brothers blood, and that he felt
himself spoiled of the peace that he had with God: he was possessed, (and
not without just cause) with an exceeding fear, least the creatures also,
should make war against him. Behold (says he) thou have cast me out this
day, from the face of the earth, and from thy face shall I hide my self, and
I shall be a vagabonde and a wanderer in the earth, and so it shall come to
pass, that every one that finds me, shall kill me. In what a woeful
taking was this wretched man after his sin? how were his thoughts troubled
and perplexed: He had neither pacem pectoris, nor pace^ corporis, neither
peace within himself, nor peace without himself. I shall be hid from thy face
(says he) there he was robbed of his inward peace, his peace with God: And
every one that finds me will kill me, here was he left naked of that
outward peace, that he had with the creatures of God.

Shall I need to lay before your eyes, a multitude of examples? Had Saul
peace? had Achab peace? what peace had Iefabell more then Zimri? had Judas
peace? nay let every Iehoram inquire of his Iehu, 2. King. 9.22
Is it peace Iehu? is it peace? and it shall answer him, What peace? what
speak thou of peace? so long as the fornications of thy mother Iezabel, the
transgressions of thine own wicked and rebellious heart, be in so great a
number?

It is well worthy our best observation, that may be gathered out of the
words in the Original. The word Shalom, that signifies peace, Heb.
comes of the Verb Shalah, which signifies quiescere, or quietum esse, to
be calm, still, or to be at rest. But the word that is here translated, the
wicked, Reshagnim, is derived of Rashang, which has a contrary signification,
inquietum esse, or tumultuari, to be troubled and tossed up and down, like
the water, and disquieted. This is the right taking and condition of the wicked
man: his sins are like the bloustering winds, that cause the billows of his
breast, so violently to rage and swell, that he can have no peace at all; and
hence it is, that this our Prophet in his 57. chapter, compares him unto the
raging Sea, that is beaten too and fro, and takes no rest, but casts up mire
and dirt.

But let us hear the Prophet David object: The wicked prosper, and increase in
riches, Psalm. 73.5.12.
they are not in trouble as other men. Let us join the holy Job complaining
with him, that Job. 9.24.
the earth is given into the hand of the wicked. And now what shall we answer
unto these mighty witnesses? I answer with the saying of Bernard upon Caine;
consolatione^ miseram, obtinent, quam quaerunt, they obtain the miserable
comfort which they desire, but that true consolation and peace, which (above
all things) is to be desired, they shall never obtain.

When Caine had lost his peace with God; he besought him, that he might have,
at the least, an outward peace; that he might not be forced to flee from
place to place, as a vagabond to save his life. The Lord gave him a protection
for his life, and granted him license to possess the earth. In like manner,
the ungodly men of the world, having lost that pacem aeternitatis, peace which
abides for ever, they nevertheless obtain at the hands of God, precario, by
way of entreatie, pacem temporis, (as Hugo Cardinalis speaks) that is to say,
temporary and external peace, and an abundance of earthlye things, more many
times then their hearts do. But alas, small comfort can they reap out of
these things, the end of which is bitterness: Prou. 24.1.
The heart of the wicked (says Solomon) even in laughter sorroweth, and the
end of his mirth is heaviness.

It is well worthy your most Christian attention, which the Prophet Jeremy
debateth in the beginning of his 12. chapter. O Lord (quoth he) if I dispute
with thee, thou art righteous, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments.
Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? why are they at So the word Shalu
signifies.
peace that rebelliouslie transgress? why have thou planted them? and why do
they take root? why do they grow and bring forth fruit? Mark how the
Prophet himself resolves this question namely, that thou may pull them out
like the beasts for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of destruction.
What joy is there in this prosperity? what comfort can there be in such a
peace, that ruin, and destruction attends upon?

What joy had Be^shatzer, in the plentiful and royal Banquet, that he made
unto his thousand Princes? when in the midst of his cups, he beheld a hand,
writing the sentence of his present downfall? His thoughts were troubled
(says the Text) his joints were loosed and his knees smote one against
another. His company could not comfort him, nor the variety of his dishes, no
nor the remembrance that he was a King, over many kingdoms and Provinces,
could ease his thoughts, or bring any peace unto him.

Take all the most pleasant delicates, that the Earth, the Seas, and the air
may afford: let the wit and art of man work upon them, and make them as
answerable unto the taste, as the heart of man can wish. Set them (together
with all the delights, that may give satisfaction to the rest of the senses)
set them I say before a man drawn out of the dungion to execution; and bid him
fall to, and eat his fill, and be merry. Will he glut himself think thou?
will he feed upon thy dainties? no doubtless, he will put his knife unto his
throat, and refrain his appetite. And he will answer thee, I can take no
delight in these things, because I perceive heavy times are growing upon me,
and death and dissolution waits for me.

Even thus it is with the wicked man: although his barnes be full, and his
presses ouer-flow, though he have Mines of gold, and rivers of Oil; though
he number his Oxen by thousands, and his Sheep by ten thousands: though he
be as royally arrayed as Solomon, and fare as deliciouslie as the rich
Glutton: though he want no outward means, that may add one iotte of joy and
delight, to ravish the heart of a carnal and sensual man. How-so-euer he may
seem for a time, to laugh and rejoice, and to surfeit himself with the
sweetness of these things: yet if his heart be communed withal, and examined
upon the point, it will answer; I find no peace in this abundance: they are
but as Viniger powered upon Nitre, and as Songs unto a heavy heart, I take no
pleasure in them; for why I see always before my face, the fingers of a hand,
writing bitter things against me. When all these things have their end, as
they cannot long continue, when the vn-wel-come and woeful time comes,
wherein they will forsake me, or that I must be taken away from them: there
can (I see,) remain nothing unto me, but a fearful expectation of wrath, and
the declaration of the just judgments of the Almighty GOD, against me for my
sins.

This is the force of an evil conscience, which as the Heathen Orator could
say; is very great indeed; Cicero, pro Milone.
vt paenam semper ante oculos versari putant, qui sunt rei magnorum scelerum,
in as much, as they that are guilty of heinous offenses, think their
punishments to be euer-more before their faces: therefore they spoke to good
purpose, that called the conscience of men, fraenum et flagrum, a Bitte, and a
Whip. A Bitte or Bridle that checketh the wicked man, admonishes him of the
foulness of his sin, and pulls him backward, that he rush not headlong
into it. A whippe, that scourges, and tormenteth him, when he has committed
it.

Let the Godless Epicures of the world, deride, and make a mock, of all the
testimonies of Gods providence; yet this one argument derived from the grief
and horror of conscience, it is, so real, so evident, so manifest, that they
shall never avoid it, nor delude it. Let Dionysius make a mock of all
religion, yet this shall make him to tremble, and quake. This shall affright
Caligula in his sleep by night, and pursue him with dreadful apparitions by
day. The force of this shall make Nero to stabbe himself, and Judas to hang
himself. In a word where this conscience is, it will prove it self (as
Ambrose speaks) Iudicem et vltorem sceleris, Lib. 7. et 44.
a Judge, and a revenger of wickedness. It will not suffer the wicked heart,
to be at rest and peace, but will follow him, from place to place with open
outcries, with proclamations of wars, and deadly hostility.

Hence it is, that the wiseman says of the wicked, that he Pro. 28.1.
flies when no man persueth him: no there needs not the fierceness of man,
when his own conscience takes up arms against him. He shall fear, with the
2 King. 7.6.
Aramits, Psalm. 53.5.
where no fear is (as the Psalmist speaks). A noise (as it were) of horses
and a rushing of Chariots shall be in his ears: trepidabit ad arundinis vmbram,
the shadow of a Reed shall dismay him, yea as it is in Leuiticus, Leuit.
26.36.
the shaking of a leaf shall chase him, and he shall flee, as if he fled
from the sword. Deuteronomy. 28.
He shall say in the morning, oh that it were evening, and again at evening,
oh that it were morning, for the fear of his heart, wherewith he shall fear,
and for the sight of his eyes, which he shall see.

Thus the scriptures describe the turbulent estate of a wicked and sinful man.

What tho the stranger shall wish thee peace, in the morning, when thou go
forth? and thy neighbors, and friends salute thee with peace? and tho at thy
return, thy family shall pray for thy peace? what if in the Church thou hear
the word of peace? and receiuest the Sacraments, which are the signs of peace?
yet if thy heart lust after sin, if it be void of Religion, and spoiled of
the grace of God; if thou have made a covenant with vanity, and smitten hands
with iniquity, thou know, thou have no peace; for thou have a witness
within thy breast, ye will not lie ( oh te miserum (says Seneca) si hunc
contemnis testem, miserable and wretched art thou, if thou contemn this
witness) thy gnawing and barking conscience, that shall tell thee, there is no
peace.

It was a right worthy and excellent conceit of him, Bucholcer.
that entitled this conscience a practical Syllogism, the Maiar proposition
whereof is the law of God; the Minor and the conclusion, the application of the
Thesis ad hypothesin, that is to say, of that law, unto a man's own particular
person, approving good and condemning evil. As for example, the Prophet David,
in his conscience reasoned thus: Fornicatours and adulterers God will judge,
for it is written thou shall not commit adultery, there is the law, and that
makes the Proposition. But I am an Adulterer; therefore GOD will judge me:
here is the application of that law unto his own person, and that makes up
the rest of the Syllogism. But thou will say, if this be so, and if this
kind of reasoning which no man is freed from, be the cause of horror and
disquietnesse of mind, What peace can there be to any man living? seeing
every man is sinful? and what peace, could David have in heart, more then
Caine or Judas? if his conscience concluded such bitter things against him.

I answer with that of Paul Col. 2.14. that the hand writing of ordinances,
that is contrary unto us, (which is the conclusion of an evil conscience)
Christ Jesus has taken it out of the way, and fastened it upon his Cross.
The law therefore remains still, for CHRIST Math. 5.17.
came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it. And it serves to the
humbling of man's soul, that he may acknowledge his insufficiency, while he
compares his own weakness, and imperfection, with the strength and
perfection which the law requires: but that Chirographum, or hand writing,
that indenteth judgments, and punishments, against the sons of men, which I
call the particular application of an evil conscience, the precious blood of
Christ Jesus, has defaced it and blotted it out.

So that the law may say, He that sins shall die the death, yea and the
dear Child of GOD, may assume, and answer, in the sorrow of his heart; it is
I that greeuiously transgress and sin; and yet the conclusion, shall not
make against him, for his conscience shall prophecy unto him, as Nathan unto
David: the Lord has taken away thy sin.

Hence it is that the Princely Prophet in the 32. Psalm, pronounces that man
blessed whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Ber. lib. de
conscientia.
Non dixit (says Bernard) quorum nullae inuentae sunt, sed quorum remissae
sunt iniquitates; non quorum nulla sunt, sed quorum tecta sunt peccata: the
Prophet did not pronounce those blessed, in whom there is no iniquity found,
but those, whose iniquities are remitted, not those who have no sin (for then
our state were desperate) but those whose sins are covered.

Thus have I framed (as briefly as I might) a Body of doctrine out of this
Text: Your patience I beseech, until I breath life into it, and then I Will
commend you to the grace of God, who is only able to make it lively unto your
souls.

Art thou crushed under the burden of a troubled and accusing conscience? and
art thou afraid that the peace of GOD is taken from thee, for the multitude of
thy sins? what will thou now do? where will thou inquire for comfort, where
will thou inquire for rest? grandis tribulatio, vbi nullus euadendi locus,
says Gregory, it is a very heavy, and grievous tribulation, from whence
there is no way to escape, where there is no likelihood of liberty, no hope of
delivery. If thou return to these outward helps, and seek peace in
earthly, and transitory things: behold there, afflictions will press thee
down, cares will torment thee, a multitude of miseries will gaze upon thee,
and circumuent thee. For what true consolation lies there, in the pleasures of
this life? and what is the joy that arises out of riches? shall they abide
with us for ever? will they not take their wings and begone? Math. 13.22.
are they not the thorns that choke the word of God in us, 2. Cor. 2.16.
which the Lord has appointed to be the sweet savor of life unto life, to
all that shall be saved? breed they not more sorrow in their loss, then joy
in their possession? what then remains but this? flee to CHRIST JESUS, the
Fountaiue of peace, the GOD of peace, the Prince of peace. Lay hold upon him
with the arm of a lively faith: let him not depart from thee, until he have
blessed thee, until he say unto thy poor distressed soul, I am thy
salvation.

Again; Is this peace so excellent a thing? a peace that passes all
understanding? Is it a jewel of so precious and necessary use? that without
it, the abundance of the riches, and of the delights of this world, are turned
unto us, into gall and bitterness? and has that heavenly Oracle pronounced;
that this peace falls not to the lotte of wicked men, and that because of their
wickedness? what remains then, but that we make war with our sins, that
we may have peace with GOD? He that has peace with his sins, the Lord
proclaims open war against him; that this war therefore may be turned
into a happy peace, let us make war with our sins.

Craesus being taken captive of Cyrus, used this one reason to prefer peace
before war, namely, because in the time of Peace, the children might bury
their Parents, but in War, the Parents (with much heaviness) buried their
children. But in this spiritual batteling, we may use the same argument, to
prefer war before peace: because in peace our children and wicked
offspring, (that is) our sins, bury us; whereas if we make war against
them, we bury them.

I know, I know, the Devil will persuade us, to play with our sins: but in
the mean while, we may be such that they will not play with us, but as the
yong-men played before Abner and Ioab, 2. Sam. 2.14.10.
to take the life of our souls from us. They will say, as Iael unto Sisera,
Judges. 4.
Turn into us, and fear not: they will provide Milk for us: they will devise
means to cover us, and to lull us a sleep, but the end of all this will
prove a deadly stroke. They will come unto us as the crafty Gibeonists unto
Iosuab. 9.
Ioshuah and the Children of Israel, we will be your servants, come and make a
league with us: but we must provide a means, to keep them in subjection,
Hewers of wood, and Drawers of water, at the least, or rather because we are
not ty'de to keep our oaths and covenants with sins, let us take them, and
their children by the heels, and dash out their brains against the stones. Exo


If Moses had not slain that impure Egyptian, d. 2.
the poor Ebrewe, had had no rest. If those five wicked Nations had not been
destroyed, before the Jews had seated themselves, in the Land of Canaan, where
had been their peace? Saul favored Agag, but it was with the loss of his
kingdom. Seeing therefore the case is so dangerous: let Agag be slain, yea
let Achan be slain expel the Canaanits, kill the Epyptian. Let us slaie our
lusts, and concupiscence, mortify our flesh, resist the devil, destroy the
wickedness of our gainsaying, and rebellious hearts. Oh how blessed shall we
be, if we do thus? doubtless we shall possess our souls in peace, whiles
we live, and end our days in the joy of the Holy Ghost.

The portion of time, that is cut out for us, in this world is but short, and
uncertain; And what a folly is it then, to live in such a sort, in which we
dare not die?

The house wherein our souls dwell, Ecelesi. 12.
threatens our ruin, on every side. The Hands.
keepers thereof do tremble, and the Legs.
strong men bow themselves: the Teeth.
Grinders cease, because they are few, and the windows of the eyes grow dim;
seeing therefore, it cannot long continue, but fall it will, and must; let us
be careful, to provide for our selves, an other house, even the house of a
quiet, and good conscience.

Our body is but as a Tent or Tabernacle, which must be pitched, 1. Cor. 51.
here and there, and removed from place, to place, in the war-fare of this
life: but our conscience, is our house and palace, in which, (when the
troublesome war-fare of this life, is at an end) we must take our rest; Ber de
interiori Domo.
therefore he warreth well indeed (as Bernard speaks) that so fights in
his body against sin, that he also, build up an house of peace, and comfort,
for his soul.

Thus have I drawn, and presented my waters unto you, and if you desire to
drink of any, besides those of the Well of Beth-lehem, I hope you will taste
of these also. I compare not the drops of my smaller Springs, with the
streams of those profound and Crystal Fountains of Bethel; questionless,
they are drawn with great labor and pains, 2 Samuel 23.16.
and many times with the ieopardie of their dearest lives, for which cause
perhaps, ye power them (with David) upon the earth, and ye drink them not.
These are none such, therefore they desire (though they deserve worse) a better
entertainment. Courser fare, amongst your dainty delicates, sometimes may
get a welcome: and grosser meat may prove profitable, now and then, at
least thus far, vt cum pro fastidio sumitur (says Gregory) ad subtiliores
epulas auidius redeatur; Gre. in prefatione in Hom. super Ezechiclem.
that when you have fed on them until you loath, you may return with a
better appetite to the dainties you love. The Lord in his mercy grant, that
our souls may still be fed with the wholesome bread of the simple and
saving word of God, not made sour with the leaven of man's wit (an offering
not to be offered to the Lord) but seasoned and sweetened with the blessing of
his sanctifying Spirit, Leuit. 2.11.
that it may become a sauoure of eternal life unto every one of our souls,
for Jesus Christ his sake; to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three
persons, but one only God, let praises be given by Angels, and by men, and by
all his creatures in heaven and in earth, for evermore.

Amen.


