ENOTIKON OR A SERMON OF the Union of Great Brittannie, in antiquity of
language, name, religion, and Kingdom:

Preached by JOHN GORDOVN Deane of SARVM, the 28 day of October 1604, in
presence of the Kings Majesty at WHITEHALL.

LONDINI Impensis GEORGII BISHOP. 1604,

ENOTIKON OR A Sermon of the Union of Great Britannie.
MATTHEW. 12. verse. 25. Every Kingdom divided against it self (or in the self)
shall be brought to naught (or desolate;) and every city or house divided
against it self (or in it self) shall not stand.
CHrist Jesus the eternal Son of the eternal Father, Division brings
destruction, Union preservation.
does deliver unto us in this text, a most wholesome and profitable doctrine,
into the which he shows to all estates of every Society of man in the world,
That Division is the overthrow, destruction, and desolation of all estates
whatsoever; whereby we are taught, That the contrary virtue to Division (which
is Union) has been, is, and shall be to the end of the world the cause of the
preservation and keeping of all spiritual and temporal felicity and
happiness in the society of mankind in this earth.

In these three words, All estates of society are contained in three words.
Kingdom, (...), House, are comprehended all men of whatsoever estate,
quality or condition they be. Christ in this doctrine does proceed a
generaliori ad specialius, a summo ad infimum, from the more general to the
more special, from the highest to the lowest. This word Kingdom does contain
in it Cities; and City, houses; and House, man and woman: on the other part,
by that order of doctrine which does proceed ab imo ad summum, from the lowest
to the highest, which is the order Architectonicke of building. By the union of
man and woman is made the lowest degree of society, which is here called a
House; by the union and conjunction of many houses, does proceed the second
degree and estate of mankind, which is called City; and last, by the union of
many cities does come the third and lowest degree of society, which is
comprehended under the word Kingdom.

In the exposition of this text we mean (God willing) to gather some wholesome
and fruitful doctrine of the mystical signification of these three words out
of the ancient original Hebrew language. The mystical signification of the
Hebrew words, man and woman.
These words then that signify all the estates and conditions of the society
of mankind, in the original language have a certain hid doctrine, which does
express and signify that which is most wholesome and profitable to the
felicity and happiness of all men. We must first begin at the words that
signify man and woman, by whose union a house is made. The Hebrew word that
signifies man, (...)
is Isch, in the which word are three letters united to signify one thing. The
first, Aleph, signifies learning, knowledge, and a conductor. The second, Iod,
signifies God, because by the ancient Hebrews he is called Macom, (...)
a place, that does contain and comprehend all things created inferior to
himself. The third, Schin, does signify second. Which three letters united in
the word Isch, which is man, does set before our eyes a wholesome doctrine for
the instruction of all men that will follow the same; to wit, that the
knowledge of God does make man a second God, Strom. 7.
and the image of God, as Clemens Alexandrinus teaches us: (...). God dwells
in the middle of man, that is, in his soul and mind; even as the letter Iod
which signifies God, is in the midst of the Hebrew word Isch, that
signifies man. The word that signifies woman in Hebrew is Ischah; (...)
which is made by the growing or augmenting of the letter He, to the foresaid
word Isch, that signifies man. This letter He, signifies respiration of life,
which does serve to be a memorial, that the woman took life from God, by
making her out of man. This letter also signifies her inclination toward man;
for this letter affixed to the word Isch, that signifies man, does denote
motum ad aliquid, a motion from one thing to another, as from God to man, the
woman being created by God to adhere to man. This blessed conjunction of man
and woman in the holy bond of marriage does make a house.

The Hebrew word Beth that signifies house does consist of three letters. The
mystical signification of the word house. (...)
The first, Beth, does signify the form of the material and earthly house,
in the which man and woman do dwell: the second Iod, signifies God (as said
is) the third Tau signifies a mark or sign. For in the 9. of the prophecy of
Ezechiel it is called the mark of salvation and preservation of the people
from death and destruction: ^zechiel. cap. 9.
as the blood of the paschall Lamb was sprinkled on the house posts of the
Israelits to be a sign that when God sent his destroying Angel to kill all
the first borne of the rest of the people, their first borne should be saved,
and preserved; which mark was a figure of Christ his blood that saves all
true believers, from the destroying Angel and death eternal. Of this
mystical signification of these three letters united in one word, we are
taught that God his true knowledge and worship signified by the letter Iod,
being in the middle of the house joined with the mark of the letter Tau, which
is a sign of salvation contrary and against the destroying Angel, that that
house is preserved and kept safe against sin, and Satan's machinations. This
much for the mystical interpretation of the Hebrew letters in the word Beth
that signifies house. Note also that this word House is here figuratively
taken for man and woman, dwelling within one a house. Which is continens pro
contento, that is, when the container is taken for the thing contained.

The second word whereby is signified the second degree of the society of
mankind, ^he mystical ^^gnification of (...) word City (...) Hebrew.
is the Hebrew word Gnir, which does consist of three letters, having in them a
mystical signification, (...)
showing us by what means all cities are to be conserved from this division
whereof Christ speaks in this Text. The first Hebrew letter is Gnain which
signifies the eye: the second is Iod, which as we heard before signifies God:
the third is Resch, which signifies the head: whereby we collect the
signification of the whole word to be this. That God being in the eyes and
heads of the Citizens, shall be the only means to preserve and defend that
City from division, which does bring forth, as our Text says, a miserable
desolation.

The third Hebrew word whereby is signified the most high and general degree
or estate of the society of mankind, The mystical signification of the Hebrew
word Melech a King.
is the word Kingdom, which does come from King, which in the Hebrew language
is called Melech; (...)
and consists of three letters also: the first is Mem which signifies water,
and is of the duall number, because that there are superior and inferior
waters, which in their mystical signification do denote and signify
spiritual and temporal Life. As Christ in the Gospel of John calls
himself and his doctrine the water of life: John. 4. 10.
the second is Lamed, which signifies knowledge and doctrine: the third is
Caph which signifies the hand, and is figuratively taken for strength and
force of arms, and for the hand of Justice: the union or conjunction of these
three letters in the Hebrew word Melech, which by interpretation is called
King, does teach us what is required in this most excellent office of a King,
to wit, that he be a fountain or water of life and felicity to his subjects,
by maintaining the water of life, which is true religion: that he retain true
doctrine and learning within his kingdom. For the administration of justice,
and preservation of his people: that he have in his hand the sword of justice
which is here signified by a mighty hand or a hand of force. That he may be
able to resist the violence of foreign enemies, and punish the rebellious
murderers and oppressors in the Land. Also the word Melech does signify in
Hebrew, counsel, and in the Greek tongue it is called (...), that is to say,
a King is (...), the foundation of the people. Whereby we learn that the
counsel and wisdom of a King is the foundation of the whole estate of his
subjects, who hereby are preserved from all divisions, factions, and
dissentions, whereof comes desolation as Christ teaches us in this Text. The
Poet Homer calls Kings (...) enutriti a Jove nourished by God, admonishing
thereby that as a child does participate of the nature of his nurce: Even so
Kings should participate the nature of God, who is their nource. This
participation of Kings with God is effectuated by exercising themselves in God
his word, and ruling their kingdom according as they are instructed by God his
law. As it is written in Deuteronomy.

The word division in the original language is called Peleg, (...) The
mystical signification of the word, division, in Hebrew
which word does consist of three letters: the first, Phe, signifies the
mouth; the second, Lamed, learning and knowledge: the third Gimel, retribution,
By the which three letters conjoined in one word is mistically contained the
causes and effects of Division. For by the mouth is signified all seducing,
deceiving, or beguiling with the mouth, whether by lying, false persuading, or
poysonable flattering by knowledge and learning is signified the wicked abuse
of learning, in employing the same to sow division amongst men: by retribution
is signified, the vengeance that men exercise seth one against another by
division, discord, and dissension. By the which mystical interpretation we are
instructed of the whole nature of division to this end, that we may see how
dangerous a plague division is, whereby every one of us may learn to avoid
the same. Of all this we gather that Division is the separation and partition
of things that ware before united; where also we collect that Union does go
before Division, and that the one is contrary to the other. The phrase and
manner of speaking of Christ's maternall language (which was the language of
Jerusalem) does express in this Text the inward operation of division, with
greater force and efficacy then the Greek language. For where the Greek text
says (divided (...) against it self) the Syriack has Gnal napscheh against
his own soul. (...)
Signifying thereby that the fountain of division is rooted in the soul,
heart, and mind of man, whereby we are taught that union which is contrary to
division, must begin in the heart and soul of man. Therefore let all men that
love God, who is the God of union, and enemy to division, graciously dispose
their souls, hearts, and minds to the performance and accomplishment of this
blessed Union of this Island.

The word Union in the original language is Achad and does consist of three
letters: The mystical signification of the word Union in Hebrew.
the first is Aleph, which (as is said) signifies knowledge, learning, or a
conducter: the second, (...)
Cheth, signifies breathing or life: the third Daleth, signifies a door, of
the which three letters conjoined in the Hebrew word, Achad, Union, we are
taught that Union is the door whereby we enter by knowledge to life and
eternal felicity.

I have set before your eyes this doctrine of the mystical signification of
the Hebrew letters, that are contained in these words Man, Woman, City,
kingdom, division, and union, to this end that the persons which are to treat
of this great work of union in the uniting of the Island of Great Brittannie in
one kingdom in the members, as God has united them already in one head, may
make their profit thereof and apply the same to their hearts.

And because I have heretofore showed you, Man is a type of a little world and
of a little kingdom
that the beginning of all society in this earth, is by the Union and
conjunction of man and woman together, I will (by God his grace) represent unto
you the image of a kingdom both in the outward and inward man. For this effect
we shall mark that man is called by the Philosophers (...) that is, (...).
a little world. Because the harmony of all the Elements is found in the
edifice and building of the man in the conjunction of the which, man's
preservation does stand, as by their division his destruction ensues. And
seeing the world is made of many kingdoms, (...)
we may also call Man (...) a little kingdom, as before we heard he was called
a little world.

In this little kingdom of the outward man, The Image of a kingdom in the
outward man.
the head is the King, and sovereign governor of the whole body, because by
the head, there does come nourishment and food to the body: And as in a
kingdom there be many, members, that is, subjects, under one King: even so in
this kingdom of the outward man there be many members, as the arms, hands,
legs, and feet, which are as officers, and vnder-gouernours, to the head
their King. By whose administration the head distributeth equally to all his
members food and nourishment. Let us apply this similitude of (...) in the
outward man to our selves: seeing the whole people of this Island is already
United under one head, and seeing the arms, hands, legs, and feet are tied
to the obedience of this their head. And that the head and the members are ipso
iure, and ipso facto, by law and by the deed it self United. Let no man be so
unreasonable to separate them, for in so doing they do but throw stones
against the heaven. For how can the arms, hands, legs, and feet serve the
head in the nourishing of the whole body, if they were only united in the head
and divided amongst themselves? If the hands and arms were divided one from
another, and separated from the whole body, it were then impossible and against
nature that this body could be nourished, by the work and industry of the
hands: and again, if the feet were divided from the head, and the rest of the
body, and the one from the other, the head must needs fall to the ground.
Therefore let not the hands deny the service due to their head, which
consists in preparing and administrating food to uphold and nourish the
head, and the whole body. The force of both the arms, and hands does come from
the head to the body, and from the head to the arms. Let not the feet, and
legs deny their service in carrying of their body, because from thence comes
their nourishment and food. But let us apply this doctrine more particularly
to our selves. The head of this Island, the Kings Majesty, has united in his
Royal person the arms, hands and legs of this body, which is this kingdom of
Great Brittannie, to wit, the South and the North in one obedience, and
service, whose strength and nourishment does flow from this head as from a
fountain: So having this consideration before you, judge and ponder with your
selves what a miserable and dangerous estate it were, that one of the arms,
hands, or feet should draw to it self, the whole food which comes from the
head, and not to suffer his fellow to be participant thereof. Therefore let not
the arms of the South, I mean the Officers, and great Governors in the South,
attribute to themselves only, the whole sustenance and nourishment that does
come from the head, that is to say, preferments, offices, and dignities as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, excluding from thence the fellow arm of the
North, which is the other arm of this body: and on the other part let not the
arm of the North, which is the other arm of this body, withdraw from his
fellow the offices, preferments, and dignities that proceed from the head,
which equally should pertain to them both. But according to the disposition of
nature in this (...) or little kingdom. Let both the arms be equally
participant of the benefits, that come from their head. Thus much concerning a
perfect and stable Union betwixt the members and the head, and of the Union of
the members amongst themselves.

We come now to the Image of a kingdom, The Image of a kingdom in the inward
man.
which is represented unto us in the inward man. Honorius a very faithful
Christian Emperor, instructing his son Arcadius (who succeeded to his Father
into that great huge Monarchy of the whole world,) described the form of that
kingdom, Claud. Paneg. Cons. 4. Hon.
which is within man. As Claudianus the Poet does record in a very elegant
panegyrike of the fourth Consulship, of this foresaid Honorius. Wherein he does
teach us that this inward kingdom of the inwardman does consist of Men's, which
in the Greek language is called (...), that is, the wit, understanding or
mind of man, having within it (...) Ratio, reason, which by him is called
syncera Men's, and alluding to the allegory of the ancient Greek Poets, he
imagines that this mind filled with wit, and understanding was stolen out of
heaven, and placed within the outward man by Prometheus; which does signify
the unspeakable providence of God in the creation of man to his own Image,
which is this divine mind, wit, understanding, soul and reason infused by God
his spirit into the inward man. The wit, and reason of the mind bears the
Image of a King in the inward man. And as Claudianus says in the person of
Honorius, The maker of man, to wit, Prometheus (as is said) -- hanc alta
capitis fundauit in arce

He did place this spiritual king of the inward man in his head, as in a throne
out of the which he rules and disposes all the actions of man, provides and
foreseeth to keep his subjects which are Ira, Metus, Cupido, anger, fear,
covetousness, in good order and temperature; of the which it will please you
hear Claudianus words as follows.

Illas inferius collo, praeceptaque summae
Passuras Dominae, digna statione locauit.
That is the maker of man, did place the subjects of this King of the inward
man, in these parts of the body which are under the head and neck, as in a fit
station, ward, or standing place to obey the commandment of their sovereign
Lord, the first of these subjects named Ira, anger, has his seat in the heart
which is full of heat: the second Metus, fear has his seat in the lungs or
lights: the third Cupido, desire, covetousness, has his seat in Iecore, in
the Liver. Let us draw this example of the image of the kingdom, in the inward
man to our selves, in this union of great Britannie, which great work is now
in hand, for even as Men's or Ratio is the king, who rules, and keeps in
order his subjects, to wit, Ira, metus, cupido, even so the king and head of
this Island must keep his subjects in the South and in the North, that are as
diverse of nature as Ira, metus, cupido, in good order and temperature, least
that not being ruled, and ouerruled by their King, they fall into a lamentable
division, whereupon will follow according to Christ's words in this text, a most
miserable desolation (from the which I pray the Lord deliver us) So that I
conclude if we be united under one head and one king, we must be united amongst
our selves, or else be disobedient to Reason our King: This if we do, all the
members of one body shall agree in a harmony amongst themselves, and be
participant every one of his fellows benefits, in so much that the heat of
the heart, wherein wrath and anger dwells must participate of the moist and
cold of the lights, that is, the fury of wrath and anger must be ruled, and
brideled by the fear of god, and of the king his Lieutenant here on earth,
which otherwise getting loose bridle raines, would cut the whole kingdom by
division in pieces: Also the respiration and breathing of the lights must
temperate, and moderate the ardent heat of desire and covetousness that is in
the liver. So that ye may see the three inward parts of man, which are subject
to their king reason, must communicate one with another all their offices and
commodities, otherwise the subjects of the kingdom of the inward man could not
keep themselves in the obedience of Reason their king.

Of this we learn, that by the figure and type of this kingdom of the inward
man the whole people and subjects of this Island should consider, that if they
will follow the law of their king reason (which they must needs do, or else
they cannot remain united with their sovereign king, whose kingdom is ruled
by reason) it behooves them all to make every one participant of an others
help, and aid, in communicating mutually one to his neighbor, and fellow the
emoluments, and preferments on both the sides. For when the heat of the heart is
withdrawn from the cold moistness of the lungs and humiditie of the liver: or
when the lights, and the liver do withdraw their refreshing from the heart,
then the kingdom of the inward man is brought to confusion, and desolation, by
the division of the subjects in withdrawing the commodities one from another
which should be common to both. Ye see now what I mean; that if the people of
the South withdraw the commodity of their heat from the North; and on the
other part, if these of the North withdraw the refreshing of the heat of the
South: There is no doubt, I say, but if such division were suffered by Reason
our king, it would bring forth ere it were long such a distemperature amongst
his subjects, that in the end in place of union, there should be nothing but
miserable desolation and confusion, which is the fruit of Division, spoken of
in our text.

Now let us come to the opening of the matter contained in our text, having
already amply enough spoken of the mystical doctrine, collecting the same out
of the literal sense. ^lu^ sorts of kingdoms.
Christ in these words (every kingdom) does teach us, that there is diversity
of kingdoms, to wit, the kingdom of God in heaven, the kingdom of Satan in
hell, and the kingdom of men in earth. And again the kingdom of men may be
subdeuided into the kingdom of God and the kingdom of Satan amongst men. This
kingdom of God is composed and made of the elect number of true believers,
which are predestined and preordained to life everlasting before the
foundation of the world was laid. The kingdom of Satan, in earth is made of
the whole number of the reprobate (who are set down more particularly by S.
Paul in the 13 to the Romans and in the 5. cap. to the Galat. verse. 19.) as
adulterers, all unclean persons, Idolaters, all contentious and seditious
persons, murderers, drunkards, gluttons etc. and in a word all other wicked
offenders, who as S. Paul teaches us shall never enter into the kingdom of
God.

The kingdom of God in heaven does consist of Archangels, The kingdom of God
in heaven.
Angels, Cherubins, Seraphins, Virtues, Thrones, and all other sorts of spirits
called by S. Paul (...) ministering spirits, who do praise and worship
continually their Creator with hymns, and spiritual songs, surpassing the
intelligence of man in this earth, living in an incomprehensible and
unspeakable felicity and happiness in an inaccessable light, who are guided
by the everlasting wisdom, and providence of the eternal, omnipotent, and
only good God.

This celestial kingdom was from the beginning established in union: But
Satan who was created in all perfection, and for his brightness (by the
ancient Fathers) called Lucifer, did fall away from his Creator, and drew with
him innumerable legions of Angels, and in so doing, by his apostasy and
defection from God, did make a division amongst the Angels in the kingdom of
heaven. For the which he was thrown down from that heavenly habitation, to
the bottomless pit of hell, prepared for him and his Angels before the
beginning of the world, as we may read in the Gospel of Saint Matthew, Matthew.
25. 41.
where they are tied with chains of eternal darkness, 2. Peter. 2. 4.
as Saint Peter, Iud. v. 6.
and Saint Jude do teach us: from this original division made by Satan in the
beginning in the kingdom of heaven, came an eternal and endless desolation
upon him and all the rest of the Angels of iniquity, according as it is here
said in our Text: Every kingdom, etc. Although Satan will admit no division,
in his own kingdom, as we are taught in this Chapter; yet he is the very
fountain, and welspring of all divisions, both in the kingdom of God and man,
from the beginning of the world to the end thereof.

For the better understanding of this word Division which is in my Text, Three
kinds of Division.
you must know there be three kinds of Division, viz. a division betwixt God
and man: a division betwixt man and man, and a division betwixt country and
country. The division betwixt God and man does come by Idolatry, and sin:
the division betwixt man and man, is partly by diversity in Religion, and
partly by ambition, in hunting after dignities, honors, and preferments, of
which also does come the division of countries and lands.

As we have showed you how many kinds of Division there be, Sundry sorts of
Desolation.
now it follows to show how many kinds there be of Desolation. There is a
desolation of men's goods, which does fall out by robbing, stealing, forraing,
spoiling, burning ship wrake, and all other means that may be to the prejudice
of men's goods. There is a second desolation of man's body, which does fall out,
by plagues, pestilence, or by the sword in civil or foreign wars: There is
a third desolation of man's soul, which does fall out by Idolatry, apostasy
and blasphemy; of the which all other sins do proceed.

Having showed you what Division and desolation is, and their kinds, I purpose
(by God his grace) for the better exposition of my Text, to set summarily
before your eyes, as in a painted table, the most notable examples of the
Division of Kingdoms, Cities, and houses in all ages: together with their
desolation which do follow on the other, as the effect the cause: Moreover we
shall see, that division is a punishment and a curse of God laid on mankind: as
by the contrary Union is a great blessing of God amongst all estates and
conditions of men, which we shall do to this end, that laying before you the
good fruits of Union, and the miseries and calamities that do flow from
division of kingdoms, countries, and houses, that all these things may serve,
for your instructions who have now in hand the consideration of the blessed
Union of this Island of Great Britannie into one kingdom, which is already
united in our head our dread Sovereign the King his Majesty.

The first division that ever we read of after the creation of the world, The
first Division invented by Satan.
was invented by Satan that old Serpent, by the which there came a miserable
desolation upon all mankind. For soon after the creation of Man and woman, who
was created in an angelical nature, United with God, and having the visible
communication of Gods presence, was placed in a habitation of unspeakable joy
and felicity: But Satan upon hatred and envy did seduce and deceive the
woman's mind by lying, and false persuasions, and by the woman the man, with a
conceit of vain glory, that they thought to be like God in knowledge: so
being thus ways seduced by Satan, they brake and violated Gods commandment;
of the which came the first division betwixt God and man, and after the
division followed a miserable and lamentable desolation upon the whole race of
mankind which daily in our own persons by doleful experience we find to be
true. For being created immortal they became subject both to the death of the
soul, and the death of the body, and were cast out of that place of
unspeakable joy and felicity, which in the original language is called
Gan-heden a Garden of pleasure into to a most barren and infertile soil,
wherein he should labor hardly and purchase his bread by the swet of his face,
till he return again to the earth. Upon the other part, God who is the
fountain of charity, love, and Union, yea charity it self, did begin his
kingdom also amongst men, whereby at the time preordinate in his
incomprehensible providence, he should overthrow the kingdom of Satan. God, I
say, did begin this his kingdom in the very fall of man, in that blessed
promise, which he made to Man, when he said, that the seed of the woman should
bruise and destroy the head of the Serpent. Genesis 3. 15.


The first example of the beginning of the kingdom of Satan in this earth by
division, Desolation came by Division in Adams house, and in his posterity.
is in his practizing of the division of the house of Adam. Who having two
sons, Satan established his kingdom amongst men in the person of Cain. For
Cains heart being puffed up with arrogancy and pride, by reason of his
birthright (whereby he pretended preeminence above his brother Abell, both in
the favor of God, and in regard of religion) he offered up a Sacrifice to God,
which was rejected, because he offered the same with an evil mind. But Abell
the second brother, having his heart filled with love, and humility, did offer
a Sacrifice to God which was willingly accepted, because he did offer it with
faith, as Saint Paul does teach us in the 11. Cap. to the Hebrews. Of this
Satan takes occasion, to engender in the heart of the elder brother an
immortal inanimitie, and hatred against the younger, so that by these means,
Satan seduced Cain to murder his brother traitorously (as he himself was a
murderer from the beginning.) This murder made a division in the house of
Adam, which was the cause of a miserable and pitiful desolation that came to
pass by succession of time, in the drowning of the whole world by the deluge.

But God on the other part, having a care of his promise of the blessed seed,
did renew his kingdom amongst men, in the person of Seth, Enos, Enoch, and
sundry others, who were the true and faithful worshippers of God, that blessed
seed that was promised, in whom the ruin of man with God, did consist. Yet
notwithstanding Satan continuing in his practices of division against mankind,
being desirous to bring them all to lamentable desolation and confusion, did
seduce the progeny of godly Seth, and Enos, whom the Text calls the sons
of God, by the bewitching beauty of the daughters of men, to wit, the
daughters of the Cainites, who were an Idolatrous and wicked people: of this
ungodly mixtion, the generations of wicked Idolatrous and blood thirsty men,
did so multiply, that we read in Genesis the whole race of mankind was
corrupted, Genes. 6. 11.
by falling away from God; which division brought in by Satan betwixt God and
man, was the cause of miserable desolation. For God for the punishment of such
wickedness did destroy the whole world except Noe, his wife, their three
Sons, and their wives, being eight persons only that did find favor in the
sight of God. We see by this example, that it is most true which is here spoken
by Christ, that Every kingdom, etc. For here we see how Satan in this first
age, did practice a general desolation in the whole race of mankind, by the
division which he brought into the house of Adam.

Out of this doctrine there may be collected a wholesome instruction, and
warning to all the subjects of this Island of Great Britannie. But more
specially this doctrine does appertain, for the instruction of these, whom God
and his Lieutenant has assembled at this time, to treat of the performance of
this godly work, of the Union of this Island in one kingdom. For even as the
first age which was before the deluge, did descend of one Father, and was
divided by discord amongst brethren, and afterward by this division brought to
small desolation and destruction: So the first Inhabitants of this little
world, of great Britannie, (who are called by Virgill, diuisi toto orb
Britanni,) were in the beginning borne of one Father, but amongst themselves by
brethren divided, who could not live together in love and amity: of this
division, which has been for many years, many desolations did fall out, in
the whole Island by sundry cruel, and bloody wars: yet in our days God has
showed his mercy wonderfully toward us in uniting us al under one head. Whereby
we are taught also, that as the diversity of heads, and Kings in this Island
made the diversity of kingdoms: Even so the singularity of one King, and one
head, makes the singularity of one kingdom: so that this whole Island is
united ipso iure, and ipso facto in that same united estate, in the which it
was before the first division thereof, into diverse kingdoms. Therefore let
every man think, that it is, both agreeable with law, and reason, that we be
no more two kingdoms, but one, seeing we all confess to have only one head,
and one King.

The order of this matter does lead us to set down before you, Division of
^^^guages, and diversity of ^^uernours did bring forth division of lands and
countries.
the beginning of the division of countreies and lands, betwixt people and
people, of the which division, the whole multitude of kingdoms according to
the diversity of languages did proceed in the beginning of the renewed world,
as we read in the history of Genes. Genesis 10.
For Noah and his three sons, Sem, Ham, and Iaphet did divide the whole
habitable world amongst their posterity. After the confusion of languages,
which did fall out a hundred years after the deluge. The ancient Greek
authors, whom Epiphanius did follow in his Anchorato, did most constantly
hold, that the whole Orient, which commonly is called Asia, did fall by lot to
the eldest brother Sem, and to his posterity: the whole South called Africa to
Cham, and his posterity: the whole North and occident commonly called Europa,
to Iaphet and his posterity: we have the testimony of this also in those
ancient Greek histories, and poesies, which Horace did follow, in the which
he calls the posterity of Iaphet, Audax Iapeti genus.

In this general division of the whole world we may observe, that the
governors and captains of these people, which first did inhabit any land,
gave the first names to that land or kingdom that they did inhabit. Of the
which names there remain as yet to our days some signs, marks, and
remembrances of their first imposition; as for example, the country of
Thracia, gat the name from Thyras one of Iaphets sons; the country of the
Grecians, was called Ionia from Iauan, one of Iaphets children, who by the
Grecians was called Ion, et inde Jones: The country of Moschouia, whose people
to our age are called Muschouits, did take the name from Meschet, another of
Iaphets sons. In the 10. cap. of Genes. after that Moses has named Iaphets
posterity, he says, that the Isles of the Gentiles were divided likewise by
Iaphets sons according to their families, and languages, and although the
names of the governors, and people, who first did inhabit the islands of the
Gentiles, are not expressed in the Bible: yet we find them expressed by that
most renowned Doctor Epiphanius in his Anchorato, who after he had named and
spoken of Iaphets posterity and progeny, he does name in the end of his
Catalogue, Britanni, Scoti, Hispani: Insulae vero ipsorum, Brittannia, Sicilia,
Rhodus, etc. so that we see here that this Island of great Brittannie, is first
named amongst all the Islands of the world, by all appearance at that time, as
the greatest.

Whereby we may collect, The antiquity of the name of Brittannia in the first
division of countries.
that this name of Britannia, or Brettania comes from the name of such a one
of the posterity of Iaphet, that did first divide the Isles of the Gentiles,
unto whom by lot this Island did fall. Therefore it is most certain that as the
rest of the names of the kingdoms of Europe, did take their original name out
of the Hebrew language from the sons of Iaphet: even so we must seek the
Etymology of Britannia, out of the Hebrew language, which is Brit-an-iah, (...)
and does consist of three words. Brit signifies, foedus, a covenant; an, ibi,
there: iah Dei, of God. Which three being conjoined in one, do signify, that
there is the covenant of God, that is, in this Island the covenant of God was to
be established.

The proper names of men, Proper names of men and places prophetical or
memorial.
and places in the renewed world was prophetical, for they did contain
mystically within them prophecies of things that were to fall out afterward: or
else they were imposed for a memorial of notable things already come to pass.
As for example, the name of Abram which is made of the Hebrew word, (...)
Ab Pater, Father, and Ram, excelsus, high, that is to say, a high Father, was
altered, and changed by God himself, (...)
in adding thereto one other word hamon, which signifies a multitude, and so
joining all these three words together, per synaeresin, he was called Abraham,
pater excelsus multitudinis, a high Father of a multitude, in which name was
contained a prophecy: into the which change of his name God did make a promise
to him, that a multitude of Kings, and people should come of him: for this same
cause God changed the name Sarai, (...)
which signifies a particular Lady into a more general name Sarah, (...)
which signifies a great and general Lady, because a great number of Queens
and Ladies were to come of her. In like manner, Jacob did impose a new name to
the place where God did appear to him, (...)
and called it Bethel the house of God, which before was named Luz, that is, a
Nutte tree, to be a perpetual memorial, that in that place God and his Angels
did appear to him ascending and descending a Ladder. In the same manner also,
Jacobs name was changed by God, (...)
and was called Israel, that is, a prince to God, to be a continual memorial
of his wrestling with the Angel, who bare the figure of a man. For the Text
says, Strenue egit cum Deo and cum hominibus, that is, he played the part of
a valiant wrestler, both with God and man. And Jacob named that place Peniel,
(...) Genesis 32. 30.
the face of God, because in that place he saw the face of God under the shape
of a man Even so we may say, and that not without reason, that the name of
Britan-iah, is a prophetical name from the beginning, foreshewing that the
covenant of God should be established in this Island, at the appointed time by
God. The covenant betwixt God and man, does consist in the true worship, and
adoration of the only increated God, which is most plainly set down to us in
the new Testament of the Gospel of Christ Jesus.

As the general name of the whole Island does contain under it self, The
signification of the ancient names, Anglia, Scotia, Wallia, and Hibernia.
all the people that dwell therein: Even so the significations of all the names
of these people are contained within the signification of the general name
Brit-an-iah. The people of this Island, are divided into four sundry countries,
according to the division of the earth, and the places where they dwell. For
Angli do inhabit the South East side: Scoti the North East: Walli the South
West: and Hiberni or Heberni, and Hebrides Insulae, the North west. And from
the people, the places of their habitation are called Anglia, Scotia, Wallia,
Hibernia. Undoubtedly all these four names have their ancient original from
Iaphets posterity, as Epiphanius, and others do write: So that we may gather
that the etymology of their names is to be searched out of the Hebrew
language, whose signification has a great correspondence, with the general
name Brit-an-iah. And therefore it is fit they be known. Angli, Saxones, and
Viti were the three ancient nations, that came out of Sueuia, and Germania into
great Britannie as Beda does witness, Beda lib. 1. cap. 15.
and diverse other Historiographers; from thence the name of Anglia did come,
who in their own country were called Angles before they came into South
Brittannie, as Balaeus writes. And therefore we must not seek the Etymology of
England neither from Hengist, neither any Queen named Angla, neither from
angulo, or angelo: but we must search the deriuation of Anglia, out of the
original language, seeing we may see clearly, they are descended of the
posterity of Iaphet. An-gli-iah. (...)
Wherefore An-gli-iah in Hebrew is ibi Reuelatio Dei, there is the Revelation
of God: Scotia, is also a most ancient kingdom in this Island. For in the book
of collections out of Joseph Bon-gorion, written in Hebrew, Vespasianus
speaking to Nero, does make mention of Scotia, so does Flauius Josephus in an
Oration which he had to the people of Jerusalem, Hegesippus. lib. 5. cap. 15.
which Hegesippus does testify. Quid attexam Brittannias interfuso mari a toto
orb diuisas, and a Romany in orbem terrarum redact as tremit hos Scotia, quae
terris nihil debet. Of this name also Epiphanius bears record, when
hereckoned the posterity of Iaphet, as I showed you before: and therefore we
must in like manner seek the deriuation of Scotia, out of the Hebrew, which is,
(...)
Skot-iah quies Dei, the rest or peace of God. Hiberni or Heberni are descended
also of Iaphets posterity. (...)
And therefore in Hebrew Heber-nin-iah and by a contraction Hebernia, is,
Transitio filij Dei, the passing over of the Son of God. Even so Wallia does
come from Gallia, from whence Walli had their progeny, who as yet do speak
the old language (which was in Gallia before the Roman conquest) and in this
Wallia were the old ancient schools of the Gentilique religion of the
Druides. The name then of Wallia or Gallia, (...)
Galli-iah in the original is, flumen Dei, Gods River: or reuelatio Dei, the
Revelation of God. So that ye may see all these names are prophetical, and do
foretell that the covenant of God signified by the general name Brit-an-iah
should make this happy and blessed Union in one Religion, and one Kingdom.

The prophecy of all these names was accomplished immediately after Christ his
ascension, The accomplishment of the prophetical name of Britannia.
and the sending down of the holy Ghost upon his Apostles, and Disciples.
Theodor. de Cur. gree Sermon. de leg.
For we read in Theodoretus, Metaphrastes, and Nicephorus, that S. Paul, S.
Peter, Joseph of Arimathaea, and Simon Zelotes did preach the Euangell of
Christ in Brittannie, (...), etc.
that is, the new covenant betwixt God and man: at which time this said Island
of great Britannie did bear the same name of Gods covenant as it does now. All
Historiographers, and Chronologists of whatsoever profession, do bear
witness that about 80. years after Christ, Britanni omnium gentium primi
public fidem Christi receperunt. The Britains before all nations first
publicly received the Faith of Christ; I must confess there was Faith and
Religion before received in Jerusalem, in Asia, in Rome, France, and Spain:
but it was not so publicly embraced, in any place, by Kings and superior
Magistrates: as it was then received by Lucius, King of Britannie, and by all
his people. Tertulian also, who lived 200. years after Christ, Tertul. ad Iud.
in his writings against the Jews alleges to them, that the whole world had
received Christ his Faith, yea and amongst the rest speaking of the Britains
he says. Britannorum loca Romany inaccessa, Christo sese subdiderunt. Origin
who lived about the same time, does witness the same.

Also this prophecy that is contained mystically in the name of Britannie
has thrice come to pass in this Island. First, as is said, it was accomplished
in the preaching of Christ's Apostles, and their Disciples: Secondly, in the
time of Constantinus Magnus by the union of the kingdom of the whole world
with Christ's kingdom: Thirdly, this prophecy is accomplished in our days (as
we shall hear more amply hereafter) in us and our posterity. For before our
days the covenant of God has been broken, and violated in this Island, by the
operation of Satan, who transforming himself into an Angel of light, in
taking upon him the pretext of Christ's true religion, did change the worship of
Christ, into the worship of Christ's images, made by the hands of man, of gold
and silver, which he made to be worshipped, as Christ himself. As Thomas
Aquinas, and the rest of that sort, do teach. Quod Christus, and imago Christi
eadem adoratione adorari debeant. That Christ and his image should be
worshipped with one and the self same adoration.

Moreover that old enemy of mankind, Satan, did make our predecessors to
break Gods covenant by seducing them to worship, and erect a strange God in
this earth: which was a new created God made of a wafer cake, by
transsubstantiating the substance thereof into the substance of the humane
nature of Christ pretending Christ, God, and man, reallie to be contained under
the outward form thereof, which they called by the name of God, Creator, and
adored him as the true God, both contrary to the Scriptures, and the ancient
doctrine of the Trinity, by the which no thing is to be adored extra (...)
consubstantialitate^ Patris, that is not united in consubstantialitie with God
the father, which union cannot be performed in the Imaginary
transsubstantiation of this wafer cake, neither yet can it be united with the
deity of Christ, as Cardinal Bellarminus does confess; so that ye see, how
the covenant of God was broken in this Island, by the worshipping of a strange,
and new God, who was not incarnate or borne of the blessed Virgin Marie, not
united with the deity in the Virgins womb.

Of all these we note, The restitution of the ancient name of Britannie, is a
testimony of the Union of language, kingdom, and religion.
that God having restored again in this Island the true worship of the only
uncreated God, excluding from this true worship all false adoration of visible,
and created things, and restoring again in this Island the true covenant of
God; of this we note, that seeing the covenant of God is restored in this
Island, the name also of great Britannie, which does signify the covenant of
God, both by the law of God, and the law of man, should be restored in the
same, as it was before. Therefore I take the restitution of this ancient name
of great Britannie, by the Kings most excellent Majesty to have come, by the
very motion, and instigation of Gods holy spirit, to this end; that it may be a
perpetual memorial, and testimony, that God has restored his true covenant
of eternal life, which he has promised to all those that do worship him
faithfully and truly. Let every one of us bless, and praise God, for the
restoring of the same. Let all the subjects of this Island think, that it is a
great glory to them to be called Britannes, that is to say, the people of Gods
covenant, which after the name of Christian is the most glorious and honorable
name, that any man in the world may enjoy.

I think I should not discharge my duty, if in this place, I did forget to
show you the King his Majesty's great and laudable modesty, which he has
observed in restoring of this ancient name, in so much that laying a side all
privileges, and prerogatives due to other Kings, in such like cases. For when
the whole kingdoms of the Orient were united to the Assyrians, they took
their names from their sovereign King: And when the Monarchy was translated
to the Persians, that second Monarchy received the name of the Persians: and
likewise in the third, and fourth Monarchy, the people embraced the name and
title of those that were their Kings and Princes. So that by the Kings M.
prerogative and privilege, seeing that the South part is fallen to his royal
person, both by the law of God, and nature; the name of the former kingdom
might have been imposed to this kingdom, which is last fallen in his power:
We see also that the name of Scoti is insert, by Epiphanius in the Catologue of
those countries, that were distributed to the posterity of Iaphet: whereof we
may note the antiquity thereof. So that all men may see, that look with an
indifferent eye, the great modesty, the good consideration, and loving kindness
that has accompanied his Majesty in this great work, insomuch that he has
not used his own prerogative in bringing in a new name in this kingdom of the
South: But he has only restored the ancient name of great Britannie, both to
the South and the North. To the end that he might extirpat the very seed of
division, which has been these many years deeply rooted amongst us: But now
(God be praised) by the embracing of this godly Union, both in the head, in the
members, and in name, all matters of division, and contention, are to be buried
in the grave of oblivion. For by this name of Britannie, which is as much as
Gods covenant we are united both in the corporal, and spiritual kingdom.

But let us return back to the division of Countries. The first division of
countries, and languages.
And first let us make our profit of the division of countries, and lands
amongst Noah's posterity. The cause of this division was, for that the space of
a hundred years, or thereabout after Noah, the whole race of mankind, did
dwell together, as in one country without any division. But Satan who watches
day and night to establish his kingdom by division of countries amongst men,
did engender a desire of vain glory in their hearts, that they were about to
build a tower which should reach to heaven; all this was attempted by them, vt
acquirerent sibi nomen, Genesis 11. 4.
That thereby they might purchase themselves a name. But God did punish this
their vain glory, by the division and confusion of their tongues, being all
before vnius labij of one lip, and of one language. This division of tongues,
was the cause that the heads and governors of families, that were of one
language, did separate and divide the whole earth amongst them, as we said
before; where by the way we have to observe that division of languages was sent
upon mankind as one of Gods curses; for there is nothing more forceable to
maintain Union and peace amongst men, then conformity in language: as on the
other part we see diversity of tongues does engender hatred and envy amongst
the nations of the whole world.

This being considered, Division of languages a curse of God.
it follows that division of lands, in sundry countries, is a rod and
punishment of God, which being conjoined with the division of tongues has
begotten sundry fearful and cruel wars betwixt country and country,
nation and nation. Therefore seeing division of languages is a curse of God, it
follows necessarily that the Union of diverse Kingdoms, in one language, and
one Kingdom, is a special blessing of God. Wherefore briefly we intend to
bring in for all your instructions some examples, out of the four Monarchies,
where we shall see, as in a glass, how these two do follow, the one upon the
other.

In the first Monarchy of the Assyrians, Examples showing Union to be a
blessing of God.
the Assyrian language was then a common language used in the whole Monarchy,
and from thence came to the Jews by the captivity of Babylon, and to this day
all the Christians of Asia do use it in their divine service: And it is
evidently known that the Monarchy of the Greeks did spread the Greek tongue
throughout all Asia, and Egypt, yea and it did remain in the beginning of the
Roman Monarchy, when all men studied to the understanding of the Greek
language, and the Romans having obtained the universal Empire, did establish
therein their own language: Even so, when Christ came into the world, to
establish his kingdom by the preaching of the Gospel, he sent down upon his
Disciples, the knowledge of all tongues, which was a spiritual Union of them.
And therefore God converted the curse, that came by the diversity of language,
into a great blessing, by giving his Apostles the gift of the understanding of
all tongues: So God did begin the Union of this Island, by the Union of one
language in both these nations, which came to pass by a conquest. Yet God
would not perform this Union of these two kingdoms by conquest, which is a
kind of violent Union; but in the time appointed by his incomprehensible
wisdom has united us not by a violent, but a free and voluntary Union. So
that long after the Union of the language of the South and the North, he did
unite us in the covenant of God, which is signified by our general name
Brit-an-iah: and afterward united us under one sovereign head and King. The
which Union of one language, one Religion, and one King, makes the Union of
the two countries, ipso iure naturali. For as we have proved, that the first
division of lands, did come from the diversity of languages, as also the
diversity of choosing Kings to govern sundry people according to the
diversity of their languages: Even so, by the general rule, deficiente causa,
deficit effectus; the cause of the division of kingdoms being taken away, the
effect and division of them should be taken away, ipso iure, and ipso facto.
For so they return to be one nation, one people, and one land, as they were
before the division.

By this it is most evidently showed to us, that our great Britain being in
our days united in one language, in one religion, and under one head, one King
and supreme governor, we cannot by any law, be any more two nations, or two
kingdoms, but only one.

The second example of the Union of sundry Countries, Union of kingdoms a
blessing of God.
Kingdoms, and Lands, being before divided, is manifest in the posterity of
Abraham. For the Land that was promised by God to the Israelites, which since
was called Palestina, was divided into diverse Kings, and Kingdoms (as the
history of the Bible does teach us:) all these divided Kings and kingdoms
were united by God in one kingdom of the Israelites in the person of David,
and Solomon, in the time of which Union was the most happy estate of any
kingdom we read of before that age: So that we may gather, seeing the cause of
this Union of many kingdoms was the unity, and singularity of the head; even
so the like Union and singularity of the head in our great Britain, does
unite ipso iure, and ipso facto, the kingdoms that were several and separated
before.

Therefore let no man imagine that we are two kingdoms, or two nations, but
vnus grex, vnum ouile, sub vno pastore, Homer.
ac vno Rege: as Homer did call the King, (...) the Pastor and Sheapheard of
the people. In this blessed Union of many kingdoms in the person of David, and
of his son Solomon, was established the kingdom of God in earth, which was
joined with the united estate of the temporal and worldly kingdom. For the
temple of Jerusalem was builded for the exercise of the true worship of God;
But Satan continuing in his accustomed malicious practices, did cast in the
seed of division: first by division of Religion, and of the spiritual
kingdom, and then by the divisions of earthly, and temporal kingdoms; by the
which divisions in the space of 300. years, or thereabout, the whole kingdom
of the Israelites was brought to a lamentable desolation, according to the
doctrine of Christ Jesus in our Text. An example that division of kingdoms, is
a curse of God, and that for Idolatry.


Satan to establish his kingdom in the middle of the people of God, did
deceive the wise Solomon, by the filthy love, and desire of foreign women:
afterward he seduced him to erect Idols, and false Gods in the high places of
that holy Land, retaining nevertheless the temple of Jerusalem, and the true
Sacrifice, worship, and adoration of God: by the which maintenance of true
Religion on the one part, and false Religion on the other, there did proceed a
division so odious unto God, that for this cause, he did pour forth his
curses and maledictions upon the posterity of Solomon, and rent away the ten
Tribes, and parts of the kingdom of the holy land from Roboam his son, which
he gave to Jeroboam his servant: leaving only to Roboam the two Tribes which
did remain. By this we learn, how displeasant this division of Religion made
by Solomon was to God, and what a miserable desolation it did bring, by
succession of time upon his posterity.

Let this punishment, The application of the division that was in Salomons
kingdom.
which was laid by God on Solomon be an example to all the Kings and Princes of
our days, by whom God has builded his Temple in the spiritual Jerusalem,
that is to say, the preaching of the true worship and adoration of the
increated God, that they be not by any means seduced, by the desire and
covetousness of the riches of that false God, which is made of a wafer cake,
to be erected, set up, and maintained in high places, houses, and castles,
which do pertain to men of high places in the Countreies and kingdoms where
they dwell. For undoubtedly as God in every place, and in all ages is like unto
himself: even so shall he be to the end of the world, to all the Monarchs,
Kings, Princes, sovereign governors, and to all Republics, that do commit
such an offense as Solomon did, which came to pass by a division of false and
true religion that was suffered by Solomon.

I pray the eternal God to extermine and abolish all the remnants and relics
of Idolatry, which as yet are excercised, and tolerated in the high places of
this Island: and let us all call to God in the contrition and humility of our
hearts, that that same good God, who moved his Majesty's heart to renew all
these laws, that serve to extinguish all Idolatry (which his Majesty does
detest as much as any man living) would also move and touch the hearts of all
his subjects, who are in the high places of the land, that they may follow the
godly example of their Sovereign Prince and King, and that they may put in
effect the saying of the Poet, Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis: that
following the example of their King in loving the true religion, and hating
false worship and Idolatry: every one of them according to their place and
estate, may be careful to purge and cleanse this whole Island from the
spiritual plague, and pestilence of Idolatry, that does to much increase in
many places of this Kingdom* so that if God put not to his helping hand, it is
to be feared, and there is to great appearance that this foul infection of
Idolatry shall extend it self universally through the whole country, that it
will not be contented with the high and secret places: but will come to the
valleies, towns, cities, and Churches; which without all doubt, if it be
suffered, will bring that miserable, and fearful desolation, whereof Christ
does speak in our text.

Satan by the division of the earthly Kingdom betwixt Roboam and Jeroboam did
practice a lamentable division in the spiritual Kingdom of God, Division of
kingdoms brings division of religion.
whereby he did establish his kingdom of abominable Idolatry: Again we see
that the old serpent has always taken occasion to establish his Kingdom, (in
the which is exercised false religion) by the division of the earthly
Kingdom: as he did in the first world, by the division of the house and
posterity of Adam, and as he did in the age following, by the division of
languages, lands, Countreies, and kingdoms, as ye have heard before. And for
this effect Satan did seduce Ieroboams heart, that he might show himself
ingrate to God, who had been so beneficial unto him, in making him King of
the greatest part of his Masters kingdom; and to move him to such a falling
away from God, did cast in his heart this worldly consideration, to wit, that
if he should suffer his people to remain united with the two Tribes of Judah,
and Benjamin, which did appertain to Roboam, and so to continue in the
exercise of true religion in the temple of Jerusalem, would be the cause to
reunite them, as they were before in one Kingdom.

This wicked mind of Jeroboam did distract him from God, The example of
Jeroboam.
and took away that true confidence which he should have had in him, which was
this. That as God did foretell by his Prophets that he was to give him these
ten Tribes, even so he was to conserve them, to him and his posterity upon
this condition, that he would remain constant in God his true worship, and
Religion: out of this all Monarchs and Kings have their lesson, who have
received from God this their high preferment, that they should take heed,
least such ungodly cogitations enter into their hearts, as did into Ieroboams,
which the devil infused into his heart, by lying, and false imaginations: The
only true means of keeping, maintaining, and preserving of a Kings royal
estate, is, to be constant in defending the true worship of God. Dan. cap. 2.
21.
Who as Daniel does teach us, dat regnum cui voluerit, and transfert regnum a
quo voluerit, gives a kingdom to whom it pleases him, and does transfer
and take away kingdoms, as pleases him.

Satan in drawing men from the true Religion in dividing, Worldly commodities
cause of Division in Religion.
and separating them from the kingdom of God unto the kingdom of darkness,
does proceed and work by degrees. For first he drew away Jeroboam the King
from God, by his deceitful counsel; next he seduced the people of the ten
Tribes by worldly and earthly commodities, to join with their King in this
apostasy and falling away from God: persuading them that it was a great
vexation of body, and chargeable expenses, and consumption of their goods, to
go so far as up to Jerusalem to offer their sacrifices, and so to avoid
such a tedious travel to their persons, and such a great wast and spending of
their goods, he persuaded them, that it was better to build Temples and Altars,
and institute sacrifices at home in their own countries near their own
Cities and houses. In this respect and regard of worldly commodities, there
came a lamentable division in Religion amongst the Elect people of God, which
made the greatest part of them, to be Idolaters, by worshipping of two golden
calves, which were erected by their new King, the one being set up in Bethel,
and the other in Dan; in the which places they did build temples, as Joseph
does write; from whence we learn, that the division of the earthly kingdom
was the mean by the which Satan did practice the division of the kingdom of
God, by separating the greatest part of this people from the true Church of God.

After this division of the kingdom in the Elect people of God, An example of
Desolation coming by Division.
within the space of 240. years, there did fall out a miserable desolation
upon the Israelites, according to the doctrine of Christ in our Text. For God
raised up cruel wars against the Israelites, and in the end they were all
carried away into a miserable captivity in the country of the Assyrians, 2.
King. 17. 24.
and another people of the said country called Cuthians were planted in their
Cities, houses, and lands.

That this example may serve for our instruction: First let us be thankful to
God who has united the people of this Island in the true Religion, The Union of
language, Religion, and kingdom in great Britannie.
and worship of the only God, Creator of all things, excluding the false
adoration of things inferior to God, or created by God: Secondly, let us be
thankful to God that he has united us under one head and King, taking away
from us the dangers that diversity of Kings ordinarily does bring forth, to
wit, division of Religion, and advancing of Idolatry. All these considerations
should instigate us, to put to our helping hands to the performance of the
Union of the members of this Island, that is, the South and the North; and for
this effect, let us beware that the pretext of worldly commodities do not make
any separation or division amongst us, as we see Satan did amongst the people
of Israel, which only fell out for worldly respects. Let not the people of the
South challenge to themselves the great riches, and fertility of their country
to be a color, whereby they should not ioyn in union with the people of the
North, because their riches are not so great, or their soil so fertile. Let
not their riches be a mean whereby they should pretend any pre-eminence above
them, either in offices, or preferments temporal, or spiritual, or in
dignities of honor: On the other part, let not the subjects of the North
desire, or hunt after any pre-eminence in honor, dignity, offices, or
preferments, either temporal, or Ecclesiastical, because that the King his
Majesty, our common head, was borne and bred, and had his beginning in the
North, or because the Nobility of the North may claim to have some
pre-eminence by the antiquity of their houses, above the South. But let us all
think with our selves, that as our head and Sovereign Lord is made of a
blessed commixtion of the blood royal of the South and the North: Even so, let
all the subjects of the South and the North think themselves mingled together,
and united in their head and King: So that all men of worth, and merit, be
equally participant of the honors, dignities, preferments, and offices of
great Britannie, according to their talents, places, and merits, laying aside
the place of their birth, whether it be South, or North. This equality is the
only mean to establish this blessed work of the Union in the members, as God
has established the same already in the head, which will take away from
amongst us all seed of discord.

The order of this matter which we have in hand, Union of kingdoms in the 1.
Monarchy, was the beginning of true Religion, amongst the Gentiles.
does lead us to set before your eyes, that the united estate of Kingdoms,
has been always the most blessed and happy estate amongst men, and that as
well in respect of worldly commodities, as in regard of the propagation and
maintenance of true Religion; which we may easily gather by the Union of the
kingdoms of the world under the four Monarchies: as on the other part we may
see the miserable and fearful estate of all men, that are subject to
division, in the division of the Monarchies in sundry kingdoms, as it did fall
out, whereby the true worship of God and Religion was troubled and oppressed,
and the false worship of Idolatry augmented and maintained by the division of
kingdoms before united.

After that the kingdom of Judah was overthrown by Nabuchadnetzar King of the
Assyrians, the Temple of God destroyed, and the whole people led into
captivity to Babylon, God did begin to establish his Kingdom in that
captivity, and the calling of the Gentiles, which was a figure and a type of
the eternal kingdom of God, that he was to establish by his eternal son,
over all the nations, and people of the world. Of which kingdom Daniel did
speak in the interpretation of the Vision of that great Image, Dan. 2.
which did appear to Nabuchadnetzar, which was a representation of the
mutation of all Monarchies, and Kingdoms to the end of the world; of the which
kingdoms we shall speak according to the order of their establishment.

We read in Daniel, Dan. 4. 31.
how Nabuchadnetzar was called to the true Religion from the Idolatry of the
Gentiles, The Union of Kingdoms in the 2. Monarchy, was a mean to call the
Gentiles.
by the miracles which were wrought by Daniel; but Belthazar his son, for
falling away from the true Religion, to the profanation of the golden, and
silver vessels, that were dedicated to God his service in the first Temple of
Jerusalem, Dan. 5.
was deprived of the Monarchy. For it was translated from him to the Medes and
Persians. We read in Esdras and Nehemias how Darius and Syrus were converted
to the true Religion, and adoration of the only increated God, how they did
restore the people of God to their own country, and how they gave great
wealth and riches to build the second Temple, which was a figure of the
establishing of Christ his kingdom.

In like manner when God did translate the Monarchy from the Persians to
Alexander and his successors, By the Union of kingdoms in the 3. Monarchy,
true Religion established.
we do learn by the history of Flauius Josephus, that Alexander himself did
maintain the Priesthood, and Temple of Jerusalem, Joseph. antiq. lib. 11.
cap. vlt.
being in his voyage to war against Darius, and by the way besieging Tyrus, he
gave a command to the high Priest, and Senate of Jerusalem, that they should
furnish his army with all things necessary for their siege. But being refused
by them, after the winning of Tyrus, he went to Jerusalem with an intention to
destroy the same; but when he did see the high Priest, and his brethren clothed
with their clothes dedicated to the Sacrifice of the true God, who came to
receive him in a peaceable manner, he did humble himself in all reverence
before the Priest, and gave him all the external adoration, which was
ordinary due to Kings, Priests, and Prophets, and being asked of his chief
Captains why he did so: he answered, that before his expedition in war,
there was a God that did appear to him, clothed after the fashion of this high
Priest, who did call him to the kingdom of all Asia, and did promise the same
to him.

This was the cause that moved Alexander to enter into the Temple of
Jerusalem, Ibidem.
and Sacrifice to the true God of Israel, which was a preparatiue of the
establishing the Universal kingdom of Christ, by calling all nations in the
world to the true Religion, and worship of the only true God, from gentilisme,
Idolatry, and worship of a multitude of false Gods. After his death the
Monarchy was divided into four parts, during the which division of kingdoms
before united, the Church of God did suffer great troubles: Yet God did
maintain her for a time, by Ptolomaeus one of Alexanders successors, who did
much good to the Israelites, and was the Author of translating the Bible into
the Greek language, which was a mean to instruct the Gentiles in the true
knowledge of God, and of his religion; which as I have said already, was a
preparatiue to the establishing of Christ his kingdom amongst all the nations
of the world. The division of the Monarchy, and kingdom of the Greeks
brought by succession of time, a miserable desolation, according to the
doctrine of our Text, which was a preparing before hand of the translation of
the Grecian Monarchy, to the Romans.

The Roman Monarchy did grow to her perfection, Christ himself made choice
of the united state of the 4. Monarchy, to join his universal kingdom with
the kingdom of men upon earth
in the person of Augustus Caesar, and did endure partly in perfection, partly
in her decaying age, for the space of seven hundredth years or there about:
But in her declining age, great divisions did fall out by civil wars, which
did bring forth a great desolation, and dissolution; of the which there did
rise a multitude of other Kings and kingdoms, according to the prophecy of
Daniel: Dan. 7. 7.
during the perfection of this Monarchy Christ did establish his eternal
kingdom, which was the calling of all the nations of the Gentiles from their
Idolatry foretold by the Prophet.

Christ amongst all estates of the world, did make choice of this united estate
of all kingdoms under one King, and Monarche to begin his spiritual kingdom
here amongst men. Whereby we are taught that the only son of God did love the
condition of the Union of many kings in one, as being an Image of his heavenly
kingdom, above all other estates. For the choice of Christ's birth and
Incarnation under the estate of Union, was a prophecy of the Union of Christ's
universal kingdom which was to be joined with the earthly Monarchy. The
beginning of the foundation of Christ's kingdom was in the age of a general
peace established by Augustus, who as we learn by the Roman histories, Toto
arbe pacato Ianum clusit. did close the Temple of Ianus, the whole world being
at peace.

We will lay before your eyes briefly, The wonderful blessing of God showed on
great Britannie, in the Union of religion, and all the kingdoms thereof, in a
Monarchy, in the person of a Britain Emperor.
the estate, and progress of this blessed union of the worldly Monarchy, with
the spiritual kingdom of God, and show you also what a great benefit God has
powered forth upon this Island of great Brittannie, in choosing it to be the
holy place, wherein this admirable union of God and man is conioined in the
person of a Britain King, uniting the temporal and spiritual Monarchy in
one. We are taught by Ecclesiastical histories and others, that Christ Jesus
the eternal son of his eternal father, after his crucifying, and ascension by
sending of his Apostles through the world, did propagate the true religion and
adoration of the increated God in the whole Roman Monarchy for the space of
fifty years: But Satan who was, and as yet is, a vigilant watchman, a
careful searcher, and a busy Bishop did not forget his devilish attempts.
For knowing that the preaching of the Euangell would destroy his Temple, which
was full of Gentilique Idolatry, Eusebius. in Eccles. hist.
he did raise up Nero, and many of his successors, Sulp. Sever. and alij.
to exercise many bloody and cruel persecutions against Christ's own Apostles
and Disciples, for the space of three hundred years or therabout. Hoping by
such cruel murdering of Gods holy Saints to abolish the true adoration and
religion of Christ, and to maintain the temples of his Idols and false Gods.
But that is true, which antiquity does say, Sanguis Martyrum est semen
Euangelij. The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Gospel. So that in this
case Satan was frustrated of his wicked expectation that he had to destroy the
true religion by the shedding of the precious blood, even as he was deceived
when he seduced the people of the Jews to crucify the Lord of glory. For if
Satan had known, that the crucifying of Christ Jesus, and the shedding of the
blood of that immaculat Lamb should tend to the salvation of mankind, and of
his reunion with God, he would not then have instigated the Jews to crucify
the Lord of glory; and if he had known that the bloodshed of so many holy
Martyrs which were killed, for the space of three hundred years after Christ,
by the Roman Emperors, and their lieutenants; if he had imagined, that all
these things did more establish, and confirm Christ's Gospel, then they did
hinder the passage thereof, he would have left of to have procured so many
persecutions against the Christians.

All these persecutions being ended, God did unite great Britain in one
kingdom, and one true religion by the marriage of Constantius Chlorus, and
Helena.
God did conciliat a marriage, betwixt Constantius Chlorus, (who had to his
part of the Roman Monarchy, Germany, France, Spain, and great Britain)
and Helena daughter to Coilus or Coelus, who was King over that part of
Britain, that did resist the Romans; by the which marriage Constantinus Magnus
their son was borne in this Island, who after the death of his father that
died at York, Eusebius, in vit. Constable. and Bal. cent.
did enter into the full possession of this Island of great Brittannie, Eutrop.
lib. 9. Gallic. in Panig.
and so it was wholly united in his person, where he did establish the true
Christian religion and the true worship of the only uncreated God. From thence
he did take his journey by France, to Rome, where he overthrew in battle
Maxentius that great persecutor of the Christians. And having established
there, and in the whole occident the kingdom of Christ, he went to the Orient,
where he did likewise overthrow in battle Licinius; Eusebius. lib. de vita
Constantini.
the which Licinius after he had been long a Christian did return to
gentilisme, and became a persecutor; Balaeus.
And so by all these victories this Britain King became Emperor, King, and
Monarche of the whole world, who did make Laws for the abolishing of
Gentilisme, and establishing of Christian Religion.

We do learn by this history, how the prophetical signification of the name
Britannia, was fulfilled in Constantinus days, in whose person, both the
temporal kingdom of the whole world, and the spiritual kingdom of the true
Religion of God, was united. Of this we collect, that the restoring of this
ancient and glorious name of Great Britannie into one kingdom, under our new
Constantinus, is to be embraced by all men with great congratulation and
gladness.

Secondly, The Union of great Britannie in one kingdom, and one true Religion,
by the means of a second marriage.
we do learn of this history, that as God did first procure the blessed
Union of this Island, by the marriage of Constantius, and Helena; Even so, that
same good God, who is ever like himself, did bring forth three most happy
Unions within these hundred years, or there about, by a marriage betwixt King
Henry the seventh, and Queen Elizabeth heir of York. The first Union was of
the two houses of Lancaster, and York; the second Union did consist in the
uniting of all the people of this Island in the true Religion and worship of
God, and abolishing of Gentilisme, which was brought in under the pretense of
Christian Religion; the third union was the uniting of England, and Scotland
together in the person of our gracious Sovereign, who is descended Lineally
from King Henry the seventh. For it is notoriously known that by that happy
marriage of King Henry the seventh, heir of Lancaster, and Elizabeth heir of
York, the cruel wars which were for many years, betwixt these two houses,
were extinguished; and the Union in their royal progeny established: out of
which marriage came King Henry the eight, (who did begin to abolish Idolatry in
this Island,) King Edward the sixth who did establish true Religion, and Queen
Elizabeth of happy memory, who did embrace all the days of her life the true
ancient Christian Religion: unto whom lineally our Kings Majesty succeeded,
in whose Royal person is made the reunion of this Island in one kingdom, as it
was before in Constantinus Magnus days.

Let us all then call to memory three great blessings, Three blessings upon
Great Britanny above all other nations, which do come by means of Union.
which God has powered forth upon us. The first is a public embracing of
Christian Religion, begun by King Lucius and all his people, and abolishing of
Gentilisme, and Idolatry, wherein God did prefer this Island before all the
nations of the world. The second blessing is, that God raised up in this Island
Constantinus Magnus a Britain Emperor, in whose reign God did unite the
earthly kingdom with the spiritual. The third blessing is this last admirable
Union of the South and the North in one kingdom, under one King and governor,
in the true Religion and worship of God, by the which Union this Island is in
the most happy estate of all the kingdoms of the world. God give us all
thankful hearts to acknowledge the same.

I will entreat all the subjects of Great Britain, to lay before their eyes,
the blessed estate of the Union of this Island, in one language, one true
Religion, and in one temporal kingdom: And on the other part, look what was
the miserable and lamentable estate of this Island, during the space that it was
divided into many earthly kingdoms, and holding under the spiritual
captivity of the Idolatry of spiritual Babylon. And for this cause remember
the history of the division, and civil wars of the Roman Monarchy, how
they did draw their soldiers and warriors out of this Island, and mark, at
that same time, what a desolate and miserable estate both the spiritual and
temporal kingdom did fall into. For the North Britains did rise up in war
against the South Britains, who for their aid and help had refuge to the
Saxons, who did profess Gentilisme and Paganism.

But the Saxons having delivered the South Britains from the oppression of the
North, The miseries and calamities that did fall out in Britannie by the
division thereof into sundry kingdoms.
did thrust out the Southern people out of their possessions, lands, houses,
and Country: so that a great number of them, did fly into little Britannie in
France, and the remnant went to the Western part called Wales. I might show
you also how that the South was divided into seven Kingdoms, Bed. Hist. Ang.
lib. 1. cap. 15.
at what time there were most cruel wars exercised amongst themselves: how
that afterward they were afflicted by the Danes, and how during the division of
kingdoms in all these ages, all learning, all true Religion, and all piety
was banished, yea almost extinguished: and by the contrary, all barbaritie by
violence and bloodshed, all Gentilisme, and Idolatry did abound; I might show
you, how all these things did reign in this Island during the divided estate of
this kingdom, but time will not suffer me.

Let the consideration of felicity, An exhortation to the performance of this
happy Union.
(which does flow from Union) on the one side; of misery and calamity (which
does come by division,) on the other side, work mightily in the hearts of all
these, whom God and his Lieutenant has chosen at this time, out of the South
and North, to entreat of this Union whereof I have now spoken. And that they
may learn what a dangerous thing it is, to leave any little seed of any
former division; we are to take heed of Satan's lying deceptions, who is a
busy watchman seeking by all means to throw in some seed of division amongst
men, to hinder and stay the good work of God; as men's particular commodities,
and preferments, which are not of such weight or importance in respect of this
happy Union: Therefore, Tollantur a nobis nomina diuisionis, Let all the names
of division or discord be taken from amongst us. Let us also learn by these
histories of the Union, and division of kingdoms, a very sure rule (as I
showed you a little before) that the division of countries in diverse kingdoms
does come from the head Governors, who by dividing of one kingdom made many
kingdoms, as we see in the first division of the world, and specially in the
division of the kingdom of the Israelites; In the third Monarchy of the
Greeks amongst the four successors of Alexander; In the dissolution of the
Roman Empire into the Orient and the Occident: In the subdiuision of the
kingdom of Carolus Magnus, in the Occident; In the subdiuision of Spain, into
many kingdoms. In the division of this Island, into many kingdoms. So that the
cause of division ceasing by the Union of kingdoms, the people was united ipso
iure and ipso facto, as France was (during the first race of Kings called
Meroninges) divided amongst four brethren into four Kingdoms: but so soon
as all those four fell in one Kings hands, they were all united ipso facto, in
one, ratione capitis, by reason of their head. Likewise, we have an example in
Spain, and in South Britannie, when the seven kingdoms did fall in one
Princes government, they were all seven united ipso facto, ratione capitis, by
reason of the head: Even so, pari iure the South and North, being united under
one King, it follows necessarily that the Kingdoms are united amongst
themselves: so that by the Law of God and man our Great Britannie is no more
two kingdoms, but one only; He that opposes himself against this holy
Union, does offend his God, make little regard of his Prince and King, and
hurts the welfare and happy state of this whole Island.

Let all men remember by the foresaid examples, that the Union of kingdoms
has been always the furtherance and standing of true Religion; but division
of kingdoms has been the overthrow of true Religion, and advancing of
Idolatry; let all those that love God, perseverance in true Religion,
prosperity of their natural King, and standing of the Commonwealth of this
Island, (which is the common mother of us all) be careful of the performance of
Gods work, and put to their helping hand for the furtherance thereof. And let
all reasonable and godly men consider, how God on his part has taken away from
us, all the causes of division, as diversity of Language, Religion,
Governors, and Kings, and has united us in one Language, in one Religion, and
under one head and King. If we then cast in any lets or impediments on our
side; or if we invent any new subject of division betwixt the South and the
North, we shall be like unto those that do divide, tear, and cut in pieces
their own bowels, devour their own children, and put fire in their own
houses.

Let all men therefore examine their own hearts and minds, The Conclusion.
whether they feel any inward motion within them to further and advance this
good work. If they do, let them believe certainly, that such a motion does
come from God; and by the contrary, if any man find any evil motion in his
heart that tends to the hinderance of this good work, let him believe that
this motion comes by the Devils suggestion. Let us all pray to God as well in
our private houses, as in our public assemblies, that God would perform this
his own work, wherein does consist the establishing of his true worship and
Religion in this Island, and the extinguishing of all false Idolatry; Let us
avoid all evil motions, inventions of men, impediments or hinderance
whatsoever that Satan may cast in men's minds to trouble this his holy work, to
stay the building of Gods house; let all men be assured that God will power
down his blessings upon all those, that shall further this work, and will
send his curse and punishment on all them and their posterity that shall let
or stay the progress of the same holy Union. We will end here, praying all in
the unity of our hearts and souls, that the eternal Union of all the subjects
hearts in this Ilan^ (...) be an Image of the Union of Christ's Elect members in
hi^ their head, who is the fountain of all (...) with the Father in the Union
of the (...), three persons in one Deity, be all hon^^^ praise, and glory, now
and for ever, Amen. (...).


