A RECOVERY FROM APOSTASY. Set out in A SERMON Preached in Stepny Church near
London at the receiving of a Penitent Renegado into the Church, October. 21.
1638. By WILLIAM GOVGE D.D. and Min. in Blackfriars LONDON

Herein is the History of the surprizall and admirable escape of the said
Penitent.

(...) Athanas. de Commun Essent P.F. and S.S. Nitrum nostrum and herba
fullonis est paenitentia. Hi^^n. in Hierem. cap. 8. LONDON, Printed by George
Miller, for Joshua Kirton, and Thomas Warren, at their shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the white Horse, 1639.

An advertisement to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THe ensuing Sermon is by the Author himself published, Martial of old thus
complained of a divulger of his book,

Quem recitas, meu^ est, O Fidentine, libellus: Sed male dum recitas, incipit
esse tuas Lib. 1. Epigram, 38.

Dr. Playser of Cambr. having a like cause of complaint, expresses his
complaint in the Poets words, thus turned into English.

O Fidentine, a book of mine, thou print'st against my will: It is not mine,
but now it is thine, because thou print'st it ill.


to prevent the publishing of other copies taken at the Preaching thereof by
such as have skill of Brachygraphie or short-writing; of whom some attempted in
the Authors name to publish their own notes. Many have been much wronged
hereby: and that by the Short-writers omissions, additions, mis-placings,
mistakings. If several Works of one and the same Author (but some published
by himself, and others by an Exceptor) be compared together, they will easily
be found in matter and manner as different, as Works of different Authors. I
have heard living Authors much ^omplaine hereof. The wrong done to (...)
deceased is the greater, because no redress can be made thereof. Had this
Sermon been published by any (...) swift-writer, all the particulars of those
tortures which Martyrs endured, and of their courage in enduring the same and
many amplifications of sundry general heads then in concise sums only
uttered, must needs have been left out of this Treatise. For the Author having
ever accustomed himself to be observant of the time usually set a part for a
Sermon, choosing rather to leave an appetite in his Auditory, then to glut
them, did forbear to deliver such testimonies of Martyrs sufferings, and
undaunted resolutions as he had in writing before him; and withal, when he
espied the time to slip away apace, he contracted his matter, and summarily
delivered, especially in the latter part of his Sermon, the points that are now
more fully set down.

That thou may (as in a small map) behold at least the heads of such points
as are handled in this Sermon (which might well carry the title of a Treatise)
know that her is distinctly set down 1 A particular narration of the Penitents
surpriz all, apostasy, escape from the Turks, and penitency, page 2. 2 The
distinct heads of the whole Parable of the Prodigal, page 7. 3 The difference
betwixt turning from the better, and from the worse, page 10. 4 The ancient use
of circumcision, and when, and why it was abolished, page 12. 5 When one is
lost, when found, page 12, 15. 6 The deceit of such Apostates, as privily
without any public penance slip into the Church, page 16. 7 Public
confessions of true penitents, p. 17. 8 The great damage of Apostasy, page 23.
9. The difference betwixt tortures of body and terror of conscience, page 26.
10. A senseless conscience worse then restless page 27. 11. The tortures
inflicted on Martyrs p. 29. 12. Their courage in enduring them p. 35. 13. The
recompense of Martyrs, page 37. 14 The punishment of Apostates, page 38. 15
Faith of more worth then life, p. 39. 16 Martyrs resolute answers, page 43. 17
Grounds of their refusing deliverance, p. 51 18 Martyrs in mind and inward
habit, p. 56. 19 Directions for constancy in the Christian faith, page 57. 20
Motives to redeem Christian slaves, p. 62 21 Evidences and benefits of
repentanc^, p. 64 22 The necessity and and efficacy of true repentance, page
67. 23 The difference betwixt the unpardonable and other sins, page 75. 24 The
grounds of pardon of Apostasy, p. 74. 25 Examples of Apostates that repented,
p. 77 26 The error of Novatians in denying pardon to penitent Apostates, page
79. 27 Exhortation to all of all sorts to entertain a penitent as a Brother,
page 80. 28 Justification of our Churches indulgency, page 81. 29 Incitation to
such as have denied the faith, to repent, page 82. 30 Directions for a
penitents future carriage, page 83. etc.


Besides these, which are all copiously handled, many others are by the way
touched.

The recompense which the Author desires is thy prayers for him.

A RECOVERY FROM APOSTASY. Set forth in a Sermon Preached in Stepny Church at
the receiving of a Penitent Renegado into the Church.
LVKE 15.31. (...). He was lost, and is found.
A Text the more pertinent it is to the point in hand, Quo magis accommodus, eo
magis commod^s.
the more profitable it is like to be in the handling thereof; wherefore that
you may the better discern how pertinent this Text is for this present
Assembly, I will as distinctly and succinctly as I can relate the special
occasion thereof.

The History of a penitent Renegado.
THis Penitent here before you, Vincent Iukes by name, is an English man, borne
in Shropshiere, and in the seventeenth year of his age was bound apprentice to
a Cook in Ratlife of this Parish. After two years service, his master set him
forth to Sea in a Cooks place in the Adventure for Greeneland. Thither they had
a prosperous voyage, and returned safe within five months. Anno 1636.
The year following he was set forth again (as before) for Genoway. In this
voyage they were set upon by Turkish pirates, and after a dangerous sight,
wherein seven were slain and about twenty more wounded and maimed, he with
three and thirty more were carried to Argier, where, within four days after
their arrival, they were sold for slaves in the Market place. Of that company
many died, four were ransomed, and seven there still abide in slaverie. It is
a custom there that their King have his choice of every eighth person to be
sold. And it so fell out that this man was one of the eight. The King therefore
had him for his slave, and after two months passed him over to his brother; by
whom he was sold to a Negro. That Negro used him most cruelly: and by daily
threatenings and soar beatings forced him to renounce his Christian Religion,
deny Christ, acknowledge Mahomet to be a great Prophet, and in testimony
thereof to be circumcised and to conform himself to the Turkish rites, and
attire. All these things thus accomplished, the Negro sold him to a Grecian,
who was also a Mohammedan. This Grecian put him for a Soldier into a Turkish
ship, which went forth upon spoil. In that ship were two English Christians
and a Flemming Circumcised as himself, with twenty native Turks. The two
Christians and two Renegadoes being together in the sterridge, espied five of
the Turks alone together below board: and thereupon consulted to take that
opportunity ^f freeing themselves from slavery, or spending their lives in the
attempt thereof. Thus on a sudden they fly upon those five Turks, who suspected
no such matter, and with their knives, having no other weapons, stabbed them.
This done, they seized upon the muskets, swords and other weapons which were in
that room, and therewith killed five more of the Turks that came one after
another to see what the tumult might be about: and they wounded and maimed five
more. The five Turks that remained alive unwounded were so affrighted, as they
knew not what to do, but through fear ran up to the riggin: where they were
threatened to be shot through if they would not yeald. They yeald therefore upon
promise to have their lives spared; and coming down one by one were bound, as
the five maimed Turks were. Thus a full conquest being got over all those Turks
they sailed to S. Lucas in Spain, where the Conquerours sold the ten living
Turks, the ship and all that was in her for six hundred pounds, which they
divided among themselves, and had each of them an hundred and fifty pound
apeece.

The Spaniards dealt fairly with the four that now professed themselves
Christians: and used all the enducements they could to bring them to their
Religion: Three of them were persuaded, and abode among the Spaniards. This
Penitent bearing more love to his native Country and reformed Religion in which
he had been brought up, refused to abide in Spain, but took his first
opportunity of coming for England in the Centurian 1638.
the last of April. He had not been long in England before he put to Sea
again for Greeneland. In which voyage he professes that he was much
troubled night and day, and that he could not well sleep through horror of
conscience for denying his Christian Faith. So soon therefore as he returned
safe from Greeneland to England, he went to the ancient grave Cura^e of
Stepny, the Parish where he lived, and made known his case to him; who for
the present comforted and exhorted him to abide more steadfast in the true Faith
for the future. But because the case was no ordinary case, the said Curate very
prudently advised with the reverend Doctor, and Vicar of that Church. The
Doctor on the same ground, and with like prudence made his case known to the
right honorable and right reverend Father in GOD his Diocesan; who advised
with the most reverend Father in GOD the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his
Grace thereabout.

Thus was there a solemn, pious, and grave form of Penance prescribed for
admitting him again into the Christian Church. At the performance whereof this
duty of preaching the Word was enjoined to me: Which in obedience to
Authority, and with hope in GODS assistance I have undertaken. And that what on
this occasion I shall deliver may be both seasonable and profitable, I have
made choice of the Text which you heard before; And I pray, hear it again, He
was lost, and is found.

Ye have here the Catastrophe or sweet close of a Parabolicall History, A
resolution of the Parable.
or Historical Parable, which is full of trouble and confusion throughout the
greatest part of it, but ends with a joyful issue.

The Place whereon it was represented, is the Church. For out of the Church did
the Prodigal depart: Into the Church did he return: And most of the memorable
matters therein related, are related as performed in the Church.

The Persons mentioned therein are,

1. God himself, represented under the title of a Father, ver. 20.

2. A Penitent Apostate, and a justic^ary Professor, set out under two
Brothers, ver. 11, 29, ^1.

3. Lewd tempters and inciters to evil, implied under the Harlots which the
elder brother mentions, ver 30.

4. A covetous worldling that takes advantage from a distressed man's necessity
to put him to a base work, not allowing competent food, He is here styled a
Citizen, ver. ^5.

5. Hard-hear^ed Neighbors, who are no whit moved with ^ distressed man's
ex^remities: intimated under this phrase, No man gave to him, ver. 16.

6. Obedient Servants, who readily performed what their Master commanded about
a welcome intertainement of his Son, ver, 22, 23.

7. Sympathizing Friends, who rejoiced with the joyful Father, comprised under
these words, They began to be merry: ver. 24. and further implied by the music
and dancing mentioned, ver. 24.

Most of the forementioned Persons are brought in performing several parts.

The distinct parts are five.

1. In the first, the younger Son obtaines his portion of his Father, and
riotously spends it, ver. 12.13.

2. In the second, the Prodigal being brought to extreme want, is forced to
seek service of an hard master: under whom he was put to a base work: and yet
for his pains had not enough to sustain nature, ver. 14, 15, 16.

3. In the third, the said Prodigal is brought to himself, and to think of
his Father: to whom addressing himself, he is met in the midd way by his
Father: and graciously embraced upon his penitent confession, ver. 17, 18, 19,
20, 21.

4. In the fourth, his Father with all the cheerful and joyful expressions
that he can, brings him to his house, clothes him with the best robe, feasts
him, and cheares him with music and dancing, ver. 22, 23, 24.

5. In the fifth, the elder Brother hearing the melody, and enquiring after
the cause, enviously expostulates the case with his Father: but the Father
graciously endeavors to give him full satisfaction: wherein he concludes with
the words of my Text, He was lost, and is found.

These five Parts might easily be subdivided into sundry other particulars.

But having by the forenamed generals brought you along from the beginning of
the Parable to the last clause thereof, my purpose is to hold close to this
close, He was lost, and is found.

In sum this Text sets out A recovery from Apostasy. Sum and parts of the
Text.


The particulars most observable are two.

1. The Damage of Apostasy, He was lost. For when he went out of his Fathers
house he proved an Apostate. His Fathers house was the Church, wherein alone
were the means of salvation: and out of which he had no hope of salvation, but
was in that broad way that leads to destruction. Thus was he filius perditus,
a lost child. A great damage indeed was this.

2. The Advantage of Penitency. He is found. By sight and sense of his sin,
by an humble acknowledgement thereof, and by returning to his Fathershouse, he
showed himself a true Penitent: and by his Fathers receiving him into his
house, and giving him such welcome as he did, he was under the means of
salvation again. Thus was he filius inventus. A child whom his Father enjoyed.
As great an advantage was this to the Son, as joy to the Father.

Difference betw^x^ turning to the worse, and to the better.
Before I proceed in a distinct handling of these two particulars, I suppose it
to be meet to set before you a general view of the whole: and that as it
consists of two opposite terms, LOST, FOUND; but made to agree by two
different tences or times, WAS, IS. He WAS lost, and IS found.

He WAS, He IS; These are the two distinct and different times.

The former, He WAS, notes out the time past: and that was his fore-lorne
estate.

The latter, He IS, points at the time present: and that is his newborn
estate.

Thus he is here set out unto us, not in that condition which the Prophet
describes in these words, Ezekiel. 18.24.
When the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the wicked man does,
shall he live? All his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned.
In his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned,
in them shall he die. But he is set out in a more blessed condition, which the
same Prophet thus describes, Ezekiel. 18.21.
If the wicked will turn from all his sins that he has committed, and keep
all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, h^ shall surely live:
he shall not die.

If the terms of my Text had been thus changed, He was found, and is lost, it
had been more miserable then, fuimus Troes, we were a flourishing people: or
then, (...) Aeca the title and first word of Ieremiahs Lamentations, HOW? Lam.
1.1.
How does the City sit solitary that was full of people? In such a case,
miserum est fuisse, it is a miserable thing to have been: to have been in our
Fathers house, and to be lost: as, to have been living and to be dead. But as
the parts of the Proposition stand in my Text, He was lost, and is found,
meminisse juvabit, it will be a comfort to consider that such and such a
woeful estate is altered: that He was lost, and is found. It is like to that
comfort which he found in his soul, who said, I was a blasphemer, and a
persecutor, and injurious, 1 Timothy 1.13.
but I have obtained mercy. Hereupon with much content and comfort he says (1
Cor. 15.10.) By the grace of God I am that I am.

To show that such a passage from the worse to the better is remarkable, and
not to be forgotten, the Apostle advises the converted Gentiles to remember it
Remember that ye being in time passed Gentiles in the flesh: Ephesians. 2.11, 12,
13.
-- That at that time ye were without Christ: -- But now in Christ Jesus, ye
who sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ.

This was the case of the penitent Prodigal, He was lost, and is found. And
this is the case of the Penitent Renegado here before us. He was lost, When the
Renegado was lost.
and is found. He was lost, not when he first set to sea: nor when the Turkish
Pirates set upon the ship wherein he was: nor when they took him captive: nor
when they sold him for a slave: nor when he was under the harsh and hard
handling of the cruel Negro. The basest slave that can be under man, believing
in Christ, and fast-holding his Christian faith, is (to use the Apostles
phrase, (1 Cor. 7.22.) the Lords freeman. Therefore not lost. He that endures
whatsoever the cruellest persecutor can inflict upon him for Christ's sake, is
blessed, Mat. 5.11. Therefore not lost.

But he was lost when he became a Renegado: When he renounced his Christian
faith: when he acknowledged Mahomet to be the great Prophet; when he yielded to
be circumcised, and have all his hair shaved off, and to put on Turkish
attire, and when he professed himself a Mohammedan, then He was lost.

Had he not yielded to those evidences of a Renegado, No sin per force
but that per force they had been put upon him, he had not been lost. If per
force he had been circumcised, if per force he had been shaven, if per force
the Turkish turbant or tuffe had been put upon his head, and other Turkish
attire upon his body, he had not thereupon been lost.

The an^ient use of circumcision.
In this case circumcision it self as it avails nothing, so it does no hurt.
Circumcision was of old, before Christ was exhibited, an honorable Cognizance
whereby Gods people were distinguished from such as were extranei, out of the
covenant and in contempt called uncircumcised (1 Samuel 14.6. and 17.26, 36.
Ephesians. 2.11.) But by Christ, When and why circumcision abolishe^.
who pulled down the partition wall beetwixt Jew and Gentile, was that, (as
other rites of that use, which were also Types of the Messiah to come) utterly
abolished. On which ground says the Apostle ( Gal. 5.2.) If ye be circumcised
Christ shall profit you nothing, that is, If any revive that rite, which
(beside that it was a sign of difference betwixt Jew and Gentile, and a bond
to tie men to the whole Law) was a Type of the Messiah to come, he denies
Christ to be exhibited, and to have wrought man's redemption: and in that
respect Christ shall profit him nothing.

Now because Christians, on these and other weighty grounds, utterly reject
Circumcision, Jews, Turks, and other adversaries of the Christian faith, are
not only circumcised themselves, but do what lies in them to draw such
Christians as they can get into their clutches, to be circumcised. The evil o^
circumcision under the Gospe^^.
For any Christian to yield to them herein, whether it be by fair or foul
means, is to deny the Christian faith, and to renounce Christ himself: which
whosoever does, is lost. It is all one, Niceph. Ecl. H^st. lib. 5. cap. 32

(...).


as of old it was to offer incense to the Heathenish Idols: which because
Origin did, he was excommunicated by the Church. Not fear of torture and
torments moved Origin to do what he did (for those he had often endured in great
measure with much patience: so as his adversaries saw that there was no working
on him that way) but it was pretense of avoiding another sin. Quae sitor quum
se tormentis victum ab illo intelligeret, al diabolicum prorsus consillum
animum a^jecit, etc.
For the Commissioner, when he discerned that by inflicting torments he naught
prevailed, but was vanquished, he turned himself to a more divelish plot; for
understanding how much Origin was addicted to preserve the chastity of his
body, he brought him to the Idols altar where a filthy Black-more was placed,
and threatened, that, if he would not offer incense on that altar the Black-more
should defile his body, which filthiness to prevent, he offered the incense.
This pretense did not excuse his fact, nor avert the Churches censure. What the
Black-more had done per force to him, would have been accounted no sin of
his. But his offe^ing of the incense was accounted a denial of the Christian
faith.

Renegadoes that yield to be circumcised go as far, (yea and further too) in
denying Christ, as Origin did, yet have they not such a pretense as he. Not
unjustly therefore may they be accounted lost, as was this Penitent here before
us.

Yet his standing here before us, as ye see him, gives evidence that he is
found.

He was not found when he with his fellows slew some of the Turks in the ship:
When a Penitent i^ found.
nor when they brought ship and the other Turks to Saint Lucas and there sold
them: nor when he arrived in England his native Country again. Though these
were sure evidences of his freedom from Turkish slavery, yet not so of his
freedom from a far worse slavery under sin and Satan, whereunto he
subjected himself, when he renounced his Christian faith. His three companions
whom he left in Spain, may yet still, for ought we know, remain lost.

He began to be found when he was touched in conscience, and pricked in heart
for his grievous Apostasy. He went on in the right way to be found, when he
made known his case to his Minister, and made confession of his great offense
to him: and yet further, when he willingly subjected himself to the discipline
of our Church, and manifested his willingness to undergo any penance that
she should enjoyne: Poenitentia peccati tunc prodest si eam in Ecclesia
Catholica gerat. Aug. de Eccles dogm. c. 80.
humbly and penitently desiring to be received into her bosom again, and to
be accounted one of her children. For Repentance of sin is then profitable,
when it is performed in the Catholic Church. Where, of old, Recte
constituuntur ab ^is qui Ec^lesiae praesunt tempora paenitentiae, ut fiat etiam
sa^i^ Ecc^esiae in qua remittu^tur ipsa peccata. Aug. (...). c. 65.
times of penitency were appointed by the Governors of the Church, that
satisfaction might be given to the Church, in which remission of sins is
granted.

Now therefore he is found indeed. Now that after the just censure of
excommunication for his Apostasy, upon his humble confession and hearty
repentance (as we hope) he is here this day received into the bosom of the
Church, now he is found. So as now to his everlas^ing comfort (if he remain
constant) and to the great rejoicing of all true Christians that now behold
him, or shall hear of that which we behold, my Text may in special be applied
to him, He was lost, and is found.

Apostates creeping into the Church without public pennan^^ are still lost.
I fear, I fear, that there are some even now here present that have been in
the case wherein this Penitent was, lost; but not in the case wherein he is,
found. I fear there are some that have played Renegadoes, and as an evidence
thereof, are circumcised. Let such know (whether they hear me themselves, or
shall hear of what I say by others) let them know, that by their secret
thrusting themselves into the Church, and concealing their sin from the
Governors thereof, and that without just satisfaction which ought to be
publicly given for an offense so scandalous as theirs is, they can never find
such peace in their conscience as this Penitent may. Yea let them know that
they have great cause to fear the deceitfullnesse of their hearts, and to
suspect the truth of their repentance, if at least they make any profession of
repentance. True Penitents, which by notorious sins have dishonored their
profession, scandalized the Church, and given matter of insultation to the
enemies of true Religion, will not be ashamed to make open confession of their
sin, and be willing to undergo any penance that by the true Church shall be
enjoined to them.

They of Iaakobs house who had taken with them strange gods, brought them to
Iaakob, and their idolatrous earings too ( Genesis 35.4.) which was a real
confession of their sin, and a demonstration of the truth of their repentance.

Achan, though he knew he should die for it, yet made this open confession. (
Josh. 7.20.) Indeed I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel: and thus and
thus have I done. It is probable that he was the rather enduced to make this
confession, because Joshua had told him, that thereby he should give glory to
the Lord God of Israel in the verse immediately before: Vide Andr. Masij
comment in Ios. 7 19.
and that he obtained mercy for the remission of his sin before God, and
salvation of his soul.

The Israelites having cast off the Government of the Lord by Judges, being
convinced of their sin, make this open confession thereof, We have added
unto all other our sins this evil, 1 Samuel 12.19.

The Jews after the captivity having married strange wives (which was against
the Law, Deuteronomy. 7.3.) openly and penitently thus confess their sin, We have
trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives, Ezra 10.2.

David, though a King, having committed scandalous sins, contents not
himself with a private confession thereof to the Prophet Nathan (2 Samuel
12.13.) But Iste Psalm^ vo^e^^ continet p^nitenti^: often^^ns ut qui ceci^^ri^
in crimin^, (...) redeat a^ a^utem Hier. in lo:
by a Penitentiary Psalm makes open and public confession thereof to the
whole Church, Psalm 51.1.

To like purpose tends the second book of Solomon, styled Ecclesiastes. Aiunt
H^br^i hunc librum Salomonis esse paenitentiam age^tis, quod in sapientia
divitiisque confisus, per mulieres offenderit Deum. Idem.
The Hebrews say that this book is an evidence of Salomons repentance: for
that he trusting in his wisdom and riches offended God by women.

That which S. Paul writes (1 Timothy 1.13.) of his being a blasphemer and a
persecutor and injurious, is a public confession of his sins.

It is noted ( Acts. 19.18, 19.) as a fruit of true faith that many that
believed, came, namely openly and publicly, and confessed and showed their
deeds. Among these were many also of them who used curious arts (that is
magical and diabolical arts) brought their books together and burnt them,
before all men: that is openly and publicly.

Niceph. Ecl. Hist. l. 2. c 32.
The Young Man whom S. John committed to the tuition of the Bishop of Ephesus,
being recalled, after his Apostasy, with tears on his knees openly craves
pardon.

Lamentum quod circumfertur nomine Origeni^.
There is a Lamentation of Origin, published among his works, wherein he
himself does openly confess, and penitently bewail h^s scand^lous yealding
to Pagan Idolatry.

(...) Iren. (...) Har. l. c. 9.
Sundry that were seduced by Marcus the Magician, in testimony of the truth of
their penitency made open confession.

Eusebius Ecl. Hist. l. 6. c. 34.
Philip who of Roman Emperors was the first Christian, desiring to be admitted
into the Christian Church, stood in the place where penitents were wont to
stand, and made open confession of his sin.

Haeresis hujus vocabatur Episcop^^. Euse^. Ecl. Hist. l. 5. c. 28.
Natalis a Bishop among Heretics did the like.

Many other particulars might here be reckoned up of such as of old in the
times of persecution having renounced the Christian Faith, upon touch of
conscience made public confession of their Apostasy, and were thereupon
admitted again into the Christian Church.

For Eusebius. Ecl. Hist. l. 6. c. 34.
in those days they suffered none, that had once renounced the Christian Faith
to be received as members of the Church, unless they gave good evidences of
their true repentance, and that by their deep humiliation, free confession,
and willing subjection to such satisfactions as the Church should enjoyne.

For this end they had In Ecclesiae qualibe^ praebyterunt paenitent^arium
constituerunt
Ministers to order the penance of such Penitents, and to receive them again
into the Church. Certus est paenitentium locus Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 12. c. 28.
They had also public places for such Penitents to stand in: and they had
Lege ibid de f^rma paenitentiae.
forms of confession, and rites for Penitents to observe.

From those primitive times of the Christian Church even to these our days,
they who after their revolt from the Faith, have been thoroughly touched in
conscience for their sin, have not unwillingly made recantations, and
confessions, and undergone what the Church thought meet to lay upon them. This
time after time has been done in all reformed Churches: And that not only by
such as h^ve returned from Paganism, Turcisme, and Iudaisme, but also from
Anabaptisme and Popery.

Indeed the ancient Discipline of the Church about receiving such as had
Apostatised from her, into her bosom again, was more austere, then now it is:
Ritu^ ^ste propter Novati. anos institutu^ esse dicitur, quu^ communicare illi
cum eis nollent, qui sub Decij persecutione fidem abn^garant, and postea
resipiscentes ad eam redierant* Niceph Ecl. Hist. l. 12. c. 28.
The rather because of the Novatians, who would not communicate with them, who
had denied the faith in the persecution of Decius, and afterward repenting
turned to the same faith again.

In those days Penitents were wont to put Sacco sumpto and cinere conspersu^.
Niceph. l 4. c. 21.
sackcloth upon their backs, and ashes on their heads: And Stant illi periude
atque judicio damnati essent, etc. l 12. c. 28.
to stand as men condemned, with their countenance dejected; yea and with much
sorrow and wailing to cast themselves down at the Bishops feet, who also
weeping with them and for them, prostrateth himself: and the whole assembly
weepeth too. The Bishop risen up, having prayed for them, and given them what
counsel and charge he thought meet, bids them stand up: and dismisseth them
for that time: Being so dismissed they gave themselves to mourning, watching,
fasting, praying, and other things meet for Repentance: and waited till the
Bishop should call for them. Sometimes they were long put off before they were
admitted into the Church, and participation of all Gods ordinances.

But now the Church deals much more gently and graciously with such as she
conceives to be true Penitents. Yet so, as she may search, and cleanse the
wound, and work the more perfect cure.

Ye, ye, whosoever you be that have renounced your Religion, and denied your
Lord and Savior, and yet without any public confession or satisfaction
intrude into the Church, and thrust your selves in among the guests which are
invited to the Lords Table, Ye draw a skin over a festring wound: Ye eat and
drink your own damnation: Ye make the Lord to expostulate the case with you,
and to say unto you, How came ye hither not having a wedding garment? This is
the doom denounced against such ( Math. 22.13.) Bind them hand and foot, and
take them away, and cast them into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Well note this and tremble. I wot well, that it were far
better for you to stand as humble Penitents in a Christian Congregation on
earth, humbly confessing your sins and graciously receiving absolution of
them, then to be in the number of them, of whom the Son of man shall be
ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father with his holy Angels (Mark
8.38.) And assuredly he will be ashamed of such, as having denied him are
ash^med to make open confession of that their denial.

But this Penitent here before us by his humble submission to the Churches
order, and penitent confession of his heighnous sin in the midst of this
great Congregation, apparently shows, that as formerly he was not ashamed to
deny Christ, so now he is not ashamed to confess Christ. He is indeed ashamed.
But of what? Even of his former shamelessness. Of this shame he has no cause
to be ashamed: Unless it be that he can be no more ashamed, that he was
before so gracelesly ashamed of his Savior.

In this ground, he being, as ye heard before, received into the Church
again, I will again apply my Text to him, and say of him, He was lost, and is
found.

Hitherto of the general consideration of my Text, by handling the two
opposite terms jointly in their distinct times. I proceed now to the
particular points severally: each by it self.
The two branches which in special sprout out of the body of my Text, are
these.

1. The damage of Apostasy, intimated in this word LOST, which gives us to
understand that Apostasy implungeth into perdition.

2. The advantage of Penitency intended under this word FOUND, which gives us
further to understand that Penitency restores to salvation.

Of these in order.

It has been showed before that the HE here meant was an Apostate. He
forsook the Church, and in that respect he is said to be Simplex verbum (...)
significat perdere co^positum (...) non caret emp^^si. (...) and (...)
opponuntur apud Isocrat. in Archid.
(...) LOST: That is in the state and case of him to whom eternal destruction
and damnation belongs. His Apostasy therefore implunged him into perdition:
where into all Apostates are implunged. So much is intended under this phrase
Substractio ad perditionem
(...) (Heb. 10.39.) a withdrawing or drawing back unto perdition. The
withdrawing whereof he speaks is from the profession of the true Faith, an
Apostasy from it. This is evident by that which in way of opposition, he
adds, (...), but of Faith. We are not (says he) of them that draw back: but
of them that cleave close to the true Faith, and fast hold it. Now by adding
this inference ( unto perdition) to that sin of drawing back, he plainly
shows that Apostasy implungeth into perdition. In this respect that notorious
Apostate Judas is, by him that well knew what was his due, styled, the son of
perdition, John 17.12. Christ foreseeing that he would fall away, and prove an
Apostate, in relation thereunto terms him a son of perdition, that is a man
that would implunge him self into eternal destruction.

S. Peter in setting down this point, notes out the true ground and reason
thereof in these words, Denying the Lord that bought them, they bring upon
themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. By the Lord that bought them, he
means the Lord Jesus Christ. Now to deny him is an high pitch of Apostasy: And
thereby ^hey bring upon themselves destruction; in that there is no salvation
in any other. For there is no other name under heaven given among men whereby
we must be saved. Act. 4.12. They who deny him by whom alone salvation is to
be had must needs bring destruction upon themselves. This is the most
principal reason of all.

There is another like to this, noted by the Apostle ( Hebr. 10.25.) they
forsake and desert the assembling of Saints together, that is, the Church of
God, the Communion of Saints. Now as Christ is the only Author and giver of
salvation: Nulli nostrum dubium est per arcam Noae ^cclesiam suisse figuratam.
Aug de Unit. Ecl. c. 5.

Firmissime tene omnes qui extra ecclesiam catholica^ praesentem fin^unt vitam,
in igne^ aeternum ituros Nam and in diebu^ diluvij neminem legimus extra arcam
potuisse salvari Aug. de Fid. ad P. Diac. c 37, 38.


So he causes the sweet stream of salvation to flow forth upon his body
only: which is the true catholic Church. Where the Apostle says ( Ephesians.
5.23.) He is the Savior of the body, he means it exclusively, of none but of
those who appertain to the body, and are members thereof. In this respect the
Church is fitly resembled to Noah's Arc. For as none were saved from perishing
in the general deluge, but they who abode in the Arc: So can none be saved
from eternal perdition, but such as remain in the true Church. Apostates
therefore, by deserting the Church implunge themselves into Perdition: and
remain as children of Perdition, even as persons lost, while they continue
Apostates.

The miserable plight o^ apostat^.
Hereby take notice of the wretched disposition, and woeful condition of
Renegadoes: who cast themselves out of the true Church, renounce their
Christian Faith, and deny the Lord who so dearly bought them. What, what is
then in this wide world that can countervaile such a loss? Or what can stand
him in any steed that is lost? Can wealth? Can honor? Can liberty? Can life it
self?

1. Wealth got by Apostasy is vanishing.
1. The wealth of this world, which is all the wealth that can be gotten by
Apostasy, may prove like Ionahs gourd, and vanish away ere thou be aware: even
while the thought of some seeming content is in thine head. But the wealth lost
by Apostasy, is, as the Apostle sets it down ( Heb. 10.34.) (...) a solid
substance: and that (...) much better then this world can afford. For it is
(...) in Heaven: it is there treasured up for us; and thereupon it is (...)
enduring, that never fades away. This better, enduring substance, in Heaven, is
lost by such as are themselves LOST through Apostasy.

2. Honor of Apostates ends in shame.
2. The honor achieved by denying the faith may prove like Hamans promotion,
which lift him fifty cubits high above ground upon a gibbet: but the honor
lost by Apostasy, is 1 Pet. 2 9.
a Royal Priesthood, Rev. 3.11.
a Crown, Jam. 1.12.
a Crown of life, 1 Pet. 5.4.
an incorruptible Crown of glory, Iam. 2.5.
a Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.18
an heavenly Kingdom, ^ Pet. 1.11.
an everlasting Kingdom. This is the honor that belongs to such as pers^vere
in the faith; which they who renounce the faith, do forfeit.

3. Ap^s^ates (...) miser^ble (...).
3. The liberty attained by leaving the true Christian Church, may be some
external, temporary freedom from prison, from chains, from galleys, from
bondage and slaverie under cruel men. But the liberty lost thereby, is that
divine, and Romans 8.21.
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Gal 5.1.
wherewith Christ has made them free: which is a freedom from the wrath of
God, the curse of Law, the dominion of sin, the tyranny of Satan, and
eternal damnation. Is the rage of man more to be feared then the wrath of God?
chains of iron more then the bonds of the law? Bondage under Turks more then
slavery under Satan, whose work which he enjoynes is villainy; whose wages,
which he gives is damnation? are blows and stripes on the body, Terrors of
conscience most terrible.
more then gawles and wounds of conscience? The anguish of a tormenting
conscience is much more intolerable then of scourges, whips, bastenadoes,
strapadoes, racks, or any torturing instruments on the body. There needs no
other Accuser of an Apostate then his own conscience: no other Witness to
convince him: no other Adversary to aggravate his crime: no other Iewry to
find him guilty: no other Judge to condemn him: no other hangman to execute
his doom upon him. There needs no other to work his woe, then his own
conscience. Instance all these in that great Apostate Judas.

Who accused Iud^s, or brought in the bill of indictment against him? Did any
of his fellow Disciples? No: none but his own conscience.

Who did bear witness against him? Did any of the Priests of whom he received
money to betray his Lord, or any of their officers who saw him accomplish his
treason with a kiss? No: none but his own conscience.

Who aggravated his crime? Did Nicodemus, or any of the Lawyers that believed
in Christ? No: none but his own conscience.

Who found him guilty? Did any of the common people, who followed Christ from
place to place, and r^ceived sundry kindnesses from him? No: none but his own
conscience.

Who gave sentence against him? Did Annas, or Caiphas, or Herod, or Pilat? No:
none but his own conscience.

Who brought him to the place of execution, and there hung him upon a tree? Did
any of the Governors soldiers? No: none but his own conscience.

His conscience was his Accuser, Witness, Adversary, Jewry, Judge, Executioner.

What the Poet said of envy, may be applied to a guilty conscience, -- Siculi
non invenere Tyranni Horat Epist. l. 1. Ep. 2.

Tormentum majus --
Never did the fiercest tyrant
Invent a greater torment.


If it be said that all Apostates have not such torturing consciences, I
answer, A senseless con^cience worse then rest-lesse.
that then they have a seared conscience, which is much worse. A restless
conscience, though for the time it be even an intolerable burden, yet may it
prove a means to bring the tortured soul to deep humiliation for his sin,
to sound repentance, to an earnest desire of pardon, yea and to faith in Christ
Jesus: and thereupon be pacified, and quieted, as his was, who came trembling
and fell down before Paul and Silas, Acts 16.29, 30
and sa^d, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved? B^t a senseless conscience
never works any remorse, or restraint: but is an occasion of men's giving
themselves over to work all wickedness with greediness. Thus after their
hardness and impenitent heart they treasure unto themselves wrath against the
day of wrath (Romans 2.5.) In this respect a conscience past f^eling casts a man
into a more desperate condition, Cum tenentur in tam grand^ crimine per^uss^
su^t animi caecitate, ut nec intelligant delicta nec plangant. In^ignantis D^i
major haec plaga est. Cypr. Sermon. 5. de lapsis.
then a conscience destitute of all comfort. And of the two, it is better to
live and die in despair, then to live and die in an impudent remorselesnesse:
greedily committing sin without any trouble of conscience. Surely in the day
of judgment it will be easier for the conscience which is restless here, then
for the senseless conscience.

God to be feared more then man.

Heb. 11.35, 36.


Be wise now therefore all ye that may be brought to the trial of cruel
mockings and scourgings. yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment, and of all
manner of tortures: be well instructed in the difference betwixt such things as
man can inflict upon the body, and such as God can inflict on body and soul:
that ye be not worse then the foolish fish, which leap out of the warm water
into the flaming fire. Such are they, who to escape the hands of mortal men,
fall into the hands of the living God, not considering the weight of that which
the Apostle says ( Heb. 10.31.) It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God.

The fears which usually most affright men, and draw them to be Renegadoes are
but of such things which the Apostle (1 Cor. 10.13) styled (...) humane or
common to man: Such as by man are inflicted, such as by man may be endured.

I suppose greater and crueller tortures cannot in these days be by man's wit
invented, What tortures Martyrs en^ured.

Maccab. 6.9, 10 and 7.1, 2, etc.


then were of old inflicted by spiteful persecutors on the Jews in the days
of Antiochus, and on Christians in the time of the ten notorious persecutions
under the Roman Emperors.

Erat spectaculum eorum quae fiebant ita crudele, ut omnem narrationem superet.
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist l. 8. c. 6.
So cruel was the sight of those tortures which persecutors inflicted, as
exceeds all expression.

Virgis, flagris, loris, funiculis lacerati ossa nudata patebant: and aceto
sale mixto purulentis corporis partibus perfunduntur.
Constant Christians had their flesh torn from their backs with rods, scourges,
whips, and cords, so as their bones lay bare, and the raw parts of their body
were washed with vinegar and salt.

Fustibus percussi.
They were knocked with clubs.

Instrumentis membratim extensi.
They were stretched on racks.

Fractis cruribus puniti.
Their legs were broken, and they so left miserably to perish.

In utraque manu digiti acutis calamis sub extremis unguibus perforati.
They were goared with sharp pricks under the lowest parts of their nails.

Testis toto corpore ad mortem usque discerpti.
Their bodies were scraped with shells to death.

Terga excoriata. Capitibus pellis detracta a front ad mentum usque.
Their backs were fleaed. Their skin was pulled over their heads from the brow
to the chin.

Nares, labia, aures, manus etiam and pedes amputati: and ipsi veluti quaedam
victimae in carnes dissecti.
Their noses, lips, ears, hands and feet were cut off; and they as sacrifices
cut into gobbets.

Linguae funditus exectae (Plectrum palati and faucium saevus tibi Tortor
revulsit. Prudent. (...). Him. 10. de Romano Mart.)
Their tongues were cut out by the roots, and pulled out of their jaws.

Oculorum expunctionem and effossionem tolerarunt.
Their eyes were boared and dug out.

Robustiores ramos instrumentis quibusdam in unum contraxerunt: deinde cuilibet
Martyrum crura alligarunt: atque ita eos in suum quemque locum pro natura sua
recurrere permittentes, subitam m^mbrorum distractionem effecer^nt.

(Intereatque feris dilaceratus equis. Prud. de Hippolyto. Him. 11.)


Their bodies were rent and pulled to pieces by strong boughs, forced together
by instruments, and let loose when the limbs of the bodies of Martyrs were tied
fast unto them. Their limbs were also pulled to pieces with wild horses.

Iacobus fullonis instrumento percussus obijt.
Their brains were knocked out with a fullers instrument.

Fractis cruribus puniti.
Their legs were broken to pieces.

Igne combusti.
They were burnt with fire.

Carbonibus ignis ad supplicij diuturnitatem adusti.
They were a long while together parched on hot burning coals.

In sublime sublati molliore igne supposito, fumo suffocati.
Being hanged by the heels and their heads downward over a soft fire, they were
choked with smoke.

In morem carnium vescarum igne paulatim consumuntur.
They were roasted at the fire, as flesh to be eaten uses to be roasted.

Ignes and craticulae fiebant sensim Martyrum corpora torrentes.
They were leisurely broyled on gridierons set over fire.

Ferream sedem perserunt in qua corpora ipsorum velut in sartagine cocta nidore
astantes replebant.
They were fried in red hot ieron chaires, as in a frying pan, which annoied the
standers bie with a stanch.

Plumbo igne liquefacto bulliente adhuc and ignescente tergora perfusi.
Hot boiling lead was powered down their backs.

Aeneas laminas ten^rimis corporis partibus applicabant.
They clapped fiery plates of brass upon the most tender parts of their body.

Tyrannus cum considerasset regionis naturam quod frigore horrida esset, and
anni tempus quod hybernum; observata nocte in qua maxim malum ipsum
augesceret, and alias tunc aquilo in ipsa spiraret: jussit quadraginta
Christianos nudatos sub dio in media urbe congelatos mori. Tunc ubi mandatum
audivissent, cum gaudio abjecta etiam extrema tunica ad mortem per frigus
precedebant. Basil. in 40. Mart. Conc. Item Greg. Nyssen. de ijsdem Orat. 2.
A persecuting tyrant considering the nature of the country, that it was
terribly cold, and the time of the year, that it was winter: and a night
wherein the cold extremely increased, and that the northwind then blew there:
commanded forty Christians to be set stark naked under the open air in the
midst of the City, to freeze to death. Then when they heard that charge, with
joy casting away even their innermost vestme^t, they went on to their death by
cold.

Pardalum, Vrsorum, Suum agrestium, Boumque impetum sustinuerunt.
They endured the violence of Libbards, Bears, wild Boares, and Bulls.

Fame, siti, frigore necantur.
They were destroyed with hunger, thirst and cold.

Eos qui in carcere suffocabantur canibus rojecerunt, adhibitis nocte dieque
custodibus ne quisquam eorum sepeliretur: prolatisque reliquijs cum* a bestijs,
tum ab igne relictis, ac partim laceratis, partim adustis, deinde and
reliquorum capitibus una cum truncis pariformiter inhumatis complures dies
militaris curae custodiam deputarunt.

Haec and alia tormentorum genera memorantur a Basilio Concionibus in S.
Martyrs. Prudent. in Hymnis de Coron. Mart. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. 1.
and l. 8. c. 6, 7. etc. Niceph. l. 7. c. 11, 12.


Such as were stifled in prison they cast to dogs, setting watchmen night and
day, lest any of them should be buried: and such remainders as were left both
of beasts and fire, in part torn, and in part burnt, together with the heads
and bodies of others they cast out in like manner unburied, and committed them
for some days to the custody of soldiers.

Thus the barbarous cruelty of persecutors extended it self as far as it
could, even beyond the temporal lives of Martyrs.

Many Martyrs of all ages and se^es.
I suppose that more cruel torments cannot be invented then of old have been
inflicted on Christians. Se victos esse nec habere amplius quod inferrent
confessi s^nt. Eusebius. Ec. Hist. l. 5. c. 1.
Persecutors have acknowledged that they were overcome; and had no more to
inflict. Yet was all that they did or could inflict but humane (as was noted
before) such as flesh and blood by the assistance of the divine Spirit could
and did endure: which assistance was afforded not only to Viri cum mulieribus,
and ad^^dum par vulis, torme^tis tradu^tur.

Eusebius. loc. citat.


strong men, but also to women and young children, who were given up to be
tormented. Neither were they only a few choice persons who endured Martyrdom
in Christ's cause, but such multitudes year after year, moonth after moonth,
week after week, day after day, as an ancient Father testifies, that Nullus
dies qui non ultra quinque millium numerum Martyrum reperiri posset ascriptus,
excepto die Calendarum Ianuarij Hier. ad Heliod.
there was never a day in the year, except the first of January, whereunto the
number of five hundred Martyrs at least might not be ascribed. Complures ^no
die cumulatim perpessi sunt, ita ut lictor gladium s^um h^bitaret, l^borandoque
defi^eret. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 8. c. 9.
So many one after another in one day suffered, as the Executioner blunted his
sword, and with the pains he took, fainted. That which many of them endured,
though to flesh flesh and blood it seemed intolerable, yet with much patience,
Praeclaram ^la^ritatem ac revera divinam virtutem Martyrum vidimu^.
excellent cherfulness, and divine courage they endured it. They were not
as Bears hall'd to the stake, but while persecutors were sitting on their
judgment seats and condemning some Christians, Assiliebant alij ad ipsum
judicij tribunal, ^eque ipsos Christianos esse confiten^es, etc.
others leaped in and prof^ssed themselves to be Christians: and suffered the
uttermost that could be inflicted Cum gaudio risuque ac ^ilaritate extremam
mortis sententiam suscipi^^^^^, it a ut Psal^erent, etc. Eusebius. loc (...).
with joyfullnesse, and a kind of pleasantness, singing Psalms as long as
their breath lasted: as Paul and Silas did, being after soar scourging put
into the stocks in a prison, Acts 16.23, 24, 25.

Such tortures and torments so courageously and manfully have sundry Christians
in all ages suffered, as to them who only heard thereof, they seemed
incredible, and to many who were eyewitnesses thereof they seemed so strange
and beyond admiration, as they thought the Martyrs to be madd, witless, and
senseless. But Martyrs themselves (who had the light of Gods Word for their
direction, The ground of Martyrs courage.
and the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of Christ: the eyes
of their understanding being enlightened: Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19, 20.
whereby they knew what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the
glory of his inheritance in the Saints: and what is the exceeding greatness of
his power to us ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power,
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his
own right hand in heavenly places) Martyrs, I say, by the light of the Word
and inlightning of the Spirit, with the eyes of their mind, pierced through the
thick cloud of all their sufferings, and (as Stephen by an extraordinary work
with his bodily eyes beheld the Heavens opened, and the Son of man standing
at the right hand of God) they did seethe gracious favor of God toward them,
Act 7.56.
and feel the comfortable shining thereof upon their souls, whereby they were
encouraged, and enabled to endure all that they endured. For God uses to give
such inward comfort, courage, assistance and supportance to his Saints
suffering for his names sake, as is unutterable, unconceivable.

The recompense of Martyrs.
Besides, the mind and meditation of Martyrs was so fixed on the recompense of
reward, which with much confidence they expected, as the sense of pain was
swallowed up therewith. For they accounted all tortures that could be
inflicted, Romans 8.18.
Not worthy to be compared with the glory to be revealed unto them. Most
elegantly and emphatically has the Apostle set out the wonderful great
disproportion betwixt a Christians suffering, and the recompense following
thereon, 2 Cor. 4.17. expounded.
in these words, Our light affliction which is but for a moment works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

1. All that can be by man inflicted on man is but (...) premer^: ut calceus
dicitur (...) premere pedem: and uvae dicuntur (...).
(...) compressio, a pressure, and that of the body only. For man after he
has killed the body, has no more that he can do, Luke 12.5. Thus much is
implied under this phrase ( Gen, 3.15.) Thou shall bruise his heel. Satan by
his instruments can reach no higher then the heel, that is the body, the
inferior part of man. For this pressure of the body, by way of recompense,
shall be conferred glory, that which of all is exceedingly desired. The glory
here meant compriseth under it whatsoever may make to the happiness of man,
and that both in body and soul.

2. The kind of affliction is but (...) some light thing easy to be borne by
him that is endued with the Divine Spirit. For afflictions for Christ's sake may
be comprised under that yoke and burden of Christ which is easy and light,
Math. 11.30. But the recompense is (...) a weight, such a weight as infinitely
over-poiseth all afflictions.

3. The continuance of affliction is but (...) for a while, even for a moment.
At the uttermost they cannot extend beyond this present life, which is a short
life. But the weight of glory is (...) eternal, without date, without end.

4. To show that in this comparison all degrees of comparison are exceeded, he
adds hyperbole upon hyperbole thus, (...), which emphaticall Graecisme,
because other tongues cannot word by word express to the full, they are forced
to use words and phrases which exceed all comparison, as Mire supra mo^um
Erasm. Supra modum in sublimitate Vu^g. lat.

Excellenter excellens Beza.


wonderfully above measure, above measure exceedingly: exceedingly excelling:
or, as our last and best English translation turns it, a far more exceeding.

What Orator or Rhetorician could have set out a difference or disproportion
more to the life and to the full, then the Apostle has done in the
forementioned words?

Who should not, who would not be moved hereby to endure any thing that by
man can be inflicted for professing Christ, rather then by denying him, loose
that exceedingly excelling weight of glory: Hereof when S. Paul, being rapt
into the third heaven, had but a glimps, he saw and heard (...) unutterable
matters, 2 Cor. 12.4.
which man cannot possibly express. These, these are the things which eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man. 1. Cor.
2.9. And these are the things that are lost by denying Christ.

The punishment of Aposta^y.
Yet is not this all. Apostasy pulls upon a man not only poenam damni, loss of
bliss, but also poenam sensus, Post inexpiabile malum saevie^s ignis aeterna
scelerum u^^ione torquebit. ^ypr. de ^au. Martyr.
that which will make him feel pain and smart, even the sense of torture and
torment: and not such as man only can inflict: No nor such only as all the
Devils in hell can inflict: But such as by the wrath and power of the Almighty
is inflicted: Such as red hot iron, boiling lead, flaming fire, and all other
corporal and temporal torturing torments are too light to parallel or compare
withal. For they are easelesse and endless, merciless and remediless. A
fire kindled in mine anger (says the Lord Deuteronomy. 32.22.) shall burn unto the
lowest Hell. Hear this, O Apostates, and tremble. Receive therefore the
counsel which the Lord thus gives ( Luke 12.4, 5.) I say unto you, my
friends, Be not afraid of them who kill the body and after that have no more
that they can do: But I will forewarne you whom you shall fear: Fear him who
after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell: yea, I say unto you, him
fear.

Because hard and cruel usage of Turks, and fear of worse is the cause
alleged by this present Penitent, whereby he was moved to renounce his
profession of Christ, I have the longer insisted thereon, and endeavored to
make clear these six distinct points.

1. That Apostates may implunge themselves into greater tortures then they can
avoid.

2. That all that by men can be inflicted on constant professors of the
Christian Faith, are no more then what God can and will enable them to bear.

3. That greater tortures cannot be invented then have in former times been
inflicted on Christians.

4. That Martyrs in all ages have expressed much comfort and joy in their
greatest sufferings.

5. That their recompense far surpasses their endurance.

6. That by denying Christ that recompense is lost and intolerable torments in
Hell purchased.

If these be not enough to embolden Christians against all that man can do, I
know not what can be enough.

But yet there remains one stumbling block to be remooved, and that is about
life. Faith of more worth then life.
For skin for skin and all that a man has will be give for his life.

For satisfaction hereunto let it be considered that

1. This was the Devils allega^ion, Job. 2.4. And shall a Christian fight with
the Devils weapons against Christ?

2. I^ that high prize set upon life be taken in a fair and right sense, it
must be applied ad idem, to matters of like kind. For a temporal life, all the
temporal things that he has, may be given: as ( Mar. 5.26.) the woeman which
had an issue of blood, spent all that she had on Physicians, namely all her
temporal estate. But the true faith is of another kind: the good of our
souls, the present consolation, and future salvation of them, depends on a
constant profession of the true faith. It is not in our power to part with it.

3. Life preserved by Apostasy is but a temporary life, a shadow, a vapor, a
bubble, a breath: Soon gone, even before a man can think of parting with it.
How long did Judas retain his life after his Apostasy? The rich fool had his
soul taken away long before his account. For while he dreamed of many years,
he heard this summons, This night thy soul shall be required of thee (Luke
12.20.)

4. If life be preserved some while, it may prove so troublesome, so
wearisome, so irksome a life, so full of terror and horror as a man wish
again and again that he had died before he denied Christ. Instance Judas
Iscariot of old, and Francis Spira of late.

5. Eternal life is forfeited by purchasing temporal life after such a
manner. In this respect whosoever will save his life shall loose it, as Christ
says, Math. 16.25. Whosoever denies Christ to save this temporal life is like
to loose eternal life.

6. Temporal life is not a valuable consideration for the loss of the soul.
For what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Math. 16.26.

If it be said that life being preserved, Pretense of future re^e^tance a vain
pretense for preserving life.
an Apostate may find opportunity of escaping out of persecutors hands, and so
repent, and return unto the Church, and glorify God: as a soldier by flying
in time of danger, may again return into the field, and get the day: I answer
that

1. It is but a may be. Not one to a thousand find such an opportunity. This
Penitent here before us found such an opportunity. But many thousands surprised
by Turks as he was, spend all the remainder of their life in the state of
Apostasy.

2. If they find an opportunity of escaping, it will not necessarily follow
thereupon that they will or can repent having once denied their Savior. As it
fell out with the ten Lepers, so it falls out too too usually with
Renegadoes: but one of the ten returned to give glory to God: which caused
Christ to say, Where are the nine? Luke 17.17. Here is now one before us, that
by a right course of penitency is admitted into the Church again. About ten
years now past there was another in like manner received at Minhead in
Somersetshire. But are these two the tenth, or tenth of ten times ten of them
that having played the Renegadoes are returned into their country, yet never
gave any public evidence of their true repentance?

Grace how abused.
3. It is a most undue and impious inference from Gods grace to sinners, to take
occasion of sinning: which the holy Apostle does with much indignation detest.
For where to the magnifying of the grace of God, and comfort of such sinners,
as almost to despair felt the intolerable burden of sin pressing upon their
souls, he had said, Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound, Rom 5.20.
some thence took occasion of turning the grace of God into lasciviousness:
with whom the Apostle thus expostulates the case, Shall we continue in sin
that grace may abound? Romans 6.1, 2.
Having noted their impious inference, with a vehement detestation he thus
rejects it, God forbid. Far be any such conceit from a Christians mind.

That the non-consequence of such an inference may be the better discerned, the
groffe mistakings thereof are wisely to be weighed. They are manifest in these
three particulars.

1. There is non causa pro causa: the cause is grossly misapplied. For they
make Gods grace a cause of committing sin, whereas the Apostle produces it as
the cause of remitting and removing sin.

2. There is non subjectum pro subjecto: the subject matter, or thing whereupon
Gods grace exercises it self is mischievously mislaid. For they make sins
to come, or a resolved purpose to con^inue in sin the subject of abundant
grace, whereas the Apostle intends sins past which can not be recalled: and
thereupon if they be not through grace remitted, the sinner that has
committed them is most miserable.

3. There is non objectum pro objecto; the kind of sinner, who is made the
object on whom abundant grace is conferred, is wretchedly mistaken. For they
take the Apostle to speak of such as delight in sin, and retain a purpose
of living and lying in sin: whereas he means such as find and feel
themselves to be sinners through sense of the heavy load of sin pressing
soar upon them: even such sinners as Christ came to call to repentance, Mat.
9.13.

Thus we see how pretense of returning to God afterward is a most wicked
pretense of denying God for the present.

Gods faithful Martyrs in all ages have made little or no account of their
temporal life, Martyrs little regarded li^e.
when it came in competition with Christ, and a profession of the Christian
faith. (...).

Heb. 11.35.


The Apostle gives this testimony of them, they would not accept deliverance.
He means deliverance from death or preservation of life: this, though offered
they would not accept, namely on persecutors terms or conditions, which was to
deny the truth of God, or renounce their faith in him.

As an evident proof hereof, give me leave to set before you some of their
answers in this case. Resolute answers of Martyrs.


When Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were threatened to be cast into an hot
fiery furnace, unless they would worship Nebuchadnezars idol, they make this
reply ( Dan. 3.16, 17.) O Nebuchadnezar we are not careful to answer thee in
this matter. If it be so, our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us from
the burning fiery furnace: and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King.
But if not, be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods,
nor worship thy golden image which thou have set up.

When Eleazar was promised to be saved from torments, and death, if he would
but make show of yielding, he courageously answers, It becomes not our age
in any wise to dissemble whereby many young persons might think that Eleazar
being fourscore and ten years old, Maccab. 6.24.
were now gone to a strange religion.

Thus also one of the seven brethren in the name of the rest, We are ready to
die, rather then to transgress the laws of our Fathers: (...). 7.2.
meaning such laws as God of old had given to their Fathers to be observed by
them, and by their posterity age after age.

To like purpose answered all the other brethren, and their mother too.

Christ himself, when Peter would have dissuaded him from suffering, with
indignation thus replied, Get thee behind me Satan, Mat. 16.23.

Saint Paul when the Disciples upon notice that he should be bound at
Jerusalem, besought him not to go up thither, answered, What mean you to
weep and to break mine heart. For I am ready not to be bound only, but also
to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.

Ignis and crux, incursus bestiarum, dissipatio ossium, convulsio membrorum,
totius corporis commolitio, ac supplicia Diaboli in me veniant, modo Iesum
Christum acquiram. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 36.
Ignatius being much threatened for his zealous profession of Christ, says, Let
fire, and cross, invasion of beasts, breaking of bones, pulling asunder of
members, grinding of my whole body, and what else the Devil can inflict come,
so I may hold Jesus Christ.

Frumentum Dei sum, and dentibus bestiarum commolior, ut mundus panis inveniar.
Ibid.
And being brought forth to devouring beasts, he uttered these words, I am Gods
corn, and am ground by the teeth of beasts, that I may be pure bread.

Octoginta sex annos servij Christo, nec me ulla in re laes^t unquam, and
quomodo possum maledicere Regi meo qui me servavit. Ibid. l. 4. c. 15.
Polycarpus, when the Governor promised to let him go free, if he would
deny Christ, answered, I have served him fourscore and six years, and he
never hurt me in any thing. How shall I curse him who has saved me?

And the Governor adding one while promises, another while threatenings, Quid
tardas? infer quicquid lubet. Ibid.
Polycarpus thus cuts off all, Why do thou make delays, inflict what thou
lists.

Lucius illi gratias egit, ac subjecit, hac se ratione a malis hujusmodi
dominis liberari, and ad bonum Patrem, and Regem Deum se proficisci. Ibid.
Lucius thanked him that brought him forth to suffer, and said that he should
be free from those evil masters, and go to God a good Father and King.

Germanicus, when he was brought forth to be torn in pieces and devoured by
beasts ( the Governor persuading him to be mindful of his youth, Cum
Germanicum Proconsul flectere vellet, atque aetatis admoneret, sponte sua
bestiam in se illexit. Ibid.
that he might be spared) of his own accord incited the beasts against
himself.

Sanctus ad cuncta interrogata respondet, Christianus sum. Ibid. l. 5. c. 2.
Sanctus being under tortures for professing himself to be a Christian, unto
every question propounded to him, he answered, I am a Christian: whereby he
occasioned his torments to be continued to death.

Converte partem corporis satis cremat am jugiter, Et fac periculum quid tuus
vulcanus ardens egerit.
Can we think that Saint Laurance would have accepted deliverance, who lying on
a red hot gridieron over burning coals, with an invincible spirit thus said to
the tyrant, Turn the side broiled enough, and see what thy burning fire has
done.

Coctum est, devora: Et experimentum cape sit crudum an assum suavius. Prudent.
de Coron. Mart. Him. 2.
And being turned, and thoroughly broyled on the other side, thus again, Eat
that which is broyled, and try whether raw or broyled be the sweeter.

Hi rapiant artus: tu rape, Christ, animam. Ibid. Him. 11.
Hyppolytus when he was tied to wild horses to be pulled a sunder, thus prayed,
Let them rend my limbs, do thou, O Christ, rap up my soul.

To omit other particulars of the ancient Martyrs in the Primitive Christian
Church, with whose courageous speeches manifesting a contempt of death volumes
might be filled, Erant qui cum opibus, nobilitate, gloria, eloquentia and
philosophia illustres essent, nihilo tamen secius cuncta haec verae p^etati and
fidei in servatorem nostrum Iesum Christum postponebant. Isti quamvis
rogarentur ab innumeris cognatis and alias amicis: denique and alijs in
dignitate constitutis primoribus: praeterea and ab ipso Iudice obsecrarentur,
ut sui ipsorum miserere^tur, uxoribusque and liberis parcerent, haudquaquam a
tot and tantis viris ab hoc induci potuerunt, ut vitae hujus amore
afficerentur, and confessionem servatoris nostri contemnerent, and negationem
illius susque deque facerent. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 9.
it is indefinitely recorded of many who were famous for their wealth,
nobility, glory, eloquence and learning, that nevertheless they preferred true
piety and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ before all these. And though they were
entreated by many of their kindred and friends otherwise, yea and by others in
great place, and by the Judge himself, that they would take pity on
themselves, their wives and children, yet would they not be induced by the
entreatings of so many and great ones, so to be affected with the love of this
life, as to forbear the confession of our Savior, and to set light by the
denial of him.

Thus we see how Christians of old would not accept deliverance.

To these let me add a few more of later times, who by their blood sealed up
the truth of that reformed religion, which we in this land do now profess,
and gave good cause to be put into the Catalogue of Martyrs, even of true
Christian Martyrs.

Pardon being offered to John Husse at the stake if he would recant, he
answered, These and many other like examples are recorded by John Fox in his
Acts and Monuments, as appears in their several Histories.
I am here ready to suffer death.

Hierom of Prage to like purpose thus, If I had feared the fire, I had not come
hither.

Martin Luther (though no Martyr, yet to show his undaunted spirit in
maintaining the truth) being dissuaded by his friends from going to Worms,
where his adversaries were assembled to dispute against him, returned this
answer, I am resolved and certainly determined to enter Worms in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, though I knew there were so many Devils to resist me,
as there are tiles to cover the houses in Worms; can we imagine that this man
would have accepted deliverance on his adversaries terms?

Galeazius a Gentleman of great estate, who suffered Martyrdom at Sant-angelo
in Italy being much pressed by his friends to recant and save his life, replied
that Death was much more sweet to him with testimony of verity then life with
the least denial of truth.

Francis Camba a Martyr in the Diocese of Millaine, being much assailed by his
friends, and terrified by his foes, by no means could be overcome, but gave
thanks to God that he was accounted worthy to suffer cruel death for the
testimony of his Son. Such were the expressions of joy in his sufferings, as
his persecutors caused his tongue to be boared through, that he might speak no
more to the people.

Anne Askew being offered the Kings pardon, even at the stake, if she would
recant, gave this resolute answer, I come not hither to deny my Lord and
Master. By that which this Gentlewoman with admirable courage and constancy
endured, she verified that which of old Iulitta spoke concerning their Sex, We
women ought to be as constant as men in Christ's cause.

Walter Mill, who suffered Martyrdom in Scotland, being solicited to recant,
made this resolute reply, Ye shall know that I will not recant the truth: for
I am corn, I am no chafe; I will not be blown away with the wind, nor burst
with the flaile: but I will abide both.

Mr. John Rogers, the first Martyr in Queen Mary's days, being solicited to
revoke his doctrine for saving his life, said, That which I have preached I
will seal with my blood.

John Hooper Lord Bishop of Gloucester, upon the sight of a pardon cried out, If
ye love my soul away with it; if ye love my soul away with it.

Thomas Hawks a Gentleman in Essex, on a like occasion gave this resolute
answer, If I had an hundred bodies I would suffer them all to be torn in
pieces rather then abjure or recant.

Bishop Ridly to like purpose thus, So long as the breath is in my body, I will
never deny my Lord Christ and his known truth.

Old Father Latimer used such a speech to one that advised him to spare
himself, as Christ did to Peter on a like occasion, which was this, Get thee
behind me Satan.

In like manner all the holy, constant Martyrs refused to accept deliverance:
some after a more zealous, others after a more mild manner.

Many were the motives whereby Martyrs in all ages have been enduced to be not
only careless, but even prodigal also of their lives. Ground of Martyrs
constancy.
Therein they had respect to Christ, to the Church, to the Faith, to their
Brethren, to Themselves, to Persecutors, to Satan.

1 Christ's honor.

Quam laetus in illis Christum fuit* quaem libens in talibus servis suis and
pugnavit and vicit, etc. Cypr. Epist. 6. l. 2. Laetatur milite suo Dominus
Laetatur test nominis sui Christus. Cypr. de laud Marty.


1 Christ much rejoices in such servants. For constancy of Martyrs unto death
(of such Martyrs as profess the name of Christ and suffer for his Truth) is a
great honor unto Christ. Is it not an high honor to a King to have such
Captains and Champions as will not yield to their Sovereigns enemies, but
stand it out to the uttermost till they get the victory, though it cost them
their life to get it? Yet no mortal King can (as Christ does) put spirit,
courage, or strength into a subject: only it is conceived that such valourous
soldiers as are ready to hazard their lives for their Sovereign, serve a good
Master. Thus do Martyrs give persecutors to understand that they serve a good
Master: Praeliatores atque assertores sui nomin^^ ^rexit, corrobors ^it, anima
v^l. Idem Epist. 6. l. 2.
and that they believe in him who has done more for them then their dearest
blood is worth, who enables them with courage, and comfort to endure whatsoever
for his names sake can be inflicted on them, and therein (...) to be more then
conquerers: and after all give such recompense as their sufferings are not
worthy to be compared with, Romans 8.18, 37. Is not this an honor to Christ?

2 The Churches renown. Obeatam ecclesiam quam sic honor divinae dignationis
illuminat: quam gloriosus Martyrum sanguis illustrat. Ibid.
2. The Church which breeds, and sends forth such courageous and resolute
children as are ready to spend their blood in their mothers cause, is much
honored. Never did any Church bring up such children as the Church of Christ.
She has the glory of invincible Martyrs. Of it, it may truly be said, O
blessed Church, which is honored with so divine renown: which the glorious
blood of Martyrs does beautify.

3 Confirmation of the faith.
3. The Faith which such Martyrs profess by their standing steadfast therein
unto death, is sealed and confirmed. The blood of Martyrs is a seal of that
Faith for which they shed their blood. By this kind of ratifying the Christian
Faith many have been brought to embrace the Christian Faith: As of old Ioh.
2.23. -- 3.2. -- 4.53. -- 7.31. -- 1^.45. Act. 5 12, 14. -- 8.6. -- 9.35, 42.
many were enduced to believe in Christ by the miracles which he himself did,
and which his Apostles did in his Name. If the tortures whereby sundry Martyrs
were put to death, and their manfull, cheerful, and joyful enduring of them
(whereof before) be duly weighed, we shall find their enduring to be so
miraculous, as their sufferings may well be accounted miracles.

4 Establishme^t of others profession.
4. The Brethren which believe and profess the same Faith, are by the
constancy of Martyrs much streng^hened. For the invincible courage of some
putts life and spirit into others. In an army valourous Leaders much animate
the rest of the soldiers, Passione corporis fratrum mentes ad divina martyria
provocatis, duces vos exhibendo virtutis etc. Cypr. Epist. 25. l. 3.

Ad tormenta vincenda caeteri^ duces facti, exemplum virtutis fidei
praebuerunt. Idem. Epist 6. l. 2.


and embolden them to follow their leaders. Now the Church is as an army with
banners (Cant. 6.4.) Martyrs are as Leaders: they courageously and victoriously
make the onset: Other Christians by their example are pricked on as occasion
serves to follow them. Read Phil. 1.13.

5 A blessed memorial.
5. They procure to themselves even for the present in their souls much peace,
comfort and joy. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in them, so their
consolation also abounds by Christ. (2 Cor. 1.5.) Then especially are the
comforts of the Holy Ghost even poured upon a Christian soul. For Nucqua^
tantas tribulationes carne tolerare^t, nisi magnam quietem me^te concipere^t
Augu^t. Enar. in Psalm. 63.
they could never endure such torments in the flesh, unles they had much peace
in their soul. For the future, on earth they leave a most sweet savor of a
renowned name: When their bodies are consumed their name is as an ointment
powered out, and Posteris ^onae samae facula^^ accendunt. Bas^ Conc. in Mart.
Manant.
they thereby do light a torch of Fame to posterity. For Memorias Martyrum
celebramus. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 32. and in P^a 6^. Basil. Con^. in 40. Mart.

Chry. H^^ de beato Job.


the Church was wont to celebrat the memory of Martyrs: For which end they had
set days in the year, whereon Christians in full assemblies met together,
rehearsed catalogues of Martyrs, and gave solemn praise to God for the power
of his Spirit, manifested in their admirable patience and perseverance. And in
Heaven they have the highest degree of glory. For though God do not reward men
simply for their works, namely for the merit of them, yet he rewards according
to their works ( Romans 2.6.) and proportions the degree or measure thereof,
according to the kind of work which on earth is done, and according to the
measure of grace whereby he enables men to do it.

But Martyrdom is the most difficult, the most acceptable and honorable work
that on earth can be done: Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ,
(says the Apostle Phil. 1.29.) not only to believe in him, BUT ALSO to suffer
for his sake. Martyrdom therefore is in Heaven crowned with the highest degree
of Glory. GREAT is their reward in Heaven, Math. 5.12. On this ground they who
set down the different degrees of celestial glory by the different fruits
which the good ground brought forth, Some thirty, some sixty, some an hundred,
apply the Centena fertilitas Martyrio potius imputetur Aug. de S. Virg c. 45.
hundred fold, which is the highest and greatest degree of glory, to Martyrdom.

6. Confusion of persecutors.
6. Tanta est virtute Blandina repleta ut lassarentur qui per vices illam quovis
suppliciorum genere ^orquebant a mane ad vespe^am, seque victos esse
confiterentur Eusebius. Eccl Hist. l. 5. c. 1.
Persecutors and torturers of Martyrs have by their admirable constancy unto
death bin exceedingly astonished and even confounded. They have so long
continued even from morning to evening and that by course to torture Christians
(among others, a woeman, Blandina by name) as they were weary, and acknowledged
themselves to be overcome. And Praeses confu^us quod in efficaciter eas
torsisset and a mulieribus victus esset. Idem. l 6. c. 41.
the Governors themselves who commanded them to be tortured, and stood by to
see execution done, were confounded that their tortures nothing prevailed, and
that they were overcome by women: and Praeses and assessores perterriti: and
Christiani qui judicabantur ad fere^das passiones fire ^ui. Ibid.
they who sat as assistants by the Governors were affrighted thereat. So as
Christians condemned were enabled to endure whatsoever was inflicted on them,
and their Judges much affrighted. Yea Virtu^ est ta^ta Martyrij, ut per illam
credere etiam ille cogitur qui te vulto ci^ere. Cypr de lau^e Mart.

Lictor co^numeratus est inter Mar^yres. Basil Conc. in 40. Mart.


by the undaunted and invincible courage of Martyrs, some of their executioners
and tormenters have been converted, have professed them selves to be
Christians, and suffered with the Martyrs, and received the crown of
Martyrdom. These are the victories, triumphs and trophies of constant Martyrs.
Thus they lead captivity captive.

7. Disappointment of Satan^
7. The Devil himself is by Martyrs constancy exceedingly disappointed. For
he sets his instruments on work to deal with Christians, as Haman intended to
deal with the Jews ( Hest. 3.23.) namely, to destroy, to kill, Dum putant
quod possent finire Christianos creverunt Aug. Enar. in P^a 62. Sanguis
Marty^um semen Ecclesiae.
and cause to perish all Jews both young and old, little children and women.
But with like success did the Devil plot against Christians. For, as by the
disappointment of Hamans device, many of the people of the Land became Jews.
(Hest. 8.17.) So while Satan's instruments sought to make an end of Christians,
they increased the more. For, Diabol^s cum d^monibus sa^cia^us est. Basil. in
^^nc. de 40. Mart.
the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church. We read ( Reve. 13.3.)
of a Beast whose head was wounded to death. Surely the Devil with his feends
were wounded even unto death by Martyrs resisting unto blood. The time of the
ten fierce persecutions, and of the purity and power of Religion that followed
thereupon contain those thousand years wherein Satan was bound. Rev. 20.2.

They who on the forementioned grounds accounted not their life dear unto
them, but preferred their Faith in the Lord Jesus, and a steadfast profession
thereof before wealth, honor, liberty and life it self, and chose rather to
be faithful Martyrs then desperate Apostates, had good ground to be so minded.

Martyrs in mind.
O that all who profess the Faith of Christ were like minded! It well becomes
us all to be so minded. And if indeed we be so minded, God who knows the
mind, heart, and spirit of a man will answerably account of him, and accept
him, though he never be brought to the fiery trial, as if he had been
brought to it, and endured it to the very uttermost: Virtutes animi aliqua^do
in opere manifesta^tur, aliqua^do in habitu late^t: sicut martyrij virtus, etc.
Iam erat in Job patientia, quam noverat Deus, and cui testimonium perhibebat,
sed homnibus innotuit tentationis examine Aug. de bono cojug c. 21
The virtues and graces of the mind sometimes are manifested in their deed or
work: and sometimes lie hid in their habit, as the virtue of Martyrdom. Many
may have the same prowess that Martyrs have, who are not brought to the same
proof thereof. By trialls, that which is in a man before God is brought forth
before men: Not that it is then first begun, but that it is then first
manifested. Before the Devil went about to sift Job, his soul was possessed
with patience, which the Lord well knew, and whereunto he gave witness: But to
men it was made known by the trial of tentation. Thus we see how we may be
Martyrs in the most halcyon times that can be, even such as ours are: So as the
ground and glory of Martyrdom is meet to be made known, and to be meditated
on in these our days; and the rather, because we cannot be sure of an
everlasting continuance of our peace, or of the Gospel of peace among us. As
it is therefore needful and useful in the prime and strength of our age, when
we have best health to meditate on the sundry kinds of diseases, and manifold
casualties whereunto we are subject, and on death, the end of all: so in the
most flourishing times of the Church, meditation on the uttermost that may be
endured even to the shedding of blood for fast-holding our profession of
Christ, is a most meet meditation.

Most especially is this like to be useful for you Mariners, Merchants, Danger
must make men be the better resolved.
Merchants-factors and others, whose calling it is to go to sea in ships, and
to do business in the great waters, where ye are in danger to be surprised
(as this Penitent was) by the mortal enemies of Christians, or have occasion
to abide and trafique among them. You may be brought to trial, and to give
proof before men, whether the habit of Martyrdom be in you or no.

Be ye therefore strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Take unto
you the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand in the evil day,
and having done all, to stand.

For this end receive these few directions. Directione for constancy.


1. Be well grounded.
1. Be well instructed in the verity, excellency, utility and necessity of that
faith which ye profess: so as ye may be able to maintain it against all
adversaries. The Apostle (Col. 2.7.) advises Christians, to be rooted and
built up in Christ, and stablished in the faith. Therein he alludeth to a tree
well rooted in the ground, and to an edifice well set upon a good foundation.
Such an edifice though the rain descend, and floods arise, Altiu^ ac penitus
terrae defigitur arbos: Aes^ulus inprimis* qu^ quantum ve^tice a^ aur^s
Aethe^eas ta^tum radice in ta^^ara tendit Ergo non byemes illam, non fla^ra,
neque imbres

Convellunt: immota manet, etc.

Virg. Geor. l. 2.


and winds blow, and beat upon it, will stand, and not fall ( Mat. 7.25.)
There are trees whose roots are as deep, and spread as far abroad in the
earth, as their boughs ascend, and spread themselves in the air. Our oaks are
supposed to be such. No storms, no tempests can overthrow them. The branches
may sooner be rent from the body, and the whole tree split asunder, then rooted
up, and thrown down. So a Christian well rooted and grounded in the Articles
of his faith, will sooner have his limbs pulled one from another, and his body
and soul severed, then drawn from his faith, and renounce his profession
thereof.

2. Take an invincible resolution.
2. Take an unalterable and invincible resolution before hand to stand to thy
faith, and never to renounce thy profession thereof. This is an especial
means to make a Christian stand steady against all assaults. Ye Mariners know
what it is to have a resolved mind and purpose to sail to your intended place:
ye pass through all weathers: no gathering of clouds, no shouring of rain,
no thundering and lightning, no storms and tempests will turn you back: as
soon may your ship be set in the sea, as you return back again: you are
confident of passing through, though it be with much labor and pains, with
great difficulty and peril. But they who go to sea for pleasure, to be
sea-sick, or to see strange countries, if they see a black sky, and discern
storms arising, they cry out, O back again, back again: We Will no furth^r.
Sur^ly a settled resolution in case of religion will be of more force for
holding out against all persecution, then in case of a Mariners vocation
against the surges of the sea. For a Christian has more assurance of Gods
divine assistance in all his sufferings to be enabled to endure and overcome
all, then any Mariner can have of safe-passing over the sea.

In this resolution of a Christian, Man's resolution on Gods assistance.

Non sufficit propositum hominis absque subfideo Dei.

Theophy^ac. Enar. in Luc. 12


this caveat must be observed, that it be through faith in Gods promises, and
confidence in the Spirits assistance: and not in conceit of his own strength.
This is no better then presumption. Peter failed herein, Mat. 26.33, etc. This
his resolution and profession ( though all men should be offended because of
thee, yet will I never be offended: and again, though I should die with thee,
I will never deny thee) this profession, and the resolution of his mind
answerable thereto, was good and commendable: all Christians ought to be so
minded, and to profess as much: but not on such a ground as he did. For he
pres^med too much on his own strength. This Christ well discerned. Wherefore
that he also might find out, and discern the deceitfullnesse of his heart,
and presumption of his spirit, he was left to himself: and so he fell from his
profession, and denied his Lord. Self-conceit is a forerunner of Apostasy.
Instance Pendleton in Queen Mary's days.

By this caveat added to the direction it appears how a Christian jealousy
may stand with an undanted resolution. Jealousy, in regard of our own
weakness: Resolution, in regard of Gods assistance.

3. Set thy heart on the Faith.
3. Set your heart on Christ and on his Gospel. Be affected therewith as David
was with God and his Law: which were his Love, his Joy, his Delight; sweeter to
him then honey and the hony-combe. better then silver and gold. Love is of an
uniting nature: it makes the soul of him that loves to cleave close to the
object loved: as the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, (1 Samuel 18.1) so as he never renounced him, nor failed him in any strait. But if,
while men outwardly profess the truth, they do not inwardly and heartily love
it, it may seem just to the Lord, to send them strong delusions that they
should believe a lie (as is threatened, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.) and so renounce the true
faith.

4. Walk worthy of the Gospel.
4. Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called. This direction is
given by the Apostle ( Ephesians. 4.1.) in these very words: and often inculcated,
under these and such like phrases, worthy of God who has called you (1 Thessalonians.
2.12.) worthy of the Lord, etc. (Col. 1.10.) In these phrases the Word
imports not any merit, or condignity, but a mere meetnesse and congruity, as
is evident by this phrase, fruits worthy of repentance (Luke 3.8.) that is (as
the very same phrase is translated, Mat. 3.8.) meet for repentance. For if
worthy should there implie any matter of desert, evil fruits would there be
intended. For evil fruits they are which deserve repentance. Fitly is this
word thus translated ( Phil. 1.27.) as it becomes. Let your conversation be
(...).
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ. This worthy walking imports a
blameless conversation. A man of a loose life, whose conscience checks him for
living in sin, dares not venture his life, no not in Gods cause. He can have
but small hope of Gods accepting him. Uprightness works boldness. This made
Saint Paul so bold and courageous in all his trialls, as he was, that he had
lived in all good conscience, Acts 23.1. He therefore exhorts Timothy (1 Timothy
1.19.) to hold faith and a good conscience. And to press this point the
further, he gives instance of some that had put away a good conscience, and
concerning faith had made shipwreck. By this inference he shows that a good
conscience is as a ship: and faith as rich lading therein. If the ship be full
of leakes, ship and lading are like to be lost. A bad conscience cannot hold
faith in time of persecution. Holy men have ever been the stoutest Martyrs.

5. Pray for assist^nce.
5. To all other means add faithful, fervent, constant prayer. When the hour
of Christ's suffering came he went into a garden to pray. There he prays not
once, but again, and again: and being in an agony he prayed more earnestly,
Luke 22.44. To this the Apostle alludes ( Heb. 5.7.) where he says of Christ,
that he offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto
him that was able to save him from death and was heard. This means he also
used for Peter's stability, when Satan desired to have him, that he might sift
him as wheat, I have prayed for thee (says Christ, Luke 22.32.) that thy faith
fail not. So as prayer is an especial means to keep faith from failing.
These things are written for our learning, that we might be incited to use the
same help. Use it therefore before the trial, use it in the trial. Call upon
him that is able to establish thee, and thou shall assuredly be heard.

Redeem Captives.
To that which has been said to such as are in danger to be lost, let me add
a word of exhortation to you that live at home safe and secure under the
protection of the Defender of the true, ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic
faith: have pity, have pity on those that are in bondage under adversaries,
and persecutors of the said faith; on such in particular as are, as this
Penitent not long since was, taken captive by Turks. Among other evidences of
your pity afford some help to redeem them. This is one of the seven
capital works of charity and mercy. The seven are these.

1. To feed the hungry. Po^untur septe^ cleemo synae corporales, scil. Pascere
esurientem, potare fitientem, vestire nudum, recol^igere ^o^pitem, visitare
infi^mum, redimere capti^um, and sepelire mortuum, quae in hoc versu ^^tinentur.

Visito, poto, cibo. ^e^imo, tego, c^lligo, condo. Tho. Sum. 22. q 32. art. 2.


2. To give drink to the thirsty. 3. To cloathe the naked. 4. To entertain
strangers. 5. To visit the sick. 6. To redeem captives. 7. To bury the dead.
To redeem Captives is in sundry respects the best of them. For it extends to
the good of their bodies, and of their souls. Of their bodies in freeing them
from slavery. Of their souls in keeping them from Apostasy.

It were a worthy work, well beseeming the famous Cities of this Land, for
every of them to have a sacred treasure for this end, to redeem Captives. But
I fear least such a work be more to be wished then hoped for. Yet I conceive
that it may well be wished and hoped for too, that all who have good
intelligence by certificate from the Trinity-house, or otherwise, would
contribute something toward the redeeming of every one, that time after time
they shall hear to be held in captivity under the Turks, or other like
enemies of the Christian faith. If every one of ability would make conscience
of this duty, though they gave but a little to one, and a little to another,
many hundreds more might be releeved then now are. Multorum manibus g^ando
levatur o^^s.
For many hands make light work.

O that in pressing this exhortation my voice were louder then Bow-bell, that
it might sound into the ears of every rich man in and about London, yea that
it were like that voice which sounds so loud, as there is no speech nor
language where the sound of it is not heard. If with all it might pierce into
the hearts of them that hear it, and move their bowels with compassion, then
might my hope be answerable to my wish. But let the bowels of you which hear
me be moved, and this my charitable motion will not be altogether in vain.

Hitherto of the first general part of my Text: the danger of Apostasy, He was
lost.

The second follows, which shows the Advantage and benefit of Penetency, He
is found. Well note the grounds whereupon this word FOUND is used, and ye will
clearly discern that it imports true Penitency, and a great benefit thence
arising.

The grounds are these.

Evidences of the Prodigalls repentance.
1. The Prodigalls mind is renewed: for it is said, verse 17. that h^ came to
himself. He was before witless and senseless: as a mad man, out of himself.

2. He discerns the difference betwixt being in the Church and out of it:
which difference he thus expresses, How many hired servants of my Fathers
house have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with hunger?

3. His resolution is altered. Before, the Church was a prison to him: he must
needs wander into a far country, ver. 13. But now he thinks of returning to
the Church: I will arise (says he, ver. 18.) and go to my Father.

4. He meditates on a solemn confession of his sin, thus, I will say unto
him, Father, I have sinned.

5. He aggravateth his sin, in these words, Against heaven, and before thee,
that is, openly in the sight of Heaven: and secretly, before God.

6. His heighnous sin more troubles him, then his heavy affliction, I have
sinned, says he.

7. He acknowledges his unworthiness, I am no more worthy to be called thy
Son, ver. 19.

8. He humbly contents himself with the meanest place in Gods Church, Make me
as one of thy hired servants.

9. He puts his purpose into practice, He arose and came to his Father.

10. He leaves his former desperate course ( He arose) and enters upon a new
course, He came to his Father.

These were the evidences of his true penitency.

The benefits thereof were these.

1. His Father takes notice of his intention, when he was yet a great way off,
his Father saw him, Favors showed to the penitent Prodigal.
ver. 20.

2. His Fathers bowels are moved at sight of him, He had compassion.

3. His Father upon sight of his true repentance made speed to receive him, He
ran.

4. His Father expresses all, signs of a fatherly affection, favor and love
to him, He fell on his neck and kissed him.

5. His Father so decks him, as he may appear more amiable then before, He
puts the best robe on him, ver. 22.

6. His Father conferres on him things of dignity as well as of necessity, He
put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet, Ibid.

7. His Father gives evidences of the great joy he had at his sons
conversion, He killed the fatted calfe, and did eat and was merry, ver. 23.

8. Others also rejoiced at this Apostates conversion. There was music and
dancing, ver. 25.

9. His Father test^fied better respect to him, then to the elder son who
never fell into such exorbitant courses. This is evident by the eldest sons
expostulation, ver. 29, 30.

10. His Father accounts him as a new son raised from the dead: and thereupon
will not suffer his entire affection to be alienated from him by the brothers
displeasure against him, ver. 32.

The forementioned evidences do clearly demonstrate that the Apostate, of
whom my Text speaks, was received into the state of grace and salvation.
Join therefore with the truth of the Prodigalls penitency, the favors that
followed thereupon, all comprised under this word FOUND, and it will appear
that Penitency restores to salvation.

Such as had implunged themselves by Apostasy into the state of perdition, it
brings into the state of salvation.

In this doctrine ye are distinctly to observe, first the sure Groundwork or
Foundation, Penitency: and then the fair structure of building reared
thereupon, A restoring to Salvation.

The former is taken pro concesso: as a point in no case to be questioned, The
necessity of Repentance.
but to be granted as an undeniable principle. For to proclaim pardon to an
impenitent, or to put an Apostate into the state of salvation without true,
sound, evident repentance, is to play the part of a foolish builder, that
without a foundation builds an house on the earth: against which the stream
did beat vehemently and immediately it fell and the rain of that house was
great, Luke 6.49. If the stream of temptation do in any kind vehemently beat
against the conscience of such a deceitful convert, his vain hope of
salvation is like to turn into a certain fearful looking for of judgment.
By experience we find that a deep wound hastily skinn'd over before it be
thoroughly searched and cleansed, is like to fester, and to prove incurable: So
Apostasy or any other like scandalous and notorious sin, being soothed, and
smoothed over with undue hope of mercy and pardon, before through humiliation of
the soul, great contrition of the heart, free confession of the mouth, and due
satisfaction to the Church, which are all branches of true penitency, may
prove unpardonable.

All the Prophets before Christ, his immediate Forerunner, Christ himself,
his Apostles, and other faithful Ministers after them, have laid the
Foundation of Repentance from dead works, to erect assurance of mercy
thereupon. Whosoever confesses and forsakes his sins, shall have mercy. Pro.
28.13. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, and come now and let us
reason together, says the Lord: Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be made white as snow, though they be made red like crimson, they shall be as
woole, Isaiah 1.16, 17, 18. Return ye Backsliding children, and I will heal
your backslidings, says the Lord, Ier. 3.22. Turn ye, turn ye from your
evil ways, for why will ye die. Ezekiel. 33.11. I will go, and return to my
place, till they acknowledge their offense and seek my face, says the Lord.
Hos. 5.15. By these particulars we are given to understand what was the
constant doctrine of the Prophets. To like purpose John the Baptist, Math. 3.2.
Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. The very same did Christ
preach, Math. 4.1^. and his Apostles, Mark. 6.12. To this question, what shall
we do? St. Peter returns this answer, Repent, and be baptized every one of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, Act. 2.37, 38. S.
Paul expressly says ( Act. 26.20.) that he showed that men should repent and
turn to God, and do works meet for repentance. It is an advice given to the
backsliding Churches of Asia, to repent: as to Ephesus, to Pergamus, to
Thyatira, to Sardis, and to Laodicea, Rev. 2.5, 16, 22, and 3.3, 19. J might
further fill volums with testimonies of Fathers, and later Divines tending to
the same purpose. For other good and sure foundation can no man lay.

By this manner of raising, restoring, and receiving such as are fallen,

1. A concurrence of Mercy and Purity in God is manifested. Reasons for the
necessity of restoring penitents only.
Of Mercy in receiving such as ran from him. Of Purity in receiving them upon
their repentance.

2. A mixture of Merit and Virtue in Christ's Sacrifice is evidenced. Of Merit
in procuring pardon for such as denied him. Of Virtue, in altering their mind
and disposition.

3. The extent of the operation of the Holy Ghost is made known: and that by
healing the wounds of the soul by repentance, as well as by easing the anguish
thereof by assurance of pardon.

4. The Gospel, which publishes Gods free grace and rich mercy, is freed from
the unjust imputation of a doctrine of looseness and licentiousness, in that
it calls such sinners to repentance, as it offers grace unto.

5. Faith which justifies a sinner without works, is prooved to be justified
by works, in that the sinner who with the heart believes unto righteousness,
with the mouth makes confession unto salvation.

6. The Church which admits none but penitents, is thereby declared to be an
holy Church, and a communion of Saints.

Thus we see what good ground there is to lay down this groundwork of
Penitency as a qualification for such as are restored to the state of
salvation: so as all that shall be further spoken of restoring Apostates, must
be understood to to be spoken of Penitents. For Christ has once and again as
an irreversible doom denounced, that except men repent they shall perish, Luke
13.3, 5.

Proceed we now to the structure to be erected upon the aforesaid foundation.
And that it be not raised higher then the foundation will well bear, we must
distinguish betwixt the different kinds of Apostates.

Apostates who never return.
There are Apostates who having once turned their face from their Lord, never
turn to him again, as they of whom it is said ( Ioh. 6.66.) From that time
many of Christ's Disciples went back and walked no more with him. Of these,
some are such, as in regard of the event, never do repent. Others are such as
in regard of the nature of their sin, never can repent.

The Apostate incapable of pardon.
I find in Scripture one and that but one only kind of Apostates excluded from
all hope of recovery. True it is that every Apostate implungeth himself into
the state of perdition (as has been prooved before) inso-much as if he live
and die in that estate of Apostasy he cannot be saved. But there is a kind of
Apostasy which is styled a sin unto death, for which no prayer is to be made
(1 John 5.16.) and for which there remains no more sacrifice (Heb. 10.26.)
and which shall never be forgiven (Math. 12.32.) Such an Apostate is he who
falls totus, a toto, in totum: wholly, from the whole, for ever.

Totus, wholly: that is in outward profession and inward disposition: in tongue
and heart.

A toto, from the whole: that is from all the Articles of the Christian
religion.

In totum, for ever: or with a settled peremptory resolution never to return to
the Religion again.

They who thus fall, use to hate, blaspheme, and persecute the faith from
whence they are fallen, and the preachers and professors thereof: which they
do notwithstanding they have knowledge and be in their soul persuaded of the
truth of that Faith from which they so fall.

Such were the Pharisees, whom Christ charge with blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, Mar. 3.29, 30. Such were Hymeneus and Alexander (1 Timothy 1.20.) whom Paul
delivere^ unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme: and against whom
he makes a just imprecation. 2 Timothy 4.14.

Fertur Iulianum fidem in Christum confestim adeo manifest, and impudenter
abnegasse, ut sacrific ijs quibusdam, and invocationibus, and victimae cruenta
baptismum a nostris acceptum, abluerit: and initiationi ecclesiasticae
renunciarit: and ex eo tempore lavationibus, victimis and alijs quaecunque
gentilium superstitio exposcit, and privatim and public usus est. Christianos,
studium Imperatoris circa sacra gentilium non med^ocriter contristavit,
attonitosque reddidit: praesertim ob id, quod antea Christianus fuisset. Etenim
tanquam religiosus erga paternam religionem, a puero secundum ecclesioe
consuetudinem initiatus, inque sacris Scripturis institutus, ac sub episcopis,
and viris ecclesiasticis enutritus fuerat. Sozom. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 2.
Such an one also was Julian styled the Apostate: of whom it is reported that
suddenly he did so openly and impudently renounce his faith in Christ, as with
certain Sacrifices and enchantments, and a bloody offering he washed away the
Baptism received of Christians: and renou^ced his admittance into the Church:
and from that time used privately and publicly killings and quarterings of
beasts and other superstitious rites of the Gentiles. This mind of Julian, then
Emperor, about the solenmities of the Gentiles, did not a little trouble and
astonish Christians, especially because he had been a Christian before. For,
as one addicted to his fathers* (which was the Christian) religion, he was of a
child trained up according to the custom of the Church, and instructed in the
sacred Scriptures and brought up under Bishops and ecclesiastical persons.

Odij vehementia adversus dogma Christi, nullum maliciae genus ^misit, Ibid. c.
5.
Through excess of hatred against the Doctrine of Christ, he omitted no kind
of malice. He was the most spightfull, mortal, malicious and mischievous
enemy that Christians ever had: and so continued to his death: wherein though
he were forced to acknowledge the powerful revenging hand of Christ upon him,
Iulianum, vulnere accepto, implesse manum suam sanguine ferunt: and sparso in
era, dixisse, Vicisti Galilaee: simulque and victoriam confessum, and
maledictum ausum esse. Theod. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 25.
yet he did it with a scoff; For being mortally wounded (none can tell how) he
took an handful of his own blood, and casting it abroad in the air, cried, O
Galilean thou have got the victory.

It is impossible to renew such Apostates again unto repentance. But all
others may be renewed, and restored to salvation: as

1. Such as have fallen away in outward profession only, not in heart and
affection. What Apostates may be restored.
Such an one is not an Apostate totus, wholly. In him, this undue pretense ( My
tongue alone has sworn, Iuravi lingu^ mentem injuratam gero: Cic. offic. l.
3. ex Eurip. Hippol.
my mind remains unsworne) may be taken in the fairest sense: though not for
justification, yet for extenuation, at least in comparison of him who does it
totus, wholly.

2. Such as have renounced, not all the Articles of the Christian Religion, but
those only for which they were called in question. These fall not a toto, from
the whole faith.

3. Such as fall animo resurgendi, with a mind and purpose to rise again, and
to return to the Church again: and that upon the first opportunity of escape
that they can get. These fall not in totum, with an utter, final desertion of
the Church, at least in their intention.

Every of these kinds of Apostasy, is indeed most heighnous in the kind
thereof: from yielding whereunto every Christian ought to be far: and more
ready to endure the most bitter Martyrdom that ever any Christian did, then
either in profession alone, or from any one fundamental Article of the true
faith, or for any intended time to fall. For in every of these ways is God
highly dishonored, his Son our Savior extremely under-valued, the glorious
Gospel vilified, the profession thereof disgraced, weak brethren offended,
and adversaries occasioned to triumph and insult.

Yet are not the forementioned Apostates, no nor others, though worse then
they (except only before excepted, such as sin unto death) to be excluded
from all hope of recovery, mercy, and pardon. And that for these reasons,

1. The freeness of Gods grace. For God justifies freely by his grace, Romans
3.24. and his free gift is of many offenses, Romans 5.16. Wherefore that the
freeness of Gods grace may more clearly be manifested, it pleases him to
extend it to such, as of all others are most unworthy (as Apostates who deny
him, are. Venia peccatorum fi^eliter (...) ab (...) vult ^ortem peccat^r^^,
(...) ut ^onvertatur a perditione pen^^e^do. and (...) ^^sc^atione Domini
vivat. Si quis a^^ter de just^ssima Dei p^etate sentit, non Christianus, sed
Novatianu^e^^ Aug. de (...). c. 80.

Non de ipsis crimini^^^, qua^^i^et magn^^ remittendis in Sa^cta Ecclesia Dei
desperanda est mis^ricordia agentibus pae^itentiam, etc. Aug En^bir. c. 65.


) Man's unworthiness gives evident proof of the freeness of Gods grace. And
the more unworthy any may be thought to be, the more free will that grace which
is extended to him, be known to be. So as pardon of sin may in faith be
expected from him who will not the death of a sinner, but that repenting he may
be freed from destruction, and saved by the mercy of God. If any think
otherwise, he is not a Christian, but a Novatian.

2. The riches of Gods grace. God is said to be rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. Now
the greatness and heighnousnesse of sin commends the riches of mercy, and
shows that to be true, which is said, Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded grace
did abound much more. But by Apostasy sin abounds, and may be reckoned in the
number of great crimes: yet in the Church, such as repent ought not to despair
of Gods mercy.

3. The infinite value and worth of Christ's sacrifice. It is a sufficient price
for any sin, yea and for all sins: in which respect it is said, that the
blood of Jesus Christ clea^seth us from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1.7. If from all sin,
then from Apostasy.

Object. On these grounds the sin against the Holy Ghost might be pardoned.
Why the sin ^agai^st the Holy G^ost is unpardonable.


Answ. Not so: and that for these Reasons.

1. They wilfully and utterly reject the only means of pardon, the Lord Jesus
Christ. In this respect they are said to tread under foot the Son of God,
Heb. 10.29.

2. They neither will, nor can repent. It is impossible to renew them again
unto repentance. Heb. ^.^, 6.
As other sinners who do not repent are not pardoned, so these Apostates,
because they cannot repent cannot be recovered.

3. An irreversible doom of the Judge is absolutely without any limitation
gone out against these: but it is not so against any other sinners. The doom
is this, Whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost it shall not be forgiven
him, Mat. 12.32.

4. The means to be used by others for recovering sinners is absolutely
forbidden in these men's case. The means is prayer. The prayer of faith shall
save the sick: and if he have committed sins they shall be forgiven him,
James 5.15. But the Apostle, even where he prescribes this means for
obtaining pardon, excepteth the sin unto death, thus, If any man see his
brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give
him life, for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death, I do
not say that he shall pray for it, 1 Ioh. 5.16.

4. A fourth ground of an Apostates recovery is the extent of Gods promises,
which extent is so large, as (except before excepted) it excludes none. All
manner of sin shall be forgiven unto men, Deus Ecclesiae Catholicae in persona
beati Petri, ligandi solven lique tribuit potestatem. Aug. ad P. Dioc. c. 3.
says the Judge himself, Mat. 12.31.

5. A fifth is Gods faithfulness in ratifying the just censure of his Church.
For Christ gave to his Church in the person of Saint Peter power of binding and
loosing, when he said ( Mat. 16.19.) I will give unto thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven: whatsoever thou shall loos^ on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. When
therefore the Church upon due observation of an Apostates true repentance
absolves him, and receives him into her communion, that Apostate may justly be
accounted to be recovered, and to be brought into the state of salvation.

6. The last ground, Examples of Apostates pardoned.
which now I intend to note, is example. For we read that in all ages
Apostates, and that of all sorts and kinds (except before excepted) have been
recovered, and received into the favor of God and his Church.

Adam, D^ primo homine, patre generis humani, quod eum Christ^^ solverit,
Ecclesia fere tota conse^tit. Au^ Epist. 99. Taciani sa^uti primi homini^
contradicunt. Aug de Haeres. c. 6.25.

Vetu^ lex quibusdam ignovit, ne omnino crudelis diceretur. Aug. Quaest. ^uxtim
c. 102.


the first man was a most notorious Apostate. Yet the Church in all ages has
taken it for grant, that he repented and was saved. It is therefore reckoned
among the heresies of the Tacians, that they opposed the salvation of the first
man. The promise of redemption was first made to our first Parents, Genesis 3.15.
and that they believed it, may be inferred from their teaching their children
to offer sacrifice, Genesis 4.3, 4.

The children of Israel in Egypt played the parts of Apostates, by the Idolatry
which they committed ( Ezekiel. ^0.7, 8.) so in the Wilderness ( Exodus 32.1, 2,
etc.) and in the land of Canaan, under their Judges (Judges 2.17:) and under
their Kings (2 King. 29.6.) Yet upon their humiliation and repentance, God
received them to grace and favor.

But to give instance of particulars, Solomon in his old age proved an Apostate
(1 King. 11.4.) yet he repented as is evident by his book styled Ecclesiastes,
which the Hebrews say (as we heard before) is the book of Salomons repentance.
That God was merciful in pardoning his Apostasy, appears by this promise
which God made to David concerning him (2 Samuel 7.14, 15.) If he commit
iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the strip^s of the
children of men; But my mercy shall not depart from him, as I took it from
Saul.

Manasseh in his younger years did himself, and caused Judah to do worse
then the Heathen, yet he repented and found mercy, 2 Chronicles. 33.2, 9, 12, 13.

Pro sacerdotali officio, redigentur in ultimum gradu a. Hier. in loc.
The Levites that went away far from God, though they were excluded from the
more excellent functions in the Temple, yet upon their repentance were admitted
into the Temple, to do the inferior works thereof, Ezekiel. 44.10, 11, etc.

Penituit Petru^ negasse Christu^, quod ejus indica^t lachrymyae. Aug. Epist.
108 Seleuc. Vid. Aug. de Agone Christi. c. 30.
Peter thrice together not without swearing and cursing denied his Master, yet
his tears declare that he repented: and both the other Disciples, and also
Christ's manner of entertaining him afterward, show that he was received to
mercy.

Many forsook Paul, which was a kind of Apostasy: but Paul's prayer for mercy
to be showed to them (2 Timothy 4.16.) gives evidence of a possibility, yea and a
probability too of their finding mercy.

In the ten fierce and fiery persecutions of Christians under the Roman
Emperors, many renounced the Christian faith: Hos Ecclesia Cathol^ca materno
recipit sinu, tanquam Petrum post f^etum negationis per ga^icanum a^monitu^.
Aug de agone C^risti. c. 30.
and in the tumults raised by Arrians, others renounced the Orthodox faith, yet
the Catholic Church with a motherly affection received them again upon
evidence of their repentance: as Peter was received after his weeping, being
put in mind of his sin by the crowing of a Cock.

We have before showed how the Church of old had days, and places, and rites,
and Ministers for admitting penitents after their Apostasy into the Church:
which gives an evident demonstration of her willingness and readiness to
entertain such.

The like might be noted of the Orthodox reformed Churches, which ever si^ce
the beginning of the Reformation have time after time received such as have
turned from their Heresy, Pertinet ad disciplinam Christianam ut nemini
panitendi interc^udatur ad^^us. Aug. de Mendac. ad Con^ent. c. 13.
Idolatry, Superstition, Apostasy, or any other notorious and scandalous
offense. For it is an especial branch of Christian discipline, to stop the
course of repenting and returning to the faith from none.

1. Take notice hereby of the just cause that the true Christian Catholic
Church, The error of Novatians.
and the Orthodox Fathers of that Church had, Quomodo contra Novatian^:
c^ntendendum sit, qui penite^tiam salutarem negant. Aug. ^uaest. mixtim. c 102.
to detest, and abhominate, as they did, the unchristian, unchar^table, and
unmercifull opinion and practice of the Novations in denying repentance to such
as had once denied the Christian faith: and in refusing to admit them into the
Christian Church again, though with all the testimonies of penitential
humiliation and contrition that they could express they desired it, and made
free offer of all the satisfaction that the Church should require. Most proudly
and odiously they styled themselves (...) Puritans, as if they had been
forsooth the purest in the world, Cathari, qui seipsos isto nomine, quasi
propter mundiciam superbissime atque odiosissime ^ominant, paenitentiam de
nega^t, Novatum sectantes haereticum: unde etiam Novatiani appellantur. Aug. de
Haeres c. 38

(...), id est mundos se vocant, cum sint omnium immundissimi, negantes
paenitentiam per quam peccata mundantur. Hier. in Hos. 14.


yea and they only the pure ones: whereas they are of all the most impure:
denying repentance whereby sins are purged away. Their extreme severity, or
rather cruelty, being directly contrary to the mind of God, our gracious and
merciful Father, Novatus quasi haereticus semper, and perfidus omnium
sacerdotum voce damnatus. Cypr. Epist. l. 2. Epist. 8. Synod. Afric. 2. Aug. ut
supr.

Nusquam tam vigere debent viscera misericordiae quam in Ecclesia Catholica, ut
tanquam vera matter, nec peccantibus fitijs sup^rbe^ insultet, nec correctis
difficile ignoscat. Aug de Agone Christian c. 30.


manifested in his Word by his own free and rich grace offered to penitents,
by the directions given to his people to receive such, and by their constant
course in entertaining such, the Catholic Church adjudged Novatus to be
accounted an Heretic, and put Novatians into the Catalogue of Heretics. For
bowels of mercy ought no where so to be enlarged as in the Catholic Church;
that as a true mother, she neither proudly insults over her children that
fall, nor hardly pardons them being amended.

2. This makes much to the justification of this days solemnity in receiving
this Penitent by a prescript order of our Church into her communion. Our
Churches indulgency toward penite^t^
Herein our Church shows such a tender compassion to this her son that was
once lost, but by Gods good providence is now found, as the Father did to the
Prodigal: affording unto him the best welcome that she can. What cause have
thou, O Penitent, to bless God that thou were borne and brought up in such a
Church, wherein thou had at first the benefit of Baptism, to preserve thee,
as Noah was preserved in the Arc, Paenitentia quasi secunda post naufragi^
miseris tabula. Hier ad Demet. de Virgin.

Idem Comment in Esaias. 3.


from the deluge of destruction: and now again a recovery by penance enjoined
to thee, and performed by thee: which being heartily done, is as another
plancke after ship-wracke reached out unto thee, to keep thee from drowning.

3. All ye that are children of the same mother and brethren and sisters to
this Penitent, A penitent to be recei^ed as a brother.
imitate this gracious indulgency of your Mother toward him. Be not like the
Prodigals elder brother, who envied his brother, and was offended with his
Father for the grace, favor and honor which was showed to his penitent
brother. Do ye rather show your selves to be of the mind of the Angels of God,
in whose presence there is joy over one sinner that converteth, Luk 15.10.
Henceforth upbraide not to him his Apostasy: Upbraide not his circumcision;
upbraide not his subjecting himself to Mahometisme: shun not his society;
avoid not communion with him, no not in the most sacred and divine ordinances:
trafique with him: eat and drink with him, pray with him and pray for him:
Receive him as a brother beloved: Forgive him, comfort him: I beseech you that
you would confirm your love toward him.

Public penance to be undergone by penitent Apostates.
4. My heart stirs me up again to return to such as have renounced the
Christian faith and been circumcised, in the name of the Lord Jesus to beseech
them, yea and to require them for Gods sake, for the Gospells sake, for the
Churches sake, for such friends sake, as are privy to it, and for their own
souls sake, as they tender the peace of their conscience, yea and the
salvation of their soul, to make their case known, to submit themselves to
the discipline of the Church, and to be willing to give such satisfaction as
the Church shall think fit. Ye had many that could bear witness of your
denying the faith, and those such as took occasion thereupon to insult over
you, over your Faith, over the Church by which you were instructed in the
Faith, and over your Lord and Savior on whom you placed your Faith. Is it not
then meet that you should have many witnesses of your returning to the Faith
again, and of your humiliation and contrition for that dishonor you have done
to God, and to his Church: and those such witnesses as h^ve power to loose you,
and to receive you again into the Church: ye and such as will rejoice at your
conversion, and praise God for the same? De vulnere ipso non crubescis, de
ligatura vulneris erube^cis? Vide plura hac de re apud Cypr. in Ep. and in
Sermon. 5. de lapsis.
O be not more ashamed of confessing your sin, then you were of committing
it. Shall he who was not ashamed of his wound, be ashamed of binding up and
healing his wound.

5. Let me in the last place leave a few directions with thee, O Penitent, upon
whose occasion we are here met.

1. Repentance must be from the heart.

Oportet paenitentiam agentes flere a mare, and reliqu^ quae paenitentiae
propria sunt ex cord demo^strare Basil. Moral. Sum. 1. c. 3.


1. That which now thou do openly with thy tongue and body before us children
of men, do it ex animo, do it heartily as to the Lord the Searcher of hearts.
Thus will thy repentance be sound indeed. Thus will much inward peace be
brought to thy conscience. Thus will thou be loosed in Heaven as well as on
earth. All the grace and favor which now the Church shows is upon this pious
and charitable presumption, that in prostrating thy body thy soul is humbled,
and that the confession of thy mouth proceeds from the contrition of thy
heart. If it be otherwise, thou dissemblest with the Church, thou deceivest
thine own soul, and mockest God who will in no wise br^oke such mockings.
Unless thou do, what t^ou do, sincerely and heartily, thou art in no better
case (if not in a worse) then they who have suffered themselves to be
circumcised by professed enemies of Christ, and therewithal renounced the faith
of Christ, and yet seek not to be loosed by the Church of Christ. They cannot
in Faith expect to be loosed in Heaven, because they are not first loosed on
earth. Nor can thou expect to partake in Heaven of the benefit of the
Churches loosing thee on earth, because it is utterly made void by the
deceitfullnesse of thy heart. But we are persuaded better things of thee, and
things that accompany Salvation though I thus speak.

2. Apostasy requires more then ordinaty repentance.
2. Be inwardly more dejected in soul, more pierced in spirit, and broaken in
heart, then with the tears of thine eyes, beatings of thy breast, casting down
of thy body, and confession of thy mouth thou can express. For thy sin for
which this penance is enjoined is an heinous sin, Aggravation of Apostasy.
a crying sin, a sin that comes near to the unpardonable sin, that sin
unto death. Thereby thou deniedst the Lord that bought thee: thereby thou
renouncedst the only means of thy salvation: thereby thou rannest out of thy
Lords camp into the army of his enemies, and so becammest an enemy to thy
Lord. Orare oportet impensius, and rogare, diem luc^u transigere, vigilijs
noctes ac fletibus ducere, tempus omne lachrymosis lamentationib^s occupare,
and ^. Cypr. de lapsis.
How dishonorable was this to thy Lord? How disgraceful to his Church? O how
did those cursed enemies insult thereat? What cause have thou to cry our (as
Ier. 9.1.) Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night for my sin? Thou have cause enough to draw
water (as the Israelites did, 1 Samuel 7.6.) from the bottom of a broaken heart,
and to power it out before the Lord, as he who said ( Psalm. 119.136) Rivers of
water run down mine eyes. Remember what Peter did, when he was put in mind
of such a sin as thou have committed, He went out and wept bitterly, Math.
26.75. Those bitter tears must needs flow out of the bottom of an heart
throwly broken.

Me thinks I now behold many weeping eyes in this assembly, bewailing thy
woeful fall; and I must confess that I also find mine own bowels troubled
within me. All this is in compassion of thy case. Ought not thou to be much
moved thereat? Howsoever the Church be pleased in much-tender-compassion to
enjoyne this easy, mild penance unto thee, do thou betwixt God and thine
own soul yet further load thy self through a serious and d^epe apprehension
of, Paenitentia agenda secundum modum sui cujusque peccati. Aug. Encb. c. 65.
Secundum conscientiae molem exhibenda est paenite^tiae magnitude. Amb. ad
Virgin. lays. c. 8
and meditation on the heighnousnesse of thy sin, that Christ observing thee
to labor and to be heavy laden under the burden of thy sin, may (according
to his promise, Math. 11.28.) give thee rest. Repentance is to be ordered
according to the kind and measure of sin.

3 Repentance daily to be renewed.
3. Let not thy penitency end with the penance of this day. Well note the Lords
exprobration to Israel (Isa. 58.5.) Is it such a fast that I have chosen? A day
for a man to afflict his soul? Nor is one days penance sufficient repentance
for such a sin as thou have committed, I have heard a tradition concerning
Peter that he wept whenever he heard a Cock crow. It becomes a penitent
Apostate, whenever by any occasion he is put in mind of his sin, to be
struck at his heart with godly remorse. Thou did long lie in thy sin: even
so long as thou livedst among the Turks. All that while thou did conform
thy self to Mahometisme. And think thou one day of penance to be
sufficient? Continue to renew thy repentance every day: though thy life be
prolonged in the Christian Church many more years, then thou were among the
Turks.

4 Fruits meet for repentance to be brought forth.

Paenitentiam agentibus non sufficit ad salutem secessu^ solus a peccatis,
verum opus est ipsis etiam fructibus paenitentia dignis. Basil. Moral. Sum 1. c
4.

Satisfactio paenitentiae, est causas peccar^rum excidere, nec earum
suggestionibus adi. ^um indulgere, Aug. de Eccl. dogm. c. 54.


4. Be very circumspect over thy self for the remainder of thy life, that thou
bring forth fruit meet for repentance. This is that worthy walking, whereof
we spoke before. As a wife that has formerly lived loosely, and defiled the
marriage bed, being received into the favor of her husband again, must carry
her self more soberly, more modestly, more inoffensively, and must be more
watchful in avoiding all temptations that might allure to that sin again,
ye and all suspicions thereof: So an Apostate received by the Church into grace
and favor, must walk more circumspectly then if he had not fallen. For it
much lies on him to repair his Christian credit: or rather to be the more
zealous in honoring God, and bringing glory to the Gospel of Christ and to
his Church, yea and in giving matter of rejoicing to professors of the true
religion. This is a point that merely concerns thee, O Penitent. Quenda^
adolescente^ fabulae feru^t post amores meretricio^ peregre profect^, and
abolito am^re, regressum postea veteri occurrisse di^ecte, qu^ ubi no^
interpellata^ mirata, putaverit no^ recognita^, rur^us occurrens d^xerit, Ego
sum, responderit ille, Sed ego no^ sum ego. Am^. de Poenit. l. 2. c. 10.


Be like that young man, who having followed Harlots, after some while absence,
that kind of love being extinguished in him, met with an old love of his, but
said not one word to her. She wondering that he spoke not to her, thought he
had not known her, and thereupon said, Sir, it is I. Whereunto he replied, But
I am not I: that is, I am not the same that I was before. In like sense, Be not
thou, thou: Be not the same thou were before.

5. Relapse to be taken heed of.

Si a prima peccatorum miseria erep^i, rurs^ ad eandem malignitatem revertimur,
gr^vi^r pu^itio nos profecto expectabit. Chrysostom. in Mat. 12. Hom 44


5. Take heed of relapse. Christ himself saw this to be a needful caveat: and
thereupon pressed it once and again on such as he had recovered from sin: as on
the woman taken in the act of adultery ( Ioh. 8.11) thus, Go and sin no
more: and on him that had been deseased 38. years he enforces it with a
commination ( Ioh. 5.14.) thus, Sin no more, lest a worse thing come to thee.
For if, after we are freed from the misery of sin, we return to it again,
soarer vengeance is like to befall us. Experience shows how dangerous a
relapse is after a recovery from a bodily sickness. Much more dangerous is a
spiritual relapse after repentance from an heighnous sin. The heart of man by
such a relapse will be much more hardened in sin; and the Devil in such a case
will take with himself seven other spirits more wicked then himself, and they
will enter in, and dwell there (Mat. 12.45.) Yea and God himself may be so
incensed thereby, as to afford no more grace to him that has so ill employed
his former grace, as to depart clean away from it. Thus the last state of that
man is worse then the first. Look therefore narrowly to thy self, thou who
art now restored: and make use of those directions which were before given to
such as go down to the Sea, to make them constant in holding the faith.

6. True penitents may and must believe that they are fully discharged.
6. Believe that thou art now acquitted of that heighnous sin of renouncing the
Christian faith. If thine heart be upright thou have good cause to believe it,
in that thou have taken that course which in Gods Word is prescribed for
obtaining a discharge. Thou have been pricked in thine heart for thy sin (as
the Jews, Acts 2.37.) Thou did go to thy Pastor, and enquire what in thy
case thou should do (as they who being defiled came to Moses, Numb. 9.7.)
Thou have subjected thy self to the order which the Church prescribed (as
David did to Gods advice, 2 Samuel 24.19.) Thou have made penitent confession of
thy sin (as they did who came to be baptized of John, Mat. 3.6.) Thou have
desired this Congregation to pray for thee (as the Israelites desired Samuel to
pray for them, 1 Samuel 12.19.) The Church loses and absolveth thee (as the
Church of Corinth absolved the incestuous person, 2 Cor. 2.10.) On these
grounds thou may safely, thou ought faithfully to believe that thy
deepe-died scarlet sin is washed away by the blood of thy Savior to whom
thou art now returned: and that thou art fully acquitted and discharged
thereof. We do undoubtedly believe that by repentance sins are abolished: so
as, Paenite^tia a^oleri peccata indubitanter cred^n^^ Aug. de Ecclesi^st.
^ogma^ c. 80.
if we return not to them again they shall never be imputed to us. In this
respect a true penitent is blessed. For Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not iniquity: and in whose spirit there is no guile, Psalm. 32.2. If
therefore thy conscience shall hereafter be overmuch troubled with doubtings,
and fears, and despair of pardon of thine Apostasy, account it a temptation
of Satan, and yeald not unto it, but resist it; and say to thy soul, Why art
thou cast do^ne, O my soul? why art thou disquieted in me? Hope in God: He is
thy God, reconciled unto thee: He has discharged thee: who then shall lay this
sin to thy charge? By exercising thy faith after this manner thou will bring
much peace to thy conscience, and make the remainder of thy life more
comfortable to thee: and with much cherfulness carry thy self as a child
of the Church in the works of thy calling: and in all duties of piety, justice,
and charity. Only be careful to observe the former directions with this
consolation.

7. Penitents must bring others to repentance.

Tu ne recideris, sed a negatione resiliens est o etiam alijs paenitentiae
exemp^ar ne despere^t. Theophilac.

E^ar. in Luc. ^^


7. Do wha^ lies in thee to bring other Renegadoes to return to the Church,
to submit themselves to the discipline thereof, to be willing to give
satisfaction by public penance. And the rather to encourage them thereunto,
make known unto them the inward peace and comfort which thou have received
hereby. This is a duty which on a like ground Christ enjoined to Peter (Luke
22.32,) in these words, When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren: and
David undertaketh to do as much, Psalm. 51.12, 13. where he makes this prayer
and promise, Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy
free Spirit: Then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be
converted unto thee. This is a good kind of recompense which such as fall,
make to the Church. As by their fall many are offended, so by their rising many
may be established. If by private means thou can not so far prevail with
such as thou know to be Renegadoes, as to bring them voluntarily to make
satisfaction to the Chruch, then follow Christ's advice, Mat. 18.17. Tell it
unto the Church. As for thy self, that thou may remain henceforth steadfast
and unmovable in the faith, thou shall not want the prayers of them, who now
with much rejoicing praise God that the Text is accomplished in thee: in which
respect we may conclude as we began, and say, HE WAS LOST, AND IS FOUND.

FINIS.
Recensui concionem hanc cui titulus est [ A recovery from Apostacy] nec in ea
quicquam reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica Imprimatur SA: BAKER. Ex
edibus Londin: Feb. 4. 1638.


