AN EXPOSITION ON THE WHOLE FIFTH CHAPTER OF S. JOHN'S GOSPEL: ALSO NOTES ON
OTHER CHOICE PLACES OF SCRIPTVRE, TAKEN BY A Reverend Divine, now with God, and
found in his Study after his death, written with his own hand, viz.

An Exposition on the fifth of John. Notes on Ioh. 3. verse. 29. to 36. Notes on
certain verses of the first and second of Mark. Notes on Luke 3. verse. 19,
20. Notes on Iam. 4. verse. 7. Notes on Genesis 2. verse. 9. and 7. and 23. Notes on
Exodus 12. verse. 8, 11, 14, 15, 16. Notes on Psalm. 30.2. An Exposition on part
of the fifth and sixth Chapters of the Ephesians.
LONDON, Imprinted for John Bartlett, and are to be sold at the sign of the
gilt Cup in the Goldsmiths Row in Cheapeside. 1630.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE FIFTH OF JOHN.
JOHN 5. VER. 1, 2. After this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went
up to Jerusalem.

Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheepe-market, a poole, which is called in
the Hebrew tongue Bethesda, having five porches.


THe four Evangelists do write the history of Christ, which is of 4008.
whereof 3974 are briefly passed over in his pedigree beginning at Adam, Luke 3.
So that there is 24. remaining: And or these about 30. hespent in private, the
other four in his public ministry.

This Harmony was first divided into six parts:

1. From the beginning of the Gospel to Christ's baptism.

2. From his baptism, which was his installation into his ministry, to the
first Passover, when he began to manifest himself plainly.

3. From the first Passover to the second.

4. From the second to the third.

5. From the third to the fourth.

6. From the fourth to his ascension.

This present history is the first history of the third part of the Harmony,
and of the second year of Christ his public ministry.

The reason why we do end the first year with the former History of Matthews
calling, and begin the second year with this, is

Because there is no History recorded after the former, but some circumstance
moves us to think it was done after this Passover.

2. That circumstance which is set down, Mar. 3.23. shows that story to be
after this Passover: for corn was then ripe, which was about Pentecost, and
therefore after the Passover, which was about March: and that is the meaning of
Luke, when he says, Chap. 6.1. the second Sabbath after the first, viz. the
Passover.

But here a question may be moved concerning Matthew his entertainment of
Christ, which seems to have been presently after his conversion.

Answ. If we consider the circumstances, we shall find it otherwise; for Mat.
9.18 it is said, While Christ spoke these things etc. namely, while he was
reasoning and disputing with the Pharisees and the disciples of John concerning
companying with Publicans, and fasting, Then came Iairus the Ruler unto him.
Now he came not till a long time after this passover, as appears by Mark.
5. and Luke. 8. as we shall show when we come to speak of it, and therefore it
follows that the feast of Matthew, upon occasion whereof that dispute arose,
was not till after this time.

But why then is Matthew's calling and his feast both joined together by the
Evangelists?

Ans. 1. There is no necessary connection.

2 It is because of the matter, which, concerning o^e man, is also set down
together. So John his imprisonment and beheading are put together: though he
were long time in prison before he was beheaded.

This History in general shows what Christ did at the Passover in Jerusalem
the second time of his coming thither: and it contains,

1. A famous Miracle, from the beginning to ^he fifteenth verse.

2. A disputation upon it, unto the end of the Chapter. In the Miracle are
these branches.

1. The time. 2. The place. 3. The Party cured. 4. The occasion. 5. The manner
of working. 6. The manifestation of it to be a true Miracle. 7. The effects.

1. The Time is set down indefinitely: There was a feast of the Jews:
whereupon some doubt is made what Feast it was. Some say it was the feast of
T^bernacles, and some Pentecost. But to omit the answering of their reasons,
which themselves confess to be but coniecturall* it will appear plainly that
this was the Passover. John 2.14. there is mention made of a Pass^ouer, after
which Christ preached in Iudaea, and there ^e passed over the Feast of
Tabernacles and Pentecost. For Ioh. 4, 55* Christ says there were four
months to harvest, which was about our Whitsontide: therefore Christ spoke
that between December an^ January, and the feast of Tabernacles was in
September: and so Whitsontide or Pentecost was past long before.

Moreover the Passover is called (...), by a propriety, a ^ea^t, thirteen
times in the new Testament; by the Evangelists twelve times, and once Act.
18.21. and it was the principal feast, because it was the first, and was
instituted for the remembrance of the greatest benefit, and also was the most
lively type of Christ his sacrifice.

Now in that Christ went to Jerusalem to celebrate his Passover, we learn,
That Christ was conscionable in keeping all the ordinances of God, and that
according to the m^nner prescribed by God. He went to Jerusalem, and kept not
this feast in Galilee: wherein we ought to imitate Christ.

2. The occasion in general is laid down, v. 6. in which we ^ay consider
these parts. 1. The place. 2. The party cure^ 3. The occasion it self. 4. A
conference that Christ had with the man.

1. The place is described, 1. By the situation of it. 2. The name. 3. The
rooms of it. 4. The company.

1. The Situation in general is in Jerusalem, a famous City, whither all the
Tribes resorted thrice in a year, as also the dispersed Jews among the
Gentiles, and moreover many Proselites of all nations.

Doct. God does by his wisdom and providence so dispose of his great works,
as they may be most famous: thus he sent the holy Ghost, Act. 2. when such a
multitude of all nations were come up to Jerusalem, etc. so were the Churches
plan^ed first in most famous Cities, as Corinth. etc. For first, hereby Gods
Name comes to be more known, and he gets the greater glory: secondly, the
Church is the more edified.

In Particular it i^ noted to be by the place of the sheep, (...), some
understand (...) market, some say the sheep-gate; which is most probable,
because mention is made of such a gat^ nigh the Temple, Neh. 3.1. where the
Seventy translate ^t so, using the same word. Howsoever, it was a place where
sheep were kept for sacrifice. And this shows the reason why there was a
poole there, viz. to wash and water the sheep that were brought thither: which
was done in a pious and religious respect to the sacrifice of God, although
afterward through covetousness it grew to such excess, that they did sell
for gain in the very Temple. And thus should they that have authoririe be
careful to provide such things as are fit in the Church etc. for the setting
forth of the worship of God.

2 The Name: Bethesda, a house of pouring out; whereby it should appear, that
the poole was not of standing water, but such as came running in, in great
abundance from some Spring head: but in the Syriack it is called Bethehesda, by
adding (...), and it is a usual thing in translating of such words as have
(...) in them, into Greek, to leave out that letter. This signifies a house
of mercy; which name might be given unto it in remembrance of this gracious
work of the Lord, in giving such virtue to this water: and this shows the
care of the people, to retain in memory the works of the Lord. Thus did
Abraham, for the saving of his son Isaac, Genesis 22.14. and Jacob, Genesis 28.19.

3 The Rooms. Five Porches or Galleries, (...): it signifies a spacious place
to walk in. These were made for the relief and good of those poor people,
that they might be dry from wind and weather, because they were to tarry a
great while before they could be healed; and according as the number of them
did increase, so they builded mo porches. There were five porches. This is
recorded as a commendable work of charity, for our imitation, that God having
given us abundance, we should in thankfulness to him, and charity to relieve
them that want, bestow something on the poor.

Verse. 3. In these lay a great multitude of sick folk, of blind, halt, and
withered, waiting for the moving of the water.

Verse. 4. For an Angel went down at a certain season into the poole, and
troubled the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water,
stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever dise^se he (...).


FOurthly, the company which was there: which is described, first, by their
number, secondly, their condition, thirdly, the end of their being there.

1 Their number is expressed, when it is said that there was a great multitude:
which shows, that in those days they were many whom the Lord scourged, and
laid his heavy hand on them; as may appear by this, and also in that
notwithstanding Christ did daily cure so many, yet still many more resorted
unto him.

This came to pass, first, because of their own sin, secondly, for the
manifestation of Gods power and glory now at the coming of Christ: thirdly,
that it being a thing so common, every one might the better apply it to
himself, and take notice of his own condition.

2 Their condition: their distr^sses are here said to be of four kinds; there
were, first, sick folk, weak and feeble persons, such as were unable to
help themselves, and so weakened through sickness, that they were past
ordinary cure; secondly, Blind, thirdly, Halt, fourthly, Withered. all which
diseases could not be cured by ordinary means.

This is first, to show that this cure was miraculous, secondly, hereby God
would pull down the pride of the Jews, that even in the midst of their
glorious city, such a company of distressed persons was to be seen, as a
spectacle of their own condition; which use we are to make of the sick that
are amongst us: thirdly, it shows the great goodness and pity of Christ,
that he would come amongst them. which teaches us also not to cast our eyes
asquint upon poor sick persons, but rather to go unto them, if we have any
means of help; like the Samaritan.

3 The end why they lay here, which was to wait for the moving of the water:
and the reason of this end is in the fourth verse, that by stepping into the
water at such a time, they might be cured.

Hence we learn, That they who were dist^essed in body, had a care to use the
means of recovery. So we see when Christ did manifest himself to have divine
power to cure diseases, how all such as were sick resorted unto him; and the
reason was, because they were sensible of their bodily diseases. To apply this
to our spiritual diseases, this condemns us, that we being sick and dead in
sin, do not yet regard the means of cure.

The reason of their waiting, set down verse. 4. contains the story of a great
miracle; whereof there are two parts, 1. the means of working this cure, which
was, troubled water. 2 the means of attaining to it, viz, the stepping in.

In the means of working this cure, first, there was water used. Hence, to
omit the allegories of some upon this place, why water is here used, in
general we may learn, That God does use means in the working of his
extraordinary works. Not but that he could do them without means: but it so
pleases him to use them, for the trial of our obedience. and it teaches us
to be careful, in the use of all means that God has appointed for the
effecting of any thing. Secondly, it was Troubled water. Now troubled waters
are not wholesome, and good for cure as clear waters are; but this was ^o (...)
Gods ^x^^aordinarie power, and that the cure came from him, not from the water.
Hence the Doctrine is, That God can make any means powerful for the effecting
of that which he will have done; yea, though the things be never so unlikely
and contrary: as wood to bring up iron, 2. Kings 6 6. Salt to make water sweet,
2. Kings 2.21.22. Clay and spittle to cure the blind.

For the work is only from the Lord, and not from the means: but God does it
to draw our minds from the means, to the consideration of a higher author.
Wherefore we are not to tie Gods power unto the means; or in those means that
God has appointed, to dispute of the fitness and goodness of them, as Naaman
did.

To apply this to the means of salvation, it teaches us to consider the
ordinance of God, and not the weakness of the means. The want of which
consideration made both Jews and Gentiles to stumble at the Gospel of Christ,
and not to r^ape that benefit by the ministry of the Apostles as otherwise
they might.

3. The Cause of the troubling of the water is here expressed to be an Angel.
Some read the text, an Angel of God; but that he was so, is plainly employed by
this divine and good work whereabout he was sent. Many questions are here
moved about this Angel; which seeing they are but curiosities and mere
conjectures, we will omit. In general we may learn, That God has made these
glorious Angels to be his ministers for the good of men: so are they called
ministering Spirits; and so we read they were sent from time to time to the
children of God to comfort, to defend them, etc.

But a particular reason of the sending of an Angel here, was that they might
know, that the virtue to cure came not from the goodness of the water, but
that it was a divine work, seeing that the water could not cure till the
messenger of God from Heaven was come.

2. It was for the honor and glory of God to have such glorious messenger^.

3. This was a great honor which God does to men, in sending Angels to them;
which should teach us to respect this honor, and by way of gratefulness to
honor him again, by having our hearts filled with an holy admiration of Gods
great works, as Psalm. 8. and yet take we heed of giving this honor due to
God unto the Angels, a sin whereunto we are much subject, Col. 2.18.

4. The Time when this water was troubled is indefinitely set down, [ at a
certain season.]

Quest. A question is made, whether the time were set and fixed when the Angel
did come down; as at every solemn Feast, or on the Sabbath day, etc.

Answ. There was no set time, as appears, first, because there were so many
continually waiting for the moving of the water; which they needed not to have
done, seeing they might have come at the set time only. Secondly, because
there was a sign given of the Angels coming down, viz. the water was
troubled, which needed not, if they had known that he did come down at a
certain hour. Thirdly, the long time of their abiding and waiting here, and
the word (...), translated season, implies no certain time, but is
indefinitely taken here, and so used in many other places.

The reason why this was uncertain is, that they might wait, which thing they
did. So must we, seeing the Spirit blows where it lists, attend still upon
the preaching of the Word, because if one time we find not comfort, another
time we may, so that we ought to come still. The like must we do in all
things, whereof the season is kept close unto the Lord, and unknown to us. So
much for the means of working this cure.

2. The second point, is the means of attaining unto this cure; which was
Stepping into the water. And this is amplified, First, by the Restraint, he
only was cured that first stepped in. Secondly, by the issue and effect of it;
he was made whole, etc. The water was the means whereby the cure was wrought,
and they that would be cured must step in. Hence the Doctrine is, That they
that obtain a blessing must use the means: Act. 27.32.

Now in temporal things al men are ready to use the means of obtaining any
good: but in things spiritual, we all stumble and fail. Wherefore seeing God
has appointed his Word and Sacraments the means for our salvation, we ought
to be concionable in the use of them. And whereas many flee unto
Predestination, that they need not use the means, seeing if God have elected
them, they shall be saved; we must consider, that God, who chooses us unto
this end, has ordained means to bring us unto it. Neither does this use of
the means withdraw our hearts from depending on the providence of God, but in
a moderate use of them, our hearts are more lifted up to the consideration
thereof.

The Restraint stands in this, that but one was cured at once, he that went in
first: not because God was able to cure no more, but first, to show, that the
virtue came not from the water, but was in the will of God. Secondly, to cause
the^ to strive to go in first. Thirdly, to show, that this was not so much for
a corporal good as for a spiritual or to draw their mind to consider of his
power and presence among them. We may here apply this to the means of
salvation, that as there was here a strife to enter into the water: so in us
there should be a strife after the Word of God, and an endeavor to follow it,
as it was in John's time, when the kingdom of Heaven suffered violence, But the
instruction that naturally arises hence, is this; That means are not further
powerful, then God does give a blessing unto them. So here, it being the will
of God that but one should be cured, he that came in after the first found no
help, the water was but common water to him. So the Sea that was a wall to the
Israelites, drowned the Egyptians. So 1. Cor. 3.7.

For although God have appointed the means, yet he still retains his power
over them. And without the will of God, the creature is neither willing, or
able to do us good.

Wherefore in the use of the means, let us pray to God for a blessing, and
depend on him, not doting upon the means, as Asa did on his Physicians.

Yet further, in this Restraint observe also an extent: for although but the
first were cured; yet whosoever this First were, and of whatsoever disease he
were sick, he was certainly cured, which shows.

That God in bestowing of his gifts, is no respecter of persons. And the
reason, for that the ground of his works is in himself; and from his own
goodness, and not from any thing in man. Which may serve for an Encouragement to
all to come to God.

The Issue, or effect may be considered, first, in it self; 2. in the Extent.

The former is; That he that stepped into the water was surely cured. Whence in
general arises this Doctrine: That a right use of the means appointed by
God, and used in that manner that God has appointed, shall assuredly be
effectual as appears by the example of Naaman: and the blind man whom Christ
bad go and wash.

Reason is, because Gods honor and truth is herein engaged he having promised
so much. Wherefore we may rest on it.

Object. But many hear the Word and reap no benefit by it.

Answer. It is because they hear it not as they ought. For nor he that went
into the water, but he that went in first was cured: so they only receive
profit by the word, that hear it attentively and reverently, and mixing it
with faith. Hebr. 4.2.

Wherefore this is a rule, That if the means be not effectual, we fail in the
use of them.

The Extent is, that they were cured of whatsoever disease they had.

Doct. God is able to cure all disseases. Which is a matter of consolation to
us whatsoever our distress be.

Now for the Manifestation of this to be a true miracle, these circumstances
may be alleged: First, that the water was troubled, and so not so fit for
cure, as clear water. Secondly, that this was wrought by an Angel coming
down from Heaven; which shows it to be a divine work. 3. That the cure was
restrained only to that time; which shows, it was not natural, seeing nether
before, nor after, it could work the like effect. 4. that none but the first
could be cured. 5. that all diseases, whatsoever they were, were here cured.
All which show it to be a true miracle, and also a great miracle, and also a
great miracle, the like whereof we do not read recorded, and it is wonder that
there is no where mention made of it but only in this place. By it we may
consider of the goodness of God toward his people the Jews; who were now
without a Prophet, and so had continued a great while before the coming of
Christ, to the end, that their minds might be the more raised up to look unto
Christ. God therefore for a token, and evidence of his presence among them,
that he was yet their God, and that he had not rejected them, gives unto them
this extraordinary miracle, and that in the City of Jerusalem, that all might
the better take notice of it. 2. God wrought this great work for a
confirmation of the true worship of him.

Doct. So long as a People do remain the people of God, he always gives some
sign of his presence amongst them.

Verse. 5. And a certain man was there, which had infirmity thirty and eight
years.


WE are now come to the 3. Part of this miracle, viz. the Party endured who is
set down indefinitely to be a certain man. Secondly he is described his
condition, that he was diseased 38. years.

In that he is only called a certain man, it implies, that he was a man of no
great name or note, but that he was a poor man; as also appears, in that he
had layne here so long without help; for if he had been a rich man, he might
have hired some to put him in. Yet Christ makes choice of this man, to show his
power on him. Which shows the freeness of his grace: a point often noted.

Moreover of all the company that was here, he made choice of one only to cure
him: which he did, First, because it was sufficient for him to show what he was
able to do upon one as well as upon many. Secondly, that it might be an
encouragement to others to seek unto him. So that if no other but this man
were here cured, it was their own fault, in not coming unto Christ. For we
never read that he refused any that came unto him for help and comfort.
Thirdly, to show that he was bound to none, but what he did, he did
voluntarily, and so he chooses a poor man, one that deserved least.

Here we are to take notice of Gods dealing, how he bestows his favor but
upon few, in respect of the multitude: as in the Deluge. So of many thousands
that came out of Egypt, two only entered into Canaan: of four grounds that
receive seed, only one brings forth fruit. See Math. 20.16^ many come to the
word, but few are cured by the ministry thereof. Neither let me here
expostulate, and contend with God, for it is Gods goodness that he has
appointed means, and that he does make them effectual to any. And so that
may be answered to them, that Christ does, Matthew. 20.15. 2. The consciences of
wicked men shall tell them, that they have not done all that which they might,
and have not used that ability which God gave them to do good. But for those
on whom God shows favor, who are converted by the word, this is, First, to
magnify the goodness of God, that but of a few it has pleased him to make
choice of them. Secondly, to catch them to honor God, who has so much
honored them by a godly life, and not to be like unto the multitude.

The Condition by which this man is described, is, that he had an infirmity
38. years. etc. If the circumstances be considered, we shall say that he was
of all the company one of the most miserable; First, in that it is said, he was
diseased; that is, as the original signifies, the disease had so long grown
upon him, and so much infected him, that he was unable to help himself.
Secondly, in that it is said, he was [ in] this weakness; that is, the
disease had ouer-whelmed him, and wholly possessed him in all parts. Thirdly, in
that he found no help at all to succor him. Fourthly, that to his disease
there was added poverty; and poverty joined with sickness makes it much the
more grievous. Fifthly, The continuance of it, that he had been sick 38.
years, shows the greatness of his misery.

Doct. Christ makes choice of the most wretched and miserable to succor them:
a point to be observed in most of his miracles. Which he does for the
magnifying of his mercy both in it self, for the greatness of misery does
amplify the greatness of mercy. 2. And also in the apprehension of the party
helped that he may the more highly prize and esteem of it, and the more
gracefully accept of it as Paul does, 1. Tim. 1.13

Use. To teach us that the greatness of our misery should be so far from
making us doubt, and despair of succor, as rather to minister to us hope to
be releiued of our misery, being a fit object for Christ's mercy to work upon.

Now although this man had lien a long time in this disease, yet at length the
Lord sent him help. Hence we learn. That though the Lord suffer men a long
time to lie in misery yet at the length he affords them comfort and releife.
This man was sick. 38. years; the woman with the bloody issue 12. years; the
woman bound by Satan 18. years: the blind man, Ioh. 9. till he came to man's
age, as Verse, 21. so the Cripple Act. 4.2. yet all cured. The captivity was 70.
years, yet at length they returned: 2. Chron. last. Ezr. 1. Abraham's seed in
bondage 400 years, yet at length delivered. So Satan has been let loose now
600. years Reu. 20.7. yea, the Church has almost 6000. years been in
continual warfare; yet shall at length triumph in heaven. The reason why God
does thus dispose of it, is; First, in regard of himself, that his power, and
glory, and mercy may be the more manifested: as Ioh. 9.3. and 11.4. Secondly in
regard of man, for the trial of his patience: for the continance of a misery
does more try a man's patience then the Weight of it.

Nevertheless, God does send help first, to manifest his wisdom care and
providence, that he does not forsake and forget them though he have deferred to
help them. Secondly to minister comfort to those that have long been in
misery, when they shall see others in like case comforted.

Use, is not to be discouraged, because of the long continuance of our
afflictions; but that we consider, that their is some end or other, why the
Lord does defer to help us. And that God herein aims at our good, as well as
his own glory that hereby he will have our hearrs purged, our minds weaned
from the world, and desire of heaven more increased: so that the issue and
fruit of our affliction shall recompense the grieuousnesse of it. If this man
had been cured, before he had not come to that knowledge of Christ and so to
remission of sins as now he did; as Verse. 14. wherefore we must wait on God
with patience: Hab. 2.3. and uphold our selves, First by faith beleiuing that
God does herein deal with us as a wise God, and a merciful father. Secondly
by Hope to strengthen our faith and to make us look for both present
assistance in troubles, and future deliverance from them.

Verse. 6. When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in
that case --


THe fourth part of this miracle, is the Occasion here laid down, consisting
of two branches: First, Christ's sight of his present misery. Secondly, his
knowledge of his former estate.

From the First, this Doct. arises, That the sight of our misery, is a motive
to stir up Christ to compassion toward us. Which ought to minister unto us a
further ground of patience and comfort in afflictions: a point heretofore often
noted in Christ's miracles.

From the second, that Christ did only see his miserable estate, but did also
take notice of the circumstances of it, or that he had so long continued in it,
we learn; That Christ is not ignorant of the circumstances of our misery, the
time, the kind, manner and measure as Luke 13.16. Exodus 3.7. This is another
ground of great comfort that howsoever the greatness of our misery be unknown
to men, yet it is all known to God, who does accordingly pity us.

Verse. 6. -- he says unto him, Will thou be made whole?

Verse. 7. The impotent man answered, Sir, I have no man, when the water is
troubled to put me into the Poole: but while I am coming, an other steppeth
down before me.


THese words contain the fifth part of this miracle, viz. the Preparation to
this miracle. How Christ prepares this man, and the rest there present, to the
observation of the miracle, it consists in a conference between Christ and the
man. Wherein observe, First, Christ his Question. Secondly, The man's Answer.

Christ's Question is, Will thou be made whole? a strange question, may some
think. For did not the man come hither for that purpose? and was Christ
ignorant of that, or does he speak it to gall and vex him. No, but for these
reasons:

1. To show, that it was not in this man's power to heal himself; that be did
it not voluntarily; that he lay so long here, but of necessity, because no man
would help him.

2. To work in him a desire of cure, and likewise a hope to have some help of
Christ.

3. To move the party himself to attend this work that he mean to do upon
him; as also to move the rest of the company, and those that were present to
mark it. For they would think: Surely he means to do some thing, that he
does ask him this question.

4. To show indeed that he did take compassion on him, and did commiserate his
estate.

5. To manifest his own preventing grace, in that Christ sought him, before he
thought on Christ.

From all these do arise several instructions: as

1. That they who by necessity, by the hand of God, are brought into miseries
are especially to be pitied; and not such as for a little ease do make
themselves miserable, as do many beggars.

2. That they who are brought to a sight of their misery, and a desire and hope
of comfort, are fit to receive ease and comfort from Christ.

3. That Christ so ordered his great works as most may take notice of them;
and so we are to attend to the works of God, that they be not lightly
ouerslipt.

4 That knowledge of our miseries works compassion in Christ.

5. that Christ thinks of helping them, who think not of seeking of succor
from him. See Esaias 65.1. This is to be observed of us, because it is verefied
in the conversion of every one of us. As in the conversion of Adam; God sought
him, when he fled from God: so it is ever since: And this is to the end that we
may give all the praise of our conversion to him.

In the Answer of the man we note 1. The title He gives unto Christ. Secondly,
the substance of his Answer.

1. Sir: A word given to men in occasion of speech, arguuing, First, a
reverence that he gave unto Christ. A point immitable of us, because
Christianity does not overthrow ciuilty, but establish it; especially, this is
to be used when a kindness is offered; for this is a sign of gratefulness,
and the contrary of Ingratitude; as of Nabal to David.

2. As this showed his reverence, so it argues his ignorance of Christ, that
he knew him not to be Christ; if he had, he would have given him another
title like Nathaneel, Ioh. 1.49. and have desired help of him rather, then
showed the reason why he was not helped before, as now he does.

Doctrine. Ignorance of Christ his Power, his Goodness, his Nature and Offices,
make us backward, and careless in seeking those good things at his hands,
which otherwise we might receive; Ioh. 4.10. for knowledge is the ground of all
other graces, and without this we never seek for them. Which condemns the
ignorance of men, and teaches us to labor after this grace.

2. In the Substance of his answer consider, First, that although this man had
a long time lien here in great misery, yet having now occasion to speak of it,
he murmures not against God, he is not bitter, he enuieth not those that went
in before him, but only makes a plain narration of the matter; which shows
his patience, otherwise then many, who if they find no help will fret and
fume, accuse both God and man, etc. an example of such murmurs: see 2. King.
6.33.

2. Mark the reason that should move him thus to declare his case unto Christ,
it was, First, because he had a desire that Christ should help him into the
Poole. Secondly, for that he hoped that Christ would do so. So that all this
while he thought of no other means of cure, but of the Poole. Where having
seen many evidences of Gods power in curing of other, his mind is fixed upon
it, only tying, the power of God unto this water, and not considering that he
was able to cure him by other means. So the Israelites, Psalm. 78.20. and hence
this is the fault of most, That we tie Gods power to those means that he
ordaines. Whereas we should account of them but as of particular evidences of
Gods Power in general, whereby he is able to make other means effectual.

More distinctly this answer does set forth unto us. First, the inhumanity of
the Spectators and inhabitants about this place, that none would vouchsafe to
help this poor man, so long and pitifully distressed to put him into the
poole; especially this being a place besides the Temple: whether the Scribes
and Pharisees, who made such pretense of Piety, did daily resort: yet see what
want of charity there was in them, which shows their piety was but
hypocrisy. And we see that Christ does many times tax them of cruelty. So in
the Parable of the Samaritane, Christ says that it was the Priest and Leuite
that were unmerciful.

2. This shows the desire both of the man himself, and also of all the rest;
that is, to be cured by the water; and for this cause, there was a great strife
among them to go in first. The like desire and endeavor should be in us after
the spiritual means of salvation.

Verse. 16. And therefore the Jews did persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him,
because he had done these things on the Sabbath day.

Verse. 17. But Jesus answered them, My Father works hitherto and I work.


THe effects that followed upon the miracle was, 1. In regard of the Jews, who
reproved the man, because he did as Jesus bid, verse 10. 2. In regard of the
man himself, who iustifies his action by Christ's authority, verse 11. 3. In
regard of Christ, who first conueies himself out of the way for a time, verse
13. Afterward meeting this man in the Temple, gives him direction how to carry
himself for the time to come, verse 14. After Christ had made himself known
to the man, he goes presently to the Jews, and declares who it was that had
healed him, verse 15. Wherein he did well, because, 1. The work was good, viz.
to publish the works of Christ, and to manifest his glory. 2. His mind herein
was good. 3. And the end, viz. to instruct the Jews, who before he knew to be
ignorant. In the sixteenth verse is laid down a second effect of this
miracle, in regard of the Jews, viz. Their persecution of Christ. Whence in
general we may observe, that malicious and wicked hypocrites will spare none.
Their reproof of the poor man might have some pretense to shadow it, they
coming with a religious pretense of the Sabbath. And because, he having been
so long time sick, might be ignorant of what should be done of the Sabbath.
But now in that they persecute Christ also, by whose authority this man had
done it; and of whose Divine Power they had so many evidences, it shows
plainly that the former came from malice, and not from any religious care of
the Sabbath. Thus it is the nature of malice at length to show it self like
poison in a man's body, and fire that will not long lie hid. This appears in
Papists, who although they pretend Religion, yet their secret malice does often
break out in treasons, rebellions, etc.

Now this as it is laid down as a second effect, so is it also set down as a
Transition to the second part of this Chapter, and an occasion of that
disputation following: more particularly note here.

1. The effect which is two fold. First they did Persecute. Secondly, they
sought to slay Christ.

2. The Reason of it.

Here, first mark the Inference how this is brought in upon the former. The
action of the man was good and commendable, viz. to Preach Christ, yet
therefore did they persecute Christ. Hence the Doctrine is wicked and
malicious, men may take occasion from good and commend able actions to bring to
pass many mischievous works, as is plain by Cain. Genesis 4.8. and 1. John
3.12. and Ismael. Genesis 21.9. et Gal 4.29. because Isaac was regenerate: and
thus did the Jews against the Prophets and Christ himself.

Reason is, because of the poisonous nature in wicked men, which like the
Spider turn the sweetest things into poison.

Use. Not to Censure the actions of men, though some evils and mischiefs are
raised thereupon by wicked men, but to consider the action whether it be good
and justifiable, and so the occasion only taken and not given.

1. They persecute Christ. The word is taken from Hunters, that pursue the
beast and suffer him not to be at rest, till he be taken. Which notably sets
forth the purpose of the Jews, that they would bring him before the High
Priest, and Rulers, and there accuse him, and condemn him. etc. The cause of
all this, is their own malice whetted on by superstition and ambition. Use is,
that we do look for the like, enduring the Cross, and despising the shame as
Christ did. etc.

2. They sought to slay Christ: note here, first the Extent of their rage in
this word Slay. Secondly the Restraint of it, in this word Sought.

Doctrine 1. Persecutors of Gods Ministers are satisfied with nothing but
blood, and so are they called blood suckers, and the metaphor of Hunters before
used, fitly shows this. So Ier. 38.4. 1. King. 19.2. Nothing would satisfy
the Jews, but to have Christ crucified.

Reason and ground of it is as an immortal hatred and insatiable desire of
blood, so also a secret fear that wicked men have, that they think themselves
not secure, till such be taken away.

Use is therefore, always to look for one trouble after another till we be
dead. So though much be past, yet still to prepare for more: until we come to
that rest, which remains for the children of God.

Doctrine 2. From the Restraint that they only sought, but did not effect it:
we learn that. Wicked men do not always prevail according to their desires
and intents: as here these Jews against Christ, nor Herod against Peter, as he
had against James, nor Iezabel against Eliah, nor the Jews that sought to kill
Paul.

Reason. For there is one that rules and directs all things, and has appointed
an hour, in which they shall be done: as John 7.30. cum Luke 22.53.

Use. This is a ground of great comfort and encouragement to the Godly, that
God will at length restrain and bridle the enemy, howsoever in his wisdom
for causes that he sees good he suffers them to prevail a while: this should
teach us to trust in God, to fear him only, and to be constant in our
profession.

The Reason is set down, because he had done these things on the Sabbath day:
which the Evangelist lays down not as if it were the true only reason
indeed, but as the reason which they pretended. Hereby showing, First their
superstition, that they stood so much upon the outward rites, that they
neglected the maine works of the Sabbath. Where we may see the nature of
superstition, that it is busied about shadows, letting go the substance: and
also the danger of it, making men eager persecutors of such as do allow of
their inventions. Secondly, their Hypocrisy that they did so severely reprove
a man for show of breaking the Sabbath; yet make no conscience themselves to
persecute and to seek to murder, and that without a cause, even upon the
Sabbath day, as it is probable. And thus also deal the Papists.

Ver. 17. Here note, First, the Generalle Christ's answer. Secondly, what kind
of answer this was. First, consider to whom Christ does make this Apology: it
was to such as were captiously and maliciously bent against him, to deprave the
honor of God in this good work done to this poor man. Nevertheless, in that
Christ vouchsafes an answer unto them, we learn: Though Christ meet with
wicked men. yet their malice could not make him leave his goodness. Now he
answers them here. First, in regard of God, that the Truth and work of God
might be justified. Secondly, in regard of his Disciples, and of this poor
man, who now began to believe in him: to strengthen their faith that they
should not be moved with the cauels of the adversaries. Thirdly, and of these
also, either to win them if it might be, or to make them the more inexcusable.

Use. That this mind be also in us, Phil. 2.5. to be good and kind, not only
to the kind, but to malicious and evil men. 2. Tim. 2.25. Romans 12.21. this is
a property of Christianity, nature teaches us the other.

In the Apology it self, consider we, first, the meaning of the words.

My Father] this is meant of the first Person, it being spoken in relation to
Christ. Wherefore he says [ my] worketh] that is, he sits not idly in the
Heavens, but he is busied and employed in governing and preserving all things.

Hitherto] from the beginning of the World, continually without intermission
upon every day, the Sabbath not excepted. For this is a reason, that therefore
works may be done upon the Sabbath day. That which might be objected, Genesis
2.2. is meant only of works of Creation.

And I worke] Here is a similitude, and a likeness implied: as he works
continually and is blameless, so I having the same authority, do work and am
blameless. Secondly, that I work with the Father, and the Father with me;
that which I do, the Father does; and what the Father does, I do.

So that here are contained two grounds of his defense.

1. The Authority of himself. 2 The condition of the work that he does.
From the former, the Argument is this: God the Father works every day, even
on the Sabbath; and is not to be blamed. But I am Gods Son, and have the same
authority with him; Therefore though I work upon the Sabbath day, I am not to
be blamed.

From the second, the Argument is this: Divine works may be lawfully done upon
the Sabbath day: But this is a Divine work, wherein the Father works, and I
with him. Ergo, it may be lawfully done on the Sabbath. We read in the Gospel
of diverse kinds of Apologies that Christ uses, taken some from one thing,
some from another. Here he uses an Apology only proper to himself, drawn
from great and high mysteries which he does partly to confirm his authority,
partly to confute the conceits of his adversaries: Because the poor man had
alleged his authority for what he did, and they cauelled against it
maliciously, saying, What man is this. Christ therefore does give them to
understand, that he is no man, but God, equal with the Father, and therefore of
sufficient authority to command him, and to justify what himself has done,
etc.

Observe here a great encouragement to stand to the truth, so far as it is
known unto, because God will still vouchsafe more illightening and
confirmation daily. So Christ does now reveal himself manifestly what he was
unto this poor man who before had stood for him.

2. This may be a warning to all captious and malicious men, though they may
for a while make fair glosses, yet in the end their madness will be known 2.
Tim. 3.9.

3. Further here note, how this answer is made of Christ to prevent an
objection that the Jews might urge, concerning Gods resting on the seventh day.

The sum of this apology is, a Demonstration of the equality between the
Father and the Son. The branches of it are two; First, what the Father does.
Secondly, Christ's likeness with him in that.

Of the First, there are two parts.

1. A description of the first Person, my Father. 2. A declaration of his
worke^ works.
In the Description we will show, First, how this relation of Father is taken
commonly. Secondly, how properly in regard, of Christ. For so the word my,
shows a kind of propriety and peculiarity.

It is taken commonly, 1. in reference to all creatures by virtue of creation.
So God is called the Father of the Rain. Job 38.28. 2. In reference to Angels:
Job 1.6. and that, first, in regard of the Image of God in which they were
created and still remain. Secondly, in regard of that special love manifested
to them, that God vouchsafes them to be always in his presence. 3. In
reference to men, besides the former respect of creation. First, in a civil
respect, in regard of their Office whatsoever their Quality be. So Magistrates
are called the Sons of God. Secondly, in a Spiritual respect; First, by
virtue of Adoption God having taken them to be his Sonnes^ Rom 8. Secondly, by
virtue of Regeneration, he having begotten us again to himselfe^ Ioh 1^12.13.

2. It is Proper to Christ in a double respect, First, in regard of eternal
generation, as he is God eternal of the same substance with the father. Heb.
1.5.6^ Ioh. 3 16. Secondly, As he is Mediator, God and Man, by reason of the
personal and hypostaticall union of the two Natures: Luke 1.32^35.

Uses to be made of this, are, First, That Christ being the natural and true
proper Son of God, hence it is, that we come to be the Sons of God. Ioh.
8.36. Ioh. 1.12. for whom Christ admits for his brethren, them will God admit
for his Sons.

2. This is the ground of Christ's Intercession; he is Gods Son, and the
Son of his love. If God give us his Son, he will give us all things with
him, he denies him nothing. Psalm. 2. 8. Romans 8.32^

3. Note here the honor of the Saints, that we are united and made one with
him, that is, the Son. So are the Saints called Christ 1. Cor. 12.12.

4. This sets forth the love of God, that he did not spare his only Son; and
also of Christ, that he would vouchsafe to be the Son of man.

5. This teaches us our duty, viz. to kiss the Son, to adore and worship him,
etc.

2. The second part was the Declaration of the work and Providence of God.

Doctrine. God who first made all things by his mighty Word, does still uphold,
govern and guide them by his wise and good providence: not like a Carpenter
that builds a house and leaves it: or like the Ostrich, that lays her eggs,
and leaves them in sand to be trodden of beasts: Job 39.36. but like a mother
that brings forth a child and nourishes it. This providence of God is proved.
First, by the names and titles given to God. For this cause God is caled
Jehovah; noting a presence still assistant, which name was not given him before
the seventh day after he had made all things; before he was called Elohim, a
mighty God. Genesis 2.4.

This name is compounded of the present, preterit, and future tence: as Revel.
1.4 in this regard are many names given unto Places; as Genesis 22.14. and 16.14.

2. By the effects of it: as in Job the 38.39.40.41. chapters* all which, and
the like are evident proofs of Gods providence.

If any object: That many good things hapen unto the wicked, and many evil
things unto the godly; and therefore shall deny the providence of God.

I answer: First, That the ground of this, and so of all other misorders is
sin. Secondly, that the seeming good things that come to the wicked are
indeed evil things and turn to their destruction. And those evil things that
come to the godly are indeed good to them, and turn to their benefit. Thirdly,
Many things in this world seem to fall out crosly, to the end that we might
look for that general judgment, when every thing shall be ordered according
to justice and right.

2. If it be objected that it does not beseem the Majesty of God to have
regard to small and base things!

I answer: The smallnes of such things does not so much debase his care and
providence as the infinite number of them does magnify his wonderful wisdom
and power in disposing of them.

The use in brief is, First, To refute all Atheists and Epicures. Secondly, to
teach us to look up unto him, to depend upon him, to cast our selves on him,
to look for a blessing from him, whatsoever the means be that we use, etc.

The Second point is, the likeness, Idenity, or Samenes, of the Son with the
father. Christ here proves that his power and authority is one and the same
with the fathers, because the effects of both are one and the same. The
Doctrine in general is, That

Christ is equal with the Father. This himself plainly expresses verse. 19.
and it is manifest in regard of the effects which are attributed to both
jointly, as Heb. 1.2. touching the creation; and to either of them; as the
creation of the world to the son. Ioh. 1.3. and redemption to the father. So
the sending of the holy Ghost to the Father; Ioh. 14.26. and to the Son; Ioh.
15.26. and 16.7. this equality is plainly expressed. Ioh. 1.1. and Philip. 2.6.

Use. 1. To refute all heretics denying him to be God.

2. It confirms the former uses, drawn from the title, Father; and it shows
that he is to be worshipped as God the Father. Heb. 1.6.

3. To strengthen our faith in the maine point of religion, viz. redemption by
Christ, that we may be fully persuaded of the infinity and all sufficiency of
his merits.

Consider now the maine End and Scope, for which Christ alleges this: he
does it, as we heard, to defend himself against the Pharisees, who excepted
against that work which he had done on the Sabbath. His defense is grounded,
First, on his own authority. Secondly, on the goodness of the work. God
works, says he, every day, on the Sabbath also, and is blameless. But I
have the same authority that God has: therefore I am not to be blamed.

Hence this Doctrine arises; First, from the proposition; that God cannot
break his Law. The Sabbath was not here violated, because in this act, God did
work with Christ. The grounds of it are,

1. God is Lord of his Law, and not tied unto it: for he gave it unto his
creatures, not to himself.

2. Gods will is the rule of goodness, of lawful and unlawful.

3. The absolute perfection and goodness of God, that he cannot go against
it, denying or thwarting himself.

Some objections are made against this, as Genesis 22. Where God commands Abraham
to kill his son. and Exodus 12. Where the Children of Israel are bidden to
borrow of the Egyptians Jewels, etc.

To these I answer: First. That these are not against the law: for the former
example, there was no fact done, nor any intent and purpose of a fact to be
done, but was only a trial. In the latter, the word which we read, borrowed,
signifies also to ask, or require. So that they asked of the Egyptians these
and these things; and the Egyptians gave them unto the Israelites freely: and
God did so extraordinarily work upon the hearts of the Egyptians, that they
gave them their chief things.

2. I answer. That God is Lord of life and death, to take life from man when he
will. And as he has power; so also he has right to do it. Now God forbids
the taking away of life, when we have right so to do; God therefore may
command any one to be the instrument of doing this. Secondly, So also had God
an absolute power over the goods of the Egyptians, to to dispose of them as he
pleased. Besides, consider the equity of this fact; First, equity did require,
in regard of that sore bondage wherein they held them, that they should make
them some recompense. Secondly the Egyptians enjoyed their labor; and this
deserved wages. Thirdly, They reaped much good by the Israelites, who builded
them cities, etc. And therefore it was just and equal, that they should be
rewarded.

Another Object* is out of Hosea 1.2. but to this I Answer: that it was but a
vision, and no fact: and the Prophet only declares unto the people, that thus
and thus was done in a vision: to set forth unto them their estate, what they
were like unto.

2. From the Inference, or conclusion, arises this Doctrine. That neither
Christ can break the Law of God; and that upon the same grounds, as the
former: so he is said to be the Lord of the Sabbath.

Use. 1 To show unto us, that whatsoever Christ did in subiecting of himself
to the Law, it was for our sakes. So Gal. 1.14. which is spoken in regard of a
voluntary submission, as a pledge and surety for us.

Object. But what if he had broken the Law, had he not been subject to
punishment as other men?

Answ. This is a supposition of an absolute impossibility and therefore not to
be made.

2. To teach us, that what God and Christ did by the absolute goodness and
perfection of their nature that we should endeavor to do, in being pliable to
his law, and subiecting our selves to it, because it is agreeable to his will.

Lastly, from the goodness of the work, that it was a Divine work, and so
Lawful. This Doctrine does arise: Works tending to the honor of God, are
proper to the Sabbath.

Verse 18. Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, not only because he
had broken the Sabbath, but said also, that God was his Father, making himself
equal with God.


IN this verse is laid down a violent opposition against the former Apolagies.
The branches of it are two; First, The manner of the opposition. Secondly, The
Causes.

In the manner, note, First, The Kind of this Oposition; they sought to Kill
him. Secondly, the Extent; the more. In the Kind, note this Doctrine, arising
from it: that the adversaries of the truth labor to suppress the truth, not
by force of argument, but by persecution. Thus did the old Jews with the
Prophets, casting them into Prison, and killing them, but yet not discovering
any error in their Preachings; as 2. Chron. 24.21. So dealt Herod with John
Baptist; and the Jews with the Apostle; Act. 4.16. So have Heathen men and
Heretics always done toward godly Martyrs; and so do Papists where they get
the upper hand.

Reason hereof is; First, The evidence of truth, which is such, that it cannot
by soundness of argument be refuted.

2. Obstinasy on the adversaries part, who will not be bea^en down.

This shows a difference between those that seek for truth in sincerity, and
such as are of a gaine-saying, and cauilling spirit. The one seeks the good of
their adversaries that they might know the truth as well as themselves, which
makes them to deal with all meekenes and gentleness; unless it be toward
such as are wilful, and obstinate in fundamental points of Religion; such
indeed are brought to punishment: but yet after many warnings, admonitions, and
exhortations. But the other aiming only at victory and conquest, use all
violence; and if not in deeds, yet in words; using all violent and and bitter
words, striving only to maintain a cause. As we see that Papists, Lutherans,
Anabaptists, etc. do in their writings: and generally the more men swerue from
the truth, the more they go from gentleness, growing in heat and choler, to be
bitter and violent.

The Extent is, in these words. The more.] why? because Christ had more
evidently mantained that which he did, and had now clearly manifested himself.

Doct. The more evidence is given to the truth by the defendors of it, the more
violent opposition is made against it by the enemies thereof. When Christ had
wrought that great miracle of raising up Lazarus. We see how the Jews
persecuted him; Ioh. 11.47, 48, 53.

But especially, when he rose again from the dead, how do they bestirre
themselves; by spreading abroad lies, by bribes, etc. Mat. 28.12, 13. This
makes Papists more to hate Protestants, then any other kinds of Religion
whatsoever; because of that clear light which they bring against their
Idolatry. And here note a further difference between a meek spirit and a
contradicting spirit; the one considers the force of argument, and if it be a
sure, a certain ground they yield unto it, albeit their Opinion were otherwise
before; as Peter Act. 10.28. the other only labor to maintain a cause.

The Causes are twofold: partly old matter; because he had broken the Sabbath,
which is not to be taken simply, but in reference to their conceit, who made
this a pretense. Partly new matter; because he made himself equal to God.

Thus these adversaries, though they have new matter yet, they let not go their
old hold. Even as the Papists that stilbring their old threadbare arguments,
besides their new devises.

The new matter that they conceit to have against him, is, that he blasphemed:
First, In that he made God his Father, Secondly in making himself equal to
God.

But before we come to their erroneous conceits, let us first observe some
sound and orthodoxall points, which the Jews gathered from the words of
Christ, whereby we shall see, how they understood his meaning aright. The

1. Is, That Christ did account God his own Proper Father (...), and not a
common Father, as he is to other creatures.

2. That he was equal with God. And so though they were malicious enemies of
Christ yet more truly did they observe and conceive his meaning, then many
heretics have done.

3. A third is this* That he that unjustly makes himself the son of God is
worthy of death. This is a sound collection and herein they go beyond the
Papists in tolerating the Pope, who makes himself God, taking unto him his
Titles, Attributes, and Authority.

All this serves to amplify and aggrauate their malice, that thus perceiving
his meaning, and not being able to charge him with untruth and collusion that
he had at any time used, yet notwithstanding they would without any further
trial, rashly accuse and condemn him of blasphemy, and seek to slay him.
Worse then Pilate, who hearing that Christ never said but truth, was afraid to
meddle with Christ, when he heard that he called himself the Son of God.
John 19.7.8.13.

Doctrine. Malice blinds men's eyes that they cannot search into the truth: but
makes them condemn at the first whatsoever they think will make against them.
As do the Papists.

Use, is to teach us not to condemn any thing without full trial.

Verse. 19. Then answered Jesus, and said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto
you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do:
For whatsoever things he does these also does the Son likewise.


IN this verse begins a confirmation of the former Apology, with the
Amplification of it unto the end of the chapter. The whole Sum of all, is to
show, that Christ is the true Son of God, equal with the Father. We may
observe in it three parts.

1. Certain Effects for the proof of it, from the 19. to the 31. verse.

2. Certain Testimonies to confirm it, from the 31. to the 40.

3. A reproof of the Incredulity of the Jews, from the 40. verse to the end.

The Effects whereby his Deity is proved are, First, Generally propounded.
Verse. 19. Secondly, Generally Repeated verse 30. And as they are generally
propounded, so are they particularly confirmed from the 21. verse to the 30.

The Effects verse. 19. are laid down, First, Negatiuely. Secondly,
Affirmatively. The sonn^ can do nothing without the father. And what the
father does, that does the son. But before we come to handle these points,
some general instructions are to be delivered out of the words before going.

1. In that Christ answered again, we learn, That Christ still continues in
his goodness, though his enemies were more and more incensed and enraged against
him.

Use is, as for our Imitation; so for our comfort, that if Christ be of so long
patience toward his enemies, how much toward them that love him, though they
offend often against him.

2. The Preface declares, First, the truth of the matter, Verily, verily.
Secondly, the authority of him that speaks it, I say unto you.

Verily, etc.] This shows, that it was not a matter that fell from him by
chance, but that it was such a truth he would staid to it; a truth whereof he
was sure and certain.

I say unto you.] a speech proper to Christ, who being the Son of God, might
avouch a thing upon his own authority. Furthermore, these shows Christ's
earnestness toward the good of these men And Secondly, that was a matter of
great weight and moment. Thirdly, that he was so far from shrinking from the
truth, because of their opposition, that he is the more earnest in standing
for it. Which should teach us to do the like.

Now come we to the meaning of the words^

The Sonne] the second Person in Trinity, etc.

Of himselfe] alone without his father, as separate from him, having no
communication with him.

Can do nothing] this implies not any restraint, or inability, but an absolute
necessity and impossibility that the Son should do any thing, which the Father
does not. So that this Implies a union in nature, and Essence; because though
both have ability of themselves, yet neither can do any thing without the
other. Whereas in nature, things therefore cannot work one without the other,
because they have not ability in themselves, without the help of one another.

But what he sees, etc.] This is spoken according to the capacity of the
Jews, it implies a taking of council together, as Ioh. 1.18. Genesis 1.26. nor
is it a word of speculation of Efficacy, implying a communication of knowledge.

For whatsoever things, etc.] Here are three points

1. The Son does not only nothing alone without the Father, but does jointly
with the Father what the Father does.

2. That this communication is not in some things, but in all things.

3. That as the Son does the same things, so he does them after the same
manner, by the same authority, to the same end etc. [(...), likewise.]

So that here in this 19. Ve. is contained a proof of the equality of the Son
with the Father, because the joint effects of both are one and the same.

The mystery and maine point here to be noted is,

That Christ is true God of the same essence with the Father, and every way
equal unto him. Because, First, he can do nothing of himself without the
Father, but as he does all things originally from the Father, so he does them
jointly with him. Secondly, yea he can do nothing: implying a necessity and
impossibility. Thirdly, because he is in the bosom of the Father. Seeing [ save
what he seeth] the councels of his father and communicating him, which none but
Christ has done. Fourthly, again what the Father does, that he cannot but do.
Fifthly, because this concurrence is in all things. Sixthly and lastly, he does
every thing after the same manner with the Father. All these show an Identity,
Samenes and Equality, between Christ and God the Father. Some illustrate this
by examples, as if a thing burn, and cannot choose but burn, and burn
always, we say, that it is fire: so Christ, doing divine works, and the same
with his Father, and that he cannot but do them, and does them after the same
manner that his Father does, he must needs be God. Some Heretic have
objected against this place, that Christ does these things by imitation; and
this they say is, meant by [ seeing and showing.]

Answer. It is false, because he does these things by the same authority and
power, that the Father, having life and power in himself, as verse. 26. and
because he does them after the same manner that the Father does.

As touching the Phrases of seeing on the Sons part, and showing on the
Fathers part: these are spoken, First, in regard of our conceit. Secondly, to
show the distinction between the Persons; the Father being the Fountain of
the deity, shows; and the Son, the second person, is said to see.

3. This may be interpreted of the humane Nature of Christ.

Use. 1. Seeing Christ proves his equality with the Father, in regard of the
effects common to both, we must learn to account of all things done and spoken
by Christ, as done and spoken by God the Father; and so to give credence,
reverence, and obedience accordingly to the same.

2. As to account of the doing of Christ, as done by God, so likewise when we
behold the works of God the Father; as the frame of the World, and the things
therein and do consider in them the glory and Majesty of God; to consider also
in, and by them, the glory and excellent Majesty of Christ: and in this we go
beyond the Jews, Turks and Heathen, who in the creatures ca^ behold the
Majesty, of God the Father only.

3. In the works of redemption, which set forth the love, mercy, and goodness
of Christ toward us to observe the love and mercy of God.

4. That what Christ does by Necessity, though not of compulsion, but of nature
and essence, we should endeavor to do, striving ^o do ^he will of God, and to do
nothing but what we have a warrant for out of the revealed will of God. So like
wise to be like to him in all things, viz. in kindness, in goodness, in honesse,
and such like virtues, which are laid down in the Word, as a rule for us to
walk by, and wherein he has set himself forth as a pattern for us to
follow. For a ground of this, note that prayer of Christ, Ioh. 17.21. we are
all one] not in essence, but mistically having the same Spirit. Wherefore we
should labor as truly to initate God as Christ though not as equally. And as
Christ did his essential union by effects equal with those of his Father, so
we to show our spiritual union by like effects.

Verse 20. For the Father loves the Son and shows him all things that
himself does, --


IN these words are laid down the Causes of the former effects; they are
twofold. First, Partly the Love of the Father Secondly, Partly that the Father
does communicate all things to the Son.

The Father loves the Son.] This is here expressed by a kind of propriety,
(...), he loves him alone, none like him, him in, and for himself, vid. Col.
1.13. Ephesians. 1.6. Matthew. 3.17. (...), a word that signifies one, that only,
and wholly beloved.

Reason of this is not grace and favor, but Nature, because Christ is his
Son: as earthly men do love their children, because they come from
themselves, and are of their substance. vid. Pro. 8.30. Heb. 1.2. Now according
to the greatness of the persons loving and loved, so is the love, viz. every
way infinite, the like whereof is not in the World to be found. So that Christ
is he in whom is the beginning of Gods love, and on whom it does rest, and
from whom it is conveyed to all other. This, first, does greatly amplify the
love of God, that he would give the Son of his love to us: and of Christ,
that being his Fathers delight, he would come from his bosom for our sakes.
How great a love were it for a King to give his only son for a poor
Captive. This thing was so highly accepted of God in Abraham, that he did not
spare his only son, that it was an occasion why God did swear so to bless
his posterity: Genesis 22.16, 17.

2. This is a maine ground to strengthen our faith, in the intercession of
Christ, to come unto the Throne of Grace with confidence and boldness. For is
Christ the Son of Gods love? and will he then deny us any thing that we shall
ask in his Name? And for this cause we ought to hold us close to Christ, and
to stick wholly to him.

Further, this love must be considered not only as a thing proper to Christ,
but also as an evidence of Gods love unto us, that we may gather from hence,
that we are loved. For Christ having united us unto himself, we may be
assured, that God who so greatly loves the Head, will also love the Members:
Ioh. 17.23. And this is meant, Matthew. 3.17. God is well pleased in Christ, not
only with him, but with whomsoever he beholds in him; as Ephesians. 1.6. so that
none are loved but in Christ, and all in Christ are loved.

So much for this first Cause, simply considered in himself: Now we come to
consider it in the reference thereof, viz. as it is to show the ground of that
power, authority, dignity, excellency, and equality which Christ has with
his Father. Whence we learn, that Christ did not usurp these things, bu^ God
did freely and willingly bestow them on him.

Use. 1. Further to strengthen ou^ confidence in him, to repose our selves upon
his redemption, mediation, etc. Secondly, it serves for the terror of those,
that oppose themselves against this dignity and equality of Christ: for they
provoke God, and are fighters against him, who has in love communicated these
things to Christ. Thus did the Jews, because they would have none to be equal
to God, oppose against the authority of Christ: and this likewise is spoken to
aggranate their malice.

The second Cause whereby it comes to pass, that Christ does the same works
with his Father, is, because the Father shows him all things. Which is not to
be taken for a bare relation, or an instruction; or that the Father does them
only in the presence of the Son, as one man may do a thing in presence of
another; or that he sets them before him, as in a Map or Table: but for a
communication that the Son does participate of the Wisdom, Power, and
whatsoever else the Father has, together with his Essence. Secondly, that the
Father does so set forth himself in his Son, that he may be seen in him*
and who so knows the Son, may know the Father, as Ioh. 14.9. And this is a
further argument to prove the equality, because God co^municates all things to
him.

Use. 1. It shows unto us, how the unsearchable mysteries, and depth of Gods
wisdom come to our knowledge, and to be revealed unto us. God has
communicated them to Christ, and Christ has declared them to us. See Revel.
5.5. etc. And this shows a reason of that phrase, that Christ is called the
Word, because he has uttered the will of his Father, and has declared the
secret Councels of God, Therefore are we to hear him, Matthew. 17.5. as the old
World was to hearken unto him, speaking by his Prophets, and the Jews to
himself when he was on earth, and the Church afterward when he spoke by his
Apostles; so are we now to hearken to him speaking in his Ministers, who
declare to us the will of God. So much for these causes considered severally in
themselves.

Now consider them jointly, as, the love of the Father is made the ground of
communicating all things to the Son. Whence observe, that

1. All that Christ has from his Father, it come from love, then how much more
does all that which is in us come of love.

2. According to the love that the Father did bear unto the Son, accordingly
did he bestow the Spirit: Ioh. 3.34. also dignity and honor upon him.

Use. So likewise learn we by Grace to judge of Gods love toward us, if we
find that we are regenerated and sanctified, to be persuaded of Gods love. And
further, by the measure of grace, to hope for the measure of glory: for the
more grace we have, the more God loves us; the greater is his love, the
greater will be our glory.

3. It is a fruit and token of love, to envy no skill, knowledge, dignity,
honor, etc. but to be ready to communicate all things. So says Christ to his
Disciples; You are my friends, I have showed you all things. And herein
especially is that saying true, Among friends all things are common. And this
may be a trial for Parents if they love their children, for Schoolemasters if
they love their scholars, and for all friends if they love one another.

Verse. 20. -- and he will show him greater works then these, that ye may
marvel.


NOw we come to consider the particular evidences of this equality: but before
we come to speak of them, we must consider the transition from the former
general points unto those that follow, here laid down by Christ in these
words. Which is done, first, to prevent a secret objection which the Jews
might make: For it is so, that what the Father does, thou do; and what thou
do, the Father does; can the Father then do no more, then that which thou
have done, ^iz. to cure the sick, give sight to the blind? etc. Christ
answers; God can do more: these are but small evidences of his almighty
power, but he will manifest unto his Son greater works, whereby it shall be
declared, that he is the Son of God. Secondly, to stir up attention,
because the things which Christ had yet done, were lightly esteemed, and
opposed against, now therefore God would show such great works, that their
hearts should be amazed and astonished at.

In this transition are two points; first, the extent of Christ's power [
greater works.] Secondly, the event of it, [ they should marvel.]

For the former, it has reference to the miracles which Christ had before time
done. Whence the Doctrine is, that Christ's miracles which he did, were but
evidences of a far greater, and more almighty power; as his miracles of
healing the sick, of power to cure our sins, of restoring sight to the
blind, of power to illighten our minds, of casting out of devils, of his power
of subduing the Devil, and delivering us from his bondage, and the like. And
this use ought we to make in reading the miracles of Christ.

2. Ye should marvel. Ye, mine enemies.

Doct. Such is the evidence of Christ's power, that it makes all astonished: as
we may read at the working of most of his miracles, and at his resurrection,
how greatly the Jews were astonished. And at the day of Judgment, all such as
have opposed against him, shall tremble and quake. Now this astonishment at the
power of Christ is, that wherein we must rest, it being an argument rather of
Christ's power, then of our faith in him. But we must consider the end of this
power, for which it was given him, viz. that he has it for our good, that he
might save us; and then his power will be a ground of our faith, to make us to
shroud our selves under him.

Verse 21. For as the Father rayseth up the dead, and quickens them: even so
the Son quickens whom he will.


THe Particular evidences for the proof of the equality between Christ and
God the Father, are, 1. The Power of quickening in this verse. 2. The Right and
Authority of Judging: verse. 22.


Rayseth and quickens.] To phrases, implying one thing, as appears in the
other cause, where but one is expressed, yet not in vain is that of quickening
added. For first, it shows, that they were dead, and so unable to help
themselves. Secondly, that he rayseth them not as stocks and stones, but with
the raising puts life into them; which amplifies the benefits. Some take this
raising of the dead to be meant of Christ's miracles, in raising of the dead,
but that is to much to restrain it only to that: wherefore hereby is implied,
first, a Spiritual quickening from the death of Sin, at our conversion.
Secondly, a corporal quickening, the raising of our bodies out of the graves
at the last Day; now if we will refer the miracles of Christ unto this, as
evidences and proofs of what he was able to do at the last Day.

Even so, etc.] Herein is the equality: as the Father does raise up the dead so
does the Son.

Whom he will.] This is not spoken to put a difference, that the Father does
quicken some whom he will, and the Son others whom he will; but is added as a
joint work to both; not restrained to the Son, but only applied to him; and
this, First, because the Jews doubted not concerning the Father, but confessed
that he was able to raise up whom he would.

Wherefore this shows, first, that there was no compulsiue necessity in Christ
to do, as the Father does, but a mere freewill. Secondly, as there is a unity
in Nature between them; so is there likewise in Will. Thirdly, that the Son
has a power to quicken whom he will, and whom he lets he dead in sin.
Fourthly, that this quickening is of Grace.

5. That this is a happy quickening here meant, belonging to those that he will
show grace unto. So it is not simply to be taken for the raising from the
grave, but for a raising to life everlasting. Such a raising as we believe in
the Creed.

The point then is, that the Work of the Father and the Son in quickening, is
one and the same: 1. Ioh. 5.11.

Whence are two evidences to prove the equality: First, He that quickens the
dead, is equal to God the Father in power. But Christ quickens the dead;
Therefore, etc. Secondly, The Son does this of his freewill; so also is he
equal to the Father.

Consider in the words two points; first, the effect: Secondly, the ground of
the Effect.

The effect is quickening of the dead, which is here brought in, ^s one of
those greater works which the Father will show unto the Son, hence note, the

Doct. Quickening of the dead is one of the greatest evidences of divine power:
greater then that of Creation. Thus the Apostle when he would set forth the
great power of God, he alleges this: Romans 4.17. Ephesians. 1.19.20. Romans 1.4. a
work so great, that of natural men it cannot be conceived and believed: Act
17.18. yea it was hard for the Disciples to believe it: as Thomas. Io. 20 25.

And as this Resurrection from the grave, so is our Quickening from sin, an
evidence of the power of God. And for this cause, the means of quickening is
called, The power of God: Romans 1.16. 1. Cor. 2.5. For we are dead in sins.

Use. 1. We see how needful it is to meditate on the power of Christ, to
strengthen our Faith, in regard of the Resurrection.

2. That seeing our raising from sin, is one of the great evidences of Gods
almighty power, it confutes the Pelagians, that say, a man may raise himself:
and Semipelagians that say, a man is but sick, and being helped by a little
grace, he works out his salvation himself. And lastly, all carnal
Gospellers, that think they can turn from their sins when they will, and
lead a spiritual life.

2. The ground of this effect, is the will of God. Hence we learn, that

Doct. Christ as Mediator has an absolute power of life and death, to pull
whom he will out of this jaws of death, and to suffer whom he will to perish:
Ioh. 10.18. Revel. 1.18.

Use. For consolation of those that believe in Christ, that if here we have
evidence of grace, we may be assured to be raised up again to life. For if
the Spirit of Christ be in us, it will raise us up a^ the last day, as the
Apostle ^^ith. For regeneration is but the first fruits of eternal life. See
Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6.

Verse. 22. For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to
the Son.


IN this Verse is laid down a second particular evidence, and proof of the
equality of Christ with God the Father: the Argument is this: He that has
all power, all government, and all judgment committed unto him, is equal to
the Father. But Christ has all these, etc. Therefore he is equal to his
Father.

Also this is set down as a reason of the former argument, Verse. 21. For
Christ may quicken whom he will, because (as it is in this Verse) he is the
supreme Lord that guides and gouernes all things.

For the meaning of the words, note the phrases of [ Judges, Judgment:]
iudgings and judgment are not to be taken (only) concerning the last
Judgment, but concerning the supreme disposition and government of all things
in the world: as appears by the word [ all judgment.]

Judges no man] That is, by himself alone, but in, and by the Son.

Has committed] That is, the Father does communicate to the Son this Office,
and has taken him into his fellowship in the government of the World: not that
the Father does sit idly in Heaven, but that in, and by his Son, he does
govern all things.

The Doctrine that hence naturally arises, is, that Christ is the supreme
Lord and Governor of all, Matthew. 28.18. Mat. 11.27. Heb. 1.2. Which is to be
understood of Christ as he is Mediator, as we shall see, Verse. 27.

Objections against this, are, first, that usually judgment is attributed to
God.

Answ. Christ here is not excluded, but it is to be taken of the whole Trinity.

Object. 2. out of Ioh, 8.15,

Answ. Christ here is not excluded, but it is to be taken of the whole Trinity.

2. Object. out of Ioh 8.15.

Answ. That is not to be exclusiuely, but that there is one that does judge,
namely, the Father, yet he does it in and by his Son. It is there spoken of
the Father for the greater terror of the Jews.

3. Object. out of Ioh. 8.15. where it seems that there is a plain
contradiction.

Ans. That is spoken of Christ his present action and carriage not of his power
and right of judging, as appears by verse. 16. [ for himself did teach and
instruct them.]

2. It is spoken in opposition to the Pharisees that were rash in censuring
others.

Use, 1. It teaches us how to account of Christ not only as of a Savior from
whom we look for good, but also as a supreme Lord, and so to fear and
reverence and to be afraid to displease him as Ps. 2. and not to make him a
packhorse for our sins, because he is a Savior.

2. It is for our consolation, that this our Savior is Judge. Who then shall
lay any thing to our charge?

3. It is for terror of those that oppose themselves against Christ. As Jews,
and Turks, and such as persecute his members: for they persecute him that is
their Judge.

4. That all men should honor the Son, as in the verse following.

Verse 23. That all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father;
he that honoreth not the Son honoreth not the Father which has sent him.


THis verse contains an Amplification of the former Effects by the end of
them, wherein consider.

1. The end it self, which is a duty of Honor to be performed.

2. The manner of performing it.

3. The motives to urge and presseit.

In the duty consider, 1. the thing it self, 2. the extent. The thing it self
is honor: which is a general word comprising under it all those duties, which
we owe to Christ, as it is usual to comprehend the duties of inferiors to
superior in this word Honor, as the fifth Commandment.

Doct. Honor is due to our Lord Christ Jesus: Psalm. 2. last. For kissing was a
token of subjection. Heb. 1.6. so we read that Christ was often worshipped, as
by the wise men, Mat. 2. by the leper Mat. 8. and by his disciples.

Reason, because Christ though he did abase himself, yet he still remained God
and lost none of ^is exc^llency therefore we are still to honor him.

Use, That it is not sufficient to abstain from rebellion, and from
dishonouring and despiting of Christ but we must reverence and honor him, for
the omitting of a holy duty makes us liable to the judgment of God, as
appears in the last sentence of Christ. Wherefore it is not sufficient to say
we are no Arrians, nor Jews to deny Christ, nor Papists to confound his
offices? but where is the faith in him? how do thou reverence and fear him?
etc.

2. Point, is the Extent, in this word (all)

Doct. All of what state and condition soever are bound to this duty of
honoring Christ: the Angels, Psalm. and Heb. 1.6.

Reason is Phil. 2.9. he has a name above every name, and so every knee must
bow to him.

The manner of performing this duty is in these words (as they honor the
Father) which shows the measure of that honor which we must do unto the
Son, for the (...) implies not only a similitude and likeness, as some
Heretics would put it off, but also an equality implying such an honor as is
due to no creature but only to God.

Doct. So high and great honor as is due to the father, in that measure is it
due to the Son as appears by many places Jude verse 25. in the salutation of
Paul in his Epistles where he is joined with the Father, and has the Church
done in giving glory to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, etc. joining all
together.

Reason of this is the equality between them, and this is also another argument
(the sixth) to prove that same equality, because the same honor is given to
Christ, that is given to God the Father; Esaias. 42.8.

Note this against Turks, that account Christ to be a great Prophet, and
Arrians that count him to be a God, but an inferior, and created God.

The Motives to urge this duty are in these words [ He that honors not,
etc.] Where consider, first, the Reason; secondly, the Amplification.

The Reason is [ He that honors not the Son, honors not the Father] which
is laid down, First, as a strong reason, because this honor is not only, in
regard of a high account that he has of his Son, as a King counts himself
honored, when his son is honored, or in regard of a dear affection that he
bears to him, or in regard of place and representation of the person of the
Father, the King is honored when his Ambassador is honored, but also in
regard of an identity and samenesse, that the Father cannot be honored but by
the Son.

2. It is set down to prevent an objection that might be made, that this
honor was derogatory to the Father. Christ's answers, Th^re is no such
consequence, but that the Father is honored in this, and not dishonored.

Doct. The Father is honored in, and by the Son. Phil. 2.11 Thus God is to
be praised by Christ; Heb. 13.15. Ephesians. 5.20. so are the Prayers of the Church
concluded all in the name of Christ.

Use. 1. it shows, that many deceive themselves in the worshipping of God: for
th^ugh all think that God is to be honou^ed, yet not knowing Christ, they
worship not him, but their own conceits.

2. It teaches us, to behold all the attributes of God in Christ.

The Amplification is in these words [ Who has sent him.] This may seem to
cross all that has been formerly said. For an Ambassador is inferior in
honor to a King that sent him.

Answ. The Phrase of sending does not always implie an infe^iority.

It is here used in a threefold respect; first of distinction of the Persons in
the Trinity: So the second may be said to be sent of the first: and so the
Holy Ghost, though he never abased himself, nor were incarnate, is yet said to
be sent by the Father and the Son: Ioh. 14.26. et 15.26.

2. Of Christ's incarnation, that though he became man, yet was he Lord of
Heaven and Earth, and sent from God. So it implies an honor and dignity.

3. Of the Offices of Christ, as he is Mediator in a twofold respect; first,
that no Office that Christ had, but it was appointed and ordained of God: Luke
1.69. God is said to raise up a salvation. Secondly, as these Offices were
appointed to Christ; so was he deputed to them: Heb. 5.4, 5.

This Phrase then amplifies the reason, and shows, that this equal right of
honor to him, as to the Father, is no usurpation, but a natural communication,
and voluntary dispensation.

Doct. Christ usurped not that honor, to be equal in dignity to his Father:
Psalm. 110. 1. Act. 2.36.

Use. 1. Of comfort, that the things that Christ did, are acceptable to the
Father for us.

2. It shows the sin to be the greater, in dishonouring the Son.

3. Here we have a good ground why we perform divine worship to Christ. Why
do not the Papists bring the like for worshipping of Saints.

Verse. 24. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my Word, and
believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but has passed from death to life.


CHrist having in the former verse laid down the ends of the particular
evidences of his Deity, proceeds again in this verse and follows to a
further amplification of them: more powerfully, plainly, and distinctly; to
urge and press them. The former, as we have heard, was the Power of
quickening. In the amplification whereof there are three parts.

1. Who are quickened in this verse 24.

2. By what Means they come to be quickened, 12.

The voice of Christ, verse 25.

3. The Ground of this quickening power that is in Christ; verse 26.

The second effect was the Power of Judging: whereof we shall speak, verse
27. and follows.

Verse 24^ Touching the occasion of these words, and dependence of them on the
former, it may be considered in two respects:

1. We heard, verse. 22. that the Son quickens whom he will: hereby
implying, that every Son of Adam is not quickened, but those only to whom he
shows favor. Now who they be, is here expressed in this verse, viz. such as
hear his Word, and believe in God.

2. Verse 23. was showed that there is an honor due to Christ; now he shows
what it is, viz. to believe in him, etc.

Hence we learn.

Doct. 1. That they only, which do hear the Word of Christ, and do believe
in God the Father, do partake of the the quickening power of Christ. For this
hearing and believing, is a beginning of our quickening, and raising from
death: so that from hence we may gather an evidence, and assurance, whether
this quickening power of Christ do belong to us, and whether we be of the
number whom Christ will ray^e up unto life eternal, yea or no.

Doct. 2. That the honor, which is due unto Christ, is to hearken to him in
his Word, and to believe in him.

This is all that is required of us: Deuteronomy. 18.15. Mat. 17.5. Ioh. 3.16. viz. to
believe.

Use is, first, to stir us up to honor Christ by this means: even as
subjects, if they see their King to count himself honored by such and such
things, they will endeavor to do them.

2. To reprove them that will honor God after their own conceits, as Saul, 1.
Sa, 15.22. or after the traditions of men as Mat. 15.9. or by outward pomps and
solemnities as the Papists, which are but toys to the excellent majesty of
Christ. So much for the dependence.

The words themselves contain in general a description of such as are raised
up by Christ. The parts are,

1. A Preface, Verily, etc.] of which has been spoken before, only here it is
added to move us to attend unto the matter delivered as a point to be much
regarded and observed.

2. A promise wherein observe first, the Parties to whom it is made. Secondly,
the promise it self [ has everlasting life, etc.

The Parties are described by their actions: first, [ he that heareth] Secondly
[ and beleeneth] these actions are both of them amplified by their objects
first [ my word] secondly [ him that sent me.

The first action, [ he that heareth] which is laid down both as a cause of
the latter viz. of believing, and as a means to attain to life everlasting.
Whence we learn.

Doct. That the means to attain to true faith and to eternal life, is the
hearing of the Word. Romans 10.14, 15, 17. Ephesians. 1.13. Act. 15.7. that faith
follows hearing the Word. Now eternal life is a consequent of faith as Esa.
55.3. 1. Ti. 4.16. hence the word is called the word of salvation. Act. 13.26.
Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 1.16. yea salvation it self Heb^ 2.3.

Reason. First hearing is a cause of knowledge, now knowledge and illumination
are a ground of Faith. Secondly, by hearing, is the Spirit conuayed unto us; by
which Spirit, Faith is wrought in us: by faith we are united to Christ; and
being united to him, we have a right and title to heaven. So the Word is called
the ministry of the Spirit. 2. Cor. 3.6. Gal. 3.2.

Use. 1, For Ministers that they be faithful, diligent, and conscionable in
preaching of the Word: for it there be no preaching, there can be no hearing:
Romans 10.14. a point of exceeding great moment because idle and idol pastors
do shut up the kingdom of heaven against the people, and cause them to lie in
sin and incredulity, so becoming guilty of their blood: 1. Cor 9.16.

2. For the people to stir them up to diligence to hearken and attend unto
this Word when it is preached, etc.

The object of hearing is here said, to be the Word of Christ. Whence we learn;

Doct. That it is not every word which is able to work faith in us, but only
the Word of the Son of God. The Gospel my Word] as opposed to the words of
men, and their traditions. Ioh. 6.63. Romans 1, 9. Ioh. 1.18, and 14.6.

The law cannot do this; for that is the letter that kills, and it is the
ministry of death: 2. Cor. 3.6.7. and much less then the words of men, and
their traditions.

Use is to teach us, that as we be diligent to hear, so we be careful to
know what we hear.

The second Action, is to believe. Though hearing be a thing necessary, and a
good groundwork and beginning, yet it is not sufficient, but we must further
believe in the truth, declared by the Gospel.

Doct. It is not sufficient to hear the Word only, but Faith must be added to
our hearing: Hebr. 3.2. Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 1.16.

For the Word does but only offer grace. Now what good is it to have a
Benefice offered only, if it be not received: but this is done by Faith: Act.
13.48.

Use. As before we were exhorted to hear, so here we are directed how to
hear, viz. not to content our selves with a bare and naked hearing, or that we
do understand the Preacher, and know the mysteries of the Scripture, but to
apply the Word and Promises to our selves.

The Object of this action is described in these words [ him that sent me]
which is a description of God the Father, and implies a relation between the
Father and the Son: as if he had said, In him of whom I am, who has given me
unto the World, etc.

Doct. God as he is the Father of Christ Jesus, is the only object of our
Faith; and therefore he says not [and believes in God] simply, but in him
that sent me. And therefore we must come unto God in Christ, and do
whatsoever we do in, and through him: Heb. 13.15.

No creature can be the object of our Faith, on which we may rest, because it
is not able to protect us from Gods wrath. Neither is God himself, as he has
immediately to do with us, for so he is most strict in justice, and as a
consuming fire, before which we are but stubble. Only as he is well pleased in
Christ, and in him manifests his grace and favor, may approach unto him with
confidence.

Use. It shows the vanity of the most part of the World, that either know not
Christ, or deny him, as the Jews; and so dare to come unto him in great
justice. So much of the Parties.

The Promise is declared, first, affirmatively [ has everlasting life.]
Secondly, negatiuely, and shall not, etc.

Doct. The fruit of that honor which we perform to Christ Jesus, is eternal
life: Ioh. 10.27, 28. 1. Pet. 1.3, 4. which is not in regard of any desert of
the works, but of Gods free grace, who sets down this reward to encourage us,
and to magnify his own mercy.

Which shows his fatherly tenderness toward us, that whereas we are bound to
do no less, and he might absolutely command us; yet he rather chooses to
draw us on by the hope of reward.

Use. To be stirred up to the performance of these duties, both in regard of
thankfulness to God, and in respect of our own good.

This is now further amplified by the contrary, [ and shall not come into
condemnation, etc.] Which imply in effect the same things that the former; yet
they are added not in vain, but for the further confirmation and strengthening
of our Faith in a matter of such weight, and for the answering of all
objections that might be brought.

Wherefore this shows a double benefit: First, we shall have life. Secondly,
we shall be delivered from death. And further it notes a difference between
that happiness wherein man was first made, and that whereunto we are brought
by Christ. Adam was created happy and immortal: but withal there was a
possibility to fall. But we not only have immortality and life, but also such
a firmness and stability, as we shall not come into death.

[ Has passed from death to life.] Some take the meaning to be thus, that the
believer when he dies goes unto Heaven; which is a good sense, and
comfortable: but rather we are to understand it thus, viz. that by death is
meant, the subjection of us all to eternal condemnation. But now so soon as
we believe the Obligation and Band is cancelled, and we having Faith, have
our acquittance, and are set free.

Doct^ Faith brings with it a discharge from condemnation, Romans 8.1.

Which is to be noted as a special comfort of our consciences against the
terror of sin, and horror of condemnation.

Doct. 2. No middle between damnation and salvation: he that is freed from the
one, is sure of the other. [ Has passed from death to life.] This appears in
the Parable of Lazarus and the rich Man: and in the sentence of the last
Judgment: as is plain by reason, because there are but two sorts of people,
the one in Christ, the other out of Christ, etc. Which must note against the
Papists conceits of Limbus Patru^, Limbus Infantum, and Purgatory: which as it
is derogatory to the blood of Christ, 1. Ioh. 1.7. so is it a doctrine very
uncomfortable, and that which does add a sting unto death: also it is a cause
of much injustice, when Parents will give away their lands from their children
to Monks, etc. to sing for their souls.

Now concerning the phrase, has eternal life, and has passed, etc. it
implies the certainty of these promises. Yet a question will be made, in what
respect we may be said so soon as we believe to have eternal life?

Answ. It is, first in regard of hope.

2. Because we have the beginnings, and first fruits of it, viz. we are taken
into the Kingdom of grace, which is the beginning of the Kingdom of glory.

3. In regard of our union with Christ our Head, and now glorified. Now we
being members of that body, whereof the head and principal part is raised up,
and in possession of eternal life, we may be said also, as Ephesians. 2.6.

Doct. The true believer is, and may be sure of his eternal salvation. Which
is to be noted against our adversaries the Papists. Secondly, as a comfort to
uphold us in time of trouble.

Verse. 25. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
shall live.


IN these words is laid down the second general point, viz. the means
whereby they are quickened. The parts are two.

1. A Preface, [ Verily, etc.] which words are here the third time laid down.
Now we may not think, that Christ used in vain these strong asseuerations,
but that he does this to strengthen our Faith, to rouse up our dullness, and
to aggrauate the incredulity of those, that yet notwithstanding all this will
not believe.

2. A Promise: wherein consider,

1. The time of accomplishing of it, [ the hour commeth] viz. of Christ's
death, resurrection, and glorification; for then he drew all men unto him, and
then was the Gospel published abroad. Yet this hour was now begun, because
that Christ was now exhibited. Now this time is called an hour, because it is
a set and certain period which God has appointed, and in which these things
should be fulfilled.

Doct. The time of the Gospel is the time of salvation: for Christ here
speaks of the time of the Gospel: 2. Cor. 6.2.

2. The parties on whom this work is to be wrought, viz. the Dead, that is,
all natural men; especially meant of the Gentiles, who before this time were
Alians from the Commonwealth of Israel, etc.

Doct. The state of natural men, is the state of dead men: Ephesians. 2. there is
in them by nature no jot, or dram of spiritual life. Which note,

1. Against heretics that have so much magnified Nature, as the Pelagians.

2. That we may take notice of the wretchedness, and vileness of our nature
wherein we are borne.

3. To show, that the work of our conversation is a powerful work and
divine. And for this cause we are not to marvel, that the shrill sound of the
voice of the Gospel do not pierce unto the heart of many men; for why? they
are dead,

3. The means whereby it is wrought, viz. the voice of Christ, not only of
himself whilst he was here living upon the earth, but especially is it to be
taken for that power, which by his Spirit he gives unto the Word preached. And
therefore though Ministers do preach, and may be said to convert; yet properly
it is the powerful voice of Christ speaking in them, that works upon the
heart.

Verse. 28. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in which all that are
in the graves shall hear his voice.


IN this Verse is contained, first, a Reproof of the incredulity of the Jews,
[ Marvel not]: for they took Christ for no other then an ordinary man, and
therefore did not believe that which he had spoken, Verse. 26, 27. of his power
and authority; but wondered much that he should say such things of himself.
There is an holy admiration without doubting, as when we admire the great
works of God, whereof yet we make no doubt: but so to wonder, as to call in
question any truth of God, to think it impossible, because we apprehend not
the reason of it; this is a fault, and here reproved. For hereby we do
impeach the power of God, and bring it to our own reason.

2. A further proof and confirmation of the point in question, viz. the power
and authority of Christ. The proof is drawn from the effect, namely, the
raising up of the Dead. So that in brief, it contains a description of the
Resurrection: wherein observe.

1. The Time. 2. The Parties. 3. The Cause.
1. In the Time note, first, that it is a set time and period appointed by God
[ the houre], which time we are with patience to wait for. Secondly, it
comes; it shall not be prevented, not ouerpassed, but shall certainly come.
Which, first, is against all deniers of the Resurrection. Secondly, it is for
our comfort at the time of death, as also in regard of our friends departed.
And lastly, it serves to encourage us to go on in our Christian course: 1.
Cor. 15. last verse.

2. The Parties are described.

1. By their place of abode: all that are in their graves: that is by a
Synecdoche of one kind for all the rest, by what manner of death so ever they
died, and howsoever they were consumed. This implies; That the consumption of
our bodies shall not hinder the resurrection; because the ground of it is the
power of Christ, in regard of which there is no difference.

This serves for an encouragement against the diverse kinds of death whereunto
we may come: as it was to the Martyrs: Heb. 11.30.

2. By their generality, [ All] none, no not one shall be forgotten in the
grave: as appears by the Parable of the Net that gathers of all kinds:
Matthew. 13.47. Which is for the comfort of those which in this world have been
forgotten, none has taken notice of them, these at the resurrection, Christ
will not forget. Secondly, it is for the terror of the wicked, that none of
them shall escape. Thirdly, it teaches us to prepare our selves so in this
life, that we may rise unto joy and glory.

3. The cause of the resurrection is the voice of Christ [ hear his voice:]
that is, the voice of Christ; verse. 27. they shall hear not in regard of any
faculty, or ability in the dead, but of the powerfullnes of the voice of
Christ, that peirceth even to the dust, and gives a power of hearing unto that
which had none at all.

Doct. The cause of the resurrection is the almightines of the voice of Christ:
1. These. 4.16. Act. 17.31.

Object. 1. These. 4.16. Matthew. 25.31. this is attributed unto an Archangell,
etc.

Answ. These places indeed show, that there shall be a means used, and that
an external means by the ministry of Angels, like as there was in the
giving of the Law, but yet the efficacy, and force of this means, comes from
the power of Christ: as verse. 25. it is the voice of Christ speaking in his
ministers that conuerteth the heart: as 2. Cor. 13.3.

Object. But how shall the wicked be raised up by Christ since they have no
right unto him?

Answ. We must consider Christ in a double respect, as a Savior, or as a Lord;
as a Redeemer, or as a Judge. He raises up the righteous by virtue of his own
resurrection, and of that union between him their Head, and they his Members:
but the wicked he raises by the almighty power of a Judge, to bring them unto
Judgment.

Use. Here we may note a difference between the faith of the Jews, and of us,
in one and the same Article of Religion; they believe the resurrection only by
the general power of God, we by the power of Christ also.

2. This serves for a proppe to strengthen and uphold our faith, in the
doctrine of the resurrection, if our reason shall dispute against it: for it is
most true that by na^urall reason and argument, that the body once consumed to
dust, should rise again the same.

Verse. 29. And they shall come forth that have done good unto the resurrection
of life: but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.


IN this verse is declared the issue of the resurrection. In sum, it is a
declaration of the last Judgment, or, of the diverse end of the good and of the
wicked. Between whom there is here laid a comparison; first, wherein they both
agree. Secondly, wherein they differ.

1. The agreement is this: that there is a resurrection belonging to both: as
all lay in the grave, so all shall hear, and all shall come forth: but yet the
one to life, the other to death.

Doct. All that likeness and equality that is between the godly and the wicked
before the last judgment, shall not cause the fame end unto both: as in the
parable of the Tares, Mat. 13.30. Luke 17.34, 35, 36. and therefore is that day
called, a day of the declaration of the just judgment of God; Romans 2.6. for
God will then put a difference between the good and wicked, whatsoever the
likeness between them has been in this life.

Use. To answer the scoffs of Atheists, who because they see things fall
alike to all, think it in vain to serve God: as Eccles. 2.15. Job 21.14.15.
Mal. 3.14, 15. but see Psalm. 37.37. Esaias 3.10.

2. To tax fond conceited men, that will desire to be buried in such a man's
grave, or tomb, whom they hold for a good and holy man, that at the
resurrection they may receive some benefit by him. Which is very ridiculous,
although in some civil respect it may be desired.

2. in the difference between them, note, first, the reward of the Righteous
S^condly, the revenge of the wicked [ they that have done good unto the
resurrection of life.] Here observe, first, the Parties. Secondly, the Reward.

1. The Parties are such as have done good: who are those? not such as build
hospitalls, give money to Friars and Monks, etc. as the papists think. But
there are four things that concur to bring it to pass, that a man may do
good,

1. The Party that does it. The rule is: That the person himself must be good
before the work can be good. Tit. 1.15. Gen 4.4. God respected first Abel and
then his offering. But how is the person good? In Christ the fountain of
goodness: Ephesians. 1. Wherefore our works are then good, when they come from us as
accepted of God in Christ, with whom we are united.

2. The matter of the work: It is then good, when it is squared according to
the rule of goodness, viz. the Word of God: so that Actions framed according
to Gods Will revealed in his Word, are good.

3. The manner: which is the chief, and gives being, to the rest. The rules
are, first, that as it is good in its own nature, so it must be done of us in
that respect, that it is good; that is, in Conscience and obedience to Gods
commandment, because he has commanded us: 1. Pet. 2.19. Romans 13.5. Secondly,
that in regard of our weakness and infirmity, it be done in humility, with
denial of our selves, and faith in Christ, to have all the blemishes pardoned,
all the defects covered; and what is wanting, to be perfected in him otherwise
being done in a proud conceit of our own worth, it is odious and abominable.

3. That it be done in vprightnes and sincerity of heart, as to God who is
Judge of it: Ier. 17.10. and fourthly, that it be done as a work of God; that
is, which God has appointed unto us, either in our general, or particular
Calling.

4. The end that we must aim, first, at the glory of God. Secondly, The good
of man. And from hence may we see, who they be that do good.

2. The second thing is the Reward [ of life] namely of eternal life; as Dan.
12.2. Matthew. 25. last verse.

Let us consider what this life is; it is, in a word, our Communion with God:
that is, a conjunction of soul and body with him. From whence arise these
prerogatives.

1. A continual enjoying of the glorious presence of God, in as glorious and
full manner, as the creature is capable of. A happy thing it was for the
servants of Solomon always to behold his glory; 1. King. 10.8. and a great
favor for Moses to see but the back parts of the Lord. How great then will
be the glory, when God shall in such special manner communicate himself to
us: Ioh. 3.2. and be all in all unto us. Reu. 21.22.23.

2. A fellowship and communion with the glorious Angels and Saints.

3. An absolute perfection of soul and body, and of all the powers of both,
perfect knowledge, perfect wisdom; 1. Cor. 13.12. so that all things shall be
done in that manner, as they could not have been done better. In soul, such
integrity, as no defect; in body, immortality, incorruptibility, agility, and
finally, a glorious body like unto the body of Christ: 1. Cor. 15.42.

4. A full perfect and absolute contentedness that we shall not see what more
to desire: so that nothing can be added to our happiness.

5. A full redemption from all manner of misery whatsoever, especially that
misery of miseries from sinning against God. The expectation of which freedom
is it, that in this life does refresh the soul of a Christian, groaning under
the burden of sin.

6. An admirable joy and delight in this happiness, which indeed gives life to
all the rest: for it is better to be without honor, then to have it with
grief and vexation.

7. That which makes up the heap of all the rest, is the perpetuity and
everlasting continuance of them.

Use is, first, to breed in our hearts an holy admiration of the goodness of
God, that has prepared so great things for us. Secondly, to stir up in us a
desire of it, and in desiring to use the means that lead unto it.

The other part is the revenge of wickedness: wherein consider,

1. The Parties, they that have done evil: who, not only open sinners, but
all that commit an anomie, or transgression against the Law; for then there is
evil.

All that are not accepted of God in Christ, whether Pagans and Infidels, or
unregenerate Christians, all ignorant persons, that know not the will of God.
For if we draw a line without a rule, we through the perverseness of our
nature, shall draw it awry. All superstitious persons that take their own
conceits, and men's traditions for a rule; or such as do good things for
by-respects, all proud conceited iusticiaries that do trust to their own
perfection, all hypocrites and dissemblers, all busybodies that do those
things which belong not to them, all vainglorious persons, and haters of
their brethren.

For to make use of this, consider the second point, the issue of these men in
their punishment, which consists, first, in the pronouncing of that fearful
sentence, Go ye, etc. Secondly, in the execution of it, the horror of which
is vnconceaueable and unutterable; for besides the privation of happiness,
there is a fellowship with the Devil and the damned, all horror and ugliness,
nothing good in soul or in body, no comfort, and which aggrauates the terror
of all, eternal continuance of this woe.

Use is therefore, that if that which has been said of life do not allure us,
that this do terrify us.

Here are now to be answered two questions that arise from these words.

Quest. 1. Whether the good which we do, be the proper cause of salvation?

Answ. No: the best good that the best can do, is no cause of their salvation:
Gal. 2.16. Ephesians. 2.8, 9. Tit. 3.5.

Reason. For life eternal is the free gift of God; Romans 6. last. and if it be
of Grace, it is not of work: Romans 11.6. Ephesians. 2.6, 7, 8.

2. Suppose we did all that God requires; yet we merit not, since all is but
our duty: Luke 17.10. yea, Adam if he had continued in his integrity, and full
performance of the whole Law of God, yet had he not thereby merited Heaven, it
being but his duty so to do: then much less we, whose righteousness is as a
filthy clout: Esaias 64.6.

3. All our works are imperfect, and so cannot merit: for if we our selves
can find many imperfections in the best of them, God can find much more; Job
9.15, 30, 31. Yet is life eternal attributed to our works, as they are signs
and evidences of the soundness and truth of our Faith in Christ, by whom we
obtain the same. And secondly, there is a twofold reward; the one of debt, the
other of favor, called the reward of inheritance.

Use. The use of this point, is to teach us rightly to distinguish of works,
and to know their right end, that we be neither arrogant and conceited, nor yet
profane and negligent of them.

Quest. 2. Whether evil works be properly causes of condemnation.

Answ. Yea: as meriting and deserving it properly: for damnation is the wages
of sin.

Object. But how can that be, seeing the punishment is greater then the sin:
the punishment infinite, and the sin but finite.

Answ. The punishment is not greater then the offense: for the offense must be
weighed according to the greatness of the person offended: now this is God,
who is infinite, and accordingly his wrath infinite.

Sin therefore is infinite in measure, though not in time but the punishment
is infinite, not in measure, but in continuance. For the Creature is not able
to bear the whole wrath of God at once (as Christ did,) and therefore it lies
under the burden thereof eternally.

What then is the difference between good and evil works.

Answ. Sin is perfectly and fully evil: but the good works we do, are not
perfectly good, unless they were done every way according to all things
commanded, and so were fully answerable to the Law of God, which we cannot do.

In the last place, consider we some few instructions that arise from the
manner of laying down these words.

1. [ They that have done good.] Doct. Not the abstaining from evil, but the
doing of good is that which causes the resurrection unto life.

In Mat. 25. are three arguments to prove this point: first, that of the five
foolish Virgins that wanted oil, Verse. 3. Secondly, that of the unfaithful
servant who was punished, not because he had purloyned, or stole any thing, but
for not employing of his Talent, Verse. 25 etc.

3. The tenor of the sentence: which is pronounced according to works done, or
omitted, Verse. 35. etc. Psalm. 34.14. 1. Pet. 3.10.

For herein does the Image of God consist, that we be renewed in our minds,
and that we put on the new man, as well as put off the old.

Use. It serves for reproof of the greater sort of men, who think it
sufficient if they be not thus and thus, though in the mean time, as touching
works of Faith, Piety and Charity, they have none.

2. [ They that have done good.] And Doct. The good. [ they that have done
evil.] And evil that in this life is done, is a sign and evidence, either of
life, or of condemnation: 2. Cor. 5.10. [ In his body] whilst he lived: Luke
16.25. [ In thy life time] for this life is but as a probation time.

Use. See Galat. 6.10. Eccles. 9.10. 2. Corinthians. 6.2. Hebr. 2.13, 15.

3. Doct. Consider what it is that Christ here urges as an evidence of life
eternal: it is the practice of good works, not the Profession.

Which serves to reprove vain Professors.

4. [ Resurrection of life.]

[ Resurrection of condemnation] That there is a difference between the good
and the wicked, we have heard. Here we see what it is: even the greatest
contrariety that can be: Mark. 16.16.

Which must encourage us in our Christian course, that howsoever the wicked may
seem in many things to be better then we, yet there shall be a difference
hereafter.

Verse. 30. I can do nothing of mine own self, as I hear, I judge; and my
judgment is just, because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the
Father who has sent me.


IN this Verse is laid down the condition of Christ's judgment; to wit, that
it is a just judgment; that he judges according to equity. This is confirmed
by that communion that is between the Father and Him. The Argument is this:
That which the Father does, orders, and wills, that is lawful and just.
But the Father judges with me, he directs my judgment, and consents
thereunto. Therefore my judgment is just. The proposition is omitted, as
granted of the Jews: the assumption and conclusion are here set down. The
assumption in three points:

1. In that he can do nothing without his Father, [ I can do nothing of mine
own self.]

2. In that the Father orders the course of this judgment; [ as I hear, I
judge.]

3. First, negatiuely, in that he seeks not his own will. Secondly,
affirmatively, in that he seeks the will of him that sent him.

The conclusion in these, [ and my judgment is just.]

So that this Verse, as it is a further proof of the point in question; so is
it likewise a conclusion by way of repetition of all the former arguments.

Meaning of the words, [ I can do nothing, etc.] Namely, as Verse. 17.19. with
this difference, that there he speaks in the third, here in the first. For
having proved it to be true in a third person, lest they should mistake, he
does now apply it to himself.

Heare] see Verse 19.

Iudge] see Verse 22. Iudgement] as Verse 22.

Because I seek not, etc.] Not as if Christ his will were opsite to his
Fathers; for then he should deny his will, as we do: but this does show a
correspondency between the will of the Son, and of the Father. As if he had
said, I seek not mine own will, without the will of my Father; but in seeking
of his will, I seek mine own.

2. Christ speaks this according to the conceit of the Jews, who took
Christ but for a man, and thought that he herein followed but his own fancy.

The parts then of this Verse are;

1. A Proposition in these words, My judgment is just.

2. A Confirmation of it, drawn from the communion that is between Christ and
God the Father. This is expressed in three branches.

1. A joint Cooperation of both together. 2. A mutual Communication of
counsel. 3. A Correspondency of their will.
The Proposition is laid in the midst, and not before the reasons, nor yet
after: which Christ wisely does.

Verse. 31. If I should bear witness of my self, my witness were not true.


We have heard how in this Chapter, Christ does prove himself to be God;
first, by a miracle. Secondly, by a divine Apology occasioned by the miracle.
In which Apology he confirms it by two sorts of arguments; first, by divine
effects, such as cannot be done, but by God himself. Secondly, by divine
Testimony. This we are now come to handle; and it is laid down from the verse
31. to the end.

The Testimony is first, generally declared verse. 32.

2. Particularly set forth in four distinct instances, the first, of John
Baptist. verse. 33.34.25. Secondly, of Christ his works. verse. 36. Thirdly, of
the Father; verse. 37, 38. and lasty, of the Scriptures, verse. 39, etc.

But before he come to the testimonies it self, Christ does first lay down
the occasion of using of this kind of argument; which is to prevent, and meet
with a secret objection, which the Jews might make on this wise, viz.

That those great and excellent things, which before he had spoken of himself,
might well be suspected, and called into question; because they concerned
himself, and himself did avouch them of himself. Now their readiness to make
such an objection, appears by Cap. 8.13. where they do it plainly upon the
like occasion. Therefore to prevent this, Christ brings in other testimonies
which might witness the same things of him, which himself had spoken.

This must be noted for the reconciling of a contradiction, which seems to be
between this place, and chap: 8. verse. 14. For in that place Christ speaks
literally, and according to the truth of the thing; namely, that as he was
indeed God, so albeit he had no other testimony, yet was his own sufficient
in his own cause: but in this place he speaks by a Rhetorical concession
and grant, according to the conceit of the Jews touching him, that he was but
a man and no more. Now then the witness of a man in his own cause, although it
may be true, yet is not sufficient to decide the matter.

Observe then here, first, What Christ yielded unto, Secondly, Upon what ground.

Doct. Our Lord, Christ Jesus, for the further confirmation of the truth, and
satisfaction of the hearers, yields from that which he might have stood upon:
Though he might have stood upon his own testimony as sufficient, he being
God; yet because this was not so clearly evident, unto them, he brings in
other testimonies and grounds for the confirming of this truth, that were more
plain and easy to their appprehension. So Mat. 17.26.27. he yields from his
right, having other means to manifest himself to be the Son of God: and
Mat. 26.53. he might have called for Legions of Angels.

For Christ sought not himself and his own glory Ioh 8.50. but the glory of
God, by giving evidence unto the truth, and the edification of the hearers.
Which shows, first, Christ his great meekenes, even against his adversaries;
and his great desire to bring them to the knowledge of the truth. He might hau^
only delivered the truth, and being God, have exacted credence on pain of
eternal condemnation; but he considers our weakness, and so imitateth God his
Father, who not only com^andeth, but brings with all arguments and reasons,
to show the equity of his Laws, to the end to persuade us to yield obedience.
Secondly, it is for our Imitation, that as occasion offers it self, we be
ready to yield from our right, and not stand to strictly on every thing that
may be justified, if by other means the truth may be the better persuaded and
taught.

2. The ground upon which he yields is, that if he had been man, as they
conceited him to be, then his own testimony had not been sufficient.

Doct. None are to justify themselves and their actions, and to commend the
things which they do. For if Christ, who was free from an ouerweening conceit
of his own doings, from vain glory, and desire of applause, and whose
testimony was most true, would not yet commend himself; how much less may
we, who are partial in our own matters and subject to the other vices? Prou.
27.2.

For, first, If we commend our selves, it ministers occasion that our
testimony should be suspected; and it is hard but we shall mingle some
untruth, either in suppressing some circumstances which might disgrace us, or
amplifying other hyperbolically which tend to our honor.

2. It savors of a desire of vain glory.

3. If we do things that are indeed praiseworthy, it is needless; for they
will commend themselves.

Use. For reproof of those that stand so much upon their own credit, that
they will have every thing so, because they say it: as does the Pope, who what
he says, sitting in his chair, men are bound in conscience to believe: herein
making himself like God: 2. These. 2.4. And as do many, who though they deliver
a thing but upon their own authority, yet are offended if it be called in
question. So much for the occasion.

Verse. 32. There is another that bears witness of me, and I know that the
witness which he bears of me is true.


We are now come to the point it self, viz. the Testimonies that are
alleged. Which are first propounded in general in this 32. verse, to be
Divine testimonies, The testimonies of God the Father himself for that is
meant: where he says, There is another, that is, God the Father: not John, as
some say; for Christ would here bring in an undeniable testimony.

But how is God another from Christ?

Answ. In four respects. First in regard of the Jews conceit, that Christ was
but a man: so is God another. Secondly, in regard of his Humane Nature: for
though both make one person, yet the Divine Nature is one, and the Humane
Nature another.

3. In regard of his Office, as he was Mediator between God and Man, so he
may be said to be another then God. Fourthly, in regard of his person, as he
is God, being a distinct person from the Father: so is the Father (...), but
not (...).

The meaning then is this, as if Christ had said; You except against my
testimony, as a humane testimony; but I have a divine testimony of these
things, even the testimony of God himself, who by John, by his own voice, by
his works, And by his word, does bear witness unto me.

The General then of this verse is this; That those things which Christ had
delivered, were confirmed by divine testimony.

The points to be noted are, first, Who it is that bears witness. Another,
that is God.

Doct. The testimony whereby Christ does justify himself and his actions,
and upon which he does rest, is the testimony of God: Ioh. 8.14, 18.

For first, he would not stand upon his own testimony as is before handled:
and secondly, this testimony is uncontrollable; as shall be showed hereafter.

Use. Here we learn whereon to rest, and ground our actions, viz. upon the
testimony of God, and his approbation: 2. Cor. 10. last. For men may deceive
through flattery, and be deceived through ignorance: but God can neither. And
better it is to seek for the app^obation of the master, then of the servant.

2. The kind of Testimony: wherein we may observe two points.

1. The thing it self; It is a true testimony. 2. The manner of setting it
down. [ I know, etc.]
1. Doct. The witness which God does give, is an infallible certain true
witness: for God is truth; both actiuely declaring only the truth with falshod
without error, and passiuely, because he cannot be deceived he is truth in
abstracto: Exodus 34.6. Psalm. 31.5. Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18.

Use. We heard before, that we were to seek for Gods witness and approbation of
the things we do. This now is a motive to urge us thereto, because his witness
is without exception. Romans 8.31.

2. Christ in setting down this testimony, shows his assured persuasion, and
settled faith in it, and this from his own experience that he had found it so.
[ I know:] hereby, first, showing that he went upon sure and certain grounds
in all that he did. Secondly, checking the Jews infidelity.

Doct. The witness of God is so effectual and powerful, that it works
credence in those to whom it is given: Job 16.19.

Wherein stands a maine difference between a humane testimony, and a divine
testimony. For man, though he may give a testimony, which for the matter is
true, yet he cannot for the effect, to assure him to whom it is given, that
he may certainly know that it is true.

Use. Apply we this testimony of Adoption, that they who have it, do know, and
are assured of it: Romans 8.15. Gal. 4.4.6.

2. Doct. Though others know not the testimony of God, yet we must not shrink
from it: as Christ does here, Ioh. 17.25. Ioh. 6.67, 69. Mat. 26.33. a good
resolution of Peter, had it not been in too much confidence and presumption of
himself. Which holy and constant courage ought to be in us all. So much for
the General.

Verse. 33. Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth.


WE have heard in general, that Christ has divine testimony to confirm his
authority, and equality with his Father.

Now in particular this is exemplified, and set forth in four branches: first,
by the testimony of John, in this Vrese unto the 36. Verse.

In which note, 1. The occasion thereof; Verse. 33. 2. The witness it self;
Verse. 33. 3. The end of alleging it; Verse. 34. 4. The commendation of the
witnesse-bearer; Verse. 35.


1. The occasion is in these words; [ Ye sent unto John.] which points unto
that solemn embassage which the Jews sent unto John: Ioh. 1.19, etc. From
whence note the good guiding and ouer-ruling power of God, who disposes of the
actions of the adversaries of his truth, to the confirmation of the same truth:
for it is likely they sent not unto John with any good mind, but in
hypocrisy; for so John reproues them: yet does Christ hereby confirm the
truth of John's witness. Showing hereby, first, that this witn^sse came not
voluntarily from John, he went not unto them to declare it, but they sent an
embassage unto him, to ask him touching those things. Secondly, that there was
no compact between John and Christ: for John knew not Christ until after that
time: Ioh. 1.29.

2. In the testimony it self note, first, the action; secondly, the object.

1. The action is in th^se words [ he bare witness.] This was proper to his
offi^e unto which he was appointed to be a witnesse-bearer: Ioh. 1.6, 7. Luke
1.15, 76.

Object. Act. 10.43. it is said, all the Prophets were witnesses of Christ, and
the Apostles: Act. 1.8, 22. and 3.5. and 10.39, 41. how then was this proper to
John?

Answ. In general it is a common duty to all Ministers: but John was a more
special witness, for that he first pointed out Christ, and declared him
before he was known, going immediately before him, as a Herald before a King,
as the Day Star before the Sun.

2. The object is in these words [ to the truth.]

Verse. 35. He was a burning and a shining candle, and ye would for a season
have rejoiced in his light.


IN this Verse is set down the commendation of the witnes-bearer: which Christ
adds, because he would not insist upon the testimony of John, and lay the
whole proof upon it. Now lest he should seem to make light of John, as one
whose testimony was nor so greatly to be regarded, he does therefore here give
this high commendation of him. Whence we see, that Christ as he does maintain
his own honor, so does he not disparage the honor of John, but together with
his, maintains his authority. Contrary to the practice of many, who envy the
credit of others, etc. Now John is commended,

1. From the condition of his office: He was a candle, and therefore not having
light from himself, but from another: showing, that Ministers are no other
then ordinary men, unless they be illightned from God. And this teaches
people how to esteem aright of Ministers, and yet not to despise them, seeing
that a candle is necessary in the night.

2. From his properties: first, of burning, noting his inward zeal to the
glory of God, and salvation of his people. Secondly, of shining, by his
faithful preaching, and godly life. A patter^e for all Ministers.

3. From the effect of his ministry, the people rejoiced, though the wicked
and hypocrites but for a season. Here note first, the action, they rejoiced;
which is spoken, not so much in commendation of them, as to show the efficacy
of the ministry of Gods Word, that it works even upon the obstinate.

2. The Object; They rejoiced in the light. To show, that if Ministers will
have the people to affect them, and to rejoice in their Ministry, they must
show forth the light of the Word, and the evidence of the Gospel in their
Ministry. And so no marvel though many are not regarded, who be as candles
either not lighted, or else put under a bushel. Now to show that this
rejoicing is spoken more, to show the powerful effect of the ministry of the
Word, then in commendation of them, he adds a limitation, that this their joy
was but for a season; as is the joy of all hypocrites and wicked men: Job.
20.5. see Mat. 13.19, 20. They rejoiced in John for by-respects, in hope that
he would have brought them liberty, and delivered them from the Romans, and
the like: but when John did plainly unmask their hypocrisy, and discover
their sins, their joy was nipt in the head, and withered. Which has been the
practice of people from all time, first, for a while greatly to admire a
Minister; but when he tells them of their sins, and presses their duties
upon them, Oh then he is too hard and too severe, etc. and so they forsake him.

Verse. 36. But I have greater witness then the witness of John: for the
works which the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do,
bear witness of me, that the Father sent me.


THis Verse contains the second testimony, that Christ does allege, to
prove his equality with the Father; namely, the testimony of his works. In
setting down whe^eof, first, he lays down a commendation of it. Secondly,
he declares the nature and kind of it.

1. The commendation is taken from a comparison of vnequalls, in that he says;
But I have greater witness, then, etc. we are to see wherein consi^teth the
inequality of this witness, and the rest that follow, (for this is a
transition:) and of that former witne^ of John.

It consists not in the truth of the witnesses, for all testify the same
things, but the inequality is in regard, first, of the persons bearing witness,
that were greater then John. Secondly, of the testimonies themselves that were
more clear, and evident, then the testimony of John. For though John being a
man inspired could not err, yet the people did not, or would not so clearly
see the truth of his testimony. But these testimonies are both manifest and
evident in themselves, as also to the apprehension of the people. Hence note,
that

Doctr. In the confirmation of one and the same truth, there may be
testimonies, some greater some lesser then other.

Because a testimony has his credit from the dignity and credit of the
witnes-bearer.

2. The witness it self is taken from his works. Christ's works were divine
works: Therefore they witness that he was God.

The Doctrine then in general of this verse is this: Christ's works were a
sure evidence of his divine power, and that he was God: as Ioh. 10.25. and
15.24. Ioh. 3.2. and 1.48.49. and 4.19.

For man cannot do the works of God.

Object. But did not the Prophets do miracles, and divine works, and also the
Apostles?

Ans. Yea. But the difference between their works and the works of Christ,
stands in four points, first in the works themselves. Christ made choice of
such works, as for the kind, never any did before as to raise one dead four
days and stinking. To give sight to the blind: Ioh. 9.32. and the like.
Secondly for the number never any did so many as Christ did: for he healed all
that were brought, etc. Thirdly, Christ still as he cured the body, so he cured
the soul.

2. The Prophets and Apostles were restrained, and could not do miracles when
they pleased, but when God permitted them. As appears in the example of
Elisha: 2. King. 4.27.

But Christ did work how and when it pleased him.

3. The works which the Prophets and Apostles did, they did neither by their
own power and authority, nor in their own name: Act. 3.12. But Christ did his
works both by the one, and in the other.

4. The miracles which the Prophets and Apostles did, were to show, that they
were sent of God and were his servants and messengers. But there was a higher
scope of Christ's miracles, that they aimed at, namely to show that he was the
Son of God.

We see then how strong an argument this is, and how well this witness of his
works is brought for confirmation of his Godhead.

Use is, first, that we read not the miracles of Christ, as matters only of
History, but to take them as props for the strengthening of our faith in
Christ, whom they show to be God, and so an all-sufficient mediator.

2. To apply this to our adoption) that we show our selves to be the Sons of
God, by being partaker of the divine nature, and doing the works of God.

More Particularly we are to consider 1. A description of these works. 2. A
declaration of the witness which they bear.


They are described in two clauses:

1. [ Which the Father has given me to finish.] Which shows, first, the
ground. Secondly, the extent of these works.

1. The ground of them is, because they were such works, as the Father had
given him in charge to do: which shows, that what Christ did, he did by
authority and commission from his Father: a Doctrine heretofore noted, and it
is a notable ground for the strengthening of our Faith, because God no doubt
will accept of those things that Christ did for us, they being done by his
authority. And secondly, it is for our imitation, that we have the warrant of
God for the things we do. Now as this is a ground, so it is an end why Christ
does these works; as Luke 2.49. Ioh. 6.38. and before, verse. 30. of this
Chapter: Ioh. 4.34.

2. The extent is, that Christ was not only to begin these works, but to go
through with them, and finish them. Hence learn,

Doct. That the work that God has given us, is not done, till it be finished.
This Christ knew, and so he fully finished the work his Father gave him: as
Ioh. 4.34. and 17.4. and 19.30.

Use. 1. For reproof of the opinion of the Papists, that Christ did not
perfectly finish his work, but left some things for the Saints to add
thereunto; out of Col. 1.24.

2. We must observe, that in the work of God, we add unto diligence and
carfulness, constancy and continuance.

The second clause is [ which I do.] (...), that [ I] is added ^mphatically,
from whence the Doctrine is, that

Doct. What Christ did, he did by his own power. This did the people observe
in all his Miracles, how he by his own authority, and in his own Name, did
cast out Devils, forgive sins, teach the people, etc.

Doct. Whence we learn, that Christ is to be acknowledged, adored,
worshipped, believed, and trusted in, as one that is absolute of himself to
do what he will. And thus are not Saints to be trusted unto, who are only the
instruments of God.

2. The Witness which these works do bear, is expressed in these words, [
That the Father sent me.] Now where Christ urges this sending, as a proof of
his equality with the Father, we must understand it of such a sending, as when
an Equal is s^nt, and not an Inferior; of the sending of a Son, not of a
Servant or Messenger.

This Phrase of being sent, is applied to Christ in three respects: 1. In
regard of distinction of Persons, of the Father and the Son.

2. In regard of Christ's Incarnation, who being in Heaven in the bosom of his
Father, was sent to take flesh upon him here in earth.

3. In regard of his Office, as he is Mediator between God and Man, and
thereunto sent, and deputed by God.

This shows, that Christ did not usurp any authority and dignity of himself,
but had this by communication from God the Father. A point before noted.

Verse. 37. And the Father himself, which has sent me, bears witness of me.
Ye have not heard his voice at any time, neither have ye seen his shape.

Verse. 38. And his word have you not abiding in you: for whom he has sent, him
yea believe not.


IN these words is laid down the third testimony, viz. the witness of God
the Father. Wherein observe:

1. How Christ does plainly lay down the testimony.

2. How he reproues the Jews unbelief.

In the former, we are to note,

1. The Party that gives this testimony; who is described by a twofold
relation to him, to whom the witness is given.

1. Of Father. [ The Father himself:] showing that this was the first person
in Trinity.

2. Of sending. Noting that Christ was come from the Father. So that this
testimony of the Father is, That Christ is his Son.

2. The witness it self [ bears witness of me.] But when, and how was this
testimony given?

Answ. God the Father gives testimony to his Son four ways.

1. by his Prophets; Heb. 1.1. Act. 10.43. and 3.18.

2. By inward revelation and inspiration, when God by his Spirit assures men's
hearts, that Christ Jesus is his Son; as he did to Peter: Mat. 16.17.

3. By the testimony of Christ himself; Ioh. 3.33. for in that Christ gives
testimony of himself, God the Father also does it.

4. In his own person by his voice. First at his baptism; Mat. 3.17. [and at
two other times, at his transfiguration: Mat. 17.5. and Ioh. 12.28.] And this
is here principally meant: for the first, that is, the testimony of the
Prophets, comes next to be handled; the second is secret: now Christ would
bring such a testimony, as all might take notice of. And for the third that i^
the point in question to be proved.

Here, then we are diligently to weigh the greatness of this testimony and in
it to note the great goodness of God, and the care that he has of us. For this
being the ground of all the Articles of our Religion, viz. that Christ is the
Son of God, without which there can be no comfort in believing of any. God was
not contented to have declared this by his Prophets, yea or by Christ himself;
but himself from Heaven in his own person does assure us of the truth of this
so necessary an Article of Faith, that Christ Jesus is his own Son, in whom
he is well pleased with us. And therefore of all testimonies of Scripture this
among the rest, and above all the rest is to be regarded as a most sure and
strong prop of our Faith. And this use Peter teaches us to make: when from
hence he brings a strong argument to confirm the truth of the Gospel. 2.
Pet 1.16, 17, 18.

The use is the same that is made, Mat. 17.5. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Act. 7.37. that
therefore we do hear Christ, by attendi^^ unto his Word, which he has caused
to be written for the ^^^uation of his Church. So much to the testimony.

2. In his repoofe note, first, The fault for which he reproues them. The
ground of this fault.

1. The fault is noted in these words [ ye have not heard his voice at any
time neither have ye seen his shape.] Which words may be taken, first,
literally: That they never heard the voice of the first person speaking by
himself at any time, that is, at any other time, except then, and upon that
occasion when he gave testimony to his Son. Neither yet did, or can any man
behold God with carnal eyes. So that this, first, amplifies the greatness of
this testimony, that it is a matter of great weight, since never before, nor
since, the like testimony has been given. Secondly, it shows what a great
benefit it was, that Christ was incarnate, who is the character and ingraued
form of the Father, in whom we may see and behold him: Heb. 1.3.

2. Metaphorically, and to this sense I rather agree: and then it is a
prouerbiall kind of speech taken from men, whereby Christ does tax their
ignorance and vnacquaintance with God. For men are known two ways, by their
speech, and by their shape. Now they had neither heard the voice, nor seen the
shape of God, and so were without all knowledge and acquaintance with him, and
so in this respect like Heathen men. All the means that God affoorded for the
declaration of his presence among them, his voice that he caused to be
sounded forth by the ministry of his Prophets, by Christ, yea by himself
extraordinarily, they regarded not, but still remained ignorant. Like unto
these Jews, are many among us; that notwithstanding the preaching of the Word,
remain still in their ignorance, etc.

The ground of this ignorance is set down in these words, [ and his Word have
you not abiding in you.] This Christ says to prevent an objection which they
might make, viz. That they had the Law, the Sacrifices, the Word preached in
their Synagogues, etc. and therefore were not so ignorant as he blamed them.

Wherefore Christ taxes in them two things, that the Word was indeed preached
among them, and they heard, the sound of it with their ears, but it went not
unto their hearts. Secondly, that if at any time it peirced to the heart, yet
it did not there abide.

Doct. It is not sufficient to have the Word amongst us, to hear it, to talk
of it, and the like, unless it be in our hearts, and abide there, all is worth
nothing. Though Moses were read every day in the Synagogue, it profited the
Jews nothing, because they understood it not; they were not affected with it,
unless for a short time, they made it no rule of their life to walk by. See
Luke 11.28. Col. 3.16.

This shows we have an honest and good heart, if the Word abides with us, and
we practice it; and on the contrary side, an evil corrupt heart. Even as it
fares with a man of a good, or ill-affected stomach, that either retains the
meat, and digests it, or vomits it up again, or turns it into humors.

Now that the Word may abide with us, observe these rules drawn out of the
Parable, Luke 8.

1. That we use the means to understand, and come to knowledge of the Word.
This was the fault of the first ground, the seed therein had no entrance at all.

2. That we love and delight in the Word, that we make it our joy, that we
relish and affect it: for having knowledge, and feeling the sweetness of it,
we shall be the more desirous of it, without wearisomnesse, without loathing.
From the want of this, it is, that many men of great learning are yet carried
away, because their knowledge was only in the brain, and not rooted in the
heart. Like the second ground.

3. That we suffer the Word to rule us wholly, and not entertain our lusts,
pleasures, and worldly care together with it: for these will suck out the life
of the Word: so that it will not abide with us long; as in the third sort of
ground.

4. That we have a care to make it a rule unto us, to square our life according
to it, then will it abide with us: for a good conscience is the ship wherein
Faith is preserved from suffering wrack: 1. Tim. 1.19. and we see, that error
in judgment, and corruption in manners do mutually infect one another.

The confirmation of this ground is expressed in these words [ for whom he has
sent, him ye believe not.

The Word of God did not abide in them; and why? because they did not believe
in Christ the Son of God, whom he had sent. The truth of this reason appears
in two respects;

1. Because Christ, who was sent of God, was the sum and substance of the
Word of God, both of the Law, and of the Prophets; Heb. 8.1. Act. 10.43. whom
principally it aimed to declare. Now then how is it possible that they could
have the Word abiding in them, who did not entertain and believe in Christ
when he was come.

2. Because they received not Christ, who spoke the words of God. Now if they
had the Word of God abiding in them, they would have believed in him, who had
brought this Word unto them.

Doct. The Word abides in none that believe not Christ Jesus. Which first, is
against all such as know not Christ, or deny him, or rely not upon him.

Secondly, it teaches us to lay sure hold on Christ.

Thirdly, it shows that they that despise the Word, and the Minister thereof,
have it not abiding in them.

Verse. 39. Search the Scriptures: for in them ye think to have eternal life,
and they are they which testify of me.


THese words contains the fourth and last testimony, which Christ alleges
for confirmation of his divine power and authority. Now it seems that Christ
observes an order in setting down these testimonies; first, to lay down the
less, and then the greater. So that indeed this testimony of the Scripture is
the greatest of all the rest. Not as was before noted, that there is any
difference in regard of the truth of them; but in regard of the evidence and
clearenesse thereof. This the Apostle Peter shows, 2. Pet. 1.19. where having
alleged the former testimony of the voice of God the Father, verse. 17.18.
and coming to speak of the testimony of the Scriptures, he says [ we have a
more sure word of the Prophets.] It is greater then in these respects: first,
in regard of the long continuance of this witness, that it has been a
testimony given of Christ from before so many ages, and so received by the
Fathers, and approved from time to time, as a certain ground of Faith.

2. The very writing and recording does add weight unto it, seeing that the
Scriptures also are the voice of God, as well as that which we have before
spoken of.

3. Because this testimony does more distinctly and fully set forth Christ unto
us, then any of the former do; describing him in his nature, actions, offices,
death and suffering the benefit of it, and the means whereby we come to be
partakers of it.

4. This very Oracle, and also the works of Christ, are now written and
recorded, and so come unto us under the nature of the testimony of the
Scripture.

First, then ob^erue the general scope and drift of Christ in this place,
which is, to make the Scripture the Judge, whether himself had done and spoken
well or no; unto it therefore he referres his adversaries, resting himself
upon the judgment thereof.

Hence arises this Doctrine, that

Doct. The highest and chiefest Judge of the mysteries of Godliness, matters
of Faith and Religion, is the holy Scripture: a point clear by many places of
Scripture, as Esaias 8.20. Luke 16.29, etc. 2. Tim. 3.16. and so in many places
it is called a Law, Statute, Ordinance, and Judgment; because it does declare
the Will and Council of God, which he has pronounced and dec^eed. Thus Christ
has always recourse unto the Scripture, determining all questions by them; as
Matthew. 12.3, 5. and 22.29. and the Apostles, as Peter, Act. 2. Apollos, Act.
18. last.

Reas. 1. The Sc^ipture is the very Word and Voice of God: Now who shall be
Judge of the great mysteries of God, but God himself.

2. Because the Scripture is a true and perfect Rule that cannot err, Psalm.
19. It is a sufficient Judge to decide all controversies whatsoever: and
lastly, it is an vnpart^all Judge.

Object. 1. Against this authority of the Scriptures, the Papists do make many
objections, whereof we will speak of two only. The Scripture, say they, is a
mute Judge, and cannot declare which is truth.

Answ. Though the Scripture cannot speak with the voice of a man, yet it does
speak as a Law does speak, declaring what is the will and counsel of God.
And cannot we understand the mind of a man as we^l by his writing, as by
hearing of him speak; and the rather, seeing we may the more ponder every
word. And yet the Scripture does give a mouth unto the Scripture, if we mark
it w^ll; as Matthew. 22.31. [ what is spoken unto you of God] how spoke God unto
you, but by the Scriptures; Ioh. 7.42. [ says not, etc.] Ioh. 19.24. [ which
says;] and especially that, Heb. 12.5. [ which speaks, etc.]

Because the Word written does declare unto us the will of God as plainly, and
as distinctly, as if God with audible voice did speak unto us. Yea, if he
should speak, he would speak no otherwise, then that which is in the
Scriptures. And so a^e they said to speak unto us.

Object. 2. Heretics, say they, make the Scripture their Judge, and how then
can it be a Judge of truth?

Answ. This objection, though commonly alleag^d by them, to weaken the
authority of the Scripture; yet if we well consider it, it does very strongly
prove the same. A contentious man when he will wrong his neighbor in any
matter, he will plead the Law for his right unto his neighbors goods, as
knowing, that without the sentence of the Law he cannot enjoy them. Now this
shows, that therefore the Law is the only Judge that must decide this matter.
So in that Heretics themselves for to uphold their doctrine, do rely upon
the Scriptures, as without which they must needs fail in their cause, it is a
very strong proof, that therefore the Scripture ought to be the only Judge to
determine of all matters of controversy. Again, though Scripture have been
alleged by Heretics, yet did ever Scripture determine with, and for an
Heretic?

Use 1. To reprove those vain, opprobrious, and bl^sphemous titles, that
Papists give unto the Scripture of a leaden Rule, etc. Preferring the
determination of Popes and Councels before the Scripture: which is to prefer
man before ^od.

2. It teaches us in all doubts and matters of controversy touching Faith,
Religion, and Manners, to resort unto the Word and hereon to have our judgment
grounded and settled. Not taking any thing either for article of Faith, or rule
of life that is not warranted by it. So much of the general.

The words do naturally, divide themselves into two parts: 1. A Precept. 2.
Reasons to confirm it.


The Precept is in these words [ Search the Scriptures.] From whence the
Doctrine arising is this,

Doct. The Scriptures do require study and diligence, for the finding out of
the meaning of them, and searching out the treasures hid in them.

(...)] Scrutamini: Though in the Original and Latin transl^tion, the word be
ambiguous, and may be taken in the Indicative mood, and the Imperative also;
yet I rather take it i^ the Imperative, as most translations do, for a precept
and duty, then in the Indicative, for a commendation of them; noting what they
did: as if he had said [ye search the Scripture,] etc. yet both ways the
Doctrine is sound.

Search.] It is a Metaphor taken from such as search for gold and silver Ore in
the earth; who will not cast it away by whole shouell fuls, but will search,
and sift, and break every clod to find out the gold. To this diligence in
searching the Scripture, does the Apostle exhort Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.13. and
Solomon uses the same Metaphor; Pro. 2.4. Act. 17.11. the same word. This
diligence is often urged in the old Testament by the phrase of meditating in
the Word; as Josh. 1.8. Ps. 1.2. and passim alibi.

The Reasons to move us hereunto, besides those here mentioned in the text, of
which we shall speak anon, are two:

1. The little hope of getting any good by the Scriptures, without searching
into them.

2. The assured hope to get much good by searching. For the former, we must
know, that God is hid in the Scripture, as gold is in the earth; and so is not
found out at the first sight, but after a diligent search. Cursory reading may
give knowledge of the story, and of such things as are at the first sight easy
and plain: but yet it yields little, or no profit. For these Jews, who had
the Word amongst them, heard it, and read it in their Synagogue every Sabba^h,
made no profit by it, they found not the treasure hid in them; Christ Jesus,
him they knew not, and therefore Christ bids yet search.

Object. But how can this stand with this perspicuity, and plainness that we
affirm to be in the Scripture against the Papists.

Answ. We must well understand, how the Scriptures ar^ plain, and how obscure.
First, to carnal men they are obscure, who discern not spiritual things: but
not so to th^se that are enlightened by the Spirit of God.

2. Neither is this obscurity in the Scriptures themselves, but because the god
of this world has blinded their eyes, that they cannot see.

3. In the maine grounds of salvation it is clear and plain: yea, in all, to
those that are careful and diligent, it is easy. For so the promise is, Prou.
2.3.4. and 14 but unto the careless nothing is plain.

The reasons why God has thus hidden his wisdom in his Word, may be these.
First, to discover unto us our ignorance, that when we see how many great
mysteries we are ignorant of, we may be humbled. Secondly, That he might make
a difference between those that seek him in truth, and those that contemn
him, who like Hogs and Dogs regard not Pearls. Wherefore he has also hidden
them from such. Thirdly, that God might maintain his ordinances and we might
th^rein be helpful one to another, by preaching, by instructing, etc.
Fourthly, to make us the more earnestly desire and long after the knowledge of
his Word. Fifthly and lastly, to bring us to the performance of this duty here
prescribed, to search, and search again, that the more we search, the more we
may find.

2. Now for our encouragement, consider the second reason, viz. that our labor
shall not be lost, but much rich treasure is certainly to be found by
searching. Therefore is the Law said to be better then gold, then much fine
gold of Ophir. So excellent mysteries are therein contained, as never entered in
man's heart; yea, the Angels desire to look into them: 1. Pet. 1.12. Such
mysteries as concerns not our worldly wealth, but the salvation of our soul^s.
In reg^rd of which, the mysteries of all other books are straw and stubble,
dross and dung. And indeed what learning have other books, that is not in the
Scriptures. For do thou delight in Truth? This Word is the Wo^d of Truth both
for the Author, for the matter, and for the effect; giving us assurance, that
it is the truth. Would thou have deepenesse and profound knowledge? Where Is
greater profoundnesse then in the Scripture? Would thou be an Antiquary?
Here is a story from the beginning of the World. Delightest thou in the Law?
Here is the ground of all laws, whence they spring and issue. Delightst thou
in Histories? Here are all sorts admirable for pleasure and profit. Or in
Chronology? No where is the like for truth, or for length of continuance, even
for 4000. years in several persons, lineally descended from Adam to Christ.

Now the Word (says S. Paul to Timothy, 2. Tim. 3.16.) is profitable first, to
teach; secondly, to convince; thirdly, to correct, and to instruct. According
to these properties, let us make several uses.

Use. 1. This then teaches us; first, that therefore we ought to know the
ground of those things that we believe: we must search the Scriptures.

2. That it is necessary that the Scriptures be translated, that all may search.

3. That the Scriptures are plain, or may be understood by those that will
search: else why should we search?

4. That the Scriptures are a sufficient rule and direction; and therefore
Christ bids them search in the Scriptures and no where else.

2. This refutes the errors of the Papist, who have many positions clean
contrary unto this Doctrine: as,

1. That people are to be kept in Ignorance.

2. That the Scriptures must be read in an unknown tongue.

3. That Traditions, Fathers, and Councels, must be joined with the Scriptures.

3. For Correction. It serves to reprove diverse sorts of men. Some care not to
read the Scriptures, but of all books make lest account of it: Chronicles,
Histories, Playbookes are often read; the Scriptures seldom. Some will not
suffer a Bible to be in their houses, and count it a reproach to carry a Bible
to Church. Some will read at Church, and turn to places as they are quoted,
but never at home, their business suffers them not: who yet are better then
many, that will bring other books to Church, and while the Minister is
preaching, read those. Some content themselves to have read over a number of
Chapters at a time, without any further search. Some read and labor to search
out the true meaning of places, but all is, that they may know the occurrences
of things, be able to reconcile places, and maintain them against the
Adversary, who yet fail in this duty, in that they are not cast into the
mould of the Scripture, and by their search do not find out the hidden
Pearl, Christ Jesus.

4. For Instruction: it shows, that this is a duty belonging to all to
perform, and for our Direction in searching of the Scriptures, it is
necessary.

1. That we have the Scriptures in our houses, in our closets; that we read
them diligently and frequently, with study and observation; that we attend to
reading, having thereunto appointed times at rising, at going to bed, that
besides public reading in the Family, we use private reading by our selves.
Not to tie our selves to read over three chapters a day, so to read the whole
Bible in a year; but that we mark what books are easy, what more difficult,
what best retained in memory, what more hardly; and according to make choice of
places, and to read those that are most needful and profitable for us: and
such books as are hardest, as the Epistles of Paul and the Poetical books,
Job, Psalms, etc. to read them often.

2. That we do not read, without calling upon the Name of God for direction,
to open our eyes that we may understand his will.

3. That we read with a mind to subject our seluess to it.

4. That in reading, we gather no collections contrary to the Analogy of faith
contained in the Creed, Commandments and Lords Prayer.

5. That in those things we understand not, we seek for such help of others
as we may for the finding ou^ of the truth, etc.

The reasons brought to confirm this precept are two; the first is taken from
that opinion which they had of the Scripture to whom Christ directs this
exhortation. [For in them ye think, etc.] Herein consider, first, The
Substance of the reason. Which is, that the Jews thought in the Scripture to
have eternal life. Which is not laid down as a false opinion but as a true
and orthodoxall ground, the more also to check them, who although they had so
good an opi^ion of the Scriptures yet did not search them.

Doct. The Scriptures were written for our salvation that we might have
eternal life. Ioh. last. and last verse. For they first, declare in general
the good will of God to save man, secondly, they show the mean^s whereby we
are saved. Thirdly, they wo^k Faith, wher^by we come to be partakers of this
means.

From the Inference of this reason note first, That all that have the
Scriptures in high account do not make true profit and benefit by them: as the
Jews here. And so did they highly este^me of Moses, and yet believed him not.
Secondly, that the good opinion that we have of the Scriptures, ought to stir^e
us up to search them; else it will be a witness against us.

2. The second point to be noted, is the manner of laying it down [ ye
think:] not have, for they missed of it.

Doct^ Many look for life and salvation, that in the event and issue are
deceived: Romans 11.7. thus do all Heretics, Idol^ters, etc.

The reason is, because they mistake the ground; they build o^ a wrong
foundation; they cast anchor on quicksands, that ^n the end swallows them up.

Use. Note this against such, as think they may be saved in any relig^on, so
they have a good conceit: 1. These. 5.20.

2. To discover the value hope of many that profess thems^lues Chr^stians, who
whatsoever they do, yet will say, they ^eane well, and have a good intent.

The second Reason is in these words. [ They are they which ^^st^f^e of me.]
Because the Scriptu^es give witness unto Christ: which in that it is added a^ a
reason, and motive to search (...) Scriptur^s it gives us to understand, first,
That

Doct. Christ, Jesus is the maine and chief Treasure contained in them. Run
we through the whole Scripture, we shall find this true, how it always points
at him: Luke 1.70. Luke 24.27. Act. 10.43.

For Christ is the only Author and means, whereby we attain unto life;
therefore the Scripture must needs give it unto Christ, else how could life be
had in the Scriptures.

Use, it shows whither we must go to find Christ, not to the writing of men,
but to the Scriptures.

Further, from the time wherein Christ did utter this, viz. before any part of
the new Testament was written, and therefore he must needs mean the old: we
may note, that

Doct. Christ made known to the ancient Fathers before his incarnation. Which
may serve to refute the opinions of those, that think the ancient Jews were
moved only with temporal promises and judgment, and not with spiritual. But
it was Abraham's Faith in Christ, not his hope of the Land of Canaan, that was
imputed to him for righteousness. How can Moses be said to have suffered the
rebuke of Christ, Heb. 11.26. if he had not believed in him.

Verse 40. But ye will not come to me that ye might have life.


NOw follows the reproof of these Jews. which is in general for their
incredulity, in that they did not believe in him, whom the Scriptures declared.
This their incredulity is generally laid down, verse. 38. aggrauated, first, by
the causes thereof: first, ignorance, verse. 37.38. Secondly, wilfulnes in this
verse. Thirdly, want of love, verse. 42. Fourthly, ambition, v 44.

Secondly, by the Issue, viz. condemnation, verse 45. etc.

In this verse we have to note, first a declaration of the sin it self,
namely, obstinacy [ ye will not come to me.]

Secondly, an aggrauation of it, by the mischief following upon it, namely
loss of life [ that ye might have life.]

Note here first the inference of this upon the former. We have heard that
they thought well of the Scriptures, and looked in them to have eternal life,
yet we see they come not unto Christ, in and by whom they might have life. What
is the reason of this? Surely their opinion was on a false ground, they looked
for life by other means, then by Christ, as by their own righteousness, etc.
Hence note,

Doct. They that are persuaded to attain life by false means, will never be
brought to seek after the right means. Thus the Jews, Esaias 30. and 31.
trusting to Egypt, withdrew themselves from the Lord, the only means of their
safety. Thus did the Scribes and Pharisees, Luke 7.30. despise the council of
God, whereas Publicans, Soldiers, Harlots, etc. came unto Christ. Why? Because
these had no other ground to trust unto, whereby they might attain to life.
But the Pharisees were full of many false persuasions of attaining to it by
other means: Mat. 21.30. Luke 1.33.

Use is to teach us to take heed that our souls be not possessed with false
persuasions.

The obstinacy and wilfulness of the Jews appears herein, that neither by
the preaching of John, nor by the witness of God the Father given to Christ at
his Baptism, nor yet by the testimony of the Scripture, they would be moved
to believe in Christ.

Doct. They that have the Word preached, and yet believe not in Christ, are
guilty of the sin of obstinacy. They are scorners, Prou. 1.22. Read Ezekiel. 2.
and 3. Matthew. 23.37. Act. 2^.27.

For if a man have eyes, and yet see not the Sun when it shines, shall we
not think that he winketh of purpose.

Object. But the case is not so in spiritual things; Faith is not in our
power; we have not these spiritual eyes to behold Christ of our own. How
then can it be obstinacy, if we do not believe.

Answ. 1. I answer, that there is no man that lives where the Gospel is
preached, and yet believes not, but he does fail in doing of some things that
he might do. So that though saving Faith be not in his power, yet does he
wilfully neglect to do many things which are in his power, whereby he might
attain unto Faith: as neglect of coming to the Church, of attention to the
Word, of Prayer, etc.

2. Howsoever we have not free will to believe, yet can we resist, and gainesay
the truth, and distrust God from a freeness of will, arising from the
perverseness of our corrupt nature.

So that both for wilful neglect, and also repugnancy, and resisting of the
Word, shall such be condemned as obstinate.

Use To condemn those that live under the Gospel, and yet are not wrought
upon by the Gospel, whose case is worse then that of Savages and Infidels.

From the aggrauation of this fault we may learn, that

Doct. 1. They that are obstinately set against Christ and ^is Gospel, by no
promise, no reward can be moved to relent and yield unto Christ, no, not for
life it self. Such obstinacy was in Lots sons in law, Genesis 19.15. in the
Egyptians, Exodus 9.21. Psalm. 58.4, 5. Act. 13.45.

For obstinacy does so fill, and possess the heart, that neither threats, nor
promises can take any place.

Verse. 41. I receive not the praise of men.


THis verse is inserted in policy to prevent an objection that the Jews might
make. For whereas he had reproved them for not coming unto him, they might
think thereupon, and say; O surely this man would have many followers, he
would that men should praise and applaud him. Wherefore Christ tells them, that
he seeks not, he hunts not after the praise of men; it is their salvation that
he aims at.

Doct. Christ in those things that he did, did not seek for his own honor,
reputation and glory, but to bring salvation unto others: and so many times
when he had done a great work, he withdrew himself, to take away all occasion
that people should not talk of him; yea, he forbad them to speak of him.

For first, he needed not this popular applause and commendation, being the
Son of God. Secondly, his works did commend themselves. Thirdly, yea, praise
followed him, where he fled from it. Fourthly, Christ did now abase himself,
and would now show himself a pattern of humility for our imitation; and
therefore he did not seek to extol himself, Ioh. 13.15. Mat. 20.27, 28.

Use. To set Christ before us, and to follow him; looking to our duty to do,
because God has laid it upon us, not because of applause and commendation. And
this, as it is to be done of all, so especially of Ministers that stand in
Christ's stead, who look that they draw people unto them for their good, and
not for their own praise: and so to preach, as not to preach themselves, but
for the edification of the people.

Verse. 42. But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you.


In this verse is expressed the second fault, for which he reprooueth them,
viz. their want of love; which is the second cause of their incredulity. Here
note, first, the ground of his reproof. Secondly, the thing reproved.

1. The ground, [ I know you.] Whatsoever you pretend, I know that it is not
for Gods honor and glory that you do this etc.

Doct. Christ knows man's heart and disposition, be he good, Ioh. 1.47. or
bad, Ioh. 2.25.

Use, for terror, for Hypocrites and dissemblers.

2. For encouragement to those that are upright and true-hearted.

Doct. 2. Here we may note, how Christ does rep^ooue them upon sure ground and
evidence. He never rashly or vn^ustly did reprove any; and so when they were
reproved, their mouth was always stopped, they had nothing to reply.

Use, For our imitation to go upon sure grounds, not upon evil surmises and
suspicions?

2. The fault for which they are reproved, is want of the love of God. A
strange thing, if we consider what great shows these Jews made of the love of
God.

Doct. Many who seem to stand for Gods glory, and for his ordinances, and make
great pretenses of zeal to him; yet if their hearts be known, they will be
found not to have one true spark of love in them; as in Corah and his company:
Numb. 16. in all Heretics, Papists and Idolaters. It is not for love, but for
by-respects, some through envy, some through ambition, some through
covetousness, etc.

Wherefore we are to examine our selves, with what mind we do those things
which we do, whether out of a pure love of God, or no. This we shall know, by
considering the nature and properties of this love.

1. Love of God is a holy spiritual affection, whereby our hearts are so k^it
unto him, that we do make him our summum bonum, chiefest good, whereon we do
rest. And it manifests it self by these two properties: first, a care to
please him, and to continue in his favor; that is, when we delight in his
Word, and obey his will and commandments. For in his Word is declared what
things are pleasing unto him. That this is a property of this true love
appears, Ioh. 14.23, 24. 1. Ioh. 2.5. 2. Ioh. verse. 6. Whence follows another
branch of this, namely, a fear to offend him, when we are careful to avoid
all things that do displease him: Psalm. 97.10.

2. By a love of what and whom he loves: when for his sake we love man, whom
God has made the chiefest object of his love: Ioh. 3.16. And as man in
general, so especially those on whom God has placed his special love, in
regenerating, and begetting them again to himself: 1. Ioh. 5.1. Psalm. 16.3.

^y these properties we are to examine our selves: and hereby it appears,
that the Jews had not the love of God in them; for they delighted not in his
Word, Ioh. 8.47. They kept not his Commandments, Matthew. 15.8, 9. Neither loue^
they those whom God loved; for Christ they hated, although they knew by the
testimony of John Baptist, and the witness of God himself, that he was the
beloved of God: so did they likewise the Prophets, Apostles, and holy men: 1.
These. 2.15.

Verse. 43. I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye receive me not; if another
shall come in his own Name, him will ye receive.


IN these words Christ lays down a confirmation of the former point, namely,
that these Jews had no love of God in them; his proof is drawn from their
affection and disposition toward himself, that came in the Name of God, and
toward others that came not in the Name of God. Now that the strength of this
proof may appear, observe the meaning of the words.

I am come] This is spoken of that voluntary subjection whereunto Christ did
abase himself, to become our Mediator, our Priest, and our Prophet, to reveal
his Fathers will unto us.

In my Fathers Name] This implies three things: first, that he came with
authority and commission from his Father. Secondly, that he came to bring a
Message from his Father, to declare his will. Thirdly, that he came to set
forth, not his own, but his Fathers honor and glory.

Ye receive me not,] Ye reject my doctrine, and hate my person.

If another come in his own name,] Of his own head, declaring his own
conceits, or doctrines received from other men, seeking his own praise and
honor.

Him ye receive.] Such ye honor, love, follow, and emb^ac^.

The Argument then is thus: They that love God, love those that come in Gods
Name, and reject the other that come in their own name:

But yet do clean contrary:

Therefore ye have not the love of God in you.

Observe here then, first, a description of those who are the object, whereby
our love to God may be discerned, namely, of Ministers, who are either sent of
God, or come in their own names; that is, are either faithful Ministers,
whereof Christ does here set forth himself as a pattern.

[ I am come, etc.] (But of this diverse times before) or false teachers and
unfaithful, here set down by the example of the Pharisees, of whom it is
plain, that they were not sent of God, who preached their own Traditions, and
sought only their own glory. Hence we learn,

Doct. That it is a certain note of a true Minister, to come in Gods Name, and
of a false Minister to come in his own name: the one has an eye unto God, and
runs not before he be sent; and being sent, observes what his will is, and
according to it, does all things for his glory: the other has an eye only to
man, to please him, to seek honor and preferment, etc. This difference we
see plainly between Michah the Prophet of the Lord, and Chenaanah, and the
rest of the false Prophets: 1. King. 22.11, 12, 14. between Jeremiah: Ier. 42.
who persuaded the people to obey the King of Babel: and Hananiah: Ier. 28.10,
11.

See Ier. 23.16, 17.

Use. This is a special means to try the spirits, 1. Ioh. 4.1. whether they
be of God, or no, if they seek themselves, or the Lord.

2. It shows that many among us, although they have an outward Calling, yet
comes not in Gods Name, in that they aim not at the edifying of the Church by
preaching, but their own maintenance, ease and honor; or if they preach, they
preach themselves to show learning, not for instruction of the people.

Secondly, observe in this verse the peoples carriage and affection toward the
Ministers, either receiving, or rejecting of them.

Doct. 1. They that receive not such as come in the Name of God, it is plain
they have no love of God in them: for they that love not him that is sent, love
not him that sends: 1. Ioh. 5.1. Job. 13.20. This appears by the different
carriage of godly men, and of hypocrites from time to time toward the
faithful Ministers; as of Abab and good Iehoshaphat toward Micah: 1. King.
22.8. of the good Princes, and the hypocritical call Priests against Jeremiah:
Ier. 26.11, 16.

Note this, that we may examine our selves, with what mind we have entertained
those faithful Ministers, that God has g^uen unto us in this land, etc.

Doct. 2. They who receive such as come in their own name, love not God: for
there is a maine opposition between this, the seeking of man's self his honor
and ease, and the seeking of the Lord: Phil. 2.21. and therefore they that
delight in such as seek not the Lord, assuredly love not God. For it is a
property of true love, to love those whom God loves, and hate those whom he
rejects: Revel. 26. Psalm. 139.21, 22.

Doct. 3. From the joining of these together, learn. That those who reject
true and faithful Ministers of the Lord, are ready to embrace false teachers.
Pharaoh hated Moses, but received Iannes and Iambres. Ahab hated Michaiah, but
liked the false prophets. So the Jews did flock after Theudas and Judas of
Galilee, Act. 5.36, 37. yet they rejected Christ and his Apostles. The like
they did in the last destruction of Jerusalem, as Josephus reports; and now do
they highly esteem their Rabbis. Which comes to pass, first, through the
just judgment of God, who gives them up to the blindness of their heart to
believe strong delusions: 2. These. 2.10, 11. Deuter. 28. Secondly, through the
corruption of nature, because we are naturally disposed unto error, rather then
unto truth, into which also we easily do fall, if we be not restrained by
the Spirit of God. Whence it is, that there never was any heretic, were his
opinions never so gross and damnable, but had many followers: 2. Pet. 2.1.2.

Use. This teaches us not to close our eyes against the truth, etc.

Verse. 44. How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek
not the honor that comes of God alone?


IN these words is laid down a fourth fault of these obstinate Jews, which is
also another cause of their incredulity. A cause, thoug^ (...) down, yet
indeed the greatest, being not a cause of the^^ (...) believing, but such a
cause as implies an impossibility, that it was impossible for them to believe.
And therefore he sets it down very emphatically by way of interrogation [
How can ye?]

Quest. But how may it be imputed unto them?

Answ. First, generally, in regard of Nature, it is impossible for any man to
believe, because first, by nature we relish not spiritual things, we see no
fruit, or benefit by them, and so we regard them not. Secondly, by nature we
are not capable of them: 1. Cor. 2.14.

2. But in special, whereas Christ says, How can ye believe; he makes this
their ambition to be a peculiar let and hinderance to them. For whereas the
doors of our hearts is naturally shut up against saving faith, ambition is as
a bar that keeps it fast from opening.

The first thing then to be noted in these words, is the cause of their
unbelief, viz. their ambition and desire of honor.

Doct. Ambition is a maine impediment to saving faith; Ioh. 12.43. and
therefore their Faith mentioned, verse. 42. was only historical; Ioh. 7.5.
Christ's kinsfolks believed not in him, being loath to be ill thought of among
the Pharisees.

For there is a direct opposition between Faith and ambition. Faith makes a
man to be vile in his own eyes, to see his own wants, and so causes him to
go out of himself, and seek for help at God only.

But ambition makes a man to think highly of himself, to ouerweene himself,
and be much conceited of his own gifts, as the proud Pharisees. So that he will
attribute all to himself, and nothing to God, as did Herod, Act. 12.22, 23.

Use, To take heed of this root of bitterness; to strive against ambition and
vainglory, and for motives to consider,

1. The doctrine before delivered.

2. That ambition and desire of praise corrupts, putrifies and makes odious to
God, every good thing that we take in hand, our prayers, fastings, almesdeeds,
the very worship and service of God: Esaias.

3. That in seeking praise of men, we loose the praise of God, who have here
our reward.

4. Gal. 1.10.

5. That hereby we provoke Gods wrath against us: for he resists the proud;
as did Herod, Act. 12.23.

Quest. But is it simply unlawful to seek the praise of men?

Answ. We may not simply seek it, to the end to be praised of them: for men
praise those things that are agreeable to their humor, and all do not like
godliness: but when it may tend to the honor of God, the confirmation of the
good, and the rebuke of those that oppose themselves, we may seek it. As Paul
would have the Corinthians to think well of him, but it was for Christ for the
professions sake, and that the adversaries mouth might be stopped.

2. We may not seek for it in the first place, but in his due order, first
seeking to be approved of God, then the approbation of men. First, doing those
things, which in the uprightness and integrity of our conscience we know to
be good, then if men do like and allow of it, to receive this as a blessing
of God, if not to be contented, and not to hunt after their applause. And thus
we are to labor to leave a blessed name and memory behind us.

Directions to avoid ambition:

1. In all things that we think to be excellent and praiseworthy, consider
whence we have them; 1. Cor. 4.7.

2. To consider what a Sea of impiety and wickedness is in us, how many faults
our hearts are privy unto; for this consideration will pull down all proud
conceits.

3. To consider that of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 10. last verse, that so we be not
puffed up with any thing that may seem glorious to man, but may study to
approve our selves unto God in what he allows.

Further, note here the description of an ambitious humor, in these words (
one of another) noting, that they did sooth, flatter, and claw one another.

Doct. Ambitious men are ready to puff up, and to flatter one another^ They
will give titles to others, that such titles might be given unto themselves.
They do it not that others might be praised; for pride ^uer goes with envy,
and hatred of pride in others. But this is the way to get honor from others,
by seeming to honor them.

Use. To take to our hearts in giving of honor to other, it is not a thing
unlawful, 1. Pet. 2.17. Romans 12.10. so it be not done for undue and unjust
respects, Job 31. last verse.

How inconvenient this ambition is, appears by the consequent [ And seek not
the honor, etc.] Whence observe, first, from the inference:

Doct. They which seek for popular applause and praise of men, are careless
in seeking for the praise of God, as did the Pharisees, whose whole practice was
to be seen of men, not to approve themselves to God: and so Christ compares
them to whited tombs.

For there is a contrariety be^weene Gods will and man's will, and what pleases
man pleases not him: and so if we set our selves to seek the one, we cannot
seek the other.

Use. This is a further motive to avoid ambition.

Doct. 2. In that this is laid down as a reproof of them, that they did not
seek the praise of God, note, That true praise comes from God: that praise
which we may, and ought to seek, and wherein we may rest, that is, that praise
which is given of God for those things which he allows, who knows best what
is good and praiseworthy.

Object. But may we not do those things that are praised by the Saints?

Answ. Yea: for they do it being directed by the Word, and illightned by the
Spirit, so that their praise is the very praise of God. But it must not be
understood here of that commendations which is given by natural men.

Doct. 3. From hence we may also learn, that it is lawful to seek for
praise; because it is a reward of piety and virtue: so that not the thing, but
the manner of seeking it is condemned.

Now in this case we must do as men use to do, that seek the praise of
another, they will observe to do every thing that may be pleasing unto him,
etc. so if we will seek the honor of God, we must mark diligently what is
his will, what is acceptable to him, and in those things we seek to honor him
by obeying his will, and then shall we be assured to receive honor from him
again, 1. Sam. 2.30.

Doct. 4. Alone] This implies, that we may not seek praise of God and of men
both together; laboring to approve our selves in some things to God, and in
some things to man: for the judgment of God and man are contrary, and we
cannot satisfy both. And therefore we must set our selves to reject the one,
and to seek wholly the other.

Verse. 45. Do not think that I will accuse you to my Father: there is one
that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust.


AFter that our Savior had reproved these Jews for their unbelief, and laid
down the causes thereof, viz. their ignorance, obstinacy, want of love, and
ambition, he comes in the next place to the event and issue, that will follow
upon this their incredulity; telling them (in these words) that condemnation
remains for them, they shall be accused, and so as that they shall be
condemned. It is then a very severe Commination against them, wherein observe;
first, who shall accuse them; first, negatiuely, one is removed [ Think not
that I.] Secondly, affirmatively, another is declared who it shall be, viz.
Moses.

Secondly, for what they shall be accused. First, in general, from the manner
of Christ's proceeding, how that after he had first soundly proved the point
in question, viz. that he was God, and also reproved them for their
incredulity; now seeing them still to remain obstinate, and that nothing would
work upon them, he can no longer forbear, but he threatens this ^eauy
judgment upon them. Hence we learn,

Doct. That when men will not be moved with soundness of argument, or with
reproves, they must be more roundly dealt withal, by denouncing the
judgments of God against them. This was the practice of Christ against all
obstinate men, as the Pharisees, Mat. 23. Many woes denounced. Of Moses with
Corah and his company. Of John Baptist with the same Pharisees, Mat. 3.7. Tit.
1.13. For when milder meane^ will not prevail this may work upon them, Iud.
verse. 23. Therefore as lenity and mildness does become the servant of God, so
does also severity beseem him according as he has persons to deal withal.
These cautions observed, first, that he have a calling to do it: for then does
the threatenings terrify: as if a child be threatened by his father, a subject
by hi^ Prince. Secondly, that the person be certainly found to be obstinate.
Thirdly, that it be done without passion, in a holy zeal with meekness.
Fourthly, that it be done without respect of persons to one, as well as
another, sparing none. Fifthly, that it be for weighty causes, not for trifles,
as Excommunication is now used, which makes it so lightly esteemed of. Sixthly,
it must be used in the last place, after all other gentler means sought^

In particular, first, consider the occasion of these words [ Do not thinke]
implying that this obstinacy arose in them, because they cared not for Christ,
nor esteemed what he said, whom they accounted but as a mean man like unto
others; yea, worse then others, holding him for a blasphemer, prophaner of the
Sabbath, etc. but as for them, they had Moses for their Patron, whom they
trusted in. This their thought being not yet uttered, Christ preuenteth,
telling them, that even Moses, whom they so highly magnified, should be their
accuser.

Of this dealing of Christ, we have many examples, how he does prevent the
thoughts of his hearers, so meeting with sin at the beginning, before it
break out further.

A pattern for Minis^ers to follow, teaching them to diue into men's hearts as
far as they can. Which they may do,

1. By d^ligent observing of t^eir own disposition, their own temptations,
etc. and to think the same may be in others, etc.

2. By observing what has been the quality and dispos^tion of his Hearers,
what their conceits and opinions, ^^^ir excuses and pretenses, etc.

3. By the Word which can search further then any other means. Thus shall they
meet with sin in time, and suffer no root of bitterness to s^^ing up.

2. The parties accusing.

Not Ch^^^t, but M^ses, [Thinke not that I.] But how may this be, does Christ
accuse and ^^ndemne vnbel^euers?

Answ. This may be taken two ways, either literally, and that, first, in
regard of that proper and maine end, for which Christ came into the world, viz.
not to condemn and accuse sinners: for this the Law had done before, but to
save. Secondly, in regard of his high Office, to be a Judge to hear and give
sentence, and not to be an Accuser.

2. Or figuratively; first, by way of concession; as if he should say, Though
I should hold my peace, and say nothing of you to my Father, yet should you not
be acquitted: for even Moses, whom you hold for your Patron, shall accuse you.
Secondly, by way of amplification, as if he had said, Think not that I alone
will accuse you, there is another also that will accuse you, even Moses.

From the connection of these two, observe,

Doct. They that believe not Moses and his writings, shall have Moses to be
their accuser. So they that believe not the Prophets, have the Prophets for
their accusers. The same may be applied to the Apostles, and all faithful
Ministers of the Word: for they all bring not their own, but the message of
God, whose Word cannot go back in vain, but it either breeds faith, or makes
more obstinate, it is either a savor of life, or of death, 1. Cor. 6.

Use. It teaches us to be very careful in reading of Moses, the Prophets,
Apostles, etc. in hearing the Ministers of the Word, to take heed how we read
and hear, viz. so that we apply both threatenings and promises to our selves,
that we believe all doctrine of Faith, follow after all graces whereunto we
have been stirred up, avoid all vices, from which we have been dehorted. Else
every Chapter and verse that we have read, every Se^mon (...) ^^struction that
we have heard, shall be a witness against us to accuse us.

In whom ye trust.] First, note here the erroneous and heretical collection
of the Papists from hence; therefore, say they, the ancient Fathers believed in
Moses, trusted in him, adored him, and called upon him: wherefore so may we do
unto the Saints.

The vanity of this appears, first, because these here spoken of, are such as
Christ condemns, and who had Moses to be their accuser. So that they trusted
in Moses, and Moses would accuse them for it; and what does this make for the
Papists? Secondly, by Moses is meant here Moses doctrine, and not his person;
and so they are here said to trust in Moses, as before they are said to trust
in the Scriptures. Thus in Exodus, they believed the Lord and Moses, (...) that
is, they gave credence to Moses. So 2. Chron. 20.20. So it is in the Vulgar.

Secondly, from this observe, that whereas it is laid down, to show their high
account and good opinion that they had of Moses, who yet notwithstanding,
should be their accuser.

Doct. The high account that people have of Ministers, shall not keep them
from being their accusers, if they believe, and obey not their doctrine.

For it is only faith and obedience to their doctrine that can free us from
the accusation of our Ministers: for so they shall not have to accuse us, but
to plead for us; Heb. 13.8, 17.

Verse. 46. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote
of me.


IN this verse is laid down the cause why Moses would accuse them, which is
their incredulity: not directly expressed, but laid down under a proof, and
(...) the more strongly affirmed.

Now this is strange that they should not believe in Moses, in whom, as is said
before, they trusted, whose disciples they professed themselves to be, whom
they knew to be instructed of God.

To ^^^are this, we must consider, that there is a double faith* first, ^
general faith, whereby we believe the Ministers of God to be his servants sent
of him, and that which they deliver, to be the Word and truth of God.

2. A particular faith, whereby we understand, and conceive the true meaning of
that which is delivered, and accordingly apply it to our selves. Herein failed
these Jews, for they vnd^rstood not, that Moses spoke of Christ, and therefore
they believed him not.

The proof stands thus; Ye believe not me, therefore ye b^leeue not Moses.

Doct. They that believe not in Christ aright, believe not Mo^es* the Prophets,
the Apostles, the Scriptures, or the Ministers preaching out of the Scriptures.
For all do declare Christ.

Vse^ So to read and hear all, as that we may find matter to strengthen our
faith in Christ, otherwise all will be our accusers.

A confirmation of this proof is in these words [ for he wrote of me.] Whence
we learn, first, that Christ was made known even from the beginning.
Secondly, that if we believe not the doctrine that is delivered, we do not
believe the Ministers: if we believe not Moses writings, we believe not Moses.

Verse. 47. But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words.


A Further confirmation proouing their incredulity, wherein note a double
comparison, first, between Mo^es and Christ's persons: secondly, between Moses
writings and Christ's words: as is he should say, If ye reject Moses, whom ye
t^i^ke so well of, whose writings are recorded unto you, no ma^^^ll, yea, how
can you but reject me, whose words are only s^unded in your eare^, and of whom
ye esteem so meanly, an^ so basely, [from their conceit.]

Doct. If we will no^ b^leeue the written Word of God, we wi^^ not believe any
^uide^c^ whatsoever. Mark Abra^^ms answer to the Rich man, Luke 16.31.

For the Scriptures have been approved from time to time to be the Word of
God, and the ground of all writing, speaking and preaching, having fully
declared the whole will of God.

Use 1. That we seek not any other means to breed Faith besides the Word.

Secondly, that this be a strong motive to stir up to have it in high account.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE THIRD OF JOHN.
Ioh. 3.29, 30. He that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom: but the friend of
the Bridegroom, which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of
the Bridegroomes voice: This my joy therefore is fulfilled.

He must increase, but I must decrease.


THese words are part of that testimony which John gave concerning Christ. It
begins at the 27. verse.

In it we may observe these four distinct points:

First, the free confession that John makes of his own profession and gifts:
verse. 27, 28. In th^^ ^bserue,

1. Whence his Gifts and Callings was, viz. from Heaven. This affoords many
instructions: first, that man has nothing, nor ability, etc. of himself, but
from above: which serves to humble us, Romans 14. Secondly, that every excellent
thing comes from Heaven, whether spiritual or temporal, Iam. 1.17. This
shows whether to have recourse for a supply of our wants, and to whom to give
thanks when we have received any blessings. Thirdly, that God, as he bestows
all things on men, so he proportioneth them accordingly to every man. This
shows, that we are to observe our own gifts and callings, and herewith to
be contented.

2. What his Calling was, the declaration is partly negative, [ I am not
Christ:] Affirmative; [ but I am sent before him.] This shows the integrity
of John, that John would so abase himself, and acknowledge his place, not
only before strangers, but also his friends, even such as would have
attributed greater matters unto him.

That I have said] viz. seven times recorded by the Evangelists. This shows
us, that we must be constant in our integrity. Again, in that these witnesses
so often did talk of the pre-eminence of John above Christ, and would not
after so many sayings of John be persuaded, we see how dangerous a thing it is
to have a wrong conceit fixed in our mind: wherefore we ought to labor to
prevent and redress speedily all errors in judgment.

I am not the Christ.] Why? because his disciples would have made him the
Christ. This learnes us not to take to us any Honor or Calling that belongs
not unto us, as titles, and the like.

But I am sent before him] that is, I am the servant of Christ. This teaches
us, that in no hand we be ashamed of that Calling whereunto God has called us,
howsoever it may seem base in the world.

The second point is the comparison between himself and Christ, and thereby
shows how much more excellent Christ is then himself, is twofold: first, in
the 29. verse: secondly, in the 30. verse.

First, let us see the literal meaning.

Bride. Bridegroom.] These terms are used for new married persons, and in the
original not only so, but for those that are only contracted. And this
rather is meant here, because the time of solemnization of the marriage
between Christ and the Church is not to be holden till the end of the World,
in the Kingdom of Heaven.

The friend] That is, such a one as the Bridegroom deputeth in his stead to
woo the Bride, (...), to bring her home, to provide for the marriage, etc.

Stands and hears him, and rejoices because of the Bridegroomes voice.]
He rejoices for the good end of his service, and that the Bridegroom does in
person perform that, which he did for him.

2. The Allegory. The Bride is the Church; the Bridegroom is Christ; the
Friend of the Bridegroom is here meant particularly John, who was sent to
prepare the Bride for Christ: for this was the end of his Calling. Now he
hearing that Christ is come, and himself speaks to his Bride, and that the
people hearken unto him, now does he rejoice, etc.

Now the application is excellent and very fit, to convince that envious and
ambitious conceit which possessed the disciples minds, concerning the
greatness of John above Christ. I am not (says John) the Bridegroom, but the
Friend sent to prepare, and fit the Bride for him: now how great a sin and
offense were it for us, if being sent to woe for the Bridegroom, I should
speak for my self, if I should take the honor due to him, upon my self, and
so cause the Bride to commit idolatry, and spiritual fornication with another
man.

Now come we to the instructions arising from the maine scope of these verses,
which is to show the great difference that is between the Ministers and
Christ. We may observe, first, the Comparison: secondly, the Inference.

The Comparison shows, first, the place of Christ, and the place of the
Church. The point is; Christ is the only Bridegroom and Husband of the
Church, and the Church is the Spouse and Bride only of Christ. Whence it is,
that such titles of Head, Husband, Bridegroom, are given to Christ, only in
relation to the Church; of Wife, Love, Spouse, to the Church only in relation
to Christ: 1. Cor. 11.3. Ephesians. 5.25. Mat. 9.15. Ephesians. 5.23. and in the book of
the Canticles, Chap. 4.8. Ephesians. 5.23.

Three especial reasons there are why a man has the prerogative to be a
Bridegroom.

1. The gift and consent of the Parents.

2. The love and choice of the party, that is the Bridegroom.

3. The willing consent and liking of the Bride.

1. Ioh. 17 6, 9, 11, 23, 25. The Church, is the gift of the Father.

2. Ephesians. 5.25. Act. 20.28. Hos. 2.19, 20. The love and choice of Christ,
Ephesians. 5.26.

3. Cant. 2.16. Ephesians. 5.24. The good liking and willing obe^ience of the
Church.

This then is the prerogative that is due only to Christ.

Use. This commends unto us the great love of Christ in vouchsafing this honor
to the Church, to debase himself so far as to be her Bridegroom. Whereas
indeed the best in the Church may say as John, Mat. 3.11. I am not worthy to
carry his shoes; and as Abigaile said, when she should be David's wife. 1 Samuel
25.41.

When Hester was taken to be Ahashuerosh his wife, though she were a poor
captive, yet was there some cause why the King loved her, viz. because she
pleased him, Ester 2.9. but in the Church there is no cause why Christ should
cast his love on her, as appears, Ezekiel. 16.6.

2. How careful ought we to be in pleasing of him, and by love to answer this
his love, to carry our selves reverently, to subject our selves unto his
commandments, to seek his honor, not to carry our selves rebelliously,
presumptuously, and proudly.

Again, this is matter not only of instruction, but of trial also, whether
we are of the Church, or no. This will appear by our carriage: for if we be
proud, contemptuous of our brethren, worldlings, covetous, etc. it shows, that
the Spirit of Christ is not in us, whereby we a^e united unto him, and one
unto another; if it were, then would the fruits thereof be in us, as love,
meekness, etc.

3. For Consolation: first, that so Christ will perform the duties of
marriage; what are they? That he will protect and defend, and provide for her:
for he is both able, because God; and willing, because he was not constrained
to take the Church for his Spouse, Genesis 20.16. Secondly, so Christ is a
companion with us in all distresses, Act. 9. though he were in Heaven, yet by
virtue of this union he was persecuted: so Mat. 25. penult, Heb. 2.17. Thirdly,
the Law of marriage requires, that there be a communication of all the goods
of the Husband with the Wife. Now Christ is rich, and full of grace, and so is
the Church, Psalm. 45.13.

Though the Church start aside sometime, yet does not God cast her away, Ier.
3.11. Ezekiel. 33.10, 11.

Yea, such grace is given the Church, that she shall never fall away finally,
Romans 11.29. Ioh. 10.28. Ioh. 13.1. So that this bond is indissoluble, and never
to be broken, which is another consolation we receive from hence, that we are
the Spouse of Christ.

4. For refutation: So the title given to the Pope of Rome to be Head of the
Church, is most dishonorable and derogatory to Christ. He is not so the
Friend of Christ, but plain Antichrist, arrogating that honor to him, which
is due only to Christ, 2. Cor. 11.2. our Husband. John's disciples would feign
have made him Pope too, but he refused it.

2. The comparison shows the place, and duty of the Ministers of Christ.

Doct. Ministers of Christ Jesus are friends of the Bridegroom, whom Christ
uses to call home, the bride, as Jeremy was, cap. 3.1. and Hos. chap. 2.1.
Matthew. 9.15. children of the Marriage-chamber.

The reason why it pleases Christ to have these friends, is, first, for the
honor of himself; ^s it is the honor of a g^^at man, not to do all by
himself. Secondly, for the good of the Church; that the Church might more
familiarly receive the Word by the Ministry of man, which would be astonished,
(...) she should now hear Christ speaking to her from Heaven in his Majesty
and glory. Thirdly, this is a means to try the simple and pure obedience of
the Church, that she does not so much regard the messengers, as the message,
because it is her husbands will, and so she will obey it by whomsoever she
receives the knowledge of it.

Use. This shows the dignity and excellency of the Ministers Calling.

2. To teach Ministers to be careful in the discharge of their duties, seeing
their calling is so weighty.

Now let us see what duties belong to the Ministers, as they are the Friends of
Christ. They are these:

1. To be Suitors to the Bride, 2. Cor. 5.20. to labor to win many wives for
Christ.

2. When people are won and converted, then to keep them from starting
back, and following strange flesh: for Ministers are not only planters, but
also waterers, and Nurses to bring up, as well as fathers to beget children
unto God; and if they continue not to the end, these lose the fruit and
recompense of all their former labors.

3. If by the temptations they fall, then to labor to reclaim them, Luke 15.
Christ shows his affection there by those Parables of the lost sheep, and
Prodigal child, as a pattern for all Ministers to be so minded.

4. To have a special care to maintain the honor due to Christ entire unto
him, not to part stakes with him, or to woo for themselves, as John would not
here, and the Apostles, Acts ^.12, 16.

5. To be attentive to the Bridegroom, to hear his will, and to teach it the
Church; which duty is here, verse. 29. expressed: and Ezekiel. 3.17. 1. Ioh. 1.1.
Which serves to condemn ignorant Ministers, and those also that hearken to the
voice of other, or deliver their own conceits, and such as the Papists, that
talk of nothing but the voice of the Church: John says here, hears Him, not
her, verse. 29.

6. The last is also laid down here, namely, to rejoice where people come unto
Christ, that so Christ may speak unto them, and they submit themselves to him.
This ought to be the fulness of a Ministers joy when he sees this fruit and
power of his ministry in winning souls to Christ: 1. Th. 2.19. Act. 11.18, 23.

Verse. 30. He must increase, but I must decrease.

31. He that comes from above, is above all: he that is of the earth, is
earthly, and speaks of the earth: he that comes from heaven is above all:

32. And what he has seen and heard, that he testifies, and no man receives
his testimony.


IN the thirtieth verse is noted the second inference, inferred from the former
comparison; as if he had said, Now the Bridegroom himself is come, mine
office of preparing the Bride is finished; therefore shall I decrease both in
the ministerial function: for now the people will stock unto him, and leave
me, as also in that credit and present account which they carry of me, because
they shall now reverence, admire, and honor Christ.

This then that here is spoken of John's decreasing, is not meant as concerning
the authority of John's Doctrine, or his faithfulness in his Calling, which can
never be diminished, but as long as the World stands, John will be found to have
been most faithful in his Office.

Now to show that this came not by his own negligence, or by Christ's pride and
ambition, but only by the will of God, he puts a must to it [ I must increase,
etc.]

From this humiliation of John we may learn diverse good lessons, as

First, this teaches Ministers that they should not be grieved, though they
grow into disgrace, and small account amongst men, if so be that thereby any
glory may be got unto Christ.

Secondly, that the more men are esteemed, the less account is made of Christ;
and contrariwise, the more account is made of Christ, the less will man be
esteemed; as is plain by the example of the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3.4. and by
that holy jealousy which the godly Ministers have had, when they perceived
much people to flock about them.

The use is to teach us, to fix our eyes on Christ and God, and not to dote on
man's worthiness, and not so much to have their persons in admiration, as their
Callings, and especially that message which they bring from God.

Thirdly, that where Christ shines, lesser lights are obscured: as at the
coming of Christ, and preaching of the Gospel, the Types, Ceremonies, and
dark shadows of the Law were obscured, 2. Pet. 1.19. for he is the Day Star,
and the true Son of righteousness.

1. This teaches us to be ashamed of our ignorance in these days that the
Gospel shines so bright upon us, and yet we will not walk in the light
thereof.

2. That is but a dotage and foolish conceit of some, who collect from hence,
that John was borne in that time of the year when the days decrease, and
Christ when they increase, and thereupon alter their Almanacks, etc.

Verse. 31. He that comes from above, is above all: he that is of the earth,
is earthly, and speaks of the earth: he that comes from heaven is above all.


THis verse contains a second comparison, to show the excellency of Christ
above man.

He that is come from on high^ That is, he that is come from heaven, from God.
And this is spoken in regard of the union of his two Natures: in regard of his
divine Nature, he is in heaven, yet not locally, as there included, for he
fills all things. In regard that he took unto him the humane Nature, he is
said to come from Heaven.

Is above a^l^ Angels and men.

He that is of the earth] That is, a mere man.

Is of the earth] That is, he sauoureth of the earth, speaks of earth and
carnal things. According to his condition, so is his disposition, his
condition earthly, his disposition carnal, as the like, That which is borne of
the flesh, is flesh, Ioh. 3.6.

In this comparison is showed, first, what Christ is, first, in regard of his
beginning and original.

Secondly, in regard of his excellency and preheminency.

2. What man is, first, in respect of this condition and making, [ he that is
of the earth.] Secondly, of his disposition, inward [ is of the earth,] and
outward [ speaks of the earth.]

First, general instruction that is drawn from the scope of the comparison,
is, That Man and Christ are as far different, opposite and contrary as may
be, as much as between heaven and earth: 1. Cor. 15.47. Ioh. 8.23.

This John acknowledged, Matthew. 3.11. Ioh. 1.27. and the Centurion, Matthew. 8.8.
and Peter, Luke 5.8.

The ground of this difference, is the union of the two Natures in Christ, in
which respect though the Godhead is said to descend, Ephesians. 4.9. yet is he
nevertheless God, and the similitude of the Humane nature does not make him so
like man, as the union of the Godhead does make him unlike.

First, this sets forth the great love of Christ to man, who in himself did
make a union between two so different Natures for our good, and thereby
reconciled heaven and earth.

Secondly, against the Papists, who derogate from Christ's honor, in making
many Saints not only equal, but superior to Christ, and join their merits
and intercession with Christ, giving the Pope more authority then Christ; yea,
making eue^y poor Mass Priest above Christ, because they are to sacrifice
Christ in the Mass, now the sacrificer is above the sacrifice.

The parts of this comparison are, first, the original of Christ, He came from
heaven; this is to be understood of the person of Christ, that he had his
beginning from heaven, though according to his humane nature he came from
earth, being borne of man. Which observe against some ancient heretics, who
h^ld, that Christ brought his body with him from heaven: which i^ contrary to
the History of his Nativity and incarnation, set down by the Evangelists, as
also Ioh. 1.14. Gal. 4 4. 1. Tim. 3.16. and furthermore, it is against a maine
end of the Incarnation of Christ, which is to sanctify and make holy our
nature, our birth, our conception. Therefore though the humane nature be of
m^n, yet notwithstanding Jesus Christ, God and man considered in his person, is
from above, of an heavenly offspring.

The use is, first to teach us how well those prerogatives agree unto Christ,
which the Scriptures do attribute unto him, that he is the Head of the Church,
the Savior and Redeemer of mankind, our Mediator and Intercessor, that he
will bring us unto eternal life, even because he is from Heaven: and so none
either can claim any of these prerogatives.

Use 2. That so we ought not esteem of Christ vilely and b^r^ly as the Jews
did, by looking only upon his poor and mean estate, but we must remember,
that he is from heaven.

The second part is of Christ's excellency.

Above all] Doct. Christ is more excell^nt then Man or Angels: the former is
manifest, the latter is proved plentifully in the first Chapter of the
Hebrews. Some will say, What need this doctrine? every one that is but
instructed in his Catechism can tell this. True, many know, but acknowledge it
not aright by their practice: for if we did, then would we not car^y our selves
so proudly as many do, but we would see our basen^sse and vileness, in
respect of the dignity and excellency of Christ, and so learn to be humbled.
Briefly, the use is to teach what high esteem we ought to carry of Christ,
how greatly to honor and reverence him. Other uses also may be drawn from
hence: for if Christ be above all, then is he able to protect and defend his
Church, and to provide all good things for us, etc.

The third part is concerning man, what he is first, in his condition.

He that is of the earth.] Doct. Man in regard of his beginning is of the
earth. This doctrine is well known, and is proved unto us by these
Scriptures, Genesis 2.7. Genesis 18.27. Job 33.6. Man also when he dies, returns to
dust, now it is a sure rule, that every thing is made of that whereinto it is
resolved, as ice and snow of water.

This instruction briefly ministers unto every one matter of humiliation, to
consider our weakness and baseness, which ought to be unto us as the black
feet unto Peacockes, to make us pluck down our stately feathers, and high
minds.

Secondly, in his disposition; first inward.

Is of the earth.] That is, he is wholly earthly minded, and carnally affected.
This teaches unto us first, that man naturally sauoureth of nothing but
earthly things, in all the parts both of soul and body. Take an instance in
his understanding, and we shall see it naturally carried unto carnal and
sensual constructions. Hence the Jews did expound the Prophecies of earthly
things, dreaming of an earthly Kingdom of Christ, as also the Disciples did.
Hence the Capernaites dreamed of a carnal eating of Christ's flesh, Ioh. 6.52.
Hence it was, that when Christ spoke of doing his Fathers will, which he
accounted his meat and drink, the Disciples interpreted it of earthly food,
Ioh. 4.33. So when Christ spoke to the Woman of Samaria of the water of life,
she understood it of the water of Jacobs Well, Ioh. 4.11. So was Nicodemus his
understanding altogether carnal in the matter of Regeneration, though he were
a great Docto^.

Secondly, this teaches, whatsoever knowledge and other spiritual grace a man
has, he has it only from the gift of God, being in himself utterly deuoid
of all, 1. Corin. 2.14. Roman. 8.5.

Secondly, in the outward disposition, which is his speech, and it may also be
referred to his actions and carriage.

He speaks of the earth,] First, from the connection of these two together,
the outward with the inward disposition, we learn, that according to a man's
inward disposition and affection, so is his speech, usually, though sometimes
hypocrites may make a fair color of words, to hide the privy corruption of
their hearts, but usually it is so. See for proof, Matthew. 12.34, 35. Matthew.
7.18, 20. for as the heart suggesteth, so the tongue utters, for this is the
hearts interpreter.

Use, Is to teach us to judge both of our selves and others, by our own and
their speeches; which if we find to savor of earthly things, that our talk is
nothing but of the World, and worldly wealth, we may justly suspect our s^lues,
that our hearts be carnal and unregenerate. This shows the vanity of that
excuse of many, who will say, Why, whatsoever I say, yet I think no ill, I
mean well, Matthew. 12.37.

A second Doctrine, that man of himself cannot declare and deliver any
heavenly Mysteries pertaining to salvation. This point John principally
intended, thereby to drive the people from him unto Christ, who only could
expound and decl^re unto them all divine knowledge of the mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven. And so the Prophets of old, and now all the Ministers have
not in themselves the light of knowledge, but are illightened and inspired by
Christ, in whom all the treasures of wisdom are hid, Ioh. 1.8. Colos. 2.3.

First, this is a notable evidence of Gods love toward us, who has given us
Christ Jesus, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, to open the book of the mysteries
of the King of Heaven, and to reveal them unto us, without whom we should
otherwise have had no more knowledge then Savages, and wild people have,
Revel. 5.5.

Secondly, this is to admonish Ministers that they be not puffed up with pride,
and swell against their brethren, because they have more knowledge, but to
remember that they are men as well as others, and so though they have many
helps to get knowledge, yet it is Christ, who by his Spirit must illuminate
their minds, to give them sound understanding in heavenly matters. And secondly
that they ought to teach them unto the people as the Oracles of God: 1. Pet.
4.10.

Thirdly, this teaches the people to regard the Ministers, remembering that
they deliver the Word of God, and not man, 1. These. 2.13.

The last clause of this 31. verse is repeated again, but not in vain: for
the matter was of great weight, and the preiudicate opinion of the Jews was
hard to be removed; and so he urges it again unto them. Secondly, hereby he
makes way unto his complaint for their unbelief, that though he came from
heaven, yet they received not his testimony.

Verse. 31.32. He that comes from above, is above all: he that is of the
earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth: he that comes from heaven is
above all.

32 And what he has seen and heard, that he testifies, and ^o man receives
his testimony.


WHich words contain the complaint of John for the incredulity and unbelief
of the Jews. In it are two parts; first, the ground and reason of his
complaint; secondly, the complaint it self. The reasons or arguments whereby
he vrges the greatness of their incredulity are two; first, drawn from the
excellency of Christ, [ He that is come from heaven is above all.] These
words, first, in that they are twice repeated, and that for the weightinesse of
the matter therein contained, teach Ministers that they ought not to think the
bare delivery of a truth, and that but once sufficient, but duly to consider
the weight of the matter, and so to urge and press it again and again, that
hereby as it were by many strokes, they may beat the truth thereof into the
hearts of the hearers: Gal. 1.9.

Secondly, they serve to aggrauate the incredulity of the Jews. For who spoke?
Was it not Christ from heaven, who is over all? then the greater is their
unbelief that would not receive his testimony. The Doctrine hence arising is,

The greater the person is that delivers a truth unto us, the greater is the
fault if it be lightly regarded by us. This is proved out of the second of the
Hebrews: For the Apostle having proved in the first Chapter, that Christ is
more excellent then the Angels, Chap. 2. verse. 2, 3. thereupon inferres, that
if the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every transgression and
disobedience, received a just recompense o^ reward, then how can we escape, if
we neglect so great salu^tion, preached to us by Jesus Christ. And this in
common equity; for if the King do speak unto v^, and we lightly esteem of
i^, the fault is greater, then if a mean and base person delivered the same
message unto us. And the husbandmen were therefore especially destroyed,
because they regarded not the message which the Lord sent unto them by his only
Son: Mat. 21.37.38.

For this contempt of the message, shows a light esteem of the Person that
delivers it.

The use is that which the Apostles make, Heb. 12.25. see that ye despise not
him that speaks from above. Where he adds a reason drawn from a comparison
between Moses and Christ, that if they escaped not which despised him that
spoke from earth, (1) Moses; much more shall not we escape that despise him
that speaks from heaven (1) Christ. That the former escaped not, appears by
the example of Mirian, Numb. 12. of Nadab and Abihu, Leu. 10. of the man that
gathered stick, Numb. 14. of Corah and his company, of the Israelites that
would needs fight with the Canaanites against Moses express commandment, yea
and of all the Israelites, who perished in the wilderness for this cause. Now
if these did not escape, how can we?

But how shall we hear Christ speak, who is now in heaven?

Answ. Christ speaks unto us by his ministers, to whom he has first
delivered this message; Heb. 2.3, 4. and therefore Christ says; he that
hears you hears me.

Yea, but we see no such judgments come upon those that contemn the Gospel.

Answ. It is then because we do a right observe the judgment of God: for is
not the punishment of the Jews for contemning Christ and his Gospel, namely
their utter desolation and dispersion, far greater then any of their
Captiuities under the times of the Law. Do we not see all those famous
Churches of Greece for their light esteem of the Gospel, utterly destroyed,
and now in slavery to the Turk, and is not Rome now a servant of Antichrist; a
greater plague then to be made the slave of the Turk; 2 Thessalonians. 2.9, 10, 11.
And if there be no corporal plague, then does God send spiritual punishments,
giving men up to hardness of heart, and reserving them to eternal condemnation:
2. These. 1.7, 8, 9. Act. 28.26, 27. which plague of hardness of heart is so much
the more fearful and grievous by much less sensible it is.

The second argument is drawn from the infallible and certain truth of the
Gospel that Christ has delivered, verse. 32. [ what he has heard and seen.]
which words, first, show the certain truth of his doctrine for hearing and
seeing are senses of learning, and such proofs are most sure. Secondly, it
settes forth his manner of delivering: for he spoke it not by relation and
inspiration, as the Prophets: but he saw, and heard it in heaven, in the bosom
of his Father, at the Counsell-table, as it were of the Trinity.

The Doctrine hence arising is, That the Gospel delivered by Christ, is a most
sure and certain truth. See Ioh. 1.1.3.2. Pet. 1.16. Luke 1.2. and therefore
Saint Iam. cap. 1.18. fitly calls it, the Word of Truth, both in regard of
the Author, and of the manner of delivery, and also of the effect it works in
the heart of the receivers.

Use. 1. This serves to aggrauate the incredulity both of the Jews, and also of
us who notwithstanding these clear evidences, cannot yet be persuaded of the
truth thereof. We will believe a man that says, he both heard and saw the
thing he reports; yet the Gospel first preached by Christ, in whom there is
nothing, but it makes him worthy to believed, after confirmed by the Apostles,
who were eyewitnesses, and eare-witnesses of all that was done, cannot we be
drawn to believe: Ioh. 7.48.

2. This serves to strengthen our faith in the doctrine of the Gospel
delivered unto the world; that we begin not to doubt, and stagger about the
truth thereof, but to stand constantly for the defense and upholding of the
same, and even, if need be, to seal up the truth of it with our own blood.

3. Christ's faithfulness in delivering that only which he saw and heard; ought
to teach ministers to take heed, that they deliver nothing but what is sure and
certain; which they have received from Christ, and is grounded upon the Word;
otherwise they are liable to the Apostles reprehension: 1. Timo. 1.7.

4. This confutes our adversaries, who deliver many points of doctrine, as
necessary to salvation, which they never saw nor hear, whereof they have no
ground; as of Purgatory, Limbus, Transubstantiation, etc. Finally, if we will
be certainly resolved in points concerning our salvation, we must not rely
upon the sayings, testimonies, and opinions of men, but upon the undoubted
truth of Gods Word.

Now come we to the complaint it self. The fault he complains of, was, that
no man received his testimony. Though Christ spoke from Heaven, though his
person was most excellent, and the truth of his doctrine most certain, yet no
man did believe it, that is, very few, and in comparison of those other that
believed not as nothing.

From which inference we may observe this instruction, that no evidence will
satisfy incredulous and obstinate persons: so the Jews were persuaded, the
Prophets, and namely, Jeremiah, were inspired of God, Ier 42.2. yet when he had
delivered his message from God to them, they would not believe him, but gave
him the lie, and said, that Baruch did provoke him against the people: Ier.
43.2, 3. So Pharaoh, and the Egyptians would not be persuaded, even for their
own good. The Jews, Act. 4.16. could not deny the truth of those things the
Apostles had done, yet would they not believe. So the Pharisees against their
own conscience said unto Christ, that he cast out devils by the Prince; and
though they knew he did it by his Divinity, yet would they not be persuaded;
Mat. 12.24. Thus infidelity closes up the eyes of a man's reason, so that, be
the proofs and evidences never so plain, yet he cannot be persuaded in his
heart.

Use. Not to think any thing the worse of the truth, though men believe it
not: for few there are that will believe, Esaias 53.1. Romans 10.16. but the truth
of the Gospel depends not upon man, but upon God, Romans 3.4. Wherefore we
ought not, as many do, to stagger and doubt of the truth, because Papists and
others after so much writing and disputing, and so plain evidence on our
sides, will not yet believe, but still write, and even die in defense of their
errors. For what if an Heretic be burnt at a stake, shall we think ever the
better of his heresy, or on the worse of Gods truth? God forbid. Let us rather
look upon the Word of God, and so ground our selves thereon, and consider
withal what a man is, if God give him over to the devil, to incredulity,
obstinacy, and hardness of heart.

Receiued] They heard the Word preached, and the truth of it proved unto them
oftentimes by Christ, yet they remained incredulous and obstinate. Which first,
as it serves to aggrauate their hardness of heart and unbelief. Secondly, so
it yields unto us this observation. That incredulity and obstinacy against
plain evidence of truth, is not only proper to the profane and infidels, but
to many of them also that use to hear the Word preached, to frequent Sermons,
etc. as the Jews did, Ezekiel. 33.31, 32.

Verse. 33. He that has received his testimony, has set to his seal, that God
is true.

34. For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God: For God gives not
the Spirit by measure unto him.

35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand.

36. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
him.


THese verses contain a declaration of Faith, which is se^ down, first, by
the nature and object of it, [ He that has received his testimony.] Secondly,
by the excellency of which is laid down by the effect, [ has set to his seal
that God is true.] Which is confirmed by a reason in the next words, [ For he
whom God has sent speaks the Words of God:] and this strengthened with
another reason [ For God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him.] The 35.
verse lays down, first, the ground of this latter reason, why God gives him
the Spirit without measure, [ The Father loves the Son.] Secondly, a fruit
of this love, [ and has given all things into his hand.] Thirdly, Faith is
declared by the benefit that comes by it, namely, life everlasting, which is
further amplified by the contrary of unbelief what hurt follows upon, viz.
the wrath of God: verse. 36.

He that receives his testimony] Here Faith is described by the nature and
object of it, which is the testimony of Christ, that is, the Gospel, whereof
Christ is the Author. The point of doctrine hence arising is, that true faith
is only grounded upon the Word of God, as Ioh. 17.8. That faith which relyes
upon man's word and authority, brings no honor to God, nor comfort to our own
consciences.

Has set to his seal that God is true.] Here is the excellency of faith
showed by the effect. That faith ratifieth and confirms the truth of God; as
Abraham's faith is said to glorify God, Romans 4.20. whereas unbelief makes God
a lier, 1. Ioh. 5.10. But how can faith seal up the truth of God, or
infidelity impeach it? Indeed the truth of God does not depend upon man, but
upon the immutability of Gods will; yet Faith is said to ratify and confirm
it, first, in regard of the manifestation of the truth of God to others: as
among men, he that believes another, does manifest to the world, that
accounts him a true and trusty man. Secondly, because it assures and
ascertaines unto our own hearts and consciences the truth of God. Thirdly, in
regard of Gods acceptance.

Infidelity does impeach the truth of God; not that indeed an unbelieving man
can make God a liar, but because he does his uttermost endeavor as much as in
him lies, to make him a liar, by denying and doubting of his truth.

This affoords many instructions: first, that of all other graces, Faith is the
most necessary for a man's own self, because by it we apply the promises of God,
and the merits of Christ unto our consciences. Secondly, that likewise none is
more excellent, because it confirms the precious truth of God. Thirdly, that
this is the most acceptable grace, because it sanctifies all other; without it,
it is impossible to please God. Fourthly, this shows the great respect that
God has to man, that he does accept a testimony from him. Fifthly, again,
that faith does on our part to God, that which the Spirit does on Gods part to
us; this assures us of Gods truth, that seals up the truth of God, as Christ
by his Spirit is knit and united to us, we by faith to him.

Verse. 34. For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God: for God gives
not the Spirit by measure unto him.


FOr he whom God has sent, speaks the words of God.] Here is laid down a
reason, of that which was spoken of the excellency of faith in sealing up the
truth of God, drawn from the office of Christ. The reason stands thus: He that
receives his testimony whom God has sent, and who speaks the words of God,
he seals that God is true: but he that receives Christ's testimony,
receives his testimony, that is, sent from God, and that speaks the words of
God. Therefore he that receives the testimony of Christ seals that God is
true. Or more briefly thus: Christ's testimony are the words of God; therefore
he that receives Christ's testimony, seals that God is true. This 34. verse
then contains two parts:

First, the Office of Christ, with the condition, or effect of it.

Secondly, the gifts of Christ, and the quantity of them:

The Office is set down in these words [ He whom God has sent.] Which phrase
of sending, is generally applied to all the Messengers and Ministers of God
from time to time, both before and after Christ, 2. Chron. 24.19. Ioh. 1.6.
Ioh. 13.20. And it notes three things: First, the kind and quality of their
Office, that they are Ministers and Messengers. Secondly, the warrant of their
calling; God sends them. Thirdly, that they are deputed, and set apart to that
calling. But particularly, it is here understood of Christ, and in the
general, it sets forth thus much, That Christ took not unto him this
Calling and Office of himself, but God did appoint him, as the Apostle
proves, Heb. 5.4, 5, 6.

More particularly it shows, that Christ was sent from heaven, even from the
bosom of his Father, to take flesh upon him to declare unto us the secret
counsel of God, and to work our redemption, as Gal. 4.4. Ioh. 10.36.

But it will be objected, that in this respect Christ is very God, and then
how can he be sent.

Answ. Yes, very well, if we consider the distinction of persons; for there is
no inconvenience to say, that one person may send another, as Christ is also
said to send the holy Ghost. Yea but then one person shall be inferior to
another? We answer, First, that there may be a sending among equals. Secondly,
more particularly and properly we say, that Christ, first, in regard of the
humane nature which he took into the unity of person with the D^ity.
Secondly, in regard of the Office of his mediatorship, is inferior to the
Father: Ioh. 14.28. Phil. 2.7.

Doct. Christ was deputed of God to be his Messenger, and his Minister; a
phrase much used in Scripture; as Esaias 61.1. proved to be spoken of Christ by
Luke 4.18. Zach. 2.9, 11. 1. Ioh. 4.10. and Malac. 3.1. Christ is expressly
called, the Messenger of the Covenant; and Romans 15.8. a Minister.

For first, none but Christ was fit to do this, who only knew all the secret
councels of God; Ioh. 1.18.

Secondly, none was able to perform the work, but he that was both God and
man.

For use of this point; first, this manifests Gods love unto us, that when we
had no means to come to the knowledge of his will, and to life eternal, he
sent his only Son to bring us unto both, as in the 16. verse of this
Chapter. Secondly, this shows that great respect that he bears to mankind,
in sending so great and honorable an Ambassador unto him. As among men, what
greater honor then for a King to send his son in embassage to a poor man.
Thirdly, it sets forth unto us that great love and respect that Christ Jesus
bare toward us, in that he disdaind not to take upon him this office to be
made a Messenger of God for our good, which we are well to note, that hereby we
may learn to prize Gods love according to the worth of it, and so to love him
again. Fourthly, this is matter of comfort unto us, that those things which
Christ performs, are acceptable to God, because God himself appointed him to
this work. Fifthly and lastly, it is exemplary for our imitation, that if we
will have comfort in the things we take in hand, we must look, first, that the
calling be warranted of God. Secondly, that our selves be deputed, and set
apart to that Calling, 1. Cor. 7.17. That the Calling is appointed of God, we
shall know if it be warranted in the Word; and that the Calling is ordained for
us, if we find our selves moved thereunto by the Spirit of God, and enabled
with gifts to discharge it. This makes against Mass Priests, and insufficient
Ministers, Ier. 23.21.

He speaks the words of God,] Which is the effect of his Office. The Doctrine
is, That Christ being appointed a Messenger of his Father, was careful to
declare the Mind, Will, and Word of his Father; as himself witnesses, Ioh.
7.16. Ioh. 14.24. Ioh. 17.6, 8. and Heb. 3.2. Christ is faithful, as Moses
was: for this is a maine end why his Office was laid upon him: Ioh. 6.38.

Use is, first, it is a further motive to press the point and matter in hand,
that we should be attentive unto the Word, because Christ brought it from
heaven. So that if either the Author of it, namely, God; or the messenger, that
is, Christ can move us, it serves to enforce that exhortation which the
Apostle has, Heb. 2.1. that we do not let ship this Word.

Secondly, it teaches Ministers to have a care that they be like unto Christ,
to justify that they are sent of God, by speaking nothing but Gods Word. Which
first is Gods commandment, Ezekiel. 3.10. Ezekiel. 33.7. Mat. vlt. vlt. Ierem.
23.21. Secondly, the example of the Saints shows it; so did the Prophets
always speak in the Name of the Lord. And the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11.23.
Thirdly, this will gain reverence and attention unto their Ministry, 1. These.
2.13. Fourthly, herein lies a maine difference between faithful and
unfaithful Ministers.

Now from the force of this reason arises this Doctrine, that to receive their
testimony that are sent of God, and that speak the words of God, is to seal
the truth of God. Which as it is understood here of Christ, so is it true of
all other Ministers upon that ground: Luke 10.16. Ioh. 13.20. See Exodus 14.
vlt. 2. Chron. 20.20. Act. 13.48. The reason hereof is drawn from their
Office, because they are sent of God, and are Ambassadors of Christ standing in
his stead: 2. Cor. 5.20.

Use. This ought to breed reverence in men's hearts to the Ministry, because
they have not to do herein only with men, but with God, who is honored when
the Ministry is honored, despised, and contemned, when it is rejected: 1.
Sam. 8.7. Ezekiel. 20.8.

Secondly, it serves to uphold Ministers against the despite of those, who
contemn their Ministry, because of their infirmities and weaknesses: but man
ought to consider not the person, but the office.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE FIRST OF MARK.
Mark. 1.25. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him.


THese words are a part of the History of our Lords dispossessing of a Devil;
of which History were four parts: first, the place, verse. 23. Secondly, the
description of the party possessed, ibid. Thirdly, the manner of dispossessing
of him; where first is set down the Devils striving against it: secondly, how
Christ resisted him. Fourthly, the effects of this Miracle: verse. 26, 27.

And Jesus rebuked him] Christ has absolute authority over Devils, not only
as God, but as Mediator: which is for our comfort; for as Mediator he came to
dissolve the works of the Devil.

Saying.] The charge of Christ is twofold; first, Hold thy peace, or be mufled,
as 1. Tim. 5.18. But why would not Christ receive the testimony of the Devil.
Because:

First, the ground of this confession was not good; it was not love, but a
slavish fear that made him, as a slave ready to be beaten, give good words to
his Master.

Secondly, in regard of the matter, it was in some respects true, but not in
all.

Thirdly, in regard of the manner, it was deceitfully uttered by him.

Fourthly, in regard of his person, he was not fit to give testimony of Christ;
and if he had received it, it might have confirmed that slanderous opinion of
the Pharisees of compacting with him.

Secondly, Come out of him. Christ needs nothing to overcome the Devil but
only his bare Word: So Matthew. 4. though he suffered the Devil to do much,
yet at his Word away he hies. Which shows the difference between Christ's
casting out of Devils, and others: He, by his own command; they in his name:
he hy his Word, they by Prayer and Fasting.

Further, in regard of the party, note the goodness of Christ toward mankind,
which as particularly he showed to this man here, so will he to every one of
us, in delivering us from the slavery of the Devil.

Verse. 26. And the unclean spirit tare him, and cried with a loud voice, and
came out of him.


L^ke adds, He threw him in the midst, Chap. 4.35. and hurt him nothing at
all.

The Devils obedience to the charge of Christ, observe herein, first, the
manner. secondly, the thing it self: thirdly, the issue.

1. The manner, first, He threw him in the midst. This shows his rage and
fury. Secondly, he tare him; that is, there were so sore and grievous
conuulsions in his body, as if one limme had been pulled from another. Thirdly,
he cried out with a loud voice for horror and fear of Christ. What now should
be the reason of all this violence? even because he was now to abandon his
hold. Hence mark this point, The last conflict with Satan is commonly the
sorest and greatest. This is to be observed in all other demoniakes. Memorable
is that of Christ, Ioh. 14.30. when the Devil was now at the point to be fully
overthrown.

First, the ground is, because he still seeks to devour, and man is his
pray, and so like a Lion he roareth when the prey is plucked out of his m^uth.
So Pharaoh vexed the Israelites more when they were going away then before;
which is to be noted to comfort and uphold us. And secondly, in regard of
others, to order our judgments concerning them, if we see them in any
extraordinary conflict, seeing happily this may be the last. In the first of
those circumstances, observe how far the devil may prevail with man, if God
permit him, that is, to torment his body, etc. as appears in Job. In the
third, mark how terrible Christ is unto the Devil.

Secondly, his obedience it self is noted, in that He came out: note, first,
that the Devil cannot resist Christ, because no proportion between the
infinite power of the Creator, and that finite of the creature. Which shows,
that the power and authority which Christ has, is not titular, but effectual;
in that he has authority to command, so he has power to see his commands
executed. Which teaches us to resort and trust to him.

Verse. 27. And they were all amaz^d, insomuch that they questioned among
themselves, saying, What thing is this? What word is this? Luke 4.36. What new
doctrine is this? For with authority commanded he the unclean spirits, and
they obey him.

28. And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the Regions round
about Galilee.


IN these words are contained the effects of this miracle. First, the
astonishment of those that were present.

Secondly, the use they made of it, note here, first, how they enquired and
communed of it one to another. Secondly, their particular questions. Thirdly,
the reason of it.

1. Their inquiring after this matter is first noted in way of reproof, to
tax their ignorance and negligence, that they were not acquainted with the
Scriptures and Prophecies concerning Christ, that it should be he that should
confound the power of Satan, nor had attended unto the preaching of John, nor
unto Christ's former Sermons, wherein he had declared himself to be the
Messiah. Where we may see what follows upon neglect of the ministry of the
Word, that men are ever learning, yet come not to knowledge. Nevertheless, in
that they do inquire, is commendable in them, and set forth for our imitation,
and without it we shall never make profit of the Word.

2. By their particular questions, we may see the fruit of due attention.
First, they inquire into the nature of the Miracle, [ What thing is this] for
when once by diligent attention the mind has received a deep impression, it
is never satisfied, till it has gotten the full knowledge of the thing.
Secondly, they come to consider of the principal circumstance of the miracle,
viz. the mean of performance, [ What word is this?] Lastly, they go further,
and apply the miracle to the right end of it, viz. the confirmation of a
Doctrine, which for the high account and estimation they had of it, they called
New; not in disdain to diminish the authority of it. A thing is said to be
new, when it is done in another manner then it has usually been.

3. The reason was; For with, etc.

The Fame and report of Christ, (which is another effect of this Miracle.)
First, spread abroad, namely, by the good providence of God, that Christ and
his doctrine might be the better entertained wheresoever he became. Wherein
Gods goodness to the Church appears, that thereby many came to reap profit
by that which was done amongst a few. Wherefore our duty is to publish the
works of God: which also was commanded by Christ to many whom he cured. For
first, this is a special means to amplify the glory of God. Secondly, to
increase and edify the Church. Thirdly, to hinder other idle and vain rumors,
when our care is to speak of the works of God.

2. In the intent, it spread abroad throughout all the Country; teaching us,
that it is not sufficient for us to make known to our familiars and next
neighbors, the great works of God, but also to strangers as occasion serves:
avoiding partiality, and hindering the knowledge of Gods works, by staying the
fame thereof.

Verse. 29. And forthwith when they were come out of the Synagogue, they entered
into the house of Simon and Andrew with James and John.

30. But Simons wives mother lay sick of a Fever, and anon they told him of
her.

31. And he came and took her by the hand, and lift her up, and immediately
the Fever left her, and she ministered unto them.


THis is the tenth History of the first year of Christ's public ministry, and
the fifth miracle, following immediately after the former history and miracle
of the dispossessing of the Devil, as is clear by Mark, Forthwith, verse. 29.
and Luke 4.38. he arose out of the Synagogue, and entered into Simons house,
etc. Mat. 8.14, 15. places it otherwise: but first two are to be preferred
before one. Secondly, Matthew of all other is least careful to observe the
order of times in setting down his stories, regarding rather the likeness of
the matter, and the place where they were; as laying down a great many
Parables together in one place, in another a great many miracles, etc. Thirdly,
Matthew there uses an indefinite proposition, which implies no immediate
consequence of that, that follows on that which goes before. And generally, we
must have an eye to Luke for our order, and next to him to Mark.

The Evangelists that record this History are three, Matthew. 8.14, 15. Mark.
1.29. Luke 4.35. Let us compare the differences of them in handling of this
story, which are either in addition of circumstances, or variety of phrases.

Matthew is the concisest of the rest, touching only the substance of the
story. Therefore by the way note, that i^ is an error to say, that Mark is an
epitome of Matthew, as first may appear by this: secondly, because he observes
another order: thirdly, and also has more Histories then the other.

Matthew and Mark add, this woman was laid on her bed.

Secondly, that Christ touched her. Mark adds, that he lift her up.

Thirdly, Matthew has, that being healed, she arose.

Mark and Luke first add the transition, which Matth^w has not; and
forthwith when they were come out of the Synagogue, etc.

Secondly, that those that were present, made the woman's case known unto
Christ.

Mark he is most large, and adds, first, that Christ made no delay,
Forthwith: secondly, the house of Simon and Andrew.

Lastly, Luke adds; first, that the Fever was great. Secondly, that Christ
stood over her, and rebuked the Fever. Thirdly, that immediately she arose.

In variety of phrases, as Peter, and Simon, sick of a Fever, and taken with a
Fever, etc.

The sum of this History is a miraculous curing of Simons wives mother. The
parts of it are these: first, the Time. Secondly, the place. Thirdly, the
Parties present before whom* Fourthly, the party cured. Fifthly, the manner of
curing. Sixthly, the manifestation of this to be a Miracle. Seventhly, the
event of it.

The time was, as soon as he came forth of the Synagogue, and it has a double
relation, either to the former Miracle, or to the assembly and meeting of Gods
people, verse. 22. in regard of which relation we may note, first, that Christ
counted it a proper work of the Sabbath, to do a work of mercy. Secondly,
that Christ contented not himself to have performed the public worship of God
on the Sabbath, but as occasion was offered, did also other good works.

Which is for our use, that among other duties of the Sabbath, to have a
special regard to the works of mercy, it being a good means to fill our
hearts with godly meditations, and our mouths with holy conference.

Secondly, that we content not our selves with the public service of God
only, but be careful to spend the rest of the Sabbath after the assemblies.

The place where it was wrought, was, first, a private house. Here observe, that
Christ was ready to manifest the gift which God had bestowed upon him in doing
good, not only openly before many, but in private houses also before a few; as
Ioh. 2.1. at a private marriage of a poor couple he wrought his first
miracle: and Matthew. 9.23. because it was not a popular applause that he sought
for, but doing of good to the Church, and for it he was as ready in one place
as another. Howbeit, most of his miracles were public, because hereby, first,
God was most glorified: secondly, more did reap benefit: thirdly, his
Ministry more credited.

The use is for us to do the like in doing good to all, in all places
indifferently, as occasion shall serve. For to do nothing but what many may
take notice of, sauoureth of arrogance and desire of glory, rather then zeal
of Gods glory, and good of their brother.

Secondly, It was the house of Simon and Andrew; where a question may be moved,
how it is said to be the house of Simon and Andrews both?

Answ. It was either because both had right to it, or because both of them
dwelt together. To that, Ioh. 1.44. I answer, That their breeding might be at
Bethsaida; and yet because of their Trade of fishing, they might have a house
at Capernaum. Secondly, Peter might dwell there because of his wife. Thirdly,
because Christ did dwell there to entertain him.

To that Luke 5.11. I answer, they forsook all, that is, all that might hinder
them in following of Christ, as their calling. Secondly, the use of all, but
not the possession.

Now this shows the brotherly agreement between these two brothers; a thing
highly commended in Scripture; as Psalm. 133.1, 2, 3.

Secondly, though they suffered nothing to hinder them in following of Christ,
yet they did not fondly cast away that they had. Matthew made Christ a Feast in
his own house after he had forsook all: Luke 5.28, 29. For riches are Gods
blessings, and have a good use, wherein they are to be employed, if they
cross not greater matters. Secondly, we are Gods Stewards, and no Steward may
cast away his Masters goods. This confutes the Anabaptists, and some ancient
Philosophers, which cast their money in the Sea.

The company present were the four Disciples, verse. 29. who were companions
together, Luke 5.7. Here note, first, the care of Christ to train them up,
because he meant to make them Apostles; and so he made them eyewitnesses of
his Miracles and Doctrine, for the further strengthening of their Faith, that
they might have the greater evidence to preach Christ unto others. This ought
to be the practice of Tutors. This did Paul with Timothy. Secondly, their care
and diligence to do him service in attending on him, who was their Master.
Thirdly, the Disciples desire to profit by Christ.

The party cured, was Simons wives mother. Where we may note, that Christ
thought it not an unfit thing to take a married man for his Disciple. But some
object against this, and say, that by a wise, 1. Cor. 9.5. is meant another
woman? which is both slanderous and rediculous. See Heb. 13.4. in all, marriage
is honorable, and in Ministers: 1. Tim. 3.5. 1. Tim. 4.3:

Secondly, in that Peter had a careful respect of his wives mother, we learn,
that husbands and wives should have a pious respect of the parents each of
other, as appears in Ruth to Naomi, and Moses to Iethro. The reason of it, is
the Law of marriage, Genesis 2. by which bond they are to extend their affection
to the parents of one another. Secondly, this is a great means to breed love
and kindness between themselves, when the one sees how much the other
respects his friends.

Secondly, her disease wherewith she was afflicted, was, first, a hot burning
Fever: secondly, a great Fever: thirdly, she was so sick of it, that she was
feign to lie down: fourthly, she was healed of it. All which circumstances do
amplify the disease, showing it to be grievous and dangerous. Whence learn
we, That there is no disease so dangerous, but Christ can cure it; because the
absoluteness of his power is such, that with him there is no respect of
greatness or smalnesse. Teaching us hereby to trust perfectly unto him in all
our distresses, it being he alone that can give to others wisdom to
prescribe, and to the means power to effect our health and welfare.

The manner of curing. Here note the occasion; Mat. 8.14. says, Christ saw
her. Mark, that they told him of her. Luke, that they entreated him for her.

First, then the sight of our miseries moves Christ to succor us; as Mark.
6.34. Ioh. 5.6. because the eyes of Christ are eyes of pity, like to those of
the Samaritan: Luke 10. Which serves to minister comfort to us in all miseries.
See Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5, etc. And albeit that Christ does always see our
miseries, yet must we put him in mind of them, that he may see how we are
affected with them our selves.

2. In that they told him, and entreated him for her: this shows, first, their
faith in Christ: secondly, their love and pity to her. Teaching us in like
cases to give an evidence of our faith and brotherly love, by commending the
cases of our brethren to Christ. For as he is best able to help in all
distresses, so first, it is an honor done unto him: secondly, it is a means
to obtain help for them: thirdly, it is a sacrifice acceptable to God, and we
are accepted as worshippers of him.

The means of curing, respect partly the gesture, partly, the speech of Christ.

The gesture: He came unto her, tou^hed her, and lift her up: all to show, that
this cure came of him. Christ was able to do it without these means, but he
did it to give a greater evidence. And false is that collection of the
Vbiquitaries upon Mark. 5.31. that in the flesh of Christ was a virtue to
heal, because the divine qualities were transfused in the flesh.

Doct. Where Christ will, any means are powerful as clay to (...) blindness,
Ioh. 9.6. Moses Rod to fetch water out of a Rock, Numb. 20.9. Act. 19.12. for
Christ is the Fountain of all power and efficacy.

The use for us i^, that we be careful and conscionable to use all means
warranted in the Word of God, how simple soever they may seem to us, not
opposing our conceits against this power and wisdom of God: as Naaman did,
and both Jews and Gentiles in speaking against the Gospel, the means of
salvation.

Secondly, his speech; Luke says, he rebuked the Fever. Christ has an
absolute command not only over reasonable and living creatures, but also over
things insensible.

Verse. 32. And at Even when the Sun did set, or, [when the Sun was downe]
they brought to him all that were diseased, and them that were possessed with
Devils.

33 And the whole City was gathered together at the door.

34 And he healed many that were sick of diverse diseases, and cast out many
Devils, and suffered not the Devils to say, that they knew him.


THese words contains a general History of Christ his miraculous curing of
sundry persons, diversely afflicted. It is in number the eleventh History of the
first year: recorded by three Euang^lists; Mark here; Luke 4.40, 41. and
Matthew. 8.16, 17. The differences between them are partly in addition.

1. Matthew adds, first, the means whereby these cures were wrought, his
Word, verse. 16.

Secondly, a Prophecy that went before of Christ was now fulfilled, verse. 17.

2. Mark adds the whole 33. verse.

3. Luke, who is the most copious, adds, first, a second means of cure,
laying on of his hands, verse. 40.

Secondly, that the Devils came out crying.

Thirdly, Christ's indignation against them, rebuked them.

Fourthly, he adds this clause, the Christ.

Partly in variety of phrases, as Matthew; When Even was come. Mark and Luke;
When the Sun was down, or, Even now a setting. Mark, they brought. Luke,
they all brought. Matthew has, possessed with Devils. Luke, diseased. Mark
has both. Matthew, Mark, that Christ cast out. Luke, that the Devils came
out; being in effect all one.

The several branches of this History are, first, the Time: secondly, the
Occasion: thirdly, the Parties cured: fourthly, the Witnesses present: fifthly,
the Manner of working this miracle: sixthly, the Manifestation thereof:
seventhly, the Effect: eighthly, the End, viz. the accomplishment of the
Prophecy.

The Time; When Evening was come, viz. the Even of the same day whereupon
Christ had done so much before, as the inference shows plainly.

Doct. Christ is ever ready to do one good after another, as occasion is
offered. A thing often noted in him; as after the long Sermon, Matthew. 5.6, 7.
in the eight Chapter are set down more works which he did presently after;
because he accounted of this life as of a time of work, Ioh. 9.4. and so he
did improve this time.

Which teaches us to learn the like diligence upon the same ground of the
shortness of life, laboring here, looking for our rest hereafter, Heb. 4.8.

Secondly, It is said, the Sun was down, and Evening was come. Now this
seems a time of rest, and unseasonable for such business.

Doct. No time was unseasonable to Christ to do good, he conferres with
Nicodemus in the night: Ioh. 3. with the woman of Samaria, weary and hungry;
Ioh. 4. The reason, because Christ did esteem the doing of Gods will above his
meat, drink, and rest, Ioh. 4.34. and so must we doing good works both in,
and out of season, 2. Tim. 4.2. and it is a reproof for those that will do
good, but it shall be only at seasonable and fit times.

Thirdly, Luke says, [ the Sun was setting.] Mark, [When the Sun was
set.] Here seems to be some contradiction.

Answ. The Sun was scarce down, and yet it was even now down, when as they
brought their sick unto him; so that the Son was but newly set.

The reason why they brought not their sick, till the Sun was down, was,
because the Jews did hold the works of mercy unlawful to be done on the
Sabbath day, as Mat. 12.2, 10. Luke 13.14. and 14.2. Ioh. 5.9, 10. Ioh. 9.16.
therefore in regard hereof they bring them not till the Evening, their Sabbath
then ending, as they thought. Where note we, that superstition makes men
neglect their own good, and the good of their friends. Christ might have been
gone away to some other place, or have taken himself to his rest, and would
not cure them, and other casualties might have come between. For superstition
blinds the judgment, that it cannot discern between things convenient and
inconvenient, but wholly doteth on the thing conceited. We shall avoid so
dangerous a thing, if we attend to the Word, and look that those things which
we maintain, be grounded upon the Word of God: Heb. 13.9.

The Occasion that moved Christ to work these Miracles was, because there
were brought unto him fit objects to work upon. Hence we learn, that the
charitable works of other in bringing their sick to Christ, gave him occasion
to heal them. Reason was, first, to show the goodness of his nature, not
only when the persons themselves sue unto him, but also when others entreat
for them. Secondly, to show how he approoues the good mind of others herein, as
also their Faith.

More particular circumstances to be noted, are, first, the generality; all
brought their sick.

Doct. All of all sorts are ready to seek remedies for the cure of bodily
diseases: A Ruler, Ioh. 4.46. a Beggar: Mark. 14.46. a Canaanitish woman,
Matthew. 15.22. because these outward diseases are sensible. This will be a
witness against us all, that are so careless in seeking redress for our
spiritual maladies.

Secondly, the manner of bringing. Luke says, they led them by the hand.
Mark, that they brought them. Noting hereby, that such was their care for
their friends, that they thought it not enough to tell them of a remedy, but
they brought them to the place where it was to be had: so Mark. 6.56. The cause
of it was the greatness of their Faith in Christ to cure all diseases, and of
their lou^ to their brethren.

Use is for our imitation, not only in the temporal good of our friends, but
in the spiritual health of their souls, by bringing them to the means of
salvation; such especially as are under our authority.

The Parties cured. Note here Two points. First, the generality of them
Matthew and Mark, say all; Luke, every one: and that this all, were not a few;
Mark says, that he cured many.

2. The kinds of maladies noted to have been; First, in general, diverse
diseases, some dangerous, some deadly, some infectious, etc. Secondly, in
particular, possessions of Devils.

Doct. First, that Christ in doing good, shows himself to be no respecter of
persons: all that came were healed* none lost their labor; Act. 10.34. Ioh.
6.37. For the ground of Christ's actions is in himself, and his own goodness,
not in any thing whatsoever in man.

Use. For comfort and encouragement for all, in all distresses, to have
recourse unto Christ. Secondly, for imitation that in doing of good, we respect
not the person, but the occasion that God offers. This ought Magistrates,
Ministers, Physicians, Counselors, etc. to do; Iam. 2.1. Thirdly, for reproof
of those that respect Greatness, Friends, Money, etc.

Doct. Secondly, Christ was not weary of well doing. He healed a multitude;
teaching us not to be discouraged in coming to Christ, because we see many
go; but to consider that his power and ability is not stinted, but infinite as
himself, like a never dried Fountain.

Among the diseases that Christ healed, there were no doubt, some loathsome,
and some infectious: hear observe. First, Christ loathed none of them, being
full of pity, and the more grievous the disease, the more pitiful. Which
gives us comfort and confidence to go unto him, though never so loathsome and
contemptible in our own eyes; yea, the rather because of i^; and further
teaches us to be of a like mind toward others. Secondly, that Christ was not
capable of infection, which as it is gathered here in general, so it expressly
Matthew. 8.3. proved, by curing the Leper. For Christ was not infected with our
personal diseases, being from the corruption of our nature.

Lastly, that Christ was able to cure all, it shows him to be a sufficient and
perfect Savior, both willing and powerful to do us good. The application
which the Prophet makes, in Matthew. 8.17. proves this.

The witnesses present, were the whole City, that is, many of the people of
the City. Per Metonim. Subiecti. And Synecdoc. Totius proparte. Such phrases
in Scripture are usual. Neither are we to search too curiously, nor condemn a
man of untruth presently, if he use such a phrase. That so many assembled, it
shows rather the good providence of God, then any goodness in them, being by
him brought to pass for his Glory, and the good of the Church, and the
clearing of the innocence of Christ his Son, and his plain dealing; seeing
the Pharisees and others counted him an impostor. But what profit these
Capernaites made of these miracles may appear; Mat. 11.23. Ioh. 6.

The means which Christ used were:

1. His Word, Christ has an absolute command over the Devil. So we are to
trust in Christ, if we fear the Devil. And this we must do when we see no
outward means. For Christ can work by his own Word, without any means.

2. His laying on of his hands: not that this was any Physical means, but to
show that the cure came from him.

The manifestation of these miracles to be true miracles, is set forth by
diverse branches.

1. From the generality, no disease so deadly, but Christ cured it, no spirit
so strong, but Christ dispossessed him.

2. From the ti^^. It was done so shortly and suddenly. So miraculously. For
time is required to things done by course of Nature.

3. The cure wrought so perfectly.

4. That these things were done without any natural means.

5. That the Devils came out crying, that is, unwillingly, and flatteringly.

6. That Christ did not seek to color any thing, but did it in view of all.
Wherefore Christ being thus able to do miracles, he is to be trusted unto,
above means.

The Eff^cts are two: First, in regard of the Devil. And Secondly, in regard
of Christ.

Of the Devils, that First, they came out; Secondly, they cried; Thirdly, they
confessed Christ the Son of God. The First, shows their enforced obedience;
The Second, that they stand in dread and awe of Christ; The Third, they had
knowledge of Christ, though not by themselves, but by the Church; hearing the
Prophets point at him. So that even the Devils many times do profit more by
the Word, then men of Christ. First, that he rebuked the Devil; showing his
dislike of him, and indignation against him.

Mark 2.1. And again, he entered into Capernaum after some days, and it was
noised that he was in the house.

2. And straight way many were gathered together, in so much as there was no
room to receive them; no, not so much as about the door, and he preached the
Word unto them.

3. And they come unto him, bringing one sick of the Palsy, which was borne
of four:

4 And when they could not come nigh him for prease, they uncovered the roof
where he was; and when they had broken it up, they let down the bed, whereon
the sick of the Palsi^ lay.

5. When Jesus saw their Faith, he said unto the sick of the Palsy, Son,
thy sins be forgiven thee.


THese words and the rest unto the 13. verse, contain the 15. History of the
first year of Christ's public Ministry, from the first Passover, Ioh. 2.13.

The First, was the purging of the Temple; Ioh. 2.14.

2. His conference with Nicodemus; Ioh. 3.1.

3. The execution of his Ministry in Judea. With John's testimony of him; Ioh.
3.22.

4. A bie History of John's Imprisonment; Luke 3.19.

5. His conference, with the woman of Samaria; Ioh. 4.1.

6. Jesus having left Judea, and passed through Samaria; comes into Galilee,
where he heales the Rulers Son, Ioh. 4.43.

7. From Galilee he goes unto Nazereth; his entertainment there amongst his
countrymen; Luke 4.16.

8. Leaving Nazareth, he comes to Capernaum: with his preaching there; Mat.
4.12. Luke 4.31.

9. The calling of his Disciples.

10. The dispossessing of a Devil; Mark. 1.23.

11. The curing of Simons wives mother; Mark. 1.29.

12. The curing of many together; Mark. 1.32.

13. Christ his peragration of Galilee; Mark. 1.39.

14. The curing of the Leaper; Mark. 1.40.

15. This present History, which as it is the 15. History: so it is the seventh
miracle recorded.

The first miracle, was the turning of water into wine at Cana in Galilee; Ioh.
2.1.

2. The curing of the Rulers Son; Ioh. 4.43.

3. The great draught of Fishes; Luke 5.1.

4. The dispossessing of the Devil: Mark. 1.23.

5. Curing of Simons wives mother; Mark. 1.29.

6. Curing of the Leaper. Mark. 1.40.

7. This Matthew chap. 9.2. Records this History after certain others: and
therefore some think that this and the Story there mentioned, are two diverse
Histories; but such is the agreement in the circumstances, as also for as much
as it is likewise set down before Matthew his calling to be a Disciple, that
it seems to be the same with this. [The first verse, of the ninth chapter; is
to be joined to the ninth.]

The parts of this History are; First, Christ's preparation. Secondly, the
manner of working it. Thirdly, the effects.

The preparation hereunto in general, is Christ his preaching of the Word: He
preached, says Mark. He taught says Luke cap. 5.17. that is, by preaching he
taught them. This is set forth by diverse circumstances, whereof Mark sets
down. First, the time, after some days. Secondly, the place in general,
Capernaum, is particular the house. Thirdly, the occasion, the multitude
coming together. Luke adds a more particular description of the persons that
came to hear Christ, c^p. 4. verse, 17. Secondly, the seal of Christ's
Ministry; the Power of God, etc. eodem verse.

Of Christ's Ministry has been spoken before, now come we to the Time.

It is noted here indefinitely to have been after some days; viz. which he
had spent in the desert; Mark 1. and the last verse Luke 4.16. Either in
meditation with his Heavenly Father and prayer to him, or in conference with
his Disciples, or other special Friends: having thus for a while retired
himself, he now returns to his public Ministry.

Doct. Men of public function having occasion to retire themselves for a time,
from the place of their calling, for recreation, recovery of health, or through
persecution, etc. must have a mind and care to return again to their
calling, as soon as they can. So Eliah withdrawing himself for fear of
Iezabell, is commanded from God, to return again; 1. King. 19. So Peter
lodging privately at Ioppa; Act. 9. last: is sent for to come abroad by an
Angel; Act. 10.

For our Function, is that maine work that we always intend; and therefore
our retiring ought to be for our help and not hinderance in the execution of
it.

Use. Is for Ministers, that they have a care to return to their Flock; as
David 1. Sam. 17.15. For it is their charge; Act. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.2. Secondly,
there is in their absence great danger of falling back, and growing cold in
zeal. The Devil having an entrance to sow tares, and to bring in many
mischiefs; Act. 20.29. as the Apostle Paul found by experience.

Place, is noted in general to be Capernaum; of which City has been spoken
before. Here note, that this is the fourth time where express mention is made
of Christ coming unto this City.

So that this was the chiefest place of his abode: and therefore it is called
his own City; Mat. 9.1. In regard of which residence of Christ here, and his
often preaching, it was that this City, was lift up unto Heaven; in respect of
the benefit they might have reaped by his still being with them.

Doct. It is a great benefit to have a faithful Minister, or neighbor
dwelling by us. This the Shunamite well knew; 2. King. 4.9.10. Because of Gods
blessings accompanying such. Secondly, of greater means of comfort and
instruction. Thirdly, we are after a more special manner partakers of their
prayers; for such will not forget to pray for their Friends and Neighbors, and
such as they are bound unto. Which comdemnes the world, that of all other, are
loath to have a Minister, or a godly man dwell by them; for fear lest their
profaneness be discouraged. And we see that the Capernaites light esteem of
Christ, his dwelling and pains taking amongst them; was it for which Christ
does afterward condemn them to hell, though before lifted them up to heaven.

The particular place noted, is the House; viz. of Christ's usual abode. For he
dwelt in Capernaum; Matthew. 4.13. and 9.1. Not of his own inheritance, for he
had not a house of his own, to hide his head in; Matthew. 8.20. But it is like
to be that of Simons and Andrew, mentioned before; chap. 1.29.33. For these
were likeliest to entertain him: and hither the people resorted once before
verse 33. and so found him out the easier now; and Matthew. 17.27. Peter pays
tribute for Christ and himself, as if they had dwelt both together.

Here we see that Christ lets slip no opportunity, but preaches in a private
house, having good occasion: which albeit he and other extraordinary persons,
did upon extraordinary times and occasions; yet we must take heed how we draw
it into imitation, in a settled Church where the liberty of public assemblies
is permitted to all, to the offense of the civil Magistrates. Much less may
we with Brownists and Separatists, with draw our selves from the public
assemblies to go into Woods, etc.

The Occasion in general, was the peoples concourse; where note first what
moved the people to come. It is said that his coming was noised abroad; the
rumor spreading from one Neighbor, to another. This is to be noted for such
places (as many in the country are) where the preaching of the Word is rare;
that if happily a faithful Minister coming that way, be willing th^re to
bestow his pains; one Neighbor do make it known to another, and encourage
them to come.

2. Note their readiness, expressed two ways. First, their speediness [
straight way,] which condemns the slackenesse of many in coming to the
Church. Secondly, by their Multitude, [ many,] amplified by that, that First,
the House; Secondly, no not the Porch and places about the house were able to
receive them. Amongst which multitude, though some came for curiosity, some
for help of their disease, some for other respects, yet some came to hear,
and in general, their coming was commendable, and to good effect; occasioning
Christ to instruct them.

Doct. Readiness in people to hear, ought to stir up in Ministers a desire
to preach; as Act. 10.33. For this is a sign that God will give a blessing;
Secondly, that he has called us to such a place.

The persons that were Auditors, are discribed by Luke, to have been not only
of the common sort: but also of the Pharisees and Doctors of the Law.

The Pharisees were a strict Sect, differing from all other people, in
apparel, diet, and conversation. But two things especially are noted of them.
First, that they were most exact expositors of the Law. Secondly, their
strictness of their conversation; in both which respects, Christ does notably
discover their false dealings, showing them to be, both heretical in their
Doctrine, grounding their expositions not on the Scriptures, but the traditions
of their Fathers: and also hypocritical in their conversation, doing
whatsoever they do, to be seen of men.

The Doctors of the Law, are those that be called elsewhere Scribes, not from
writing, but learning. For both Scribes and Pharisees, sat in Moses Chair,
though these were a more common kind of teachers then the Pharisees.

Both these sorts were in opposition against Christ, malicing and hating him.
And now they came with a malicious, envious, and captious mind to ensnare him:
as may appear by their reasoning against him in their hearts. Yet it is said,
these men came from every quarter round about, to show how far malice and
envy will carry men, further ordinarily then pity. Secondly, note here that
Christ cease not to preach, although these captious and envious hearers sat
before his face: being he knew that his Doctrine was true, and that he was
able to defend it. Now there was never any congregation, where were not some
envious, captious, and malicious hearers; who coming not with a mind to
subject themselves, to the Word, find occasion to cavil and carpe at it, to
bleare men's eyes with this pretense, as a cause why they do not yield
obedience unto it. For all this Ministers must not be discouraged from
preaching, but regard: First, that the Lord has sent them. Secondly, The
Talent that God has bestowed upon them, which they must employ, if the Lord
himself hinder them not. Thirdly, that there be some honest hearted hearers,
and their good is to be respected. Such kind of Auditors had Jeremy, chap.
20.10. see Ezekiel. 2.3. etc.

As an antidote against the poison of envious tongues, Ministers ought to
regard both the matter and manner of their Doctrine, that it be such as may be
justified by the Word of God, that it be so delivered plainly, powerfully,
that it savor not of ostentation, and affectation.

The Seal of Christ's preaching, is the extraordinary Power of God, that is,
the gift of healing; which did now manifest it self in an extraordinary
manner. That it is called the power of the Lord, infer no opposition, seeing
Christ himself was the Lord. Or secondly, rather because that Christ in regard
of that condition, whereunto he did subject himself, in taking our nature and
infirmities upon him; he needed the assistance of the Spirit of God. Not that
this power of the Spirit was not always in him, but because it did not alike
always show it self, as Mark 6.5. himself restraining it in regard of the
condition on men's part, viz. Faith.

At this time he does manifest this divine Power, the rat^er because of his
malicious adversaries that were there present^ So that it is to be noted, that
the more the Word is cauilled at, the more evidence God gives thereunto. Moses
miracles the more the Sorcerers did disgrace, the more clearer they were, till
they did confess the finger of God, Exodus See Act. 4.16. Which serves to
encourage honest hearers, and to confound the adversaries.

The second general part is the Miracle it self, and the working of it,
wherein note, first, the kind of the disease: secondly, the occasion: thirdly,
the manner of curing.

Touching the kind of the disease, it was the Palsy: a disease whereby the
nerves and sinews are so loosed and dissolved, that motion and life is lost in
that part which is so affected; and therefore it is called the dead Palsy,
which if it be somewhat grown, it is hardly or never cured; as it was with
this man, who was neither able to go, nor to sit, which shows the greatness
of the cure. Now though this disease be a shame to Physicians passing their
skill, yet Christ did cure it, as he is able to do all other the most
dangerous sicknesses.

The occasion of working this Miracle, was partly the Faith of them that
brought him, partly the Faith of himself, verse. 5. which Faith, though it be
an inward grace, and so of man's eyes invisible, yet Christ could see it
inwardly. Notwithstanding, here he sees it also by the fruits thereof in them
by their charity, diligence and labor in bringing this poor man to Christ.
Secondly, in the man himself by his great patience, in suffering all those
things they did unto him. Of these we will speak of more particularly; and
first, of the fruits of faith in this man's Friends.

Their charity and care is set down in five branches; first, that they did not
only tell him of a remedy for his disease, but also did four of them bring
him unto the place where it was to be had, verse. 3.

2. That he being not able to rise and go along with them* they carry him, and
not so only, but for his greater ease, bed and all, verse. 3.

3. Having brought him, they leave him not so, letting him alone for others to
bring him to Jesus, but themselves seek all means to come near unto Christ,
verse. 4. Luke 5.17.

4. When in seeking of this means of access, they were hindered, yet do they
not cease to proceed on, not making this hinderance an excuse either for to
leave him, or to carry him back again.

5. Finding no ordinary means, they seek unto extraordinary: first, they
clime up to the top of the house, and so draw up the bed. Now it is to be
noted, that their houses were flat on the top, as may be gathered out of Deuteronomy.
22.8. and that this house here spoken of, was open to the top without chambers,
like a great Hall, and so it was fit for a great many to come together.
Secondly, they uncover the roof, and break it open. Thirdly, when they could
not go down themselves, they let him down with ropes.

From these circumstances we learn many duties of charity to be performed in
like cases of distress.

1. That it is not sufficient to tell our friends of the means of cure, but
we must do our best to make them partakers of such means. For some are
unable to help themselves, as this man; and some are careless of their own
safety, like Naaman, 2. King. 5, 12. and some it boots but little, only to
tell them of the means, unless we help them to it our selves, and persuade
them to use it, like to Naamans servants. To apply this to spiritual cures,
we must not only make known unto others where the means of salvation is to
be had, but also as far as in us lies, make them partakers of it. For here
the reason holds true, that we are unable, careless, and unwilling to seek
unto these means of our selves. This belongs to those that are set over
others, as Masters their Servants, Magistrates their Subjects, and Ministers
also their people, to cause them to come unto the ministry of the Word.

2. That we tender those that are weak, according to their weakness,
supplying their wants; and therefore did these men bring the bed also. So did
Job relieve every one according to his want, Chap. 29.15. Gal. 6.2. Ephesians. 4.2.

Note here a contrary practice of a cruel wretch, namely, Saul, who when David
would not spare him, but would have him brought, bed and all, to be slain: 1.
Sam. 19.13. so that the charity of merciful men cannot go so far, but the
cruelty of wretches will go as far, or further.

3. That in good actions and endeavors which we go about, we suffer not
obstacles to hinder our proceeding. For no actions are without some: yea, God
does many times minister some for the trial of our faith and constancy, as
Matthew. 15.^^. etc. The devil also through malice does lay many blocks in our
ways, as 1. These. 2.18. And this is the rather to be noted, because of our
pronenesse to make excuses, especially in spiritual matters, wherein we are
like the sluggard in the Proverbs, still doubting of some danger. Herein
Hester, though otherwise a good woman, failed, fearing the Kings Edict: Hest.
4.11. but Mordecay told her, that this scruple must not hinder her in so good a
purpose, as the safety of the Jews, verse. 13.14.

4. When by ordinary means we cannot effect our desire, then are we to use
extraordinary, as David did; 1. Sam. 21, 4, 6. whose example Christ does
allege, Matthew. 12.34. So where the Word is not preached in our Parishes, we
may come to others. Always provided, that though the means be unusual, yet
they be lawful. Wherein Rebecca failed, in procuring her son a blessing, by
teaching him to lie.

Now for a general use of all, if we compare our backwardness, in seeking the
spiritual good of our friend with the care of these, in seeking the temporal
good of this man, we cannot but be ashamed. Surely seeing there is a greater
necessity of this spiritual care, then of the bodily, and that in seeking of
this, we are more acceptable unto Christ, then in the other, we ought to be
stirred up with greater care to tender the good of our brethrens souls.

Secondly, we are to consider the fruits of Faith, which are in this man the
patient. His patience is set forth; first, that he suffered himself to be
brought out of his house, which a sick man easily does not, to be carried
among the press, to be drawn up, and to be let down; all which could not
but work great disquiet unto him: yet does he not repine, and say, If you
were in my case, you would not be thus and thus tumbled up and down. But
seeing that his friends desired his good, he willingly submits himself to them.

From whence we may learn, how to carry our selves in time of sickness, to
be patient, to yield to our friends advice, considering that they do it for
our good, and also better understand what is fit for us, then our selves. Now
then how patiently ought we to submit our selves to those, that seek our good
and conversion, though it be with some trouble to us in our conscience.

We come now to consider their Faith, the ground of all these works,
expressed here, verse. 5. and Luke 5.20. [ When he saw their Faith.] Wherein
three words are to be noted; Saw. Their. Faith.

Doct. Faith makes all other works to be acceptable to Christ. He regarded
not those outward things these men did, but he saw their faith in them. The
whole Chapter of the eleventh to the Hebrews, proves, and especially verse. 6.
For Faith is the root of all sanctifying graces: by it we are united unto
Christ, in whom being rooted and ingrafted, we receive from him life and
grace, which shows it self forth in us by the fruits, as a tree receiving
sap from the root, sends it forth into fruit: so that what comes not from
Faith, has no spiritual life in it, the root whereby it is received, being
wanting.

2. Faith is the hand whereby we receive the gifts of God; as Ioh. 1.12. where
receiving and believing are all one.

3. Of all other graces, God by Faith is most glorified: for by it alone we
come utterly to deny our selves, and to attribute all to the goodness and
grace of God. This shows how far the world is deceived; first, Gentiles and
Heathens that know not God, and so no good thing they do can be acceptable to
him. Secondly, Papists, that think by works to merit Gods favor, which
conceit does indeed breed spiritual pride in man's heart making him most odious
in Gods sight.

3. Ignorant men that think their good meaning and intent makes the thing
acceptable before God. Let us then labor for Faith in all our wo^kes, doing
them, first, because God has commanded them: Secondly, in denial of our
selves, relying on Gods goodness in Christ, to have both them and our persons
accepted.

Saw.] Christ saw their faith by his divine power: but here especially by those
great fruits whereby it appeared.

Doct. The Faith which is acceptable to Christ, is a visible Faith, which
manifests it self by the fruits, such was the faith of those Worthies, Heb.
11. appearing by some notable mark or other: Iam. 2.18. For Faith if it
receive sap and grace from Christ, it will grow and bud forth; it is like fire,
it cannot be hid: and this is a mark distinguishing true faith from false:
such as is that of many carnal Gospellers, who make an outward profession, but
their fruits are none, they remain mere worldly and carnal still.

Their.] That is, as the plural number shows, of the friends of this man:
but yet in that hereupon he turns his speech unto the man, and says, Thy
sins, etc. it is plain that by this word Their, is meant the Faith of this
sick man, as well as of his friends.

Doct. The Faith, Prayer, and Charity of men are available before God, not
only for themselves, but for others also. Here then let us see how they are
available, how far not.

First, the Faith of one man is available for another, as first, the faith of
the Parents is a means to give their children a right to the Covenant of God.
So are they called holy, 1. Cor. 7.14. because of their believing parents.

Secondly, the Faith of one may be a means to bring another to repentance and
grace. So are our prayers available for the Jews, as were theirs also for the
Gentiles in times past. So may our prayers profit particular persons, by moving
God to work Faith and repentance in them.

Thirdly, to obtain temporal blessings: as Laban for Jacobs sake, Genesis 30.27.
Potiphar for Joseph's sake was blessed, Genes. 39.5. and the whole world is
blessed for the Churches sake.

But it is no way available for the obtaining of eternal life, and enjoying
the free grace and mercy of God in the remission of ones sin, for this every
man must have Faith of his own, Hab. 2.4.

Hereby we see how God does respect the Faith of his children, accepting it not
only for themselves, but for others also. And the use for us, is to use this
charitable means in the behalf of our brethren, the Lord giving us this
encouragement to come for others, as well as our selves. Wherefore it is a
commendable practice of friends to desire the prayers one of another.

Now in that this man's friends did not alone entreat for him, but himself
also believed, so that his Faith joined with theirs, was effectual for the
curing of his bodily disease, and also the obtaining of remission of sins, we
learn, that when the prayers of parties themselves are joined with others,
then they are truly effectual. So the Apostle desires the Romans to strive
with him by prayers to God; Romans 15.30.

Use is for reproof of those that think they are safe, if others call upon
God for them, though themselves never pray. This is not sufficient. Abraham
prayed for Ismael, Genesis 17.18. but Ismael prayed not with him, and therefore
they benefited him not, verse. 21. So did Samuel pray for Saul, 1. Sam. 15.35.
but Saul was careless of himself; and therefore God bids Samuel cease
praying, Chap. 16.1. So Ezekiel. 14.14. We ought so as we desire to obtain
temporal, or spiritual blessings by the prayers of others, to join also our
prayers with theirs.

All this while we hear of no petition, this poor man is brought before
Christ, and there he lies, none spoke a word for him, nor yet himself for
himself. Nevertheless does Christ work this great miracle on him.

Here note, first, Christ his readiness to grant unto us the desires and
groans of our hearts, when he knows them before that we do utter them. David
did but think to confess, and God forgave, Psalm. 32.5. Exodus 14.15. Neh.
2.4. Luke 15.18, 19, 20.

Use. For comfort of them, who through fear, grief, or trouble of mind, are
not able to express their desire. 2. If God do accept a desire, how much more
a faithful prayer.

Secondly, in the parties, note by their silence, that they thought it
sufficient to make known unto Christ this man's case, by laying him before him,
without prescribing how, or when to cure him. In like manner must we wait
patiently on Christ, not appointing him the time, place, or means of delivery.
So much for the occasion of this Miracle.

Verse. 5. Son, [man, Luke 5.20.] [bee of good cheer, Matthew. 9.2.] thy sins
are forgiven thee.

6. And there were certain of the Scribes sitting there, and reasoning in
their hearts.

7. Why does this man speak such blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but God
only.

8. And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit, that they thus reasoned
with themselves, he said unto them, Why reason you these things in your hearts?

9. Whether it is easier to say to the sick of the Palsy, Thy sins are
forgiven? or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk.

10. But that ye may know that the Son of man has authority in earth to
forgive sins, he said to the sick of the Palsy,

11. I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and get thee to thine own
house.


IN these words is laid down the manner of curing this sick man: wherein
note, first, the preparatiue unto it. Secondly, the cure it self, Arise, take
up.

The preparatiue, [ thy sins are forgiven thee, etc.] by reason of the cavil
of the Scribes is amplified by

First, a most gracious consolation.

Secondly, a malicious opposition against the same.

Thirdly, a judicial defense and apology for his saying against those Scribes.

First, the consolation: in it observe, first, a compellation: secondly, an
exhortation: thirdly, an absolution.

In the compellation note first in general, the admirable gentleness of
Christ toward this man, that though this was done in time whilst he was
preaching, and so seemed to interrupt him: yet seeing his sincere and faithful
heart, he does not reprove him, but receives him, with great kindness and
compassion.

Doctr. God rejects none, that come to him with a faithful heart. And though
he seems so to do Matthew. 15.22. yet he does not indeed reject her, but for
the manifestation of her faith, he tries her, knowing in himself before that,
for all his denial, she would not go away.

Use Is for encouragement to come to Christ.

Man] Christ takes notice of his mould and condition, and in that regard does
pity and succor him. See Psalm. 103.14. And in like may we lay forth our
frail condition as an argument to move God to pity.

Sonne] a title of favor and honor.

Doct. Christ does account all faithful men his sons and children. Where
Dives in Hell is called Son, it is ironically spoken, and by way of
vpbraiding; Luke 16.25. as the unworthy guest is called Friend; Matthew. 22.12.
The use is Psalm. 103.13.

The exhortation is set down by Matthew chap. 9.2. Be of good cheer. And it
is opposed to a kind of fear and doubt, that was in this man; by reason of
his sins: though he had Faith, yet it was not without doubting; Christ
therefore knowing his case, applies a fit remedy for the strengthening of his
faith.

Doct. Christ does not reject a weak faith, which ought to be a great
encouragement unto us, if so be that we can find in our selves any evidence of
the beginning of true Grace.

The Use Is to teach us how to carry our selves toward those that are sick,
to apply remedies according to their wants; especially, if they be afflicted
in mind, then to yield unto them all the comforts we can; Prou. 18.14.

The third part of Consolation is the Absolution, where we may note that
Assurance of the remission of sins is a most sovereign ground of comfort.

For our sins being forgiven, all things turn to our Good. It being sins
alone, that makes us miserable. Secondly, observe the difference of Christ his
manner of pronouncing absolution of sins from that both of extraordinary
Ministers; as Prophets, and Apostles, and of ordinary Ministers, ss also of
Private Christians.

Christ being God and Man, the Mediator of Mankind, has purchased by his
death remission of sins: so that he can pronounce absolution of them, in his
own Name, and not only pronounce it, but also actually give remission of
sins.

Prophets and Apostles did pronounce it in Christ's Name, etc. thhat
conditionally, upon condition of faith and repentance, also they could by
inspiration, know whether a man's sins were forgiven or not.

Ordinary Ministers, are Gods Ambassadors; and in Christ's stead, by virtue of
this Office and Function, in which they are placed for the comfort of
distressed souls; unto whom, upon condition of faith and repentance, they may
pronounce absolution.

Private Christians can do no more, but tell their brethren of the promises of
God, and comfort them with the consolations of the Scripture, but to pronounce
absolution of sins, is not in their, but the Ministers authority, and
commission.

3. We may here note, how Christ shows himself to be a faithful Physician,
in that he strikes at the root, and first takes away the cause of the disease,
viz. his sins. The like course is to be used with sick persons, to labor
first to bring them to a sight of their sins, and repentance for them, and so
to apply remedies for their diseases.

4. Christ observing the faith of this man, does presently pronounce remission
of sins. Where note that remission of sins arises from the free mercy of
God, without any works.

5. The man's friends came only for the curing of his bodily disease, and Christ
bestows on him a greater benefit, he forgiues him his sins. Hence we
learn that Christ does give greater and better things to those that come to
him in Faith, then themselves do desire. So Jacob desired but food and
apparel, and God gave him great riches. See Psalm. 21.4. Ephe. 3.20. For God
has an eye to his own bounty, and what it becomes him to give, and more
respects our need, then our request: and therefore sometimes denies our
request, granti^g us a greater benefit another way, as to Paul.

In the Opposition made against this speech of Christ, beginning at the 6.
verse, let us as in the former part of this story, consider the differences
that are between the Evangelists, in setting of it down; and first in
addition.

Matthew ^ddes chap. 9. verse 4. (...) Evil things.

Verse 8. Who had given such great power to men.

Mark adds, verse 8. In his Spirit.

Verse 9. This clause, whether etc. to say to the sick of the Palsy.

Verse 9. That he says, take up thy bed.

Verse 12. We never saw such a thing.

Luke chap. 5. adds verse 25. that he went home glorifying God.

Verse 26. That the people were filled with fear.

Verse 26. We have seen strange things.

2. In variety of phrases. As Matthew says; [they said.] Mark, they reasoned
in their hearts. Luke, they began to think or reason.

In this opposition we may note these parts.

1. The parties opposing; Scribes and Pharisees. 2. The manner of their
opposition; in their hearts. 3. The matter they oppose; Blasphemy. 4. The
ground and reason of it; who can forgive sins etc.
Parties opposing wear Scribes and Pharisees, of whom we heard before that they
were accounted learned expositors of the Law. Whence we observe, that learning
not sanctified, makes men to be the greater enemies to the Truth, of God. The
people we see did glorify God, it was the Scribes and Pharisees, that cauilled
against Christ preaching. So Ier. 26.11. Heretics have been always learned
men. And among Papists, the Jesuits are most learned.

For learning separated from grace, puffs up, and makes men selfe-conceited.
So that they set all their wit and learning to disgrace, and defame others.

Use Is for Scholars, to pray God to Sanctify their learning, unto them. Also
that the people, who from the universities, do receive Ministers; do pray for
them, that God would sanctify and season their learning with his Grace.

Manner of opposing was that this conceit was but yet in their hearts, they
uttered it not, they did not fret, fume, and depart away, disdaining to hear
such blasphemy, but they sit still, and carry a smooth face, minding to watch
their opportunity afterward.

Hypocrites do then devise greatest mischief in their hearts, when they carry
fairest faces. Ezekiel. 14.1, 3. and chap. 33.31. Judas carried so fare a face,
that none of the Disciples suspected him of treachery, every one was more
afraid of himself; Matthew. 26.22.25.

Use To teach us to be wise as Serpents, not to trust men upon show and
outward appearance, when they come to hear the Word, and are attentive unto
it. Christ did it not. Ioh. 2.24. For he saw that they had hollow hearts. Act.
9.26.

The matter they lay to his charge is Blasphemy; now to Blaspheme, is to
impeach the name and credit of any: and is attributed to man. 1. Cor. 4.13.
Iud. verse 8.

But the common use has more principally attributed it to God: and so it is
taken in double respect. First, when somethings derogatorie to the divine
Majesty, is attributed to him: and then some word is added, as blasphemes God,
the Name of God, etc. Reave. 16.9.11. Secondly, when some thing proper to God is
attributed to man, and then it is said simply, he blasphemed; Matthew. 26.65.
This sin was punishable by death. This great offense they lay to his charge,
the more to bring him in danger, and see how they aggrauate it as appears by
their diverse questions, set down by the Evangelists.

Doct. Malice does make men aggrauate every thing to the utmost, as Korah.
Numb. 16.3. the Princes conspiring against Daniel Dan. 6.13. and Haman. Est.
3.8. Tertullus Acts 24.5.6.

Use. To teach us that if we live among malicious men, we carry our selves
wisely, and warily, so that we may justify whatsoever we do.

Ground and reason of their opposition, is in these words, [ who can forgive
sins, but God only. Where first in general note, that nothing can be so
comfortably spoken, but malicious enemies will pervert it to the contrary.
Christ comforted this man, by pronouncing forgiveness of sins to him; they
impute this to Christ, as a matter of blasphemy: because there is such men, a
satanicall spirit, which like poison, turns the sweetest things into venom.

More particularly in the reason of this their Cavil, we may see that the
ground is true and good, but their fault is in the application. It is true.

1. That, that which properly belongs to God, cannot be attributed to man.

2. That forgiveness of sins, is proper to God.

3. That man, cannot forgive sins.

4. That Christ in taking this power to him, took that which belonged to God.
All these, the reason truly implies. Yet nevertheless, the conclusion which
they draw from hence that Christ Blasphemeth, is false, and blasphemous.

In which points, our adversaries the Papists, go beyond these Pharisees, who
attribute the power of binding the conscience proper only to God, to man's also;
who besides Christ, gives unto the Pope, and other, power to forgive sins and
the like.

In this reasoning of the Scribes and Pharisees, we may note two faults of
them. First, that without further inquiring they did rashly accuse Christ of
Blasphemy, upon that speech; they might have interpreted it as spoken
prophetically. Secondly, in that they did not see that he had power and
authority, to do that which he did. They did wilfully wink at all those
evidences, and testimonies of his divine power, which were manifested among
them, and were especially known to such learned men as they, the signs of his
birth; his disputing with them, his miracles and the like; by which many others
were converted. And therefore Christ bids them take heed, lest they sin against
the Holy Ghost, by denying so plain a truth.

So that we see that these Scribes and Pharisees, thinking to accuse Christ of
Blasphemy, do themselves Blaspheme, in denying unto God that which does
belong unto him; viz. power to forgive sins.

Doct. Slanderous accusers of Innocents, are guilty themselves of the same
crime, which they lay to their charge; Mat. 26.65. which is brought to pass by
the severe Judgment of God, that they may be found out in their own
wickedness, and be made the more inexcusable.

So dealt the Papists in accusing our Doctrine, as a Doctrine of liberty, when
none is more licentious, then their own, etc.

Doct. Secondly, from their false consequence, we may observe the Devils
Logic, teaching men from true grounds to gather false conclusions; that by
the truth of the ground, men's eyes may be bleared: as Heretics, and
Idolaters, always have done; alleging Scripture always for their assertions.

Use, Is not therefore to dislike the Scripture, accounting it with the Papists
a leaden rule; but to try the consequences drawn from thence, and to labor
that on this foundation we build Gold, not Stubble, Hay, and Straw. So much for
the Opposition.

We are now come to Christ his Apology, where before we handle the Defense;
we have to consider how Christ knew of this their Cauilling.

Luke says he knew their thoughts.

Matthew, that he saw them, which is more then knowing; for that he might have
done by some outward sign.

Mark, that immediately as soon as they began to think, Jesus perceived in
his Spirit.

Doct. Christ knows the very secrets of men's hearts, be they enemies or
friends; as of his Dis^iples; Luke 9.47.

The Reason is here added by Mark, he perceived their thoughts in his Spirit,
by his Divine Power and Godhead; 1. King. 8.39. Act. 1.24. And herein is the
difference between Christ and the Prophets, who knew many times the thoughts
of men, but it was by revelation, and inspiration; 2. King. 4.27.

This was another evidence against the Scribes and Pharisees to convince them,
that the thoughts of their hearts, should thus be known to Christ, no man
telling him of them.

Use, First, for instruction, to have a special regard of our hearts, when we
come before Christ.

Secondly, for Consolation in regard of enemies, that whatsoever they imagine
against the Church, shall not hurt us, seeing Christ knows all their devices,
and will prevent them; 2. King. 6.12.

Secondly, in regard of our selves, that though men ouerlooke us, and regard
not that service which we perform to God; yea, nickename us for it: yet
Christ which knows the heart willl reward us. See Matthew. 6.6.

In the Apology is first a reproof; Christ reprooues them: Why reason ye
these evil things in your hearts? So that malicious slanderers are to have
their faults plainly reproved. Psalm. 50.21.

Secondly, the Defense it self, where first, note in general, in as much as
Christ stands to that he has delivered, it being a truth, and denies it not,
though his enemies had raised a slander upon it; that, Truth is not to be
denied for the cauilling of men, and their opposition against it; Gal. 2.5.
wherein Peter halted verse 11.12.

Because Gods Truth is more precious then Pearls, and no part of it is to be
lost.

Secondly, In shrinking from the truth, we fear man more then God.

Thirdly, we give advantage to the adversary, and make him bold; and also we
discourage the weak brethren.

Secondly, In particular we see that the Pharisees and Scribes, opposed against
him, that he had taken too much upon him, namely, a property of God to forgive
sins. Christ denies not that he had taken this unto him, but says he
took no more upon him, then he had right and authority to do; namely, to
forgive sins in his own Name: and that he has this authority in a thing
invisible, he proves by a visible effect of his Divine Power. The Pharisees
reasoned thus: He that is man and not God, cannot forgive sins. Christ is
man, and not God: therefore Christ cannot forgive sins. Christ to the
contrary proves that he is God, and not man only; in that by his bare Word,
he could cure a man desperately sick: wherefore being God, he took upon him
no more then lawfully he might.

The Argument stands thus: He that has an absolute power over diseases, he
has authority to forgive sins. But I, says Christ, have an absolute
command over diseases: therefore I have authority to forgive sinnnes.

The Proposition, is laid down verse 9. where both these effects, viz.
forgiveness of sins, and curing of a bodily disease, are compared together,
and showed to be of like hardness and easiness, that it is of like power and
authority, to do the one, as the other; wherefore if they could not deny this
outward visible effect to be wrought by a Divine Power, neither could they
doubt of the other, though invisible. And for a further strengthening of the
argument, it is laid down Interrogatiuely, Christ referring it even to his
adversaries, to be Judges, whether it were not so or no.

Object. But here a question will be moved, whether the curing of a bodily
disease, and the forgiveness of sins, be equal; one as hard and as easy
as the other: for as much as it seems that sins of the soul are more
hardly cured, then diseases of the body.

Answ. First, these are compared not one with another, but in regard of humane
power, because both are above humane strain; and neither can be done without
divine power. Secondly. Being compared with the Power of God, they are both
alike; for in respect thereof, there is no difference of easiness or
hardness; 1. Sam. 14.6. 2. Chron. 14.11. Thirdly, this is said in regard of
their earthly conceit and dull understanding. For that a man but now so
desperately sick, should on a sudden be perfectly cured; this in their
conceit seemed the greater work. Fourthly, Sickness is a fruit of sin,
and he that can remove the effect, can as easily remove the cause.

To say,] that is, so powerfully and effectually, to say that the thing shall
be done.

Doctr. Outward visible things objected to our senses, are great means to
help our understanding, in conceiving of things invisible, and to strengthen
our Faith in believing of them; Romans 1.28. Psalm. 19.1.

For this end did Christ work all his miracles, that in them we might see him
to be an Alm^ghtie Savior, to cure all the diseases of our souls, to loose
all the works of the Devil, and to save us from death, and him that had the
power thereof. This collection is plainly expressed by Matth^w, chap. 8.17.

For earthly we are, and best understand earthly things, by comparing whereof
with spiritual things, we come by little and little to understand them; Ioh.
3.12. and for this cause did God in former times give signs unto his people,
his Servants and Prophets; as to Moses, Gedeon, etc.

Use, Is for us to help our selves by these outward means. Do we doubt of
Gods Providence, to consider the making and preservation of all things; of the
Resurrection, that which the Apostle says; 2. Cor. 15.36. of the manner how
we are fed by Christ, and how our sins are washed away by his blood, to
consider those things which are set forth unto us in the Sacrament, etc.

Next follows the Application of this argument, which is laid down by
Inuersion. The assumption. viz. [But I have an absolute command over diseases]
is laid down verse. 11. by an evident proof of a deed done. The conclusion is
verse. 10. by an infallible inference from the rest, viz. That ye might know,
that the Son of Man, has Power to forgive sins on Earth.

We will handle them in order, as the Holy Ghost has set them down. In them
we may observe the manner of curing this man; and first the end why. Secondly,
The means how he was cured: viz. the imperial charge and command of Christ.

The end was that they might know he had power to forgive sins.

Doctr. Christ had a further end in his micacles, then a bodily good unto those
that were cured. A higher mystery is contained in them, namely that in curing
of our bodies he might show himself the Savior of our Souls, etc. as is
declared before.

Use, Is that we read not these miracles as bare historical narrations, but
that we consider in them the Almighty power of Christ: otherwise we miss of
the fruit and benefit of them, for the strengthening of our Faith in him.

More particularly in this End consider we four points.

1. Whose good and instruction it was he aims at. 2. The title that he gives
himself. 3. The ground whereupon he does this work. 4. The Place.
1. Christ labors to instruct those that are contrary minded, his adversaries
the Scribes and Pharisees that cauilled at his Preaching. He might have rested
himself in the approbation of his Heavenly Father, the testimony of his own
conscience, the witness of his Disciples that his Word and Doctrine was true,
and in that former proof of Divine power which he had given them, in
discovering unto them the thoughts of their hearts: nevertheless seeing them
through blindness, and malice, not yet thoroughly instructed, he labors by
further proof to show them their error, and to bring them to knowledge of the
truth. Thus he deals with them again; Mark 3.22. etc. Conuincing them of
error by many arguments: and generally we may observe of Christ, that neither
the dullness of his hearers, their impious scoffing, nor their slanderous
cauilling, did hinder him from striving to instruct them further; as Nicodemus
his dullness. The scoff of the woman of Samaria; Ioh. 4.11. wherein Christ
followed his Father; Esaias, 63.2. and the Apostle the example of Christ, in
laboring to give unto Jews and Gentiles, understanding and knowledge of those
things, which they so much opposed against; and in this all Ministers should
follow their example. 2. Tim. 2.25. where the reason of it is also set down,
If those places be objected; Act. 18.6. and 19.9. Tit. 3.10. and that therefore
those that are perverse, may be presently given over: those places show rather
the contrary, for by them we see that the Apostles did labor first to instruct
them, and left them not, till they saw them obstinate.

2. The title is, Son of man: which is in Scripture taken sometime generally,
and indefinitely for all the sons of Adam, mankind, as Job 25.6. and sometime
for man corrupt, in his corrupt estate, as 1. Sam. 26.19. Genesis 6.2. Psalm.

More particularly it is given to the Prophets, and especially to Ezekiel, more
then to any of the rest, to put him in mind of his infirmity, that he should
not be proud through revelations. After a more peculiar manner it is
attributed, and most commonly it is used by himself, when he speaks of
himself, but once given by any other to him, namely; Act. 7.56.

Mark. 2.13. And he went forth again by the Sea side, and all the multitude
resorted unto him, and he taught them.

14. And as he passed by, he saw Leuithe Son of Alpheus, sitting at the
receipt of custom, and he said unto him, follow me, and he arose and followed
him.


THis is the sixteenth History of the first year of Christ his public
Ministry, and it is the last which is recorded by the Evangelists of that
year. That it follows next upon the History before going, appears in that, by
all the three Evangelists that record it, it is placed next after; It is
recorded here and by Matthew 9.9. and by Luke 5.27.28. Matthew has nothing but
what the other have. Mark adds the whole, 13. verse, and secondly that he was
the Son of Alpheus.

Luke verse 27. expressly calls him a Publican, which is also implied by the
other. and verse 28. adds that he left all. In variety of phrases, Matthew
and Mark say, as he passed by. Luke, as he went forth. Matthew says, from
thence. Luke after these things. Wherein is no difference. Mark and Luke call
him Leui. Matthew by a known name calls him Matthew. The sum of this History
is, the calling of one of Christ's Disciples, and in number the sixth. The first
was Philip, Simon, or Peter and Andrew; Ioh. 1. and James, and John Mark 1.

The parts of this Story are first Christ's preparation unto this work, viz.
his preaching; whereof note; First, the time [ againe] showing that this was
done immdiately after the former. Secondly, the place toward the Sea side;
Thirdly, the occasion, the resort of the people; Fourthly, the Act it self, he
preached unto them the Word of God: which we will but briefly run over, having
been handled heretofore in other Histories.

1. Here in general, we see how ready Christ is to do one good work after
another. Secondly, how ready he is still to afford more and more means for
the strengthening of Faith, when he sees any beginnings thereof; having now
seen what effect the former miracle had wrought in the hearts of the people,
how they were amazed, how they wondered, how they glorifie^ God for it, etc.
Here upon to confirm their faith, he does again preach unto them, and
perform this great work, in forgiving the sins of this Publican, as before
he had forgiven the sins of the palsy man. Thus God sent an interpreter to
the Eunuch, whilst he was conscionable in the use of such means, as God
afforded him. And this did Christ promise to Nathaneel Ioh. 1.50.

2. The place is the Sea side, noted to show that the place of the receite of
Custom, was nigh the Sea side. Where we may note again, that which has been
often observed upon like occasion, that Christ having the opportunity to
preach, makes use of any place, as we may do likewise in case of necessity.

3. In the occasion note the readiness of the People to hear.

4. And again, Christ's readiness to instruct them, of both which has been
spoken at other times; as also that Christ does account this viz. Preaching his
chief work: when they would have made him a Judge, he refused it. And it
codemneth the practice of many Ministers of the Word now a days, who busy
themselves in other matters, who will be Justices of peace, and decide
controversies, etc. But regard Preaching least of all.

In the work it self, note:

1. The Occasion of this man's calling, namely Christ passing by that way, and
seeing of him; which came not by chance, and fortune, but of the purpose of
Christ, and the good providence of God directing. Where note that fit
occurrences of matters are evident signs of Gods providence, but of this
heretofore.

2. He saw him: Christ saw Leui, and not Leui Christ, which shows the
preventing grace of Christ.

2. The Party called, who is described first by his name, that is Leui, which
is an Hebrew name, and shows that this man was a Jew. It was first given to
Jacobs three sons. Genesis 29.34. where the signification of it is to be seen.
This aggrauates the matter, that he being a Jew, was yet a Publican.

This name of Leui, was in time worn out, and he not commonly known by that
name, but by his other name of Matthew, and yet Mark and Luke, writing of him
now living does use this name, thereby showing their charity, in concealing of
his faults and blemishes.

2. Matthew which is likewise an Hebrew word signifying given; but it is also a
Greek, or a Roman name, and it might be given unto him to blot out that
former infamy, that he being a Jew, would yet be a Publican, and an
extortioner of his own nation: by this name he was most commonly known, and
yet himself writing of himself, spares not to use this name, regarding more
the glory of God, and the good of the Church by this his conversion, then his
own credit and reputation. So David does in the title of the 51 Psalm. So
Paul, 1. Tim. 1.13. but when he speaks to the honor of himself, he speaks
in the third person, 2. Cor. 12. for it was not themselves, nor their own
honor they sought for, but the manifestation of the grace of God.

This first shows, by what Spirit they were guided, not of flesh and blood,
but by the Spirit of ^od, of humility and meekness. The wicked indeed may
acknowledge their faults themselves, but they speak not of them with shame, as
do those men. This humble spirit in any man, is a sign and evidence of the
Spirit of God.

Secondly, this makes for the truth of the Story, that the Writers thereof
makes such conscience of the truth, when it does tend to glory, that withal
they let not to publish their own blemishes. Now if a man will lie, he will do
it to save his own credit and reputation.

Secondly, he is described by his Parentage; he is the son of Alpheus; not he
that was the Father of James and Judas the Apostles, Luke 6.15, 16. but
another, who whether they were of kin, or no, it is not expressed; only this
is noted, that these two Alpheus had sons that were Disciples. This is noted
to show the truth of the Story.

Thirdly, by his Office, Luke calls him, chap. 5. verse. 27.2 Publican,
expressly. Now Publicans were certain Officers in the Roman Empire, which did
gather up the tribute that was to be paid, and such gifts as were given. And
because the goods of the Empire were called Publica, hence came the name of
Publicans; an office in it self lawful: for John, when the Publicans came
unto him, bid them not leave their Calling as unlawful, but deal honestly in
it; Luke 3.13. Yet were these Publicans vile persons, and vilely accounted of;
either because they were so in the estimation of the Jews, who accounting
themselves a free people, could not endure to be under tribute, and so hated
those that were gatherers of the tribute: or else because of their own
mis-demeanour, being grievous ex-actors and oppressors of the people, for they
did farm the tribute of the Empire, and so did extort from the people much
above the due for their own gain: as may appear, Luke 3.13. and by that of
Zacheus, Luke 19.8. so Matthew. 5.46, 47. inplying thereby Publicans to be most
grievous sinners, and in the censure of the Church, Matthew. 18.17. whereby it
appears, that these Publicans were notorious wicked men, and odious to the
people, and much more this man being a Jew, and so oppressed his own
Countrymen.

We have heard before in the calling of the other Disciples, how it pleased
Christ to choose mean men to be his Disciples; and here we see he chooses for
his Disciple, a vile notorious sinful man, that had a brand and mark above
the rest, which first shows the freeness of Gods grace; 1. Tim. 1.13. 1. Cor.
15.10. and secondly, the abundant riches of his grace, verse. 14. of the first
of Timothy, the first Chapter. 3. Christ did it to this end, that the Apostles,
and other ministers of grace, should the more boldly and confidently offer
grace to the most vile and wicked persons, considering that even amongst them
there was one as vile as any. Fourthly, to encourage all sorts, how wicked
soever, to yield unto the grace of God offered unto them, 1. Tim. 1.16.

Use is, first, that we should take notice of this grace of God, and observe
what a great alteration it is able to make. This man, who before was counted
amongst the wicked, a most wicked person, is now esteemed among the godly a
holy man: he that was of a vile calling before, is now of a most glorious
calling: before a most vile Publican, because a Jew, now a a most glorious
Apostle, because also an Evangelist; for but two of the Apostles were
Evangelists, John and Matthew: See the like, Esaias 11.6, 7, 8.

Secondly, that none should despair.

Thirdly, to teach us to suppress our censures concerning the latter end of
any man.

Fourthly, that we think not the worse of Ministers, or of their Ministry,
who in time have been wicked livers, swaggerers, and the like: for it pleases
God even amongst such, to call many unto that Work, pulling them out of the
snares of the Devil, that they may more pity others, and apply the greater
consolations unto them.

Thirdly, the place where he was called, was the Receite of Custom, either a
house whither they brought their tribute, or a table where he sat with his
money-bookes of account, and such like.

Doct. God calls man when he left thinks of it. Matthew was now busy about
his trade and gettings, he little thought of Christ. So Paul is called,
whilst he yet breathed out slaughters.

To show, that our conversion comes from the grace of God, that to him all
glory may be given.

And this thing, if we apply to our own selves, we shall find ever, that we
were converted when we thought not of it; whereof this History and the rest
are types, though not in regard of the extraordinary manner.

Fourthly, the manner of calling: it was done by the only word of Christ,
Follow me. Which although it may signify generally to leave a former wicked
course of life, and to turn to Christianity, and so to follow Christ: yet here
it signifies more peculiarly to be with Christ, and to attend upon him: for
thus did Christ train up his Disciples with him, the more to fit them to their
great Calling.

Note hear how powerful the voice of Christ is; he says only, Follow me, and
Matthew leaves all, and goes after him.

Fifthly, his obedience, he left all that might be an hinderance unto him: he
follows Christ without casting any doubts and difficulties how he should be
provided for, that he had before undergone the envy of the people, and should
now incur the displeasure and hatred of the Pharisees, etc. but presently
without any more ado follows him. And this teaches us, when we hear the
voice of Christ sounding in our ears, and smiting our hearts, that we do
willingly and readily obey: but of these things more has been spoken in
handling the calling of the other Disciples.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE THIRD OF LVKE.
Luke 3.19.20. But Herod the Tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodian his
brother Philips wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done,

Adds this above all, that he shut up John in prison.


IN handling the harmony of the Gospel, if we compare, Matthew. 4.12. and Mark.
1.14. with Ioh. 4.1, 2, 3. it will appear, that this story of John Baptists
death fell out after that he had given that testimony of Christ, Ioh. 3. before
Christ went to Galile, when by the way he talked with the woman of Samaria,
Ioh. 4. And the order of matter requires it, in that he should be then taken
away from his Ministry, when he ended so good a work, God thereby providing
for his credit and honor.

Now it is set down by three Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, neither of
which do record it in order of time. Luke sets it down by anticipation,
because having treated of John in his third Chapter he would speak of all that
befell him in that place, so setting down this story before, when it should
have been handled after. Matthew and Mark set it down by occasion of a common
speech, that John was raised from the dead: Matthew. 14 2, 3, 4, etc. Markae, the
concisest and briefest in gathering the sums of History, is in this the
longest, Chapter 6. verse. 17, 18, 19, etc. All agree in the maine substance,
that Herod did imprison John for reproouing him for marrying his brothers wife.
They differ only in adding some circumstances: as Luke adds, first, that
Herod was a Tetrarch: secondly, that Herod was rebuked of John in plain
terms: thirdly, that he rebuked him of all the evils that he had done:
fourthly, that he added this yet above all. Matthew agrees with Mark, but
adds the cause why Herod killed not John, because he feared the people. Mark
adds; first, that Herod sent either Purseuants, or soldiers, or the like:
secondly, that expressly Herod had married Herodias: thirdly, that Herodias
had a quarrel with John. Fourthly, why Herodias could not have her mind,
because of Herod's affection to John. We will handle them all in one joint Text,
which may be divided into three parts:

First, the cause of his imprisonment: secondly, the manner thereof: thirdly,
the event and issue intended against him.

In the cause, viz. John's rebuking, consider, first, who rebuked; John.
Secondly, whom; Herod. Thirdly, for what, for marrying his brothers wife.

The manner, shows, first, how he was taken; he was sent for. Secondly, how
he was used, first, he was bound: secondly, put in prison: thirdly, there shut
up.

The event was the danger of his life; which came first, from Herod: secondly,
from Herodias: and was escaped by Herod's affection, first, toward John, this
hindered Herodias purpose: 2. toward the people, this hindered his own purpose.

The party rebuking was John, a public Minister of the Gospel sent of God, to
preach Faith in the remission of repentance and conversion from sins. He was
both a Minister, and an extraordinary one, by virtue of which calling he had
power and authority to reprove all wheresoever he came.

Doct. Public Ministers of the Word, they among others are especially bound
to reprove public offenses: Ezekiel. 3.17. Esaias 58.1. 2. Tim. 4.2.

For the calling of Ministers does require thus much at their hands, because
they are Watchmen over men's souls, and reproof does belong to the cure of
men's souls. Heb. 13.17. Ezekiel. 3.17, 18.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE FOVRTH OF JAMES.
James 4.7. Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you.


THese words contain a commandment, [ Resist the Devil:] and a promise, [
and he will fly from you.] In the commandment two things are to be marked,
first, an action; secondly, the object of that action. The action is a
Resistance, the object, the Devil. First, of the object. By the Devil here is
meant all sins and temptations arising eitheir from that corruption that is
in us, and so from our selves; or else springing from external objects, and
such motions as are by the Devil immediately suggested unto us. All which are
termed by the name of Devil, because he has the chief hand in these matters,
and is a principal agent therein. The action of resistance is that, whereby a
spiritual soldier of Christ Jesus does strive and endeavor according to that
measure of grace that is given him to avoid all sins whatsoever, and to
please God in all things, not to offend him in any. This action thus explained
in general, respecting the whole course of man's life: let us consider it
therefore in a more particular regard, according as we are to put it in
practice at several combats, with several temptations.

For the better performance of it, we are to consider three things: first, our
preparation before the combat. Secondly, our behavior in the very time of the
assault. Thirdly, our demeanor when the fight is ended. For the first, it is
needful that we be armed for our defense; the parts of which spiritual
armor, we may see affoorded unto us out of the Ephesians. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. The
first piece, is to have our loins girt about with verity: that is, an heart
firmly grounded and established in the truth, in certainty of Gods pure
worship and Religion, that we be not carried about with every blast of outside
doctrine. The second, is the Breast Plate of righteousness; that is, a steadfast
resolution of the heart, to be upright, righteous, and holy before God in all
things, not will^ng to offend him in the least: as David says, Psalm. 40.8. I
have desired to do thy good will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within mine heart.
The next part, is to have our feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace: which is an undaunted and ready mind to make a constant profession of
the Gospel in all places, and at all times, though it be to loss of lands,
goods, living, yea, life: as Saint Peter wishes us, to put on our Sandals, and
to be ready to give an account of our Faith to every one that shall require it
of us. The fourth is the Shield of Faith; which is a lively and steadfast
persuasion and assurance of the mercy of God in Jesus Christ, particularly
belonging unto us; the force of which, is to quench all the fiery darts of the
Devil; that is, all strong, all sudden, and all dangerous temptations by him
suggested. A fifth, is the Helmet of salvation, which, as it is 1. These. 5.8. is
the hope of everlasting life, whereby our heads being covered, may be preserved
from doubt and despair. Another is the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word
of God: the use of which is, that we ought to labor to be furnished with such
pregnant places of Scripture, as whereby we may both defend our selves, and
offend Satan, according as Christ did, Matthew. 4. The last is Prayer, whereby we
must entreat the aid and assistance of Gods Spirit, to strengthen us to the
combat. Our behavior in the combat ought to be guided by these rules:

First, entertain not with any liking the first motions to sin, but resist the
primary beginning, intisements, and occasions to them, and suffer them not to
have a place of abode in heart and affection.

Reas. 1. From the nature of sin, which being not at the first, repelled
quickly gets ground of us. By the example of David, who first was idle, then
looked; the temptation left him not there, but then he lusted, and afterward
committed actual folly: 2. Sam. 11. So Peter, first, he denied barely;
secondly, then he swear it; thirdly, he cursed and denied: Man. 26.70, 72, 74.

Secondly, because the Devil as he is strong, so is he subtle: give him an
Inch, and he will take an Ell. Give him but entrance to set foot into your
heart, and you shall hardly choose but he will possess it wholly.

Thirdly, put not too much trust and confidence in our own strength, but
rather to be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephesians. 6.10.
This confident boldness, and reliance on our own ability, caused Peter's fall,
Luke 22.33.

Fourthly, we must not believe the Devil, nor hearken to his persuasion and
reasons; nay, nor trust him, though he spoke truth. So when the Devil took
on him to be a Preacher, Acts 16.16, 17, 18. Paul would not suffer him to
speak, but commanded him forth. So Christ rebuked the Devil, Luk 4.34, 35.
Eve sinned by being credulous, in believing the Devil when he uttered a loud
lie, Genesis 3.3, 4.

Fifthly, we must consider what profit a stout resistance does bring viz. that
the Devil will be the weaker, the more foiles he receives, and we the
stronger.

Lastly, take heed that we compare not the pleasures of sinning and yielding to
the temptation, with the pain of resistance, for then soon shall we fail:
but rather compare the pain of resistance with the horrors, anguish, and
perplexity of an evil conscience, which follow the committing of any sin,
and see whether is rather to be undergone. The burden of an evil conscience.
Solomon (Prou. 18.14.) describes, saying, The spirit of a man will sustain
his infirmity, but a wounded s^irit who can bear it? After the combat ended,
if thou obtain the victory, first, give God the glory and praise, not
ascribing it to any strength, or worthiness in thy self; take heed of this
pride. Secondly, avoid security, and think not when thou have overcome one,
then thou have vanquished all; but know, that one temptation, like waves, come
one in the neck of another. And therefore provide thy self for a new assault.
If thou be overcome, think with thy self, that, it may be, God has let you
fall, thereby to punish some sin in thee. Secondly, lie not in sin, but
endeavor to renew thy self by repentance, knowing that it is as great, if not
a greater victory, to recover being fallen, then to avoid a fall.

Encouragements to this duty are, first, the promise here made, that he will
fly from us, like a coward, that seeing his adversary buckle his armor to
encounter with him, takes him to his heels. Secondly, consider the intent of
Satan in allu^ing us to sin; that it is not for our good, but for our
destruction. So let us not yield to his pleasures, and be drawn away by his
allurements. Thirdly, learn the nature of sin, that is it such as lays us
open to the judgments of God both here, and hereafter. Lastly, think of those
many mercies God has vouchsafed; and then say with Joseph, How can I do this,
and so sin against my God, Genesis 39.9.

One thing to be performed in the time of combat is left out, which is this,
that when the Devil labors by any temptation to draw us into any vice, we
should not only withstand and resist this temptation, but also endeavor to
do the contrary virtue: as Joseph being tempted to adultery, exercised
himself to chastity, Genes. 39. and Job, who when Satan had done all that he
could to make him curse, and blaspheme God, did not only not do that, but did
the contrary, he blessed and praised the Name of God, Job 1. last verse.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE SECOND OF GENESIS.
Genes. 2.9. And out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree that is
pleasant to the sight, and good for food: the tree of life also in the midst of
the Garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.


FIrst, some Sacraments God gave unto man, first, in his innocent estate, which
were two; first, the Tree of Life; secondly, the Tree of Knowledge of good and
Evil.

Secondly, some in his corrupt estate; First, either before Christ prefiguring
him: Secondly, or after Christ, as memorials of him.

Thirdly, Sacraments before Christ were of two sorts: first, either such as did
belong to all sorts of people. Secondly, such as were peculiarly appropriated
to the Jews.

Fourthly, of the forme^ sort were, first, the Flood, and Noah's preservation in
it: secondly, the Rainebow.

Fifthly, of the later sort there are two kinds:

Sixthly, 1. Some were extraordinary, during but for once, or a short time, and
answering either to Baptism, as 1. Cor. 10. first, the Red Sea; secondly, the
Cloud: or to the Lords Supper, as first, the Manna; secondly, the water flowing
out of the Rock.

Seventhly, 2. some were ordinary: as first, Circumcision answering unto our
Baptism, 1. Col. 2. secondly, the Passover answering to the Lords Supper.

Eighthly, Sacraments after Christ's coming to continue till the end of the
World, are two: First, Baptism; Secondly, the Supper of the Lord.

The two Trees are described: First, by their place: first, general, the
Garden; secondly, particular, the midst of it.

Secondly, by their names.

Middle,^ though this may be understood that the T^ee was in the garden, and
no more; yet it is better to take it properly, that it stood in the very midst
where it might always be seen, and thought of by the man.

Tree of li^e,] some expound this allegorically: but that it is not so meant
appears, by the plantation, by the growth, by the fruits they bare, by the
ends of their placing there, by the event of the transgression.

It was a Sacrament in two respects.

1. To put man in mind of his present [ immortall] estate, by virtue of his
creation.

2. To give him notice of his future estate. which should be according as he
used or abused this.

The Tree of Knowledge, did assure him, that if he did transgress, he should
die the death.

Why it was called the Tree of Life, there is some doubt. Some said that it had
vigor in it, to preserve the life in perpetuity, and immortality. But it
seems to be otherwise: for first immortality was properly given to man in his
creation, why then should we give it to the Tree of life? Secondly, then it
must either have kept him from sin, or have given him immortality, whether he
had sinned or no; both are false. And to the objections, which may seem to
confirm that opinion, as first out of chapter 3.22. Least man should put forth
his hands etc.] We answer that it is taken Ironically, to lay forth man's
conceit plainly.

2. Why then man should be driven out of Paradise? Aansw. First, because that
he might the better know, that he was indeed deprived of life, being now thrust
from the sign. Secondly, to show that he was not worthy of the thing
signified, viz. life, because he was unworthy of the sign. Thirdly, to show
that the sign does not belong to them, who have no right and title to the
thing signified. For now Adam had lost l^fe eternal, whereof this was a sign.
Then the safest resolution is, that this Tree, was called the Tree of life,
because it was ordained of God a sign and pledge of life eternal, so long as
man remained obedient.

So that other tree was a sign and seal of that wo^full knowledge that man
should have, if he did transgress: not that this tree could infuse any
knowledge.

Now this did seal up eternal life in two respects.

1. In assuring him that he was now immortal by his creation, and that he
should continue therein.

2. In a representation of Christ, who is life, Col. 3.4. Prou. 5. 8. Ioh. 1.4.
For man in his innocent estate, should have had need of Christ, though not to
be incarnate, yet as he is the wisdom of the Father, and the power of God,
by whom all things were created. So this was to show that this life came not
from himself, but from Christ.

Genesis 7.23. And every living substance was destroyed, which was upon the face
of the ground, both man and cattle, and the creeping things, and the foul of
the Heaven; and they were destroyed from the Earth: and Noah only remained
alive, and they that were with him in the Arc.


THese words lays down the event of that great deluge, and contains in them
two points. First, that the World and other creatures were destroyed Secondly,
that Noah, and the rest of his family were preserved They are a ground of that
third Sacrament before mentioned. In handling of which, we will consider three
points.

1. That this is a Sacrament, which is apparent by that application which Saint
Peter m^kes of; 1. Pet. 3.21. where he makes Baptism, and the flood, alike
figures representing one thing. (...) is a resemblance of a thing, and (...) a
like resemblance of the same thing [ sometime.] For we are not to understand
this, as a subordinate Sacrament, or as a Figure of Baptism, for then it
follows. First, that a Sacrament may be a sign of a Sacrament. Secondly, that
something should be represented to Noah, which he knew not of, for Baptism
was instituted long after.

2. What kind of Sacrament this was; It is first, the first Sacrament which we
read recorded in Scripture, given to the Church, [ after the fall of man.]
Sacrifices there were as we read of Abell and Cain, which were also in a
manner as Sacraments, because both represented Christ, and God by that means
did uphold their faith in expectation of him. But now the Church having a long
time waited for the accomplishment of the promises, and accounting them to be
now the further of, that they might say as it is, 1. Pet. 3 4. It stood in more
need to be supported in faith and hope, and so God ordained first
extraordinary Sacraments, and then ordinary to continue till Christ's coming.

2. This was an extraordinary Sacrament; such as were those that were either
done but once, or did continue but a short time; as the Red Sea, Manna, etc.
Now it was extraordinary in two respects. First, because it was wrought by a
miraculous power of God. Secondly, because it was wrought upon an extraordinary
occasion: yet nevertheless, though for the Act it was but once for the use, it
is continual to the Church of God.

3. In what respect it is said to be a Sacrament; and these are; First, in
general, because it represents unto, and assures the Church of God of their
deliverance from the wrath of God, by which all the world besides perished;
Secondly, particularly; First, because it did prefigure the killing of the old
man, and quickening of the new, and preservation of it unto life eternal. In
that the wicked World perished, and righteous Noah was preserved alive: the
which thing is ascribed to Baptism Romans 6. initio. Secondly, because that as
safety was brought to Noah, by means of the Arc: so salvation is not to be
had, but only by Christ. Act. 4.12.

3. Because as the Arc could not save Noah, unless he were in it; so
likewise must we be in, and of the Church: whereof the Arc was a figure, it
representing Christ, not as a particular person, but as a mystical body,
joined with his Church. Other resemblances their might be made, as; First, that
in the Arc were few, so they are but few that ioy^e themselves to the Church,
and repose confidence in Christ. Secondly, that as of those that were in the
Arc, one was a cursed Cham. So in the Church there are many Hypocrites: but
those before alleged, are the maine and principal points.

The instructions that arise out of this place are; First, in general, to show
unto us, that this Hystory is analogicall; it has not only an hystoricall, but
also a mystical and spiritual sense. Neither yet will it follow, that one
place may have two senses; for these are but two parts of one entire and full
sense.

Quest. But how may a man know when their is a mystery, besides the hystory?

Answ. This we may know; First, by a diligent observation of the circumstances.
As the Apostle does prove by circumstances; Heb. 4.7. that what the Prophet
David speaks; Psalm. 95.7. must be understood of the spiritual rest. So Act.
2.29. Peter proves David's speech to be meant of Christ; Secondly, by comparing
one place with another, the Old Testament with the New: as that of the Red Sea.
By 1. Cor. 10. That in Exodus 12.46. with Ioh. 19.36. thence we must learn
diligently to mark the Scriptures, to observe the circumstances, but
especially those applications that the Holy Ghost makes, because this is the
surest way.

2. That God does perform a double benefit to his children, by temporal
preservation. First, safety from temporal danger. Secondly, assurance of
deliverance and redemption from sin; which as it shows the tender care of
God over us, so it teaches in all temporal preseruations, to have an eye to
him, in regard of our souls, for if God be merciful to preserve our bodies,
how much more our souls; and though all temporal deliverances are not Seals
and Sacraments of this yet this use may we well make of them. But withal as
Noah did, so must we.

1. Believe Gods promises, and apply them to our selves.

2. And also yield our selves to the direction of his Word, in regard of the
means to accomplish the same; which is a maine and principal use of this
story.

3. Hence observe, that those things which work destruction to the wicked, are
a means of preservation to the Godly; as was the Red Sea. The Angel that went
behind the Israelites camp. Christ, the Word, the Sacraments; which is for
the comfort of the faithful, that they need not be terrified with those
judgments that befall on others. For as a mercy showed to the faithful, shall
be no advantage to the wicked, so a judgment lighting on the wicked, shall be
no damage to the godly, I mean in regard of that which is indeed, viz.
spiritual hurt, or spiritual blessings.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE TWELFTH OF EXODUS.
Exodus 12.8. And they shall eat the flesh in that night roste with fire, and
unleavened bread, and with bitter herbs they shall eat it.


RItes appertaining to the eating of the Passover.

1. With what it must be eaten. 2. After what manner; viz. in haste. 3. The
time when it must be eaten. 4. The place where in.
1. It must be eaten with, First, unleavened bread: Second- S^wre herbs.

Unleavened bread verse 8. further urged verse 15.16.17. the use of it enjoined
not only that night, but during the use of that Sacrament they must eat it
seven days; yet a strict penalty laid on the non-obseruers of this ordinance
verse 19.

Reason, of this ceremony was because of their have, implied verse 34. and 39.
and it was a custom, in haste to make unleavened cakes; Genesis 18.6.

To find out the Ministry hereof, we must consider that leaven is taken;
First, in the good part, Matthew. 13.33. for the Kingdom of Heaven; and so the
opposition stands not here. Secondly, in a bad sense, for corruption in
Doctrine and prauitie in life and conversation; and so in this place unleavened
bread must be taken, as signifying sincerity in conversation and truth, in
doctrine; 1. Cor. 5.8. Matthew. 16.6.12.

Use, of this is to teach us, that all that will partake of Christ aright, must
be soundly instructed in the Doctrine of faith and purity and innocence of
life; 1. Tim. 1.19. which belongs not only to Ministers but to all others as
Ephesians. 4.15. Truth in Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law; Col. 1.10.

2. That those that are either depraved in their judgment, or corrupted in
life and conversation are not fit to eat of Christ as Idolaters, Heretics;
Gal. 3.1. malicious persons, etc.

3. From the metaphor of leaven, whose nature is, that a little does season the
whole lump. 1. Cor. 5.6. learn that we have a special care to withstand
every error, etc. every sin, not contenting our selves that we are not open
Idolaters or notorious sinners, seeing a drop of poison will infect a whole cup
of medicinable potion, an one error or sin, will make a breach in conscience,
big enough to give the Devil entrance into the possession of all; so Heb.
12.15. when any root of bitterness does but peep up, we must nip it: and
not only ought we to avoid the sins, but also infectious persons, as
Here^ikes, Idolaters, profane persons, not to be companions with them; 1. Cor.
5.13. Romans 16.17.

Sour herbs. Heb. it is bitterness, which some expound bitterness and
anguish of heart: but considering that here is spoken of those outward things,
where with it was to be eaten: I take it to be rather meant of some sour
herbs, or sauce as the like.

Reason, of this was that they should have a means to put them in mind of
that anguish and vexation they suffered in Egypt.

Mystery implied is two fold.

1. That the profession of Christ is joined with affliction; Luke Act. 14.22.
2. Tim. 3.12.

2. That to the partaking of Christ we must come with contrition of heart;
Matthew. 11.28. Luke 7.38.

Of this a double use may be made.

1. That if we look to have part in Christ, we must not expect that all
things should be sweet and pleasant; but in our professing of Christ, and
inioying of him, we must look to have sour sauce, to this sweet meat; lest
in regard of the corruption of nature, this sweetness grow full sour, and we
loath it: wherefore as this must stir us up to patience, so must it teach us
how to esteem of afflictions, as of sauce to make us relish our meat, and to
have the more appetite to it.

2. That when we approach to Christ to reap any benefit by him, we must come
with a contrite heart. Psalm. 51.17.

Exodus 12.11. And thus shall ye eat it: with your loins girded, your shoes
on your feet, and your staff in your hand: and ye shall eat it in haste: it
is the Lords passover.


IN this verse is set down in what manner the passover, was to be eaten,
expressed in four branches. First, your loins girded; secondly, your shoes
on your feet; Thirdly, your staves in your hands; Fourthly, ye shall eat it
in haste.

In which in general, we see that they imply a kindness to take a Journey.
The mystery whereof is, first that there must be in us a promptness and
readiness to that work, whereunto God shall call us, a duty much commended
unto us in Scripture; Psalm. 57.7. and 27.8. Matthew 11.12. Luke 16.16. Psalm.
40.7. Heb. 10.7. For such a promptness and readiness, is a sign of the
willingness and cheerfulness of our hearts a thing most acceptable to God;
2. Cor. 9.7. And it reprooues he backewardnesse and sluggishnesse of men, to
come to the ordinance of God, to preaching on the Sabbath, to the Sacrament,
etc.

2. Hereb is signified that we be ready, for our passge from the Egypt of
this world, vnro this Canaan of Heaven: for these were a type of the other;
Matthew. 24.42. 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. Because we know not when our passage shall be, as
the Israelites knew not at what hour of the night they were then to depart.

This reprooues, the security of men, that think lest of their departure
hence, as that common and wicked speech shows; I thought no more of it, then
of my dying day. From which, want of due preparation, it comes that when the
time of departure is at hand, men become either dead in heart, and incapable of
all comfort, like Naball, or like Belshazer, are filled with fear, horror, and
amazement, winhin and without. Dan. 7.6. Let us be rather like the wise
Virgins, and that faithful Servant; Luke 12.36. always attending and looking
for the coming of his Master.

Now come we to the particular branches.

1. Your loins girded, which phrase is used in the Scripture, in a double
respect.

1. For a close and fast girding of a man's apparel unto his middle

2. For a trussing up of his garments, unto his girdle.

The former is taken from Soldiers, that buckle their Armor together with
their girdle; as God bid Job gird up his loins, when he would have him stand
to his defense, and answer for himself; Job 38.3. and 40.2. in the like
sense; Ephesians. 6.14. and this sense is not here meant, for God would not that
they should prepare themselves to fight with Pharao.

For the better understanding of the latter sense, we are to know, that in
those Eastern countries, they went with long side gowns hanging down to
their legs, which were an impediment in traveling, if they were not trussed
up. And therefore they being now to take a long journey, God bids them trusse
up their gowns to their girdles; in this sense are 1. King. 18.46. 2. King.
4.29. and 9.1.

The mystery is, that we suffer not any thing to hinder us in our course and
work that we go about; this is not meant of such things that are unlawful
and wicked, but of those that be lawful, good, and as needful as our
apparel, that if we observe any hinderance to proceed from them in our holy
course, to be careful to remove it, which as it is meant; Ier. 1.17. Luke 12
35. 1. Pet. 1.13. So without a metaphor it is plainly expressed; Heb. 12.1.

For it is a point of wisdom, when we aim at any thing to remove all
impediments, or else we venture the loss of the thing we aim at.

Use, That when lawful things do become hindrances, as they do many times
by our immoderate use of them, our doting upon them, or preferring of them to
other better things; Luke 14.18. etc. we do take them away, and abridge our
selves of them; 1. Cor. 7.31.

2. For reproof of those that care not what burden they lay upon their backs,
how many offices they get, how much lands and livings they heap up, what
pleasures, what company they follow, though in the mean time they be by these
things hindered from attending unto better duties, to the worship and service of
God.

2. Your shoes one your feet.

What! were they wont to wear no shoes on their feet.

Answ. It may be when they took their repast, they had no shoes on, it being
the custom to lie on Carpets, on which also they went. Ioh. 13.23.

2. It may be that they had shoes which they did wear at meals, and others
which were for iourneyes, but there can be but a conjecture at these things.

Mystery is, that for the furtherance we may use all lawful helps. And for
this cause as their is a fight, so is their Armor appointed. Ephesians. 6. where
verse 15. we are likewise commanded to have our feet shod, with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, so that albeit the way which we must go
through be rough and thorny, that is, full of afflictions, yet shod and
furnished with the comforts of the Gospel, we may go on boldly without fear
of pricking.

3. Staves in your hands.] Staves, we know, serves to help men in their
journey, and to rest themselves upon when they are weary.

These staves are the promises of salvation, which must sustain and uphold us,
as, Thy Rod and thy Staff, they comfort me: Psalm. 23.4.

Doct. From hence it follows, That we ought to be conscionable in the use of
those means that God has afforded us for to help our infirmities, as in all
things to consider the reward, etc. Heb. 12.2.

And it reprooues those that are bold and presumptuous of their own strength
and ability, and refuse the means appointed, whereby many times they fall
away.

4. And ye shall eat it in haste.] This is the last ceremony, and it is laid
down as a reason of the former. And the reason of this reason is expressed,
verse. 33. For God intending to bring that great judgment on the Egyptians; and
foreseeing how the Egyptians would thereupon deal with the Israelites, by
forcing them to be gone upon the sudden, he does thus provide, that they
should be all in readiness to depart.

Doct. God is careful to provide help for his people, when they are in any
streights. When the World was on the sudden to be drowned, he caused Noah to
make an Arc before hand to save himself. When the Children of Israel travailed
through the Wilderness, and were to depart from every place on a sudden at the
rising of the Cloud and Pillar of fire, God caused them to dwell in tents, and
not to build houses. So that every way he does fit and prepare his people to
those states that he means to bring them. For he that forewarned, is
fore-armed; and troubles that come on a sudden, make men at their wits end, and
cause many distractions.

Use is, to be careful in using the means that God has provided for our
good, as because the coming of the Son of man is sudden, to watch; because
as death leaves us, so judgment will find us, and the hour thereof
uncertain, it teaches to be always prepared for death. Thus though they come
on a sudden, they shall not be sudden to us, etc.

The mystery hereof is, that in this world we have no place of abode, but must
always be, as still going out of it. A point manifest by the line of the
Patriarchs, by the Children of Israel in the Wilderness living in tents: See
Heb. 11.9, 10. 2. Cor. 5. 2. Phil. 1.23. 1. Cor. 15.31. We must therefore make
haste, and use the things of this world in haste, because we have a long
journey to go, and know not how much time we have thereunto. To this end let
us learn, as Psalm. 90.12. and be as the Apostle, Phil. 3.13. where the
metaphor is taken from runners, that look not unto that which they have run,
but how far they have to run yet unto the mark.

This haste is to be made, first, for fear of hurt that may come by abiding.
Thus the Angels hastened Lot out of Sodom, lest he did partake of their
punishments. So must we haste, because of temptations of that body of death
we carry about, of snares, allurement and disgraces, etc. whereby we are
drawn to forsake the Lord.

Secondly, the expectation of a benefit causes men to make haste; the benefit
that comes to us, is freedom from sin, eternal glory, and the enjoying of
all good, etc.

Some add unto these a third right, namely, that they did eat it standing.
Where of albeit there be some probability, because of the former circumstances
(which nevertheless might be all done sitting after their usual manner) yet
it is not expressly set down, and so no inference can be drawn from it, that
therefore the best manner of gesture to eat the Lords Supper is standing.

Now in general concerning all these forenamed Rites, we may observe this
property; that some of them were only peculiar to this Passover, and to no
other: as first, that the Lamb should be kept four days, verse. 3.6.
Secondly, the liberty they had to choose a Lamb, or a Kid. Thirdly, the
sprinkling of the blood upon the doore-posts. Fourthly, all those next before
mentioned, of eating it with their loins girded, etc. Fifthly, the not going
out of the house until the morning. These Rites were then commanded and used,
in regard of the present circumstances and occasions, but were never in use
afterward. And this may appear in that, at the second institution of the
Passover, when it was ordained to an anniuersary rite, they are not repeated,
nor yet were performed by Christ, when he did abrogate the same.

And this we may observe, that there may be rites in the first institution of
ordinances, which are not of perpetual use. So in this Passover they were to
keep their houses, and to sprinkle the blood only at this time, because at
this time only the destroyer was to pass by: and likewise to eat it in such
haste, because now only they were to be gone out of Egypt on a sudden. So in
the Lords Supper, Christ used unleavened bread, because at that time there was
no leauened bread to be eaten: also he celebrated it at evening, because it was
immediately to succeed the Passover, which was eaten at Even. So he sat at
the Lords Supper, having sat before after the fashion of the Country at the
Passover.

A rule to know when such rites are occasional, as if they be not expressed in
the words of the institution of the ordinances. Seeing therefore the gesture of
sitting, is neither by the Evangelists, nor Saint Paul, repeating the
institution, expressly set down, we are herein to submit our selves to the
orders appointed by the Church.

Verse. 14. And this day shall be unto you for a memorial: and you shall keep
it a Feast to the Lord, throughout your generations: you shall keep it a Feast
by an ordinance for ever.

14. Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread, eu^n the first day ye shall
put leaven out of your houses: for whosoever eats leauened bread, from the
first day to the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.

16. And in the first day there shall be an holy Convocation, and in the
seventh day there shall be an holy Convocation to you* no manner of work shall
be done in them, save that which every man must eat, that only may be done of
you.


COncerning the time of the celebration of the Passover, we are to note,
first, the beginning; secondly, the continuance.

1. In the beginning observe; first, upon what occasion it was ordained:
secondly, on what time of the year celebrated.

First, the occasion was that great deliverance from Pharaoh, and that bondage
wherein the Egyptians held them; the same night that this deliverance was to
be sent, this Passover was instituted. God so disposing of it, first, in
regard of himself, to show that this deliverance came from him, in that every
thing came to pass according as he had before signified. Secondly, in regard
of the people, to strengthen their faith and hope, that seeing all things
accomplished according to this sign, they might believe in God, and have their
hearts enlarged to praise and trust in him.

Secondly, the time of the year on which it was celebrated, is set down,
verse. 18. In the first month; that is, in the Spring time, answering in part
to our March. The fourteenth day of the month; at the full of the Moon, after
the Spring Equinoctial. God making choice of this time, that even the time
might stir up their hearts, and encourage them to hope for a deliverance.
Also it was a type of Christ, whose coming brought with it the Spring of
grace, of knowledge and illumination, etc.

Quest. Here a question may be moved, whether they were strictly bound to
observe always this time, and no other.

Answ. To this we answer in general, that they were not so strictly tied unto
this time, as that upon no occasion it might be altered. This appears by that
story which is recorded, Numb. 9. verse. 6. to 14.

Out of which we may note these points;

First, that God requires not impossibilities of his children, but does
dispense even with his own ordinances in case of necessity, as here in case of
legal uncleanness, by burying a dead man, God gave them liberty to alter the
time unto another month. So in the wilderness was Circumcision, because of
the uncertainty of their iourneyes; and so there may be many necessary
occasions to hinder a man from the Sacrament, and so I doubt not, but if a man
that has long lain bed^ed, should have a fervent desire to receive the
Communion, the place might be altered, and it might be celebrated in a private
house there being company sufficient to make a Congregation, the like may be
said of Baptism.

Secondly, that it is better to forbear for a time, then being unprepared, to
come to the Sacrament. Against this may be objected the example of those that
came vnpared to the Passover, 2. Chron. 30.17, 18. But we answer, that God
showed his displeasure at this, in that he plagued them, ver. 20. although at
the prayer of Hezekiah, and their own repentance, no doubt he healed them. Also
they had honest hearts, and did this in ignorance, wherefore he passed by
their infirmity. Now if there might be Legal uncleanness without sin: and
yet those that were thus unclean, might not come to the Passover, much more
ought we that are indeed defiled with sin, abstain for a time, lest being
vnprepard, we make the Sacrament unfruitful unto us, and an occasion of
bringing judgment upon us, 1. Cor. 11.28.

Thirdly, that we do not wittingly and willingly hinder our selves from the
Table of the Lord. For these men were grieved, that they could not come, as
appears by their complaint to Moses, which shows they were necessarily
hindered. And verse. 13. we see a great judgment threatened against such as
might come, and did neglect it.

Wherefore it must be a matter of necessity that hinders us, and not every
pretext that we make unto our selves. So likewise many will make themselves
unfit, by continuing in malice and anger against others, by which means they
continue still in impenitency, and also show their light esteem of Gods
ordinance.

Fourthly, that if we be necessarily hindered at one time, we labor to make it
up at another, hereby showing our true desire and religious care.

2. Concerning the continuance of the Passover, we are to note, first, how
long it lasted at once for the celebration of it. Secondly, how long it lasted
in the continual succession of it from year to year.

Concerning the former, it was celebrated seven whole days, verse. 15. to the
end that it being a great ordinance, a memorial of a great benefit, and a type
of a greater, it might have a solemn celebration. Now it was kept seven days,
because it was just seven days before their full deliverance accomplished: for
the first day they came out of Egypt, and the seventh, they passed over the Red
Sea.

Here two questions may be asked:

First, whether they might increase, or diminish the number of these days?

Answ. No: they might not alter the days, to the end that the mystery might be
always had in remembrance, and be an occasion to declare unto their children,
when they should ask them the reason of them, all the circumstances of that
deliverance.

But in the 2. Chron. 30.23. we read that it was kept fourteen days.

Answ. First, they kept indeed a Festival seven days over, but it was not the
Passover. Secondly, if they did celebrate the Passover seven days longer, it
was because many were unclean amongst so many people, who could not go home
and come again the next month, and so they thought that it might be continued
other seven days, so that it was extraordinary: upon that Law, Number. 9.

Quest. 2. How these seven days were celebrated.

Answ. 1. In general all these seven days were holy, Leu. 23.4.

2. But yet we must distinguish between the first and the last day, and the
five middlemost. The five middle were holy in these respects:

First, because that rite of eating unleavened bread was to be continued.

Secondly, because on all those seven days there were extraordinary sacrifices
to be offered, proper to those days, besides the continual morning and
evening sacrifice, Leuit. 23.8. Numb. 28.23.

Thirdly, because the people were to come together morning and evening to
worship God, and to feast together in a holy rejoicing in the Lord, 2. Chron.
30.22. Luke 2.43.

But the first and seventh were in a peculiar manner, and more strictly holy.
First, because on these days there was an holy Assembly, verse. 16. Leuit.
23.7, 8, Nvmb. 28.18, 25. What this holy Assembly was, see Nehem. 8.2, 3, 5,
etc.

Secondly, in regard that they were not to do any servile work on these
days, verse. 16. to the end they might have the more liberty to worship God,
and not to be tired and wearied with labor on the five days.

Verse. 15. For whosoever eats leauened bread, from the first day until the
seventh, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.


THe last thing to be considered, is the necessity of this Sacrament of the
Passover, and so consequently of the Lords Supper, instituted in the room
thereof. That there was a necessary observation of it, appears in two
respects: First, because it was expressly and simply commanded of the Lord,
verse. 14. Secondly, because of the penalty laid upon those that should wilfully
neglect, or contemn it, verse. 15. for although only this particular Rite of
unleavened bread be here expressed, yet by a Synecdoche we must understand it
of the whole Ordinance, so that the contempt or neglect is not only of this
rite, but of the whole Ordinance, as appears by comparing this with Numb. 9.13.

That we may more distinctly see wherein this necessity consists, we are to
consider in general; that a thing is then said to be necessary, without which
another thing cannot be. Now this is used in two respects; first, for a thing
that is absolutely necessary, without which a thing cannot possibly be, so as
are the causes of things said to be necessary. Thus Christ's death is absolutely
necessary for our salvation.

Secondly, it is taken for that which is necessary by consequence, for the
better effecting, and more easy performance of a thing.

The Sacraments are necessary; not as causes, for then should they give grace
and salvation. But they are necessary as a means of salvation, and that also
not simply: for so is Faith the means, and this comes by hearing of the
Word, but in these two respects: first, because God has commanded them, they
are his ordinances to try our obedience; and so although we should reap no
benefit by them, yet were we to observe them. Secondly, in regard of our need,
because we are carnal, and are most moved with things objected to our senses,
not so much apprehending spiritual mysteries, and therefore for the help of
our understanding, and strengthening of our Faith, God ordained the Sacraments,
that so more particularly we might apply Christ to our selves.

Therefore we must distinguish between the outward signs, and the thing
signified.

Christ is that which the Sacrament represents, now to feed on Christ, to
celebrate this Passover (for so is he called) is absolutely necessary, without
which no salvation, Ioh. 6.53. But as for the Elements and other Rites, they
are necessary but in part, not as causes, nor as means simply, without which
there were no partaking of Christ, but in regard of Gods command, and our
better help.

In the Penalty observe, first, the Extent thereof; secondly, the Persons
against whom it is denounced.

1. The Extent is in these words, [ that person shall be cut off from Israel.]
To take this in the largest extent, it sets forth three things:

First, that those that offend against this charge, shall be separated from
the communion and fellowship of the people of God, and so be accounted as
Heathen men, 1. Cor. 5. last, alludeth hereunto.

Secondly, the taking of them clean from the face of the earth, either
ordinarily by the sword of the Magistrate: for so this cutting off is taken,
Exodus 31.14, 15. or extraordinarily by the hand of God.

Thirdly, a deprivation of salvation and debarring from life eternal, a
cutting off from having fellowship with the body of Christ hereafter, because
here they so little regarded the communion of his members; as Psalm. 69.28.

2. The persons against whom this judgment is threatened, are plainly set
down, Numb. 9.10, 13. Where we see, that if urgent causes did hinder any one,
God in that case did dispense with him, but if when he might conveniently keep
the Passover, and was not hindered by the providence of God, he did then
neglect it, then was he liable to this punishment.

We see therefore that the Jews were bound in conscience to the observation of
the Passover, as they also did, verse. 28. and in times succeeding, when they
were grown careless, or had forgotten the ordinances of God, we see that
godly Kings considering the great necessity of it, had great care to restore it
to its former observation; as Josiah and Hezekiah, 2. Chro. 30.

To apply this to our selves, seeing that there is as great necessity of our
Sacraments, as of these of the Jews, as great a penalty denounced against the
wilful contemuers and neglecters of ours, as of theirs, we have as great need
of these helps as they, and as great benefit redounds to us as to them, it
follows that we are as strictly bound unto the observation of the Sacraments
as they were; and therefore we are not to think^ it a matter arbitrary, and
left at our choice, but to make conscience to come, when God by his Minister
does inuit us.

2. Again, as here is condemned all wilful profanation, and contempt of the
Sacraments, so likewise is reproved that superstitious conceit that many have
of the necessity of it, who if they be sick, will have the Sacrament brought
to them, etc.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE THIRTIETH PSALM.
Psalm. 30.2. In whose Spirit there is no guile.


GVile is a spiritual deceit, whereby a man deceiues himself before God in
the matter of his salvation.

The kinds of it may be reduced to four heads.

1. Guile, in respect of Gods favor when a man is deceived by a false
persuasion, that he is in the favor and love of God. This is done three ways:

1. By comparisons; when a man compares himself either with himself, or with
gross notorious sinners that come far behind him in goodness, or with civil
righteous men. As did the Pharisees, Luke 18.11, 12. such are said to be alive
whithout the Law. Romans 7.9.

2. By reason of temporal blessings, which because a man does enjoy
plentifully, so he straightway concludes, that he is beloved of God.

3. Lastly, which is the most fearful, when men being punished with crosses
and calamities, do hereupon gather, that God loves them, saying, that they
have their punishment here, and so they shall escape hereafter; though in the
mean time they never repent of their sins, and leave their wicked courses,
for which end God did thus punish them.

2. Guile and deceit of the heart in respect of Sin; this is either before or
after the committing of it.

Before the committing of a sin, a man's hear^ deceiues and beguiles him four
ways.

1. By persuading him, it is but a small venial sin; so extenuating it, as a
matter not much to be stood upon.

2. But if the sin do seem great and ugly, then it labors to make him
believe that God sees it not, he takes no notice of it.

3. If this persuasion take no place, but that he think God will see it, then
it suggesteth unto him that he will not punish him for it, he will pass by it,
etc.

4. If all this serve not the turn, then it persuades him, that repentance
may easily be had for it, that he will repent for it before he dies, etc.

After a sin committed, the guile is threefold.

1. A man's corrupt heart will endeavor to bring him to a love and liking of that
sin, and make it seem pleasant unto him, that he may not repent for it.

Secondly, or else to cause him to defend it by colorable shifts and excuses,
that he may seem to do it lawfully.

Thirdly, if it do begin to gripe him, and to prick his conscience, then does
it labor to choke this grief and sorrow, and so to hinder sound repentance,
and that three ways:

First, by merriment, when a man thinks it but a melancholy, and so gets him
among merry companions to music, and such like, to drive it away.

Secondly, if so it leave him not, then he performs some short humiliation
for fashion sake, without true sorrow indeed, that so hereby he may as it
were, get himself out of Gods hands.

Thirdly, by some ceremony or other; as when some covetous extortioner that
gets his goods unlawfully, and never thinks of restitution, upon his death
bed, or before, will give somewhat to build an Almes-house, and so make amends
for all. This is but a ceremony as it were.

3. Guile, in respect of virtues and graces, when a man deceiues himself with
a counterfeit show of them; as

First, when he persuades himself to be a true worshipper of God, because he
frequents the places and exercises of his service.

Secondly, to be a true Christian, because he performs the outward duties of
Religion.

Thirdly, when he beguiles himself with the shadow of Faith and repentance,
and all other particular graces, whereof there is no one but may be
counterefited.

Fourthly, guile in respect of the Word, and works of the Spirit: for first, a
man may have, first, knowledge of the Word; secondly, assent unto this
knowledge; thirdly, a man may make profession of it; fourthly, yea, he may
stand for the defense of the truth thereof, and yet may he be beguiled with a
false hope of his good estate; all things being wrought in him by that
wonderful power of God, whereby he causes even the wicked and ungodly to
give testimony to the truth of his Word.

Secondly, there may be wrought in him, first, a kind of love and joy in the
Word; secondly, a willingness to hear it; thirdly, a reformation of some
sins and corruptions in the life and conversation (which is done by the
restraining, and not sanctifying Spirit,) as there was in Herod, Mark. 6.20.
with diverse the like graces; and nevertheless as Herod did, he may nourish
some one bosom sin, and so be far from the state of sound conversion.

Diverse other such deceits there are, but these are the principal: which
things seeing they are so, and that the heart is deceitful above all things,
yea, and who can know it?

Let us labor and learn, first, to suspect our hearts, and not trust them too
far, but by due examination find out the wiles and subtilties thereof.
Secondly, to get us sincere and upright hearts.

FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION OF PART OF THE FIFTH AND SIXTH CHAPTERS OF S. PAVLES EPISTLE to
the Ephesians, wherein is handled all such duties as belong to household
Government: ALSO THE SPIRITVALL ARMOVR, OVT OF WHICH A CHRISTIAN MAY FETCH
SVFFICIENT furniture against all his spiritual Enemies.

LONDON, Imprinted for John Bartlett, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Gilt Cup in the Goldsmiths Row in Cheapeside. 1630.

EPHESIANS 5. VER. 22, 23, etc. Wives, submit your selves unto your husbands,
as unto the Lord.

For the husband is the wives head, even as Christ is the head of the Church,
and the same is the savior of his body.


THe scope and drift of the Apostle in the latter end of this Epistle, is to
stir up Christians to walk worthy of the vocation whereunto they were
called, Chap. 4.1.

He here shows how they should walk, viz. 1. In the practice of the duties
of their general calling of Ch^^st^anity, which are set down in the fourth
and part of the fifth Chapter, unto the 20. v^rse.

2 In the performance of the duties belonging to their particular ^^llings. 1
In general, verse 21. he lays down the ^uty of subjection, which is a
general and common duty belonging to all callings, both inferior and
superior, of Magistrates and Ministers, yea, Ki^gs themselves.

Now this subjection must be in the fear of the Lord, which sh^weth first the
cause of it: it arises from the fea^e of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 5.29 E^clesiastes
12.13. For this bridles our unruly corruptions, which be otherwise untoward and
stubbor^e, to yield r^ady and cherefull obed^ence. 2 This shows the restraint
and manner of p^rformance, Col. 3. Ephesians 6. It must be done in the Lord. When
our submission goes against the Commandments of the Lord, no good issue
comes from it: as in S^uls obeying the people, 1 Samuel 15.15, 21. and also of
Aa^ons yielding to the children of Israel in making the calfe, Exodus ^2. for
God is the highest: and again, God is our Iud^^. This caution must be
understood in all particular d^^ies that ensue.

Now from this gen^rall ground, the Apostle comes to some particular functions,
or callings, and the duties belonging thereunto.

Hence we learn this instruction from this, in that the Apostle stays not
in the general duties of Christianity; but from thence descends to the
particular offices of such general callings: that it is not sufficient to
perform the general duties of Christianity, unless we practice the several
duties of our particular vocations, as the Apostle herein is as careful to
set down the one as the other, and to the Colossians the like, Chap. 4.5. And
the Apostle Peter in his Epistle exhorts, and in the 2 Chap. ver. 15. of Titus,
the Apostle shows, that this is a thing that the Ministers ought to teach the
people, as is plain also in the 5 Commandment, in which every one, is ranked
into certain degrees.

There are 4 considerations to stir us up:

1 That those several places and callings wherein we are set, are appointed of
God, and that he prescribes the duties belonging unto them.

2 That the particular callings wherein we are set, serve to make up the
comeliness of the Church of God, and the beauty of the body of Christ Jesus:
now we disturb this comely order, when we either exalt or debase our self
too much, or live out of our callings.

3 These are the bonds whereby we are bound and knit one to another, and by
which we both do much good, and reap much profit one of another, Ephesians. 4.16.

4 That the general duties of Christianity cannot better be showed, then in
the practice of our particular duties of our several callings.

Use. 1 That every one do observe that place wherein God has set him: herein
we must have recourse to the word, which shows us direction to walk in the
same, Tit. ^.9, 10. hereby shall we adorn the Gospel of Christ in all
things.

And we may well say without breach of charity, that they who are not careful
to perform the duties of particular callings, are no good Christians,
whatsoever show they make abroad: as an unconscionable Minister in his calling,
cannot possibly be a good Christian.

2 General doctrine is, in that the Apostle does make choice of those callings
that serve to build up a family: all which in 3 ranks he reckons up very
acurately, and is very earnest, copious and large in urging the duties of them.

Hence we learn, that the particular callings of a family are some of those
that belong to Christians, and such as in which we ought to be diligent in
ob^eruing the duties of them.

The reason is, because the family is the seminary of the Church and
Commonwealth, and as it were the Beehiue, which here and there sends swarms
forth: So all men came first from the family of Adam and Eve; after the flood
from the family of Noah: therefore great care is to be taken heerin, seeing in
families all men are first trained up, and ought so to be instructed, that they
may be profitable members afterward of Church and Commonwealth.

Therefore those that have no other calling but only of a family, ought not to
be discomforted and troubled in conscience, as if they had no calling at all,
because they have no public calling; but they ought to k^ow that such callings
are warranted by the Word of God, wherein they may have business enough to
employ themselves, if they be conscionable in performance of it: and the more
free they are from pub^ike callings, the more care and diligence in governing
and instructing their families ought they to have.

2 For those that have another public calling, to tell them, that by this,
they are not exempted from the calling of the family: for the duties of the one
do not cross the other: as Joshua was a captain of the host of the Lord: yet
what said he? I and my house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. E^i a good man
otherwise, was unconscionable herein: so was David in bringing up his
children: and we know what issue was of both famili^s, 1 Timothy 3.9. (...), he
that cannot rule and order his family well, cannot rule the Commonwealth well:
so a stubborn chi^de will never prove a good subject. These doctrines ser^e as
pr^paratiues to the ensuing duties in our particular vocations.

Now from those general doctrines, we come to handle the du^ies that belong to
the particular callings here mentioned: and first, to show the duties ^o
belong to man and wife.

Fitly does the Apostle begin with the married couple: 1 Because in the
beginning of the world, this was the first, as Adam and Eve were married and
joined together by God, Genesis 2. before either servants or children were any.

2 Because they are the chief in the family, having the government thereof,
and so are the guides and examples to others: and if they carry themselves
lewdly, their servants and children will be ready to follow their examples. So
then their fault is double. 1 In neglecting their own duties, and so wronging
one another. 2 In giving offense and ill example to others.

Now come we to the duties belonging to them, in which we will proceed in this
order: 1 to lay down the general duties that belong to both.

2 To lay down the several duties of their particular callings.

The former are twofold, either de Necessitate, de Honestate.
either such as are absolut^ly nec^ssary for the pr^seruing of the marriage
knot, or such as are meet and convenient to be done for the better preserving
of it, and furth^rance of their mutual helps and comfort. Those that are
absolutely necessary, are two.

1 Chastity opposed to adultery. By both which the marriage knot is broken. 2
Cohabitation oppos^d to desertion. By both which the marriage knot is broken.
Chastity is a virtue whereby we possess our vessel^ in holin^sse and honor, 2
Cor. 11.2. 1 These. 5. in a general intent is it understood of all purity.

But in 1 These. 4.4. of the chastity of the body. It is twofold, either of
single life, and this either of those that were never married, or such as are
widows or widdowers. Of such, 1 Timothy 5.16. Married estates, Tit. 2.5.
This note against the dotage of Papists, who think that chastity and marriage
cannot stand together, whereas the Apostle called the marriage bed undefiled.

Now this is a mutual duty to be performed of both. 1 Cor. 7.4. the man and
the wife, neither of them have more liberty than the other. It is also
absolutely necessary, because adultery does break the marriage bond, Pro. 2.17.
Mat. 5.3^. Mat. 19.9. Where the exception shows, that adultry breaks this
bond: so that if the man marry another, he is not an adulterer.

Reason is evident, because in adultery they make themselves one flesh with a
stranger, 1 Cor. 6.16. Now this near union can be but betwixt two. The use is
therefore that we observe this counsel of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7 4, 5 and of
S^lomon, Pro. 5.17 18, 19. Showing hereby, that if we have a delight in our
wives, and comfort our s^lues with one another, truly to love one another, we
shall the better avoid strange flesh: Considering also that it is a point of
so great consequence, and adultery such a sin, as God himself will judge and
avenge. If we have also an eye to the fear of the Lord, then we have Gods
promis^, Prou. 2.16. and 6.20, 24. and (...) will keep us as it kept Joseph,
Genesis 39.9.

Cohabitation is, that the h^sband and wife dwell together, enjoying the
mutual h^^pe and comfort one of another, 1 Pet. 3.7. 1 Cor. 7.12, 13. Where
the Apostle uses an argument, which if it hold in those marriages where one
party is an Infidel, much more then where both are Christians: and this was
meant, Genesis 2. vlt. in that commandment, that a man should leave all, and
cleave to his wife: and this is the ground thereof. Reason is twofold, drawn
partly from the benefits that come by Cohabitation, as, first because all
marriage duties are hereby better performed, love increased and preserved, the
gifts and graces bestowed on either of them shall be better observed, and so
God shall be more praised and glorified, their affections more nearly knit
together: for absence does alienate affections, etc.

Partly, from the hurts proceeding from the neglect thereof. 1 A neglect of the
duties of marriage. 2 A hinderance of breeding and begetting holy seed. 3 A
lying open to the snares and temptations of Satan, to many noisome lusts, and
occasion of falling into adultery.

Now this is absolutely necessary, 1 By consequent, because it gives occasion
to adultery, whereby marriage is broken. 2 Simply in it self, in the uttermost
extent. If it be an obstinate, wilful and final desertion, it does directly
break the bond. But will some say, How shall we know whether it be such a
desertion or no? We may know it by these two signs:

1 By the open profession of the party forsaking: as if he be a Papist, etc.
and ^o refuse obstinately to abide and dwe^l amongst those that are truly
religious: Hereby he manifestly proc^aimes, that his departing and desertion
is obstinate, and that he will never return again, 1 Cor. 7.15.

2 By the continuance in this separation, as is further manifested by the
comparing it with the statutes of Colleges, from which i^ any one abs^nt
himself for such and such a time, without giu^ng notice thereof, and without
any necessity, this his separation an^ desertion is adjudged wilful, and he
expuist, ipso facto. So the Laws of the Land have determined upon seven years
absence.

Object. But there is nothing for which a man may put away his wife, or she
her husband, but only for adultery, and so not for desertion.

Answer. Indeed nothing does dissolve the band by divorce and putting away, but
adultery, of which the places, Math. 5. Mat. 19. are to be understood: but yet
besides this, there are other causes whereby wedlock is dissolved: as namely
death: and so also by desertion: in which case upon complaint, the Magistrate
does relieve the innocent party wronged.

Quest. Whether it be simply unlawful or no to be absent for a time? No, if it
be not in the uttermost extent: 2 If it be with mutual consent, 2 Kings 4.22.
Pro. 7.19, 20. 3 If it be for weighty affairs, either for family or other
occasions by virtue of ones calling, as of Courtiers, Lawyers, Mariners, etc. 4
If it be for an inevitable impediment and necessity, as if a man be taken
captive, or the like.

But these cautions in all must be observed, that it be a departing with grief
and sorrow, even as if it were a pulling of one member from another. 2 That
there be a return again so speedily as possibly they may* and lastly, in the
time of their absence, to supply their presence by frequent intercourse of
letters, sending tokens of mutual love, and enquiring of one another
welfare, etc.

From hence we may learn, first, the erroneous opinion of the Canonists, that
hold that there is nothing that does break the band, neither adultery, nor
desertion: yet they hold many causes of separation from bed and board: so the
band shall remain, yet they shall have no means of performance of marriage
duties.

2 This condemns them that think themselves never well and merry, but in the
absence one of another: as they that (...) abroad when their wives are at home,
and such as send their wives into the country, etc.

The other common du^^es that are meet and convenient, and indeed nec^ssary for
the well being, and comfortable, good, religious, and peac^able estate of
marriage, and b^tter pr^^eruing of that knot. These are twofold, either as they
are both jointly to perform to others: either ^uch as they are mutually to
perform one unto another.

And they are two. 1 Love, Titus 2.4. 2 Provident care for the good one of
another.


This love is the bond of perfection, Col. 3. and it is the ground of all other
good duties, and the cheerful and ready performance of them. So that if any
duties be neglect^d between them, then hence may we gather the ground of it,
viz. want of love.

But let us s^e what kind of love the Scripture here requires: it must not
be a m^ere natural love, or a worldly love: but it is a spiritua^l love,
arising from obedience to Gods commandment, and a conscience of his ordinance.
That love that is for the things of this world, as for honor, riches, beauty,
etc. is fading and continues not, because take away the cause, take away the
^ffect: those worldly things decaying, the love thereof must also needs decay;
farewell it.

But the spiritual love grounded upon the consideration of Gods ordinance, is
firm and constant, and lasts always, because they consid^r that God has
joined them together; and so, because she is my wife, because he is my husband,
etc. therefore they love one another. This co^demnes the unnatural practice of
those that cannot affect one another, but love any other rather then their own
wives and husbands, yea, because they are their husbands or their wives: as
many will say, I could love him, if he were not my husband, or if she were not
my wife.

2 Duty: The former does especially respect the affection, this the action:
that they be provident and careful, one for the good of another, Prou. 31.1.
This good stands in four things. 1 In the soul. 2 In the body. 3 In the
goods. 4 In the good name of one another: in which the good or ill of one
another does consist: for all together, this is a general means to be used,
namely, Faithful and daily prayer one for another; for the means to obtain
any blessing of God, is pray^r, James 5.16. This to be performed continually
without ceasing: so Genesis 25. Isaac prayed for the barrenness of his wife. And
this must be done both inwardly by themselves in their secret prayers, and also
one with another. So Isaac is said to have prayed with or before his wife, Genesis
25.

1 For the soul: either to win them and convert them; or to build them up
further being converted: For the former, see 1 Peter 3.1. 1 Cor. 7. The reason
is, because this bond is not only, and so much for carnal respects, as indeed
for the good of the soul: as for this respect, they are called the bonds of
ministration.

And this is not only between those where one party is an Infidel, but also if
he be a profane person and not yet called.

For the latter, namely, edifying of one another, this must be done. 1 By
remoouing the impediments which may hinder this spiritual edification, the
greatest of which is sin; wherefore we must watch one over another for the
avoiding of sin.

This watchfulness shows it self a ways: 1 preventing of a sin, if we see
them purposed to commit any, as Rebecca did prevent Isaac in blessing Esau,
which if according to his purpose he had done, he had sinned. 2 In redressing
of any thing that is out of ord^r, as Zipporah d^d redress that fault of Moses
child, who neglected the circumcision of his child. Here also is place for
admonition, whereby the faults one of another are amended, as Naamans se^uant
did, and Abigail also to Nabal. This mild and gentle admo^ition does
especially belong to the husband.

2 By using the means of ^difying one of another, for the cherishing of the
graces in either of them, as by observing them; and by praising and w^se
commendations of them in one another, 1 The. 5.11. and the good example of each
other for the increasing of them. This condemns those wives and husbands that
hinder the salvation one of another.

3 Concerning the welfare of the body and person of one another, Ephesians. 5.28, 29.
this duty is well set down by the Apostle, that they should nourish and cherish
one another in all estates and conditions.

Yea, this G^n. 2.18. is the maine end of their coming together, Prou. 17.17.
A true friend is always constant in his love, alteration of stat^s cannot
alter his affections. If this be true of friends, much more then between man
and wife. This appears in Rebecca that had a tender care of her husband, so
that she knew what he best loved, and so provided it for him, Genesis 27.9.

This serves to reprove the unnaturalness of those that grudge one another
things convenient in any sickness, etc. The husbands complaining of great
charges, the wives of their labor and pains: and so making their afflictions
more h^auy and grievous; as two Oxen in the yoke, one drawing backward, as Jobs
wife did, Job 2. See Job 19.17.

Of this so let us be persuaded, that when God lays the cross upon one, God
lays it upon the other, for the trial of their patience.

4 Concerning the good name one of another, that the good name of the one ought
to be as dear unto the other as their own name.

Such a care had Joseph of Mary's good name, Mat. 1.19. And so Bathsheba was in
the 2 Samuel 11.5. careful for David's credit.

For* Pro. 22.1. Eccles. 7.3. A good name is better then riches, then life,
yea, then any thing else.

Again, how will this knit their hearts together, when they perceive each
other care for the credit one of another, as the contrary brings
heart-burning, contention, jealousy, and debate between them?

For the performance hereof, these 4 things are to be marked.

1 To have a care to prevent an ill name: in which, we must have respect to
these 3 especial things.

1 What the wife does relate of the husband, or he of her.

2 What they do hear; to take heed of their ears.

3 To take heed to their judgments, what censure they give of it.

For the first, that they diuulge not their infirmities, 1 Pet. 4.8. but cover
and hide them as Joseph did. This condemns those that discover and lay open
their husbands and wives imperfections; which fault is so much the greater in
these two respects.

1 Because these two being so nearly linked together, do know more by one
another, than any other, and so if these blaze their imperfections abroad, it
is a most foul fault.

2 Because of all, they are most bound to seek the credit one of another: For
the bond between man and wife is more near than between father and son, as
appears, Genesis 2.24. So that if Cham were cursed for discovering his fathers
fault, much more shall such a husband or wife be accursed, that lay open the
infirmities one of another.

2 For our ears, that they be not open to receive news and tales one of
another, that our ears be not ready and willing, itching to hear false rumors
and surmises. Our judgment must be very sparing or very charitable: that we
suspend our judgment, and not straightway rashly give our censure, as Joseph
by all likelihood did of Mary: otherwise there will be many evil surmises,
iealousies, and suspicions.

Or if we give our censure, it must be in love: the properties whereof, the
Apostle sets down, 1 Cor. 13.7, 8. either that we int^rpret it, if it be
doubtful, in the best part, or that we mitigate and extenuate it so far as
well we may: as Abigail did mitigate to David her husband Na^als faults,
whereas Michol did exasperate and aggrauate her husbands infirmity, as she
thought.

2 For redressing of an ill name; that if an ill report be rais^d, that the
wife hide it not from her husband, but discover it to him, that if the report
be upon just ground, he may be brought to r^pentance; if upon suspicion, that
he may be warned to prevent it.

3 For the procuring of a good name: that they gladly report and diuulge their
good parts, as the husband of that good wife, Pro. ^1, 28. and willingly to
hear the good report one of another.

4 For the preserving of a good name, they must, if they hear a good report of
one another, give notice thereof to each other, not to glory in it themselves,
and to be proud of it, but to glorify God for it.

For the manifestation of this care, this must be used, viz. that both rejoice
and grieve mutually, for the good or ill name one of another, by which simpathy
and fellow feeling our love and care of one another credit will plainly show
it self.

4 Concerning the goods of one another, that as they have a mutual right in
the possession of all, so they ought mutually to be provident for the wealth
and good estate of each other, to preserve and increase it: this is a common
duty; common, I say, because usually wives put this off to their husbands: but
read Pro. 31. and we shall ^ee the contrary.

This so on the one side reprooues unthrifty and covetous husdands, and on the
other idle wives.

Now generally, if all these duties were performed, how comfortable, peaceable,
and joyous would the band of marriage be, which we see many by neglecting the
performance thereof, to make most wearisome, and burdensome? so that after a
while, the^ begin to be weary one of another, to wish the death of each other,
and such other grudges, contentions and discomforts do arise between them.

Duties Common. Absolutely necessary, Chastity. Cohabitation.
Convenient to be performed one to another. Love, Care,
both to others, as the care of the worship of God in the family, etc.

Particular.


The Apostle does begin with wives, as he does in the Epistle to the
Colossians, etc. And so Saint Peter.

The reason of it is, because she is the inferior, and it is the Apostles
order, to begin always with the duties of inferior, and so is this order
observed in the 5 Commandment: But what is the reason of this? Two there are:

1 Because the inferior is the lother to subject himself to his place, not
that that is a matter of greater difficulty to obey, than govern; for this
thing is far more d^fficult: and so places of greater authority, and
superiority, are by the wise providence of God order^d for such as are of
greater strength, wisdom, discretion, and ability: as to men, not women; to
men of ripe age, and not to children, Esa. 3.4, 12. because they are to lay
down the rule of ob^dience, and so may sooner, y^a, and so oug^t to have more
wisdom; the other only to observe it being laid down.

Her^ we may consider the great favor of God in giving us suc^ a King as we
now have, of the stronge^t sex; g^uen to ^s in such a ripe age, fu^nished with
such knowledge and zeal, as never King since Christ had; indeed a true
Defender of the faith, etc.

Naturally there is in man a desire to rule, and so they who are inferiors,
are drawn unto obedience praemio and paena, as we see penal statutes and the
like are indeed most commonly for to keep inferiors within their compass,
and are not so much appointed for superio^rs.

2 Because it will fare worse with inferiors, if there be strife, who shall
begin: for whence arises rage and anger in the superior? Is it not because
of the stubbornness of in^eriours? Whereas the best way for inferiors, to
move those that are in places of authority over them, is to use them mildly
and gently, and not churlishly, yea, to win them to the performing of their
own duties, is first, to begin with duty, and to behave themselves
obediently, and reverently. Indeed both ought to provoke by good example, not
st^y till they be provoked, and to strive to go before the other in performing
of their duties; and this is praiseworthy: But generally, if there be any
contention about beginning, the inferior must begin: And in the case of
wives, there be some reasons special why they should begin.

1 Out of 1 Corinthians. 11.9.

2 Out of 1 Timothy 2.14. Because she was first in the transgression, and so ought
by her obedience recompense the wrong she has done unto her husband; by being
first in obedience.

Now let us consider why the Apostle first begins with wives amongst all other
degrees of inferiors: For why is the wife as loath to perform the duties of
subjection, as other sorts of inferiors are? yea surely, and the reason is,
because of all inequalities, there is the l^ast disparity in this, between man
and wife. Though she be not the head, yet she is the heart. See 1 Cor. ^1.11,
12. so that there is a most near relation: yea a common ^quity in many things
with their husbands: and so in some things there is an equality; but yet for
all this, to conclude as women do, that so there is an equality in all, is but
a woman's reason, etc.

Again, even in those things wherein there is a community, yet is there an
inequality, as in commanding of their children: if the father command a thing
indifferent, and the mother forbid, the fathers word ought to stand.

Again, in some things there is no equality: as the husband may command the
wife, but she by no means her husband.

Now because of this little disparity, it is; that wives of all other
inferiors, are most hardly drawn to subject themselves obediently.

This serves for the praise of those wives, that have so far subdued their
nature, as to yield willing obedience.

2 To reprove them that labor not against this corruption of nature, but
rather increase and nourish the same by their wilful perverseness.

Now, from these Generalities, come we to the particular duties belonging to
each of them in several.

And first of the Wife, contained in the 22.23, 24. verses. First, let us set
down the meaning of the words,

Wives and Husbands, ((...),) Though these be general phrases and words
belonging to all men and women, yet in our translation, they are restrained
well unto them only that are married persons, which is plain by the relation
between them here signified, and secondly by the duties which are laid upon
the^ by the Apostle.

Submi^, ((...)) The word being of the mean voice, may be translated either
passiuely ( Be ye subject) or actiuely, ( Submit your selves.) No^ there is a
two^old subjection. 1 Of necessity. 2 Of will. Of order, or of duty. The first
is in regard of that rank and degree of Inferiority wherein God has placed
wives: by virtue of which Ordinance of God, they must be subject, will they,
^ill they.

The second is that dutiful respect and reverence that inferiors are to carry
toward those that are in place of authority, because God has set them over
them: and this is the subjection here meant, that wives perform unto their
husbands.

Unto your own ^usbands: ((...)*) which words contain two things. 1 That
wives ought to have but one husband, 1 Cor. 7.2. 2 That this subjection is to
be performed to him alone, forbidding all submission to adulterers, etc.
Commanding chaste and faithful obedience unto him.

As unto the Lord,) that is, to Christ Jesus: for this word is by a kind of
excellency appropriated unto him, and it is so expounded in the 5 verse of the
next Chap. These words teach us two things. 1 That the husband by virtue of his
place, has a kind of fellowship with Christ.

2 That such a submission is to be performed by the wife to her husband, as
she would perform unto Christ. That is, 1 That it be done reverently, in
fear and trembling. 2 Sincerely, in singleness of heart, as is said of
servants, Chap. 6.5, 6.

For the husband is the wives head.) This is metaphorically spoken, in allusion
to a natural body, that is, the husband, by reason of his place, is more
eminent, he is to protect, to defend, and govern his wife.

Even as Christ is the head of the Church,) To urge and press the husbands
authority over the wife, he puts in this similitude betwixt the husband and
Christ; wherein we may consider two things. 1 That the husband, by verue of his
place, is abo^e his wife. 2 That herein there is a resemblance between him and
Christ, both which ought duly to be observed, because they are strong motives
to stir up wives to yield obedience to their husbands.

And the same is the Savior of his body,) that is, Christ is not only a head
to rule, to give spiritual life, sense and motion to his members, but (
himself) and no other is also the ( Savior) absolute and every way perfect,
((...),) to protect, defend, and save his ( body) that is, the Elect, Gods
children, such as God has given to him.

Therefore as, etc.) This conclusion inferred upon the former ground, shows
two things, 1 That there is as great reason that the wife should subject her
self to her husband, as that the Church should submit her self to Christ. 2
That such a subjection as the Church does perform to Christ, such ought the
wife to perform to her husband; that it be done cheerfully, readily,
constantly, and so in other things agreeably.

Ob. Why, but will some man say, is any man to be obeyed so as Christ is obeyed.

Answ. We must restrain this and such like generalities to the point in
question; and then we shall see the meaning to be this, that in every thing,
which does belong to the husband by Virtue of his place, to command, therein
ought the wife to obey, even as the Church obeys Christ. Like as it is said,
1 Cor. 10.23. All things are lawful for me, that is, all things indifferent:
as also. 1 Cor. 6.13.

Hence we may learn two things. 1 That the authority of the husband is very
ample and large. 2 That the wife must look unto all duties of obedience, and
not only to some, saying as some do, I will obey my husband in these and
these, but not in others.

More distinctly to speak of them, we may consider in these words, two parts.
1 The duty it self, and this,

1 Wherein it consists, viz. In Subjection.

2 To whom to be performed, namely, to their own husbands.

3 How to be performed. The manner is threefold. 1 As to the Lord. 2 As the
Church to Christ. 3 In every thing.

2 The reason of this duty, taken from the authority and place, wherein God
has placed the man. The husband is the head, which is amplified by a
similitude between Christ and him.

1 Duty is Subjection, which is a general duty commended in Genesis 3.16. For
we must think that this is not a judgment only, but also a commandment, as
the judgment upon Adam, of eating his bread in the sweat of his brows, was
also a commandment that he should not live without a calling, Genesis 3.19. And
from this ground, the Apostles and Prophets have raised this doctrine of the
wives submission, that we stand not to recite all the places severally.

This word ( subject,) is of large extent, as the word honor is in the 5
Commandment. It implies two branches of duties. 1 That she acknowledge and
yield unto her husband by reason of his place, the prerogative of eminency, and
superiority above her self. 2 That accordingly she respect him.

The first that is, That she do see and acknowledge a superiority in her
husband, is not only a maine duty, but also indeed the ground of all other. For
how can the wife subject her self willingly, if she never acknowledge any
preeminency, and authority over her in her husband? Well may she yield a
forced submission, even as a conquered King may submit himself to the
conqueror, though he account him not his superior, but in his heart
despises him, and seeks opportunity of revenge: but a willing and ready
submission she can never perform.

Now that wives ought to knowledge such a superiority in their husbands: 1 See
Genesis 3.16. 2 Let them observe the Titles God gives them in Scripture: as of
Lord, Genesis 18.12. 1 Peter 3.6. Hos. 2.16. Guide, Pro. 2.17. Head, as here,
Image and glory of God, 1 Cor. 11.7.

3 Even nature shows this, that women are alwaie^ covered in token of
subjection; whereof also their long hair is a sign, 1 Cor. 11.

4 The husband by reason of his place, represents the comely order and beauty
in a natural body, viz. That he is the head. So, etc. And also he represents
the person of Christ.

5 The woman was made for the man: she was made after the man, she was made
not of the man's head, but out of his side: all which show the superiority of
her husband.

We see then, that subjection is a necessary duty to be performed by wives:
yea, of whatsoever state or degree she was before her marriage, yet must she,
though a Queen, etc. but married to a mean subject, after her marriage
acknowledge her self inferior to him, though for her Regiment and the like
she may be his superior.

Use Is first, to teach wives, that they be diligent to learn this duty, and
for to attain to the right knowledge, and acknowledging of their husbands
prerogatives.

2 To condemn ambitious and proud wives, that will forsooth be not only
equal, but above their husbands: whence arise so many contentions in families.

The second that is, Wiuely respect consists in two things.

1 Reverence. 2 Obedience.
Reverence is either inward or outward. Inward in the heart, when the wife does
esteem her husband in respect of his place, worthy of honor; which duty, in
the last verse of this 5. Chapter is called Fear. Not slavish and servile, but
joined with love, when she grieueth if he be displeased, and reioiceth, if she
can at any time give him contentment. The married wife cares how she may
please her husband, 1 Cor. 7.34. It is such an esteem, as the Church carries
of Christ, who we see, Cant. 5. how she was grieved, and could not be at rest
when she had once lost him.

This is laid down unto us, by the example of Sarah. For if we compare, 1
Pet. 3.6. with Genesis 18.12. we shall find, that that which is set down as her
word, was only the thought of her heart.

Now this duty is another ground of the good performance of all other duties;
without this, they will be but fained, and hypocritical: for as the former
duty served to inform the judgment in a right apprehension of that
superiority God has laid on husbands; so this serves to rectify the heart and
affections, that sincerely and unfeignedly they may honor and reverence them.

The want of this fear and reverence, is the cause that we see many, who of
others are much regarded and honored for their good gifts, which are more
eminent and openly known, are yet for some hidden infirmities, whereunto their
wives are most privy, very vilely, and basely esteemed of them. For redress
whereof, wives ought,

1 More to regard that place wherein their husbands are set, in which they do
sustain the person of Christ, then to look upon their persons, to consider
them as their husbands, and not as men.

2 To be more careful to look unto their better parts.

3 To interpret all things in the better part, to cover and hide their
infirmities, and to labor to amend them.

4 To weigh their own infirmities.

These considerations will root out that vile esteem many bear toward their
husbands, and plant in there hearts an honorable respect and reverence of them.

Outward Reverence consists in two things. 1 A reverent behavior, and
carriage. 2 In reverent speech: The reverence is commended unto wives by the
example of Rebecca, Genesis 24.64, 65. and expressly commanded, 1 Cor. ^1.10. 1
Pet. 3.2.

Now this outward carriage consists in three points. 1 Sober behavior. 2
Courteous gesture. 3 Modest attire.

Sobriety, as it is a virtue especially belonging to all women, so most
especially to wives; and it is opposed to Leuity and Wantonness: for as this
vain and light carriage betokens a light esteem that wives have of their
husbands, so the other is a special manifestation of inward fear and
reverence. See Titus 2.4. This is not opposed to Matrimonial familiarity: such
as was between Isaac and Rebecca, Genesis 26.8. but such sporting ought, 1 To be
in private, when they are alone. 2 It ought to be begun by the husband, as it
is there said, that ( Isaac) sported with Rebecca. 3 That in company they do
abstain.

2 Courtesy and obeisance: not as children and servants for every light
occasion, for herein a difference is to be put, considering, that of all
inequality, there is least disparity between the husband and wife. This so
must be showed when there shall be a departing one from the other for a season,
or a coming home, or at the sitting down at table, or when the wife makes
some solemn request unto her husband: as Bathsheba did unto David, 1 King.
1.16, 31. Some may say, that David was a King, and so she reverenced him as
King, and not as her husband. But I answer, 1 that though David were a King,
yet was she a Kings wife, and so dignified with the Titles and Honors of a
Queen; and if she notwithstanding would do it, much more ought others. 2 That
if on the contrary, Vashties stoutnesse were censured as an ill example to all
wives, Ester 1.17. Why should not this that was well performed by Bathsheba, be
a good example to others to do the like?

This is also commended unto us by the example of Rebecca, lighting down from
her horse to meet Isaac, Genesis 24.64. and of Abigail to David.

3 Modesty, especially in apparel, which is a very singular manifestation of
the inward reverence and honor they do carry toward their husbands: And it
is, that they be so attired, as neither by costlinesse nor curiousness of
fashion, they exceed the state and calling of their husbands. It is commanded
to all women in general, 1 Timothy 2.9. So is it particularly applied to wives, 1
Pet. 3.3. Here are condemned those proud Dames, that will go fine and in the
fashion, though their husbands go never so plainly: which shows that there
is no care to honor their husbands; for even their example should teach them
otherwise.

Now come we to the second branch, which is Reverent Speech, which must be
answerable to their carriage, manifesting a humble subjection in themselves,
and superiority in their husbands: and it is either in Presence, to their
husbands, or in Absence, to others concerning their husbands. In the presence
of their husbands, their speeches and words must be, 1 Few. 2 Meek and Gentle.
Fewness of words; that they strive not to have all the talk, to begin and
end, to take the tale out of their husbands mouth, etc. See for this silence, 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. where the Apostle says, that the woman must
learn of her husband. Now, a learner must keep silence: and silence is
commanded unto women not only in the congregation, but also in the family.
What then, must they be mute? No: silence is not opposed to speech, but to
loquacity, when they must have all the talk. This condemns many wives, whose
tongues never lie still, etc.

Meekness and Mildness of speech is showed, 1 In Titles: all their
compellations given to their husbands, must savor of reverence. Sarah was well
inured and accustomed to this, that even in her heart, alone by her self, when
she might have styled her husband otherwise, without any disgrace to him, yet
she calls him Lord, Genesis 18.12. Only let Christians take heed, that they
avoid singularity herein, as in calling their husbands Head, or Guide, etc.
but let them use such Titles of reverence, as are usual and proper to our
toungs. I do not altogether condemn those that call their husbands by their
Surnames: as Master such a one, etc. But such are to be condemned, as call them
by their Christen names; as John, Will, Tom, etc. which indeed are, and ought
to be used toward them only that are inferiors. 2 Those that give them vain
and foolish names of their own devising: as chicke, pigge, etc. What reverence
is there in these speeches?

For the manner of speech, either in approving, or reproving any thing; they
may not directly command their husbands, but entreat: nor reprove with chiding
and anger, but gently by exhortation, avoiding unadvised and rash speech: as
that of Rahel to Jacob, Genesis 30.1. angerly and shrewish speech: as, Iezabel to
Ahab, 1 King. 2.17. Bitter and railing speech: as that of Zipporah to Moses,
Exodus 4.25. Scoffing and frumping: as Michol to David, 2 Samuel 6.20. Disdainful
and reproachful speeches: as Jobs wife, Job. 2.9. She must not give word for
word. All these are employed by Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.4. under the name of a
meek and quiet spirit: a thing much set by of God.

This therefore is to be observed, because that wives being the weaker vessel,
are more subject to choler, and rash unadvised anger. 2 Because that this
fault in them is double. 1 The distemper of affections in themselves. 2 The
neglecting of their husbands place.

2 In their absence, to others concerning their husbands, they ought so to
speak of them, as they may show their reverence and honor to them, as Sarah
did alone in her heart, as the Church in the 5. of the Cant. ver. 10. highly
extolleth her husband Christ, unto those that she meets. So does Mary speak
concerning Joseph: Thy father and I, putting him in the first place, Luke 2.48.

Now this ought to be observed of women, when they meet together, because
then, commonly their talk is of their husbands.

So much for Reverence. The second branch is Obedience: and this is that which
tryes their religion, whether they subject themselves to the word of God or no:
for the other duties stand more in contemplation, and acknowledgement, and so
may be more easily performed.

This duty is laid down in the Law of the woman, Genesis 3.16. (whereunto we
must always have an eye) which says, Ty desire shall be subject to thine
husband, and he shall rule over thee: therefore it follows, that she must
obey: and by the example of Sarah, 1 Pet. 3.6. And the comparison between the
wife and the Church enforces this. Lastly, the woman promises the same at her
marriage.

More particularly, let us consider three points.

1 The kinds of obedience.

2 The manner of performing them.

3 The extent, how far forth obedience is to be yielded.

For the first, it stands in two points.

1 That the wife abstain to do any thing of her own head, and after her own
mind, either without or against the consent of her husband. 2 That she
perform that which he wills her to do.

Consent of the husband is twofold, either express, or implicit. Express, by
writing, speaking, or other signification of his mind unto her. And this is
either General, or Special. General, when without a distinct restraint to
this or that thing, the husband gives her liberty to do what she thinks
best: as when a Minister, or other man is occupied in some public calling,
commits unto his wife the care, and managing of all his household affairs: Such
a general consent had Joseph, of whom his Master took account of nothing.
save of the bread he did eat, Genesis 39.6. And the like when he was mad^ ruler
of Egypt, Genesis 41.40. The same also had the good wife, Prou. 31. In whom
because the heart of her husband t^usted, that is, judged her faithful,
trust^, and dilig^nt for the procuring of his wealth, verse 11. therefore he
commits all unto her, she buies, she sels, she does all, ver. 16, etc.

Particular consent is for one, or some particular actions, as Hannah had for
not going with her husband at that time, 1 Samuel 1.22, 23. and Sarah against her
maid Agar, Genesis 16.6. for power and authority to correct her, but for that
manner she did it in.

Implicit consent and by consequence. 1 By Silence, when the husband hearing
and knowing of the matter, may if he will, hinder it, and yet does not, as in
the case of Vows, Numb. ^0.8, 9. 2 That which the wife gathers by the mind,
former carriage, and disposition of her husband; as if a woman in her husbands
absence, do relieve a man in distress and misery, whom she knows, if her
husband himself were present, would succor and relieve, and by this his good
mind, she is persuaded that he is willing she should do it. So Hannah, in
vowing her child unto God, 1 Samuel 1.11. had the implicit consent of her
hu^band, because she knew that Elkanah being a religious man, would consecrate
unto God that child, which he should have in his old age.

So then, if the wife do any thing without the express, or implicit consent
of her husband, she breaks the rule and Law of Obedience.

Now against Consent, is when the husband forbids it and disclaimes it, and
yet she will do it. A thing simply to be condemned.

This may be further amplified by some particulars: as, 1 in disposing of the
goods of the family: Wherein she has not liberty to do what she will: but
these goods are twofold, either proper, or common. Proper goods are such as
the wife has a property and right, not only in the use, but in the possession
of them; and they are either such as the husband before his marriage binds
himself by obligation, either upon his own voluntary motion, or by the
persuasion of friends to give unto her, to be disposed at her own mind and
pleasure: or such as he husband in kindness after their marriage gives unto
his wife; as the rent of such a house or field, or the like. In all these it is
left to the wives liberty to do therewith what she pleases, and not what her
husband would have her.

For goods that are common, which come either by the wife or by the husband;
the property, right, and possession belongs only to the husband, the wife has
only the use of them and no more. Therefore does Jacob call that riches which
he had with his wives, his riches, Genesis 31.37. and though his wives called
their goods, our goods; yet this proves not that it was theirs for possession,
but only for use: and again, this is spoken not in opposition to their
husband, but in opposition to Laban their father, that it was none of his. And
hence it is, that we never read in Scripture, the wife called rich, but only
the husband. This is also proved by that law among the Israelites, that no
inheritrix, or daughter heir might marry to one of another tribe, because then
the inheritance was to go away from the wife, to the husband: as the example
of the daughters of Zelophehad, Numb. 36.6, 8. And the Law of our Land shows
it, saying, that the woman is under covert baron, and therefore she may not
give, sell, buy, or borrow without her husband consent to it, for otherwise her
husband may revoke all again.

But here some cases of conscience are briefly to be decided:

1 Whether the wife may not relieve the poor Saints in distress without her
husbands consent?

Answ. She may not, because her husbands goods are not hers to give away. Yea,
but it is to a good end. Well, but a good end cannot justify a bad action; and
indeed children that are under the government of their parents, may as well do
it, steal away from them, and give it to the poor: and if good ends may serve
the turn, then coozeners and fraudulent persons that get their goods by
deceit, etc. may be excused, if they say they do it to a good end: as to build
an Hospital* and such like. We must so follow Christ's rule, bidding us to
give of that which we have, Luke 11.41. That objection out of Luke 8.3. is
nothing: for there indeed it is said, that Ioanna Chuzas wife, ministered to
Christ; but it is not said that she did it without the consent of her husband,
for then Christ would not have suffered it.

Ob. But what if the husband be a profane hard-hearted merciless man, that
will give nothing to the poor, and she be pitiful and compassionate
toward them?

Answ. Her hands in this case also are tied, she may not give, no more than a
son that being of discretion, and desirous to relieve the poor, may take
away any thing of his fathers goods. Her honest heart, her grief that she
cannot do it, her desire and willing mind to relieve them, shall be accepted
of God for the deed it self. But herein the husbands fault is doubled. 1. The
neglect of charity in himself. 2 That he ties his wifes hands, and hinders her
from doing the good she desires, and so even causes her to cry unto God
against him.

Object. 2 What if the husband be childish, sottish, and foolish, and have
such natural infirmities, that he know^s not how to dispense of his goods?

Ans^. In this c^s^, (...) wif^ com^s in place of a go^ernour, and the charg^
of a^l li^s upon her.

Object. 3. What i^ h^ be a drunkard, a spend-thrift, and a riotous person, may
she not then lay up something, and keep it from him?

Answ. Yes, so that she do it for the good of her husband, and her children,
to provide for them in time of need. Here therefore she must look that her
heart be upright, aiming only at this end, and so to do it with such a mind,
as she will approve her self to God for it. So did Abigail take of her
husbands goods, without his consent, for to appeas^ the wrath of David, and
thereby to preserve the life of her husband and family, 1 Samuel 25.18, 19. This
was a case of necessity, and a servant might have done it: Just as we see in
a great fire, a man puts down another man's house, and carries away his goods
to save it from the fire.

Here there is a general direction for wives in this matter, that what a
son, who is under the government of his parents, may do in this ca^e, in
disposing of the goods of his father, the same may the wife do in the
disposing of her husbands goods, and no more. Neither let the wife plead that
she brought maintenance with her, and therefore she may do what she list;
but she must consider the subjection that God has laid upon her, and that now
her goods are not her own, but her husbands: And though they be yoke-fellowes,
yet it is in familiarity, not in authority.

Now then, what unnatural wives are they that steal and purloyne from their
husbands, s^lling away their wares and such like, for to bestow their money in
gos^ipping, in following the fashion, and fine fare, etc? Hereby they 1. break
the Commandment: 2. They ill ^epay their husbands labor and pains, and so
reward evil for good. 3. They impouerish their husbands estate, it decays
they know not how: when the year comes about, the^r gains are gone, and
consumed as the dew before the Sun. 4. They show themselves to be arrant
thieves, so much more worse than other, because greater trust is put in them
than in other, and therefore the deceit is the greater: as, Prou. 28.24. 5.
They are ill examples to those that are under them, to do the like, and indeed
commonly they use their servants help in this dealing.

2 Another particular, wherein she must have her husbands consent, is in
intertaining of guests: if she have a desire to bring in guests, she must make
it known to her husband, as the Shunamite, 2 King. 4.9. The reason is, because
wives know not their husbands estate; and so hereby he may be burdened. Which
condemns those wives that will feast and entertain guests in their husbands
absence. A note of a light houswife, Pro. 7.19.

2 Such as will send their meat out a doors, to their companions and gossips,
yea, though it be to never so good company. Lastly, such as will have it in
their husbands presence, but how? It must be as they list, or else the house
will be too little for them.

3 Concerning children, and the disposing of them as first in giving of the
name, they cannot do it without the allowance of their husbands. Leah and Rahel
gave names to their children, Genesis 29. and 30. but it is probable they had
their husbands consent, as may appear also for that Jacob changed the name of
one, when Rahel had given him a name without his consent, Ge^. 35.18. So in the
naming of John, when his mother had given him the name, yet did not this
satisfy them, but they would have him name him, Luke 1.60.62, 2. For
appoynting of the Calling, manner of education, marriage, etc. as Rebbeca did,
Genesis 27.43. compared with 46. ver. and the beginning of the 28. Chap. and
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.22* and so likewise for the apparelling of the child,
maintenance, and giving of portions. This condemns those wives that cocker
their children, and will not let them be at the husbands disposing, and to be
in such places as he sees fit for them.

4 Concerning servants, in taking them in, putting them away, employing them in
business, whether they be prentizes in the shop, or other, as laboring men in
the field, etc. The Shunamite asked leave of her husband to take one of her
servants with her, 2 King. 4.22. Sarah thurst not Hagar out a doors of her
self, Genesis 21.10. Neither has she command over her husbands beasts, his
horses, etc. to run and ride whither she list, as appears by that example
of the Shunamite, 2 Kings 4.22.

This condemns such as will have their servants always at command, to go with
them about their business, though their husband have never so much need of
them. 2 Such shrewish wives as will change their servants when they list,
against their husbands consent.

5 Touching their own goings abroad, that they gadde not up and down at
their own pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.13. A fault of a Levites wife, Judge. 19.2. A note
of a whore, Prou. 7.11, 12.

6 Concerning vows, that she be not rash in binding her self without his
consent and agreement: for this the Scripture is plain, Numb. 30.9. Hannah in
vowing her son to God, had the implicit consent of her husband, 1 Samuel 1.11.

These duties thus warranted from the example of holy women in Scripture, are
sound and strong arguments to enforce the like duties upon all women, unless
we deny the Apostles argument from the example of Sarah, 1 Peter 3.6. So much
for the negative part of obedience; The affirmative or active part follows,
and that is twofold: in regard of his 1 Commandment, 2 Reproof.


For the former, the duty is* that she yield to do what he wills and
requires: which duty is laid down in the Command^ment, Genesis 3.16. and further
proved by the comparison between the woman and the Church. Let wives observe
first the genera^l rule, viz. That they subject their judgment and will, unto
their husbands judgment and will; obeying them in those things which to their
own judgment seem unmeet and inconvenient; for many wives will be content
to do as their husbands would have them, in such things as themselves also
think fit; but if any thing be required that likes not them, this they will
stick at. More particularly we may divide it into three branches.

1 That the wife be content to dwell and abide where her husband will have her;
unless it be an Idolatrous place, where she may be drawn away to Idolatry, 1
Cor. 7.15. or where she cannot h^are the Word preached: Examples of Sarah, who
went with Abraham from place to place, and Rebecca, and Leah, and Rachel, Genesis
31.4. with 16. Yea, if a man's calling requires that he must soiourne here and
there, and travel up and down: see, 1 Cor. 9.5. So Mary went to Jerusalem
with Joseph, not be to taxed, but because she was his wife, Luke 2.5. the
story shows, as Gods providence, so Mario^ obedience. Against this duty they
offend, who are so addicted to some one place, either where they were borne, or
where their friends dwell, that when their husbands calling requires, that he
dwell in some other place, they will not depart to come with him; whereby it
comes to pass, that either they must soiourn one from the other, or the
husband is constrained to leave his calling.

2 That they come unto their husbands when he shall send and call for them: as
Jacobs wives did, Genesis 3.4. The Scripture registreth the fault of Vashti, in
not coming to Ahashuerosh, Ester 1.12.

This condemns those stubborn and proud wives, that will not come at their
husbands call; they will not be their husbands servants, and why should they
send for them, say they, etc?

3 That what^oeu^r charge the husband lays upon them, they ought to p^rforme
it. So did Iero^oams wife, though a Queen, 1 Kings 14 2. and Sarah, Genesis 18.6.
Now as if ^hey were to be drudges, and servants to do every thing themselves:
but to set to their own hands in any case of ^eed and necessity: which
condemns those that repine and grudge against their husbands commands, etc.

For Reproof, two things are to be observed in it.

1 That she me^kely and gen^ly take reproof. 2 That she readi^y redr^sse the
things reproved.
The patient bearing of reproof, is a special branch of a quiet and meek
spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4. For as we say, the devil is good when he is pleased: and
perverse natures will yield when they have all things at their own will and
desire; but if when they are crossed and checked, they then take it patiently,
and submit themselves, this indeed is praiseworthy. And by this, 1 They much
manifest the reverence which they bear unto their husbands. 2 They shall
learn much wisdom by the mild and patient hearing of reproof, as Mary did,
John 2.4, 5. S^ee replied not again roughly, but learned wisdom her self,
and thereupon instructed the servants what they should do. This benefit they
lose by passion, anger, and impatiency. Yea, but what if the husband be eager
and bitter in his reproof?

Answ. She must not rail again, giving word for word, etc. Jacobs reproof
of Rahel, Genesis 30.2. was sharp and bitter, yet we read not but she took it
meekely without railing again. Object. What if it be unjust?

Answ. 1 She must by any means, endeavor to make him see his own error. 2 If
he will not hear her, but be furious and obstinate, she must bear it
patiently, and meekly even as servants in the like case must do, 1 Pet. 2.19.
which condemns those wives that are impatient of reproof, etc.

The redressing of a fault must be only when she is justly reproved: for
otherwise where no fault is, there needs no amendment.

Now she may be reproved either for neglect of some duty, or committing some
fault: for the former, her duty is to perfo^me it more carefully afterward.
The latter, namely, committing of a fault, is either when it cannot be undone
or remedied, being once done; then is required her repentance and sorrow for
it, with promise, purpose, and endeavor never to do it again. 2 If it may be
redressed, that she do it speedily, as all Christians ought to do, and
specially wives: So Rahel did by her Idols: Compare Genesis 31.19. with Genesis
35.2, 3, 4.

So much for the kinds of obedience. Now come we to the general point, viz.
The Manner how this obedience must be performed: where two things are
propounded to the wives consideration:

1 The place of her husband, who is to her in Christ's room and stead; and
therefore she must obey her husband, as if Christ were before her.

2 Her own place: she is to her husband, as the Church is to Christ; and
therefore as the Church obeys Christ: so must she her husband.

As unto the Lord, ver. 22.) The wife must so subject her self unto her
husband, as she would unto the Lord Jesus. Hereof there are 2 maine branches.

1 Negative: No other obedience is be performed to the husband, but such as may
stand with the obedience due to Christ.

2 Affirmative: such obedience as she should perform to Christ, such must
she perform to her husband.

The former has been handled verse 21. and it is a necessary duty r^quired in
all obedience; so ^specially in this, because it is the least of all other,
that no^hi^^ be done contrary to it. Reasons are, first because (...) husband
is in Christ's room, and he indeed is the proper husband; and therefore his
will must not be thwarted and crossed. 2 Seeing many good wives are worst used
of their husbands, of whom shall they receive their reward of their obedience,
but of Christ? Hence arise two further considerations.

1 That if God and Christ Jesus do command a duty, and the husband will not
assent that she should perform it, she must do it without and against his
consent. Provided: 1 That she be fully assured, that it is Gods Commandment,
and that obedience to her husband in this case is contrary to it. 2 That she be
not rash and hasty to say, God commands it, therefore I will do it, but that
first she use all gentle means possibly she can to win her husbands
consent.

2 That if the Lord forbids any thing which her husband commands, she must not
do it. Only take two caueats: 1 That she be sure God commands the contrary. 2
That she first persuade him gently and meekely to forbear, and not to urge,
and press it upon her, being contrary to a higher commandment: but if all
this serve not, she must obey Christ rather then him.

Examples of wives resisting their husbands, are very sparingly set down in
Scripture. We read of Rebecca, Genesis 27. and of Abigail, 1 Samuel 25. But these
were extraordinary, and serve only in the like case. Yet we may give some
examples, as if the husband forbid the wife to keep holy the Sabbath day: if
he command her to wear garnished apparel, paint her face, to run to
Stage Plays, etc. she must not obey, because God commands the contrary.

Therefore as the Church is in subjection to Christ, even so, etc.) The
affirmative part is, that such obedience as the Church performs to Christ,
the same must the wife unto her husband.

The manner of obedience of the Church to Christ, is manifested in five points.

1 Reverence. 2 Sincerity. 3 Cheerfulness. 4 A good conscience. 5 Constancy
and perseverance.
Reverence. Observe but the book of Canticles, and we shall see how reverently
the Church carries her self to Christ: so must wives to their husbands: and
though this, as is said before, be a particular duty; yet in some sort it is
also a general grace to be exercised in the performance of every duty.

Sincerity: Saints will pretend no more in their outward actions, but what they
intend in their hearts: the like is to be performed by wives, 1 Because they
have to deal not only with their husbands, who are men, and can look but
upon the outward work, but also with Christ, who beholds the heart and
affection. 2 When their obedience comes from the heart, it is both acceptable
to Christ, and pleasing to their husbands.

Willingness: as the Church does readily, and cheerfully obey Christ, Psalm.
110.3. so must wives obey their husbands, as Sarah did, Genesis 18.6. whose
willingness was apparent by her readiness to do that which Abraham did bid
her: otherwise her obedience is neither acceptable to Christ, nor pleasing to
her husband, nor profitable to her self. This cheerefulnes, as it is planted
in the heart, so it must be showed in the countenance, by her speech and
actions.

A good Conscience; That she subject her self for conscience sake: this the
Church does, obeying Christ because of her place, and because it is pleasing to
him, though there were no other motive in the world. So must wives obey for
conscience of Gods Commandment, and for that their husbands stand in the room
of Christ, and not as many do, for by-respects, for fear, for praise, for
hope that their husbands will let them have what they desire, and such like:
for hereby appears a maine difference between religious and mere natural
women, Romans 13.5.

Constancy. This makes all other duties perfect and (...) the Crown on them;
therefore wives must not ^hinke it sufficient to have done well, but they must
continue to do well still; and not as many wives, who at the first have been
subi^ct and obedient to their husbands, but afterward have grown stubborn,
and ^o lost the comfort of their good beginning, by a badde ending, Ezekiel.
18.24. Such a one it seems Mich^l was: Compare 1 Sam^ 19.11, etc. with 2 Samuel
6.20.

Object. But the wife will say, If my husband were to me as Christ is to the
Church, that is, a wise and religious man, then I could obey him; but otherwise
I cannot.

Answ. She must more regard his place, than his person, for by virtue of his
place, he carries the glorious Image of Christ, though in regard of his
qualities and conditions, he may bear the ^mage of the devil: like as we see
other inferiors obey their superiors; but the 1 Pet. 3.1. puts all out of
doubt.

In every thing, ver. 24.) The extent: which is not so general, but that a
limitation must be understood: otherwise it will be contrary to many other
places in Scripture: as, Acts 5.29. But it is laid down in these general
terms: 1 To show the large authority of the husband. 2 Because the wife ought
to obey in all things, that is, every thing that the husband by virtue of his
place may command, and not only in some things, which she best likes of. So
that in brief, by this generality, not Gods will, but the wifes will is
excluded.

From this ground arise two conclusions.

1 That the wife labor to bring her judgment and will in subjection to the
will and judgment of her husband: Not only in things necessary, which are
expressly commanded by the Word of God, but also in things indifferent: for she
must think her husband to be wiser than her self both for his sex and place.

2 Though in judgment she cannot think that to be mere which her husband
commands, yet she must yield in outward action in things indifferent, for
peace and qu^et sake: Nevertheless, she may persuade, and indeed the husband
ought to hear her, as the Shunamites husband did, 2 Kings 4.23.

The reason is, 1 Because hereby is her subjection manifested, that it is for
conscience, in regard of her husbands place and authority: for if it be in
things commanded, she must do it, whether her husband will or no. 2 For the
peace and quiet of families: for from hence we see arise many contentions and
brawlings, that the wife will not yield in such indifferent matters.

Verse. 23, 24. For the husband is the wives head, even as Christ is the head of
the Church, and the same is the Savior of his body.

Therefore, as the Church, etc.


THese words contain in brief five Reasons, to urge and press the former
duties.

1 Drawn from the husbands authority: because the husband is in the Lords
stead and room.

2 Under a metaphor: Because the husband is the wives head.

3 Because herein he does resemble Christ.

4 That by virtue of his place, he is a savior of his wife.

5 The example of the Church.

The first reason is a clear point, by that general rule, that all who have
any lawful authority over other, they are as gods unto them: as Moses is said
to be to Aaron.

Hence arise two conclusions: 1 That the wife in subiecting her self to her
husband, subjects her self to Christ.

2 That in refusing subjection to her husband, she refuses subjection to
Christ: proved by example of Christ himself, Mat. 11.40. John 5.23. of
Ministers, 2 Cor. 5.20. Luke 10.16. 1 Samuel 8.7.

In thus doing, wives shall be the wives of Christ Jesus. Now if we consider
duly this reason, we shall see how strong a motive it is, to persuade wives to
perform this duty of obedience.

2 1 Cor. 11.3. This reason shows, that the husband is to the wife, as the
head of a natural body is to it: he is more eminent in place, more excellent
in dignity; he has power to rule and govern: and therefore it stands with the
law of nature, that the wife do submit her self, 1 Cor. 11.14.

3 For the further urging and pressing the former reason, it is added, that the
husband herein has a fellowship and copartnership with Christ, and they are
brethren in office. And though there be an infinite disparity between Christ
and the husband, yet may there be a resemblance where is no parity, and a
similitude where there is no equality, and therefore this hinders not that
fellowship: Hence two conclusions.

1 That he is unto his wife as Christ to the Church, and therefore subjection
is as well due unto the husband by the wife, as subjection by the Church to
Christ.

2 That they that do subject themselves to their husbands, do honor Christ:
they that impeach the authority of their husbands, impeach the authority of
Christ: yea, the very place of the head in a natural body; as we see, he that
impeacheth the authority of one Magistrate, impeacheth the authority of all in
the same degree: See Ester 1.16.

Corollary: 1 That Christ will surely maintain the husbands authority, as
Magistrates in the like case will do one of another: Wherefore though the
husband himself forbear, yet may stout and rebellious wives justly fear the
reuengement of Christ.

4 The fourth reason shows, that the husband has this authority not so much
for himself, and for his wifes good. The name of Savior, is properly and
truly applied to Christ, Math. 1.21. Luke 2.22. Acts 4.12. Luke 1.69. and
2.30. He is called salvation, (...). But here in some sense it is applied to
the husband, in that he is to protect his wife, to defend her from hurt and
danger. to provide for her, etc. And indeed the head is united to the body for
this cause, not only for the authority and soueraignety, but for the good and
benefit of it: Hence we see,

1 That the subjection of the wife, is for her own good.

2 That they who refuse to be subject, as they are injurious to themselves, so
they are ungrateful to their husbands.

5 Taken from the example of the Church, which if either example it self
(which we see is of great force both without and against precept) or if the
warrantable example of the Church, that is, of good and perfect men, can
prevail; it ought much to move wives to the performance of these duties:
Hence these Corollaries.

1 There is as good reason the wife should yield subjection to her husband, as
the Church to Christ.

2 That by this subjection, the wife shall have an evidence within her, that
she is of the Church.

Now for the general use of all. If these duties be required of wives: how
careful ought parents to be to make choice of such husbands for their
daughters, as be men of knowledge, wisdom, and fearing God, to whom they may
willingly submit themselves?

Verse. 25. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it.


THis duty of Love, is a general duty, and compriseth under it all other duty,
running through all the branches of them. And it is showed by the husband, 1 In
the using of his authority; and this two ways. 1 By a tender respect toward
his wife. 2 By a provident care to provide for her.
Tender respect is either inward: and this, 1 In opinion as touching both her
Place, to account her his yokefellow. her Person, to account her in particular
the best wife he could have had, and the most fittest for him, though other may
excel her in beauty, riches, or other good qualities.
2 In Affection, to delight in her only.


Or Outward, that he carry himself as a m^n of knowledge, 1 Pet. 3.7.

And this is shown 1 By giving no just offense unto her. 2 By covering that
off^nce which she shall give unto him.


That he may give no just offense to her, he must have regard and respect, 1 To
the duties which she performs. 2 To those things that belong to himself.


In the former, that duty of the husband is, 1 Kindly to accept what his wife
performs. This will be a witness of his love to her, and a great
encouragement: otherwise it will minister grief and tediousness unto her.

This is manifested first in regard of her Reverence: That he answer her
courtesy with courtesy again; for this may well stand with his authority,
neither does it prejudice it at all. This condemns those that Lordly
ouer-looke their wives.

2 In regard that she will do nothing without his consent: he must willingly
yield her his consent, as the Shunamites husband did, 1 Kings 4. Always
provided that the request be just and lawful.

3 In respect of her obedience: he must have a care that he be not rigorous to
exact all that he may. Nor to call her to so strict examination as he does
his servants: Yea, his heart must trust in her, and account her faithful, and
yield a general consent to her in many points: as,

1 He must note what is most proper unto her, and herein give over the charge
unto her for the trial of her wisdom, and manifestation of his faithful
trust he reposeth in her: as in governing the house, 1 Timothy 5.14. Trimming and
decking of it, provision of victuals, education of young children, care over
the maid-seruants: Yet still interposing his authority, to moderate there where
he sees excess.

2 Another duty is, to commend and praise her where he sees her do well, Prou.
13.28, 29.

Now in respect of those things that belong to the husband to be performed to
the wife: the duty is, That in all things he use Gentleness, Mildness,
Amiablenes, and Familiarity: Whereunto is that bitterness mentioned, Col.
3.19. opposed, where a metaphor is used, taken from such things as are bitter
in the taste, as gall, etc. which when it is mingled with other sweet things,
makes them distastefull: So if the husband in his authority, reproves,
commands, etc. things in themselves wholesome, shall be bitter and fierce; the
wife will never brook nor digest them.

In particular this is showed, 1 In his speeches of her 2 In his carriage to
her.


That he speak of her to others with that mildnes, that others may see he
loves her, otherwise, railing and reproachful speeches of her, will make others
to brand him for an unkind husband, and also if it come to his wives hearing,
cause her to be offend^d, ^oth for that he loves her not, and also does thus
(...) her.

To her self his speeches and (...) must savor of gentleness, as do those
(...) to the Church in the Canticles: such like (...) be used in familiarity
upon occasion, though not usually.

2 In instruction: to do it with meekness, 1 Timothy 2.25. Also that he
proclaim not her ignorance to her children and servants, but for the public
to instruct her rather by the childr^n and se^uants, in Catechizing of them, as
in t^aching children their duty, we teach old men, though we name them not;
Reserving particular instruction to be used in private.

3 That in bidding her do any thing, he do it rather by wishing and desiring,
that such a thing were done; and by praying and entreating her, ( Philem. ver.
8, 9. Genesis 12.13.) than by commanding.

But yet in commanding, he must obs^rue: 1 For the matter,

1 That he command nothing which is unlawful, nor forbid any thing that is
lawful.

2 That he command nothing which in her conscience she cannot yield unto; yea,
though himself know it to be a thing lawful, yet must he wisely weigh and
consider whether it be a matter of great moment and consequence: if not, to
gratify his wife, and to tarry till she be better persuaded, and not to exact
it at all.

3 That he command nothing unbeseeming her place, as Ahashuerosh did, therein
offending, or that which she is unwilling to do, or that which is idle and
frivolous: for this makes her think, that he has a light ^steeme of her.

2 For the manner: that he do it not too frequently, but use it as a sober grave
man does his sword; though he wear his sword, yet he draws it but in time of
need, not upon every light occasion like a swaggerer. Nor peremptorily, when
there is no necessity. Nor proudly upon ostentation, as many will boast what
they can make their wives do; that they can make them light a pound of Candles
at the wrong end, etc.

4 In Reproof: that he do it gently with exhortation, intimating that such a
thing was done amiss.

For the matter of reproof, he must have care,

1 That the thing he reproues her for, be always just and true, avoiding
h^rein two faults:

1 Overmuch credulity, not rashly receiving a report of her.

2 ^uspicions, which are the seed of jealousy, the bane of marriage.

2 That it be weighty, hereby to show how hardly he is drawn to it: that
even necessity constrain^s him, because of some danger, either to her own
soul, or their estate. This also manifests his love unto her: Hence we
read, that when husbands did reprove their wives, it was usually for sinning
against God, Genesis 30. Job 2.9. 2 Samuel 6. Especially if the thing be private,
for otherwise if it be a light matter, the wife will think it to be nothing but
revenge.

For the manner: 1 That he do it sparingly and rarely, to show that he
delights not in it: 2 That he do it not at such a time, when either himself
or his wife are stirred up with passion and anger: for then he is unable to
give wife reproof, and she unfit to receive it. 3 In regard of her p^ace,
that he do honor her before the family, reproving her s^cretly.

But that rule of some, that he should reprove her for nothing whereof
himself is guilty, is scarce sound divinity: For 1 David (no doubt) did well
^condemning that man (in the parable of Nathan) of the same crime whereof
himself was guilty. 2 Again, he that reprooueth another for the same fault,
shall, if he have any grace, pierce also his own heart, and so l^arne happily
to amend himself. Though he^ ought to labor to be free of that fault which he
r^proueth in another, because it does oth^rwise greatly blunt the edge of his
reproofe^, and make them rebound back again: and also it will prove a strong
witn^sse against him ^or his condem^ation, Romans 2.

So much for his Speech: Now for his carriage: It must be answerable to his
speech, but otherwise, his tongue seems to flatter.

1 In his countenance: for this bewraies the heart, Genesis 4. and 31. viz. That
it be composed to a kind of pleasantness in the presence of his wife; not
austere and grane, to show his authority, etc. For this will discontent her,
and be a discouragement to her.

2 In his gesture, that it be not strange: for more familiarity is to be showed
to the wife than to another, provoking her also to familiarity: but this must
not be done in public, but in private, as Isaac sported with Rebecca.

3 In Actions, that they be not furious, rigorous, and tyrannous, but such as
savor of love and kindness, both in absence sending tokens of love, and in
presence, by giving of gifts: as Elkanah did to Hannah, 1 Samuel 1.4. And it is a
good counsel, That he give it with his own hands, avoiding all furious and
reuengefull actions, as the beating of his wife: which dealing is altogether
unlawful. Which point, because it is something doubted of, we will prove the
unlawfulness of it by some reasons.

1 Because throughout the whole Scripture, it is not prescribed and commended
by any one example, or precept: which argument, because some may except against
it; as not concluding, because it is negative, may be strengthened by these two
considerations.

1 How careful, copious, and plentiful the Scripture is, in setting down the
duties of the husband and wife, and yet this is passed by.

2 That whereas the Scripture is exact in setting down all the parties that
are to be corrected: there is no tittle of the correction of the wife by the
husband.

2 The small disparity that is between the husband and the wife, does not admit
this; for of all degrees of subjection this is the least, and she has a common
equity in many things, and is a governor of the family as well (though not as
much) as he. What then is this, but to deprive her of her authority, to make
her like a child and a servant, and to cause her to be despised of his children
and servants?

3 The near conjunction that is b^tweene them forbids it; they are one flesh,
as nigh as the body and the head. Now, what man that is his own man, will
beat, rent, tear, and deal cruelly with his own flesh? In Scripture indeed
we read of some that did so, as the man possessed with a Legion of devils,
Mark 5.5. and the superstitions Priests of Baal, 1 King. 18.28. and as the
Papists do now adays. And surely such as do this, are either egregiously
seduced in judgment, if they do it out of an opinion of the lawfulness of
it, or if they do it of fury and anger, they have a devil within them.

Ob. But many and wise men too will let their own flesh to be cut and lanced,
etc.

Answ. True: but yet you seldom see any man have the heart to do it himself,
but puts it to the Physician: and so no doubt, if the wife be extremely
desperate, and that there is no living with her, he may use the help of
others, namely, of the Magistrates.

2 We say, that the comparison holds not in the end why it was made.

Object. 2 Christ corrects his Church, and therefore the husband may his wife.

Answ. Christ is considered in a twofold relation.

1 As it has pleased him to unite the Church unto himself in marriage: and so
is he said to dye for it, to guide, govern, and protect it, with other such
attributes, all which the Scripture gives to Christ in this respect.

2 As he is a Supreme Lord, Master, Father, and King over the Church, having
absolute rule and authority over us, and by virtue of this he does correct us,
not as he is a husband.

4 The little profit and good that comes by this, shows the same. Now by
all lawful correction comes profit, Hebr. 12.10, 11. For what hope is there
that any profit should redound unto her, seeing there is no ground to persuade
her that this dealing is warrantable and just, that in this he has not
authority over her, nor she in subjection unto him?

Object. But this will make them dread and stand in awe of their husbands.

Answ. But such sl^uish and ch^ldish fears, and dread of the wife to the
husband ought not to be; her dread must be rather of the magistrates: but such
gentleness must be used, that she may obey her husband in meekness, for love
and conscience.

Yea, if she strike him, he must not strike her again: for then he does
revenge himself: But if she be so outrageous, he must seek help of the
magistrate, first, v^ing all gentle and good means, as restraint of liberty
and the like, and all long-suffering and patience, before he make her a public
example.

So much of giving no offense to her. Now the 2 point is concerning the
covering of such offenses as she shall give unto him, wherein his prudent
carriage is known in a wise and prudent bearing with the infirmities of his
wife. This duty as it is imposed on all, Gal. 6.2. so after a special manner
does it belong to the husband.

1 Because he is more bound to bear with her infirmities than she with his,
because he is the stronger extraordinarily, 1 These. 5.14.

2 He is more bound to bear with his wife than with any other, because she is
nearest unto him. The Apostle Peter uses an argument, 1 Peter 3.7.
to persuade husbands to bear with their wives, because they are the weaker
v^ssels, and yet coheires of the same grace. (...) how chary are we of those
vess^ls, which are (...), and yet brittle, as Crystal glass^s and China cups,
etc. But how are they to be bo^ne withal?

Infirm^ties, some are natural imperfections:

And th^se are Inward, as Dullness and Slow^esse of conceit, Shortness of
memory, etc. Outward, Lamen^sse, blindn^sse, etc


These must not give him any offense, but cause him rather to pity her. Other
are si^full infirmities: as peevishness, stubbornness, etc. In these he must
show his wisdom.

1 In using the mildest and gentlest means he can, to redress these
infirmities: as Elkanah did, 1 Samuel 1.8.

2 If he can observe any occasion that brought her to it, he must vs^ the
means to remove it: as Abraham in casting out of Agar, Genesis 21.

3 As much as may be, in turning his eyes from it, and seeming not to s^e it,
Pro. 19.11. Eccles. 7.21.

1 If notice be, or must be taken, then to be ready both to forgive and forget:
as it is lik^ly that Jacobs anger did cease, Genesis 30.

And in this thing will be the trial of his wisdom, and knowledge: for it is
no commendation to bear with a good wife.

So much for the tender respect.

The next general point is his provident care over her, which shows it self,
1 In providing things needful. 2 In protecting her from things hurtful.


Provision of things necessary, is a duty belonging, of all other, to the
husband, because the wife is of all other most properly his own, and also the
chiefest of his family. Now then the Apostles saying, 1 Timothy 5.8. is a strong
proof of this; and it stands with reason, because the wife, when she is
married, forsakes all other, and cleaues only to her husband: who is therefore
to have a provident care over her. And furthermore, whatsoever means of
maintenance she had, being unmarried, it is now all in her husbands hands, so
long as she lives with him.

Consider now first the extent, how far he is to provide for her. This is

1 For others. Whatsoever is requisite that he should bestow on others, he
should provide for her.

2 For her self: 1 In her ^oule, to have a care that she be well instructed;
a duty laid upon the husband, 1 Cor. 14.34. Th^s is done, 1 In private, by
maintaining of Gods worship, and Religion in his, daily evening and morning;
doing this either himself, as Cornelius did, Act. 10.2. or by others: as Micah
would have his house instructed by the Leuite, Judge. 17.10. and the Shunamites
husband was willing to have Elisha, 2 Kings 4.11. 2 In public, to have a care
that she be partaker of the public ministry of the Word: as Elkanah carried
up his wife with him to Silo, 1 Samuel 1.3.

2 For her body: 1 In sickness to provide all things needful for her; as
some to tend her, Physic for her and the like: And to do this not grudingly,
and repiningly, fretting because her sickness is so long, and the charges so
great; but let him then show his loving care for her, when she is least able to
do for her self: lest that his churlishnes proves another cross unto her.

2 In health to provide for good raiment, and this not niggardly, and
sparingly: as many will go bravely themselves, and their wives go very
meanly; yet, avoiding all excess. Neither ought he to deal herein with her
as a child or servant, but to give her a liberal allowance, leaving it to her
descretion to provide both for her self and for the family, such things as
belong to food and clothing, Prou. 31.15.

So likewise, for such things as she should bestow upon charitable uses, he
ought to provide for her, remitting unto her the liberty, and authority to
distribute, if that she be not, 1 Superstitious, 2 Vain and light, and so
likely to bestow it upon idolatrous and other sinful vanities.

And it is likely, being not contrary to the Scripture, and agreeable to other
rules, that Chuza did give his wife such an allowance, whereof she ministered
unto Christ, Luke 8.3.

For the manner, he is to let the wife have something of her own property,
for the better testimony of her faith, love, mercy, and charity: for many will
be liberal of another man's goods; and so may the wife in the common goods of
the family, whereunto her husband has right and intrest: but when they come to
distribute of their own, here will be the trial of their charitable mind.
Now diverse means there are to bring this to pass; as some will give their
wives the rent of such a house, or such a field, the vailes, that which they
get by working for themselves, and such like.

The continuance of the provident care, must not be only during his life: but
also during hers, if she outliue him, viz. That if he be able, he let her
have wherewithal to live as well after his death, as she did with him: at
least, if after portions distributed there remain so much, to leave her as
much as he had with her. And we see Christ was more liberal to his Church
after his departure, than when he lived bodily: and this will be a sure sign
that he loved her, when she shall see his care to provide for her after his
death.

Moreover, considering her weakness, to manage her estate; he ought to
appoint some to have a care of it for her: as Christ did for his mother, John
19.26, 27. And for this cause did David set Solomon in the Kingdom, that
Bathsheba after his death might be well dealt withal, 1 King. 1.21. And as the
more need is, so to be the more careful for her, as if she be not like to
marry again, etc.

Contrary hereunto is the practice of those husbands,

1 Who by prodigality spend their estate, and so leave their wives worse then
naught: whereas this ought to be a motive to them to avoid unnecessary expenses.

2 Who by fawning and flattering get their wives to make away their inheritance
which came with them, without giving them sufficient consideration for it,
only to satisfy their own turns while they live. This is both an
unkindness, and also a point of injustice.

3 Such as use fraudulent means to deprive their wives of the thirds, by deeds
of gift, or other conueyances. This is a sin, because we ought to be subject
unto the Laws, where they be not contrary to Gods word. And husbands should so
deal with their estates, that love, and not Law might bring unto the wife that
which is her due.

4 Such as having old sickely wives, do themselves, when they are sick,
desire the making of their wills, to settle their estate, hoping still to
outliue their wives.

So much of providing things necessary. The next point is, that he do protect
her from things hurtful; A duty which in the general is proved by the phrase
of the Scripture, calling the husband the veil of his wife: which as it
implies subjection on her part, so it does imports protection on his, Genesis
20.16. 1 Cor. 11.10. And so likewise from that of spreading the wing over them:
as Ruth, 3.9. with chap. 2.12. For which reason, also God has given strength,
boldness and wisdom, to the husband above the wife. It must be showed in

1 Preventing of danger, as in the example of David, 1 Samuel 27.3.

2 In recovering them out of danger: as in another example of David's, 1 Samuel 30
18.

This protection also must extend it self, according to the danger: as

1 Spiritual: of the soul; that he keep from the house Idolatrous persons,
as Jesuits, etc. and profane and vain persons.

2 Corporal: to preserve her from violence and hurt.

3 For her good name: to maintain her credit against slanderous persons, being
as well dead as alive: wherefore he must also be ready to hear her complaint.
He must be further careful to maintain her honor and authority in the family
against children and servants, yea, though they be the children of a former
wife; unless that the cause be just: for there are many cruel and rigorous
st^pdames, and in this case he must use all gentle means to pacify his wife:
or if this will not serve, then to remove the cause of this hatred, and to
place the children somewh^re else: for the man and woman may by no means
d^part asunder. The reason is, because the latter wife is as true a wife as the
former, and therefore the same duties belong unto her which did unto the
former: for many times it falls out, that the second wife is not respected
like the first; but surely if the husband think he cannot so love another
woman as he did his former, the best way for him is to remain a widdower.

And if not against children, much less against servants. Thus did Abraham
defend his wife against Agar, though she were his Concubine, Genesis 16.6. Not
laughing at them, and suffering them to try Masteries, etc. For let the husband
be assured, he shall feel the smart by the discontent of the wife, when she
shall see he suffers any one to abuse her.

Ephesians. 5.25, 26. etc. to verse. 33. Even as Christ loved the Church, and gave
himself for it.

So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies: he that loves his
wife, loves himself.

For no man ever ye^ hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it,
etc.


Having handled the duties, we come to the manner how the husband ought to
perform them. In these words the Apostle sets it down, propounding

First, 2. patterns for him to follow. 1 Of the Church. 2 Of a man's own self.


Secondly, 2. r^asons drawn from the examples, namely, the similitude and
r^lation in them, that there is great reason why the husband should love his
wife, he being as near to her, as Christ to the Church, and himself to his
own flesh.

In the example of Christ, 6 Circumstances are to be observed, in regard, 1 Of
the Order, 2 Truth, 3 Quality, 4 Condition, 5 Measure, 6 Continuance of his
love to the Church.

In all which we will consider of three points.

1 To show how Christ loved the Church. 2 How we must follow him. 3 How we
come short of our duty.
1 Order: Christ first loved the Church, and so drew her on to love him again;
which as it is here intimated by that which the Apostle says, that he purged
and cleansed her, signifying, that before he set his ^oue on her, she was
polluted and unclean: so it is plainly proved by that in 1 John 4.19. and
Cant. 1.2.

In like manner ought husbands to begin in love to provoke and to draw their
wives on: as well by their example, as instruction, especially considering that
is the weaker vessel.

Contrary to which, is that untowardness of some husbands, which so little
regard their wives kindness, and dutiful subjection, that though they have
never so loving wives, yet they will never love. And this is it that makes the
wives subjection burdensome.

2 Truth: Christ's love was not only in affection and word, but also in deed and
truth; which appears by that he gave himself for the Church, and the effect,
viz. the purging of the Church shows it.

Such ought the husbands love be toward the wife: For if to love indeed, be a
duty imposed on all, toward all, 1 John 3.18. much more toward a wife, which
is not only a sister, 1 Cor. 9.5. but nearer, and d^arer to her husband than
any other in the world besides.

The practice of most is contrary unto this, who in word will pretend great
love, but when they come to deeds, perform just nothing. Like suitors that will
promise golden mountains, etc. so are there many that will weep with their
wives, and make great show of kind^nesse, but when it comes to cost and
charges, they may do full^ill for all them.

3 Quality: Christ's love was an holy, chaste and pure so^e, as appears by the
effect, that by it he purged and san^tified his spouse: Wherefore also, lest
he should seem to love more than one, he has united all by one spirit, and
so made one body of all.

So between husband and wife, though their ^oue ought to be exceeding great,
yet must it be joined with purity, sobriety, and holiness: as the Apostle
says, Heb. 13.14. Where he calls the marriage bed undefiled.

Two ^ffects of this are, 1 That it restraines this matrimonial love only to
their own wives. ((...)) 2 That it does moderate Love, that it turn not into
lust.

Contrary unto this, is the practice not only of Adulterers, which love others
besides their own wives, but also of such husbands, who both in words and
deeds will behave themselves toward their wives with as much wickedness and
filthiness* as unto strumpets, neu^r observing any circumstances of time, place,
measure, etc.

4 Condition: Christ's love was free, nothing in the Church moved him to love,
no benefit redounded to him by her love; but his own goodness was the cause
of it: For though Christ bestowing many graces on the Spouse, does d^light in
her as in his own work, ye^ this was no motive without him to love her, but
even his love is the ground of his love, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.

So though there be nothing in the wife to move the husband to love her, yet
ought he therefore to love her, because she is his wife, and that God has
joined them together, endeavoring, if it be possible, by instruction and
example, to make her amiable as Christ did the Church.

Contrary is the practice of those that love no longer than they have outward
baits, either of beauty, riches, parentage, or honor, etc. Such love is not of
their wives indeed, but of those outward things.

5 Measur^: Christ's love is indeed out of measure: he gave his life for the
Church, John 10.11. than which no love can be greater, Io^n 15.13. And he that
will not spare his l^fe, what will he spare?

But will some say, This seems a hard matter, and not for our imitation, that
we should lay down our lives for our wives: But yet so it is, for besides
that the comparison here does expressly lay it down, Saint John, 1 John 3.16.
says, that we should lay down our lives for our brethren: and then the
argument holds a maiore ad maius, that if for them, much more for our wives:
But here some cautions are to be observed:

1 That when it comes to this high pitch of love, there be an absolute
necessit^, that the good cannot be effected by any other means: as the benefit
of the Church could have been wrought by no other means than by the death of
Christ.

2 That the good which we intend for them, be of greater value, than our
lives, as for the good of their souls, 2 Cor. 12.15.

3 That we do^ it not rashly, but have a just and w^rrantable calling thereunto.

Contrary to this is it, that many will prefer any thing before their wives
good, as the case of costs and charges, etc.

6 Co^tinu^^ce: Christ's love is constant and perpetual, without intermission:
after the first b^ginneth to love, he purges her more and more, and never
^eaues her, till he make her a glorious Church in heaven, Ioh. 13.1.

This also must be added to the rest, that the husband do persevere constant
in his love: for this puts the Crown on, and brings renown to the party
loving, and profit to the party loved. To this he must have care,

1 That it be grounded on a sure rock and foundation, namely, on the ordinance
of God, because that now they are made one flesh: and not on the sand, as
beauty, or riches, which will wear away, and then this love does fail with
them.

2 That he arm himself against all those things which may overthrow the
building: and having once determined to do thus and thus for her, to do it
notwithstanding all oppositions.

Contrary to this, is the love of many, which at first is as hot as fire,
afterward as cold as Ice, or none at all, and so always variable as the
wind: which shows that it was but a natural love.

Now then, by this comparison we may see what we must aim at, and so labor to
be perfect. 2 By beholding how far we come short of our duty, we shall
find much matter of humiliation and amendment.

The 2 pattern is of a man's own self. It seems strange why this should be
added; for is not the example of Christ perfect? Yes: nevertheless, the
Apostle adds this for very good reason, because that this is most sensible,
and so best perceived: for a man that knows not Christ, knows how he loves
himself: Wh^refore because some might say, that the former is a matter of
impossibility; the Apostle provides for us an easier patter^e to fo^low,
wherein are nor laid down more duties than in the other* but the same things
are urged more sensibly, and theref^re we need no^ to stand long upon it: ^et
some points do more evidently appear in this: as first, Cheerfulness: No
man loves himself repiningly, accounting it as a task laid upon him.

2 Willingness: every one is willing and ready to do any thing that may be
beneficial to his own body.

3 Tenderness: which we see plain by natural experience, how tenderly a man
will handle his own flesh. So the Apostle says, that none hates his own
flesh: but nourishes and cherishes it ((...).) The metaphor is taken from
birds that houer their wings over their young ones, or that sit upon their
eggs. We see how tenderly they do it.

4 Entireness: no man can dissemble with himself, for every thing that a man
does, is known to himself, and he will pretend no more but that which he
does intend.

Now according to these points ought the husband to perform his duty toward
his wife, which if nature cannot move him to do it, because indeed this bond
is spiritual and mystical, and not natural, then ought ^^ason, religion, and
conscience make him to perform it.

Now let us consider these patterns, as they are motives and reasons to stir
up husbands to the practice of their duties; where first we see that the
arguments are drawn from examples, which many times are of more force to
persuade than reason: and therefore here the Apostle makes choice of them. But
among examples, what do move us more than those of Great men? Now who is
greater than Christ? Besides that, his example is also a rule of perfection.

That we may see the weight of this argument, two points are to be noted.

1 The great disparity that is between the Church and Christ, which appears
in two branches:

1 The greatness of Christ, who is in Script^^e compared,

1 To creatures: so he is more excellent than the excellentest of them all,
namely, the Angels, Philip. 2.9. Ephesians. 1.21.

2 To God: he is every way equal to God, no whit inferior unto him, P^il.
2.6. so that he is Eternal, Infinite, Incomprehensible, and to be adored as
God himself.

2 The baseness and meann^sse of the Church: she is but a creature, and that
corrupt and defi^ed through sin. Yea, take every one of us in our selves, and
we are more odious in Gods sight, than any creature else, beside the devils.

But between man and woman, there is no such difference; but they are equal
in respect of gifts of graces by Creation, and also by Redemption: And in
regard of infirmities, both were made of the dust, both tainted with the same
corruption, and subject to the same end. The difference that is, is only
outward for civil respects, in sex, state and conditions, etc. And secondly,
it is only momentany, extending it self but to this life, Math. 22.30.

Now then, if Christ, who is infinitely more excellent than the Church, have
yet chosen her to be his spouse, and does so love her; this ought to be a
strong argument to move husbands to love their wives, between whom there is
so little disparity.

2 The 2 point is, the small benefit that Christ gets by the love of the
Church: If we ask what it is? We answer, It Is nothing. For neither he needs
to receive any thing of her, being already full of the abundance of all good
things, neither is she able to give any thing of her own, because she receives
all from him, Job 35.7. But much comfort and profit comes to a man by his wife:
Yea, and that in his innocent estate, Genesis 2.18. and therefore is it said, that
he who finds a wife, finds a good thing, Prou. 18 22.

Wherefore if Christ, who stood in no n^ed of the Church, yet did so love her,
as to come from heaven to dye for her, to give her all good things, etc. Let it
then be a shame for husbands not to love their wives, of whom they do receive
great help and comfort.

Now we are the rather diligent, to mark and take heed to this example of
Christ, because that it wipes away all pretenses that men usually bring for
their not loving of their wives: As,

1 Some will say that they are too great, and their wives too mean. To such we
say, 1 That after the marriage solemnized, the wife is partaker of their
honor. 2 That if they look upon Christ, there was a greater disparity
between him and the Church.

2 Some will say that there is nothing worth in her. But first, he ought to
love her therefore, because she is now his wife. 2 What was there in the
Church, that Christ could love and effect? and though he love those graces in
her, which are of his own bestowing, yet he loved her, before he bestowed
those on her.

3 Some will say, that they be so perverse, that they deserve rather hatred
than love. But, 1 this ought not to stir us up to hatred, but rather to show
our wisdom to amend it. 2 The Church it self is full of corruption,
rebellion, and provocation to anger and wrath, yet Christ continues still to
love her.

4 Some will say, that she will do me no good, but be a burden to me all my
life. If this come through some infirmity, yet may she do thee good by her
patience and well-bearing of this affliction.

2 If it be a wilful peruersenes, yet this is no charitable censure: for love
hopes the best. 3 Let him consider what good and profit the Church yields unto
Christ.

2 Concerning the other patterns of a man's own self, this likewise is added
to the former, not as a greater or stronger motive, but as that which more
sensibly and easily is perceived of us, than the former. Wherein the Apostle
sends us to the school of nature, ( No man ever yet hated his own flesh.)
Seeing then that by the ordinance of God, a man's wife is made as near to him
as his own flesh: therefore as nature teaches him to love and cherish the
one, so ought conscience and religion teach him to love the other: for his wife
is himself.

Therefore 1 As in his body, if one member be cured, all rejoice at it: so if
he be helpefull and loving to his wife, himself shall reap the comfort of it.

2 As likewise if any one be neglected and receive hurt, the damage redoundeth
to the head and other parts: so if the wife be not tendered and cared for, the
hurt and smart will be the husbands.

Therefore every one of you, do ye so: let every one love his wife even as
himself, and let the wife see that she fear her husband, verse. 33.)
IN this Verse is laid down the conclusion of all, conc^rning a brief sum of
the matter which before he had delivered, briefly repeating and applying it.
Out of them we learn two points.

1 That every one ought to apply that to himself in particular, which the
Minister speaks to all in general. ( Every one do so) This duty Christ does
often imply in his Sermons: as, Mar. 13.37. Luke 8.8. but more plainly in
those 7 conclusions to the 7 Churches, Revel. 2. and 3. when after a general
instruction to al, he wills every one to apply it particularly to himself. But
they might think that what was spoken to all in general, was spoken to none.
The reason is, because herein consists the profit of the Word; for who can take
comfort by the promises, unless that he be persuaded they belong to him? Who
regards the judgments and threatenings, unless he in particular can tremble
at them? Or who takes profit by direct^on o^t of the Word, but he who thinks
with himself, I ought to do thus and thus, etc?

The use is: That as we have heard the particular duty of man and wife laid
down, so every one in that state and condition should now make use of them to
himself in particu^ar. 1 Such as have been married, that examining themselves
by this rule, 1 They may have joy and comfor^ of that which they shall find
themselves to have done well. 2 To be humbled for that wh^rein they have
failed. 2 Such as are ma^ried, that they may learn to amend what is amiss, and
to hold on consta^tly in what they perform aright. 3 Such as may be married,
that they may know how to perform their duties according to the word of ^od and
not be led away with the common custom and practice of the world.

2 That as we must apply, so we must know what to apply, namely, every one his
own particular duty. (Therefore Paul bids every husband to love his wife,
and every wife to fear her husband.) For every one is to give an account for
the neglect, or performance of his own duty; neither shall any man be
condemned for another man's fault, Ezekiel. 18.20. The husband shall not be blamed
for his, wives fault, nor benefited by her obedience, if he neglect his own
duty: as if they must needs go both to heaven together. But if one have a
care, and the other be careless of his duty, though here the conjunction be
near, yet heer^after shall there be a perpetual separation, Luke 17.38.

The want of this particu^ar application, is the very bane of marriage: for
whilst the husband is rigorous to exact his wives duty, and the wife looks only
to that how her husband ought to ^oue her, and comfort her it comes to ^^sse
that neither of them regard their own: ra^h^r let the husband look to his
own, and the wife to hers, that both of them, he for his love, she for her own
obedience, may receive of God a recompense of reward.

Ephesians. 5. part of the 23. and 24. verses. (Christ is the head of the Church,
and the same is (...) Sau^ (...) our of his body. The Church is in su^i^ctio^
(...) all things.)


Having formerly handled the maine scope of these words, namely, as an argument
to enforce the duty of the wife: ^et us consider them absolutely, and severally
by thems^lues.

^n them we may observe two points.

1 The authority of Christ set down, 1 Under a metaphor in this word Head. 2
By the benefit and end of it, in that he is a Savior. 2 The duty of the
Church, 1 Wherein it consists, namely, in subjection. 2 What is the extent of
it. It is in all things.
Head.) This metaphor is applied to Christ in diverse respects: but two
esp^cially.

1 In regard of that dignity and dominion Christ has over the Church. 2 In
respect of that spiritual virtue and efficacy that the Church receives of
Christ.
For the first, see Col. 1.18. For the second, see Ephesians. 4.15, 16. For both
jointly, see Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Both of these are set down in the Text. The
former, by the inference, that as the husband has authority of his wife, so
Christ over the Church. The second, by the benefit that comes of this
authority, he is the Savior of the body.

Instructions. In that Christ the Son of God, equal to (...), etc. is the
head of the Church to whom sh^e is vnit^d: This shows the exce^ding great
glory of the Church, in which respect the glory of the Saints now is far
greater than was that of Adam in his innocenc^, yea, of the Angels in heaven.

Neither are the infirmities of the Church such, as that they can blemish this
glory. Nevertheless, we s^e how they are here despised and contemned, Esa.
63.2. 1 (...) 4.13. The reason is, because the world sees not (...) of the
Church, nor p^rceiu^th this glorious (...) wi^h Christ, 1 Ioh. 3.1, 2.

(...) This then must vp^old us against all the scoffs and reproaches of the
world, against our own wants and infirmities, that we be not daunted by them:
for Christ suffers us to be tried by these, 1 That we may see our own
unworthiness. 2 To make us the more thankful: for the more unworthy we are
of a thing, the more thankful we be for it: As Abigail was of David's offer, 1 Samuel 25. and was Ester a poor captive more thankful for her advancement then
Vashti, which is report^d to have been Cyrus daughter.

2 This is a ground of great comfort unto us, in that we ar^ ruled by so wise,
glorious, and powerful a governor; who will and can deliver us from all danger,
etc. which thing we must consider when we are assaulted by the t^mp^ation of
the deui^l and world. For Christ has a feeling of all our wrongs and injuries,
even as the head has of all the hurts of the body: and for this reason he
said unto Saul, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

3 This shows, that this union of Christ with us, is as near as possible can
be. But of this more verse. 30.

2 Doct. This further shows the regiment of Christ over his Church, of what it
is: That it is no Tyrannical, but such as is for our good, he having always a
sense and fellow-feeling of our infirmities and wants. The world he rules as
a Judge with a scepter of iron, Psalm. 2.9. and 110.1, etc. But the Saints he
governs gently and mildely as a father, not crushing them under his feet,
but exalting them, Ioh. 14.3.

3 Doct. Hence we see, from whence we have all graces, namely, from Christ:
as the body has all sense, and life, and motion from the head. For this cause
is Christ not only a living soul, but a quickening spirit, because he gives
life unto us, 1 Cor. 15.45. Hence it is that he is called a Vine, Ioh. 15.1, 2.
and that we live in him, Gal. 2.20.

This must make us depend upon Christ, to have reco^rs^ unto him for all good
things. Also this serves to strengthen our faith, concerning our full
deliverance not only from temporal evil, but from death and him that has
the power of it, Heb. 2.14. For if the head be above water, there is no fear
of drowning; and therefore if Christ our head be safe, if he be risen and
delivered from the power of death, we must be safe; if we perish, he must
perish too, because of this union. And this may make us bold to triumph against
all our enemies.

Further observe who they be that are united to Christ. They are the Church,
viz. all the Elect of God who are called and sanctified, whether militant on
earth, or triumphant in heaven. We may also comprehend among them, those that
are not yet borne, if we respect that that shall be, but not properly.

Doct. The gifts of Gods Spirit are proper to the Elect, being called and
sanctified, 1 These. 1.3, 4. 1 Pet. 1.4. The most precious promises are given to
them, Romans 11, 29.

Which refutes the opinion of those that say, that justifying faith and some
saving may be in the wicked and reprobate, as well as in the Elect, and that
there is no difference, but in the continuance.

2 It teaches the more highly to prize the proper graces: for those things
that but a few have, are wont to be much esteemed: Yet other and they will
make so great account of common gifts.

3 This serves for trial to know whether we be in the Church or no, and so
whether Christ be our head. Do we feel in us spiritual life and motion,
namely, the graces of Gods Spirit dwelling in our hearts? It is a sign we are
united to our head Christ: but if we be still dead in our sins, dull in our
understanding, etc. we may justly fear that we are not in Christ. 2 If there
be a mutation and change in our nature; if our conversation be heavenly, and
we partakers of the diuin^ quality, it is a token we are grafted into the true
Olive tree: which as they report, contrary to other stocks, changes (...)
into it own.

Doct. Out (...) no salvation. Which is to be understood of (...) Church, that
they who are not of the numb^r (...) who are united to Christ, can look for no
salvation, and not of particular Churches; as to say, that because he is not of
this or that congregation, therefore he cannot be saved: though in the mean
while it be a dangerous thing to separate himself from a particular Church;
where he sees the plain not^s of a true Church. Here are discovered two errors.

1 Of the Papists, that exclude all from salvation that are not of the Romish
Church.

2 Of the Separatists, that do wilfully abstain from all particular Churches.

Further, this shows that this title of Head is proper to Christ alone; as 1
who has it allotted to him of God, Ephesians. 1.22. 2 who is most eminent, high and
powerful. 3 who only has received the spirit above measure.

Then it is a presumptuous dealing of the Papists, who make the Pope to be the
head of the Church. Their distinction of Imperial and ministerial head is,
but new found; for heretofore they used to say, that Christ took Saint Peter
into the fellowship of the indivisible unity, so making them both one. And as
false it is, as never having ground in the Scripture; but is a m^ere invention
of their own brains: for they say, Christ is the Imperial head, that is, he
quickens and gives grace. The Pope is the ministerial, that is, he gouerns:
which is to separate those offices that are co^ioined in Christ: and secondly,
how does the Pope govern? is it by maintaining the peace of the Church* etc?
No, but by making laws bind to men's consciences and the like,

Savior of his body) Consider here, 1 The kind^ of the benefit, 2 The person
that bestows it. 3 The object of it.
(...), a Savior. A word in Greek, which those that are Grecians say, cannot
be fully expressed in Latin: signifying as much as a most absolute deliverer
from all danger, and all evil whatsoever, Mat. 1.21.

(...), He is) h^e alone of and by himself, Act. 4.11. a body) all the Elect:
implying two conclusions.

1 That all that are given to him of God, are saved: he saues not a leg, or
an arm only, but every part of the body. b

2 That none but those, that are given to him, are saved by him. c

Use is, 1 To amplify the benefit of the head-ship, of Christ; in whom we have
true rest and secur^ty, so that we may trust perfectly to the grace that is
brought unto us.

2 It is for our comfort and joy, and to stir us up to praise God; as the
Virgin Mary, and old Simeon did: and for this cause, the Angel said, that it
was gladsome tidings, that a Savior was borne unto the world a, Heb. 7.25.
Ioh. 19.30. An evidence of which perfect salvation obtained by him, was his
Resurrection: for this cause, he is called Salvation, Luke 2.30. Note here
first the Blasphemy of the Jesuits, that derive of that name of their
society, from that name of Christ, which is incommunicable. Indeed we may be
well called Christians of Christ, because this name is communicable, for we
are partakers of the anointing: but no man is partaker with Christ* in the
work of salvation: as also, Linwood a Papist says; and secondly, the dotings
of the Papists, that seek for other Sauiors besid^s Christ, as the Saints, to
whom may be applied that of Esa. 30.1, etc. and Ier. 2 13. As also another
conceit of the Treasure of the Church, which what needs, if Christ alone have
purchased perfect salvation?

b Romans 5.18. As Adam is a natural root, and all coming from him; partake of
his sin, and curse: so Christ being another root, all that come from him,
partake of his righteousness^ to justification, Ioh. 6.37. and verse 39. A
reason is a added, ^^cause the Elect are committed to his trust, and fidelity;
and therefore if they be lost, the loss redounds not only to the hurt of the
members, bu^ to his own discredit.

Object. Ioh. 17.12. Judas is expressly said to be lost.

Answ. Iu^as was n^uer of this company: which is plain both by the words in
the place a^leadged, where he is called the son of perdition, foreordained
of old unto this condemnation, as Jude spea^es ver. 4. Then apply that, 1 Ioh.
2.19.

This overthrows that gross error of the Lutheranes, who say, that those who
are Elect, may not only wholly, but finally fall away; an opinion strange,
contradictory in it self, to be a chos^n vessel, and to be damned, and
contrary to the Scripture: it breaks in sunder that golden chain, Romans 8.30.
Math. 24.24. Yea, the Papists confess the absurdity of it, Bellar. de great.
and libero arbitrio, lib. 2. cap. 10.

The ground of this opinion is, that they hold, that election is conditional:
which Tenent is derogatory to glory, making his will and decree changeable,
whereas he is immutable in both, and also depriues every faithful soul of a
ground of maine comfort: which otherwise does rest in an holy security (opposed
to fear and distrust) when once it perceiues in it self the certain signs
of Election.

Object. 1 Exodus 32.32. and Romans 9.3.

Answ. These holy men rapt with love and zeal, did only show what in their
hearts they could wish to be done, not what could be done; it was Votum
affectus, non Effectus.

Object. Psalm 69.28.

Answ. That is spoken according to the common opinion of men; now therefore
David desires God to make it manifest, that they did herein deceive
themselves, and others were deceived in them, who because of their profession
and outward carriage, accounted them to be written in the Book of Life.

So in like manner, that which is spoken of Judas, was spoken in regard of his
office and Apostleship, not in regard of the eternal election of God: For in
that former respect, he might have seemed to have been a chosen vessel, Act.
1.17.

Use is for comfort unto us, that though we be not the principal parts of the
body of Christ; an eye, or an ear; that is, not instructed with so much
knowledge as others, etc. yet if we be of the body, we shall be saved, Gal.
3.28.

c Because that satisfaction of Christ was a ransom and price: and none can be
redeemed and bought, but those for whom it was paid.

Against carnal Gospellers that hope still to be saved, when as yet they have
no evidence that they are of this body: for the body is guided by the head; but
those by the prince that rules in the Air, Ephesians. 2.2. The members of the
body love one another: but these hate and persecute the Saints. Briefly, this
word body, imports two things, that is, 1 A mystical union with Christ by
faith. 2 And a spiritual union one with another by love, whereof they have
neither.

So much conc^rning the authority of Christ: The next point is the subjection
of the Church, ver. 24.

Which subjection is due on the Churches part, in regard of the place of
Christ, who is her head; but much more in regard that he is so wise, and so
glorious a head, so provident and powerful to procure her good: and again, in
that she is so far inferior unto him, and therefore meet it is that she
subject her self; and unworthy she were of so great benefits, if she should
not: as Vashty was in not obeying her husband the King.

Doct. Whosoever is of the Catholic Church, is indeed subject to Christ.

AN EXPOSITION UPON THE FOVRTH VERSE OF THE SIXTH CHAPTER TO THE EPHESIANS.
And ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in
instruction and information of the Lord.
THe duties concerning the wel-nurturing of children, are of 2 kinds. 1 Such as
respect temporal good: as, first, training of them up in ciuility and good
behauior: secondly, in a good calling. 2 Or such as resp^ct spiritual good,
viz. that they be trained up in piety, which in the text, and diverse other
place, ais expressly commanded of God: who also for this end ordained in the Law
many means to stir up children to ask of their Parents what they meant: as
of the 12 Stones, of the Passover, etc: commanding Parents to declare unto
their children the mystery of these things.

Reasons of this are,

1 This is the best good that parents can do for their children, by reason men
exceed beasts: by ciui^ity, civil men excel savages: but by piety, the godly
man goes beyond all other.

2 There is a nec^ssity of this instruction of them in the fear of the Lord;
for by nature they have no pronenesse to it, and without this nurturing they
will never learn.

3 This belongs to the office and charge of parents, as they who best know the
capacity of children, and therefore are best able to apply instruction to them,
and instruction coming from them, will take more place.

4 Because children are borne of their parents in a woeful estate; and
therefore as they have been the means to convey sin and misery unto them,
so should they labor to be a like means of conuaying grace.

5 This is a double band to bind them unto their parents in love and duty,
when both nature and a religious conscience shall join both together.

6 By this means when parents dye, they may with greater comfort and security
commend their children unto God.

7 This is lastly an especial means of continuing and propagating the truth
of religion and worship of God.

Now come we to some directions for the perform^nce of this duty: These are

1 That they be sure, that all such principles as they instruct their children
in, be grounded on the Word of God: for it must be information ( of the Lord.)

2 That when they begin to learn, they be taught to read in the holy
Scriptures the book of God: as Timothy was. Compare 2 Timothy 1.5. with 3.5. for
so with learning they shall suck in Religion: and 2 there is a secret and
divine operation in the Word to work holiness.

3 That they be daily catechized and instructed in the grounds of Religion,
Deuteronomy. 6.7. where continually signifies according to the usual phrase of
Scripture, as the continual sacrifice, that which is done day by day; but
observing this caveat, that they be not too tedious, but deal with them as it
is, Esa. 28.13. Moreover, let parents take occasion to raise up the minds of
their children unto God.

4 That they take occasion especially to declare unto their children the
mystery of all those ordinances that God has instituted in his Church, of the
Sabbath, Sacraments, etc. So the Israelites were to expound to their children
the Passover.

5 To provide such tutors and governors as are religious: so Hannah did put her
son to good old Eli, 1 Samuel 1.

6 that they teach them by their own good example: as, Josh 1. Psalm. 101.2.
This adds an edge to all the rest.

It remains to show the contrary aberrations o^ parents.

1 That they are only and wholly careful for the temporal good of their
children, meat, drink, apparel, complementall carriage, and rich calling,
and good marriage; in which they respect the good of their children no more
than heathens do.

2 Many care not in what religion they be brought up: Such are those that have
rich and wealthy, but popish friends, to whom they will put their children to
be instructed; wherein what do they, but show themselves most unnatural,
giving poison to their children, and even sending them to the devil?

3 That they teach them at first profane and vile books, never also catechize
them. In which case the Papists may rise up against us in judgment.

4 By ill examples they teach their children vile sin, even in their c^adle.

Come we to the second branch, namely, the time of the performance of these
duties; of which consider 1 The beginning, when it must be done, 2 The
contiuance, how long.

1 For the beginning: Doct. So soon as the child is docible, and able to
apprehend instruction, so soon must he be taught and nurtured in the fear of
the Lord, Pro. 22.6. (...) The mouth of his way. Like as they give children
meat, as soon as they c^n take it with their mouth, Pro. 13.24. betimes, in
the morning, Heb. viz. of his age. Pro. 4.3. tender. Then was Solomon
instructed. 2 Timothy 3.15. an infant: So dealt Anna with Samuel a child.

Reasons are either privative, implying an avoiding of mischief: as, 1 Unless
they be taught betimes, they will fall into many sins, because they are pron^
to sin, Genesis 6.5. Prou. 22.15. and as soon as they have ability, they will
execute it. This is a means to prevent it.

2 This preuents obstinacy and perverseness: for within a while they will grow
refractary and indocible: as Hophni and Phineas.

Or positive, of fruits and benefits ensuing, namely, a good effect of their
labor: because, 1 Instruction is easily taught, there being an aptness and
inclination in youth to learn. 2 That which is learned in youth, is longest
retained, Prou. 22.6.

Object. But to teach children, is but as to teach Parrots that which they
understand not, and so it is but labor lost.

Answ. 1 The ground, 2 The consequence is false: for 1 a child, so soon as it
is able to conceive any thing, understands it better than any other creature
else whatsoever. 2 Suppose they conceive it not yet, 1 It is better that by
this means they be kept from an evil course than let run into it.

2 This is a great means to help their understanding as we see in Princes
and Noble men's children, that have good bringing up, who understand more at 12.
than many others at 20. years.

3 As years do increase, so will they make use of that which they learn in
youth, therefore though there be no fruit for the present, yet it will come
afterward: as it is in ^owing of corn.

The contrary practice of parents is, who suffer the b^st years of their
children to be spent in vanity and wa^^onnesse. Where note by the way, that
this point of well nurturing children, does especially belong to the mothe^, as
we see, 2 Timothy 1.15. compared with 2 Timothy ^.15. Pro. 31.1.1.8.6.20. yea, after
a peculia^ manner to mothers when they are young, they being then most familiar
and conversant about them, in feeding* c^othing, etc. For this cause the holy
Ghost does express in the books of the Kings and Chronicles the mothers name;
because chi^dren do most ordinarily follow their mothers. So Solomon and
Absalon, the children of one father, but of two mothers; the one bad, the other
good: so it is when the father is a Protestant, the mother a Papist, the
children commonly are Papists, 2 Chr. 2^.1, 3. Ahaziah fell to Idolatry, by
reason of his mothers counsel. Which serves to stir up mothers to diligence
in educating their children.

The second branch of the time, is the Continuance. The child must be
instructed so long as the parents have power and authority to govern him,
which is, so long as he lives, and they are parents, though there must be a
difference put in respect of age.

For children are bound to parents as long as they live, and so must be subject
and ruled by them. So Eli rebuked Hophni and Phineas, though they were married;
and Job had a care and command over his children, though they kept house.

Directions: That parents do so wisely carry themselves toward their
children, as they still reserve in their own hands a power to curb and brid^e
them, even when they are grown into years. Contrary to which is their
practice, which let go the reins unto their children, yea, put themselves in
their childrens power, and stand at their courtesy. Many have found the
mischief of this: as David did in Absalom,

Concerning the means of Help, for the performance of this duty of education:
they are two,

Frequent admonition: (...), to put into the mind more by instruction.

Due correction: (...), comprehending both.

1 Doct. That to instruction must be added admonition, that is, they must
labor to whet these things into the hearts of their children, to make a deeper
impression, Deuteronomy. 6.7, 8. Eccles. 12.11. Prou. 7. Because the apprehension of
children is very weak, and sickly; and therefore unless that which is taught
be urged, it will slip away. Parents therefore must observe the inclination of
their children, and accordingly urge and express upon them those things they
have taught them.

Contrary is the practice of those, who think it sufficient to have told their
children, what is to be done; but go no further, complaining of great labor
and pain that it is to be still in admonishing of them.

2 Doct. Correction must be added to Admonition:

and this is either Verbal, properly called Reprehension. Real, properly
called Correction.
Reproof goes in the middle between Instruction and Correction, as a means
to help the former, and prevent the latter. That a father must reprove his
child, is plain by Pro. 15.5. For if it be a commendation of a child to
hearken to reproof, it is a duty of parents to reprove: see Genesis 34.30. Genesis
49.4, 5, 6, 7.

The reason is, because of the fruit that thence does arise: see Prou.
6.23.10.17.15.31. The fruit of it is life and knowledge, 15.32. and chap.
24.25. The blessing of good, that is, of God.

Motives to use this reproof may be, 1 It does prevent Correction. 2 It may be
performed, when the other cannot be done, as in sickness, infancy, and elder
years.

Contrary to this, is the too indulgent carriage of parents toward their
children: as David to Adoniah, 1 King. 1.6.

Real Correction is next: it is not sufficient to admonish, but it this serve
not, God has given author^ty to parents to correct them with stripes and
blows, according to their age; yea, God has g^uen them a charge to do it,
and therein has made himself a pattern to parents, in corre^ting His
Children after admonition and reproof, given by his Minist^rs: and this must
be done, because of the perverseness of children.

Reasons is of it are, 1 In respect of the chi^de, which are

1 Privative good; Correction is as purging physic, and as a salve curing and
purging the corrup^ion of the soul, Pro. 22.15.20 30.23.13. In this respect it
is said to deliver from death, both temporal, and eternal, and* 23.14. from
hell; and therefore parents must not in foolish affection urge the painfulnesse
of correction, but in judgment consider the fruit thereof. 2 Positive good: it
teaches wisdom, Prou. 29 15. But some will say, that instruction is
sufficient to teach them, what is good and evil. Answ. The greatest wisdom
is in the pra^tice, which hereby is learned, bringing them to a nearer
observation of those things that are taught; therefore it is an error in
parents, that say that children kept under Correction, are sots: see Prou.
13.24.

2 In respect of parents 1 Hereby they spare much pain: for this will make
instruction more powerful, though few times delivered, than without it
oftentimes inculcated. 2 This preuents shame and grief to parents. 3 Hereby
they acquit themselves of being accessory to the sin, and so guilty of the
blood of their children: as Eli was punished for not restraining his children.
4 Hereby they shall bring ease, quiet, and joy unto themselves, Prou. 29.17.
when the child is made so careful, and watchful of his duty, that the
parents may be secure of his good carriage.

5 If all these fail, yet he has the testimony of a clear conscience, in
the discharge of his duty.

Directions for the well and seasonable performance hereof, regard first, the
matter, secondly, the manner, thirdly, the use.

1 The matter why the child should be corrected:

1 The parent must be sure, that he correct his child justly for a fault;
otherwise he will be but provoked against his father; for there be fathers that
correct their children for their pleasures, Heb. 12.10.

2 That as he punishes them for a fault, so they make known this fault unto
them, after the example of God, Psalm. 50.21. 3 To correct especially for those
faults, which they may show out of the Word of God, to be faults; and so show
that God is also thereby offended: for this will make them fear the more.

2 Manner. General rules: 1 That parents in correcting, do call upon God, for
themselves, that they may be directed; and for their children, that they may
reap benefit, because that they are subject to passion, and the child's nature
is against it. 2 That correction be done in love, as in all things, 1 Cor.
16.14 so especially to children, who take it as a matter of judgment, in their
parents. 3 That it be done, with a mild mind and calm affections, and to put
it off, if rage and fury arise: as God does, Ier. 10.24.

Particular rules.

1 That the quality and condition of the child be observed, and accordingly
to measure our correction:

2 That respect be had unto the fault, according to the greatness and
smalnesse of it, etc.

For Prayers.

3 The use: 1 To observe the dealing of God toward them in correcting of them;
which parents may observe by their correcting of their children, with what
pity and compassion they do it.

2 To observe, that in correcting their children, they correct their own
sins, and that the thing for which they correct them, came by their own
occasion.

Aberrations in this point are,

1 Too much indulgence. 2 Too much severity.

Duties of parents in regard of the riper years of their children, when they
are youths, are of two kinds.

1 Providing of its place and personal calling for the exercise of that gift,
whereunto they have been heretofore trained up: so Samuel made his sons
Judges, 1 Samuel 8.1. So Ishai had diverse sons, whom he placed in several
callings, some soldiers, some shepherds: a calling of esteem in countries.

Reasons are. 1 By this means they come to make use of that ability and
faculty, which they have obtained by their parents, in training of them up; and
without this they forget the same, like scholars that after long study have no
further calling.

2 Because by this means they come to do more good to the Church and
Commonwealth; for before, they are but in preparation, and their pains (as of
prentices) may in some sort be profitable, yet they are not till afterward
counted members of the Commonwealth properly.

3 By this means they come to live of themselves and do more good to others;
whereas before, their pains and gains were for their masters.

4 By this means they train up others, as themselves have been trained up
before, and so there is a succession of calling, and a maintenance of Church
and commonwealth.

Directions: Observe 2 Cautions.

1 That they be careful to place them in such a calling as they have been
trained up unto in their young years. Bezaleel and Aholiab were chosen to the
work of the Tabernacle, because they were skillful men, Exodus 25. It is not
fit, of a prentice to make a minister.

2 That the means of placing them be good, lawful and honest, that thus
entering in by those means that God has ordained and warranted, they may
depend upon his blessing, as being thereunto called by him, 1 Cor. 7.17. What
mischiefs follow upon an unconscionable entrance, all know.

Aberration in two extremes:

1 Carelessness of those that think it enough to have bestowed education upon
their children; and so account themselves discharged, saying, that they will
leave them then to depend upon Gods providence. (But we must know, that God
appoynts means, without the use of which, we cannot look for a blessing.)
Others saying, that their children may shift for themselves: just like brute
beasts, that leave their young ones when they are able to feed themselves. And
thus by their negligence, many times their children come to be very drones in
the Commonwealth.

2 When parents are too preposterous and rash in providing a calling, not
considering whether the place be fit or no for their children, but only
whether it be gainefull and profitable, or of credit.

3 Another is, of those that make no conscience of bringing their children into
a calling, into the Ministry by Simony, etc.

2 The second duty is, concerning marriage, that they be careful to provide
marriage for them in due and fit time; a plain duty of parents, Ier. 29.6. and
1 Cor. 7.36, 37. in practice, Genesis 28.2, 6. and 27.46. Agar learned so much in
Abraham's house, Genesis 21.21. and and so did God with the first man, Genesis 2.18.

Reasons, 1 Because children must wait upon their parents consent, and
therefore they ought to provide for them.

2 Parents stand in Gods stead, and so must be a means of seeking a marriage
for them.

3 Marriage is a needful means to keep their vessels in holiness; and
hereby is a holy seed preserved, Mal. 2.15.

Directions, 1 That children may have a free consent, and that they be not
forced: After Gods example, who brought the woman that he had made, unto Adam,
to see whether he liked her or no, Genesis 2.22. and 24.57. for this is the
nearest, surest, and strongest band, and ought not to be undertaken without the
parties good liking.

2 That the match be fit for them, Genesis 2.20.

Fit, 1 In Religion, Deuteronomy. 7.3.

2 In age: So God made the woman perfect at the first, as Adam, not a child.

3 In state, in some equality, else scorn and disdain may arise.

Aberrations in two extremes.

1 Carelessness in providing marriage, letting them pass the flower of their
age.

2 Too much rashness, before they know what a wife and husband mean: and a
third, providing unmeet matches for them, joining them idiots, fools, papists,
profane; so they be wealthy.

Means for the better performance of those duties, are,

1 That parents have a care to provide a stock and portion for their children,
2 Corinthians. 12.14. Whereas some object, Math. 6.19. we answer, 1 That Christ
aims here at covetousness: so as the fool laid up riches.

2 He condemns the manner, as being the only thing which they do, before
and above the care of heavenly things.

3 The measure, heaping up without measure.

Directions. 1 That this measure be not unjustly gotten, Prou. 10.2.

2 That they be not covetous, setting themselves to make themselves and their
children rich.

3 That this be not a pretense for uncharitableness.

Contrary to this is, 1 when men live at the uttermost extent of their living,
so that they can lay up nothing.

2 When men live above their living, and cast themselves behind hand.

3 When any ensnare their children, by causing them to be bound for them, and
so break their backs, and become their vndoers.

4 Covetousness, when parents lay up indeed, but will part with nothing to
their children before their death.

EPHESIANS. 6. VER. 5. Servants, be obedient unto them that are your masters,
according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, and singleness of your
hearts, as unto Christ, etc. unto the 9 th. verse.


THe su^me of these words is a direction for servants how to carry themselves
toward their Masters; wherein the Apostle lays down, first the Duties they
are to perform, where we are to note,

1 The kinds which are twofold: Obedience and Reverence.


2 The extent, which is limited by these speeches: according to the flesh, ver.
5. as unto Christ, ibid, as the servants of Christ, ver. 6. as to the Lord,
ver. 7.

3 The manner of performance set down, 1 Affirmatively, by showing them what
graces do adorn them in performance of these duties, ver. 5, 7.

2 Negatiuely, by showing what vices are to be avoided, ver. 6.

2 The motives to stir them up to the careful performance of the former
duties, which are partly employed, partly repressed.

Before we come to handle the kinds, it is necessary to lay down, here as
formerly has been done, the ground and foundations of the duties, which do
concern either the opinion, or the affection of servants. Their opinion, that
they be persuaded concerning their masters superiority, and their own
subjection, that it is good, lawful and warrantable, by the Word of God. For
seeing Reverence and Obedience have relation to authority and superiority; how
can any be yielded, when we are not persuaded, that they to whom we owe
this, are our superiors? Therefore did Korah and his company fall into
Rebellion, because they thought that Moses had not that authority, which he
took upon him, Number. 16.3. Now that servants may be resolved, touching the
lawfulness of their masters authority, let them consider, 1 That it is Gods
commandment, both in the old and new Testament. 2 The many directions, that
God gives to masters and servants, to carry themseleus in their places: But
God gives no directions for any unlawful calling. 3 The example of many godly
men in Scripture, who have been servants. 4 That, that the Apostle, Romans 13.1.
urges it as a matter of conscience, which has always relation to the Law of
God commanding.

Contrary to this, is the opinion of the Anabaptists, denying any subjection or
superiority; their reasons for it are, 1 If, say they, there be servants, and
this a calling lawful, they must have either Christians or Infidels to their
masters. If Infidels, who have no part 'in Christ: what an unfit and unmeet
thing is it for Christians to be in subjection to such? If Christians, then
are they all brethren, and why should one brother be inferior to another?

Answ. This calling of servants and masters, being a political ordinance of
God, appointed to vp-hold the Church, Commonwealth and Family, not their
quality, but their place is to be considered: See 1 Timothy 6.2.

2 Again, say they, it is against nature, our Christian liberty, and those
prerogatives we are endowed with.

Answ. Against nature, as nature now is, it is not, although if nature had
remained entire and perfect, it had been against nature. But God has in his
admirable wisdom made many things, which are punishments of sin, to be
duties imposed on us, as eating of our bread in the sweat of our brows, a
punishment, and yet a duty.

2 Christian liberty is not hereby prejudiced, the conscience still remaining
free, and not subject to any but God.

3 And as for our prerogatuines, they are to be expected in the world to come,
and not here.

3 They urge that which is said, verse 7. not serving men:) but here service
to men is not simply forbidden, but such fawning and parasiticall service, when
we wholly care to please men, and not God, in serving them.

In Affection, that the servant have an honorable account and reverent esteem
of his master. This is called here Fear; and it is described, 1 Timothy 6.1. See
1 Pet. 2.18. which affection in a servant, if it be wanting, he does indeed
deny his master to be a master, Mal. 1.6.

The means to work this fear, is to consider the place of his master,
namely, that he is in Gods stead.

Signs of his fear are,

1 When the heart of the servant desires to please his master: as Abraham's
servant did, Genesis 24. the whole chapter shows it. Which further shows it
self by a certain joy and delight they have, when they have done any business
succesfully, and for their masters profit, as Abraham's servant did, Genesis 44.
verse. 26.27. 2 A care not to offend them: as was in Joseph, Genesis 39.8, 9. which
breeds a grief in them, having done any thing offensive: as Onesimus was, no
doubt, grieved for his running away, and would not return without a letter of
mediation from Paul, his masters special friend.

Contrary to this is, 1 Slavish fear: as was in that idle and unprofitable
servant, Matthew 24.25, 25. 2 Despising of their masters, 2 Timothy 6.2.
manifesting it self in two branches, 1 Into light esteem of their masters: as
Agar, of Sarah her mistress, G^n. 16.4. 2 In a vile and base esteem of them: as
when they are poor, etc.

We are now come to the kinds of duties, and first, of Reverence, which is an
outward manifestation of that inward affection of the heart; To be declared, 1
By speech, and that first to his master, two ways, 1 By refraining his speech
in a good and commendable silence, not speaking in his presence; or being in
talk, to break it off when he comes in presence, etc. which shows a great
honor that he bears unto him.

Contrary to this, is sawcin^sse and ouer-bo^dnesse in prating to him as their
equ^l* A great fault in servants, who especially should be swift to hear, and
slow to speak, James 1.

Yet are there times when servants may and ought to speak. 1 When their
masters require them. 2 When it may be behooffull for them: as when it tends
to the good of their masters, as 2 King. 5.3. Or when they would persuade them
to that which is good, and they are against it: as Naamans servants, 2 King.
5.13. Or when they would more fully understand their masters meaning: so did
the Disciples of Christ ask him many questions: or when some scruple does arise
in the servants mind concerning the business, as Genesis 24.5. Or to clear
their innocence, when their master suspecteth any thing of them, 1 Samuel 24.9.
etc.

Contrary to this is stoutnesse, and stomackfulnesse, when they will not speak
nor answer, Pro. 29.19.

For the manner of their speech, note these things, 1 In titles, that they be
honorable, and beseeming their masters places. 2 That their words be few,
especially if they observe, that their masters be unwilling to hear of any
talk, in that business, as John the last, verse. 21, 22. 3 Their answer must
be meek, gentle, and humble, 2 King. 6.2, 3. 4 It must be seasonable, not when
they are choleric. 5 Above all things, their speech must be true; to which in
this regard they are bound by a special band.

Contrary to this, is, 1 Pride, scorning to reverence their masters with fit
titles. 2 Scolding, as in many shrewish mad servants, that will give word for
word, yea, and will have the last word.

3 Muttering and mumbling, speaking never a plain word. 4 Lying like Gehazi;
showing hereby the small respect they carry of their masters. The second thing
is speech of them, which must be the same to others, as it is to their master,
else the other will prove but fawning and hypocrisy. To this end, 1 Let them
say nothing in his absence, but what they would be willing he should hear
himself. 2 Let them speak of him in such sort, as others may see he makes
account of his master and mistress. 3 Not to speak of any thing that may
discredit them. 4 To maintain their credit against others.

Contrary to this is, 1 To discredit their masters unjustly by telling
untruths. 2 By blazing abroad secrets, as many servants do when they meet
together, and as it comes to pass when servants are changed.

2 By their carriage, which is another evidence of that reverence and fear
which they bear unto their masters: Yea, the most proper: for if their actions
do not agree with their words, they are but flatterers and fawners, yea, their
own words will condemn them, Luke 19.22. There are three branches, wherein
this Reverence consists.

1 In a dutiful obedience. 2 In an humble and decent behavior, 3 In apparel.
Obeisance in coming to them, going from them, receiving an errand from them,
bringing a message to them; to make obeisance, see for proof, Genesis 27.29. bow
down to thee:) 2 King. 2.15.

Behavior: that it be modest, humble, and lowly: as standing in their masters
presence, 2 King. 5.23. and 10.8. And though Solomon was a King, yet this is
common to Kings with other men; and wherein some may object, that by standing,
is meant no other, but to serve and minister, as Deuteronomy. 10.8. We answer, that
nevertheless, the reason of this phrase shows, that they that minister, must
be ready to perform all things; standing vncouerd, as at all times, so
especially in the Church, where God and his Ang^ls are to behold their good
order: also their looks and countenance must be sober, and modest.

Contrary to this, is the carriage of proud servants, that scorn all courtesy
toward their master, which comes to pass when their master is poor and
mean: whereby they show plainly how little they ^egard Gods ordinance, and
the image of God, which their master how mean soever does bear.

Apparel: that it be b^comming the state of their condition of subi^ction; for
this is one end and use of apparel, for to distinguish those of higher and
more emin^nt degree, from other lower and inferior. This was that which the
Queen of Sheba noted in Salomons servants, 1 King. 10.5. every one being
suited according to his degree.

Contrary to this, is the practice of most servants now a days, whom by their
apparel a man cannot distinguish from the children, no not from their masters
and mistresses themselves; all their wages, and what-euer else they can get,
either from their friends, or by pur^oyning often times, from their master, or by
other means, it is all spent in apparel. And if the master and mistress make
conscience of going soberly, the servants will many tim^s go^ finer than they.
So much for reverence.

The second general duty is obediences, the most principal and surest
evidence of their dutiful subjection, as also of their masters authority: for
reverence is performed also to others, Col. 3.22.

To which is contrary, rebellion and disobedience in servants, the greatest
impeac^ment of the masters authority, and indeed that which does plainly deny
his place; faults in the former may come of rudeness, and may be borne
withal, but this is intolerable.

This duty does manifest it self 1 In the parts. 2 In the ^xtent.


The parts of it are partly neg^tiue, partly affirmative. Negative, that they
do not any thing of their own heads, without or against their masters knowledge
and consent: for servants, during the time of their service, are their masters
goods, and so are all their actions to be done, not for their own, but for
their masters profit; and therefore good reason that he should have the
guidance and direction of them. Again, the masters will must be a rule and
direction of all their actions; and therefore did Abraham's servant enquire the
meaning of his master, Genesis 24.5. Therefore the cares of servants were boared
through, to signify that their ear must be always attentive to their masters
will. More particularly, this duty is seen in these points.

1 Servants are not to go abroad about their own business, without the
consent of their master. Contrary was the practice of Gehezi, going out after
Naaman unknown to his master, 2 King. 5.

2 They may not enterprise and go about their masters business, without his
direction; doing that work that likes them best, Prou. 31.15. For it is the
masters duty to allot unto servants their work as well as their meat. Contrary
is, when servants will be their own choosers; ^s happens where there be many
servants: and also tha^ practice of many, who are so selfconceited, that they
think things will never well succeed, unless they be ^one after their own
head. True it is, if they be more (...), (as it does so happen many times) then
their (...), the^ man meekely advise them: as Ioab did, 2 Sa^ 2^ 3. But if they
will have their own mind, they must do i^: as the Kings word prevailed with
Ioab, ver. 4.

3 In the time of their service, they are not to marry without their masters
consent. So masters did give wives unto their servants, Exodus 21.4.

Contrary is the practice of those that do take the advantage of the law, and
marry themselves, of purpose to be free, and to defraud their masters of the
rest of their time.

4 In disposing of those goods that do belong unto their masters, they may not
give away any thing for charitable uses without their consent.

5 Being hired by them, they ought not to hire themselves unto any other,
without their full and free consent. Jacob having served out his time, did
nevertheless tarry with Laban still, he being unwilling to let him depart,
Genesis 30.26, 27, 28. So far was he from going away without his consent. And
whereas chap. 31. ver. 20. he went away privily, 1 he had the charge o^ God
to be gone. 2 His time was out. Howbeit this practice of Jacobs is not
justifiable, neither can be alleged for imitation in servants. For seeing
Jacob had Gods commandment for to go away, and his promise for safety in his
journey, ver. 3. why could he not have had his departure known to Laban,
whose wrath he needed not to fear, God being as ready to have delivered him
from the danger thereof then, as he did afterward, verse 24?

Contrary is the practice of lewd servants, who run away from their masters,
like Shimies servants, 1 King. 2.39. and as Agar, Genesis 16.6. If their masters
be cruel, they must do as the Angel counseled Agar, verse 9. submit and
humble themselves: see 1 Pet. 2.18.

The affirma^iue part of obedience is, that they be willing and ready to do
whatsoever their master will have them do. This is the truest mark of hearty
obedi^nce: for the former may many times arise of fullenn^sse.

This must be manifested, 1 In regard of the masters command; that he having a
power to comm^nd, the servant ought to obey, doing that which he r^quireth,
readily and willingly, without pretending excuses, or enquiring a reason of
what he commands, Math. 8.9. which example belongs to all servants. Samuel,
who was in a manner Eli^s s^ruant, when he was called by ^od, h^e supposing it
had been Eli, went unto him a second and a third time, albeit the time were
unseasonable, and tha^ Eli had at first told him, he called him not: which
might have been an excuse not to have come a second and a third time, 1 Samuel
2.6, etc. Abraham's servant questions not about the difficulty of that long
journey, which he was to take by his masters command, Genesis 24.4. Eliahs servant
goes to the top of the hill seven times, although he saw nothing till the
seventh, 1 King. 18.24. The plowman that has labored all day, does
neuerthel^sse first serve his master when he comes home, before himself do
eat and drink, and take his rest, Luk 17.7. All to show that he must not be
w^ary, nor take vain excuses and pretenses, for not doing his masters command;
but do it he ought although it seem never so much without reason unto him.

Contrary to it, is the disobedience of servants to their masters command; and
even then most commonly when they have no need of them, Job 19.61. like
unfaithful Z^ba, 2 Samuel 19.26. This is a most foul offense in servants, and
of all others does most provoke their masters, seeing that hereby they in their
hearts do plainly deny his authority over them.

2 In regard of his instruction, tending first to their ^emporal good: as of
prentizes, and such as are committed unto others, only for this end, that they
may learn their trade. For 1 The master being bound to teach them, they are
likewise bound to learn and to follow his directions. 2 This is the end why
they were placed with them. 3 The benefit and profit is great, for hereby they
come to live of themselue another day, etc.

Contrary is the practice of idle, dull, and heavy servants, that regard not
their masters teaching, who care not so they may wear out their years, though
at the end of them they have not learned their trade: hereby showing
themselves enemies to their masters in discrediting them; to themselves, by
depriving themselves of a means to live hereafter; and to their place,
wherein they are unprofitable members.

2 To their spiritual good, that as it is the masters duty to instruct his
servants in the fear of God, so must they hearken unto him. Joshua had such
servants, else he could not have said, I and my house will serve the Lord,
Josh. 24.15. Such were in the family of Priscilla, and Aquila, Romans 16.5. So
Philem. verse 2. The Rulers servants believed upon their masters relation,
although they were with him when Jesus spoke the word, John 4.53.

The necessity of such instruction, as also the unspeakable benefit that
arises hence, should move servants to the performance of this duty.

But we see the contrary in almost all servants, who of all others will not
be servants to religious men: such as are all natural men, who are more ready
to follow the Devil, and those that bear his Image, than God, and such as
carry the Image of God. And it is a common complaint, that profane men have
better servants, and have their work better performed, than godly; yea though
they give less wages, and worse fare; because the one sort, so as they may
have their work done, care not how they break the Sabbath, and what other
sin they commit, which the other will not suffer. So much did men prefer
liberty in sin before meat, drink and wages, and any thing else.

3 and 4 In regard of Reproof, and Correction, which may be joined both
together; reproof being but a verbal correction, and correction a real
reproof: and herein obedience is showed in two branches.

1 By patient bearing all reproves and correction whatsoever it be, whether
just or unjust, mild or bitter, easy or grievous; this the Apostle Peter
proves by many arguments, 1 Pet. 2.18, 19, 20, 21. Joseph unjustly imprisoned
by his master, mutters not, nor repineth, nor yet reuengeth it when afterward
he came into authority, Genesis 39.20.

Contrary to this, is the practice of many servants, who being reproved, will
answer again crosly and thwartly; a thing expressly forbidden, Tit. 2.9. True
it is, they may make an Apology for themselves reverently, and modestly, but
if their masters will not hear them, silence, and patience is required.

2 Of those that will not be corrected, but if their masters come to correct
them, they will take the staff by the end. 3 Of such as fearing correction,
will run away: as Agar, Onesimus, and Shemeis servants.

4 Of such as will give blow for blow. 5 Of such as will seek for revenge, by
mischieuing their masters at one time or other.

2 When they are justly reproved and corrected, that they be careful to
redress, and amend that for which they were so reproved; for herein patient
bearing is not sufficient, it is not praiseworthy, 1 Pet. 2.20. yea, it is but
stupidity and blockishnesse. Thus did Onesimus amend, Philem. ver. 11.

Contrary is the practice of those, that notwithstanding all reproof and
correction, go on still, and provoke their masters, either to add more
blows, or in the end to turn them out of his doors.

2 part. The Extent of servants obedience: how far forth they ought to obey
their mast^rs, is employed here, when it is said ( According to the flesh) that
is, in civil and carnal things, and expressly laid down, Col. 3.22. and Tit.
2.9. ( In all things) which words being so general, must have some restraint
and limitation. Because masters and mistresses are men and women, and so being,
are subject to error. 2 Some may be Idolaters, Popish and profane, and so may
command that which is expressly contrary to Gods Word. 3 And again, such is
the perverseness of many, that they oppose themselves against God the highest
Master.

Nevertheless the reason why this so general a phrase is used, is to show, 1
That whatso^uer the master has authority to command, and belongs unto his
office, in all those things servants must obey. 2 That the masters authority is
very large, such as none but Gods contrary command can resist. 3 That it is not
sufficient to obey in such things as they please; but it must be all things,
though grievous and irksome unto them.

Here therefore we must distinguish between things 1 Simply good. 2 Simply
evil. 3 Indifferent. The 1 are simply commanded. The 2 simply forbidden. The 3
are good or evil, according to the diverse circumstances: and in these
indifferent is this extent especially to be placed.

The du^y then here to be learned is, that servants must labor and endeavor
to subject their judgments unto their masters, to think those things meet and
fit which he commands. The servant of the Levites, Judge. 19.11. would have
had his master lodged in Iebus, but the master thinking it otherwise meet, he
was content and went with him. If their master appoint them to any work, they
ought to think this work meet and fit for them.

Contrary is that of those, who think themselves wiser than their master: so
Gehezi thought his master unwise, to let Naaman depart: so did the Prophets
offend, 2 King. 2.16. in urging Elisha against his will. This is the cause of
many mischiefs, as of excess in apparel, when they think their master not
wise enough to provide what is fit, etc.

Now if they cannot think that what their master commands, is so fit and
profitable for him, yet nevertheless, they ought to yield obedience; this
caveat observed, that they may make known their mind unto their masters, with
mildness and reverence. So did Io^b, 2 Samuel 24.3, 4. wherein he did not
sin. For a man that is in authority, may sin in commanding, and yet he
that is in subjection, not sin in obeying the command; because the thing
being in it self lawful, the sin r^spects the mind of him that commands,
as the numbering of the people, David's proud mind.

For hereby a servant shows his hearty obedience the more plainly, when he
yields r^adily to that which is contrary to his will. 2 This is a special
means to preserve peace and love.

Contrary to this, is peremptorinesse in servants, that will obey no further
then themselves see reason.

The restraint of this generality is expressed in 4 clauses: 1 As unto Christ,
verse. 5. 2 As servants of Christ, verse. 6. 3 Doing the will of God, ibid. 4
Serving the Lord, verse 7.

All which imply in the general; that servants obedience to their masters,
must be such as may stand with their obedience to Christ. For 1 Christ is the
highest master. 2 To him we are to give the last account of all our actions. 3
His favor must be preferred, and his wrath and vengeance must be feared.

For more particular application of these general grounds: 1 If the master
command any thing that Christ forbids, the servant is freed in this case, he
may not obey; for this are Saul's servants commended, 1 Samuel 22.17. and the
midwiues, Exodus 1.17. and Joseph, Genesis 39.12. And if a King is not to be obeyed
in such things, much less a private man.

For masters herein go beyond their commission, and so lose their authority,
and are not to be obeyed, no more than a Constable or Sheriff, etc. that go
beyond their office.

Here nevertheless, this caution is to be noted, that they be not peremptory:
but 1 That they be sure that God commands the contrary to their master. 2 That
with all reverence they show their master his error by the word of God, and to
persuade him not to command them that which is contrary to it, before they
absolutely refuse to obey.

Contrary to this, is men-pleasing, when as servants care is so to please their
master, that they respect not God: as Do eg, 1 Samuel 21.18. Mat. 2.16. Dan.
3.20. neither are there so wicked masters, but they shall find such
men-pleasers as will execute their will and command; but what the judgments of
God are upon such, we may see by the example of those, Dan. 3.22.

Object. The Apostle, Titus 2.9. wills servants to please their masters in
all things.

Answ. 1 Men must be pleased in those things that belong unto their power to
command. 2 The Apostle in that place speaks of man, as opposed to God, in the
text, as subordinate to God; there so to please men, as to displease God,
herein pleasing of them, standing in the place of God, to please God himself.
Briefly, here is meant to please men in God, for God, and under God: So that
so far as servants can approve themselves to God, and have the testimonies of
a good conscience, and withal please their master, this man-pleasing is
lawful.

2 If masters forbid any thing that is by God expressly commanded, servants must
not therefore abstain: So did Daniel, Dan. 6.10. Reason is, we have a good
warrant so to do, even of God himself; and if a man have the warrant of the
King, what need he fear, although an inferior magistrate do forbid him? Thus
if servants be commanded not to give good weight, they must not do it,
although they may keep the price which their master sets: so if to break the
Sabbath and the like.

Only let them be sure and certain, that God has forbidden that which their
master has commanded.

Contrary heereunto is slauishnesse, and timorousness, when they fear their
master more than God.

For the avoiding of these extremes, and the better to perform the former
duties, let servants

1 Labor to be fully instructed what is the will and commandment of God,
Ephesians. 5.17.

2 Let them labor to have their minds possessed with the true fear of God.

3 Let those servants that be at liberty, have a careful respect in choosing of
their masters, that they as well regard their inward disposition, as their
outward calling; for this it was that Ruth followed Naomi, because she saw she
was Religious, 1 Ruth 1.16.

4 Having been brought by the providence of God under such masters as are
Religious, to cleave unto them, and to remain with them, John 6.68.

Contrary to which, is carelessness in servants, that regard not to what master
they bind themselves, be they worldlings, profane, popish, etc. all is one to
them; whereby they bring themselves into many straights, either to disobey God,
or to displease their master, etc. So much for the Extent and Restraint.

3 The manner of obedience is laid down in 4 branches.

1 With fear and trembling. 2 With singleness of heart. 3 With good
conscience. 4 With good will.
1 Fear and trembling: the phrase is doubled, to show the necessity of the
duty: by fear is meant, all the former, and respect which servants owe to
their masters: by trembling is meant, an awe and fear to provoke their master
to punish them. For as we may fear God in regard of his power, that he is
able to execute so great vengeance on us; so may masters be feared, because God
has given the rod into their hand, to execute punishment on the disobedient,
Romans 13.5. Thus was Obadiah afraid to provoke Ahab, 1 King. 18.9.

Contrary to this trembling in the defect is, 1 Too much familiarity. 2.
Answering again, murmuring and repining. 3 Carelessness in provoking their
master, thinking with themselves, it can be but a beating, etc. In the
excess, slavish fear, when all things are done for fear of the rod.

2 Singleness of heart: that is, that the service which they perform, be done
with an honest and upright heart, pretending no more in outward show, then they
intend inwardly in the heart: it is called singleness of heart, in opposition
to those phrases in Scripture of a double heart, or, a heart and a heart, as
Psalm. 12.2. Such an upright heart was in Joseph, Genesis 39.8, 9.

Reason is, because servants have to do not only with their master, but also
with Christ, who searches the heart, and by the same gives judgment of the
action, Ier. 17.10.

2 Because honesty and uprightness is so acceptable unto Christ, and he
delights so much in it.

Contrary to this, is eye service, when they content themselves with the
outward work, and never regard their heart; such are most servants.

2 Hypocrisy and dissimulation, when they will carry a fair face, fawn and
flatter, yet care not what wrong they do unto their master: as Parasites.

3 Good Conscience, employed in these speeches: 1 As unto Christ. 2 As the
servants of Christ. 3 As doing the will of God. 4 As serving the Lord. Whence
the Doctrine is: That servants must have respect to the will and ordinance of
God, obeying because of it, although there were no other reason, Romans 13.5. 1
Pet. 2.13.

This puts a maine difference between Christian servants, and such as are
wicked and profane.

2 In this may servants reap true comfort, in hope of reward at Gods hands,
howeuer their master do deal with them.

Contrary is that of many servants, who although they be good at their work,
yet do it not for conscience sake, but for fear, for gain, or some like
by-respects.

4 Good will: which respects the mind of the servant, and it is either in
regard of himself, or of his master: of himself, that his service be done
willingly and cheerfully: of his master, that it be for his profit.

Doct. 1 Servants must do service with willingness and cheerfulness; as
Christ a servant, Phil. 2.7. did the will of his Father cheerfully and
readily. Psalm. 40.7, 8. Even with as great a desire, as to his ordinary food,
Job 4.34. So did Jacob, Genesis 39.20. For the time of his service seemed short
unto him: which is a sign he did it cheerfully. And although the reason be
there rendered, because he loved Rachel; yet may these both stand together; yea,
if he had not served cheerfully, the time would have seemed so much the
longer, because of that love he bare Rachel.

Reasons hereof are, 1 In regard of God, who loves cheerfulness. 2 of our
selves: because it eases the burden of the work. And for a motive to stir
us up to readiness, consider we of the reward that God will give to such as
be faithful in their calling.

Contrary is, when servants do their business grudgingly, heavily, and of
necessity; wherein neither themselves can reap comfort, God not accepting of
their work, nor their masters profit, it being done for the most part
untowardly.

2 The profit of their master: to this is required, 1 Speediness and
quickness, that they dispatch their business so soon as they can. This was
commendable in Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.33, 54, 56. 2 King. 4.29. This
speediness about business is a sign of of willingness.

2 Diligence. That they employ all their labor and care (continually) for
their masters good, Ecc. 9.10. For this is the Talent and work of the Lord,
which he has given to servants, viz. To be diligent in their place and
seru^ce toward their master, then look Ier. 48.10. This diligence was in
Jacob, Genesis 31.38, 39, 40. What fruit comes by this diligence, is often
expressed in the Prou. chap. 10.4. and 12.24. etc.

Contrary to this, is Sluggishnesse and Idleness: which in a servant how
irksome it is, see Prou. 10.26. how unprofitable and hurtful, Prou. 18.9. Yea,
all slothful servants are thieves, robbing their masters of their best pains
and labor, which is as due to them, as meat and drink to servants. Such idle
servants are those, who if they be sent of a business, will have much talk
and prate about it, before it can be done, Prou. 14.23. It is also hurtful
for themselves: for he that is slothful for his master, will seldom be
diligent for himself.

3 Lastly, herein is required Faithfulness, a chief and principal duty of
servants, and to be referred to the whole manner of their obedience. This is
employed too here by ( good will) and in that must serve their masters as (
doing the will of God,) whose will it is, that every one be faithful in his
place. And it is expressly commanded, Tit. 2.10. And the Apostle takes it for
a ruled case, Heb. 3.5. implying that if he were a servant, he must be
faithful: for this, were those servants that received the Talents, commended
by Christ, Mat. 25. and thus Christ himself was faithful, Hebrews 3.2.

Reason of it is, because servants are stewards, and must give an account of
their task committed to them, as Luke 16.2. both to their masters and to God,
who will find them out, if they be unfaithful.

Contrary unto it, is fraud, deceit, untrustiness, theeuishnesse, etc. In
servants, whereby they bring unto their master hurt and damage.

But not to insist in the general, let us see more particularly, wherein this
faithfulness is required: This is,

1 In regard of their masters goods, in a double respect. 1 In keeping safe all
such goods of their mast^rs, as are committed to their charge; that through
their carelessness and negligence nothing be lost: thus was Joseph faithful,
that his master durst trust him with a^l that he had, Genesis 39. And Jacobs
exampl^ is a worthy pattern for a^l servants, Genesis 31.38, 39. Where also we
see, that if any be impaired, and lost by servants negligence, it does indeed
belong unto them to make it good. That word which the Apostle vs^th, 1 Timothy
6.20. (...), is a metaphor taken from servants.

^or this is the end why they receive them into their homes, and put them in
trust with their goods, themselves being then more secure, and not looking to
them so much as otherwise they would, trusting upon their servants
faithfulness.

Contrary to this, is carelessness in servants, and want of due circumspection,
whereby many times great harm comes to their masters estates; as in not taking
care to their fire and candle, not shutting their doors and windows,
suffering their clothes to be spoyl^d, their meat which is soared, to mould
and spill, contrary to the practice of Christ, Math. 14. and 15. John 6.12. And
for s^ruants in the country, that leave op^n gate^ and gaps, letting in other
men's catte^l to wrong their masters, especially in harvest time, and the like.

2 That they do their best, and uttermost indeauo^ to increase their masters
estates, then they man be the better for them, as Genesis 30.27, 29, 30. Math.
25.20, 22. This must be added to the former; for the servant that did but one^y
keep his Talent, was an unprofitable servant, Math. 25.26.

Contrary to this, is fraud and deceit of servants, in purloyning from their
masters, or detaining from him, that which is due unto him, Tit^^ 2.9. wh^re
the word used, (...), signifies to d^^aine any thing to ones self that
b^longs not to him, and it to put apart to his (...) did, Act. 5.2. wher^^^s
word is lik^wi^^ v^^d. And ^h^s fraud is not only in appa^^nt th^^^, as in
taking money (...) of their masters purs^s, boxes, and coun^^rs, etc. but in
more s^cret pr^ctic^s also: as in pu^ting into their account of expenses, more
than they ought; in l^auing out of their receipts, som^what which they should
hau^ put in, as did that unjust steward, Luke 16.6, 7. whom Christ comm^ndeth
not for his fai^hfu^ne^se, but for his wisdom in pro^iding for himself;
likewi^e, in spending more about their mast^rs busi^^ss^ than ne^d^th; w^^n
they sell a thing for more than their mast^r s^^t^th pric^, to keep that unto
themse^ues, which does inde^^ b^long unto their mast^rs. Also by inu^igli^g
awa^ their ma^t^rs customers against they se^ up th^m^elues. By receiving*
gifts without the^r masters knowledge, etc.

O^i^ct. But some s^ruants will say, My master holds m^e shor^, and k^epes from
m^e my due; therefore I may help my se^fe.

Answ. A sin in thy master cannot excuse a sin it* thee. Did not Laban
wrong Jacob, and deal hardly with him? Yet we see Jacob used no d^ceit to
help himself: but we see how God bl^ss^d him for his faithful service.

2 This faithfulness is required in regard of business committed to them, in
the execution whereof they ought to be faithful. That is, besid^s speediness
and diligence, before spoken of, they must fear the Lord, that their mast^rs
business may prosper under their hands; without whose blessings nothing succeeds
well. Wherefore in servants there is a double bond to tie them to Religion,
pi^^y, and the fear of God, both their own good, in re^pect of themselves, and
also their masters good, which may come by a prosperous success of their
busin^sse; and for this cause, they ought ^o pray for Gods blessing upon their
labors, as did Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.12. and to give thanks for any good
success: as that good s^ruant also did, verse. 2^. This being a mea^e to move
God to continue his bl^ssing another time.

Contrary to this, is irreligion and profaneness in servants, who in stead of
a blessing, bring a cur^e upon their mast^rs family, and ther^by doub^e their
sin, in that they not only d^stroy their own souls, but bring also damage
unto their masters.

3 In respe^t of their masters councels and s^crets that ^hey conceal them: as
Ie^^miah did Z^acki^h^ Ierem. 38.24, 27. This is a property of a faithful
heart, Prou. 11.13.

Provided, that the matter they conce^le, be not to the hurt of the State, the
Church, City, and place wh^re they are, or any particular m^n. Thus did
Jonathan reveal Saul's counsels unto David.

Contrary to this, is a tr^cherous blabbing abroad of such secr^ts as are to be
concealed, Prou. 11.13. and 2^.^9. which is the usual practice of servants
when they meet to^ether, still to be ta^king of hous^-business^, and what is
done at home.

Hither also is to be ref^rred the concealing of the i^firmities of their
masters; and yet nothing more common among servants, tha^ still to be talking
what fault^ such a one ha^h, and such a one, etc.

4 In regard o^ their fellow servants, faithfulness i^ required of them, in
being a good ^xample unto them, by stirring them up by their good co^nsell, to
be faithful and conscio^^^le in their service, and by helpi^g them when the
gr^a^er burd^n is laid upon them.

Contr^^y to (...), when on^ will b^ enticing o^ another from that d^ty which
they owe unto their masters* a^ ma^y s^^bbo^^^ servants, and ^h^ewish maids*
though bu^ one (...) a hou^e, will persuade the rest to (...) against ^he
mast^^, and like (...) sheep, infe^t the whole sto^ke. A^^o q^a^el^i^g one
with another, ^s M^th. ^4.4^ (...) odious and ab^min^b^e of all is it, when
servants shall de^^^e one another ^ and commit vncleaneness^, which, besides
that it is most beastly vice, does moreover br^ng dishonor, shame, grief and
vexation, and great damag^ unto their mast^rs, to the great aggra^ating of the
sin unto such s^ruants.

5 In regard of their masters children, that when they are young, they
(especially maids who commonly hau^ that charge) look unto them lovingly and
tenderly, keep them n^ar^ly and cleanely, and gi^e them their due. And because
chi^dren ar^ most in servants company, to take heed that they le^^n no ill of
them; and when they come to years, to respect them with reverence, not
esteeming of them as their equals, but as of their superiors, being the
children of their masters. So did Abraham's servant call Isaac master, Gen 24.65.

Contrary to this, is when servants are doggish and churlish to the Children.
Let such take heed, lest they get such a custom by it, as that they prove
churlish to their own also. Also sluttishnesse, and further, when by corrupt,
rotten, and evil communication that comes from them, they infect children,
who learn of them to swear, to sing lewd songs, and the like. So it comes
to pass, that many times a man has his children spoiled, even by his
servants, who teach them so much wickedness whilst they are young, that
hardly it can be rooted out a great while after. Again, when servants will
inueigle away the affection of children, either to marry them, as when they
have portions, etc. or to commit uncleanness with them; whereby many times
parents affection is alienated from their children, to dis-inherite them, or
the like. Lastly, when they shall withdraw their portion from them and convert
it to their own use.

6 In regard of the masters bedfellow, his wife, or the mistresses bedfellow,
her husband, that servants do only not entice them, but not yield unto any
enticing of their uncleanness, as Joseph did, Genesis 39.

The contrary to which, we see many times practiced, and what effects have
follow^d thereupon, not only the ali^nating of their affections one from
another but also man^ times, b^oody conspiracies for the death of one anoth^r
the wife plotting with the man, for the death of her husband, and he with the
maid likewise for hers.

7 In regard of their persons and bodies, that when they are in troubl^ and
sick^n^sse, they labor by all means to be helpfu^l unto them; for if they
ought to do all the rest before named, much more ought they to be faithful in
this regard, to have a care of their mast^rs own body.

Contrary to this, is when servants be Iudasses to betray their own masters.

3 The third and last point is, the motives to stir up servants to perform
the former duties.

1 Motive is drawn from the place of their masters, who are in Christ stead:
wherefore in obeying them, they obey Christ, and r^belling against them, they
rebel against Christ.

2 From the place of servants: because in a conscionable performance of their
service unto their masters, they show themselu^s be the servants, ver. 7. and
in this respect, though the place of servants seem but m^ane, yet indeed it is
honorable. To be the servant of the King, is an honorable place: which ought to
be a comfort and encouragement of servants, that they should not think
themselves trodden under foot, and made base; seeing that even by virtue of
this, that they are servants, they are the servants of Christ, 1 Cor. 7.21.

3 From the ground of their subjection, the will of God, which ^s it served for
a direction, so it is also ^ motive to stir up servants to their duty,
because it is the will of God in his Word. This motive is of great moment to
persuade servants to be content with their place of subi^ction in which they
are put, and also faithfully to do their duties, seeing both are the will of
God.

For Gods will is the work wherea^ we ought to time, R^m. 12.2.1 These. 4.3. 1
P^t. 2.15. For Gods will i^ the ground of good; every thing being so far good
as he wills it. It is also a rule, and a p^rfect ru^e, to which if we frame
our actions, we shall be sure not to do amiss. Lastly, it is a sufficient
ru^e; and if we have this warrant that God does will it, we need not fear any
opposition.

Hence (...) follows, 1 That therefore it is no arbitra^y matter to do^, or
not to do; but a matter of necessity of R^l^^ion, Pi^ty and Conscience,
wherein w^e have to do with ^od.

2 That there is no dispensation for them, and therefore (...), although
mast^rs do not require their duty of their servants, as some masters are of
such a nature; yet are they bound in conscience, to perform their duty.

4 The last reason is, ver. 8. drawn from the issue and event that follows
upon their faithful service, viz. the reward: the argument is drawn from Gods
general dealings with all that are faithful in their places; and if every
faithful man be rewarded, then also servants.

Doct. Servants may be sure, that they shall not lose their reward, Col. 3.24.
Thus was Jacob and Joseph rewarded; and those faithful servants, Mat 25. And
this argument, though it be not of greatest force, yet it does most prevail
with us, wher^in God shows his love in he^ping ou^ infirmities, that wher^as
he might of his absolute comm^nd, have req^ired obedience, (...) ^ather
obs^rues what we are mos^ moved with (...), and (...) he seeks to stir us up.
Now if ^^^withstanding ^his, servants be disobedient, they do both dis^onou^,
i^ disobeying his co^mand^m^nts, and do in^^ry to themselves, in d^priuing
thems^lues of such a blessi^g.

This rew^rd is, 1 Temporal, in this lif^: for God moves the heart of their
mast^rs, whom th^^ have s^rued, to recomp^nce their pains: as of King
A^ashu^^^sh for Mord^cas, ^ste^ 8.15. who had served ^im faithfully. So Mat 14
47. and 25.21. In the parab^^ o^ the (...). Or (...), if their masters (...)
hard and unkind, ^od w^^l move other to reward them: as Joseph, who had but an
(...) recompense of his master, God moved first the ^aylor to d^ale kindl^ with
him: and afterward the King himself to aduanc^ him highly. Or 3 it neither
t^eir master* (...) others regard th^^, God himself does gi^e a secret
blessing, as unto Jacob: and this more-ou^r, that they having been themselves
faithful, God stirs up their own servants to be faithful to them. Luke 7 38.

2 Spiritual: (...) all other fail, yet there is a recomp^nce of reward, ^iz.
an inheritance in heaven, Col. 3.24. ^ph^s. 1.18. Mat. 25.21, 23. Romans 2.7. And
this were enough, although there were no other reward, 2 Cor. 4.17. Yea, all
their pains and labor are not worthy of such a reward. This sweetens all
their labor, and makes it seem easy and light, as it did unto Jacob.

EPHESIANS. 6, Verse. 9. And, ye masters, do the same things unto them* putting
away thr^atnings: and know that even your Master also is in heau^n, neither is
there respect of persons with him.


WE are now come to the last order in the family, viz. of masters, which
although it be last, according to the Apostles order, is in dignity the chief.
But the Apostle first sets down the orders of inferiority; to show, that the
duties of subjection are hard^r to be p^rform^d, then those of government and
authority.

For the meaning of the words, it is thus: By masters, are meant all that have
authority over particular persons* that are att^ndant unto t^em* whether they
be chief, or such as being vn^^r others, have servants under them.

( Them) that is, to ^eruant^, before m^ntion^d. ( Do the same things) This
se^meth a strange phrase. What may some sa^, must mast^rs ob^^ an^ reverence
their se^uant^, etc? No, t^is may be^ vnd^rstood,

1 With r^^^rence to (...) duti^^ aforegoing, namely, not unto thos^ proper
duti^s that b^long to s^ruants, but to those common rul^s of equity, that
belong both to mas^^rs and ^^ruants, as to do^ a^l things in simplicity of
(...), etc.

2 Or to the v^rs. imm^diatly afor^going, that being a general ^u^e belonging
to all sorts, to do the good thing that belongs unto them, in their place and
calling.

3 Without reference: and so it is meant of a mutual, reciprocal, and
proportio^all duty that ought to pass between them; that is, in general,
that duties are to be perform^d of both one to the other, asw^ll masters to
servants, as o^ servants to masters.

All these do not cross one another, but (...) a common equity between
masters and serua^^^* a mutual duty though not an equality. This is ^xpr^^sed
by the Apostle, Col. 4.1. And this is expr^ss^d, to meet with a conceit of
many masters, that thi^k^ inde^d their servants are bo^nd to them: but that
th^m^^lues are not tied to their servants, (...) to s^eke the good of their
servants (...) gou^^nment as well as servants are to seek their mast^rs by
the^r obedience.

( Putting away threatening) not that this is simply a vic^, and so forbid^^n:
for it is lawful, and sometim^ to be used, but the exc^ss^ is ^o^bidd^n. The
reason of mentioning of this vice of mast^rs rath^r then any other, is,

1 Because men in authority, are exceeding given by nature to this vice,
thinking that their authority is not shown, unless they be rigorous. Thus are
husbands forbidden to be bitter to their wives, ^ol. 3.19. And also Fath^rs to
provoke their childr^n, ver. 4.

2 Because Infidels and heathen men thoug^t they had an absolute power over
servants, of life and death; th^rfore lest these newly converted to
Christianity, should re^aine any such conceit, he bidde^h them forbear rigor.

But for the furth^r meaning of the word, we are to consid^r, that by
th^eatning is m^ant a^l rigor in thoughts, count^nance, looks, word and
actions: so that by forb^aring of it, all excess is forbidden: as 1 In
continuance, when masters shall be too frequent in correcting upon every
occasion. 2 In measure, when the^ are furious, fierce and violent. 3 In
execution, not always to execute punishment, if there be repentance, an^ hope
of am^ndm^nt. In all these, m^sters are to moderate their threatening.

Furth^rmore, under the forbidding of this vice, the contrary virtue is
commanded, viz. Gentleness and mildness.

( Know ye) here follows the reason, which the Apostle takes for a matt^r
granted; therefore he says* Know y^e.

Your master) Some copies have both yours and th^irs. Very, fitly for the
senc^, bu^ the particle (...), Even, does imply as much. The argument is drawn
from the place of the masters subjection, that they have not an absol^te
autho^ity, but are under the authority of anoth^r Mast^r, to whom they must
give an account, and therefore to take h^ed, lest if they p^rforme not their
own duties, the^ provoke this their Master to wrath. Now He is d^scrib^d, 1 By
the place where he is: in heaven) Which implies, 1 That he is higher, than the
highest, so that all are under him, Eccles. 5.7. Psalm 33.15. (...) 15.3. that
h^e sees and does take no^ice o^ all* (...) that h^ is an Almighty God, able
to ex^cut^ ven^^^nce on all such as oppress others, Psalm. 113.4, 5. Deuteronomy.
24.14.2. His property: that he is no accepter of persons. The Hebrew word is
Face. and so signifi^th the Greek, (...). Now the face is out ward, but God
does behold the heart, 1 Samuel 16.15. and by person i^ Scripture is meant, the
outward quality and condition of men, in regard of greatness^, mean^nesse,
superiority, or inf^riority, etc. as Job 34.19. which things though men
respect, yet God does not. This phrase is taken from such as sit in judgment,
who must respect the cause only: for whatsoever is beside it, is called ^erson;
and ther^fo^e did the Ar^opagitae judge in the dark, etc.

This is noted to me^te with another conceit of mast^rs, that might think,
that God would respect them being great, and in place of authority, rather than
their s^ruants who were mean and base. Having seen the meaning of the words,
it follows to handle them in order. The sum of them is a direction for
masters, how to carry themselves toward their servants. The parts are two: 1
The duties to be performed. 2 The reasons to urge them.


Concerning the duties, we are to consider, 1 The ground of them, that masters
do owe a duty. ( Do the same thing.) 2 The duties themselves in their
several branches.

1 Ground. Doct. That masters do owe a duty even to their servants: a point
clear by the Law of God* as the precepts given unto masters he^re, and in
other places do t^stifie; and by the Law of nature: for this is one of those
bonds of ministration which are spoken of. Whereby we are bound as well to do
good to others, as to receive good from them: like as the members of the body
do one to another. B^ the Law of nations: for wise States have always from
time to time ordained Laws for to curb and restrain masters, by equity: for
good received, r^quires good to be done again. And lastly, by the Law of the
Land. In Indentures the mast^r is bound to the servant, as well as he to his
master.

Use is for masters to take notice of this, That seeing in general servants
are no more bound to them than they to their servants; therefore to be careful
for the performance of their own duty, as they would look for duty from
their servants; and to consider if the failing of their servants in their
duties, arise not from the neglect of their own in themselu^s.

2 For minist^rs, that they be not partial in urging these duties, but pr^sse
them upon the masters, as well as on the servants: and the rather, because
there are not such outward means to constrain masters to perform their
duties, as there are for servants.

2 The dut^es may all be referred to two heads: the first whereof concerns
the choice of servants, the second, the good gou^rnement of them.

1 For the choice: the duty is, that masters be careful to choose such
servants as be good: such was the care of David, Psalm. 101.6. And if this care
be in masters, it shows plainly that they have a care to the good both of
their family, and of Church and Commonwealth; whereof the family is the
seminary. 2 This will be a means, that masters shall receive more good from
their s^ruants: as also do more good unto them. 3 It shows, that masters have
as great a care to have their servants about t^em good, as to have any thing
else good whatsoever. Directions for the choice of good servants are these.

1 That they choose servants that fear the Lord: as David did, Psalm. 101 6.
for Piety and Religion is the ground of r^u^rence, of obedience, of
faithfulness, and a^l other duties. 2 Such servants will pray for a blessing
on their masters business. 3 And also they bring the blessing of God with them
upon the family.

2 That they choose such as be fit for that work wh^^eunto they will put them.
This moo^^d Saul to choose David for h^s s^rua^^, 1 Samuel 16.18.

3 To choo^e (...) as they may (...) choosi^g of them, sh^wes a work of
char^ty; (...) ar^ poo^e and h^lpelesse: for this will b^ a mo^iu^ to m^k^ t^^m
to ^e dili^ent and s^^uiceable to their m^st^rs, because they depend only vp^n
them, and know not what course to tak^ else. Now* a^though we may be d^ceiued
notwithstanding all thi^, yet must we not be d^ceiu^d willingly, but use
circumspection, and tak^ trial of them before w^ enter into cou^nant with
th^^, as Laban, with Jacob, Genesis 29.14.

Contrary is the pra^tice of such, who choose wicked and prophan^, swearing and
swaggering servants, or popish, etc and so bring a curse and snare upon their
family, and a plague to inf^ct their children, and the r^st of their family: ^o
regarding neither it, nor Church, nor Commonwealth.

2 Of such as will choose none but rich men's sons, that may bring a great
portion with them, who indeed prove most unserviceable of all other, scorning
to do any work, etc. whereas poor men's sons, knowing they must trust to
their trade, will be diligent, etc.

2 Concerning their good government, and authority over them: it is seen in
two points.

1 That they have a care to maintain and countenance their authority, 1 Timothy
3.4. For that may be applied to masters; and this is a commendatio^ of the
Centurion, Ma^h. 8.9.

Reason is, 1 A master by virtue his ^^ace does carry the Image of God;
therefore to maintain his authority, is to magnify Gods Image, and ^o honor
him; and the contrary is ^o defac^ this Image.

2 This is a sp^cia^l m^anes to have more diligent service perform^d b^ the^r
servants, toward themselves.

3 As of ^oi^g ^ore good unto their servants.

Directio^s how this may be performed* are,

1 That they carry themselves worthy of their calling, and answerable unto it,
by having a special care to their own duties, to perform them faithfully,
that so they may be a pattern and example to their servants, 1 Timothy 4.12. For
this will gain honor to them, as it did to I^b, Job 29.89. So David says, he
will walk in integrity in the midst of his house.

2 To keep servants in awe and fear. That evil servant was kept in awe,
though he made no good use of it, Math. 25.25. yet is it noted for a
commendation of his master.

3 What they do, to do it with authority and gravity: as did the Centurion,
Math. 8. Tit. 2.15.

Contrary is that of those, who carry themselves basely, and abiectly in their
house before their servants, being vain, foolish, wicked, etc. This makes
servants to contemn and to despise them. This made Michol despise David who in
her conceit had debased himse^fe, 2 S^^. 6.20. And herein Da^id offended in
too much mourning for his son, 2 Samuel 19.5, etc.

2 Of such as carry themselves too remissely, praying their servants; as
Prithee do this, etc. And if it be not done, th^n patience, and do it
them^^lues. Th^s, ^^ough toward equ^^s it be gentleness, yet in such as are
in authority, (...) is baseness.

3 Of such as make their servants their fellows, and companions to play with
them, to drink with them, and the like; whereby they become very presumptuous;
for all are ambitious, and, give an Inch, they take an Ell.

4 Of such as conspire with their servants, to deceive their masters or
mistresses of their goods: so to ride abroad and spend, and do other things
without their priuity; for hereby they make themse^ues slaves to their servant,
snot daring to speak of their servants wickedness, for fear lest they
discover their own practices.

5 When masters will suffer themselves to be ouer-ruled in things unjust,
unmeet and unlawful: as Zedek^ah was by the Princes, Ierem. 38.5. Thus they
lose their authority, and their servants become their mast^rs: a thing
intolerable, E^cles. 10.7.

6 In the other extreme, when men are too imperious and rigorous, that servants
dare scarce appear in their pr^sence* but are glad when they are from them:
this was Daui^s fault, when his word prevailed, 2 Samuel chap. 24. and of
churlish Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.17. Much unlike to I^b, chap. ^1.13. or Naaman, 2
King. 5.13. whose servants perswad^d them.

The second point is in well managing of their authority. This consists in
two things expressed, Col. 4.1. Masters, give unto your servants that which is
just and equal. Just, respects the place and work of servants, and therefore
it is to be done to all. Equal, respects the mind of the servant, when he
does service with good will, in singleness of heart, in absence as in
presence, etc. Here must be (...) equity, to love them, to recompense them
somewhat above that which the Law requires.

This Justice respects, 1 The soul of the servant, 2 The bod^, 3 His estate.
In all th^se, masters are bound by justice to do good unto them.

1 Touching their soul: ^he duty of masters is to instruct their servants in
the ways of sa^uation: as Abraham, Genesis 18.19. Thus did Joshua, chap. 24. and
Zacheus; Therefore Christ said, Salvation is come to his house, because he
knew, that Zacheus being now conu^rted, would instruct his servants. So John
4.53. the servants be^eeu^d, though they saw not the miracle, because the
Centurion instructed them in faith. So A^ts 10.2. and 16.34. in this regard is
there said to be a Church in the house of Aquila and Priscill^* and of ^hilemon.

This ought to be performed, 1 In regard of God, who commanded. 2 Of
thems^lues: their office requir^s it: for masters are as well Priests and
Prophets to pr^y for, and to instruct their family, as Kings to govern it. And
further, this will be a means that they shall have more faithful service, if
they can plant Religion in the hearts of their servants. 3 Of servants; for if
the master will do any good for his servant, this is the great^st good he can
do: and so if it be truly wrought in the servant, he will acknowledge he
could not have received a greater good. 4 Of Church and Commonwealth; for being
faithful in the family, they will be faithful in the other also: and this
also will make them to instruct their own servants another day.

Dire^tions are, 1 That there be daily instruction, information and
ctaechizing; and if this course continue, though it be but a little at a time,
yet great profit and increase of knowledge will come thereby.

2 To cause them to come to the p^blique m^nistery of the Word, Exodus 34.23.
Thus Christ came to the Temple and Synagogue with his Disciples, who were his
servants and attendants on him: So did Cornelius, Act. 10.33. We are all here,
etc. And this is expressly commanded in the 4 Commandment: for this will
strengthen their faith, when they hear those things publicly taught, which
they have learned in private.

3 And as to come to the Church, so also to cause them to tarry there.

4 To pray for them, that both the private and public means may be ^ffectuall.

Contrary is, 1 The practice of most masters, whose conceit is, that they are
not bound unto this duty, but if they pay them their wages, etc. it is enough.
They will object, Why? we made no such covenant with them to catechize them,
and the like.

Answ. There is a double bond w^ereby they are bound unto their servants. 1 Of
compact and covenant. And thus wages, etc. is due to servants. 2 Of their place
and office, what it is that God requires at their hands. And thus they have
couenanted no such thing with servants, yet must they instruct them, because
God has command^d, and their off^ce r^quireth it.

2 They fail herein, who lay so much work upon their servants, that they can
have no time for religious exercis^s.

3 Thos^ that k^^pe their s^ruants from Church, and send them hi^her and
thither on the Sabbath day.

4 Such as make fe^^ts in their houses on the Sabbath day. And h^nce it is,
that in many hous^s, inferior offic^rs ^r go to Church, but once in a ye^re
to rec^^^e.

5 Those that ^re so long a dressing, etc. tha^ the^ come to C^u^ch in no time;
their s^ruants also tending on them.

6 Such as will have their servants attend on them to the Church, but th^n they
man go whither they will, so they com^ when service is done, to bring them
home again.

7 Such as never examine them how they profit, etc.

For their body. 1 In health; the duty is to allow them that which is meet for
the preservation of h^a^th, as to a^ford them food: for quantity; su^ficient,
for quality, wholesome, man's m^at; as we say, for time seasonable. 2 Apparel
n^cessary against heat and cold, and also dec^nt and comely. 3 For labor,
that it be moderate, not too much to oppr^sse them. 4 To allow them r^st at
those two ordinary times, the night, and on the Sabbath day.

Contrary is, when masters regard not their servants health, but care not how
they use them in all the former points.

2 In sickness, to provide things needful for them; to use the best means of
recovery; and if they die, to bury them according to their place.

For their estate. The 1 duty is, That masters pay unto servants their wages.
Here is requir^d, 1 that their wages be according to equity, sufficient for
them to provide things necessary. 2 That it be paid in season, at the time
couenant^d, yea in kindn^sse, if need be, beforehand. 3 To pay it with the
most.

Contrary is, 1 When as masters unjustly detain their servants wages, and
never pay them; this is a crying sin. 2 When they ^oath to pay it, and long
in holding it back, that servants must ask, and ask again, till they be
ashamed. 3 When they alter their servants wages, and seek to diminish them: as
Laban did toward Jacob.

2 Duty is, so to dispose of their servants and order them, that after their
time is out, they may live of themselves: and therf^re, 1 to keep them still
employed. 2 In such things, as may be profitable to them hereafter. 3 To use
inspection over them, to see that they perform their duty. 4 To suffer them to
set up after their time is out.

Aberrations are, 1 When the master has no car^ for the time, and so harbors
Idle-packes in his house, that have no employment. 2 Such as envy to their
servants the mystery of their trade. 3 Such as will use all means to hinder
their servants from setting up of themselves, indeauouring to keep them still
servants as long as they live.

Equity (the second point) is shown in this, that mast^rs do distinguish and
put a difference between^ good and bad servants; and if they be good indeed,
to respect them accordingly, and to have them in price and good est^eme, to
commend them, to recompense them, to pass by and wink at an offense; when
they are going away, not to suffer them to go away empty, but to help them in
their setting up and in their marriage.

Contrary is, when masters make all alike, yea, a servant that has been a
long time good and faithful unto them, at his going away, they will pick a
quarrel against him, and so turn him away with nothing.

In regard of the power that masters have, this is their duty, That they keep
within comp^sse of their power, not to go beyond it; as not to command a^ything
vn^awfull or unmeet, in regard o^ the a^e, s^x^, condition, or conscience of
their servants, or any thing that may end^nger their life: for they have no
power over it. 3 That the master let his servant b^e free in his marriage, not
enforcing him to take one or other. 4 In putting him off to another master
(which he has power to do) that the master be careful to make choice of
such a one as should d^ale with him, as himself would have done, that this
change may be for the good of the servant.

Contrary aberrations be: 1 When the master makes his will a rule. 2 When he
shall cause the untimely death of his servant, not only by open murder, but by
being an occasion to bring him within danger of the law: or by thrusting him to
maintain quarrels, or so beating of him, that death do follow. 3 When he
shall enforce marriage upon his servants. 4 To pass them over to men ungodly
and wicked, either of no calling, or of an unlawful calling.

And know even your Master also, etc. Having finished the duties, there comes
in the next place to be considered, the Reasons to move masters to perform:
which are laid down in these words. The argument in general, is drawn from
that place of sub^ection wherein masters are, and it is amplified by
circumstances. 1 Employed, viz. that the Master of masters is a common Master
both to masters and servants. ( Even your.)

2 Expressed. 1 Of the place wherein this Master is, viz. heaven. 2 Of a
property belonging to him, that he is no respecter of persons.

Doct. They who are masters, have a Master: this is notably set forth by
Joseph, Genesis 50.19. (...) under, or in stead, Eccl^s. 5 8. In this respect he
is called, as Deu. 10.17. 1 Timothy 6.15.

Reason is, because man is prone to insolency; and if he were not under
authority, he would grow intolerable: for this cause, God retains in his
hand, a power, authority, and command over him.

V^e. (...) main^ use int^nd^d by the Apostle, is, that as se^uants should do^
their duti^^ to their masters, which they r^quire: so mast^rs should do those
duties to their servants, which God r^quires at their hands.

2 This is also a ground to restrain mast^rs that they do nothing to their
servants, but what they will justify before their great Mast^r. This moved
Joseph to let go his brethren, when h^e had them in hold, Genesis 42.18. and
Nehemiah to deal well with the people, Neh. 5.14, 15. and I^b, chap. 31.13,
14. Wherefore masters are to think of this, when they exact any thing of their
servants that is not fit; when they are furious and incensed against them: when
they detain any thing from them, and opp^^sse them, let them then think how
the^ will justify this, when their greater Master shall call them to account.

Doct. 2 Mast^rs and servants have both one, and the same Master. Mal. 2.10.
Job 31.15. 1 Cor. 7.22. Whence it follows, That howsoever for orders sake and
good of outward government, there is a difference between masters and
servants, yet in respect of God, they are both as fellow-seruants: as appears
by comparing of Luke 18.42. with M^t. 24.49.

This serves further to curb and brid^e the insolency of masters, and it
aggrauates greatly their cruelty toward their servants.

The place where this Master is, is heaven; because there and from thence, he
does manifest his glory after a sp^ciall and peculiar manner; the reasons why
it is here expressed are, 1 To show that this Mast^r is a master of great
glory, excellency and majesty, so that there is no proportion between him and
masters here on earth, Psalm. 113.4. 2. To show that the eyes of the Lord are
upon all his servants: as one in a high place may easily behold all things
below, Psalm. 11.4 and 33.13. and the reason of this, Psalm. 102.2^.

3 To show his might and power in rewarding, and rendering vengeance. Psalm.
123.1. ( as an argument) Eccles. 5.8.

All these may be so many motives, to urge and press the duties of masters 1
If God be so g^orious and excellent, how then ought masters to r^sp^ct him, and
the rather to be moved to perform their duties unto their servants: as we see
the s^ruants of great men, and Noble men, are most dutiful and r^ady in their
service? 2 Let no masters deceive themselves in this conceit, that whatsoever
they do to their servants, is within their own house, no body sees them, and
their servants dare not complain: For God is in heaven, and he beholds them,
Prou. 15.3. 3 God not only sees them, but he will take vengeance of them; and
this vengeance will be heavy, as coming from God; therefore this ought to move
them to deal gently with their servants.

Doct. 3 From Gods property. This great Lord and Master is not moved with any
outward respect, but is a just, vnchangeab^e and vnpartia^l Judge, Job 34.19.
for there is no passion in God, nor alteration of affection, Job 10.4.

Use is to teach masters to shake off all vain hopes and pretenses, that God
will respect them more than their servants, because they are great, and have
friends, etc. their servants are but base and mean, etc. 2 This is for
imitation of Magistrates accordingly to carry themselves. 3 It teaches
mi^isters not to urge or to keep close matters in respect of persons, but
impartially to press the duties of all sorts.

Further, mark the inference of this reason upon the duty: the Apostle bids
them forbear threatening, because they have a Master that is over them. Whence
observe that ignorance of that place of subie^tion wherein we are, and of that
authority under which we are, makes us insolent and cruel. This appears in
Pharaoh, who was cruel to the Israelites, because he knew not God, Exodus 5.2.
and Sennac^e^^b, 2 Kings 18.33, 34, 35. because men conceit they have an
absolute authority. This is the ground of pride in That man of sin, 2 These.
2.4.

Now, whereas the Apostle, in setting down the duty of masters, brings such
a strong reason to move them, and yet in the duties of husbands and wives,
parents and children, does not so: the reason is, because in husbands and
parents there is a natural love and affection, which does move them; but in
masters there is no such thing: and therefore he lays down a thundering
reason, bringing them to the Iudgement-seate of God, so to terifie them.

EPHESIANS. 6. VER. 10, 11. Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might.

Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the
assaults of the devil.


THe sum of these words, is an exhortation to Christian spiritual courage
and fortitude. The parts are

1 An exhortation to a duty.

2 A direction showing the means for the performance of that duty.

In the exhortation, consider we the manner, and the matter. The manner is in
these words, Finally, my brethren. Wherein note, 1 The necessity of the matter,
which the Apostle exhorts unto: in the word ( Finally) (...), 2 The affection
of the Apostle, (my brethren.)

1 Finally.) As if the Apostle should have said, I have instructed you in the
former part of my Epistle, in all points necessary to be known and bel^^ued,
saying down both the genera^l duties of all, and the particular duties that
belong to every one in his calling, and particular place; yet is a remainder,
even this one thing, which I will now deliver unto you, without which, all that
has been formerly delivered, will be but unprofitable, and of no use. Hence
we learn,

1 That though we be never so well instructed in the general and particular
duties belonging unto us, yet it is necessary that we should be further
exhorted to courage and constancy; a point which the Apostle observes in his
Epistles, as 2 These. 3.13. 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Timothy 4.5, etc. adding exhortations to
the performance of duties before delivered.

Use, which we are to make, and is here intended by the Apostle, is that we
should give diligent heed to that which is hereafter to be delivered, because
by it, all things before will be made profitable.

2 In that the Apostle lays down these things in the last place, bringing
them unto the ground of h^lpe, where they must s^eke for ability to perform
the former duties: We may hence learn, that we have no fre^ will to do them
of our selves: for here the Apostle shows us the means whereby we are
enabled to do them: which note against the Papists.

2 M^b^ethren) The Apostle calls the Ephesians in a spiritual respect; in
regard of God, who had adopted them all for children. Herein note,

1 The humility of the Apostles mind. 2 The gentlen^sse of his affection.

His humility appears, in that he makes them all equal unto himself, 1 Cor.
3.1. For brethren, is a word of equality: so that although himself were an
Apostle, a chief Apostle, a planter of the Churches, a father of thousands,
and in particular, a planter of this Church, and father unto them; yea, (which
is to be noted) though he write to all sorts, even to children and servants;
yet nevertheless, in regard of that prerogative that God had given them to be
his children, he calls them all brethren. That this is a good collection,
appears by Mat. 23.8. where Christ reproouing the arrogance of the Scribes and
Pharisees that took other Titles, and magnified themselves above other,
bringing this reason, ( ye are all brethren,) Heb. 2.11.

Use. That we take this for an example of humility, Romans 12.16. for this
humility is a virtue that commends us to God and man, making us sociable, and
keeping us from disdain and contempt, etc.

2 He labors by Love to persuade them to these duties, though he might have
commanded them: as Philemon verse. 8, 9. for brethren is a token of love, and
this word ( my) ads an emphasis to his affection: So 1 Cor. 15.58. he calls
them beloved brethren: and so Phil. 4.1. James 1.19. and 2 Cor. 6.13. Gal.
4.10. 1 Cor. 4 14. he calls them children, all to insinuate himself, the
better to persuade them to those things he aims at.

Use. For our imitation, that we do testify, and manifest our love and
gentleness, that our persuasions may have the more force, and be the better
embraced, and like sour pills covered with sugar, the more willingly
received. 2 Note here the difference of the spirit of the world, in respect of
Christ: for they scorn this name of brethren. So much for the manner.

The matter of the exhortation is in these words, Be strong) which is meant of
a spiritual strength and courage.

Doct. Valor and courage, is needful for the performance of all Christian
duties. This was commanded to Joshua, Josh. 1.6. Which, that it is not meant by
an outward bodily courage, but of a spiritual, appears by the verses
following, 7.8, 9. David urges this to Solomon, when he went about to build
the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 28.10. This resolution was in Christ, Luke 9.51. and in
Paul, Acts 21.13.

Reasons. This is needful, in regard,

1 Of our own disposition, dullness and backwardness to Christian duties: for
w^ carry flesh about us, which draws back^ like a Bear coming to the stake.

2 Of the manifo^d oppositio^^ against us: for Satan is still at our elbow,
^ach. 3.1. 1 These. 2.18. Thus when Christ did addr^ss^ himself to my work: as
to his ministry, he wa^ tempted by the devil, Math. 4. to his passion; first
Peter sought ^o hinder him, Math. 16.22. and then the devil, John. 14.30. All
which were done in the Head, to show what is done in the members, 1 Pet. 5.8.
Furthermore, there are reproaches, disgraces, pleasures of this world, and
troubles and the like, that stand in our way.

Use. To reprove the security of Christians, that think not on these things;
and therefore never seek for strength: whence it comes to pass, that although
they know what is to be done, and assent unto it, yet when they come to
perform many things, they do them coldly and slightly, and are quickly turned
away from their Christian course for small matt^rs; for a nickname: as of
Puritan, etc. Much unlike David, 2 Samuel 6.22. Thus are they drawn sometimes
to do^ many things, wherein their consciences condemn them. Better it were for
such, that they had never given up their name unto Christ; for none that are
timorous, may fight the Lords battles, Judge. 7.3. for by their timorousness,
they discourage others, disgrace their brethren, and give vantage to the devil.

2 It is to teach us to get Christian resolution, to say with our selves, This
is the way, and I will walk in it. And to this end, to observe that point of
wisdom, prescribed by Christ, Luke 14.27, 28. etc. Prou. 28.1. So much for
the exhortation.

The direction concerns the means whereby we come to be made strong; which
means are twofold.

1 Such as we are to get out of our selves, verse. 10

2 Such as we are to get unto our selves, verse. 11.

The means out of our s^^nes, are in the^e words, ( In the Lord) Which shows
that the valor and courage that we have, is hid in the Lord, and from him to
be had, 2 Cor. 3.5. Ioh. 15.3. Phil. 4 13. Col. 1.11. The reasons why God
retains all power unto himself, are,

1 Partly for his ow^e glory, that ^ee may be depended upon, pra^s^d,
glorified, and sought unto.

2 Partly for our greater comfort, that we may b^ the more bold and
courageous; for our strength is but finite, and so might we fall away, as did
Adam and the Angels; but now the strength whereon we rely, is not in our
selves, but in God: so that we may boldly rest on this Omnipotency and
Almighty power.

Use. for reproof of two sorts of men. 1 Proud Traitor^ that trust to
themselves, and their own strength. This is a thing even in worldly matters and
outward strength intolerable: as in Goliath and Sennache^^b; and we see what
was the issue of their presumption: but much more in regard of spiritual^
str^ngth, as in Peter: for such provoke the Lord to l^aue t^em, yea, to oppose
himself against them: this confidence in their own strength, being a thing
derogatory to his glory.

2 Of foolish, that b^ing weak themselves, will seek for help of weak
mea^^s: as the Israelites did of Egypt, themselves being ^mpty, they se^ke to
broken pits, and come back ashamed: as Ier. 14.3. Thus do our silly Papists,
that seek help of creatures, of Saints and Angels; wh^r^as all the strength
that these had, was but only sufficient for themselu^s.

2 For instruction. 1 That we learn to renounce and deny our selves, and for
this end to labor to come to a sight of our want of help; for if we think
that of our selves we are able to do any thing, we will never seek to God:
as Psalm. 1^ 4. Wherefore we must endeavor to see our own (...), impotency and
emptiness, how we are nothing in our selves: For 1 this will be a m^anes to
bring us to seek for help. 2 It will be a means to obtain help; for God
strengthens them that are weak, etc.

2 That having seen our own w^akenesse, we then f^ie unto God our sure Rock,
and then may we be secure of victory and conquest, if we cast all upon him,
and ma^e him our Champion, 1 Cor. 15.57.

For our further encouragement, mark the amplification ( In the power of his
might.)

Some take these as for a cause, and the effect, viz. might to be the cause of
power, power to be meant of strength which is in us, and might to be in the
Lord: as if he had said, In that power which ye receive from the Lord. But 1
this is a curious distinction without ground. 2 It is the Apostles purpose
here, to raise up our minds out of our selves, to a higher power without us,
and above us: Wherefore it is rather an Hebraisme, and so it is translated by
some ( his mighty power:) like as in the 1 chapter ver. 19. So that it adds an
emphasis, showing this power of the Lord to be a most Almighty power.

Doct. That the power of God whereto we trust, ^s a strong and mighty power,
able to protect and defend us, as chapter 1.19. a surpassing measure of power,
as himself is, so ever is agreeable to him, viz. infinite.

Use. It serves for our encouragement to strengthen our faith, that we may
trust securely unto it: which is to be noted. 1 In regard of our own
weakness. ^ In regard of our enemies, who are many and mighty.

2 It answers that objection of our adversaries, that blame our Christian
confidency, as arrogant presumption. This were indeed so, if we did rely upon
our own strength. Such an opinion had some of David's confidency, 1 Samuel 17.28,
37.

Now follows the Direction concerning such means as we are to seek unto our
selves, expressed, ver. 11. Wherein in general are laid down those means
whereby we may be fenced, and armed against our spiritual enemies. The parts
are two.

1 A Direction. 2 Motives drawn from the end.
In the Direction observe, 1 What is the means, viz Armor. 2 How this means
is to be used. Put it on. In the means note. 1 The Metaphor, ( Armor.) 2 The
quality of it, ( of God)

Concerning the Metaphor, it is taken from soldier^ that are among their
enemies, either fighting, or looking for a combat, who for fear of being
wounded, will arm themselves; and being armed, they dare resist their enemies,
and fear them not: so Christians, being the Lords soldiers, placed in this
world, the Lords field, to fight against many enemies, that have many weapons
to wound us, this armor is lent unto them, wherewith they may be fenced, etc.
The parts of which armor are in brief, the sanctifying graces of Gods holy
Spirit, as we shall see hereafter.

Hence we learn, 1 That,

Doct. The life of a Christian is a warfare, 2 Timothy 2. ^. 1 Timothy 1.18.
Christians are called soldiers, and their life, a fight and battle, 2 Timothy 4.7
Those that oppose against us, are called enemies, Luke 1.71, 74. Their
tentations are called assaults and fights, as here, and 1 Pet. 2.11. And hence
is the distinction of militant and triumphant Church.

Now God has thus disposed of us. 1 That his power might be the more
manifest. 2 That he might make trial of the grace bestowed on ^s. 3 To wea^e
us from the world, for a soldiers life is a hard life. 4 To make heaven the
more welcome to us.

Use, is that, 2 Timothy 2.4. not to entangle our selves with the t^ings o^ th^^
wo^^d, o^ to look^ for case and quiet, but it ^ll to pr^par^ o^r ^elu^s (...) a
sight, and to ^ake heed of spiritual ^^c^rity, (...) the d^uill o^ a sudd^n
do surprise us. W^e know what b^fell the people of Laisi^, Iu^g. 18.

(...). 2 In that the graces of God are compared to ^^mour, w^e le^rn^, th^^
the (...) san^tifying graces that God g^ues v^, are for our d^fence and
saf^gard; whence we ^ee,

1 How needful they ar^ for us.

2 That this kind of armor is not for pride, but it is a^mour of proof^, for
(...) ^^c^ssary def^nce.

The quality of this armor is, that it is armor of God: that is, made of God
in heaven, pre^crib^d by God in his Word* given of God by his Spirit, and such
armor as is agreeable to Gods nature. All which im^ly nothing ^lse, but that
it is spiritual armor.

Doct. The armor wher^by we are fenced, is divine and spiritual armor, 2
Cor. 10.4. This will appear by the description of the parts.

For, 1 There is no warrant to use any other armor.

2 No other armor will do us any good to defend us, because our enemies and
their weapons are spiritual.

Use. 1 For reproof of Papists, that think to drive away the devil, with
holy water, crosses, etc.

2 Of sottish worldlings, that feeling terror of conscience, think to drive
it away with mu^icke, with company, with physic, etc.

3 It teaches us rightly to distinguish between armor and armor, and to use
that which the Word of God does set down unto us.

Another quality, whereby this armor is described, is in this word ( whole) or
Complete, (...), which signifies such an armor, as is sufficient to de^end a
man, and to arm him from top to toe, so that he shall not need any
more,.Hence we learn, that

Doct. The graces of Gods Spirit are sufficient for us, to d^fend us from all
dangers whatsoever, till he bring us to heaven. Hence is Scripture called
sufficient, because it does set forth unto us all those graces, whereby we are
mad^ absolute and perfect, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.

(...). But many Saints have been foiled (as David. Peter, etc.) the devil
has found a hole where to wound them, and therefore it seems they had no
complete armor.

Ans. This comes to pass, not through any defect in the armor, but through
their own weakness, and want of skill in using of it, or carelessness in not
putting it on: yet that this armor is complete, and no piece wanting for any
part, appears plainly in this: That all were not wound^d in the same place,
but some in one part, and some in another, according as they did use, or not
use their armor, for the defense of that place; but if they had been all
foiled in one part, it were a sign that there were a piece wanting for that
part. For hereby, 1 We should deny Gods providence, that he were not careful
to provide all things needful. 2 That he is wise, to know what is wanting. 3
That he is careful of his children, th^s to lea^^ the^ as a pr^y to their
enemi^s

Use. To stir us up to seek after this armor: as soldiers that being to
enter into a dangerous skirmish, will aforehand s^^ke where they may provide
themselu^s of sure armor.

2 Having found it, to be content with it, to be bold and couragi^^s i^ it:
as David was against Goliath, 1 Samuel 1^.45. So much of the means.

The Use is in this, that we must put it on: Which implies 2 things. 1 That
this a^mour must be put on.

2 That it must be put on every piece and part of it. ( Put on the whole.)

He follows the metaphor still; that we must do as soldiers do, who put
their armor upon their backs, and let it not like housekeepers in time of
peace, hang by the walls and rust. So by this putting off this spiritual
armor, is meant a using and employing of the graces, that it is not sufficient
to know were this armor is to be had if need be, and where it is laid up,
and so to discourse of it; but this putting on, is a word of action and practice.

Doct. 1 Christians ought to exercise the graces of God, and to put them in
trial and practice, Romans 13.12. 1 These. 5.8. C^l. 3 12. viz. show it, let
others feel that thou have the bowels of mercy, Romans 13.14. viz. make Christ
his merits, and his graces yours. Another metaphor is used to this end, 2 Timothy
1.6. (Stir up the gift) taken from fire which, must be blowed, before it can
burn and flame, that we may receive heat. Also another metaphor, Mat. 12.35.
a man that has great treasure, and let it not lie still rusting and cancring,
but bring it forth to the good of himself and others.

The reason is, Because all the good that comes unto us from the graces of God,
is by the use of them. So though pearls, money, etc. be good in themselves,
yet they bring no benefit to the possessor of them, if they be laid up in the
treasury and be not brought forth.

Use. That we do not deceive our selves, boasting that we have armor, and
yet never use any: as many will say, they have as strong a faith as any, yet
do they not live by sense, heaping up together, and only caring for the
things of this world; and if crosses do come, where is their shield then? does
not every dart pierce them to the heart? etc.

2 To teach us, that whatsoever armor we have, to have it still upon our
backs. Have we the helmet of salvation, that is, hope of eternal life? let
us show it, in moderating our desires of the things of this life; because we
still look for a better, Genesis 49.18.

Doct. 2 It is not sufficient for Christians to put on a piece of this armor;
but all must be put on, that is, we must have all the needful and sanctifying
graces of Gods Spirit, Ephesians. 4.15, 24. We are exhorted to put on the whole new
man. Now these graces are as members of this n^w man; wherefore, as in natural
bodies there is a proportional growth of all members in the body, and if all
the growth be in the head, or in the legs, etc. that man may be called a
monster: so must we grow and increase in all spiritual graces together, and
not in one alone; for if there be all faith, and no charity, great knowledge,
and no obedience, much devotion, but little discretion: there is some corrupt
humor, that thus turns all the nourishment to one part.

Object. But is it possible that one man should have all graces?

Answ. Yea, it is possible, and necessary: as the Apostle testifies of the
Corinthians, see 1 Cor. 5.7. For the Spirit sanctifies a man throughout: So
that as a child has all the parts of a man, though not in that strength and
bigness: so have the Children of God all graces, though some in greater, some
in lesser measure.

Reasons, why this armor is thus wholly to be put on, are

1 Because God has made nothing in vain; and therefore seeing he has made
armor complete, for to cover every part. and has prescribed it unto us, we
are therefore to put it all on, because he has made it for us: for will not a
Captain take it in evil part, if when himself has provided armor for all
his soldiers, they come neuerthel^sse into the field unarmed?

2 Our own necessity: for if we have not on every piece thereof, the devil
will quickly find out that part which is unarmed, and so wound us, and
overthrow us.

3 So unseparably are graces knit and linked together, that he that has not
all, has none. For what is faith without righteousness, but mere presumption?

Use is that same that Saint Peter makes, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. viz. to join all
graces together, etc.

Further, from the R^ference of these two sorts of mean^s, that we are as well
to (...) for some unto our s^lues, as rely upon those that ar^ without us, we
learn, that

Doct. It is not sufficient to look for he^pe from God, but we our selves
also must do our endeavor in the use of those m^anes (...) has prescribed,
and so work out our salvation togeth^^ with him, Psalm. 119.32. Cant. 1 4.

Object. But how can we thus do our endeavor? ^e are dead in sins, etc.

Ans^^r. (...) must distinguish of times and states. Before our conversion we
are dead, and have no ability at all: But God, when he raises us up gives us
life and ability, the will and the deed: for he raises us not like stocks
and stones, as John 5.21. Ephesians. 2.5.

2 But we are not able to think a good thought.

Answer. The Apostle there speaks of our selves, as consider^d in our selves
without the help of God: And so likewise we are not to endeavor in a proud
conceit of our own strength, but we must still acknowledge that God does all,
it is his Spirit that assists us, and gives us strength to work, and to be
able to yield our selves pliable to the work of God in us, so to confess that
we live not, but Christ lives in us.

VERSE. 12. For we wrestle not against f^^sh and blood: but against
Principalities, against Powers, and against the worldly governors, the Princes
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness^^ which are in
high places.


IN this verse is laid down, 1 The kind of this combat, under the metaphor of
wrestling: implying that it is a very sore combat.

2 The Parties that maintain this sight: who are either such as defend
themselves: expressed in this word ( We) that is, all Christians whatsoever,
the ministers themselves not excepted: as appears by changing of the person
from ( Ye) to ( We,) the Apostle thereby not excepting himself.

2 Or such as assault. These are described, 1 Negatiuely: ( not against flesh,
and blood:) where, by flesh and blood is understood, 1 The substance of flesh
and blood. 2 Those things that are as flesh and blood, that is to say, weak,
frail, and mortal.

Hereby is employed, that our spiritual enemies are more than flesh and blood,
of more might and valor than all the men of the world: as by comparing the
malice and power of the devil, with that of men, may appear.

Use. It serves to stir up our dullness, and to make us more watchful,
having to do with so mighty enemies.

2 When we have to deal with wicked men, to consider that we have not only
to strive with flesh and blood, but also with the chief enemy the devil, who
is the principal worker, and whose instruments wicked men are: and so not to
bite the stone that is cast, but to have an eye to him that throws it.
Further, from the opposition of these two parts, ( Not against flesh, etc. but,
etc.) arises this instruction:

Doct. That they who are quailed and daunted by flesh and blood, will never be
able to stand out against Principalities and powers.

Which is to be noted against the cowardlinesse of men, that are moved with
every temptation. For the fear of men. We see that I^b being not moved with
those losses that he sustained at the hands of men, did also valiantly stand
out against the malice of Satan.

2 Affirmatively, ( but against, etc.) In the exposition of which words, there
is some difficulty.

Principalities. Property it is the Office of a Prince, or the honor of a
Prince: In brief, it signifies a government, and b^ing app^ied to a Prince,
it adds a great emphasis to it: So that Principa^ities, is as much as, those
that have a gouernm^nt.

Powe^s) Some vnd^rst^nd for an inferior kind of power: as Titus 3.1. 1 Timothy
2.2. 1 Pe^. 2.14. attributing principalities to the highest and chi^f^st, as
unto the King; and Powers, unto infer^o^^ Magistrates vnde^ him. From which
distin^tion of (...) wo^ds, some do make degrees of diue^s; but though I will
not deny but that there is an order of (...) as Math. 9.34. and 25.41. which
they make am^^g the^ (...), ^or the better performance of their ^spand^ p^ots,
and so take unto th^mselues offices; not that the^ have any assigned of God:
yet in this place is meant no such m^tter, for he^re is no comparison made
between the devils, what power one has over another; but between them and
us, what power and government they have over us: So that Powers here,
signifies an ability, and power which they have to execute their government.

Worldly governors) (...). This amplifies the former concerning their
government, and also limiteth it, showing that they have an absolute
government, but are only worldly gou^rnours, that is, over the men of this
world: but yet lest we should think that all men are under this government,
it is add^d, Of the darkness of this world) that is, of the ignorant and
wicked of the world, who are called darkne^s;e: who being blind, see not the
danger whereinto they implunge themselves, by subiecting themselves to the
devil.

This also she^es the cause how they come to be the devils subjects, because
they are wicked, and rebel against God.

Spiritual wickednesses.) Here they are set forth, 1 By their nature, they
are spiritual things, and have the properties of spirits: as to move from one
place to another, in a moment without resistance, etc.

2 Their quality: they are most monstrous vile, malicious wicked spirits; and
therefore called spiritualls of wick^dnesse, in the Original.

Which are in high places.) The word in the Origina^l is (...). It signifies
Heavenly, and i^ translated, chap. 1. verse 3. Heavenly t^ings, not Plac^. But
if we understand it of plac^s: then it shows wh^re the devils have th^^
ab^ade; namely, in the lowest heaven, in the air.

If we take it for Things, then it shows the cause of our combat that it is
not for e^rthl^ ma^ters that they c^ntend; but for heavenly and spiritua^l
things, such as concern the salvation of our sou^es.

The words then area description of the terror of our spiritual enemies:
described.

1 By their Dominion, ( Prin^ipali^ies, Gouerno^rs:) which is amplifi^d 1 by
that Power that they have to execute their government: ( Power) 2 By the
parties that are governed: ( The darkn^sse of this world)

1 Doct. Our spiritual enemies are such as have a rule, dominion, and command.
A point clear, chap. 2. verse 2.2 Cor. 4.4.

Quest. But how comes he to have this power? whether is it of God or no? for it
seems so to be, Romans 13.1.

An^^. That general ground is there restrained to the gou^rnm^nts, and unto
all lawful governments ordained by God. But a^ for the devil, he could indeed
have no power bu^ by Gods permission: and although that God do suffer him, yet
has he no right and title unto this d^gnity. The reason then is, 1 In regard
of himself, because he does tyra^nical^y usurp this power, like as does the
Pope, his chief instrument, 2 T^es. 2.4. Deuteronomy. 18 7. See Math. 4.9. Luke 4.6.

2 In regard of his vassals that slauishly y^^ld unto him, and voluntarily give
unto him this power, ^o making him their Prince, Ho^. 8.4. Now, the devil is
so ambitious, that if any thing be g^uen, he will take it: and give an inch* he
will take an ell.

V^e. 1 To teach us to take heed, how we yield to the devil, or give him one
jo^e: for where he can get an entrance, there will he set his throne: if we
give him sway a little, h^e will be the whole prince and ruler.

2 To stir us up to subject our selves to our Lord Christ, and to carry our
selves to him, as to our Lord and King: for then will he defend and main^aine
us, and (as Kings do) not suffer others to bear ru^e over his own subjects;
otherwise, if we refuse to have him reign over us, it is just for him to give
us over to these cruel and tyrannical Lords.

2 Doct. As they have a dominion, so they have power to execute the same, and
to keep their vassals under them, chap. 2. ver. 2. The point is manifest:
therefore to handle this their Power more particularly, let us consider,

1 The Ground of it. It has pleased God thus to arm them with power. 1 In his
just judgment for the punishment of the wicked. 2 For the trial of his
children. 3 For the manifestation of his power, in the assisting of them. 4
That the excellency of his graces, wherewith he armeth his children, might be
seen, that they are armor of proof to defend them.

2 The Extent of it, how far this power reaches. To this in general may be
answered, That h^ is able to do what^oeuer is within the compass^ of nature
under heaven, that may be done by natural means. He has no power upon the
heavens, as to alter their motion, etc. But under the Moon he has power, as
1 in the Air, to^nish it together with great violence, to cause winds and
tempests: as when Jobs house was o^erthrowne, Job 1.

^ In the water, to raise up tempests: likewise, for the drowning of ships and
men, to make breaches, etc.

3 In the earth, to turn things top^^e-turu^e, houses, trees, etc.

4 On living creatures, to destroy them, etc. as the Swine, Mat. 8.

5 On men, to take their bodies and hurry them up and down, from place to
place: as he did Christ's body* to smite it with diseases, to enter into it and
take possession of it, to trouble the conscience, to stir up the humors of
lust, choler, etc.

Qu^stion. But is not his power diminished by his fall? Is he as powerful as
the good Angels?

Answer. No: for we see, that when there has been opposition between the
good and the evil angels, the evil have still been foiled, as Dan. 10. Reu.
12. So that if comparison be made between them and the good Angels, their power
is somewhat abated: but if comparison be made between them and other
creatures, their power still remains so great, that we cannot see wherein it
is any whit lessened. And therefore we are not to be secure, as if his power
were so weakened, that he could not hurt us since his fall; but to be stirred
up to watchfulness, and to be strengthened in faith, seeing God has given us
the good Angels to protect and defend us.

3 The restraint of their power. In which we are to consider, 1 what they
cannot do.

Quest. Whether can they go beyond nature, or against it?

Answ. They cannot, because they are creatures, and must be subjected unto the
order set down by God, who is the only Lord of nature, and only can alter it,
go above and beyond it. Examples in 4 points.

1 The devil cannot do that which is simply, and properly a miracle: as to
cause that flaming fire should not burn, to raise the dead: for these are
against and above nature. And to do these, is a property of God, whereby
Christ did declare himself to be God, and likewise his Apost^es to (...) by
the p^w^r of God, and to (...).

Ob^^t. The (...), wrough^ miracles, as did (...), 12, 22. and 8.^.

(...). 1 (...) things might b^e done by natural (...) bring serp^nts and
^rogs from (...) them there.

2 (...) were done only in show and (...) and d^luding t^^ir eyes: for 1 (...)
were devoured of Mo^^s (...) that his was a true serpent, and (...) that the^
made no resistance, but (...).

2 For the (...) blood. How could it be, ^ith all the wat^r in ^gypt was ^ready
turned into blood? and therefore i^ must n^eds be ^ome of the water of ^oshen:
but upon Goshen came none of the plagues of Egypt.

3 Conc^rneing the ^rogs. Those that Moses brought in, were gathered on heaps,
so that they stanke: but no such matter is record^d of the other.

So that the devil may do^ wonders which may seem ^trange to us, because we
know not the cause, but not miracles.

The devil cannot directly force the will of man to yield to his b^nt* as to
make him si^ne against his will: for forced will is no will; and (...) is an
action of the will, else it is no sin: He may by thr^atnings and allurements
persuade the will, but he cannot force it.

3 The devil cannot simply s^arch the heart of man, for this the Lord ascribes
unto himself, as a property belong^ng unto him only. The devil can give a
near guess at the g^nerall disposition of the heart, by the actions, speeches,
inclination, etc. but precisely to know what the thought of the heart is, he
cannot.

4 He cannot simply declare things to come. This also God takes as a property
belonging to himself, and th^reby does in Scripture distinguish himself from
Ido^s and false gods: and therefore among the heathen he used to give out his
answer in doubtful terms, that might be true two ways; and if it fell out
otherwise then they interpreted it, then they said they mistook the meaning of
the Oracle.

2 What they are hindered from doing, although they can, and would do it; for
they do nothing but by ^ermission, and ther^for^ we read in Scripture, 1 Pet.
2.4. Judge 6. Reu. 20.2 That the devil is chained and ti^d up like a bandog,
that can go no further then his linkes will let him. So Sa^an desir^d to
winnow Peter, Luke 22.31. But he could not. This does make greatly for the
comfort of the godly. So much of their power.

2 The second thing whereby their dominion is amplified, is the parti^s that
are governed; who are described when it is (...)* They are governors of this (
World, of the darkness^ of this World.)

1 Doct. This rule and government is only here, in, and over this world.

Which is an enco^ragement to endure all the assaults that are made, b^cau^^ it
is b^t for a time; there will come a tim^ of r^d^mp^ion and full freedom from
all. And 2 it is an encourag^me^t against the hour of death.

Yet all the men in the world are not vassals of the devil, but only the
d^^kne^^e o^ this world* Such men as are blind through ignorance, and wicked
through corruption within and without, 2 Cor. 4.4. 1 Ioh. 3.8. Ephesians. 2.2.

2 Doct. The devils dominion is over blind and sinful men. The former resist
him not, but do ignorantly fo^low him, not s^^ing indeed what he is. The other
think, his gou^rnme^t is pleasant, and so believe not whatso^uer is spoken of
the diu^ll. The ignorant know not what a blessed and comfortable thing it is,
to be the Lords subjects. The wicked, they rebel against him.

Use. For trial whether we be under the government of the devil or no: which
we are, if we ^oue and lie in darkness, John 3.19.

2 For direction, how we may come from under his power and dominion, namely, by
coming forth from darkness into light, Col. 12.13. Luke 1.79. Acts 26.18.

3 For consolation to such as have evidence in their own souls, that they are
light in the Lord; because they are freed from the power of the devil. And let
such carry themselves as children of the light. So much of their dominion.

2 The second thing whereby our spiritual enemies are described, is their
Nature. In that they are called (...); Spiritual things.

Doct. The devils, the enemies of our souls, are of a spiritual substance:
for they still retain the same substance in which they were created, that they
might bear the punishment of their sin, in the same nature that they sinned;
and that they are spiritual substances and beings of themselves, appears also
by their power, their offices, their place, their punishment which they endure.
Which

1 Note against those, them to be but qualities and affections rising from us.
A conceit both erro^ious and dangerous, extenuating the terror that ought to
be had of the devil, and so causing security.

2 It greatly aggrauates the cunning of them, in these respects.

1 Being spirits, they are invisible and cannot be seen by flesh and blood:
and such likewise are their assaults: so that w^e fight against them, as blind
men against seeing; we cannot tell where and how they strike, etc. which is a
great disadvantage.

2 Being spirits, they can be in every plac^ with us, knowing our actions, and
words, and g^ssing at our thoughts: which is a great advantage to them: as if
one enemy should know the counsels of anoth^r: as 2 Kings 6.12.

3 Being spirits, there is no bodily thing that ca^ hind^r them in their
enterprises, they can pass over, and through all things. And hence is their
vnconc^iueable swiftness, in their passage from place to place: as swift as
lightning, or as our eyesight. This great quickness does likewise give them
great advantage.

4 Being spirits, they are not ^ubiect to fainting, wearisomen^sse, and d^cay:
but a^^er many hundred t^ousands of exployes done, they ar^ stil^ ready for
more. Whence it comes that they g^t so great exp^rience, and do^ assault
continually without intermission.

Notwithstanding these disaduantages on our part, we have comfort in the Lord,
the Spirit of spirits, who is with us to d^fend us, who has given his Spirit
to open our eyes, that we may see the sleights of the devil, to strengthen us
that we faint not, and to be That strong man to keep him from taking
possession of us.

3 Use. It shows that we must fight against him, not with earthly weapons, but
with the spiritual armor of God, here prescribed. So much of their nature.

3 They are described by their quality and condition. ( Wickedness.)

Doct. They are foul, wicked, and unclean spirits: so is the devil called,
by a kind of propriety: (...): That wicked one; and that in these respects:

1 Because they are the authors and beginning of sin, Ioh. 8.44.

2 Because of their nature, which is wholly impure, not one jot of goodness in
it.

3 In regard of their will, because they delight and joy in wickedness, and
have no thinking to repent, unless it be, not to have done more than they did.

4 In regard of the continual practice of sin in themselves, and folliciting
of others always unto evil.

Use. 1 For trial, whether the spirit of Satan be in us* or no; for if we
give our selves over to sin, we are guid^d by the spirit of the devil.

2 It ought to be a strong mot^ue unto us to hate all impiety, because herein
wear like unto the devil.

Now note we how a^l a^e set down in the plura^l number: Prin^ipalities,
Powe^s, world^y governors, spiri^uall wi^k^dnesses, to show that they ar^ not
a few, but many who are our en^mies.

Verse. 13. For this cause t^k^ unto you the whol^ a^mour of God, that ^ee may
be able t^ resist in the evil day, and having finished all things, to stan^
f^^s^.


FRom the former consideration of the greatness and terriblenesse of our
enemies, the Apostle takes occasion again to stir us up to the gr^ater
watchfulness, and courage in withstanding these our enemies. ( For this cause)
that is, in regard we have so great en^mies, so malicious, powerful, and
strong; wherefor^ he repeats again the direction before laid down, verse. 11.

The words then contain two points, 1 A direction. 2 Motives.

In the direction observe, 1 The means that are to be used. 2 How they are to
be used.

The means a^e expressed in these words, ( the whole ^rmo^r of God,) of which
has been spoken before, verse. 11. Only consider some reason^ why this is
again (...) they are ^ especially. 1 The Apostle hereby shew^s, that he had
deliuer^d this direction with good adui^^, not rashly, and suddenl^: and
therefore he is told again^ and again to say it* as Gal. 1.9.

2 Tha^ as it is a truth in it self, so it is behoofefull for us, and
^specially to be regarded o^ us, as Psalm. 24.7.9.

3 Because the Apostle will kn^w that we are very backward to perform this
duty, and therefore he urges it again.

V^e 1 ^or Minist^rs to urge and press upon their people their duti^s again
and again.

2 To r^prooue people that have itching ^ares, and cannot endure repetitions,
but sti^l long after new points.

Further, from this repeti^ion, we may obs^rue both the necessity, and
sufficiency of th^se m^anes pr^scribed, in that they, and they only ar^ (...)
down^ before, and again repeat^^ aft^r the descr^p^ion o^ our enemies, verse
12. Which should move us to take good h^^d unto them.

2 The manner of using the means, is set down in another phrase then before.
( Take unto you) but ver. 11. ( P^t on) The doctrine hence arising, is this,
That

Doct. The graces whereby we are defended, are not from our selves, but from
another, 1 Cor. 4.7 Iam. 1.17.

Nature gives unto brute beasts wherewith to d^fend themselu^s, so ^oo^e as
they ar^ brought forth, and so they grow up needing no other; but it is not so
with man: we are borne naked, and without all defense for our bodies, needing
apparel, and w^apons to defend us: So are we likew^se in ^espect of our
souls, utterly void of a^l grace power and ability, to keep our selves from
the assau^^s o^ our enemies: see Ezekiel. 16.4 etc. Wherefore we a^e to get unto
us this spiritual a^mour. So much for the d^^ection.

The motiu^s are taken from the end, which is s^t down in two d^grees. 1 that
in the fight w^ may be able to r^s^st 2 that after ^he ^igh^, we may stand fast.

In the first no^e 1 the ^enefit, 2 the (...), 3 the time.

1 The be^^fit in th^se words, ( that y^e may be able.) Whence is c^nf^rm^d the
do^^rine before ^eliu^r^d, that whosoever ha^h thi^ armor, may, in the ^^ght (...)
thereof, be (...) of vi^tor^.

2 The duty is in thi^ word, (...) or stand against our enemies. A w^^d of
(...) of defi^nce. Whence

Doct. 1 The Armor that is given us of God, is given us to d^fie our Enemy
boldly, and to combat with him, Iam. 4.7. 1 ^et. 5.9.

Use. To teach us, that we who prof^sse our selves soldi^rs o^ Christ, and have
taken unto us this armor, must know that we are not c^lled to embrace ^his
Word, and live idly at ^ase, but to fight.

Doct. 2 Seeing that we are bidden take this armor, and so resist, we learn,
That without this armor it is in vain to resist, we shall rush like horses
upon the pikes, we fight like nak^d men, against men armed.

Use. As before we^ were taught to resist, so here we are showed how to resist:
not foolishly trusting in our own strength, but armed with the power of God.

Doct. 3 That we give no place to the devil: for such is his suttlety and
cruelty, that he knows how to take every advantage, and being once entered,
like a fierce lion will devour us.

Use. It reproues the folly of those that will yield a little, and hope well
enough to recover themselves, but sin grows by degrees, and the devil gets
great advantage, by persuading us to yield a little: and if we sin a little,
and so lose our ground, we shall find it a harder matter to recover it, being
lost, then to have kept it at the first.

3 The Time is noted in these words ( In the evil day) not evil in it self,
but in regard of those occurrences that fall out upon that day. Some take this
to be meant of the whole course of our life: others too strictly, for the
hour of our death. I rather take it in a middle sense, for a certain time or
day, namely, the day of trial and temptation, wherein we are assaulted by the
devil, who would bring us to the evil of sin and of punishment; and
therefore it is called evil.

Doct. Hence we learn in general, that there is an evil day that will come
upon us, as Reu. 6.11. And ther^ore the Scripture puts a must upon it. We must
through many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of God. Herein also is the
difference between the Church militant, and the Church triumphant. Y^a, who in
his own exp^rience does not find this to be^ true?

Use. that we be not secure, thinking no evil wll come upon us. A conceit
not only of the wicked, Psalm. 10.6. but even of those also that have given up
their names to God: as David, Psalm. 30.6.

Quest. But when then is this day? Answ. God disposes of it, as of the day of
death: though it will certainly come, yet we know not when, to the end that
we^ might always watch and pr^pare our selves. So that we learn,

Doct. 2 That we must prepare, and be always armed for an evil day. Thus Job
thought of his afflictions before they came, Job 3.25. Thus Paul prepared for
his afflictions, Acts 20.22, etc. And so does he warn Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.18.

Use. For reproof of those that live securely, thinking that all peace and
quietness shall still last: and so like the people of Laish, Judge. 18. are
easily surprised. So much for the first degree.

In the second observe 1 The Time. 2 The issue or benefit. The Time is
expressed in these words, ( having finished all things.) Wherein we may note, 1
the Action, 2 the Object, ( all things.)

Doct. The instruction from thence is, that the assaults made against us are
many: ( all,) as Psalm. 34.19. The Commonwealth of Israel was a type of this,
which was continually exercised with afflictions in Egypt, and afterward till
they came to be in quiet in the Land of Canaan. And this is also verified in
the life of Christ, his Prophets and Apostles. So then, as there is an evil
day certainly to be looked for; so likewise are there many to be undergone of
us. Wherein,

1 God does show his goodness in assisting and delivering us, and the truth of
his promises, in not forsaking us.

2 Hereby God wou^d weane us from the world, in which through ease and quiet,
we too much de^ight.

3 And mak^ us the mo^e to ^ong after Heaven.

4 This comes ^o pass, by reason of the vn^a^iable ma^^ce o^ the devil, who
w^ll use more m^anes than one to foil us, if it may be: as h^ did to Job and
Christ.

Use. 1 To t^ach us to look for one affliction after another, and t^^r^^ore
^till to prepar^ our selves.

2 For comfort, tha^ we do^ not think our selves forsaken of God, ^^cause of
m^ltitude of af^lictions and tempta^ion^, s^eing that it is our condition
whilst we live here.

Doct. 2. ( Finis^^d.) It is not suff^cient well to acquit our selves o^ some
one of those assaults, that are brought against us; but we must valiantly stand
against all whatso^uer. Hence is the constancy of the Martyrs commended, that
endured a^l sorts of afflictions, Hebr. 11.36. and 12.4.

R^asons are, 1 Because all the promises of reward made unto us, be annexed
with the condition of constancy and perseverance to the and, Reu. 2.7. and in
all those 7 Epistles, Math. 10.22.

2 Because without continuance, all our former courage and constancy is in
vain, Gal. 3.4.

2 The benefit is in these words, ( to stand fast.) (...). Not in the
Imparatiue mood, as implying a duty, but in the Infinitive, as noting a
benefit; the issue and euen^ of the fight: Implying, that at length we shall
be conquerours; and as victors, stand last in the field, when our adu^rsary is
fled awa^.

Doct. They who do well fight the battles of the Lord, shall be sure at length
to have the victory, 1 Cor. 10.13. Thus did Christ stand last in the field: and
so did I^b, James 5.11.

Use. It serves for comfort and encouragement to fight valiantly; for here is
the blessed issue that will ^^comp^nce all our labor and travel.

VERSE. 14. Stand therefore, etc.


IN this and the verses following, is laid down a particular exemplification
of that general direction given unto us, how to keep our selves safe from all
the assaults of our spiritual enemies. In which we may observe, how the
Apostle la^es down. 1 Duties to be performed, which are twofold.

1 Stand, in this verse. 2 Pray, verse 18.
2 The means whereby they are performed, 1 That we may stand. The means are
expressed in six branches. 1 The girdle of verity, etc.

2 That we may pray. The means are, verse 18. Before we come to the
particular handling of these points, observe here the coherence, and joining
together of these two duties, Stand and pray. Whereby we learn, that as on the
oe side we should not be faint-hearted, timorous, and careless: so on the
other we be hot proud and insolent, trusting, and presuming on our own
strength. The first shows that God will not help us, unless we labor and
endeavor to do our best The second shows, that we can do nothing without
the help of God. We must pray, so trusting to God, to his promises and mighty
power: that we also stand, that is, use the means that he has prescribed.
Again, we must so use the means, always having an eye unto God: So neither
tempting by neglect of the means, nor presuming on the means to be careless
in seeking help of God. This was notably represented unto us, in that first
battle of the Israelites with the Amalekites. Exodus 17. where Joshua was
fighting, and Moses praying both together. See the like, 2 Chronicles. 14.10, 11.

Use is for us, that we do not separate those things that God has joined
together.

1 The first duty to be performed, is in this word Stand, a warre-like word,
taken from the manner of standing in war. We heard it used before, verse 13.
but not in the same Mood nor Tense; and so not in the same signification. There
it was in the Infinitive: here it is in the Imparatiue: there is meant standing
after the fight; here, in the very fight. Now this word implies 4 things.

1 Courage in this Christian war; for timorous and faint-hearted soldiers are
ready to fly away, where a man of valor will stand it out.

2 An abiding in that place and rank wherein our Captain Christ Jesus has
set us, and not to straggle from it.

3 Watchfulness. Not to be sluggish, to lie down and sleep, but to stand on
our feet.

4 A kind of continuance and constancy. Not to be still putting off and on of
our armor, but to keep it on still.

From whence accordingly we are to observe four duties.

1 Christian soldiers must be of a valourous and courageous mind, to stand
against, and to defy their enemies. Such courage as David had against Goliath:
which how needful it is in all things, appears, in that the Lord does so often
urge to Joshua, even three times together, Joshua 1.6, 7, 9.

Reasons. 1 In regard of our enemies, who are daunted with nothing more, than
with courage and valor, and insult over us when we are timorous: like the
Woolfe that flies away if he be resisted, but if you run away, he sets upon
you eagerly.

2 In regard of other, unto whom our valor may be a great encouragement: as 2 Chronicles. 11 14.

Use. To be exhorted to the performance of this duty, and for motives to stir
us up to consider,

1 How in our fight the Lord is with us, and stands by us. This motive was used
to Joshua, Josh. 1.5.9.

2 That we fight in the name of the Lord, armed with his power, which is
ingag^d in our fight: this gave David that inuincib^e cou^ag^.

3 The cause of our fight that is just, for the salvation of our sou^e^. Now
the ^quity or the cause is a great ^ncourag^ment to soldi^rs: as unto Iphtah,
Judges 11. And contrariwise that the cause of our a^uersaries is most unjust,
who fight against God, to disso^ue his works, to diminish his Kingdom, etc.

4 That we fight with enemies indeed, but enemies vanquished and spoiled, Col.
2.15. H^b. 2.14. Yea, whose w^apons are a^l blunted, the sting of afflictions,
of sin, and of death being taken away.

5 The promis^ of victory, and assurance of it. Then which th^re cannot be a
great^r encouragement.

2 That w^e must be careful to abide in that place wher^in our Captain has
placed us, 1 Cor. 7.20. Ephe. 4.1. But we a^e to know, that we have a double
place or calling. 1 General, as we are Christians, members of Christ,
prof^ssing his name.

2 Particu^ar, as we have several places in the Church. The duties th^n are
two.

1 That we remain firm and steadfast in the Church* not forsaking our
prof^ssion, and straggling out of it; for the Church is the field, in which we
must fight, and r^maining in it, we are under the protection of our Captain^:
but stragg^ers from the army have neith^r protection of Cap^aine, nor help of
fellow soldi^rs to defend, and so fall into their ^nemies hands: as the
Separatists.

2 That we be careful to abid^ in that particular place, wherein we a^e
set, be we^ Cap^ain^s. Li^utenants o^ soldiers that is, Magistra^es, Minist^rs,
Mast^rs of famili^s, or the like, Romans 1 ^. 4 etc.

To be stirred up hereunto, consider we,

1 That it is the wise Lord that has appointed us our several places and
callings. H^b. 3.2.

2 That this standing in our ranks, is the comeliness and beauty of the
army, yea, the very strength of it; for confusion bre^ds disturbance, and
giu^s ad^antage to the enemies. Thus in the body all the memb^rs standing in
their due place, make up the com^inesse thereof, and are ready for the mutual
h^lpe one of another.

3 That thus we shall best m^nifest the graces of God given unto us, whilst we
ke^pe every one his own place: as ^ common Soldier, though he may well
manna^e a Pike or a Gun, yet cannot well discharge the place o^ a Ca^taine.

4 That the Lord will seek for us, and reward us in our places where he set
us. If he find us out of our ranks, he may happily give us a knock, or
cashiere us ^ as he did Corah, Dathan and Abiram.

3 That we be watchful, and stand upon our defense against these our enemies,
1 Pet 5.8. For else we may be su^denly surprised. The diu^ll comes as a thief,
he sends not an herald before him with defiance, he fights not to show
valor, but his aim is at blood and spoil; and so he uses all treachery.

Use. Mat. 24.43.

4 We must stand always armed and defenced against our enemies, n^u^r putting
off our armor; for here is the difference betwe^ne this spiritual and carnal
warfaring. The night, truce, season of the year may cause a laying aside of
arms for a time in this earthly war; but there is no intermission in the
spiritual fight.

Ob. But this seems a very burdensome and tedious matter.

Answ. Not at all, but if we come once to have this armor well fitt^d unto us;
it is most easy and pleasant for use. Math. 11.30. and no whit combersome,
though otherwise in regard of defense it be called armor.

Use. To reprove those that are weary and fall away: Such never had this
armor well fitted unto them: as Judas and Demas.

Ver. 14. And your loins g^rded about with verity.


NOw follows the manner and means of performing the former duty; for which
end the Apostle does distinctly d^scribe the armor of God, laying down the
seuera^l parts and pieces of it; which are in number six. The first is
expressed in th^se words, ( And your loins girded about with verity.)

But before we^ come to the handling of this, and the other particulars, there
are three general obseruation^ taken from all jointly co^side^ed, to be spoken
of.

The first is this: that most of these pieces are defensive; b^t o^e off^^siue,
viz. the sword of the Spirit, and that but in part, b^ing also defensive.

2. That here is armor for the forepart, bu^ none at all for the hinder parts
of a man.

3 That every part before is covered from top to toe.

Hence we learn three instructions.

1 That Christians must more seek to defend themselves, and maintain their
own, than to annoy their enemies. Thus did Christ, when he made himself our
example in his first conflict with Satan: we see Satan first s^ts upon him, he
only defends himself: and thus have the servants of God dealt with the
instruments of the devil from time to time. This is an argument that our cause
is just.

2 That in this Christian war and conflict, we^ must never fly away; but
stand unto it face to face. There is no hope to get good by running a^a^: it i^
dishonorable to God, and dangerous to our selves, because then we l^e all
op^n to the weapons of the devil: therefore let there be in us the mind of
Neh^mia^, Nehe. 6.11. for the devil fights not for glory, as me^ do, who
think it as great a glory to put their enemies to slight, as to slay them: but
it is b^ood that he aims at; wherefore let us remember Lots wife, Luke 17.
and that he that sets his hand to the p^ow, and look^s back, is unfit for the
Kin^dome of Heau^n; he that ^^ies, is vnw^rthy to be a soldier of Christ; and
therefore not to fly, hoping to come again another time, being in the mean
while naked to all the darts of the devil, who may wound us at his pleasure.

3 Here is compl^at armor for the forepart: a helmet, comprehending the
beauer and gorget, to cover the head and face down to the neck. A brestplate,
containing under it the skirts or bases, to cover all unto the knees. The
Greaues or Boots to cover the legs unto the sole of the foot. For the right
hand a sword, for the left a shield. Lastly, a Girdle or Belt to bi^de all
together. Whence the i^struction is, that the graces of Gods Spirit, that he
bestows upon us, are sufficient to defend and keep us safe: So that this
being complete and sufficient armor, we need not seek further to add any
thing to it, to make us bold and courageous. So much in general.

Now we come distinctly to handle the parts: wherein we will observe this
order:

1 To declare what are those graces here meant, by the parts of the armor.

2 To show how fitly those graces are resembled unto the m^taphor.

3 To gather the uses and instructions arising therefrom. The first, in that
order, that the Apostle has set them down, is the Girdle of ver^ty, or truth.
To omit other signification, there is a fourfold truth here meant. 1 Of
Judgment, and Opinion. 2 Of heart and affection. 3 Of words. 4 Of deeds and
actions. All which are as linkes of one, and the same chain, and must
concur, to make up the strength and beauty of this Girdle.

1 Truth of opinion and judgment, is that whereby we do maintain and uphold
the Word of God and true Religion grounded thereon. In a word, it is soundness
in Religion, in Doctrine, soundness in faith and b^lief^, as 2 Peter 1.12.
Ephesians 4.15.

2 Truth of affection, is a kind of inward honesty and si^cerity, when we set
God before our ey^s always, and our selves in his presence: and so, though we
be alone, yet carry our selves that we may be accepted and approved of him,
Psalm. 5.6. This was in Joseph, when he was tempted, and in Hezekiah, 2 King.
20.3.

3 Truth in spe^ch, is, when the words which we utter, be agreeable to our
mind and intention, and also to the matter spoken of: for else we tell a lie,
or an untruth. Wherefore we must utter that which we know to be a truth,
Ephesians. 4.25. Romans 9 1. 1 Timothy 2 7.

4 Truth in action, is, when we deal plainly and faithfully, not
hypocritically; whether we have to do with God in his worship, or otherwise
with men: not pretending more than in truth we do intend, 1 John 3.18. Ephesians.
4.24. ( True holiness.) Thus is Nathaniel commended for a plain honest man,
John 1.47.

All these must be lin^ed together: and if you take away any one, the Girdle
breaks, and loses his strength and comeliness. For, though the heart be
sincere, the speech true, the Actions plain and honest; yet if the judgment
be unsound, and we be carried away to error, superstion and Idolatry, all
those fair shows will prove but stubble and dross. Paul thought that he
had an honest heart, and was unrebukable for his conversation, Acts 26 9. but
being misse-led in judgment, what did this avail him? He afterward esteemed
it nothing.

Again, though we hold the truth, if we have a double heart, full of
hypocrisy and dissimulation, we are the more odious and abominable to God,
and our knowledge shall serve as a witness to condemn us.

Moreover, if we will seem sound in heart and opinion, yet lie in word,
dissemble and deal double in our actions, what do we but disgrace the truth,
and plainly profess our selves hypocrites?

Now th^se thr^e last, truth in heart, speech and action, may be comprised
under one name of Integrity or Sync^rity, when our heart, word, and deed agree
in one, and all enlightened and directed by the Word. So that truth in
judgment is the fountain, these the streams.

For Application to the metaphor, how fitly this grace is re^embled to the
girding of the loins with a girdle or belt, we are to know, that this phrase
of gird^ng the loins, is used in a double respect.

1 As it is taken from travelers; who in the Eastern hot parts used to go in
long side garments, and therefore when they iourneyed, did trusse them up to
their loins with a girdle, as Luk 12.35. Exodus 12.11. This is not meant here.

2 As it is taken from soldiers, for the knitting and fast girding of their
Armor close together about: as Job 38.3. In this sense is it here taken. Now
soldiers use to have a strong girdle called a belt to gird their harness about
them, and it has a double use.

Use. 1 For Ornament: because the armor is joined together about the middle
with joints; and therefore to cover those joints which are not so comely, they
use a broad girdle. 2 For strength. 1 For that it serves to keep the armor
close and fast together, that in the sight it fall not off, or comber him. 2
For that it does much strengthen a man, to have his loins and middle fast
girded about.

The fit res^mblance then of this grace, appears in regard both of that
grace, comeliness^, and ornament, as also that strength, which truth giu^th
unto those that have it.

First, for truth of judgment. What great^r ornam^nt of Religion, then the
sound evidence of the truth of that which we profess^? Antiquity,
universality, succession, great revenues, etc. are nothing to this, y^a, do
more d^sgrac^ it then adorn it; for superstition, the more anc^ent it is, the
more approuers it has, the more odious and abominable.

2 Ag^in^, for st^^ngth. Truth in Religion is able to ma^ntaine it self
against all opposers; yea although a man come far behind his adversaries in
reading and learning.

3 Furth^rmore, this truth makes us to stand constant and firm in our
prof^ssion even to the death: as it did the Martyrs. For truth in heart, what
makes a man more amiable and gracious in the acceptance of God (for God only
beho^deth this) then truth in the inward parts, an honest, single, simple
heart? For this cause was David a man after Gods own heart, Acts 13.22.
because he had an upright heart, 1 King. 15.3. For this cause did Noah find
favor with God, Genesis 6 9.

Again, what Learning, Art, or Eloquence can more grace a man's speech, then
truth?

Lastly no outward comeliness, strength of body, or beauty of face can so much
adorn us, as faithfuln^sse and plain dealing in all our actions.

Now, (to join all these three together) for strength* the conscience of our
uprightness and integrity, is a great means to uphold us in the day of trial.
This vpheld Job, although his wife and his friends counted him an hypocrite,
and although the hand of God was heavy upon him. Job. 27.5. and 31.35. This
made Hezekiah to call upon God with that confidence, as 2 Kings 20.3.

Use. It teaches us to be careful to follow that precept of the wise man,
Prou. ^3.^3. To buy the truth, and not to sell it. Where, although by truth be
especially meant truth of Religion, yet may it be extended to the other also It
has two branches,

1 Concerning those that have it not, they must buy it. 2 Concerning those tha^
have it. They must not sell it. So that they that want this girdle, must get
it, and they that have it, must ^eepe it.

First therefore (...) are to examine our selu^s, whether w^e ^e in the truth
or no, ^ Cor. 13.5. For that may well be applied unto this, seeing there is no
o^e thing that m^kes ^o great and maine a diff^rence betw^^ne the Elect and the
r^probate, as this truth, it being a special tok^n of our effe^tua^l calling.

1 Truth of Iudg^ment. Whether we be assured that o^r pro^ession be the true
Relig^on of God or no? The principl^s wh^r^of we must try by the Scriptures,
which are the only touchstone to try this God, 1 These. 5.21. 1 Ioh. 4.1. Ioh.
5.39. Acts 17.11.

2 If upon trial we find our judgment resolved in the truth, then are we
to examine whether this knowledge do, like the ointment of Aaron, Psalm. 133.2.
season our heart and affections. Whether our hearts be sound or no; for this is
deceitful above all things, ^uen to a man's own self, not only in gross
hypocrites, but in many others, who know not the weakness of their heart,
because they never searched into the depth of it: as Peter.

To this end we are to examine especially what is our disposition, when we
are alone in private and have to do with none but God: when we may commit
sin, and keep it close from the e^es of men, then to mark what is our
integrity and uprightness, whether like unto that of Ios^ph, or no.

3 Finding the fountain to be pure, we are to observe what cl^are streams do
flow from thence in our words and actions, Luk 6.45. Wheth^r there be a
correspondency between them and our heart; as if w^e worship God, whether we
do it with our heart; if we have holy conference, whether our heart move us
unto it.

For our direction in this trial; we are to consider,

1 The ground and motive that stirs us up to do any good thing, whether it
be applause, as in the Pharisees, whether ho^our and credit, or the avoiding of
disgrace, as in Saul, 1 Samuel 15.30. or for company sake, or for respects to
some particular men, as Ioash, 2 Chro. 24.2, 15, etc. or for profit and gain:
as the Shechemites, Genesis 34.23. or to avoid trouble; as the Papists that come
to Church rather then pay a fine, and be put in prison: In all these there is
no truth, because no respect unto God, to do his will, because it is his will.

2 What is the sincerity of our hearts, whether it be in all things, Hebr.
13.18. or only in some few; for many will do some things upon by-respects, or
because they are agr^^able to their humors and dispositions, as Herod; but this
truth where it is, is like leaven that leaueneth the whole lump.

3 What are the things, in which we are most strict and secure, to keep a good
conscience in? Whether first and above all, in the chiefest things, or i^
^rifles and smaller matters; which is hypocrisy, Math. 23.23.

4 The order of our actions, whether we first begin with our selves, before we
seek to urge the same things upon others; not as the Scribes, that lay heavy
burdens upon others, which themselves would not touch, Mat. 23.4.

Now upon this trial, if we find that in any of these respects we want
truth, then must we buy it, that is, use all means to attain unto it,
although it be with the loss of those things which we have: as they that buy,
must depart with some things: which is notably set forth in two parables, Mat.
13.44, 45, 46.

Motives to stir us up to get it are,

1 The excellency of this treasure. This notably commends the excellency of it,
in that nothing makes us more like unto God than this, who is truth it self;
and so nothing makes us more amiable unto him. Again, it makes us like unto
those that are like to God: as the Saints and Angels in heaven. Contrariwise,
nothing makes so us like the devil as untruth, John 8.44. The excellency of it
appears also herein, that there is no grace (I dare s^y) in the Scripture so
much urged, as this of truth.

2 The need that we have of it; for all other graces without it, are in vain:
they are corrupt, and putrified, if they be not seasoned with truth; therefore
are we exhorted to love unfeigned, to faith unfeigned, etc. So that this
attribute of truth does commend every grace, 1 John 3.18.

3 The benefit that comes by having of it; for the least measure of grace
seasoned with it, is accepted of God, Psalm. 51 6. and 145.18. yea, bl^ssedn^sse
it se^fe is promised unto it, Psalm. 15.2.

It fo^lowes to show the way, how to get this truth.

1 For truth in judgment: we must do as men use to do that would buy any
thing, they will go to the place where it is to be had, and use the means to
get it. Now the contrary, where this pearl is to be had, is the Church, the
mould wherein it is hid, is the Word of God; and the ministry thereof, is the
means to discover and make it known unto us: there needs then but our
attention and diligence to resort unto these means. Silver and Gold there
needs none to get it, though this also sometimes we must not spare for the
obtaining of it.

2 For sincerity, let our care be to do, as Enoch did to walk with God, to
set our ^elues always in his presence: the consideration whereof will make us
^o be upright, as Genesis 17.1.

Now, having once gotten this Girdle, let it be our care and endeavor to keep
it fast, and not to loose it. Not to se^l it, that is, not to exchange it for
any thing whatsoever. To take nothing for it, because nothing is worth it: be
it ease, riches, or the like.

Which we are to note the more diligently, because if we once have this grace,
the devil will labor by all means to coozen us of it: for this is that for
which only he fears us; and therefore there is nothing that he more
opposes against, by diverse suttleties and temptations, than against truth and
sincerity.

VER. 14. And having on the brestplate of righteousness, etc.


IN these words is laid down the second piece of this spiritual Armor,
nam^ly, the brestplate of righteousness, which m^st be joined with the former:
as the particle ( And) shows. For verity is, as has been showed, like salt.
Now righteousness is that which it seasons. This is the substance upon which
that does work, that respects only the manner of working. In handling
whereof, we will consider these points.

1 What this righteousness is.

Righteousness is a holy quality wrought in us by the Spirit of God, whereby
we do conform our selves to the whole Law of God. Sometime in Scripture, this
word has relation only to the duties of the second Table, but then it has
always some other word joined unto it, that has reference to God: as (
holiness,) Luke 1.75. Ephesians. 4.24. or it is restrained to that signification, by
the circumstances of the place, as Deu. 24.13. But when it is set alone, it
does respect the whole Law; both the duties to God, and also to men, Mat. 5.20.
This is that which we call Justice, whereby we give unto every man his due. Now
the Law shows what is due from us to God, to others, and to our selves: So
that it cannot be better defined, than a conformity to the whole Law of God.

Object. But then this is such a piece of armor, as never any did attain unto
it, unless it were Adam, Eccles. 7.31. Genesis 1.26. the Saints in heaven, Hebr.
22.23. and Christ Jesus himself, Act. 22.14. Esa. 59.17. But of others, that
of the Apostle, Romans 10.5. is true. There is none righteous, no not one. How
then are we exhorted to put on this brestplate?

Answ. There is a double righteousn^sse mentioned in the Scripture. 1 A Legal
righteousness performed according to the rule and rigor of the Law. 2 An
Evangelical righteousness, in a gracious acceptance according to the
limitations of the Gospel. The former is a full and perfect fulfilling of the
Law, in all and every point and degree thereof, by a man's own self, Romans
10.5. Gal. 3.10, 12.

But the righteousness of the Gospel mitigates the severity thereof, and sets
forth unto us a twofold righteousnes^ 1 Of faith, Romans 10.6, etc. which is
meant here, but in the 6 verse, where it is compared to a Shield.

2 Of a good conscience, which is that powerful work of the Spirit, Gal.
5.22. in the regenerate, when by the endeavor to approve themselves unto God,
by doing those things that the Law requires, Act. 24.16 Hebr. 13.18, This is
here meant, and it consists in two things. 1 The abstaining from evil, all
things offensive to God, and hurtful to man. 2 The doing of good; for those
two must always be joined together, to make up this brestplate, Psalm 119.3.

2 The second point to be considered, is how fitly the grace is resembled to
the metaphor.

The word (...) here used, signifies that part of the body, wherein are
contained the vital parts, the heart, lungs, liver, etc. which being wounded,
there is no hope of life, from the neck to the midst, or to the navel. Hence
is the word also used for that piece of the armor that covers this part. The
use then of of a brestplate, is to keep the vital parts from being mortally
wounded, that a man be not stricken down without recovery. The same use has
righteousn^sse, to keep the soul, from being deadly wounded with the darts of
the devil, that the poison thereof do not pierce through the very heart and
life of grace, and quite extinguish it. For sin, and nothing else is that
which mortally wounds the soul, and pulls Gods wrath upon us. Now from this,
righteousness preserues us, because by it we do avoid sin.

3 The 3 point is, how we must put on this brestplate.

There is no better way, than by the right practice of true repentance; for
repentance is a change and alteration of the mind, and such a change as brings
forth a reformation in our lives. Whence is both an utter detestation and
abiuration of all evil, and a constant resolution to enter into a new course of
life, forsaking all former wickedness. Now where this is indeed, the devil
will not easily, or not at all prevail against us. Otherwise, if it be
wanting, our swinish and doggish nature will still remain; so that howsoever
thoough some judgment of God, or other occasion, we may for a time leave
sin, yet shall we easily return to it again.

4 The fourth point is, What is the benefit and use of this brestplate?

Surely great, and much every manner of way. 1 In regard of the comparison of
it to a brestplate, because it defends our souls from being mortally wounded,
and thrust through with sin: Because such as have this righteousness, will
endeavor to avoid all things that wound the conscience, and to do all things
that preserve, cheer and comfort it.

Object. But do we not see, that they who have been most circumspect and
careful, have fallen into sin, as David, and Peter, etc? How then does this
keep us from being wounded?

Answ. It does not keep a man from being wounded, but from being deadly
wounded: for howsoever they may commit sins that are gross in themselves,
yet in them they are not gross sins, being committed through infirmity,
violence of temptation, want of watchfulness, not with full consent and
desire, etc. So that although they be wounded, yet it is not incurable at the
heart.

Yea, by these wounds they grow the more strong and sound, increasing hereby in
greater fear and care to please God. It keeps them not altogether from sin,
but from giving up themselves to sin, that it do not so seize upon them, as
to soake to the heart, and suck up the blood and life of grace.

2 It serves to give unto us an assured evidence of our spiritual union with
Christ; from whom we have this power and this grace, and so is it a token of
our effectual calling, and of our eternal election, 2 Pet. 1.10. 1 Ioh. 2.29.
And by consequent, of our everlasting salvation. Which assurance makes us bold
and confident.

3 By this we get a good name while we liu^, and when w^e are gone. Also
hereby are we fenced against all that shall speak evil against us, 1 Pet.
3.16. Themselves and not we shall be ashamed, whilst we live blameless,
Luke 1.6. that is, giving no just occasion of blame.

4 This is a great honor and ornament unto our Christian profession, really
confirming the truth of it, when our practice is answerable to our profession.

It strength^neth likewise our port, whilst by our good example we confirm
others that are our fellow soldiers. And lastly, it allureth others to our
profession.

5 Hereby we show our selves to be the Children of God: we imitate and honor
our Captain Jesus Christ, who went against the devil perfe^tly armed with
this brestplate; and give others cause to honor and glorify him, 1 Pet. 2.12.

5 The fifth point to be considered, is, The wiles that the diu^ll uses ^o
d^priue us of the most excellent piece of armor, knowing that so long as w^e
are therewith armed, he cannot pr^uaile: and this he does, 1 by laboring to
make i^ of no use unto us, and this by stretching and beating it out further
then the metal will bear. Thus, by persuading us to trust too much unto it,
making our righteousness a meritorious cause of our salvation: as did the
Pharisees, and as do the Papists, Conc. Trident. sess. 6. Can. 32.

To avoid this wile, observe,

1 That our righteousn^sse is in it self imperfect, and in regard of the
imperfections and pollutions of it coming from us, no better then a filthy
clout, Esa 64.6. And therefore so farr^ from meriting salvation, that it rather
des^rues damnation; and therefore the Saints have always desired pardon for
their best works, Psa. 143.2.

2 That all the righteousness we perform, is but our duty: and therefore
Adam himself, in his integrity could not merit: Christ only did, in regard of
the personal union, Luke 17 10.

3 This conceit of merit does so putrify righteousness, that it makes it
odious to God, being directly contrary to the free grace of God, and
Alsufficient merit of Christ, Romans 11. Gal. 2.

4 That it is only a way which the Lord has appointed us to walk, to testify
our obedience and thankfulness to God, that we might profit our brethren, and
have evidence and assurance of our faith, and effectual calling.

5. In all works of righteousness, let us compare them with the rule thereof,
viz. the Law, so shall we see how imperfect they are, and how far short they
come of that which is required. This will humble us*

2 By laboring to make us lightly to regard this brestplate: and this the
devil does diverse ways.

1 By suggesting unto us that it is a needless piece of armor, because Christ
has satisfied all, and fulfilled the whole Law for us, and has left nothing
for us to do; so that if we have faith, it is sufficient for us. Thu^ did he
deceive the Christians in the Apostles time, taking occasion from that doctrine
of justification by faith alone; and so does he decieue many in these days.

To avoid this, consider, That though our righteousness be no meritorious
cause of salvation, yet it is a way wherein we are to walk; though we are
not saved by it, yet we cannot be saved without it, 1 Cor. 6.9. Heb. 12.14.
Tit. 2.12. Ioh. 3.3. Luke 1.75. Ephesians. 2.10. 1 These. 4.7. Tit. 3.14. (
Necessary.)

2 That God has made nothing in vain, and therefore if he have made as well
the brestplate of righteousness, as the shield of faith, we are to use both:
Yea it is certain, that he that has not the brestplate of right^ousnesse,
cannot hold forth the shield of faith, because he has no ground of any right
and title to Christ* having not his Spirit, which manifests it by the fruits
of righteousness, Iam. 2.21.

2 By persuading us, that it is a combersome and toylesome matter, a great
hinderance to our honor and promotion, our gain, our ease and pleasure, etc.
Thus did he deceive Esau, who is therefore called profane, not regarding to be
of the Church: and Demas, 2 Timothy 4.10. Thus does he deceive the most in these
times. To avoid this, we must consider the fruits and issue, rather then the
present inconveniences. For no armor is like unto apparel to be worn for
pleasure. But if we have an eye unto the issue, all the troubles that we can
endure, are not worthy the bl^ssed fruits that we shall reap of it, Romans 8.18.
2 Cor. 4.17. Esa. 3.10.

3 If thus he cannot prevail, he will object unto us, that it can be of no
use, and stand us in no stead at all, seeing that all our righteousness is but
dross and dung, Esaias 64.6. Phil. 3.8. And by this means he brings many to
desperation.

For to avoid this wile, we are to know that howsoever our righteousness be so
indeed, if either it be compared to the Law of God and his justice, or taken
alone by it self in opposition to Christ, yet notwithstanding as it is a
fruit of Gods Spirit, as coming from ^ heart purified by faith, as done by
the adopted Child of God united to Christ; as it is a way wherein to walk to
heaven; thus it is a matter whereby we may reap much comfort, giving us an
evidence that we belong to Christ, although it be no matter of boasting.

4 He has yet a further wile, he will grant that it is needful and of use:
but yet we need not be too strict and careful* if we have some evidences of
our faith, it is enough; the Lord will pardon, his mercy is great, etc. A
subtle wile, whereby many are dec^iued.

For to avoid this, we^ must consider the nature of righteousness, that is,
that chain which holds us up from falling into hell. The linkes of this chain
are the duties of the Law: if one link be broken, down we fall into hell.

Objection. But we sin all.

Answer. True: but the righteous sin by reason of the frailty of the flesh,
violence of temptation, etc. yet he takes no liberty to sin, with full
consent, to live and lie in it wilfully and wittingly; and therefore, 1 Ioh.
3.9 he sins not, that is, gives not himself over to any one sin.

2 Again, we know not whether we shall ever turn to the Lord or no, or have
time and power to repent, if we refuse to do it, when God calls us.

5 O! But be not ouer-iust, lest thou be desolate, Eccle. 7.18. Men will
forsake thy company, etc.

But we must know that in true righteousness we cannot be too strict in
avoiding of those things that are seen indeed, and in doing of those duties
that are duties indeed. But this is meant, when we will make a righteousness
of our own, and make more sins than God ever made. No marvel then if we be
forsaken. Otherwise we shall be sure to have fellowship with Gods Spirit, with
the good Angels, with the Saints in heaven hereafter.

6 The sixth and last point to be considered, is to give you a view of those
that want this part of spiritual armor, and so lie naked to the devil, and
are mortally wound^d of him. These are,

1 Atheists, Psalm. 14.1.

2 Machiau^llists, who lay this for a ground, that no man should be of so
tender conscience, as for Religion ^ake to be hindered in any plot.

3 Epicur^s, who are wholly and only for themselves, and so regard neither
their duties to God nor to man: as the Judge, Luke 18.

But what? are there such amongst us? Yea. 1 Atheists. We shall know them by
those three notes set down by David, Psalm. 14. Which are: 1 They fear not
God, ver. 1, 2. 2 They call not upon the Lord, ver. 4. 3 They mock at the
righteous, ver 6. Which if we apply to these times, we shall find them true in
multitudes.

2 Machiauellists, for are there not amongst us State-protestants, that make
piety but a matter of policy?

3 Epicures, the notes of them set down, Eze. 16.49. are to be found amongst
us.

All these are openly and notoriously unrighteous: there are others more
privily, as,

1 Such as live honestly, and ciuilly, and deal truly, etc. but yet live in
ignorance, regard not the Sabbath, in brief, make no conscience of the duties
of the first table.

2 Such as will seem pious and religious, but in their dealings are unfaithful
and unjust. If inferiors, rebellious, careless in their charge: if super^o^rs,
etc. How can any of these be said to have on the brestplate of righteousness?

Use of all is, to consid^r the danger we are in, and to be stirred up to use
that help that God has here provided for us; and to this end,

1 To acquaint our selves with the word of God, out of which we may learn what
is true righteousness, that we may be able to distinguish between it and
counterfeit.

2 To acquaint our selves with the use, end, beauty, benefit, excellency and
necessity of this piece of armor.

3 Hereupon to examine our selves of the time past, that we may be humbl^d for
our former failings, that so our former sins may not be in time to come a
dart in the hand of the devil to wound us.

4 Upon examination, to have a holy resolu^ion to enter into this way of
righteousness, and therein to walk.

VERSE. 15. And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of p^ace.


WHen the devil can pr^uaile by none of the former ways, then he labors in
the next place to overthrow us by afflictions, troubles, and persecutions,
which he raises against us, to hinder us in our proceeding. Wherefore the
Apostle, to arm us also against this, bids us to look for troubles and
affliction, and to prepare our selu^s against them with this armor here
prescribed, viz. The shoes of the preparation of the Gospel of peace.

Some understand this for the preaching of the Gospel, as if the Apostle did
allude to Esa. 5 2.7. Romans 10.15. And so they make the profession of the
Gospel to be these shoes here meant, Psalm. 119.105.

But the common and most usual exposition is, that hereby is vn^^rstood the
knowledge of the Gospel of p^ace, that is, of our reconciliation with God.
Which comes neer^st to the point, for hereby come we to be fenced and
prepared against troubles. We are then to understand by the preparation of the
Gospel of peace, not the Gospel it self, but an effect which it works in us.
So that this preparation is that furniture, which the Gospel of peace does
prescribe unto us, and which it does, it does work in us, namely, a heart
settled, and resolved to go boldly through all troubles, which is to be put on
as a pair of shoes. So the Siriacke renders it fitly: Put on as shoes the
preparation of the Gospel of peace.

In handling of this piece of armor, we will go on i^ this order. First, to
consider what is the spiritual grace that is meant hereby.

2 The fit comparison of it to this part of bodily armor.

3 The ground of this patience.

4 The benefit of it.

5 The wiles and subtilties the devil uses to deprive us of this necessary
piece of armor.

1 The grace here understood, is patience: for it is the Apostles purpose to
arm us against troubles: now what so fit a grace for this, as patience, which
in this regard among all other virtues of Job, is only commended unto us, James
5? This is set down by this description, ( The preparation of the Gospel of
peace.) Preparation, or, because by it the heart of man is settled, fixed, and
resolved to go on in the way, what impediments soever are in it.

Of the Gospel.) Because it is the Gospel that does settle the heart: this
brings good tidings, Luke 2.10. Of what? That God has given his Son for us,
ver. 11. that his wrath is pacified toward us, that our sins are forgiven
us. This is that God, which when once we know, our hearts are fully resolved to
bear all things, seeing that now nothing can make us miserable.

Of peace) Both in regard of the subject, and nature of it, in that it first
made tender of peace to man, and still declares and publishes it.

2 And also of the effect, because the Spirit of God, by the preaching of the
Gospel, pacifies the conscience tormented with sin: as was signified by the
song of the Angels, Luke 2.14. This is added, to show the ground of true
patience, viz. That it must be grounded upon the word of reconciliation, for
then only can the heart go on with courage and comfort in enduring all things.

FINIS.

