Here begins a little treatise called the gouernall of health with ye
medecyne of ye stomach.



IN this treatise that is clypped gouernall of health. What is to be said with
crystes help of some things yt long to bodily health had and to be kept or
to bodyly health lost and to bear covered and is departed in.viii. chapytres yt
is to say. In the first chapter of the profit of good gouernall of health. In
the second chapter what is first on morrow to be done. In the.iii. chapter
of bodyly exercise yt is to say besynes and his profit. In the fourth chapter
of spyces of exercise. In the fyfthe chapter how a man should behave him in
mete etynge. In the syxth chapter how a man should be have him in drinking of
his drynkes. In the seventh chapter what should be done after mete. In
the.viii. chapter of the noise of evil governance.

IT needs him that will have long life to know the craft of holsom
governance. And so for to keep contynuelly the health of his body / for else
he may not come to his natural end / but he shall dye or his kyndly time come
/ and therefore thus says Galye^ the conning. He says of wholesome governance
is meruaylous / for it makes a ma to live till he be old and without sykenes
in the last of his old aege. Therefore the same Galyen after that he knew the
craft of wholesome governance / came never in to no sykenesse but selde / that
was into a fymera^ that is to say a sharp fever and that was for trauayll in
vysytynge of his friends / about the common profit / for thus he says / I
take god to record and his au^gelles assygned to keep me that who that
wylfully and besyly will study in ye treatise of holsom governance and will
keep all hole ye doctrine thereof he shall never dye but on and upon kyndly death
which death is sweet and soft without great pain as the same Galyen witness
the in the dyfference of feuerys. But understand yt holsom governance may not
duly keep that most needs be occupied will him or nyll him and may not when
him needs leave of for thy it needs him that he have that needs him to his
life without trauayll and pencyfull and in all things that he be of free
condycyon. And ferthermore it is to wete that.viii. things at the leest ben
need full in wholesome gouernaylle of the which the first is a dyscrete chose
of thoo things that shall be eeten or dronken. The second is welfull bodyly
exercise to foore meet and that till the swetynge begin / of namely till his
wind change fro sloughe to sweetness. The third is well profitable and
well needful that all that shall be eten be well and small chewed. The fourth
is that thou ete while thou have talent to ete. The.v. is yt thou speak on
morrow till you wake by thine own will / for as Arystotle says not only in
metes and drynkes be we nourysshed and fostred but also in sleep. The.vi. is yt
thou take no mete and drink in sorrow ne in care but in Joy as much as you
may The.vii. is that thou have ne hold no cold in winter ne in somer after
blood letynge. The.viii. is that thou use saffron in thy mete / for it
quyckeneth kyndly hete and comfort thy dysgestyon and taryeth thine old
aege and brings in gladness and lets thine humors fro rotynge and dryenge.

IT is in stories of our elders yt on a time a mighty king brought together
three of the best leches that might be / of Ynde / of Mede / and of Greece. and
he commanded them that each of them should study to assygne ye best medycyne
which if a man would use should profit him to help of body and him should
need none other medycyne. Truly the leche of Greece assygned and said that every
day a man to take.ii. his mouth full of hot water / should make a man so hole
that him should need none other medycyne. And the leche of Mede assygned and
said that it should profit much every day fasting to take gromel sede / and
I say said Arystotle yt he that slepeth so much that he has no heaviness in
his womb of mete yt he took to fore hy^ dare not dread of any great sykenes ne
of ye gout Also who that eteth every day erly seven dragmes yt is to say.xxi.
penny weyghte of sweet reysyns he dare not dread of flewmy sykenes and his mind
shall be amended and his understanding shall be slere / and who yt uses in the
time according to his complexyon may be sure and dread not of the fever
quarteyne. Also who that etethe nottes and fygges with a few leaves of rewe yt
day shall no venym him noye. It was axed of Galye^ what medycyne were most
profitable and he answered abstynence. And co^stantyne says in his book yt
hight vyaryk yt who so will keep his co^tynuell health keep his stomak so yt
when him needs mete leave it not ne take no more thereof than him needs / and
the same understood of drink / also in holsom governance sleeth / wrath
great thought / heaviness / anger and such other. For all ghostly accydentes yt
is to say sodeyne falling in to a man's mind outaken Joy alonly dry and
that moysteth netheles some heteth as wrath / for thy wrath profyteth to
flewmatyk men and it harmeth cleryk men. Moreover it is to wete yt in lent
season / yt is to say in veer and in the beginning of somer children be well
at ease after the lykenes of tempred qualytes but other aeges ben well at ease
in contraryous times as old men in somer and young men in winter / also in
wholesome governance keep this rule if thou will be hole and sou^de / flee heavy
charges be not wroth / soupe not to late / and fle under mele sleep wake after
mete and eschew and spare strong drynkes and namely of wine: hyde not thy pysse
/ nor constrayne the not to syege / keep well these three things / gladness in
mind / travail in mesure / and rule of mete / and drink as thou would / ete
boldly in wy^ter / and in veer scarsly / and in somer mesure well thy metes /
and flee namely fruytes of auguste. Arystotle writing to great Alexandre and
said sith to man is a bretyll body me semethe I should write unto the some
profitable thing of lechecrafte if thou will he said besyly behold the
ensample of holsom governance and live after this precious order of diet ye
shall need no leche out take accydentes of battle / and such other / what is
first on morrow to be done

AFter that a man has well and peasybly fulfilled his sleep look he rise and
clothe himself with good cloth and sweet if he have them / then he owethe to
walk a little euenly to stretche out his lymmes and kembe his heed for why
kembynge draws out ye vapors yt come fro the stomak to ye heed in time of
sleep / and therewith look that ye be besye to put out ye superfluytes of ye
body insyegynge pyssynge coughyng and spyttynge / then look he wasshe his
hands and his face in somer with cold water / and in winter with hot water.
Then look he pray and praise his lord after his doctrine of his law / and
vysyte the poor in god / then if he like him he should study or read dyspute
or talk and wise men's cou^ceyll saying besyly here and in mesure be merry and
flee utterly wrath and sorrow in asmoche as he may / and use himself mesurably
to travail as walking or riding and in clean high places fro mire and
marros / for this profyteth much for it breketh wind in a man's body and
strengeth and lengeth his lymmes and comfort the hete of the stomach and
strengeth his Joints / and melts evil humors.

Of the body exercise and of his profit.
WE owen unto know by actours of lechecrafte that tho that shall live fair and
well in holsom governance / ought to have even and te^pered exercise to fore
mete / for that gives to all the body tempered hete even and not passing /
which should a man's exercise be / a phecysyen dyscryueth thus. Exercise is a
wylfull meuynge by which a man's wind is made great and often it needs yt
this trauayl be wylfull / and not stressed by need but that he be all fre and
work after his own will. And therefore labor of carpenters and plowmen
masones maryners and such other is none exercise of lechecrafte / for it has
not properly wylfull meuynge / merchants truly burgeys cloysterers and such
other walking well and long / but it is not properly exercise of lechecrafte.
But when a man walks freely of his own will / and so swyftly till he
begin to faint and his wind change / then anon he should rest / for if he
meuyd any ferther / it should be pain and faintness / and such exercise is
cleped tempred for thereby grow many gods to man's body first for thereby is
ye kyndly hete stre^gthed and each and so ben other four virtues yt is to say /
virtue drawing / virtue defyenge / virtue witholdynge / and virtue out putting
and so ben there.v. bodily wits / yt is to say / herynge / seeing / smelling
/ tastynge / and feeling / and so be^ there three myndly virtues / yt is to say /
maginityf dyscretyf and memoratyf. And though error happed in all these
werkynges of lechecrafte so it were not to notable and exercise were as should
be should never man's body need other medecyne / for exercise fulfylleth ye
defautes of al other / for they be not merry ye dread blodeletty^ge and such
other / but by exercise may be heled netheles.ij. things ben needful to every
well exercysed yt is to say yt he be not to full ne to empy to full then would
the humors louse and so were great dread of the liver or some fever or sodeyne
death for thy in such a case look that there be long dyscrete abstynence so
that he be not to empty for than should his body he feeble out of mesure and at
the last for feebleness it must nedys lose / therefore who that is to empty it
needs yt he labor not till he be more and better releued. Truly auctours
sayen yt exercise is one of the highest and noblest thing yt may be done of to
man's body and full needful it is in gouernall of health and lengthynge of
life for why exercise fulfylleth the medecynes of blodes and bathynges and
such other things / and therein is no dread nor bytternes ne exspenses / but
therein is pure recreacyon of body and of soul so it be done in clean places /
and than should men show themself to the clean air and delight in seeing
far and nere. water and land / heaven and earth / grene and falowe And in all
these he should praise and worship our lord god Fulgens dyscryuyth exercise in
a full manner thus saying exercise is true keeping of man's life and prycke
of kind slepynge and the fylth of foul color and tendynge of slothes hete
and wasting of superfluytes and saddynge of lymmes and sleynge of sykenesses
and dryuynge away of vices medycyne of langores wy^nynge of time and debt of
youth and Joy of old or age and help of health enemy of ydelnes and
dystroyenge of all evil. But among all other things it is to wit that
exercise mesureth mesurably heteth a man's blood and dries it. And therefore
mesurable flumatyke men should use it and rest coleth a man and moysteth him
and that is good for coleryke men for thy he alone draws himself from
exercise yt would feign fail Joy and felycyte in this life. Galyen says yt
great purgacyons and vomytes should not be taken but seldom and for great need
for why Who so will each month ones or twyes greatly purge himself he shall
bring his body to many evil uses for he shall enge^dre theri^ many noyous
humors for why each day exercise is fulled full to keep a man's health for who
yt eteth or drynketh much / may not be hole but if he will so^what sleep and
swynke. Then these things yt be said it shows yt mesured exercise has many
profytes for it / styreth ye kyndly hete and opens the poores / and louseth
cold and thycke tough humors And when they ben loused bears them out at the
poores and makes a man's joints slypper and light and it comforts all the
members of a man's body. Wherefore noyous humors ben more holsomly pourged and
mesured by exercise than by laxatyues or vomytees / for another of them may be
without empeyrement of kind / and right as due keeping of kyndly exercise is
needful / so other while is rest. For why rest in asmoch as it is contrary
to exercise / some is bodyly / some is ghostlye / of which each either if it
be mesured after that kind would it is heleful both to the body and soul /
and if it be not so it is contrary. For why if rest be to much it enge^dreth
nouryssheth and multypleth evil humors and increases much corrupcyon. For
why when water restethe to much it sty^keth / so Iron and each metal rusteth
when it rests.

The spyces of exercise.
SPyces of exercise ben there well many as there ben diverse states of persons
/ some ben strong and some be feeble / some rich and some poor / and some
prelates at the large and some subgectes and enclosed and sometime weder is
fair and clear and sometime not so but derke and rain / and therefore it
needs to have spyces of exercise for why ye best spyce and ye first is to walk
tofore mete in high places and clean. Another spyce is to ride and that is for
rich men / but great prelates must have other manner of exercise for why in
chamber shall be a great cord knytted in the end and hanged up / and take that
cord with both hondes and stand vpryght so that thou touch not the earth
and stand a good while then rynne as much as thou may heder and theder
with that cord and other while skyppe / and if this please the not / have a
stone of.xxx.li. weight or there about and if thou will have health therein
often bear that stone fro that one side of the house to that other side / or a
long while hold up that stone or thou let it down or bear it about thy
neck / or bythene thyn ho^des / and so of other manners till thou faint or thus
hold a staff in thy hand and let another take it from the if he may with
even draught / or thus close a penny in thine hand and let an other take it if
he may or thus hold thy breath as long as thou may and then puff it out as
herd as thou may do. And this manner of exercise is full prouffytable to put
out noyous superfluytees / for why many superfluytees in sleep ben witholde^
therefore if thou have none other manner of exercise holding of brethe helps
it much. Yet there ben other manners of exercise for young men that been lusty
as to run / to wrestle / to lepe / too cast the stone / and so of other
plays / also tempred fresshely companynge with a young broune woman is good in
winter / and with a young white woman is good in somer and is also good and
helping in gouernyng of health to boby but not to soul / except to them than
that mowen have it by gods laws so netheles that there be so much time
between yt he feel hy^self eased and lyghtned in his body and that he ete the
better and sleep the better. But therewith understand that asmoche as helps
tempred compaynyenge so much noyeth dystempred companyenge and namely to
much for it coleth him wastes him and febleth him. For why man's kind is
made of ye best blood and best defied that hastily may torn in to man's
lymmes. And for why when a man casts out that noble humors to much he is
hugely dyosclored and his body much febled more then he let four sythes so
much blood out of his body / also who that much deleth or companyeth
flesshly with a woman lightly catches the palsy with more evil.

How a man should behave him in etynge.
When a man has well exercysed him as it is said tofore / rest a while after
and when a little fresshe whete bread well baked and somdele soured then drink
a draught of good clear wine or other good sauery drink then rest a while
after and study in some wise means the^ have some solace and mirth with thy
friends and with other honest company. Then against even take thy mete and
supper most sauourly but if thy custom be there against. But general rule of
all fysyke and leches / is that thyn hour of etynge be wha^ you art ky^dly
hu^gry / and tofore ye hu^gre ete not / but if it be a little mess of good
werme mete to provoke thy^ appetyte with and when thou have appetyte let not /
for as a fecysyon says the stomak out of use to suffer hunger fulfylleth ye
body of roten humors. And then will a man's body wex noughty humors / because
yt the colere is drawn to ye mouh of stomak / so yt aftward wha^ he would ete
he may not. Ferthermore it is to wit yt no man should ete but he knew
certainly his stomach void of that thing that he ete to fore / and that
shall a man know by desire that he has to ete / and by plente of spyttynge
coming up to his mouth. For who yt eteth without desire of his mete shall
find the kyndely hete of his stomach cold / and he that eteth with desire he
shall find kyndely his stomach give up a smell and sauoure like ensence / by
these and such other should be understand of them that have mete ordained at
their own will / and who that will not ete when some ever that he might have
mete for they ben not bounden to the laws of this craft dyatory as to the
qualytees of the metes / understand that thylke mete which that most
governs thyn health should not be passing in any qualyte / for why / metes
that been to hot brenne the blood as peper / garlyk / onyons / cresses / sauge
/ myntes percely / and such other / and tho metes that been to cold fresen the
blood / as letuse / pursylam / gourdes and such other. And if thy metes ben to
watery then they rote the blood / as ben melons / cocumbres / and if thy metes
ben to dry it throws out thine vytayle virtues and if thy metes ben to fat
they let thy dysgestyon and if thy metes ben to sweet they stope yt and make
the constypute and costyffe and thy metes ben bitter they nourysshe the not.
And if thy metes be to salt they brenne noye and break thy stomak and if thy
metes ben to sour they make ye sone old. For thy none of these metes much
and contynuelly use is good to health of man's body but only that mete is good
yt is te^pored and lacks to mykelnesse as be^ these good metes for health of
man's body and holso^ la^be or young kyddes souky^g calves he^nes capo^s
cheky^s pertryches plouers fesau^tes small birds of ye field and of the wode
but not of the water. And when the season comes yo^ge rabottes and pigs feet
ben good and other extremities as groye^ and eres and scaled fysshe of clean
rennynge water Rere eyren or eggs. Also borage ox tongues whete bread well
bake and wellauyned and somdele salted of yt that is one day old or tweyne and
of other that been not to much passing in any qualyte and if we dread excess
of any qualyte amend it by the contrary thereof an insample if you be seek of
evil and toughe metes use therefore sharp metes and short as a little of
hard chese scraped small and of little quantyte / and also a pere or two or
three of the most best fruit to thy complexion and nature. Sothly salt metes
sour and bitter may be amended with sweet apples sweet metes ben amended with
sweet honey and good old wine and so of all other and if thou will ete fruit
ete them fast cheryse / grapes and almondes and after mete a few peers quynces
and nottes a few while they ben grene and walnottes ben best but let ye skin
be clean pycked away fro the mete. Also the complexyon of a man should be looked
to as if he tempred keep him so with like metes and drynkes and if it be
dystempred by his contrary bring it little and little again to tempre and for
why to sangweyn men dystempred give malyncolyous metes and to malyncolyous men
sangweyn metes and to flewmatyk men / colered metes / for every evil complexion
may be brought to tempre. But if necessaryes of lyuelode let it. And know wha^
you will and note it for a sovereign notabylyte / who yt eteth often mylk and
fysshe often katche thereof a lepre or a white scabbe. Also often to use hye
colored wine and milk togyd bri^geth a man to both lepre and scabbe / here
none suffyseth of qualyte of metes as to the quantyte / understand that thy
mete ne thy drink should be no more / but as thy kyndly health might ouercom
it else / thy body shall wast and thy virtues vex feeble. And for the quantyte
of metes drynkes may not certainly be spewed look how thou felyst it has done
the most good and such qua^tyte use. Ferdermore understand that no man
should ete anon after his exercise ne anon after he were bathed / but first
rest him a while so that he hungre and then when he will ete if he be a rich
man set tofore him many meets of which yt one is better than that other For a
fecysyon says it shall better save him and beter nourysshe him and skyll why
for mete yt is taken with delight the stomach hugely coueyteth hastily katcheth
long holds and well defyeth and that mete that is best defyeth is most
nourysshynge for man's body. Truly other mete yt is not defied is taken with
fulso^nes and defyeth not well / for why a man desire more moton the^ a capon
ye moton shall rather be eten and so of all other metes. But there yt is much
dystaunce in qualyte of metes we may not do thus and also beware yt it be none
erraunt appetyte as in women yt ben with child and though it otherwhyle be ye
shall it not always be denied. Ferthermore as Galyen says yt at one mele me^
should not ete diverse metes and therefore at morrow ete but bread alone and at
even flesh alone for when two diverse metes ben take at one male of the^ come
two euylles one in either by it self a another in them both together in
themself for then one trauayleth to torn in to great and heavy humors and
that other in to subtle and light in them both for if subtle mete go before
it is first defied and goes forth and draws with hy^ the great metes
vndefyed and if the great metes goo first to fore than the subtle mete is not
medefyed and may not for the great go forth and so it wexeth corrupt And
which of these manners ever it be always it is evil but more evil it is that
the subtle follow the great for the chaufynge / and chaungynge in to kind of
raunes may be helped / but the chaungynge in to corrupcyon never or seldom and
of wonder hard is helped. And thereto accords Galyen a fycysyon and other
doctors but nevertheless peradventure a contraryous custom long used may do
away the corrupcyon. Also wete well that virtue of defyenge is often broken
when raw mete is put on half soden for the one rawnes sheueth out the other and
so the half soden is corrupt. Moreover that no man ete so much yt the stomak
be euyed therewith ne that his appetyte cease. But who yt uses great exercise
and to much and selde and therewith eteth unruly and contyneth it he shall dye
by sodeyn death or shall feel wicked syknes ye though his mete were right good
for by cause his degestyon is corrupt therefore keep well thy stomak from to
much mete and drink. And it so myshap any time anon with water and oil of
such other spue it out anon / and than sleep and if thou may not sleep walk
softely up and down and.xxiiii. hours ete not after / ne drink not than ete
a little with a draught of good clean wine so the wine be not to great ne of
high color and on the third day have some exercise and be bathed than ete a
little after and after sleep and thou may than use this electuare dyatryon as
says a fycysyon. Two cause be of sykenesses yt is diverse metes and long
sytty^ge and much ety^ge of diverse metes for of them ben gendred diverse
humors some good and some evil long sitting for then the mete yt is first
take is defied or the last begin to defye and so that is defied draws with
him to ye liver yt is vndefyed and so these two ben cause of great sykenesses.
Also as old wise men saying / ma^shold never ete his fill at one mele in
taking diverse metes for as a wyseman says no thing is worse than to multeply
metes and so to sytte long thereat for thy he says yt men in old time were
satysfyed at morrow with bread alone and therwt they said resonably the more mete
should be toward even / but the custom were contrary for a uycenne says yt
hole men should better ete at against night then on morrow for the kyndly hete
is closed wtin the^ and gadereth about ye bowelles / netheles flewmatyk me^ ete
not to cold for they need but little exercise to meue her ky^dly hete which mo
weete by the morrow But now the most usage is here again and among many men
it is found more holso^ to ete by day then by night and parauenture yt is
skyll of custom And therefore thus says a wise man short souper and light
souper is selde^ grievous great soupers noyen as leches teache we read it often
openly also as a uycenne says between two etynges.xi. hours to be is
profitable and so ete thryes in two days as to day twyes and to morrow but
ones and so to continue forth so yt if error fall in twyes etynge / and so
again ward for that one must be amended by that other sithe it is hard to
live without error in moreover understand that men that have good
understanding / etynge for they would live but they that gone by flesshelynes
would live for to ete and ontrary to nature. And wit thou well that too a
coleryk man's stomach when the virtue is strong and great hete great metes
ben good. As be of porke great venyson and great bestly fysshes rough and great
bread salt mete flesh half soden and great mighty colored wine / and if ye
hete of the stomach be feeble and if he have but little exercise ye metes
aforsayd would much noye hym-but to such a stomach give subtle metes as
chekens and small fysshes of stony renny^ge water. rere eggs bread well baken
and well soured small wine and of clean and oryent color not deep and such
other. But these metes should be corrupt of an hot stomach / and if the
virtue dygestyffe be in ye mean time of dyetyng as capons hens partryches and
such other. Also and governance of health fle all cessyuous metes and namely
these but if it be for a medycyne / fle also al fruits and all herbs yt ben
not good as these namely / cole wortes and letuse for they make maly^colyous
blood Galye^ says yt my fader ever forbad me yt I should ete no new fruits
and grene if I would be without sykenesse / and while he lived so did I and was
also without sykenesse / and when he was deed I ete fruits and caught ye fevers /
and after yt I caught conning to keep myself I kept me from fruits. And I
had no more ye fevers / but if it were a little sharp. fever called offymera /
and all my friends yt kept my doctrine / kept the^ from fruits and had their
health / Arnolde a great clerk says thus. In lent long usage of stoppy^ge
metes / as fysshe and pese potage therefore it is profitable first to ete porrey
of pesen / for this is a war that wise men has commended / and thus it is made
/ do pesen in fair water all night and in the same water boil them on the
morrow a good while and then cleanse the^ and keep the clensyng and when mete
time comes do thereto a little wine powder of spyknard a little saffron and
clean small salt and then boil it on a walme / and so ete it for it opens
and cleanses well the capytall veins of ye liver and ye ways often of ye vryne
/ and keeps fro the stone and grauelles namely if ye foresaid pesyn be soden in
the foresaid water with persely.

How a man should behave him in his drink.
THe less ye drink at mete ye better it is ever so it be mesurably taken /
for a man should not at mete drink much lest it make mete to swy^me in his
stomak / wherefore me^ should dry^ke a little / so yt the mete be well meddled
and te^pred together. And then let it be a long while or you drink again / and
tha^ drink a great draught at ones ne drink not to much after ye first
morcell in no manner of wise / but drink often a little and a little of small
clean wine best according to health and gouerny^ge of thy co^plexyon and nature
/ and for health of body is clean and small claret wine not to new ne to mighty
so it be well and proporsyonly tempered with ye quantyte of clean water. More
over no man be so hardy to drink fasting cold water / nor after yt he has
accompanied with a woman nor after great travail nor after exercise till he
have first rested him / nor by night namely if he have glove tofore / for why
long sleep and fast slepynge is cure thereto.

What shall be done after mete.
AFter when thou haste ete thou sholdest stand or walk a little softely up
and down till thy mete goo down to the botom of the stomach and then sleep
a little if that thou be used thereto both ye day and the night namely sleep
first on thy right side for that is kyndly for thy dygestyon shall be better
for the^n lies thy liver under thy stomach / as fire under a caudron. And
after thy first sleep torn on thy left side yt thy right side may be rested
of thy long lyeng thereon. And when thou have layen thereon a good while and
slepte turn again on thy right side and there sleep all night forth / and look
yt thou lie not to straight ne to crooked with thy legs but in a mean between
straight and crooked. And in no wise lie not vpryght / for the^ will the
superfluytes abide within the and turn to wicked and grievous euylles contrary
to health. Also to ly grouelynge on the womb is good / so yt thy brethe be not
greuyd therwt and ye heuyer and the gretter thy mete be and the more thou haste
taken thereof / ever the longer thy night sleep be and ever the subtyler yt thy
mete be and ye less thou have ever the less should thy sleep be. For sleep is
full helpy to old men for it makes them moist and therefore says Galyen when
he was old he ete letuses with spyces for he would sleep the better. More over
sleep is full helpy to the dygestyon of thy metes but not anon after that thou
have eten for thou myghtest be strangled. Also wit thou that if a man before
auauntyssyed of his body / much sleep then is not good for him for it will
waste his moystenes / and of one thing beware that to long sleep or to short
febleth a man's body and breketh it. And after thou have ete^ take no
latuaryes nor other hot things for they turn thy mete to corrupcyon nor
anon after thou haste ete run not nor ride not to fast for then every
stre^ge meuynge thing turns thy mete to corrupcyon / also ye virtue
dygestyffe is nourysshed through rest also after mete and tofore asmoch as you
may sle wrath sorrow and pe^cyfulnesse and right as tofore me exercyses be^
good so after mete they noye and rest is best. Moreover Aueroys says right as
cold water cast in a pot boylynge lets ye boylynge for a time / so to
drink after mete namely sone lets ye dygestyon and makes it to cease for a
time / and therefore it is not good after mete to drink much till the mete be
defied / but after mete to suffer thrust somewhat is good. And if you will
easily void thy stomach stand after thy souper till you be weary or walk a
thousand paces and wit thou yt glotery and when thy mete defyeth not well
what ever ye case be bathing ne blood lettynge ne exercise ben not good but
rest sleep abstynence and dyatryon pypyon. Exercise is not good for thereby
should thycke raw humors be lole and then thereof the lymmes should be
nourysshed and yt were evil / for why in such exercise ye kyndly hete is not
comforted but more febled and strau^glyd for ye raw humors are dyssolued for
right as water quenches fire so raw humors quenches kyndly health.

Of noyes of evil governance.
THere be^ many yt only not use evil governance i^ metes and dry^kes but also
may^tene it / and as they seyen be^ well at ease and well defyen and they
scorn leches and otherwise men that use good governance for they believe yt
they should be excused of their error by there long custom for why custom is
a full strength in kepy^g of man's body. And ye said Galye^ thus custom is
better defied / wherefore thus says Auycee^ evil mete used is better the^ good
mete not used ye contrary of all these says Co^stantyne as it seems thus glad
they not yt use evil mete though they be not now hurt aft they shall not so
escape / heart me^ may say ye custom accords with ky^de or if it accord it
shall be holde^ and if it accord not and be not roted it shall be cast away
but not suddenly but little and little. For thy though it seem the^ yt good
gouernaylle of custom that they ben well by reason of custom / virtue /
strength or aege. Nethelesse her virtues wasting pryuely and so every day they
ordeyn the^ to lepre or to sodeyn death. As they yt long time use befe old
salted or bestly fysshes or raw flesh or they that sleep to little / or
exercise to much after mete or out of mesure cold or hot and so of many other
truly of such it may be said. But if they leave of / they shall not a sterte
the broke of death.

FOr health of body cover for cold thy head
Ete no raw mete take good head thereto
Drink holsom wine feed the on light bread
With an appetyte rise from thy mete also
With women flesshely have not a do
Upon thy sleep drink not of the cup
Glad toward bed at morrow both two
And use never late for to suppe
And if it so be that leches done the fail
Then take good head to use things three
Temporat diet temporate trauayll
Not malyncolyous for none aduersyte
Meke in trouble glad in pouerte
Rich with little content with suffysaunce
Never grutchynge merry like thy degree
If fysyk lack make this thy governance
To every tale give thou no credence
Be not to hasty ne suddenly vengeable
To poor folk do no vyolence
Curtoyse of langage of fedynge mesurable
On sundry mete not gredy at the table
In fedyn^ge gentle prudent in dalyaunce
Close of tongue in word not deceyuable
To say the best set always thy plesaunce
Have in hate mouths that been double
Suffer at thy table no detraccyon
Have despyte of folk that been troubelous
Of false raueners and adulacyon
Within thy court suffer no dyuysyon
Wtin thy household it shall cause increase
Of all welfare prosperyte and foyson
With thy neighbors live in lest and peace
Be clean cladde after thine estate
Pass not thy bonds keep thy promise blyue
With three folk be not at debate
First with thy better beware for to strive
Against thy felawe no quarrel for to contryue
With thy subget to strive it were shame
Wherefore I cou^ceyll pursue all thy live
To live in peace / and get the a good name
Fire at morrow and toward bed at eve
Again mystes blake / and air of the pestylence
Be time at mass you shalt the better cheue
First at thy rysynge to do god reverence
Vysyte the poor with entyere dylygence
On all nedy have compassyon
And god shall send grace and Influence
The to increase and thy possessyon
Suffer no surfettes in thy house at night
Ware of rere soupers and of great excess
Of noddynge hedes and of candell light
Of sloth at morrow ne eslombre Idylnesse
Which of all vices chief porteresse
Void and dronklew / liars and lechours
Of all unthrifty exyle the maystres
That is to say dyse players and hasardours
After mete beware make not to long sleep
Head foot and stomach preserve aye from cold
Be not to pensyfe of thought take thou no keep
After thy rent mayntene thy household
Suffer in time in thy right be bold
Swear none oaths no man to begyle
In thought be lusty sad when thou art old
No worldly Joy lasts but a while
Drink not at morrow before thine appetyte
Fro thing contrary to their complexyon
Of great hondes the stomach has great pa^yne
Thus in two things stondeth all thy wealth
Of soul and of body who so list them show
Moderate fode gives to man his health
And all surfettes does from him remewe
And charity to the soul is dew
This receyte bought is of no potycary
Of master Antony ne of master Hughe
To all indyferent it is rychest dyetarye
Here ends the gouernall of health. Enprented in fleet street in London in the
sign of the son by Wynkyn de word.

wynkyn de word




