PLAYS Confuted in five Actions, Proving that they are not to be suffered in a
Christian common weal, by the way both the Cauils of Thomas Lodge, and the
Play of Plays, written in their defense, and other objections of Players
friends, are truly set down and directlye aunsweared.

By Steph. Gosson, Stud. Oxon.

S. Cyprian. Non diserta, sed fortia.
LONDON Imprinted for Thomas Gosson dwelling in Pater noster row at the sign
of the Sun.

To the Right Honorable Sir Frances Walsingham Knight, one of the principal
Secretaries to her excellent Majesty, of her highness most honorable Privy
Counsel, and Chauncellor of the order, Stephen Gosson wishes prosperity in
this life, and life everlasting in Christ our Savior.
IT is reported (Right Honorable) of Callicratides, that being appointed by
the Lacedaemonians to succeed Lysander as Admiral of their Fleet, the
Atheniens sent out above ^ hundred and fifty Ships ^^ainst him: whereupon
the Master of his Ship persuadinge him to retire without offeringe his
enemies any play, because he was to deal with the greater number; he
answered, that Sparta would be never the worse though he were ^oylde, but to
^^e, was in his judgment, the greatest reproach of all. So fares it this
present time with me, which giving forth my Defiaunce unto Plays, am mightily
beset with heaps of adversaries, yet such is the Majesty of the Cause, that,
though all the pride of mine enemies, and pomp of Athens be ship^ to meet
me, it will stand upright, when I with Callicratides am overthrown, but to
shrink in so good a quarrel, is in my opinion, more foul a disgrace then
death it self. God knows I never undertook this troublesome piece of work
for any vain glory as Crassus did his Inuectiue against Carbo, and repented
him afterward, because it was a hatchet to his own liberty, setting many
men's eyes a work to watch him; nor of any fantastical ouer-hardinesse, as he
that having taken a Wolf by the ear, neither lets him go; for being
assaulted; nor is able to master him for want of might: But as the Wrastler
entering the list, first tastes his strength, by lifting some churlish piece
of weight at the arms end, and therevvith as it were rebateth his stomach,
for being too rough when he comes to grapple; I first weighed in my hands the
aunciente Fathers of the Church, that the massinesse of their arguments in
this matter might cause me not to deal so ouerthvvartlye and stubbornelye, as
the Defendantes of Players have deserved. Nevertheless I thought it necessary
to nettle one of their Orators above the rest, not of any set purpose to deface
him, because he has dealt very grossly, homely, and uncharitably with me,
but like a good Surgeon to cut, and to sear, when the place requires, for
his own amendment. Which thing I trust shall neither displease your honor,
nor any of the godly, in the reading, so long as the person whom I touch is
(as I hear by his own friends, to his repentance if he can perceive it)
hunted by the heavy hand of God, and become little better than a vagarant,
looser than liberty, lighter than vanity it self. The right, for the
recovery vvherof I framed these actions belongs not to me, but unto God,
whose manner is to beat down the loftiness of usurpers, not with the
vvisdome of the world, or with preparation of spear and shield, but with the
foolishnes of the Gospel, and the nakedness of his truth. Therefore it had
been as dangerous for me, in this simple Confutation of our Comedies, to play
with my pen by seekinge fine pouders for deintie noses, as it is for the
soldier to dally with his weapon when the battle ioynes. It is one thing to
flourish, an other to fight, one thing to brag, another to come to handye
gripes. Finding Plays of themselves, as filthy as the stables of Augia,
impossible to be cleansed before they be carried out of England, with a
stiff stream, and the banishinge of them as worthy to be registered in the
labors of Hercules as the conqueringe the monstrous wild Bore, of Erymanthus,
that wasted the country round about: If ever so notable a thing be brought
to pass it must be done by some Hercules in the Court, whom the roar of the
enemy ca^ never daunt. Which persuaded me amongst all the patrones of virtue
in her Majesty's court to dedicate both this and my self unto your honor, that
your wisdom might be a countenance to my study, your authority a buckler
unto my life. Agamemnon a valiant Captain of the Greeks, thought verily,
that if he might have but ten such as Nestor to take his part, it would be
no trouble to sack Troy: I have been always of this opinion, that if but one
such as Nestor, that is, your honor, do no more then thruste out your hand to
succor me, let the wicked discharge their shot at my face, Plays will be
easily fired out: and I when I sleep shall be as safe, as the child in his
cradle, whose mother will not suffer a fly to bite him. Mean while I most
humbly crave pardon for my boldness, in presuming, to crepe into your honors
patronage: I make as much accounte of your honor, as the Atheniens did of
Paralus their holy ship, that was n^uer lanched but upon high, and great
affaires^ The Ge^tlemen Players in the city of London, are grown in such a
heat, that by their foming, their fretting, their stampinge, my friends do
perceive how their hearts work, and enfor^eme to bring to your honor no common
fraighte, but as much as my life and security hereafter shall be worth. If
the providence of God, who many times scourges a man with the sin that he
loved, have ordained those players whom I fed with fancies, to be a whippe to
my back, and a dagger to my breast, the fault is mine own, the punishmente due:
But if it be the pleasure of the Almighty, rather in mercy to deliver, then in
justice to confound; and by your honorable patronage to snatch me out of the
jaws of those ravenous wolves, that have whetted their teeth to pull me down;
I shall learn to employ my study to the glory of God, and be bound to your
honor vvhilest I live. Thus vvishing a charitable mind to them, better
success unto my self, plentye of happiness to your honor; I leave them and me
to your honors consideration, and your honor to the tuition of God himself.

To the Rightworshipful Gentlemen and students, of both Universities, and the
Innes of Court.
TWo things (Gentlemen) I ^ercei^e to be invincible in ye world, both which,
to my grief, are quite against me, Favor, and Eloquence: the one in Players,
and that I fear: the other in you, and that perad^e^ture will stay my passag. I
mistrust that the favor, which Players have got with the greater multitude,
will make them prejudicial to the cause I handle, for love is so blind, that
it never sees any blemishe in the thing it likes, but a ^iuy, even by the
smallest, and weakest proppes that it ^atcheth, finds a way to rear it
self. The eloquence that is in you, as I confess it to be great, so were it
not greatly to be doubted, if it were but indifferent in my self. Now since my
Rhetorike is little, my Eloquence nothing, compared to you, whose continuali
exercise, is joined to continual study: though the truth be as sure on my
side, as the succession of night is to the day, yet I hold my self vanquished
before you s^rike.

One being asked of Archidamus the king of Sparta, whether he, or Pericles
were the better wras^ler, a^swered, that he could not ^ell: for, when I throw
him (quoth he) he denies he was down, and persuadeth the beholders to believe
him: Such is the excellency of your wit, if it be bent to contend with me
for Plays, that how^oener I trip you, or fetch you over, you are a^le to say
that I come not near you, and make the Reader auoueh it, agains^e the open
testimony of his eyes. I would Readers considered y^ when they come to ^he
view of any new book, they are bid by their friend as ghestes to a banquet:
at a banquet if any dish be before you, which your stomach a^hors, It is a
poin^e of good manners, somewhat orderly to remove it: In books if any thing
be offered that you cannot relish, curtesy wills you, with a thankful kind
of modesti^ to refuse it. Our fathers forefathers in older time, were wont to
place Mercury in their Temples among the Graces, whose meaning was, that as
Mercury was counted the God of utterance: and the three Graces, the Ladies of
Curtesy: so placinge the shrines of them together, might teach us to know that
spee^^ is desirous of frendlye ears, and writers have great need of Gentle
Readers. When Gentlemen read with a mind to bark, their throtes are so
narrow that nothing will down: whatsoever we speak is too round or too
flat, too blunte or too sharp, too square or too crooked, one way or other
it stands a wry. The fairest city in the world may be overthrown, with
less charge, less labor, less time, than it can be builte: a bracke is
sooner spiede than drawn together: books many times are speedily reprehended,
but amended by leisure, at the Calendes of the Greeks. It is the property of
some kind of Dogs, to tear the skin of the beast with wonderful
stomach, when it is dead and within the doors, which abroad they never durst
open at when it lived: and diverse iollie sif^ers in these days can toss, and
turn, and within their own walls make dishecloutes of writers, whose sight
would be too hot for their presence if they might join. Seeinge many books
printed and few liked, I conjecture with my self that the reason is, that some
ar curious, some froward, some idle. W^ know that counsel is as necessary to
our ears as light to our eyes, the one is a lantern to the body, the other a
bright shining lamp unto the soul. Receiving instruction, if your tooth be
too white, you may chance to sterue: if your nose be so fine that nothing will
please you, but that which is sweet, you may well be compared to those nice
kind of Dames which in platting of Garlands forget their thrifte, or to him
which thinks it impossible to quench his thirst, if his drinks be not serude
in a cup of gold: if you be contentious and overthwart, willinger to cauil,
than to learn: contented to read, but not to regard: to be taught, but not
reformed: you are like unto him that forsakes the Physician when he is cut,
and never permits him to finish the cure: if you be so slow, of your selves,
that because writers many times do not set down every thing that may be
spoken, but only point with their fingers to the place, where you may be
satisfied if you seek it, you will not travel and study to fish it out, you
are not much unlike to naked birds in the nest that ever lie yauning at the
bill of ye dam, and search for no more then is put in their mouths. You know it
is a notable point of folly for a man to toaste himself by his neighbors fire,
and never bestirre him to keep any warmthe in his own chimnie: as great a
madness is it in many Readers, when they are taught, not seek to mainetaine it
of their own: which is, to content themselves with the glorious blase of an
other ma^s knowledge, whereby they outwardly get some color in their cheeks,
but within they are duskie, dark and obscure. Many things might be spoken
against Plays, for the vain ostentation of a flourishinge wit, bravely, for
satisfieng the^ that are insatiable, largely: for instructing of them that are
unlearned, plainly: which I have omitted. For, to tread alof^ among you as a
tragical Poet in my bus^ins, were as fondly done as to throw water in the sea
where it can not be seen: to dilate this discourse for the insatiable, were as
much as to close up the mouth of Curtius gulf, that will never be stopped but
with my life: to lay open every thing to ye ignorant, were without judgment to
charge them beyond their strength, which are to be fed like children, with a
little, and often.

What effect my labor will take among you, I am not sure, yet hope the best, at
all adventures I have committed it to the Press. Seiramnes the Persian seeing
many men wonder that he spoke w^sely, but nothing that ever he spoke was
regarded: told them that words were ^uer in his own power, but success^ was
never within his rea^he. You may see if you please, that the counsel I bring is
good and sound, but if you despise it when it is read, I will comfort my self
as Seiramnes did: I have my books in my study at commandment: you are out of
my walk, and your own men. I was very willing to write at this time, because
I was informed by s^^e of you which ^eard it with your ears, that ^i^^e my
publishing the Schole of Abuse, two Plays of my making were brought ^o the
Stage: the one was a cast of Italian devises, called, The Comedy of Captain
Mario: the other a Moral, Praise at parting. These they very impude^tly affirm
to be written by me since I had set out my in^ec^iue against them. I can not
deny, they were both mine, but they were both pe^ned two years at the least
before I forsook them, as by their own friends I am able to prove: but they
have got such a custom of counterfaiting upon the Stage, that it is grown to
an habit, and will not be left. God knows, before whom to you all I do
protest, as I shall answer to him at the last day, when al hidden secrets shall
be discovered, since the first printing of my Inuectiue, to this day, I never
made Play for them nor any other. Therefore if ever they ^e so shameless, and
gra^^les ^o be^ye me again, I beseech God, as he has given me more wit, to
spend my time well: so to send to them more honestye, to speak a truth. I
could purge my self of this sclaunder in many words, both how I departed from
the City of London, and bestowed my time in teaching young Gentlemen in the
Country, where I continue with a very worshipf^ll ^entleman, and read ^o his
sons in his own house: but the men are so vain, and their credit so light,
that the least word I speak is enough to choke them. He that reprehe^ds a
vice, and shunnes it not, snuffes the Lamp to make it burn, but puts in no
oil to nourishe the flame. Therefore as son as I had inueighed against
Plays, I withdrewe my self from them to better studies, which so long as I
live I trust to follow.

Thus submitting my book and my self to your judgment, I leave to trouble you
any farther, craving this at your hands before we part, that if any Player
belie me in your hearing upon the stage, you would rather consider of the
person than of the speech, for a Player is like to a Merchants finger, that
stands sometime for a thousand, sometime for a cipher, and a Player must
stand as his part falls, sometime for a Prince sometime for a peasant.

Yours Stephen Gosson.

The first Action.
IF any that have known me already by acquaintance, or shall know me hereafter
by reading some part of my simple travels, chance to wonder, that I whic^e
heretofore have not only so favored, but written Plays, that my pen has
been readier to defend them, then to deface them; now with alteration of mind
so depely accuse that which so highly I esteeemed. Whatsoever he be, if he
weigh the reason that moves me thereunto, I trust he will both allow that
which by my School of Abuse has past against them: And think it necessary
for me at this time, to renew my plea. When I first gave my self to the
study of Poetry, and to set my cunning abroache, by penning Tragedies, and
Comedies in the City of London: perceiving such a Gordians knot of disorder in
every play house^ as would never be loosed without extremity, I thought it
better with Alexander to draw ye sword that should knappe it a sunder at one
stroke, then to seek ouernicely or g^^gerly to undo it, with the loss of my
time and want of success. This caused me to bid them the base at their
own gole, and to give them a volley of heathen ^riters: that our divines
considering the danger of such houses as are set up in London against the
Lord, might batt^r them thoroughly with greater shot. But such is the
queasinesse of our stomach, that like unto ^r^ueilers at the Sea, being ready
to cast, we think to find remedy by change of place, sprawling down from the
Ship to the Cockb^a^e, yet are never the near, so long as the hum^ur works
within us: and acknowledging the ^^schefe bred by plays we hope to avoid yt by
changing their day yet suffer the^ still to remain among us. Wherein we may
well be compared to children that holdinge yse in their ^andes, for
discomodities sake are unwilling to keep it; and for wantonn^s, loath to le^ it
go. Co^mod^s a Romane^ Emperor, was so excellent in throwinge of ^i^ darte,
that having gotten Sundry sorts of wild beasts, as marks for the exorcise
of his hand, the whole city of Rome assembled together to behold him, neither
^^we him throw twice at one mark, nor give any wound which was not deadly:
And yt were to be wished that every man which talks upon him to rebuke
sin, should level so straight with Commodus, and stick so sure, that as often
as he shootes at deformityes, he might hit them, and as often as he hittes,
kill; So should the readers with the Romans see, neither any kind of
monster twice gaulde, nor any vice recover the first wound. Nevertheless as
some Philosophers are of this opinion that the heavens because they move do
yield a kind of harmony in their mottion, yet if you request to know the
reasone, why we discern it not by the ear, their answer is, that we never
hear it, because we ever hear it. So the abominable practices of plays in
London have been by godly preachers, both at Paul's cross, and el^^ where, so
zealously, so learnedly, so loudly cried out upon to small redress; that I may
well say of them, as the Philosophers report of the moving of the heavens, we
never hear them, because we ever hear the^. Whereby I gather, that the
wisdom of man, is able to rule any thing but man: for the savage and brute
beasts neither grudge to feed where they are appointed, nor resist when they
are driven from those places, where they love most of all to byte. But whether
our ears be wilfully stoped, and our eyes muffled, that in hearing, we hear,
and not understand; in seeing, we see and not perceive; or whether the devil
our ancient enemy has stricken so deep and so venomous a tothe into the heart
of man, as has infected, and wounded the soul to death, I know not well^ yet
sure I am, Heb. 6.8. Heb. 4.12
and have sufficient warrant by the word of God, that being watered with the
Preachinge of the Gospel, if the fruit we yield be thorns and briers, it
is a very earemarke of reprobates, and of such as are given over by the Lord,
to their own sense, to follow destruction with full sail. The word of God is
lively, and mighty in operation: being lively, if it do not quicken and
stir us up to a newenesse of life, it is a token that we have no life, but
are already stone dead, in the works of darkness: being mighty in
operation, both the plaiers and we must be persuaded, that their idle
occupation, having so stout, so strong, so puyssante, so mighty an enemy as
the word of God, though the honor and authority of their Masters hold them
up for a time, yet in the end they must have a fall. For neither strong holds,
nor inventions of men, nor any high thing that is exalted against the knowledge
of God, shall be able to stand, when the foot of his Prophets comes against it.
Amongst all the favorers of these uncircumcised Philistines I mean the
Plaiers, whose hearts are not right, no man til of late durst thrust out his
head to mayntaine there quarrel, but one, in wit, simple; in learning,
ignorant; in attempt, rash; in name, Lodge; whose book, as it came not to my
hands in one whole year after the privy printing thereof, so I confess, that
to it, before this time I answered nothing, partly because he brought
nothing; partly because my heart was to big, to wrestle with him, that
wants arms. Therefore considering with my self that such kind of sores
might be launced to sone, I chose rather to let him ripen and break of him
self, that vomiting out his own disgrace, and being work out of favor among
his own friends, I might triumph in the cause and shed no blood. Though some
of his acquaintance have vaunted to cut and ^ewe mee^ I know not how: yet
having greater regard to the souls of many, then to the threatninges of few;
to the honor of God, then to the pride of ever bragging and b^sie Players; by
Gods assistanc^ I will prove unto you, that stage Plays are not to be ^uf^red
in a christian common weal. Which I trust I shall be able sufficiently to (...),
if I give you a taste (...) of the (...) o^ Plays, and of the (...): ^f the
ca^^es, which I fi^de by ^eading; of the effects, which I know by my own
experience. I hope that no Christian will be so shameless to say that the
doctrine and invention of the Devil, is to be suffered in that common weal,
where the glad tidings of grace is truly preached. For to mainetaine the
doctrine and invention of the Devil, is a kind of Apostasy and falling from
the Lord. For God has made us to his own likeness, Ephesians. 4.24.
which likeness consists not in lineaments and proportion of the body, but
in holiness and singleness of life. Therefore receiving the doctrine and
inventions of the Devil, betwee^e whom and God there can be no truce, no
league, no manner of agreemente, because the one is holy, the other impu^e; the
one good, the other evil; the one light, the other darkness: we forsake our
God, forsakinge of him, we loose his image and likeness, loosinge his image,
we are not his children, and consequently have no part nor fellowship with
Christ in the world to come. That Stage Plays are the doctrine and invention
of the Devil, may be gathered by Tertullian, who notes very well that the
Devil foreseenge the ruin of his kingdom, both invented these shows, and
inspired men with devises to set them out the better thereby to enlarge his
dominion and pull us from ^od. And Thomas Lodge in that patchte pamphlet of his
wherein he takes upon him the defense of plays, little perceiuinge how
lustely ye chippes fly in his face, whilst he heweth out timber to make the
frame, confesses openly that plays were consecrated by the heathens to ye
honor of their gods, which in deed is true, yet serves it better to
overthrow them them establish them: for, whatsoever was consecrated to the
honor of the Heathen Gods was consecrated to idolatry, Stage Plays by his
own confession were consecrated to the honor of Heathen Gods, therefore
consecrated to idolatry. Being consecrated to idolatry, they are not of God,
if they proceed not from God, they are the doctrine and inventions of the
devil. This will be counted news learning among a great number of my gay
countymen, which bear a sharper smacke of Italian devises in their heads,
then of English religion in their hearts. Nevertheless the godly perceive how
lamentable and damnable a case we stand in; lamentable, because we are so
asotted with these delights, so blinded with the love, and drunken with the
sweetness of these vanities, that greedely we flock together, and with our
brainesicke assemblies not unlike to the Troyanes hale in the horse, whose
mischief has been discovered by the Prophets of the Lord, and whose bowels
have been many times gaged with the sword of his truth: damnable, because we
profess Christ, and set up the doctrine of the devil; we hold with the hare
and run with the hound, heaping up judgment upon our souls by this
hypocrisy. Certain it is, that this life of ours is a continual warrefare, a
pitchte field, wherein, as the lickerous tongue of our mother Eve has justly
provoked the Lord, to set the devil and us at deadly feude, so is it our part
to bethink us of him, that never leaves nibling at our heel. He is called
the Serpent, the envious man, the Prince of this world, the common enemy of
Christ, and of man kind. Being a Serpent he is subtle; being envious, he
repineth at our estate^ being a Prince, he is mighty; being an enemy, he is
malicious; malice breeds continual discord; continual discord, a
perpetual study and desire to hurt: which the Apostle understanding, gives
us a watch woo^de to walk warely. For having an enemy so crafty conc^ited, so
well appointed, so envious, so malicious, so willinge to mis^h^^^e us: no
doubt but he has set up many trappes, shot many nets, bayted many hooks,
to take us, to tangle us, to thrattle us. Which is enough to make us suspecte
every pleasure that he profereth. When Pyrrhus L. P^erus.
saw that the Romans could not be over thrown by force of arms, he buried
the bodies of them that were slain; he dealte very honorably with his
prisoners returninge them home without ransom, and sent his Ambassadors to
entreat of peace: whereby he made accounte to win that with vndermininge,
which open assalt could never get. The Devil, whose treachery passes the
shifts of Pyrrhus, feeling such a terrible push, given to his breast by the
change of religion, and (...) the happy entrau^ce of her Majesty to the
crown, has played (...) beguilie ever since. He deals very favorably with
us now, he entertayneth his captives with all manner of courtesy, he craves
no ransom for our release, his Ambassadors have been a great while among
us. First he sent over many wanton Italian books, which being translated
into english, have poisoned the old manners of our Country with foreine
delights, they have so hardened the readers har^s ye seuer^r writers are trod
under foot, none are so pleasunte or plausible as they, that sound some kind
of liberty in our ears. This contempt of good books has breed a desire of
fancies and toys. For if it be as Ambrose De fuga secu^^.
says that the decrease of vanity is the increase of virtue: I may reason of
the contrary, that the increase of vanity is the decrease of virtue. Therefore
the Devil not contented with the number he has corrupted with reading Italian
ba^dery, because all cannot read prese^teth us Comedies cut by the same
pattern, which drag such a monstrous tail after the^, as is able to sweep
whole Cities into his lap. They which have any experience in martial
discipline, know yt the easiest way to conquer, is either to bribe ye
Captain, to betray^ his Prince, or to allure ye Soldiers, to reuolte and
forsake their Captain. Our enemy whose experience is great by continual
practice had from the beginning tried his cunning upon Christ but took the
foil: yet leaving nothing vnsifted that may serve his purpose, and seeing that
neither riches nor preferment of this world, could move our Captain to fall
forward and worship him, because we are commanded to follow our Captain foot
by foot which is Ircksome to perform, he settes Comedies abroach and
er^cteth Theaters to make us fall backwarde and fly the field. Happy says
the Prophet is he That walks not in the Counsel of the ungodly, Psalm.1.
nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the chair of pestilence. The
counsel of the ungodly is the cunning drift, the deep search, the subtle
cast of the Children of darkness which are sharp sighted in all kind of
mischief. The way of sinners is the proceedings and practices of sinners. The
chair of pestilence is the Assembly of wicked worldlings. But if we flock to
Theaters to gase upon plays, we walk in the Counsel of the ungodly, because
plaiyng is one of those politic horns which our enemy do^^eth against the
Gospel; We stand in the way of sinners, because plays are the proceedings and
practices of the Gentiles in their Idolatry; We sit in the chair of
pestilence, because we thrust our selves into the company of them, which being
ouergorged with the preaching of the word, begin to lift at seuerer discipline,
and worship the Devil by falling backward. This Apostasy plungeth us up to the
throat in sin and wickedness and ringes a peale for reueng in the ears of
God, by whom we learn that the reward of sin is a bitter curse. Sithince
stag plays are the doctrine of the Devil; the Counsel of the ungodly; the
way of sinners, the chair of pestilence; the forerun^ers of a curse procured
to that land wherein they floorish, how can they be suffered in this common
weal wherein we profess the name of Christ, except we stand at defiance with
Christianity, or proclaim open war to our souls? Some curious sister
peradventure may judge me to be streighter l^ced the^ I need, or cast this in
my teeth, Objection.
y^ such chris^ia^s as will borow nothing f^^ the Gentiles lest they stand in
the way of sinners, must neither occupy ships, for they were inverted by
Minerua; nor wear any line^, because it was proper to Osyris; nor exercise
almost any kind of handycraft, for most of them were borrowed of the Gentiles.
To whom I answer with Tertullian, A^nsweare (...)
that of things received from the Heathens, Some were revealed unto them by
God, for necessary uses and the benefit of man; some were inspyred by the
Devil, which under the show of indifferency shadow the corruption of a privy
condition, by which they are subject unto vanity. Those things that are
invented for necessary uses, as, Ships, clothing woollen or linen, Manuary
crafts, may be accepted of Christians without error, for they are the
blessings of God bestowed upon us; but those things which are neither necessary
nor beneficial unto man, yet carry in their Foreheaddes a manifest printe of
their first condition, as Maygames, Stageplaies, and such like, can not be
suffered among Christians without Apostasy, because they were sucked from the
Deuilles teate, to Nurce up Idolatry. God thinking him self not sufficiently
honored, except the outward conversation of our li^e do give a testimony to
the world of the inward holiness of the mind, charge us severely to
avoid every thing that hinders the outward profession of Christianity.
Therefore the Apostles writing to the Churches of Antioch, Syria, Cilicia, Act.
15. verse. 28. and 29.
judged it a necessary Burden to be laid upon them, that they touch not
things sacri^^^^^ unto Idols. Wherefore if ye outward use of things
indifferent, as meats, be to be tied to ye rule of charity, and not to be
taken, when they offend the consience of the weak; how much less ough we to
ioyn^ with idolaters in their plays, which are nawghte of them selves, and
offensive to the godly? if we be careful that no pollution of idols enter by
the mouth into our bodies, how dilligent^ how circumspect, how wary ought we to
be, that no corruption of idols, enter by the passage of our eyes and ears
into the soul? we know that whatsoever goes into the mouth d^fileth not but
passes away by course of nature; but that which enters into us by the eyes
and ears, must be digested by the spirit, which is chiefly reserved to
honor God. This spirit of ours is already defiled with the idolatrye of the
Gentiles, if we be partakers of their sacrifices, and makes us stink in the
sight of God, for as he that steals but a trifle is guilty of theft, so he
that allows the least parcel of offringes of the Gentiles is accessory to
idolatry if not by ye quantity of ye thing, yet by ye nature of the crime.
Which being considered, I am forced to say, that such men as are erectors of
Stage Plays among Christians, either see not that they communicate with the
sacrifices and idolatry of the Gentiles, for lack of knowledge; or seeing it,
dissembl^ the matter ^or want of zeal. Two sorts of sacrifice were used
among the Heathens, the one, to the Gods of their country, the other to the
Spirits of the dead, they committed idolatrye in them both. Among such
Idolatrous spectacles as they sacrificed to their Gods, Lib. de spectac^lis.
Tertullian affirms yt Plays were consecrated unto Bacchus for the first^
findinge out of wine. These Plays were not set up by the Gentiles of any blind
zeal within themselves, but by the motion of the devil, as may be proved by
the original of them in Rome. This kind of Idolatrye was long practiced among
the Greeks, the Romans not being acquainted with ye same. Therefore ye devil
spying his time to bring it into Itali^, about 400. years after ye building of
Rome, in ye Consulship of Sulpicius and Stolon the inhabitants being
mightelie deuowred with a great plague, the Devil foreseeing the time when
the plague should cease, taught ye Romans by the oracles of Sibilla to set
forth plays to app^a^e ye a^ger of ye Gods, yt ye pestilence ceasing after
this solemnising of their plays, might nussle the^ in idolatry and
wa^tonnesse ever after. For as ye wicked spirits which ye Gentiles worshipped
appeared once fightinge in the plain of Campania, to whet them to slaughter
and bloudshead by this illusi^n: Lib. 2. de ciuitate Dei.
so did they (says S. Augustine) with the like subtilty, cause Plays to be
consecrated unto them, wherein their Adulteries^ and Impurities were peinted
out, that such as gave credit to the same, might follow their example, and
they that could not be brought to believe it, yet seeing their Gods delight
to be worshipped so, might give them selves over to abominable lust. Though
the Romans in that horrible Plague that vexed their City fetched the famousest
Plaiers out of Hetruria, yet did not the Sickness of body surcease, because the
delicate frenzy of plaiyng entered, but the craftines of wicked spirits
foreseeing that the pestilence should have an end, Agust. lib. 1. de ciuitate
Dei cap. 32.
took advantage hereby to infect not the bodies, but the manners of the
Citizens with a greater plague. Every Seafaring man is able to tell you that
there is greater danger in those storms that forbid you to shoot into the
Haven, then in them that will not suffer you to sail at al: which policy the
Devil used to pervert the Gentiles. For those wicked spirits which
challenging a divinity to them selves, were worshipped of the Gentiles,
neither regarded the smoke of sacrifices, nor show of plays, but the men that
offered up both to honor them. By this means the Devil driving them from
the worship of the true God, as ships from the harbor where they should ride,
held them in greater peril of death then if they had worshipped no God at
all. Sithince it is manifest by all Antiquities, if we search them, that plays
are the Sacrifices of the Devil, taught by him self to pull us from the
service of our God, as often as ever we set them up in our Christian Cities,
the Devil, triumphs and rejoices therein as in things sacrificed by
Christians unto him.

Because that as in the Church singing and praising the Lord together as he
him self has instrcted us in his word, is a sign by which the true God is
assured that we sacrifice our hearts unto him with the Calves of our lips: So
the Devil perceiving us to advance the offringes or sacrifices of the
Gentiles, after the same manner of houses, of apparel, of Stages, of Plays,
that he instructed the Gentiles by his Oracles, has great cause to be
merry, and to hold him self honored thereby. Is it ^o? and shall we say
we do it not with the mind to commit Idolatry? Truly this aunsweare is
like to a drawght of cold water in burning Fevers, whereby the body is
quieted for a time, but the sickness can never be removed. The noble Scipio
Nasica perceiving that the City cannot long endure whose walls stand and
manners fall, when he saw the whole Senate bent to build up Theaters, and
set out Plays, with earnest persuasion drew them from it. And Valerius
Maximus flatly affirms, that they were not brought in to Rome Sine pacis
rubore, without a steine of disgrace to the time of Peace. August. de ciuit.
Dei. lib. 2.
They grew in time so infamous among ye Romans the^ selves, that if any
continued in that art, they were deprived of the dignity of other Citizens,
and removed by the Censors from their Tribe.

Wherefore I beseech God so to touch the hearts of our Magistrates with a
perfect hatred of sin, and fear of Judgment; so to stir up some noble
Scipio in the Court, that these dau^sing Chaplines of Bacchus, and all such as
set up these wicked arts, may be driven out of England, may be shutt from
the company of the Godly, and as open professors of Idolatry, separated from
us by Sea and Land. If there be a zeal in authority, to banish them; a
diligence in Preach^rs to pursue them a general consent in us to loath them;
I dare boldly avouch from my own experience, that monstrous sins, with very
light travel; imminent danger, with very small troble; old fes^red
corruptions, in very short time will be displaced; the Churches in London more
frequented, more furnishte, more ^illed; the divine service of God more
regarded, more reverenced, more kept; and the utter suppressing of a few,
breed a sweet reformation in many thousands.

The 2 Action.
IF the day wherein we be delivered from the jaws of death, ought to be as
joyful to us as the houer of birth, because the joy of sa^etie atchiued is
sure, the condition of birth uncertain; and because we are borne without
pleasure, saved with gladness: Both I shall think my study very well employed,
and my loving cuntrimen of England shall have cause to rejoice, if it please
God by my travel against Plays, to make me a stay to the riot of their
expenses, a discloser of the corruption in their families, and a watchman
against the hazard of their souls. All which as I judge to proceed of Stage
Plays; so must I confute the opinion of them that hold the contrary. Young
Master Lodge thinking to iett upon startoppes, and steal an y^che of his hight
by the bare name of Cicero, allegeth from hi^, ^t a Play is the Schoolmistresse
of life; the lookinge glas^e of manners; and the image of truth. But finding
him self too week in the knees to stand it out, neither alleging the place
where Tullie says it; nor bringing any reason of his own, to prove it; he
flittes from this to the Etymology of Plai^s, from thence to the mu^niors, and
so gallops his wisdom out of breath. It seems that Master Lodge s^w this in
Tulile with other f^lk^s eyes, and not his own. For to my remembrance I never
read it in him, neither do I think that Master Lodge can show it me. For in
his Tusculans second, third, and ^ourth book, he misliketh plays, in his
books of the common weal, he is sharp set against them. In his Epistles
writing to Marius, Ep. Iam. lib. 7.
who was absent from the plays that were set out at Pompeys charges, he
tells him that if any pain of body, or decay of health withhelde him, he
attributes it rather to for^une, then to his wisdom, but if he contemned
those bables, that other men wonder at, and being not ^indered with sickness
refused to see them of his own accord, he rei^yceth greatly in his frie^des
behalf, first, that he felt no greese of body, next that ^he was perfectly
whole in mind, because he fores^owed to come to those spectacles, which other
me^ delight in without cause. I would it pleased master Lodge to remember that
in cases of conscience no man's authority may stand for reason, it is
therefore our duty to weighe before we speak, whether the testimonies of
other men will abide the hammeringe, when they come to be wrought by the word
of God, otherwise to take what soever they say for Oracles, and muster them
together in proof of that which neither reason nor conscience does allow, is
as fond and impertinent an enterprise, as to open our lock with the hatchet,
and cleave our wood with the key.

But because master Lodge will needs father these words upon Tullie that
never spoke them, I will first set down the matter, and the persons of both
kinds of plays, then rippe up every part of this definition, that you may see
how this gentleman like the Fox at the banquet of the Storke, Aesop. Fab.
lickes the outside of the glass with an empty stomach, when his head will
not suffer him to enter in.

The argument of Tragedies is wrath, cruelty, incest, injury, murder either
violent by sword, or voluntary by poison. The persons, Gods, Goddesses,
furies, fiendes, Kings, Queen's, and mighty men. The ground work of
Commedies, is love, cosenedge, flattery, bawderie, slye conneighance of
whordome. The persons, cooks, queanes, knaves, baudes, parasites,
courtezannes, lecherouse old men, amorous young men. Therefore Plautus in his
prologue before the comedy of the captives, desiring to curry favor with his
auditors, exhorts them earnestly to mark that play, because it shall cast
no such stenche of impuritie into their noses as others do. There is in it
(says he) neither forsworn baude, nor harlot, nor bragging soldier. Why
could he not give this commendation to all the rest? because it was the
practice of the devil, to weaue in a thread of his own spinning. Why is this
rather purged of filthiness then the rest? because it is the iuglinge of the
devil, to turn himself sometimes to an Angel of light, to deceive us the
sooner. The best play you can pick out, is but a mi^ture of good and evil,
how can it be then the schoolemistres of life? The beholding of troubles and
miserable slaughters that are in Tragedies, drive us to immoderate sorrow,
heaviness, womanish weeping and mourning, whereby we become lovers of dumpes,
and lamentatio^, both enemies to ^ortitude. Comedies so tickle our senses with
a pleasanter vain, that they make us lovers of laughter, and pleasure, without
any mean, both foes to temperance, what schooling is this? Sometime you shall
see nothing but the adventures of an amorous knight, passing from country to
country for the love of his lady, encou^tring many a terible monster made of
broune paper, and at his return, is so wonderfully change^, that he can not be
known but by some posie in his tablet, or by a broken ring, or a handkircher,
or a piece of a cockle shell, what learn you by that? When ye soul of your
plays is either mere trifles, or Italian baudery, or wooing of gentlewomen,
what are we taught? paraduenture you will say, A common and fond objection.
that by these kind of plays, the authors instruct us how to love with
constancy, to sue with modesty, and to loath whatsoever is contrary unto
this. In my opinion, Answer.
the discipline we get by plays is like to the justice that a certain
Schoolmaster taught in Persia, which taught his scholars to lie, and not to
lie; to deceive, and not to deceive, Xenopho. Lib. 1. de instit. Cy^^.
with a distinction how they might do it to their friends, and how to their
enemies; to their friends, for exercise; to their fooe^, in earnest. Wher^in
many of his scholars became so skillful by practice, by custom so bold, that
their dearest friends paid more for their learning then their enemies. I
would wish the Players to beware of this kind of schooling, least that whilst
they teach youthful gentlemen how to love, and not to love; how to woo, and
not to woo, their scholars grow as cunning as the Persians.

As the mischief that followed that discipline of Persia enforced them to make
a law, that young men should ever after be taught simply as householders use to
instruct their families: so I trust, that when the Londoners are sufficiently
^eaten with the hurt of such lesso^s as are learned at Plays, if not for
conscience sake, yet for shunning the mischief that may privately break into
every man's house, this method of teaching will be come so hateful, that even
worldly policy without any gramercy shall be driven ^o banish it.

Sappho writing to her Lover Phaon, tells him, Ovid. Epist.
that her study peepes out in her behavior, and Thalia her Muse has made her
wanton. How true this assertion is, appears by Mathematicians, which are
solitary; musicians, whose minds are as variable as their art. This may
suffice to persuade us that no man^er of goodness can be learned at a play,
partly because the best is a mixture of good and eull, as shall be showen more
evidently by the formal cause thereof when I come to that place. The mind of
it self is simple without mixture or composition, therefore those instructions
that are given to the mind must be simple without mingle ma^gle of fish and
flesh, good and bad where both are profred, the hereditacie corruption of our
nature takes ye worst and leaves the best. Polit. 7. (...) vlt.
Upon this consideration Aristotle (...) fo^biddeth yo^g men of Plays till
they be settled in mind and immovable in affection lest coming to the Stage
to fetch Physic for love, they quench their heat with a pynte of water and
a pottle of fire; partly because that which is learned, must be learned of the
best, least the example of ungodly Masters, poison us rather the^ instruct us.
But whether Plays, for the matter; or Players, for their manners; be fit
Schoolmasters of honesty, I report me to them that by frequenting Theaters are
very well acquainted with the argument of the one, the life of the other. If
any goodness were to be learned at Plays it is likely that the Players them
selves which committ every syllable to memory should profitte most, because
that as every man learneth so he lives; and as his study is, such are his
manners; but the daily experience of their behavior, shows, that they reap
no profit by the discipline them selves; how then can they put us in any good
hope to be instructed thereby when we have the sight of such lessons, but an
hour or two as they study and practice every day, yet are never the better.
Master Lodge finding some peevish index or gatherer of Tullie to be a sleep,
is very well contented to wink for company, and thinking his word so current
to go for payment, would gladly persuade us upon Tullies credit that a Play
is the Schoolmistres of life. Wherein I perceive he is no changeling, for he
disputes as soundly being from the university and out of exercise, as he did
when he was there, and at his book.

The next property that of his own brain, (but in Ciceroes name) he gives to
a Play, is, that it is a very Glass of behavior. The corruption of manners is
there reu^aled and accused. Which is easily confuted, by the circumstaunce of
the place, of the person, of the manner, and of the end of accusation. For the
place; no private man's life ought to be brought in question or accused, but
where he may plead in his own defense and have indifferent judges to
determine the cause, to that end ^eceiue we a couple of ears that both
parts might be heard, both equally weighed, and therefore did Alexander in
judgment stop one ear with his finger reserving it wholly for the defendant.
At Stage Plays it is ridiculous, for the parties accused to replye, no
indifferency of judgment can be had, because the worste sort of people have
the hearing of it, which in respect of there ignorance, of there ^icklenes,
and of there fury, are not to be admitted in place of judgment. A Judge must
be gra^e, sober, discreet, wise, well exercised in cases of government. Which
qualities are never found in the baser sort.

A Judge must be immovable, uncorrupted, upright, neither turning to the right
hand, nor to the left; the meaner sort^ tottre, they are carried away with every
rumor, and so easily corrupted, that in the Theaters they generally take up a
wonderful laughter, and shout altogether with one voice, when they see some
notable cosenedge practiced, or some sly conueighance of (...) brought out of
Italy. Whereby they show them selves rather to like it then to rebuke it. A
judge must neither be in^lamed with choler, nor blinded with affection; The
rudest of the people are sometime rau^shed with every giewgawe, sometime so
headie, that they run together by heaps, they know not whither; and lay
about with their clubbes, they see not why. Which thing the ancient
Philosophers considering called them a monster of many heads. If the common
people which resort to Theate^s being but a^ assembly of T^ilers, Tinkers,
Cordwayners, Sailors, old Men, young Men, Women, Boys, Girls, and such like,
be the judges of faults there painted out, the rebuking of manners in that
place, is neither lawful nor convenient, but to be held for a kind of
libelling, and defaming. Howsoever they face it out with their own cards,
pretending that as the Painter in his shop expresses one or other by a
counterfaite: Objection.
so the Poet on stages presents you a picture of his own drawing, wherein
you may behold the whole life of man, Answer,
it appears by antiquity, that the Poets which were before, had another
meaning: for as any man had displeased them, to reueng their own cause they
studied to present him upon the stage, there did they russie, and taunt;
scoff, and ^^ppe; thunder, and lighten, and spue up their c^unning to deface
him. Whereupon grew one of the laws of the twelve tables, that no man should
be so hardy as to write any thing, Cicer. in his 4. book of the. common weal
whereby the good name of any body might be hurt; they would not have the
life and behavior of the citizens, subject ^ythe^r to a Poets in kehorne, or a
Players tongue, but to the seat of justice.

Epist. lib. 2.
This may be gathered by the Epistle of Horace to Augustus, and by other famous
writers, which having curiously searched ye laws of the Romans, confess in
plain words, that the ouerlashing of players was so restrained. Whether this
be the practice of Poets in these days you may perceive by the drift of him
that wrote the play termed the three Ladies of London, which in the Catastrophe
makes Love and Conscience to be examined how thrie good ladishippes like of
plays? Love answers that she detesteth them, because her guts are turned
outward, and all her secret conueighaunce, is blazed with colors to the
peoples eye. Conscience like a kindharted gentlewoman does allow them.

In this point the Poet makes so much have to his iorneyes end, that he
throws him self headlong down the hill. For neither Love disliked them,
before he had married her to Dissimulation, whose prop^itie is to say one thing
and think another: nor Conscience allowed them, before he had spotted her with
all abomination, whose nature is to allow that which is like her self,
filthy, corrupt, spotted, and defiled. The writer of the play called London
against the three Ladies confesses in his prologe that he made it partly for
envy, partly for a vain glorious mind. For envy: because his stomach would
not bear the commendations, that other men gave to the three Ladies in his
hearing. For vain glory: because he straue to do better himself, and ^^sd
the cushion; somewhat I grant he bettered it in show, touching the substance
he does but cavil as I would declare, if it were not from the matter I take
in hand. By these few you may gather of all the rest, and persuade your selves
that as stages and Theaters are not allowed by the laws of God, or man, to
meddle with disorders: so is it not the mark that their authors shoot at
when they fill th^se rooms. Mat. 7. ver. 3.
If any deformity be reprehended there, it is to be done by the players mouth,
he that will show another man his fault, must purge him self first. For as
they were forbidden in old time to expound any Oracles which had any
infection about their bodies: Plutarch.
so have they no grace in rebuking others, that nourish a canker in their own
souls. How are they able to pull us up that grouel as flat in the dust as
we? what credit, has any good counsel in Players lips, when it works no
amendment in themselves? Concerning the manner of rebuking whosoever takes that
office upon him must do it secretly, of compassion, and in the spirit of
meeknes^ Secretly: because we ought not to defame the parti^ rebuked against
the law of charity, or the rule of Christ: the law of charity, which covers
the multitude of offenses; the rule of Christ which w^ll^th us to draw our
brother aside and ^ell him our mind.

O^ compassion^ for he that rebukes must be inwardly stricken with greese of
heart to s^e the majesty of God offended, and the soul of his brother
h^zarded.

So Paul writing against an incestuous person, 2. Cor. 2 ve 4.
confesses that he did it with many tears, whereby he gives us to understand
how he pitied the offender, and lamented the damnable case he stood in. Gallat.
6. ve 1.
In the spirit of meeknes: because we ought to consider our own^ weakness, which
are subi^^te to infirmities, and may be tempted as much as other. But when any
thing is reprehended by Players upon the Stage, it is openly blown into the
ears of many and made a by word, it proceeds not of sorrow, or compassion
toward him that has offended, August. 2. de ciuit^ dei.
but springs either of ye Poets malice, for so Eupolis handled Alcibiades;
or of corruption, as Aristophanes dealt with Socrates and Cleon; with Socrates,
in his Comedy called The clouds, wherein he was hired by Anytus and Melitus to
discredit him; with Cleon in his Comedy named, The men at arms, bribed by
Nicias and Demosthenes (as some writers suspect) to do the like. It is not
spoken in the spirit of meeknes, but with a scoffing, and iearinge spirit,
altogether unmeet for such a purpose. The white that rebukers ought to leuil
at, is the recovery of him that has trodde awrte. Act. 8.21
So Peter bidds Simon the sorcerer to repent that his sin might be forgiven
him. 1. Cor. 5.5.
So Paul commands the Church of Corinth to deliver the incestuous man unto
Satan that his soul might be safe in the day of the Lord. But neither the
Poets which pen the plays, nor the Actors that present them upon the Stage,
do seek to do any good unto such as they rebuke, for the Poets intent, is,
to wreake his own anger, as I showed you of Eupolis and those y^ were
restrained by the Twelve tables; the Actor^ either hu^^ for their own profit,
as the players in London; or follow the humor of their own fancies, and
youthful delights, as the students of the universities, and the Inns of
Court.

Therefore upon the place, upon the person, upon the method, upon the end of
reprehention, I conclude, that a play, can be no looking glass of behavior,
and the rebuking of manners is as fit for the Sage, as the picture of Chastity
for the stues. Yet is Master Lodge very eager to force it upon me, for Tullies
sake, using his old facion of disputing, compelled with hunger when reason is
scant^, either to fly to a blind text, or to play the woman and braule it
out. He roweth on farther in this barge and holds it hard that a play is the
Image of trueth^ Wherein he far^th as mariners at Sea, who have no more title
to that they have passed, and le^te behind them; then to that which remains
untouched, and lies before them.

As the other two properties which he posted over, are su^fitiently proved, not
to belong to Comedies, for which he clames them: so (God willing) you shall
perceive, that he enters as boldly upon this, without any commission to bear
him out. The per^ectest Image is that, which makes the thing to seem, neither
greater nor l^sse, then in deed it is. But in Plays, either those things are
^ained, that never were, as Cupid and Psyche played at Paul's; and a great many
Co^edies more at ye Black friars and in every Play house in London, which for
breuiti^s sake I over skippe: or if a true History be taken in hand, it is
made like our shadows, longest at the rising and falling of the Sun, shortest
of all at hie noone. For the Poets drive it most commonly unto such points, as
may best show the majesty of their pen, in Tragical speeches; or set the
hearers a gogge, with discourses of love; or painte a few antickes, to fit
their own humors, with scoffs and tau^tes; or wring in a show, to furnish
the Stage, when it is to bare; when the matter of it self comes short of
this, they follow the practice of the cobbler, and set their t^^th to the
leather to pull it out.

So was the history of Caesar and Pompey, and the Play of the Fab^i at the
Theater, both amplified there, where the Drums might walk, or the pen
ru^fle, when the history swelled, and ran to hye for the number of ye persons,
that should play it, the Poet with Proteus cut the same fit to his own
measure; when it afoorded no pomp at al, he brought it to the rack, to make
it serve. Which inuinciblie proves on my side, that Plays are no Images of
truth, because sometime they handle such things as never were, sometime they
run upon truethes, but make them seem longer, or shorter, or greater, or
less then they were, according as the Poet blows them up with his quill, ^or
aspiring heads; or minceth them smaller, for weaker stomakes. I may boldly
say it, because I have seen it, that the Palace of pleasure, the Golden Asle,
the Ethiopian history, Amadis of France, the Round table, baudie Comedies
in Latin, French, Italian, and Spanish, have been thoroughly ransackt, to
^urnish the Play houses in London. How is it possible that our Playemakers
headdes, running through Genus and Species and every difference of lies,
cosenages, baudries, whooredemes, should p^ese^t us any schoolemistres of life,
looking glass of ma^ners, or Image of truth? Objection.
for ^^th says the Author of the Play of plays showen at the Theater, the
three and twentieth of February last, They shall be now purged, the matter
shall be good.

Answer.
Be it as he says, let us grant him that he may have Plays, if he please
whose matter is good, simple, sweet, De spectaculis,
and honest; yet must I answer him with Tertullian that as no man, which
desires to give you a deadly poison will temper the same with gaull, and
Elleborus, or any thing that is bitter, and unpleasant; but with sweet and
wholesome confectio^s: So the Devil, at Plays, will bring the comfortable word
of God, which, because it norisheth of nature is very convenient to carry the
poison into our veins.

But since Bucchanans book is an old wormeaten objection which was laid in my
dish at my first publishing the school of abuse, you shall see whether it be
lawful for Christians to play it. when I handle the representation of plays
though theirs matter be honest. As for that glosing play at ye Theater which
profers you so fair, there is enterlaced in it, a ba^die song of a maid of
Kent, and a little beastly speech, of the new stawled r^ge, both which I am
compelled to bury in silence, being more ashamed ^o utter them, then they. For
as in Tragedies some points are so terrible, that the Poets are con^^rayned to
turn them from the peoples eyes; so in the song ^f the one, the speech of the
other, somewhat is so dishonest, that I can not with honesty repeat it.
Nevertheless if they should altogether swepe of this donge from the Stage, and
employ them selves soberlie to rebukinge of manners; as I have already proved
the Stage to be unfit for such a purpose, so I persuade my self, that the
other is b^t the iugglinge of the devil, who perceiving his comedies begin to
s^inke, gives us a grain or two in the weight of the cause, to make up his
market, 2. De ciui^. Dei.
and as Augustine notes is contented sometime to be evil spoken of in Plays
to bleare our eyes. He affords to us as he did to Plautus some small number
of plays without love or curt^sane, yea with very good matter, to ^aintaine
the idolatry of the Genti^s. Objection.
The number of the years wherein they flourished among the Greeks, though
they be re^oned to be thirtene hundredth, yet if they had mounted to thirtene
thousand this is no^ enough to persuade us that are Christians to do the like.
Answer.
For the plays of the Grecians are to be received among Christians, if th^^
Gods be ^o be honored, but their Gods are by no means to be honored,
therefore their plays are by no m^anes to be received. De spectaculis
Te^tullian teaches us that every part of the preparation of plays, was
dedicated to some h^^the^ god, or goddess, as the house, stage, apparel, to
Venus; the music, to Apollo; the penning, to Minerua, and the Muse^; the
pronuntiacion and act^on to Mercury: he calls the Theater Sacrarium Veneris,
Venus chapel, by resorting to which we worship her.

The Censors in Room whose manner was once in five year straightly to examine,
and redress disorders, having a great care to avoid all corruptions of
manners, were very painful in racinge and destroying Theaters, which
poisoned their country with the lousnesse and dissolute behauioure of ye
Greeks. Therefore when Pompey had built a stately Theater of stone at his own
charges, fearing that in time to come it would be defaced by the Censors
sommoning the people to the dedication of the same, placed a chapel to Venus
on the top, and called it not a Theater, but Venus temple consecrated unto
her. Objection.
Though the names of heathen gods or goddesses be of themselves no more
hurtful, then the ^ames of other men, Answer.
that are dead: yet triu^phing under those titles with the Gentiles, and
attributing a kind of divinity unto them, as the Gentiles did, is to be
defiled with their idolatry. What is idolatry, but to give that which is
proper to God, unto them that are no gods? what is so proper unto God, as
worship to his majesty? trust, to his strength? prayer, to his help? thanks,
to his goodness? setting out the Stage plays o^ the Gentiles, so we worship
that we stoop to the names of heathen idols; so we trust yt we give our selves
to the patronage of Mars, of Venus, of Iuppiter of Juno, and such like, so we
pray, yt we call for their succor upon the Stage; so we give thakes for the
benefits we receive, that we make the^ ye fountains of al our blessings,
wherein if we think as we speak, we commit idolatry, because we bestow yt upon
the idols of ye Gentiles, which is proper to God; if we make a divorce between
the tongue and the heart, honouringe the gods of ye heathens in lips, and in
iesture, not in thought, yet it is idolatry, because we do yt which is quite
contrary to ye outward profession of our faith. God terms himself to be
jealous, and iealosie misliketh the smallest iestures or signs of
familiarity, that are given to strangers. If Sidrach Misach, and Abednago had
not known this, they might have veiled and bended, to the Kings idol, but
because ye outward show, must represe^t yt which is within, they would not
seem to be, that they were not: whose example is set dowe as arule for us to
follow. A body would think it to be somewhat tolerable, to sit at the
table of Idolators, or to eat of ye meat that has been consecrated unto
idols, when we throw not our bodies down before the^, yet is not yt to be
suffered among Christians, as I proved before by ye Apostles, much les ought
this to be suffered among us, yt any should take unto the^ yt names of ye idols,
and iette upon stages in their attire, 1. Epist. ca. 5.
contrary to the counsel of Saint John which exhorts us to keep our selves
from idols, wh^rein he does not only forbid the worshipping, but the
representing of an idol. Tertul de Corona.
So subtle is the devil, that under the color of recreation, in London, and
of exercise of learning, in the universities, by seeing of plays, he makes us
to join with the Gentiles, in their corruption. Because the sweet numbers of
Poetry flowing in verse, do wonderfully tickle the hearers ears, the devil
has tied this to most of our plays, that whatsoever he would have stick fast
to our souls, might slip down in sugar by this intisement, for that which
delights never troubles our swallow. Thus when any matter of love is
enterlarded though the thing it self be able to allure us, yet it is so
set out with sweetn^s of words, fitnes of Epithites, with Metaphors,
Alegories, Hyperboles, Amphibologies, Similitudes, with Phrases, so picked, so
pure, so proper; with action, so smothe so lively, so wanto^; that the poison
creeping on secretly without grief chookes us at last, and hurleth us down in
a dead sleep. As the Devil has brought in all that Poetry can sing, so has
he sought out every streine that music is able to pipe, and drawn all kind
of instruments into that compass, simple and mixte.

For the eye beeside the beauty of the houses, and the Stages, he sends in
Gearish apparel maskes, vauting, tumbling, daunsing of gigges, galiardes,
morisces, hobbihorses; showing of iudgeling castes, nothing forgot, that might
serve to set out the matter, with pomp, or ravish the beholders with variety
of pleasure. To seek this, is, to spend our studies in things that are mere
natural, to spend our time so is to be carnally minded, but to be carnally
minded is death, Romans 8
how then can we look to be Partakers of the benefittes of Christ, which
run a contrary race to him? Where no promise is, there can be no faith,
through the whole course of Scripture as there is no promise for such as live
in the flesh, so hell and damnation is sharply threatened, shall we flatter
our selves with a wanne hope, to nourish the delights of the flesh while we
live, nevertheless to win heaven after death? Object.
Paul flat^e pronounces the delights of the flesh to be emnitie against God,
if they be e^^it^, pursuing them so greedely as we do, we bend our selves
openly against him, that paid the pr^ce of our ra^^ome with the b^oode of his
s^^ne, O horrible ingratitude; we ^ellowe the pomp and vanity of the wicked
world, which we renounced in Baptism, O damnable apostasy. The heathens, that
knew not God, but naturally guided them selves by reason, judged the^ rather
to be beasts then men, which fixed their studies in wanton spectacles, and
spending good hours in evil exercise, seemed to wroote in the earth like
swine. Therefore Marius in an oration to the Romans reckons this up among the
rest of his virtues to get him credit, that he neither banqueted curiously,
Sal. lugurth.
nor beheld plays: having before given account of his bringing up, how he
was taught to suffer hunger and thirst, ^ea. ^a^^d ^olde, ^o bear all weather
in the field, by the way of contempt he sets out a soft, a si^ken, a
Courting kind of life, fitter for women then for men, wherein he holds
plays so unfit for manly discipline, that attributing it for an ornament to
his honor to mis^ike them, he privily insinuates a reproach unto such as love
them.

Sithince you see eue^ by ye examples of the Romans, that plays are ^atsbane
to the government of commonweales, and that Players by the judgment of them,
are infamous persons, unworthy of the credit of honest Citizens, worthy to be
removed from their Tribe: if not for religion, yet for shame, that the Gentiles
should judge you at the last day, or that Publicanes and sinners should pre^e
into the kingdom of God before you, withdraw your feet from Theaters, with
noble Marius; set down some punishment for Players, with the Roman Censors;
show your selves to be Christians, and with wicked spectacles be not pulled
from discipline, to liberty; from virtue to pleasure; from God, to Mammon, let
nothing be acceptable in your eyes, that is not holy; nor sweet in your ears
that is not heavenly; so shall you prevent the scourge by repentance, that is
coming toward you; and fill up the gulf, that the Devil by plays has
dug to swallowe you.

The 3 Action.
SUch ought to be the liberty of speech in every well governed commonweal,
that neither virtue might lack an open friend, nor vice an enemy, and happy
no doubt were we in Engeland; if as virtue is never commended in clouds, so
vice might be touchte in the open Sunshine. But we are so generally given to
flatter our selues^ and Parasites so ready to cover our faults, that because
we love our deformities we defend them, and had rather excuse them, then shake
them off. This makes many writers willinger to praise some, without deserte,
than to rebuke any, upon just occasion, for, to commend men unworthily, is
taken for courtesy; to dispraise though ius^ly, is thought for the most part a
point of envy. Nevertheless sithince tongues are given unto us to speak, and
ears unto every man to hear, that the one might teach, ye other be ready to
receive good Counsel, and receiving it, practice the same in life: according
to the measure of those gifts that God has given me, I will speak somewhat
farther against Plays, requesting my countrymen to open their ears as they do
their bottles, and shake out the dust of contention that lies within for
corrupting good liquour when they have it.

And because words many times are as fruitelesse as addle eggs, when
conception is weak and without life.

If any be so captious as for the exercise of his wit to hold me Play, and
prepare him self to encounter me in any one of mine actions or in all, I must
callenge the laws of the tennis co^rt at his hands, that is to take
whatsoever I s^nd him, right; and return it to, fair above the line.
Whatsoever he be that looks narrowly into our Stage Plays, or considers
how, and which ways they are represented, shall find more filthiness in them,
the^ Players dream off. The Law of God very straightly forbids men to put on
wome^s garments, garments are set down for signs distinctiue between s^xe and
^exe, to take unto us those garments that are manifest signs of another ^^xe,
is to falsify, forge, and adulterate, contrary to the express rule of the
word^ of God. Which forbids it by threatening a curse unto the same.

Exodus
All that do so are abomination v^the Lord, which way I b^s^ch you shall they
be excused, that put on, not the apparel only, but the gate, the gestures,
the voice, the passions of a woman? All which like the wreathinges, and
windinge of a snake, are flexible to catch, before they speed; and bind up
cords when they have possession. Objection.
Some there are that think this commandment of God to be restrained to them,
that go abroad in women's attire and use it for iugglinge, to shaddowe
adultery.

These interpreters like unto narrow mouthed vessels, Answe^e.
will receive nothing without loss, except it be slenderly powered in
a^cordinge to the straightnes of their own making. These men must
understand, that, that can bear noe excuse, which God condemns, such is the
integrity, uniformity, and simplicity of truth yt it is ever like it self,
it never carries two faces in one hoode, that thing is no where, nor a^ any
time lawful by the word of God which is not ever, and every where lawful.

Though the heathen Philosophers which knew not the truth, because they were
ignorant in God the fountain of truth accor^ing to their own fa^cies held
one thing to be sometime good, and sometimes ^^^il: yet will not God be mocked
with Philosophers dreams. Whatsoever he simply pronounces, evil, can never be
conditionally good and lawful. I trust they will not have God which is ye
Author of all wisdom, al learning, all arts, to be ruder in setting down to
his people the precepts of life, then Philosophers are to give to their
scholars ye precepts of art. They study in teaching of their auditors, to
write generally and universally, and shall God in his tables be tied to
specifications, particularities, and exceptions? no, no, the same God that
says thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, says thou shall in no place,
and at no time covet her; he y^ forbibiddeth thee to steal, commands that
thou never steal; and he that charge thee not to put on women's garments,
charge thee in no place, and never to put the^ on. Nevertheless we will wade
somewhat further in this point, and see whether by ye Philosophers them selves
it may be suffered. I trust they will grant me that every lie is sin, for the
devil is the father of all lies, Matthew. ^^^ico. ^. cap. 7.
as often as ever he lies, he speaks of his own. Aristotle in the thickest
fogge of his ignorance concerning God, pronounces a lie to be naught of it
self, and to be fled. Let us therefore consider what a lie is, a lie is, Aqui
part. Theolo. 2. Q. C X art. ^
Actus cadens super indebitam materiam, an act executed where it ought not.
This act is discerned by outward signs, every man must show him self
outwardly to be such as in deed he is. Outward signs consist either in words
or gestures, to declare our selves by words or by gestures to be otherwise
then we are, is an act executed where it should not, therefore a lie.

The proof is evident, the conseque^t is necessary, that in Stage Plays for a
boy to put one the attire, the gesture, the passions of a woman; ^or a mean
person to take upon him the title of a Prince with counterfeit port, and
train, is by outward signs to show them selves otherwise then they are, and
so with in the compass of a lie, which by Aristotle's judgment is naught of it
self and to be fled. Object.
Some other there are that take greater occasion of stumbling at Gregory
Naziancen, Bucchanan, and such like, than ever those famous men did offer. It
cannot be denied that Gregory Naziancen one of the fathers of the Church,
wrote a Play of Christ; Bucchanan wrote an other of John Baptist, to what
end? To be Played upon Stages? neither Players nor their friends are able to
prove it.

How the^? As the beginning of poetry in the books of Moses, Answer.
and David, was to set down good matter in numbers, that the sweetness of
the one might cause the other to continue, and to be the deeper imprinted in
the minds of men: So Naziancen and Bucchanan perceiving the corruption of the
Gentiles, to avoyde that which is evil, and yet keep that which is good,
according to the true use of Poetry, penned these books in numbers with
interloquutions dialoguewise, as Plato and Tullie did their Philosophy, to be
read, not be played. For Naziancen detesting the corruption of the Corpus
Christi Plays that were set out by the Papis^es, and inueighing against the^,
thought it better to write the passion of Christ in numbers him self, that all
such as delight in numerositie of speech might read it, not behold it upon
the Stage, where some base fellow that ^laide Christ, should bring the person
of Christ into contempt.

So Bucchananus wrote his play of John Baptist for the king of Scots to
read, that beholding therein, the practice of Parasits in Herod's court, The
Tyranny of Herod powered out upon the messenger of the Lord, and the punishment
that followed: He might learn to govern his own house, and beware what
entrea^^e he gives to the Prophettes of God.

If it should be Played, one must learn to trippe it like ^ Lady in the
finest fashion, another ^^st have time to whet his mind unto tyranny that he
may give l^^e to the picture he present^th, whereby they l^a^^^ to
counterfeit, and so to sin. Therefore whatsoever such plays as contain good
matter, are (...) out (...), may be (...) profit, but cannot be played, wit^out
i^ ma^ifest brea^h of Gods commandment. Objection.
Let the Author of the play of plays and pastimes, take heed how he reason
ye actio^, pronu^tiation, agility of body are ye good gifts of God. Answer
Ergo plays consisting of these cannot be evil. The argument is faulty, and
follows not, for so might the Adulterer defend himself: the prick of desire
is naturally given unto man by God, all sorts of apparel are his blessings,
Ergo to covet another ma^s wife, to put on the apparel of a woman cannot be
evil. Notwithstanding the one has so little substance to utter it self, the
other so few sinews in it, to give it strength, that neither of both is to be
allowe^^ Action, pronuntiatio^, apparel, agility, music, severally considered
are the good blessings of God, nothing hurtful of their own nature, yet being
bound up together in a bundle, to set out the pomp, the plays, the inue^tio^s
of the Devil, it is abominable in the sight of God, and not to be suffered
among Christians, Every stream has a taste of the spring from whence it
flows, sweet or sower; every branch is partaker of the quality of the ti^e
whereon it grew, hot or cold; and every play to ye worlds end, if it be
presented up on the Stage, shall carry that brand on his back to make him
known, which the devil clapped on, at the first beginning, that is, idolatry.
The Godly can never like of that which in a diameter is opposite to the cross
of Christ, whosoever is in the way of God beholds no vanity, the perfect way
of God is Christ, and shall we that profess ye name of Christ be^old this
vanity? The preparation of Stages, apparel, and such like as sets out our
plays in shows of pomp and state, is it that we wonder and gaze at, by
Tullie it is flouted and laughed to scorn, ye statelynes of the preparation
drownes ye delight which the matter affords, therefore he doubts not but
Marius could very willingly absent himself from it, what delight (says he)
has the sight at 600. mules in Clytemnestra; Epist. ad Maur.
or 3000. cups in the Trojan horse, or variety of footmen and horsemen in
some skirmish, those things yt made ye common people wonder, would ha^^ brought
n^ ^elight at al to thee. Macrinus succeding Antonius in the Roman empire, and
being at Antioche, gave him self daily to beholding Plays, for which he
grew into contempt among all his friends, Lib. ^.
and is noted of infamy by Herodian.

The waste of expenses in these spectacles that scarce last like shoes of
brown paper, the pulling on, and this study to prancke up themselves to please
our eyes, was long ago condemned by the heathen Cato, whose opinion is
registered to be this, that such carefulnes of our bodies, is a carelesnes of
our virtues. Shall Tullie, Herodian, Cato condemn this glittering, this pomp,
this diligence in setting forth of plays, for vanity, for wantonness, for
negligence of honesty: and shall we that ^^u^te of the law, of the Prophets,
of ye gospel, of God himself, so look, so gaze, so gape upon plays, that as
men yt stare on the head of Maedusa and are turned to stones, we freeze unto
yse in our own follies? If the lives and examples of these heathe^s have no
force to move us, whose wisdom when we consider it, was so great, that they
could not be deceived in so plain a case; whose vertu^s so notable, yt they
despised these unseemly gaudes which ye skumme of all people have in
admiration; whose government so politic, that riot and excess was severely
punished; yet let the commandments of our God which are autentike; let the
care of our souls that shall be judged; let the thr^atnings of him that
detesteth hypocrisy, pomp and vanity, so strike our hearts, that we tremble
and shi^er at the remembrance of folly past, and gather up our wits unto
amending. Have we sinned with the Gentiles in representinge of their Plays?
let us learn with true Christians to abolish them, it is incident to every man
to fall, proper to the graceless to continue it, carry no sail against the
wind, change of course is a safe ^hade unto the penitent.

The Fourth Action.
IT has been an ancient policy in ye field, to give the enemi^ grownde,
for some advantage, and by counterfeyting a timorous kind of flight, to drop
down the carriage, as money, provision, and victual by the way, that the
Soldiers might stay their pursuit, and fall to ryfling. Whereby both they
that were chased, have recovered them selves, and they that were conquerers
have lost all, suddenly discomfited with new supplye among all the stumbling
blocks that our enemy the devil has cast in our way for foylinge him utterly.

It may easily be gathered by the end of Plays, that Comedies and Tragedies
are the fittest devises he could strew behind him, to stop us of passage, and
break our order. Not that he means to take his heels, but to kill us by
subtlety when we straggle. What brings disorder more then sin? that plays
are set out for a sinful delight, may be gathered partly, by Maenander, partly
by Terence, partly by ye manner of pe^ning in these days, partly by the object
of plays. By Maenander because Viues affirms that he perceiving the Macedons
wholly given over to love, Comment. in August. lib. 2.
and wantonness, wrote Commedies of love, to feed their humor. Prolog. in
Andria ^. Pop^^^^ vtp^ ^c^: q as fe^^ss^ ^ (...).
By Terence because he confesses of him self, that all that he sought was but
to close with the common people. By the manner of penning in these days,
because the Poets send their verses to the Stage upon such feet as
continually are rolled up in rhyme at the fingers ends, which is plaucible to
the barbarous, and carries a stinge into the ^ares of the common people. By
the object, because Tragedies and Commedies stir up affections, and
affe^^ions are naturally planted in that ^^rt of the mind that is common to us
with brute beasts.

He that trauelleth to advance the worst part of the mind, is like unto him,
that in government of Cities^ gives all the authority to the worste men,
which being well weighed, is to betraye the City, and the best men, into the
hands of the wicked. But the Poets that write plays, and they that present
them upon the Stage, study to make ^ur affections ouerflow, whereby they draw
the bridle from that part of the mind, that should ever be curbed, from
runnings (...) head: which is manifest treason to our souls, and delivers
them captive to the devil. The Author of the play of plays, spreading out
his battle to hemme me in, is driven to take so large a compass, that his
array is the thinner, and therefore the easier, to be broken. Objection.

The s^stence of the ^lay of pl^yes wri^^en in their own ^^^fence.


He tyeth Life and Delight so fast together, that if Delight be restrained,
Life presently perishes; there, zeal perceiving Delight to be embraced, of
Life, puttes a ^nafle in his mouth, to keep him under, Delight being bridled,
Zeal leads life through a wilderness of lothsomenesse, where Glutte
scarreth them all, chasinge both Zeal and Delight from Life, and with the
clubbe of amasednesse strikes such a pegge into the heads of Life, that he
falls down ^or dead upon the Stage.

Life being thus fainte, and ouertrauailed, destitute of his guide, robbed of
Delight, is ready to give vpthe Ghost, in the same place, then enters
Recreation, which with music and singing rocks Life a sleep to recover his
strength.

By this means Tediousness is driven from Life, and the temte is drawn out
of his head, which the clubbe of amasednes left behind.

At last Recreation sets up the Gentleman upon his feet, Delight is
restored to him again, and such kind of sportes for cull^ces are brought in
to nourishe him, as none but Delight must apply to his stomache. Then ^ime
being made for the benefit of Life, and Life being allowed to follow his
appetite, amongst all manner of pastimes, Life chooses Commedies, for his
Delight, partly because Commedies are neither chargable ^o ye beholders purse,
nor painful to his body; partly^ because he may sit out of the rain to veiwe
the same, when many other pastimes are hinderd by wether. Zeal is no more
admitted to Life before he be somewhat pinchte in the want, to avoid
extremity, and being not in the end simply called Zeal but Moderate Zeal a
few conditions are prescribed to Comedies, that the matter be purged,
deformities blazed, sin rebuked, honest mirth intermingled, and fit time
for the hearing of the same appointed, Moderate Zeal is contented to suffer
them, who joins with delight to direct life again, after which he triu^phes
over Death and is crowned with eternity. These bugges are fitter to fear
babes the^ to move men. Nevertheless this is the substance of that which is
brought for pla^es, this is the pillar of their credit. Al other men y^
subscribe not this but inueigh against them, by writing in books; or by tongue
in Pulpits; do but crow as he terms it, and speak against Commedies
for^lacke of learning S. Siprian, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine,
Isodorus, Tertullian fathers of the Church most excellently learned, counsels
as the third of Carthage the Synod of Laodicea, and such like, that condemned
plays, and ye skilfullt Deuines at this day in England which are compelled in
Sermons to cry out against them, were now to be set to ye schole again, if
the mouth of this plaimaker, were any just measure of their knowledge. Answere^
Sithince al their force co^sis^eth in this point of Life and Delight I will
take ye more pain to overthrow it, and so conquer ye rest without schirmish,
like to ye Romans who meeting the whole power of Carthage upon ye sea, and
foyling it there, thought it superfluous to proceed any further, or bring the
Ram to the walls, when Carthage was drowned in ye deep. And as the Romans
thought y^ after Carthage was overcome, no country was ashamed to be subdued.
So I trust y^ when I have beaten their captain to the earth, by force of
argument, none of them all will disdain to be taken, or to cry out with
testimony of good conscience, great is the truth, and it does prevail.
Though it please not him to distinguish between delight, and del^ght, yet for
the better understanding both of that which is spoken in defense of plays, and
of that which by me shall be brought against them, you must consider yt there are
two sorts of delight, Aqui. par. 1. Q. 31. Art. 5.
the one belonging to ye body, the other to the mind, that, is carnal, this
spiritual. Carnal delight is the rest o^ sensual appetite in the thing
desired when it is felt. If this be not governed by ye rule of Gods word, we
are presently carried beyond our selves, therefore ought we to follow the
counsel of S. Paul, which exhorts us earnestly to suppress the same.
Colos. 3.5.
Spiritual delight is the operation of virtue consisting in a meditation of the
life to come purchased to us by the blood of Christ, and reueiled for our
comfort in the word of God. A notable blessinge is pronounced on him whose
delight is in the law of the Lord, Psalm 1.
and the Prophet him self voweth solemnly to God, Psalm.^ 19.
that he will talk of his commandments, walk in his ways, and delight in his
statutes. By the whole discourse it may be gathered, that the delight belonging
to the body, is it, which this gentleman requires as physic against the
troubles and vexatiations of this ^se, which bewrays him to be sowste in that
error, that Aristotle reproves in his Ethickes. Lib. 7. Cap. 14.
For if the delight of this life, be to be sought as a remedi^ against the
sorrous of the same, excess of delight must ^e granted to excess of sorrow,
as ^x^^sse of thirst, requires excess of drink, excess of hunger, excess
of meat; excess of grief, exc^sse of pleasure: but excess of delight in
this life is not to be sought, for fear of sursette; therefore to cure the
anguishe of this life with such kind of pleasures as life pursues, is to
measure the remedy by ^^re own appetite, which in d^^d i^ nothing else, but
either to rece u^ that, that our sick stomach des^reth, when it cannot judge;
as to eat chalk in the green sickness; in an ague pilchers; or as they that in
some kind of leprosy drink poison, which is altogether hurtful to good
complexions, yet works it accidentally some ease in them. Being once shipped
in this part of Philosophy he is carried too farr^ beyond his skill.

For in making sorrow an enemy to delight without distinction, it is easy, to
find where the shoe wringes him, and that want of learning which he^ imputes
to other, may very well be attributed to himself.

I grant that sorrow and delight are contrary, yet may a contrary sometimes
be the cause of his contrary. As Rheubart, which all the Physicians confess
to be hot, yet doe-they find it to cool in the hottest fevers, when it
sweepes away choler, that causes heat.

An^. phisic ^.
Though contraries of their own nature be utter enemies, yet accidentally the
one may begete the other, so delight many ti^es may spring, ^f sorrow, which
is to be taken two di^ers ways as it is in act, Aqui part. Theolog. 1. q. 32.
art, 4.
or as it is remembered: sorrow as it is in act, may bring forth delight, when
it makes us to think of the thing we love, such was the delight of the
Apostles when they were whipte, they departed from the Counsel with great
joy, Act. 5.4.
to see themselves accounted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ.

Sorrow as it is remembered when it is paste, considering with our selves that
we were in trouble and escaped it, is also a cause of delight, Virg.
so AEneas comfort his soldiers in the midst of their sorrows, putting
them in mind, that the remembrance thereof, would turn to delight another
day. Therefore under color of an absolute conflict between sorrow and
delight, to shake off the yoke of s^uerer discipline which zeal brings in
to govern life, is to iuggle under boarde, a secundum quid ad simplicit^r,
which Logicians do know is so great a fault in disputing, as deserves to
be puni^hed in their youngest scholars. By forcing upon life a certain
necessity of carnal delyght, to set up his Comedies, h^e wrappeth himsel^e in
many inconveniences. For it hinders the course of reason, it whets us to
wantonness, it norisheth imperfections, and argues a corruption in our manners,
it hinders the use of reason three sundry ways: Aqu. part. 1. qu. 14.
First, it wi^hdraweth the mind from better studies, the mind like a stringe,
being let down, and pitched, beneath h^s natural compass, to this key of
carnal delight, which we reap by Comedies, is very sore maynied and robbed
of Souerainetie if delight be^^g^ea^e. Next by reason of a contrariety when it
exceedes, thus Aristotle drawing out a straight line of the office of prudence,
th. 6. cap. 5.
makes it consist in giving good counsel, to live well; in which place he
counts temperance, the Nurse; exceeding deligh, ye corrupter of prudence. But
Comedyes ma^e our delight exceed, for at the^ many times we laugh so
extreemely, that striving to bridle our selves, we cannot; therefore Plato
af^irmeth ye great laughter breeds a great change, de Rep.
and ye old proverb peradventure rose of this, much laughter is ye cognisa^ce
of a soole: where such excess of laughter b^rsteth out yt we cannot hold it,
ther^ is no temperance, for the time; where no te^pera^ce is, there is no
wiseome, nor use of reason; when we show our s^lues void b^th of reason, and
wisdom, what are we then to be thought but fools?

Last of all it is a block in the way of reason, because it locketh up ye
powers of the mind from doing their ^uetie, and like a kind of drunkenness,
makes us stagger, very unfit, either to speak; or to walk as we should in
our vocation. It wh^ts us to wanto^^cs: because it breeds a hunger, and
thirst, after pleasure^ For when the thing which our appetite enjoys cannot
be received all at once, but by succession, or change, we gape after more, as
he ye hearing one half of a sentence, and delights in that, is very
desirous to have the rest. So in (...) delight being moved with variety of
shows, of euentes, of music, the longer we gaze, the mo^e we crave, yea so
forcible they are, yt afterward being but thought upon, they make us seek for
the like an other time. It nourishes imperfections, so long as it settes our
hearts upon things that are transitory, vain and shall perish in the
twinkling of an eye, it argues a corruption in our manners, because it is the
window by which we look into the secret corners of the soul, it is the very
line^ and lead, whereby our disposition is measured to be roughe or smooth^
straight or crooked, lawefull or unlawful, right or wrong. How shall we know
a man to be good, or evil, but by the goodness or naughtines of his will? His
will appears by the end thereof, that is counted the end wherein it rests,
and the rest of our will, is the delight that we reap in the thing we hold
to be good.

Thus we pronounce all them to be virtuous, whom we see to delight in the
works of virtue; them to be wicked, whom we find to rejoice in the works of
wickedness. For as that is evil which rebelleth against reason and the laws of
God, so is that delight to be judged evil that is fixed in the same, and the
man likewise evil that so deliteth. Therefore I may well say the delight which
springs of Comedies (whereby superiority is given to affect^ons and so
rebellion raised against reason, the laws of God are broken which bid us come
out and depart from the doctrine of the Devil) so marketh the corruption of
our manners in our forehe^ddes, that every one that has iudgmente may point it
out^

But to leave over curi^u^^y to descant upon this plainesonge of life and
delight, either by Aquinas, or by Aristotle or by Philosophy her self. I
exhort you with Paul to beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy^ and
vain deceit, Collo^^ ^
after the traditions of men, and after the iudiments of the world, and not
after Christ. And s^thince we are commanded by the same Apostle, as we have
received Christ, so to walk in him, let us bring the trial of our cause to
the touch of Gods word, and examine by that, what the life and delight of a
Christian ought to be, then shall you see my general proposition very
strongly confirmed, that Plays are not to be suffered in a Christian
commonweal. Paul commands the Phillippians to reioyc^ in the Lord, C^p. 4.
ver. 4.
not for a day nor a week, nor a month, nor a year, but ever: the reason is
added, that their modesty might be known, and why should their modesty be
known? because the Lord is at hand: by which Particle the delight of this
life is beaten down. Christ giving us to understand the danger of these
delights wherein we laugh with the world, pronounces a woe upon them, Luke
6.25.
woe be to you that laugh now, for ye shall weep and lament.

It behooves a Christian so to delight, and rejoice now, that he may rejoice
and delight at the last day, ^ Pe^ 4.25.
which joy is accomplished by this that we are partakers of the cross of
Christ. How far this delight is different from Comedies, is easy to be
seen with half an eye, and if Peets have no surer gyrthes to their sa^dle
the^ life and delight, it will be no trouble to unhorse them, for a Christian
knows how to delight in death. ^ertul. de Spec
Large is the ground I might trauace in this behalf, yet for breuities sake I
will pass it over, and show you she life of a Christian as I promised We are
taught by Paul that Christ is our life, Collos. ^.
and that our life is laid up with Christ in God: therefore by the way of
comparison, as Christ died, and after ascended up to heaven, so he persuadeth
^s to dye, that is to mortify this ^lesh with the delights thereof, and to
seek after those things that are above, where Christ our life is. The end of
the death of Christ was, 2. Cor. 5.15.
that we which live in this world, should not live to our selves, but unto
him; here is all prerogative taken from us, we are now no longer our own
men, for if by the benefit of him we live, our life must be his and not our
own. Our life is not his, except we crucify the flesh, with the affections
and concupiscences of the same, we crucify not the affections of our flesh,
when we ^esorte unto plays to stir them up, therefore running to plays we
live to our selves, and not to Christ, when we live to our selves, it is no
li^e.

Yet the Author of the Play of Plays and Pastimes thinks he has plowed
such surrowes on my back, as will never be filled up again, because Comedis
norish delight, and delight should never be taken from life.

This argument cuts like a Ledenhaule knife where (as they say in common
speech) if one pour on steel with a ladell, Obiect^
an other comes and wipes it of with a fether. ^^seb.
Nevertheless here it may be that my friends of the universities will
accus^ me of that ausleryty, which was used by some of the Godly long ago, who
perceiving men in all things naturally to pass the bounds of modesty, and
being desirous to lay some strong kind of plaster to this old soar,
allowed men to use the blessings of God, but for necessities sake, prescribing
them nothing, but that which was necessary: thus were they enjoined to
abstain from al manner of things, that might be spared. Which in deed is a
harder yoke then the word of God does lay upon us: For after this rate, we
should have no more then one c^ate to our backs, nor the use of many creatures
which God has ordained for the service of man. Many things there are that the
hands of God has bestowed upon us not only for necessity, but for delight,
as apparel, meats, flowers, metalles, and such like.

Apparel as well for comelines, as to keep off the injury of the air. Meats,
as well for delight, as for nutriment; otherwise had the prophet never reckoned
it up among the benefits of God^ that he gives us wine to make our hearts
glad, Psalm. 104. 16.
and oil to make us a cheerful countenance. The singular beauty and
sweetenes of flowers, the variety of colors wherein one thing excelles
another, had been bestowed in vain, if the Majesty of God had not as well
regarded our delight, as relieved our need. This I take to be the foundation
whereupon the Author of the Play of Plays builds his strongest reason, which
is this, because we have ears to hear, eyes to see, and so foo^th, Comedies
presenting delight to both, are not so rashly to be condemned. To whom I
answer, Answers
that the creatures of God may be used both for necessity, and for delight, so
far forth as they are referred to that end, for which they were made.

God has bestowed apparel, foode^ flowers, Treasure, as gold, silver,
pearl, bewetifull and rich stones, as Diamoundes, Saphi^es, Rubies,
Carbuncles, Turkies, Chrysolittes; beesides them, Yuorie, ^ett, and marble^ of
these blessings some are both necessary and delightsome, some are only
delightsome; nothing necessary: but to what end? That we might use the^ well,
and by these tra^sitorie benefits be led as it were by te hand, to a
consideration of thos^ benefits that are laid up for us in the life to come.
We are placed as Pilgrims in ye flesh by which as by a ^^^ney we must come to
our own home, Cor^ ^.
therefore passing by the earth, and by the flesh it is our due^y (as trauelers)
to be careful to use the earth, and the flesh^ and the blessings of both, so
^that they may further, Cor. 7
not hinder the course w^ take in hand.

Whereupon Paul exhorts us to use this world^, as though^ we^ used it not,
by which counsel of his, all affections, all thoughts, all delights, that may
clappe any lead to our heels, or draw us aside when we should run
forwards still, until we be crowned, are cut away. Now are we thankful
to God, how lift we up our minds to meditate on the life to come, how use we
these blessings, as helps in the way we have to trace, when they are
riottously wasted upon Comedies, which draw us all back to a sinful delight?
how use we the world as though we used it not, when our studies are so
fixed upon the world? how mightily Plays pull us back from our travel, has
been already declared by many strong reasons drawn from the four causes of
the same, therefore to hold them tolerable because they delight, is a reason
altogether rude, and misshapen, having neither head, to bring it in, nor ^oote^
to bea^^ it up. But as many which show^i^g up lustely in their youth, bew^a^e
the greenene^^e of their years, by the rawenesse of their manners, and of the
wiser sort, are counted for boys though they look like me^: so I trust y^
all that have judgment will measure ye reasons of li^e, and delight, rather by
the substance, that is within; then by the outward show howsoever they meu^t,
or brag it out.

Enter every one into your selves, and whenever you hear that play again,
or any man else in private conference commend Plays, consider not, so much what
is spoken to color them, as what may be spoken to confound them. It is
shame, to frequent plays, impudency to defend them; it is dangerous to fall
in the enemies hand, present death to be prisoners to the Devil; it is sin
in the Gentiles to set out Plays, in Christians it is a presumptuous sin,
because we see better ways and take the worse, we know their corruption, and
allow them. All this has been sufficiently proved by anciente writers, and
daily revealed by learned Preachers, yet will not my countryme^ leave their
Plays, because Plays are the nourishers of delight; wherein I perceive they
are like to the snake, cut of their head, they whiske with the tail.

The 5 Action.
I Think you maru^ile why so many famous men in both universities, have made
open outcries of the inconveniences bredde by plays, none of the^ by printing
have taken the pains to write any full discovery against the^, I especially,
which neither in age, wisedme, nor authority may be compared to them, with
less learning, and more presumption, hau^ taken the charge upon my self. They
hold this opinion yt plays are not to be suffered in a Christian commonweal,
but they do not thoroughly prosecute the same, because that finding the ears of
their hearers stopte with the deaf ad^er, they begin to shake the dust from
their shoes against them, and follow the counsel of God him self, which
bids them throw no pearls to swine. The thing they condeme, because it is
evil; they begin to be mute because men are obstinate in opinions. What
then? am I the boldest in all th company? no. Am I more zealous the^ yt rest?
God forbid I should rob any, of those titles of virtue yt they possess, or
challe^ge yt to my self, which is due to them. What is the reason the^ yt I
dare set in my foot before the rest? Because that if any of the^ should write
against plays, that occupy your pulpits with learned sermons, whose knowledge
and authoryty herein is great. If I say, they should speak but one word
against ye sleepines of Magistrates which in this case is necessary to be
touchte, they shall seem straight to swerue from the text, to speak without
book, and to utter a great deal more then needs. But I, though my speech be
somewhat more free then theirs, shall be excused for want of iudgement^ Since I
am raw; or for childish aspiring, since I am young. Beside this, having once
already written against plays, which no man that ever wrote plays, did, but
one, wh^ has changed his copy, and turne^ himself l^ke ye dog to his vomit,
to play^ again. And being falsely accused my ^elf^ to do ye like, it is
needful for me to write again. These things with indiffere^cy co^sideres, will
persuade the reasonable, y^ I have taken this enterprise upon me, not only
without any malepart oue^hardines, but of necessity, because my experience has
taught as much as any, and made me able to say little less the^ any. Therefore
as I have already discovered y^ corruption of plays by y^ corruption of t^eir
causes, The Efficie^t, the Matter, the Form, the end, so will I conclude ye
Effects yt this poison works among us. The devil is not ignorant how mightily
these outward spectacles effeminate, and sof^e^ ye hearts of me^, vice is
learned with beholding, sense is tickled, desire pricked, and those impressions
of mind are secretly conveyed over to ye gazers, which ye plaiers do
cou^terfeit on ye stage. As long as we know our selves to be flesh, beholding
those examples in Theat^rs yt are incide^t to flesh, we are taught by other
men's examples how to fall. And they that came honest to a play, may depart
infected. Lacta^tius douteth whether any corruption can be greater, the^ yt
which is da^ly bred by plays, because ye expressing of vice by imitation, Lib.
6. cap.
brings us by the shadow, to the substance of the sams. Whereupon hes affirms
them necessary to be banished, least wickedness be learned, or with the custom
of pleasure, by little and little we forget God. What force there is in the
gestures of Players, may be gathered by the Tale of Bacchus, ^y^apoe
and Ariadne, which Xenophon reports to be Played at a banquette, by a
Syracusian and his boy, and his dancing Trull. In came the Syracusian not
unlike to Prologue of our Plays, discoursing the argument of the fable, then
entered Ariadne, gorgeously attyred like a Bride, and sat in the presence of
them all, after came Bacchus dancing to the Pipe, Ariadne perceiving him^
though she neither rose to meet him, nor stirred from the place to welcome
him, yet she showed by her gesture that she sat upon thorns.

When Bacchus beh^ld her, expressing in his dance the passions of love, he
placed him self somewhat near to her, and embraced her, she with an amorous
kind of fear and strangenes, as though she would thruste him away with the
little finger, and pull him again with both her hands, somewhat timorously,
and doubtfully entertained him.

At this the beholders began to shoute, when Bacchus rose up, tenderly
listing Ariadne from her seat^, no small store of courtesy passing between
them, the beholders rose up, every man stood on tippe toe, and seemed to houer
over the pray, when they swear, the company swear, when they departed to
bed; the company presently was set on fire, they that were married posted
home to their wives; they that were single, vowed very solemly, to be wedded.
As the stinge of Phalangion spreads her poison through every vain, when no
hurt is seen; so amorous gesture, strikes to the heart when no skin is
raced. Therefore Cupid is painted with bow and arrows, because it is the
property of lust to wound alooffe. Which being welll weighed, Saint Cyprian
had very good cause to compl^^ne, that players are spots to our manners,
Epist. lib. 2. ^^. ^.ad Dona^
nouri^hers of vice, and corrupters of al things by their gestures. The godly
Father knowing the practice of playing to be so evil, ^pist: lib: ^. ^p. 10 ad
Eucrati^m.
and the inconveniences so monst^ous that gr^w thereby^ thinks the majesty of
God to be stained, y^ honor of his Church defaced, when players are admitted
to the table of the Lord. Neither was this the opinion of Saint Cyprian alone,
Council: Arela^c^s: 2.20.
but of the whole assembly of learned fathers in the council held under
Constantius the emperor.

Great is the hardness of our hearts when, neither fathers, nor counsels^ nor
God himself strikes us with any shame of that, which every good man is ashamed
to remember. Mine eyes thoroughly behold the manner of Theaters, when I wrote
plays my self, and found them to be the very markets of bawdry, where choice
without shame has been as fr^e, as it is for your money in the royal exchaung,
to take a short stock, or a long, a falling ba^d, or a french ru^^e. The
first building of Theaters was to ravish the Sabines, and y^ they were
continued in whordome ever after, Ouide con^esseth in these words. Scilicet ex
illo sole^nia more Theatra nuc quoque Art. amand.
formosis insidiosa mane^t

As at the first, so now, Theaters are snares unto fair women. And as I told
you long ago in my school^ of abuse, our Theaters, and play houses in London,
are as full of secret adultery as they were in Rome. In Rome it was the
fashion of wanton young men, to place them selves as nigh as they could to the
curtesans, to present them pomgranates, to play with their garments, and wait
on them home, when the sport was done. In the playhouses at London, it is the
fashion of youths to go first into the parde, and to carry t^eire ^ye through
every gallery, the^ like unto ravens where they spy the carrion thither they
^ye, and press^ as ne^e to ye farrest a^ they can. In stead of po^^granates
they give the^ pippines, they dally with their garments to pass ye time, they
minister talk upon ^l occasions, and either bring the^ home to their houses
on small acquaintance, or ^^ip into tauerns when y^ plays are do^^. He
thinks best of his painted sheath, and takes himself for a jolly fellow, y^
is noted of most, to be busyest with women in all such ^laces. This open
corruption is a prick in the eyes of them that see it, and a thorn in the
sides of the godly, when they hear it. This is a poison to beholders, and a
nurseris of idelnesse to the Players.

Most of the Players have been either men of occupations, which they have
forsaken to live by playing, or common minstrels, or trained up from their
childehoode to this abominable exercise and have now no other way to get
their living. A common weal is likened to the body, whose head is the
prince, in the body: if any part be idle, by participation the damage
redoundeth to the whole, if any refuse to do their duty, though they be
base, as the guts, the gall, the bladder, how dangerous it is both to the
body, and to the head, every man is able to conjecture.

We are commanded by God to abide in the same calling wheirein we were called,
which is our ordinary vocation in a commonweal. This is the standing, which as
faithful soldiers we ought to keep, till the Lord himself do call us from
it. Be we never so base or mean in the sight of men, yet k^eping our standing,
living in our vocation, doing our duty, we have this comfort, that God is
our captain, God is our guide, it is given us of God, yielding our selves
obedient to him, we can not but glister in his sight.

If we grudge at the wisdom of our maker, and disdain the calling^ he has
placed us in, aspyring somewhat higher then we should, as in the body; when
the feet would be^ arms, the arms would be eyes; the guts would be
veins, the veins would be nerves; the muscles would be flesh, the flesh would
be spirit, this confusion of order weakens the head: So in a commonweal, if
private men be suffered to forsake their calling because they desire to walk
gentleman like in sattine and velvet, with a buckler at their heels, proportion
is so broken, unity dissolved, harmony con^^u^ded, y^ the whole body must be
dismembered and the prince or the head can not c^u^e but sicken. Wherefore I
hope ye wise will account it necessary, that such as have left their
occupations, eythe^ be turned to the same again, or cut of from the body as
putrified members for infe^^ing the ^est. Let them that have no occupation at
all, ask God forgiveness for the time so evil spent, and apply them selves
speedely to live within the compass of a common weal. Let them not look to
live by plays, the little thrift that follows their great gain, is a
mani^^st token that God has cursed it, that which is gotten over the devils
^acke, is, spent under his belly; it c^mes running, and departes flying with
the wings of an Egle in the air. I have showed you loui^g countrymen ye
corruption and inco^ueniences of your pla^es, as the s^lendernes of my
learnings would affor^e, being pulde from ye vniuers^tie before I was ^i^e, and
withered in ye country for want of saap^: if you prefer y^ opinion of Lodge or
any such like before ye infallabe testimo^y of your own^ senses, if I which for
the love I bear to your souls, and the du^tie that I owe unto my God, have
plainly declared what I read by study, or find by practice, concerning
plays, not as a picte Orator that with g^eatest skill; but as a welwiller, y^
with smallest ieoperdie might speak my mind; If your preachers whose learning's
wonderful; zeal, unspeakable; if ye ancient fathers of ye church, which have
lookte very narrowly into the cause and in anguish of heart set down their
judgment; if the counsels of fathers which are not the Oracles of any one man
but debated substantially by the heads of many, if the word of God, which is
the finger yt points you out the way, which is the trumpete yt gives y^
surest sound, which is ye square, unto which you must be fashioned, which is
the w^itten voice of the God of Israel challenginge credit of it self, may
not persuade ^ou to leave your plays, the succese of my labor will be lean,
and ye hope of your ame^^ment ster^ed to death: but if you be such as I take
you for, glad to be taught, unwilling to perish, lovers of the Gospel, haters
of liberty, champions in earth for the right of Christ, calle^gers to the
devil and all his works, no spirit of sleep shall be muffle your eyes, no
fat of self will, or ignorance shall cover your hearts, no parasite shall
flatter you, in your sin, no Lodge, no playmaker, no Epicu^e, no A^heiste,
shall make you to surfette with these delights.

Plays are the inventions of the devil, the offerings of Idolatry, the pomp
of worldlinges, the blossoms of vanity, the root of Apostasy, the food of
iniquity, riot, and adultery. detest them. Players are masters of vice,
teachers of wantonness, spurs to impuritie, the Sons of idleness, so
long as they live in this order, loath them. God is merciful, his wings are
spread to receive you if you come betimes, God is just, h^s bow is bent and his
arrowe drawn, to se^^ you a plague, if you stay^ too long.

FINIS.

