Imprimatur.

THOMAS WYKES.
October. 9. 1638.
THE MAN FOR HEAVEN.

A Sermon Preached at the Court to his Majesty's Household, Anno Domini, 1637.

By JOHN GORE, Rector of Wendenlofts, and Preacher of S. Peter's in Cornhill,
LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop, for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Green Dragon in Paul's Churchyard* 1639.

The Man for Heaven.
PHILIP. 3. 20. Our conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for
the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.
YE Honorable and Honored Courtiers, here is a Text of Scripture fit for
persons of your rank and quality. A text that will learn you so to demean your
selves, so to order your Conversation in this World, that after you have been
Courtiers on Earth, you may be Courtiers in Heaven; after you have conversed
with men, you may converse with God; after you have served and attended our
gracious King and Queen below, you may be preferred and taken up by the Angels
of Heaven to accompany and attend the King of Glory above. Certainly, if there
be an (...) an Heaven upon Earth, an Estate of Majesty, Height and Glory; Hear
it is, and you are those that are advanced, and enstated in it; Let me only
advise you (as a poor unworthy Messenger of Christ) to take heed and beware of
Capernaums Doom, Mat. 11. 23. And thou Capernaum which art exalted to Heaven
shall be thrown down to Hell; Oh pray to God that ye may escape that woeful
praecipitium, that dismal, that doleful, that deadly Downfall: Rather (as
Solomon says) let your way be upward, direct your steps and courses to
Heaven-wards, and labor every day to arise in your care, in your zeal, in
your devotions to God, that you may come nearer to Heaven at night, than you
were in the morning; that so even while you live and converse on Earth, you may
be truly and rightly said to have your conversation in Heaven. For so speaks
my Text of some, and God grant it may be spoken of us all, that Our
conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ.

In which words there are two general parts to be observed: First, the
excellency of the Saints (they have their conversation in Heaven.) Secondly,
the expectation of sinners, (from thence also we look for the Savior, etc.)
First, what is meant by conversation. Secondly, how we that live and converse
on earth, can be said in proper sense to have our conversation in Heaven.

The first of these may be considered in four circumstances,

1. That a man's conversation is Res continuata, a constant, a settled, continued
thing. It is not one or two, or some few particular actions that do denominate
a man's conversation, but the general course and current of his life; which if
it be rightly ordered, as it ought to be, then it is termed an Honest
Conversation, 2 Peter 2. 12. (Have your conversation honest among the
Gentiles.) if otherwise it be idly and unprofitably misspent, then it is termed
a vain conversation: 1 Pet. 1. 18. (ye are redeemed from your vain
conversation.) That which brings a man no profit, no credit, no comfort in the
end, that is a vain conversation: And God forbid that any Christians
conversation should be so vain. This we know, that as there is no man so bad
but he may do some particular actions that are right and good; as God said of
Abimelech, Genesis 20. I know thou have done this thing in the integrity of thy
heart: that one thing he did well, though his conversation went another way; so
on the contrary, there is no man so good, but he may do some particular actions
that are vile and bad; as it is said of David, he was upright in all things, save
only in the matter of Vriah; In that one thing he failed exceedingly, though
the whole stream of his life and conversation went right to Godward.

It is with a Christian in this world, as with a Ship that goes to Sea, They
are bound for such a Coast, that way they sail, and thither they direct their
voyage; now there may come many a contrary storm that may turn them clean
back, or drive them quite another way: which for the present is a great trouble
and grief unto them, but as soon as ever the storm is over, and the Sea is
calm, they hale and toil and never are at rest, till they have recovered
themselves, and are gotten into the right way again. So fares it with a
Christian soul, such a one is bound for Heaven, that is his home, that is his
harbor, that is the Heaven where he would be; now there may come, and daily
there does come many a cross, many a corruption, many a pleasing, or
unpleasing temptation that turns him clean another way, into the way of sin
and wickedness, or turns him clean back from the way of Grace and goodness;
which for the present (like the divisions of Ruben, Judge. 5.) must needs cause
great sighings and thoughts of heart; and indeed he is never at quiet in his
mind, nor at peace in his conscience, till by the mercy of God he have
recovered himself by repentance, and come back to his old comfort and
conversation again. So the meaning of the Text is this; that it is not enough
for a man to look to Heaven at some particular times, as in the time of
sickness, of sorrow, of extreme adversity; (as the manner of the world is) for
then the wickedest man that is, will peradventure have an eye to Heaven.

Just as you see a Hog, that never looks to Heaven, till he be over-turned, and
cast upon his back, then he looks to Heaven, and cries; whereas if you do but
let him loose, that he gets upon his legs again, he returns with his snowt
to the earth, and looks to Heaven no more; so fares it (I fear me) with many a
carnal man, that seldom or never looks to Heaven, till he be overturned in
his credit, overthrown in his estate, or cast upon his back on the bed of
sickness and death; then he lisis up his eyes to those Hills from whence
comes his help, (as David speaks:) whereupon if God do but set him at
liberty, and restore him to his health, that he get upon his legs again, he
returns like a Hog to his old swinish disposition, and looks no more after
Heaven, till he be castdown again into the like distress. Thus it is, but thus
it should not be: If you desire to have comfort from Heaven in your sickness,
let your conversation be there in your health; and that not for a fit or a
brunt, but in a constant, and settled, and continued course of life; that like
as it is said of God, Deuteronomy. 11. 12. that his eyes are upon the land, from the
beginning of the year, to the end thereof; so let thine eyes be upon God from
the beginning of the day, of the week, of the year, even to the end and
consummation of thy life. You know what our Savior said to those Jews which
believed on him, John 8. 31. Si manserit is in me, If ye abide in me, then are
ye my Disciples indeed. They that only come to Christ, and make profession of
Christianity for a time, and then like Demas fall away, and embrace this
present World; these are but disciples in name only, like Labans Images, that
were called Gods, when they were but blocks: Those and none but those are
disciples in deed and in truth, that do as their master did, of whom it is
said, Philip. 2. 8. that He humbled himself, and became obedient unto the
death: He was not only obedient in his death, submitting himself to all the
cruelty, all the infamy, all the extremity of pain and shame that God or man
could lay upon him; but He was obedient unto death; that is, (as Beza expounds
it) unto his Dying day, from the beginning of his Incarnation, to the very end
of his dissolution: Here Is the Load-star that we must all be guided by* let
us bear the same mind, and hold the same resolution, that our Savior did, to
become obedient to the death, (or as Job speaks, Cap. 27. 5.) not to leave
our innocence till we die; then may we take it as an undoubted evidence and
assurance to our souls, that we, even we our selves are of the number of
those blessed Saints that have their conversation in the Heavens. This is the
first circumstance to be considered, that a man's conversation is Res
continuata, not a sudden or a momentarie, but a constant and continued thing.

2. A man's conversation is Res manifesta, an open and a manifest thing: the
Conscience of a man, that is secret, known only to God; but his conversation
that is evident and apparent to the word. So the meaning of the Text is, that
it is not enough for a man to have a care of his conscience inwardly toward
God, but he must have as great a care of his conversation outwardly to the
World. That like as it is said of our Savior, Luke 9. 53. They knew what he
was by his face, because (says the Text) his face was as though he would go
to Jerusalem: So should a good Christian be known by his face (that is) by his
outward carriage and conversation to be one that is going to Jerusalem that is
above; If thou be such a one, let it be thy principal care to lead thy life
in such a way as God does best accept, in the way of Godliness and honesty, in
the way of temperance and sobriety, in the way of truth and sincerity; that the
World may see by thy life, that as thou do live and move in God, so thou do
also live and move to God. As Alexander once gave order that the Grecians and
Barbarians should be no longer distinguished by their garments; but (says
he) let the Greciens be known by their virtues* and the Barbarians by their
vices: thus should a Christian be distinguished from a carnal man, not by his
habit, but by his heart, not by his estate and condition, but by his wisdom
and conversation, being such (as St. Paul speaks) as becomes the Gospel,
Philip. 1. 27. The works of the flesh are manifest (says the same Apostle) and
so should the works of the spirit be also. As it is said of the Kings
daughter, Psalm. 45. 13. She is all glorious within, and her clothing also is
of wrought Gold: so should every Christian soul, which is the Spouse of
Christ, and the daughter of the King of Heaven, be all glorious, or rather
indeed all gracious and all virtuous, both within and without: And as it is
said of the Ark of God, Exodus 37. that it was over-laied with pure Gold both
within and without: so should every Christian pray, that he may have a good
conscience as the overlaying of gold within, and a good conversation, as the
overlaying of gold without; providing things honest, not only in the sight of
God, but also in the sight of men, Romans 12. 17. And this is the second
circumstance to be considered in our conversation; namely, that it is or ought
to be Res manifesta, a manifest thing.

3. A man's conversation is Res familiaris, a friendly, or a familiar thing; You
know there is no one thing that breeds so much entirenesse, so much familiarity
and acquaintance among all sorts of persons, as living, and loving, and
conversing together: So the only way to bring a man into an humble familiarity
and acquaintance with his God, is to be conversant in holy duties, and to have
his conversation in the Heavens. It is the phrase of Job, (and I do not
remember that I find it any where but in that book) Job 22. 21. Acquaint thy
self with God, and thereby good shall come unto thee. Asuesce cum Deo, (that
is) Accustom and inure thy self to walk with God, as Enoch did; to talk
with God, as Moses did; to seek the face of God, as David did: make nor thy
self a stranger to God now, lest he know thee not, lest he own thee not, at
the later day, when thou and all the world will be glad to claim acquaintance
of Him. But some may say; What am I, or what is my fathers house, that I should
dare to think of being acquainted, with so great a Majesty, as is the Lord?
that is too familiar a word: I answer, according to the common proverb; volenti
nonfit injuria, That which is an injury to our thinking, is no injury to him
that is willing and desirous of it. Now you shall observe that all the persons
in the Blessed Trinity, are so far from taking ill at our hands, that they do
even desire and wish for sinful man's society. God the Father he desires it,
Esaias 1. 18. Come (says God) let us reason together, let us parley, let us
confer, let us be familiar (as it were) and renew our old decayed acquaintance,
which has slept so long, and been so unkindly laid aside. In the original it
is, Adeste, and increpemus, come let us chide together; as one friend chides
another for being strange and aloof, and taking distaste without a cause: And
this is it, makes God to chide us as he does, partly by word of mouth, in the
Ministry of his Word; and partly by Act and Deed, by sending his real
Judgments into the World to plague us for sin; which David calls
Increpationem Domini, the chiding of God, Psalm. 18. 15. and all for our
averseness, and aloofenesse in this kind, that we will not come at him to
renew our acquaintance with him, by a sound and serious humiliation, as his
mercy, and our duty does require. God the Son, He desires our acquaintance
likewise, as you may read, John 5. 39. Ye search the Scriptures (says Christ)
and in them ye look to have eternal life, and yet ye will not come to me
that ye might have life. We deal just with our Savior, as one said of his
Friend or Father, Si been essem sine te, nunquam venirem ad te; If I could be
well without thee, I would never come at thee: It is our illness, and our
weakness, our lamenesse, and our sickness, that makes us to repair unto
Christ, or else (I am afraid) we would seldom or never come at him. As for
the Holy Ghost, David calls him a Loving Spirit, Psalm. 143. 10. a Spirit that
loves the company and the conduct of a poor sinner (let thy loving Spirit lead
me into the land of Righteousness;) it is not only a leading Spirit, but a
loving Spirit; a Spirit that loves to lead us, and to carry us into all truth,
into all goodness, and to guide our sinful feet into the way of peace; we
read of diverse that were condemned in Scripture, for having to do with
Familiar Spirits, and justly, for what graceless wretches were they that durst
be familiar with those evil spirits that were the mortal enemies of their
souls; that durst to harbor those hellish Serpents in their bosoms, that
stung their Souls to death eternal: And oh, what a blessed and a happy thing
it were, if we were but half so desirous of the familiarity and acquaintance
of the Good Spirit, as they were of the evil ones; then as Job speaks in the
place forenamed, Inde proventus erit bonus, thereby good shall come unto thee:
Good to thy estate, thou shall prosper by it; Good to thy children, they shall
flourish by it; Good to thy name, thou shall have credit and reputation by it;
Good to thy body, thou shall have health and protection by it; but special
good shall come to thy Soul, thou shall have mercy, and peace, and salvation
by it: Thou shall have his good Word to instruct thee, his good Angels to guard
thee, his good Spirit to comfort thee, and above all his good Kingdom to
receive thee. Therefore, if thou love thy self, and tenderest thy own good,
let thy conversation with God, be Res familiaris, a free, a frequent, and a
familiar thing.

Lastly, if we take the original word (...) in the native and proper sense,
as it signifies the traffiquing and trading that one Merchant or one Citizen
has with another, then it affords us this consideration; That to converse or
to have commerce with God, is Res quest uosa, the gainfulest trade, and the
richest merchandise under Heaven. For if we believe the Apostle; Godliness is
no vile commodity, but exceeding gainful, yea gain it self, yea and great
gain too; (if not to the purse, yet to the Conscience; if not to the estate,
yet to the soul it is) for it has the promises not only of the life that now
is, but of that which is to come. There be many that say (says David, Psalm.
4. 6.) Who will show us any good? It is not the saying of one man, or of some
men, but of many and of most men, who will show us any Good; all their desire
is to listen and inquire who can tell them of any good purchase, any good
bargain, any good fortune that may concern them, or come to their hands; let
the party that shows it be who he will, if he shows any good we love him,
we thank him for it: Behold here is one (Saint Paul by name) that shows us
Summum Bonum, the Greatest Good, the truest and surest Gain that is to be had
in all the Christian World: and that is to keep a Factory in Heaven (as it
were) by the means and mediation of Jesus Christ, to deal betwixt God and our
own Souls in a secret and a sacred commerce, to exchange our Prayers for his
Favors, our duties for his Mercies, and so to drive a Spiritual trade in the
City of God; And this will bring us into such a way of profit, that we shall
gain Wisdom and Grace, and Comfort and Credit in this life, and a Crown of
Eternal Glory in the life to come, and now judge your selves whether to have
our conversation in Heaven be not Res quaestuosa, a gainful thing.

I come now to the second general proposition of my Text, which is this: How
we that live and converse upon Earth, can be said in proper sense to have our
Conversation in the Heavens? I shall answer it four ways.

1. Per Elevationem, By lifting up our hearts and minds, and Souls to God. We
read, Levit. 11. 21. that those Reptilia, those Fowls or other Creatures that
crept on all four, were Abomination in Moses Law, the people might not eat nor
touch them; but those that had legs and wings to leap withal, and to lift
up themselves from the Earth toward Heaven, those were clean in Gods account.
This was certainly a symbolicall type to signify unto us, that those
Christians that are always creeping (as it were) and crawling and grovelling
upon the Earth, always minding earthly things, and setting their hearts upon
the muck of this World, they are unclean and Abomination to the Lord: But they
that have the legs and wings of Faith and fervent Prayer, to leap (as it
were) from the Earth, and to lift up themselves toward Heaven in their
ejaculations and devotions to God, they are those whom God accepts. An Angel
once cried, Revel. 8. 13. Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the Earth.
Inhabitantibus, non Accolis (says a Father) not to the sojourners and
strangers of the Earth (as all good Christians are, whose Home is Heaven, and
the Earth but a place of their pilgrimage for a time.) But the woes are to the
settled Inhabitants of the Earth, who so fix their hearts on the Earth, that
they make it their Heaven; like that Cardinal that would not change his part
in Paris for his part in Paradise: or like the Children of Reuben and Gad,
Numb. 32. 3. that desired to make their stay on this side Jordan, and let their
brethren if they listed pass over into the Land of promise; for their own
parts, they liked well of the place where they were, and did not desire to
remove, because it was a place fit for their Cattle. In like sort, they that
make more account of their cattle, than they do of their conscience; and do
more esteem the pleasures and profits of a life temporal, than the
incomprehensible joys of the life eternal; they that so love the Earth, that
by their good wills they would not leave it for Heaven: Woe be to them three
ways: first, woe to them in life; secondly, woe to them in death; thirdly, woe
to them after death: or thus, woe to their bodies, woe to their souls, and woe
to both body and soul together in that woeful place of torment. In a word,
therefore if we desire to escape this threfold woe, and that it may be well
with us both here and hereafter; let us do by our af^ections, as Husbandmen
do by their corn, if it lie low in a damp room, it is in danger to putrify,
and corrupt, and stink; therefore they convey it and carry it up into some
higher room that is farther from the Earth, and nearer to Heaven, and there it
is safe. Such a damp place is this sinful World, therefore if thou would
preserve thy affections from stench and corruption, carry them up on high, list
them up to Heaven by divine contemplations, and by a divine conversation, and
then they are out of danger. We should frame our affections in form of a ship,
which is close downwards, and open upwards, in an hearty desire of a Heavenly
condition. One says well, It is with Men, as it is with the Moon: When the
Moon decreaseth, it is close above, and open below; Contrarily, when it
increases, it is open above, and close below: So if our minds, (as Nature has
framed our hearts) be close downwards, using the World, as if we used it not,
and enlarged upwards in seeking and sighing after the things that be above;
then it is a happy sign of our increase in grace and favor with God, and an
infallible evidence to our souls, that though our abode be below on Earth,
yet our conversation is above in Heaven.

2. Per Anticipationem, you that desire to have Heaven hereafter, must begin
your heaven here, by Anticipation; and that three ways: first, take direction
from Heaven in all your ways and actions; do as ship-men do at Sea, because
they have no common Road, nor beaten Path to sail by, they take their
direction from the stars, and guide themselves by the Heavens; so because in
this World (which is as brinish with sin, as the Sea is with salt; and as
dangerous to the Soul, as the Sea is to the ship) there is no common Road (as
I may say) no beaten path to Heaven, so few there be that go that way; let
every one that desires to walk safely, take heed of walking rashly, and
following the lusts, devices, and desires of his own heart, but let him look
up to Heaven for direction, and desire God to be his guide and conduct; saying
and praying in the words of the Prophet David, Psalm. 48. 14. Thou O. God art my
God for ever, oh be thou my guide unto the day of death. Secondly, learn the
language of Heaven while ye are here; as one that is to travel into a
foreign Country, will if he can possible learn some part of the language of
that country beforehand, that he may not be altogether to seek when he
comes into a strange place: So if Heaven be (as I hope it is) the Country and
the Kingdom that ye all desire to live in; be careful then while ye are
here to inure your selves to the language of Heaven ere ye come there, (that
is) to bless God, and praise him, and speak good of his Name: for as terrene,
and sordid and base discourse is the language of the World, and lying, and lewd
and profane discourse is the language of Hell: So pious, and profitable, and
divine discourse, that savoureth and rellisheth of the Grace and good Spirit of
God, that is the language of Heaven: learn that. Thirdly, labor to get a
Temper and a disposition fit for Heaven; As God has given the fowls a Temper
fit to live in the air, and fishes a Temper fit for the water; and creeping
things a Temper fit for the Earth; so desire of God to frame thy heart to an
Heavenly disposition, and to give thee a Temper fit for Heaven.

Certainly Carnal Men mistake Heaven, taking it to be only a place of Rest,
but not a place of righteousness; a place of happiness, but not a place of
holiness; so that if a Carnal man should be admitted to peep into Heaven to
see what is there adoing, to see how the Glorified Souls and Spirits are
always lauding and magnifying their God and Savior, always taken up with
Holy and Heavenly exercises and employments; he would loath no place so much
as Heaven, as being no ways agreeable, but altogether contrary to his temper
and disposition: He that is weary of one Sabbath here, how will he brook an
eternity of Sabbath hereafter: if the Footmen have ty^ed him (as Jeremy
speaks in another case, Ierem. 12. 5. how will he do to hold* pace with the
Horsemen: He that thinks too much of that little holiness that God requires
in his Saints on Earth, how will he comply with that excellency of holiness
that is in the Saints, and blessed Souls in Heaven. In a word then, as we all
hope to have Carnem Angelisicatam (as Tertullian speaks) to have Angell-like
bodies hereafter; so let us labor and pray that we may have Animas
Angelisicatas, Angell-like Souls while we are here; that we may wholly
addict and give our minds to do Gods will on Earth as it is done in Heaven,
that we may begin our Heaven here in Grace, and perfect it hereafter for ever
in Glory.

3 A man that lives on Earth, may be said to have his conversation in Heaven,
Per Charitatem, by holy Charity, which is nothing else but a divine love to
God, and to all Goodness. He that is a truly Charitable man on Earth, is in
ultima and proxima dispositione, in the last, and likest, and nearest
disposition to the Glorified Saints in Heaven: For this we know, that most of
those other virtues wherein men excel on Earth, do fail and cease when the
Soul returns to Heaven; Our Faith, that shall cease, for we shall then see
the beatificall face of God, and the blessed reward of the Godly, which we now
believe unseene.

Our Hope, that shall cease; for we shall then enjoy the good things we hoped
for: no more need of Anchour when we are past the Sea of this world, and
landed upon the shore of Heaven. So likewise Patience shall cease, for there
shall be no more pain; and Continency, for there shall be no more temptations;
and Mercy, for there shall be no more objects of misery: Only Charity, that
remaynes and abides, and accompanies the soul into the kingdom of Christ, and
of God; that is a Grace that is begun on earth, and never cease in Heaven; it
is a celestial, a heavenly quality, whether it be in men or women; in persons
of noble, or of meaner rank. It is true, all have not means alike to express
their charity to those that are poor and needy; therefore you must know, that
Charity is twofold; there is the outward charity of the hand, and the inward
charity of the heart; this later is that which God requires equally of all,
both rich and poor. It is like that Tribute of the Sanctuary Exodus 30. 15.
wherein there was an equal Rate set for the Ransom of their lives, that the
poor paid as much as the Rich: so a poor man may have as Charitable an heart,
as a Rich man, though God have straightened him in his means that he cannot have
so charitable an hand: you see 1. Cor. 13. that Charity which the Apostle so
magnifies, and extolls above all other gifts, is only this inward Charity
(Charity envieth not, is not easily provoked, seeks not her own, but hops
all things, believes all things, indureth all things etc.;) all this reflects
upon the heart, and therein a poor man may abound, as well as a rich; In a
word then, if God have clipped thy wings, and cut short thy estate, that thou
can not have a charitable hand; yet howsoever retain a charitable heart, and
what thou want in substance make up in prayer. This is the third way,
whereby a man that lives on earth may be truly said to have his conversation in
heaven.

4. The fourth and last way, is, per Claritatem, by brightness and shining in
Grace, and good works; Heaven is a shining place, full of splendor, lusture
and glory, and such are all the souls that dwell therein. The Prophet tell us
Dan. 12. 3. they that be wise shall shine as the firmament, and they that turn
many to Righteousness shall shine as the stars for evermore. The firmament
that shines by day, and the stars they shine by night; the meaning is, that
they which are truly virtuous and wise, eruditi and erudientes, the practisers,
and the teachers of wisdom; they that are wise themselves, and they that make
others wise, shall shine as the Firmament in the daytime of their life, and as
the Stars in the night when they are dead and gone; they shall shine in Grace
here, and in Glory hereafter. Though for a time they be over-clouded (as it
were) with Crosses and Corruptions, which darkens and obscures the luster that
is in them; yet the time will come that all these Clouds, these Crosses, and
Corruptions shall be blown away, and they shall shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. When Moses conversed with God, his face shined, Exodus
34. there is no good man that converseth with God, but his face shines too, that
is, he has a venerable aspect, insomuch as they that will not imitate him,
cannot but honor him: John was a burning and a shining light (says the
Gospel, John 5. 35.) burning with zeal inwardly to God, shining by a good
life outwardly to the World. You that desire to shine in Heaven must begin your
shining here on Earth: Let your light so shine, (says our Savior) that men
may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. True
Faith is in the heart, like a candle in a lantern, which must not, nay cannot
be altogether hid, but discovers it self by its own shining light.

Astronomers observe that the Galaxia, or the Milky way (as they call it) is a
Glorious Circle, and possesses a great part of Heaven, and yet is all of so
little Stars, as have no name nor knowledge taken of them by Astrologers. So
no doubt, there are many Saints in Heaven, that shine as the Stars in the
Kingdom of God, that were none of those great magnitudes, that the World
should take notice of them; but good and blessed Souls that have honestly
performed the duties of their inferior calling, and behaved* themselves
soberly, righteously, and godly in this World; and so glimmered in a poor
estate, like a Diamond that glisters in the dust. In a word, as we all believe
and hope that God will one day change our vile bodies (as the Apostle rightly
calls them) and make them like unto the Glorious of our blessed Lord and
Savior; so let us now desire and beg of God to change our vile Souls, that
they may in some measure be like the pure and precious Soul of our dear
Jesus; that all the fogges and fumes of our unsavory noisome lusts may be
dispersed and done away, that we may so shine on Earth, by a godly life and
conversation, that we may be rewarded with shining in Heaven, in a state of
immortallity and incorruption. Which GOD of his mercy Grant, for JESUS CHRIST
his sake, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be given and ascribed
all honor, praise, and glory; be done and performed all service, obedience
and duty, from this time forth for ever-more,

Amen.
FINIS.

