The maidens dreme Compyled and made by Chrystofer Goodwyn, In the year of our
Lord. M.CCCCC.xlij.


The Prohemye of the Author.
Behold you young Ladies, of high parentage
And you young virgyns, of each degree
Here is a pamphlet, even mete for your age
Where as in a myrrour, you may learn and se,
How vycyous love, you should eschew and fle
Having always shamfastnes, i^ your maydenly face
Then can you never mysse, of virtue and grace.
To love I counceyll you, never enclyne
Excepe only, it be for marriage
To the intent, to have thereby line
yet in that case, take heed you not rage
For hasty love commonly, right soon will aswage
And beware that you love not, before you be wise
Lest you repent you, more ofter than twyse.
Yet diverse in love, has had happy chance
I speak by my self, and many one mo
That of perfyte chaste love, have been in the dance
And sped to our minds, yet for to do so
Thousands have myssed, and fynysshed in woe
Therefore I read you, take good aduysement
Of good abiding, none can repent.
Called is the name, of this little book
The (Maidens dreme) which I hope shall be
For your erudycions, if you therein look
Many a good instruccyon, here shall you se
How virtue to ensue, and vice for to fle
For herein is contained, both gold and glass
They that work well, shall well bring to pass.
Thus to god, I do you commit
Prayenge you to accept, this my little warke
For that it is so rudely done, is but for lack of wit
How be it every man, can not be a clarke
Nor every bird fly, so high as the lark
Ye wot what I mean, thus fare you well
Happy be they, that follow good council.
Thus ends the Prologue.
The maidens Dreme.
IN the lusty, fresshe month of may
When the birds rejoice, every glad speryte
With their venerien voices, i^ the dawne of the day
Then I which had not slept, of the hole night
By Morpleus suddenly, had lost my sight
Which i^ a golden slombre, right soon had me cast
Recheles youth, often slepyth full fast.
As soon as I in, this slombre was brought
Two persons mesemyd, appeared in my sight
The one said (fair love) change you must your thought
For come is the day, passed is the night
Of chyldysshe ygnoraunce, wherefore of right
you must now learn, what you are come to
your years shall ensygne you, what you shall do.
You are, she said, fair, fresshe, and goodlye
Of all your members, well proporcyoned
One of the mynyonest, under the sky
Amyable, pleasant, and well favored
Wherefore you should do, a great mysded
if to your age, you apply not your reason
For each thing ought, to be taken in season.
I never knew, a more goodly maiden
More comely of body, ne fayrer of vysage
In your apparel, so fresshely besene
All correspondent, unto your sweet age
Your white quauerig dugges, would make a ma^rage
Of nature and love, you be the chief mark,
Good is the workman, that fortunatly does mark,
Of reason and wysdom, you have suffycyent
As a maid, of tender an age
In you there wants, none intendement
You are both wise, be dyscrete and sage
You be also extracte, of noble lynage
Yet all this we may, as nothing repute
Onles in due season, be gathered the fruit.
If I were a man, believe me for certain
To be my love, I would you require
For of all other, you be the most sovereign
Of bewtye, favor, and fresshe attire
There is none living, but would you desire
Your excellent bewtye, would a saint move
Right happy is he, that has a fair love.
The maiden.
THen with that, made they a pawse
These two semblaunces, that I have of told
The one approached nyghe, promotynge her cause
The other was not, fully so bold
Her mind yet to utter, I parceyued she would
Thus with me i^ my slombre, they wonderly wrought
Sowndly they sleep, that takes no thought.
Thus as I was, slomberynge in my sleep
The sweet sygnyfiau^ce, of my dreme I began to deuyse
Also what were these Ladies, I took busy keep
That had with me reasoned, in so strange wise
Then their apparel, I did well advise
Wherein were great letters, which I did read with ease
Always new things, does meruaylously please.
These letters forthwith, I began for to spell
And set them together, with all mine intent
As a maiden that could not, read very well
yet at the last, I knew what they meant
The names of these ladies, that were so gent
In them were contryued, wherefore to my mind
He that well sercheth, shall always well find.
The one was named (Amors) a noble dame
Rychely arrayed, and it had been a queen
As a lady of great renown and fame
Which we call love, so fresshely besene
The other was shamfastnes, yt works love much tene
To wicked love contrary, ever she is bent
Simple was her chere, and also her raiment.
Love then began, with me for to reason
So did shamfastnes, when she se her time
They told me many, a goodly sermon
Coming before me, as straight as a line
And gave me great battle, each one in their time
Assaylynge me with words, that persed my heart
Great is the assault, where none will astarte.
Love.
Love spoke first, and to me she did say
My fair mynyon daughter, so tender and young
Acustome thy youth, to sport and to play
To dance and to lute, with many a sweet song
To haunte wanton company, to daly among
For fro me thou have not, yet escaped the trase
youth must aquyte her, or she from the pass.
Shamefastnes.
Then answered shamefastnes, in sentence short
My fair daughter, you shall not do so
For evil is the world, beware of report
If you so offended, how should you then do
your lovers would despise you, and leave you in woe
So should you be shamed, in every town
Bewtye is nothing, without good renown.
Love.
Shame which of fear, is engendryd and spronge
With this her daughter, Shamefastnes
Never did good, to them that be young
(Said love) for youth to deceive doughtelesse
They are evermore ready, to put them in press
Believe her not fair maid, for all her pratle
For age can nothing, but babble and tatle.
Shamefastnes.
Ha my dear dought, how sore were you to blame
If such an evil woman, you did believe
Not worth a festue, were then your good name
For every creature, then would you repreue
Which at the last, full sore should you grieve
Therefore beware, lose not your byrgyuyte
A vyrgyn is a name, of great honor and oygnyte.
Love.
If you give credence, to this dastardly shame
you shall never be set by, a putred oynyon
Take now your pleasure, like a lusty young dame
Or ever that youth be, departed and gone
Wherefore choose, some goodly companyon
With whom you may take, all your lust and pleasau^ce
There is no treasure, without suffycyaunce.
Shamefastnes,
Such light counceyll, so soon to believe
And after to take thereby, some disease
With great pain you should, your self then releue
Wherefore I will tell, that should you best please
Such hasty love, is not worth a pease
To cast away your self, evil were ye quayntaunce
For hasty love, engenders repentance.
Love.
To such a young damoysell, it does appertain
To be fryske, both joyous, and Iolye
And when in such point, she does her maintain
To count her amysse, it were a great folly
For she that with youth, can dance best and dalye
Is counted most noble, be it maiden or wife
We have in this world, no more but a life.
Shamefastnes.
Helas, advise the, or ever thou smarte
Or else thou shall be, like a march hare
Lyftynge thy head up, even like a heart
That through the world, is chased with care
From such folly, my daughter, always beware
Be sobre and simple, and keep the at home
A maybe is not set by, when her sadness is gone.
Love.
Yea thou art thy mothers only darlynge
Therefore thou may, love secretly
In goodness and honor, care for nothing
Praised therefore, thou shall be hyghly
At Bankettes and plays, be present daily
At great feasts and tornays, where most people resort
To much to be fearful, does greatly dyscomforte.
Shamefastnes.
To be tymorous in youth, as seems me
Is a sign, greatly for to be praised
For fear with youth, always should be
For recheles youth is, to be despised
Wherefore dread is a sign, as I have devised
Of puet and clean chastyte, in maiden and wife
Each noble heart, ought to dread a shamfull life.
Love.
Is it then shame, for to be Joyous
And for to please, the people thereby
What should we be, of other scrypulous
Or for that ensues, to care for so greatly
Who that in youth, will live solytary
Prouyth by reason, to have a weke spyryte
The assaye (at the last) makyth the warke perfyte
Shamefastnes.
Other to avail, thy self for to harm
Is no great wisdom, as seems me
I swear to the, by this right arm
If thou to love assent, thou do great folly
For though thou, to thousa^des set forth thy beauty
They will therefore esteem ye, but like a be savage
Fylthy is the water, out of the ryuage.
Love.
Thynkest thou it sin, for to behold
Upon their fresshe cousers, these galantes so gaye
Betraped in sylke, silver, and gold
Which with spear and sheld, at the iustes does assaye
Manfully to win, the pryse if they may
Which won through your love, they give you the praise
Thus amorus hearts, reioysen always.
Shamefastnes.
Thou can not do, to be more defamed
Then of a lover, to have the name
For sonest by him, thou shall be shamed
That flaterynge in Amors, will call the his dame
God keep the from such, perpetual shame
Or to be in such a hasarde, for to desire
A grene bough will bren, if it be in the fire.
Love.
Reknowlege the goods, given the by nature
That so largely has endued ye, with vertus manyfolde
And eke there with has formed the, so fair a creature
That it is a great pleasure, the for to behold
Lease not therefore thy time, adventure and be bold
Lest thou yield account, at the day of dome
We ought to take heed, of that shall after come.
Shamefastnes.
The more goodly that nature, has the formed
And with the more bewtye, she has the furnysshed
So much more with grace, thou should be endoctryned
And with great virtues, for to be garnysshed
For if thy heart to evil, then be enployed
For evermore, thou shall lose thy good name
Well does they watch, that flies fro shame.
Love.
It were no need (me think) the to warn
If ever love, had done the dyspleasure
Or to move the thereto, so it were for thy harm
Read the hystoryes, and thou shall find I am sure
What pain noble parsons, for love would endure
Yea were she never so high a princes
To love or be loved, would put her in prees.
Shamefastnes.
Some ladies I think, has been converted
With dyssolute love, them selfs to acquaynte
Which after right sore has them repented
In making many a doleful complaynte
Better thou were of that to make restraynte
Then forthwith to repent, as it were past and gone
For a thing that is done, remedy is none.
Love.
Did not king Arthurs most noble wife
Ysode polixiene, and also medee
And many mo ladies, of excellent life
To Amorus love, give all their stude
Which has given them a name of perpetuyte
Now of this tell me, who can them reprove
They never had Joy, that never did love.
Shamefastnes.
Who that would search, their stories through out
Should find their end, to be nothing honorable
For dolorously all they endyd, without dout
As god be unto me favorable
Therefore be not to them agreeable
Of examples there be, mo then one or two
Lascyuyous love, does fynysshe in woe.
Love.
Narcissus that to love, would never assent
Was changed by a fountayn, as in Ovid we find
By the gods sharp, and ryghtfull Judgment
Be never therefore, so hawte nor unkind
But love them again, whose heart you have and mind
So shall thou love, for love obtain
Honorable love, is never in vain.
Shamefastnes.
Susanne for her chastyte, of god was preserved
Because to folysshe love, she would not condyscend
Saved she was, from being defoyled
Her honor to keep, she did ever entend
Hard was her beginning, vyctoryous was the end
Therefore learn this of me, both maiden and wife
To dred toffend god, is a blyssed life.
Love.
One may well love, without vyllanye
Or that any dishonor, thereby should arise
For if that any vyllayne, do think any folly
God can correct him, in sondery wise
In all honor (my daughter) do not despise
To love, as nature does entend
They that do as they ought, do not offend.
Shamefastnes.
Sweet and atrayant, is the entering in to love
It is honey with gall, and myrre confycte
The beginning dowse, the end bitter to prove
For it will leave the as soon, as it sees the discomfyte
In woe and care, wherefore it were great profit
Never therein to enter, for all the kind femynyne
For in the tail, lies all the venyme.
Love.
When a secret man, you do parceyue and find
Him truly to love, you need not to dread
So that he be loyal, secret and kind
In loving such one, you can not ill speed
For each of you shall have to your mede
All your pleasure together, with great Joy and solace
One can not love, in every place.
Shamefastnes.
Nothing there is, so secretly hyd
But it is openly known, to all at the last
There was never woman, so well assuryd
That to cover her crime, yet had the cast
But out it must, by some evil blast
For fear to every hascard, then must thou enclyne
Love can depart, when she sees time.
Love.
Harken (my sweet love) is it not great owtrage
That is thus spoken, by this ypocryte
Helas, what wylt thou do, with thy young age
Shall thou pass it over, as in the dark night
And thus cowardly, to put love to flight
Not payeng the trybute, of thy young days
Warkes be not fynysshed, without the assayes.
Shamefastnes.
My sister to love, without flaterynge
Engenders good love, withouten fable
But the stroke of the matrasse, aft losed is the stryng
If it fly far, is not very stable
So cordial love, to all agreeable
If it be put to far, at adventure
With pain can forget, such is her nature.
Love.
If nature would forfet, above yet is dame reason
For to withdraw, and in time to correct
To the end that none should be deceived at no season
Therefore thou may love, withouten suspect
Of any creature, for to be detect
If thou rule the by reason* I swear by god on hye
For reason does govern, above the sterry sky.
Shamefanes.
Who trusts all upon reason, as seems me
May their good name, adventure to far
But who that, his neygbours house does se
To be brennynge, in flamynge fire
To save their own, had need have desire
Lest other likewise, by theyrs should them warm
They are wise can beware, by an others harm.
Love.
Each one may know, and it is no fable
That a fair maiden, that will have no love
Semyth to be folysshe, nyce, and unstable
And knows no goodness, ne none will prove
Whose iye as a sleep, never does move
Without facyon, good maintain or manner
To have knowledge, is a great treasure.
Shamefastnes.
To have sobre knowledge, I count it not ill
Without coveting, to be subtle wise
From pratelynge language, keep your tongue still
For that is in a maiden, the mother of all vice
Be simple in chere, in answer take advise
Speak but little, onles ye be demanded
For in much clatter, many lies are dyscharged.
Love.
Yea, let them say, what they say will
That maiden, has no manner of goodness
That always from love, will keep her self still
None shall her comfort, in her dystres
For every creature, is loved doughtles
For their graces, and good condycyon
A maiden ought not, to be a rebellyon.
Shamefastnes
Have shame always, before your iyes
When you shall be to love esprysed
The world shall love you, in the more goodly wise
And you shall not thereby, of god be despised
Thus let always your empryse, be wisely conduted
To god I commend you, for done is my message
Who good counceyll believes, is counted as sage.
The maiden.
THen did I thank, these ladies both twain
For the good counceyll, that they did me give
Promising I would, do my busy pain
Never toffende, while that I did live
With yt dame Aurora, of my dreme did me depryue
Wherewith all suddenly from my sleep I abrayde
Pleasant dremes, makes folk well a paid.
When I fully was awake, out of this slombre
I thought often of that in my sleep I had seen
And many times in my mind, I did it remember
For I would thereof feign, perfyte have been
Thus at the last I had it so graven
In my heart that I could not put it away
Dremes often are true, it can be no nay.
Then when I was up, I went for to find
If by adventure I could, get one to wryght
For I had fyxed holy my mind
My dreme to enpresse, if that I might
Thus found I one, that did it gladly endyght
Whose pen to be swyfte, I did greatly desire
Long taryenge on ryuers, often is great daungyre.
Thus have I recited it word for word
As in my dreme I did it find
As well as I could in my mind it record
One sense unwritten not leuynge behind
And if I have failed, it was not my mind
Wherefore accept my good will, I heartily you pray
The most expert is not assured always.
And if therbe contained of never so small substance
Any thing herein, worthy of memory
Or that thereby any may take their plesaunce
Let them the give credence as they se cause why
Herein yet may you learn, how to avoid folly
And if the name hereof you would wete
The maidens dreme, called is this pamphlete.
Lenuoy of the Author.
GO forth little book, and do thy self present
Unto my young ladies, and mayde^s of each a state
Prayenge them with the to be content
And also with me that do the dedycate
Unto them cheyfly, wysshynge them fortunate
And although the meter, deuoyde be of eloquence
Yet is therein to be noted, many a good sentence.
Wherefore good vyrgyns all, I heartily you pray
For to take in gree, this my little pain
Howbeit I know well, that no man may
Take in hand a warke, but some will it dysdayne
But as for the Judgment, of any such light brain
I force not, so you thereby I not offend
Whom always (god wot) to please I do entende.
The Authors name.
THus Adue, mine own maystresses all
To (Christ) I commend you, that sytteth on hye
Unto whom my prayers, I (Offer) shall
That with him you may reygne, above the sterry sky
So I require you all heartily
(Good) virgyns to pray that I may (wyn)
The eternal Glory, in avoiding syn.
Thus ends this little book called the Maidens dreme.
Imprynted by me Robert wyet, For Richard Banks.

Cum priuilegio Regali.




