GODS THREE ARROWS: PLAGVE, FAMINE, SVVORD,

In three Treatises. I. A Plaster for the Plague. II. Dearths Death. III. The
Churches Conquest over the Sword.


By WILLIAM GOVGE Doctor in Divinity, and Preacher of GODS Word in
Blackfriars, LONDON.

EZEKIEL. VI. XI. Alas, for all the evil abominations of the house of Israel: for
they shall fall by the Sword, by the Famine, and by the Pestilence. Famem, and
pestilentiam, and bestias pessimas, and quicquid aliud malorum sustinemus in
seculo, propter nostra venire peccata manifestum est. Hier. Comment. l 2. in
Ezekiel. 5. LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Edward Brewster, and are to be
sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Bible, at the great North door of Paul's.
1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR THOMAS COVENTRY, Knight, Lord COVENTRY, Baron of
Alesborough, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable,
EVen he that joined his (...) Vox honorem exhibentis, and omnia bono precantis.
Abrek his joyful applause with the joyful acclamations of many when your
Lordship Gen 41. 43.
was first advanced to your honorable place, does now see further cause to
add this (...) Vox congratulantis and collandantis Deum. Rev. 19. 6. and in
psalm. saepissime.
Halelu-jah, his congratulation, praising God for your continuance, as in your
place, so in your approved Integrity, which has been found, (as the Apostle
says of the faith of Christians) (...) c 1 Pet. 1. 7.
, unto your praise, and honor, and glory, like good gold, which from the
furnace appears more solid and resplendent. For, your kind of judicature,
according to the nature of your place, and your own purpose, is not only (to
use Aug. ad Marcel. Epist. 158.
Saint Augustines phrase) Iudicis mollire sententiam, and mitius vindicare quam
leges, but it is like that which a Zac 8. 16.
Prophet calls (...) Judgment of peace: which Hier. Comment lib. 2. in Zac.
cap. 8.
Saint Hierom thus expounds, Hoc est judicium pacis ut propositum Iudex habeat
pacificare discordes. This is no small difficulty, since according to the same
Hier. Comment. lib. 1. in Esa. cap. 1.
Hierom, Non est omnium recte judicare, sed eorum qui prudentes sunt: who are
made wise from above. Therefore Solomon in visione per somnium hoc a Deo
postulavit, ut accepta sapientia just populum judicaret. Ibid.
Solomon in a dream asked this of God. And shall not the praise thereof by him
that receives it, by them that partake of the benefit of it, be returned to
him from whom descends (...) and (...) Sie distinguo, ut denationem ab ipso
dono. Beza.
(...), (...); But, my good Lord, least telling the truth of your self may
seem flattery to others, and flattery neither sorts with your disposition, nor
becomes my profession, give me leave in mine high esteem of your Honor, and
humble expression of mine affection, to publish my poor pains under your
honorable name: wishing I were able, besides my observance to your Lordship,
in my zeal to Gods Church, Gemmas offerre. But with Origin, Quia haec supra me
sunt, pilas caprarum habere merear, etc. For, whatsoever my weaknesses be,
are not these times seasonable (I would they were not) for such a Subject as is
here handled, Treatises of Plague and Famine, yea and of War too? For, though
by the Prudence and Providence of our royal Sovereign, Son and Heir of the
great Peacemaker, (...) war be kept out of our land: yet in other parts of
Christendom, it, and the restrage like overflowing floods, to the ruin of
many States and of true Religion. The Lion has roared, who will not fear? The
Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? Yet are these Treatises neither to
terrify for what is past, nor to prophecy of what is yet to come; but rather
to heal the wounds that have been made by the fore-intimated arrows, and to
direct us how to keep the Lord from further shooting out the like. It is the
part of us Ministers of Gods Word, out of his Word to declare what he intends
and expects when he smileth, or frowneth on his people. Magistrates (who by
reason of their places, are in Canaans language styled (...) Gods and children
of the Psalm. 82. 6.
most high) have the power to cause divine directions to be put in execution.
Thus therefore does an ancient Father paraphrase on that text, bringing in God
himself thus speaking to Magistrates, I have given you mine own honor, and
dignity, (...). Justin. Mart. Quest. and Resp. ad Orthodox. q 142.
and title, Therefore judge the people as if I my self judged it. To whom now
may those seasonable Treatises which do (as it were with the finger) point at
Gods particular dealing with us, be more fitly presented, then to him, who
under his most excellent Majesty, has so great a place and part, with others,
to settle orders for succouring poor people, wounded as aforesaid, and for
sheltring them from those arrows. Of the Treatises thus commended to your
honorable Patronage, gracious acceptance is in all humility craved by him that
professes himself to be.

At your Honors command, WILLIAM GOVGE.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT Worshipful, and other my Beloved Parishioners,
Inhabitants of Blackfriars LONDON, all Happiness. Right Honorable, Right
Worshipful, Beloved,
BEhold here a Testimony of my due Respect to you. Behold here an Apology for
my seeming Neglect of you. I do acknowledge that all the Respect which by a
grateful Pastor may be due to a loving People, is by me due to you. In that
respect, I do here Treatises presented to my parishioners. 1 The whole Armont
of God.

2 Domestical Daties.

3 A Guide to go to God.

4 Gods three Arrows.


the fourth time give public testimony thereof by presenting to you in
special that which is made public to all. The neglect of you, objected
against me, is, my seldom preaching among you this last year. This ancient,
undeniable aphorism, Vltra posse non est esse: ncc velit quidem.
A man can do no more then he can, gives a just answer thereto. Great has
been the weakness of my body, first occasioned by a very dangerous disease
in August last (how low I was brought thereby, many of you are witnesses) and
further increased by two relapses, one in Nov. the other in Febr. following.
(Of Gods goodness in my recoveries I shall have fit occasion to speak on The
Saints Sacrifice, shortly to be tendered unto you.) Had I no other excuse, this
(...); Chrysostom. Hom. 1. in cap. 1. ad Tit.
were sufficient. Saint Chrysostom, where he grants that by the weakness
of Ministers bodies the Churches commodities may be intercepted, concludes
that Ministers in such cases are not to be blamed. But howsoever my weakness
were a just impediment to preaching (whereby the spirits of a feeble man are
much exhausted) yet would I not make it a pretext for wasting precious time in
idleness. It was wittily and gravely said, Cavendum and in ocio ocium est.
Bern de Consid. l. 3. c. 13. Scipio Africanus dicere solebat Nunquam se minus
ociosum quam cum ocioosus esset. Cic. Offic. lib. 3.
Even in leisure lasinesse is to be shunned. Worthy therefore of all to be
imitated is he, who made that use of freedom from public affairs, as he set
himself more close to his private studies, and thereupon was wont to say that,
He was never less at leisure then when he was most at leisure: Answerably
(according to the ability which God gave me) I endeavored to spend that
cessation which I had from public employments, in my private studies, so as
some fruit thereof might redound to you and others. By this my true and just
apology, I hope the forementioned seeming neglect of you, appears to be but
seeming, Concerning the subject matter of my private pains now made public,
though I had by me sundry treatises heretofore preached in your ears, which
might with more ease have been laid again before your eyes: yet the
manifestation of Gods displeasure against us and other parts of the Christian
world, by shooting out his three (...) malas sagittas. Ezekiel. 5. 16 Metonymia
effecti.
evil arrows (so called in regard of their evil effects) Plague, Famine,
Sword, has drawn my thoughts to meditate thereon, and to publish what in mine
ordinary course of Ministry I have not had occasion to preach. Indeed on
special occasions I have out of the pulpet delivered some of the points
handled in these Treatises: but I never finished any of them. It is without
question a point of prudence to eye the divine Providence in all things. For
Maiestati divinae gubernatio pariter and administratio universitatis incumbit.
Bern super. Cant. Ser. 68.
by it without all contradiction are all things thorowout the whole world
governed and disposed: especially the affairs of his Church: on which
sometimes the light of his favor brightly shines: other-times haile-stones of
indignation are showred down. By a due observation hereof may our disposition
to God be so ordered, as that, which God expects, be effected: namely
Gratulation for his Favors: Humiliation for his Judgments. Now are the times
wherein clouds of Gods anger have obscured the bright sky of the Church.
Pertinent therefore to the present times are the Treatises following, and in
that respect the more profitable to us of these times. Quo magis quid
accomodum, eo magis commodum est.
The more pertinent a point is, the more profitable it is. I could wish that
there were not so just occasion of treating of the foresaid three arrows, as
there is. We have felt the bitterness of the plague within these six years
more then in many hundred years before in this land: which arrow is now again
shot against us: and how far the venime thereof (for it is a venomous arrow)
may infect, who knows? Both the Palatinates, Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia,
Hungaria, and almost all Germany: The general History of France has a
catalogue of 99 towns and places of Ostage for them of the religion, reduced
in these late wars.
Rochel, Montauban, Monpellier, Nesmes, and other towns, cities, and countries
in France: Bredaw in the Low Countries, and many other places in Christendom,
have felt the deep wound of war, whereby Idolatry has thrust out Piety,
Superstition is set in the room of Religion, Usurpers have entered upon the
rites of the true Lords and Inheritours, the blood of many millions has
beeneshed, more have beeneexiled, and all things turned upside down. S.
Augustine in his time complained that the outrages of the Clergy of the
Donatists so wasted the Clericorum Donatistarum latrocinia sic vastant
Ecclesias, ut Barbarorum fortasse sacta mitiora siat. Aug. Epist. 122.
Churches, that Barbarians dealings might seem to be more mild. How much more
justly may we take up that complaint against the Popish Clergy, Jesuits,
Monks, Priests, Friars, and the rest of that rabble? As for Famine, it begins
to invade all Christendom: so as one country cannot be helpful to another, as
they have been in former times. Corn has not been so dear among us, as now
it is, in any living man's memory. How far this Famine begun may proceed and to
what extremities it may bring both our, and other countries, no man can tell.
Is it not now time for Plasters to be made for the Plague, Provision to be
procured against Dearth, and Protection provided against the Sword? Such are
the evils of these Arrows, as to determine which of them is the least evil,
is not easy. I am sure, that the least of them is so evil, as there is just
cause to use all the means that possibly we can to prevent or remove it. To
these purposes tend the Treatises here tendered to you. In them ye shall find
(beside sundry other useful points) the extremities of, and remedies for
Plaster for the Plague. 70, 71, 50, 64, etc.
Plague, Dearths Death,. 4, 5, 6, etc.
Famine, and Churches 6 quest,. 83, 85 9, 10, etc. Dignity of Chivalry,. 15,
10, etc.
Sword. With such a mind accept them as they are offered to you, by him that
thinks no pains too much for your good, who is always mindful of you, and
humbly and heartily desires the help of your prayers: who though feeble in
body, yet, so long as he retains any competent strength to do you any
service, desires to be

Blackfriars, LONDON, 11. Apr. 1631. Your faithful Minister, WILLIAM GOVGE.

Errata.
In the Epistle Dedicatory in margin page 1. lin. 3, for bono read bona. Page
19 lin. 36. and Mordecai was. p. 76. l. 29. To him therefore. p. 99. in marg.
l. 10. Macrob. p. 110. l. 11. know not what. p. 111. in marg. l. 17. Genesis 17.
7. p. 325 add in the end of l. 28 imply as much. p. 335. l. 9. he makes. P.
366. l. 33. so deep a wound. p. 378. l. 12. noted that the very. p. 381. in
marg. l. 22. for redi r. recti. p. 433. l. 14. had betrothed to his.

A Table of the Principal Points handled in The Plaster for the Plague, on
Numb. 16. Verse. 44, 45, etc.
. 1. Of the resolution of the whole history. 1. 2. Of the exposition and
observations of Number. 16. 44. 4. 3. Of judgments as consequences of sin. 5.
4. Of the sins that cause judgment. 6. 5. Of the courses to be taken when
sin is found out. 8. 6. Of the cases wherein we must seek to slake Gods
wrath. 9. 7. Of putting away sin for removing judgments. 9. 8. Of Gods
foretelling judgments. 11. 9. Of Gods making known his mind to his Ministers.
12. 10. Of the grounds that Ministers now have to foretell judgments. 13. 11.
Of the meaning and doctrines of the first part of the 45. Verse of Numb. 16.
14. 12. Of the godlies exemption from the ungodlies destruction. 17. 13. Of the
cases wherein Saints have their share in public judgments. 18. 14. Of the
sundry ways of exempting Saints from judgments. 19. 15. Of Gods care of
Saints mixed with the wicked. 20. 16. Of believers dying of the plague. 21. 17.
Of avoiding communion with the wicked for avoiding their judgments. 23. 18. Of
flying in time of plague. 24. 19. Of leaving multitudes in evil. 25. 20. Of
the stay of judgment by reason of the godly mixed with the wicked. 26. 21. Of
Gods revenging therebellious. 28. 22. Of the utter destruction which
stubbornenesse brings to men. 29. 23. Of sudden judgments. 30. 24. Of the
exposition and observations of the last part of the 45. Verse. 32. 25. Of the
sense and notes of the former part of Verse. 46. 34. 26. Of respect to ones
calling. 40. 27. Of using warrantable means to pacify Gods wrath. 41. 28. Of
sacrificing humane blood to pacify God. 42. 29. Of popish toys to pacify
God. 44. 30. Of performing things warrantable with due circumstances. 45. 31.
Of showing mercy to such as wrong us. 47. 32. Of speedy pacifying Gods wrath.
49. 33. Of atonement with God after his wrath has been kindled. 53. 34. Of
Gods peculiar love to man. 54. 35. Of their desperate condition who reject
reconciliation. 55. 36. Of the penitents comfort in reconciliation. 56. 37. Of
the resemblance betwixt prayer and incense. 56. 38. Of incense typifying
Christ. 59. 39. Of the virtue of Christ's intercession to appease God. 61 Of the
vanity of mere creatures intercession. 62
. 40. Of the scope of the last clause of the 46. Verse. 65. 41. Of the sense of
these words wrath is gone out from the Lord. 66. 42. Of anger attributed to
God. 67. 43. Of the lawfulness of anger. 69. 44. Of the matter of mourning
which the provocation of Gods wrath gives. 72. 45. Of the sins which most
provoke Gods wrath. 74. 46. Of the causes of Gods wrath among us. 79. 47. Of
the kind of plague here meant. 82. 48. Of a plague as an effect of Gods wrath.
85. 49. Of afflictions as effects of wrath or love. 86. 50. Of the duties to be
done when a plague is begun. 88. 51. Of the terror of the beginning of Gods
judgments. 89. 52. Of the meaning and method of the 47. Verse. 91. 53. Of
obedience to Governors directions. 93. 54. Of ordering obedience to
circumstances aright. 94. 55. Of the danger of scanty obedience. 96. 56. Of due
respect to every branch of that which is given us in charge. 97. 57. Of speed
in relieving the distressed. 98. 58. Of the danger of delaying succor. 99. 59.
Of speedy succor. 99. 60. Of the boldness in danger which a good warrant
gives. 100. 61. Of public persons forbearing to visit particular persons
infected with contagious diseases. 103. 62. Of substituting others in ones
place in time of danger. 103. 63. Of observing Gods judgments. 104. 64. Of the
sense and scope of the 48. Verse. 106. 65. Of using means to preserve the
living. 107. 66. Of using means in desperate cases. 109. 67. Of the efficacy
of right means. 110. 68. Of Gods power over plagues. 112. 69. Of the meaning
of the 49. Verse. 113. 70. Of a plagues devouring. 116. 71. Of the terror of a
plague. 119. 72. Of the many means that God has to destroy men. 120. 73. Of
the blood of others which principals bring upon themselves. 121
A PLASTER FOR THE PLAGVE.
. 1. Of the Resolution of the whole History.
NVMB. CHAP. 16. VER. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49.
IN this history we have A Plaster for the Plague, such a plaster as has its
probatum est. For this plaster being applied to the plague, the plague was
stayed, Verse 48. Verse 44. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying.


The parts are 1. The Cause of the Plague. 2. The Cure of the Plague.


The cause is procuring. i nflicting.


The procuring cause is pointed out by this copulative particle AND, which
points at the sin of the people, set out in the 42, and 43. Verses.

The inflicting cause was the Lord. For he says, I will consume, etc. And of
him Moses says, wrath is gone out from the Lord.

For Cure of this Plague, there is 1. A prediction of it, spoke. 2. A
prescription for it.


In the prediction is expressed, 1. The Minister to whom it was foretold, unto
Moses. 2. The Matter that was foretold.


Verse 45. Get you up from among this congregation,
In setting out the Matter, there is 1. An Admonition premised. 2. A Resolution
intended.


In the Admonition are 1. The Persons Who. You. From whom. From among this
congregation.
2. The Point. Get up.


that I may consume them as in a moment.
The Resolution is of a judgment 1. Intended, that I may, etc. 2. Aggravated by
the Soreness Consume them Suddenness, as in a moment.



In the Prescription there is 1. A Remedy. 2. The Efficacy thereof, Verse 48.


The Remedy is set out by Pattern. Precept.


And they fell upon their faces.
In the Pattern we have

1. The Persons. They. 2. Their practice. Fell upon their faces.
The Precept is 1. Propounded. 2. Proved to be necessary.


Verse 46. And Moses said unto Aaron.
In propounding the Precept we may observe 1. The Persons Charging, Moses said
Charged, Unto Aaron.
2. The Prescript. This declares 1. Take a censer and put fire therein, from
off the altar, and put on incense:
The Means to be used. 2. The Matter to be effected.



The Means are Isntrumental. Principal.


The isntrumental means are Censer, Fire.


The fire is amplified by the place whence it was to be taken, from off the
Altar.

The principal means was Incense. Put on Incense.

The Matter to be effected is Expressed. Amplified.


And go quickly to the congregation, and make an atonement for them.
The Expression is this, Make an atonement.

The Amplification sets out 1. The persons for whom, the congregation. 2. The
Manner, or time, Quickly.


For there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the Plague is begun.
The Proof of the necessity of that which is thus prescribed, is taken from the
instant judgment, which is 1. Indefinitely intimated. 2. Determinately
expressed, Verse 49.


Two things are indefinitely intimated. 1. The Cause of the judgment. 2. The
Kind of the judgment.


The Cause is wrath: aggravated by the Author of it. There is wrath gone out
from the Lord.

The Kind is a Plague: Evidenced by the beginning of it, The Plague is begun.

Verse 47. And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the
congregation, and behold the Plague was begun among the people, and he put on
ince^se and made an atonement for the people.
To demonstrate the Efficacy of the foresaid Remedy, it is further related, 1.
How it was used. 2. How, in the use of it, it proved.


The Manner of using it, is 1. Generally propounded, And Aaron took as Moses
commanded. 2. Particularly exemplified.


In the particular exemplification are expressed 1. The speed made, and ran
into the midst of the congregation. 2. The reason ratified, and behold the
Plague was begun among the people. 3. The means used, and he put on incense.
4. The thing effected, and made an atonement for the people. Verse 48. And he
stood, between the dead and the living, and the Plague was stayed.
5. The Manner of doing it, And he stood between the dead and the living.


The proof of the efficacy of the foresaid remedy in the use thereof is
manifested by the Effect following thereon, And the Plague was stayed.

The determinate expression of the judgment is Verse 49. Now they that died in
the Plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, beside them that died
about the matter of Korah.
1. Manifested by the number of those that died of the Plague, 14700. 2.
Aggravated by relation to a former judgment, (beside them that died) which is
described by one of the principal Persons that pulled that judgment on their
own and on the peoples pates, about the matter of Korah.


. 2. Of the exposition and observations of NVMB. 16. 44.
NVMB. 16. 44.And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying.
THis first particle AND, being a copulative, knitteth this upon the former
History, as a consequence justly following thereon. Now in the former History
the Sin of the people is laid down. For after that the Lord had manifested
his fierce wrath against Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with those that took part
with them, by causing the earth to swallow up some of them alive, and by
sending forth a fire to consume other of them, the people that saw these
fearful spectacles of Gods vengeance, were so far from fear and trembling,
as most audaciously, and presumptuously they murmured and gathered themselves
together against Moses and Aaron, as the other, who were before destroyed, had
done. Hereby the Lord was provoked to add, to the former judgments, the
Plague here noted in my text. So as they added sin to sin: and the Lord
added Sequentium accessione ad majorem se contemptum, peccatum extollit. Chrysostom.
Hom. 22. ad Pop.
judgment to judgment. For their sin therefore the Lord plagued them. For
by the multiplication of sin, they grew into a greater contempt then before.

The title here given to God, and translated, the LORD, is Gods proper name See
the Churches Conquest on Exo. 17. 15.. 72.
Jehovah.

Gods speaking, here mentioned, implies an extraordinary manifestation of his
mind; and that so evidently as a man does when he speaks to another, and
thereby declares his meaning.

The Person to whom he spoke was See the Churches Conquest on Exo. 17. 9.. 9.
Moses: even he who was made both a Prince and Prophet to that people.

Three especial observations are here most remarkable.

I. Judgments are consequents of sin. The inference of this Plague upon the
peoples sin gives evidence hereto. II. God foretells what he intends against
sinners. For Gods speaking here mentioned was a foretelling of that he intended
against the rebellious Israelites. III. God reveals his mind to his Ministers.
Moses to whom God here speaks was his Minister. His Minister to govern, and
to instruct his people.
. 3. Of judgments as consequents of sin.
I. See. 2. Malorum in corpore causa est animae nequitia. Chrysostom. ad Pop. Hom 46.
IVdgements are consequents of sin. Take a view of the judgments recorded in
Scripture, and you may easily find sin to be the cause of all. The first that
ever was inflicted on a creature was 2 Pet. 2. 4.
the casting down of Angels into hell: But these are expressly said to be
Angels that sinned. b (...).
The next was on the Serpent, to whom the Lord thus said, Genesis 3. 14.
Because thou have done this thou art cursed: In like manner to Adam, -- 17.
Because thou have eaten, etc. Cursed, etc. Thus -- 6. 5.
the general deluge of the world, the -- 18. 20.
burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, the Exo. 3. 9. -- 56.
plagues of Egypt, Heb. 3. 17.
the judgments in the wilderness, Judge 2. 20.
in the time of the Judges, and afterward, were all for sin. But not to
insist on more particulars in a case so clear, the Wiseman expressly says,
Pro* 13. 6. The kind of Jobs afflictions.
wickedness overthrows the sinner. He that acknowledges this, commends
the justice of God.

Ob. Sore judgments fell upon Job: yet were they not consequents of sin.

Answ. 1. Surely Job was not free from all sin: 1 King. 8. 46. Sancti in
medio tribulationis peccata sua consitebantur, pro quibus se aigne and just
humiliari. noverant. Aug. Epist. 122 ad Victor. de afflict piorum.
For there is no man that sins not. Before sin seized on man, he was free
from all judgment: and as free shall he be, when again he shall be without
sin. Therefore Saints in their afflictions have confessed their sins, for
which they knew they were deservedly and justly humbled.

2. Distinction must be made betwixt judgments. Some are 1 Pet. 1. 7. Iam. 1.
3. See. 49.
for evidence, proof, and exercise of such graces as God has endued men
withal. Others are for punishments of sin: and they either 2 Chro. 33. 12
to bring a sinner to repentance, or Iud. Verse. 7.
to make him an example of just vengeance. The judgments which befell Job were
of the first kind. The judgments intended in the point in hand are of the
latter kind.

The direct contrariety that is betwixt sin and Gods purity, on the one side:
and Gods holy jealousy, and perfect Why judgments follow sin.
hatred of sin, his impartial justice, his truth in executing what he
threatens, his care to keep others from being insected, his wisdom in
stopping the mouth of such as are punished, and the many ill consequences that
might follow upon sins impunity, on the other side: as they hold judgments
from such as by their impenitency pull them not upon their own pates, so they
hasten judgments on notorious sinners.

. 4. Of the sins that cause judgment.
1. Ios. 7. 13.
THE charge which God gave to Joshua (when he Search cut cause of judgment.
and the men of Israel with him fled before the men of Ai) to search out and
take away from among them the accursed thing, affords a direction very
pertinent to the point in hand: which is, when we see any judgment hanging
over our heads, or feel it fallen upon us, to search narrowly and thoroughly
after the cause of that judgment. Nothing does usually so bring men's sins to
mind and memory, as judgments. Instance the example of Joseph's brethren, Nihil
sic peccata in memoriam revocare consue-vit ut poena and castigatio. Et hoc
manifestum ex fratribus Joseph etc. Chrysostom. ^d Pop. Hom. 4.
Genesis 42, 21. The Prophet therefore that penned the Lamentations, upon the
grievous judgments that had fallen upon the Israelites, gives this advice.
Lam 3. 40.
Let us search and try our ways. Upon a like occasion, which was a
manifestation of Gods displeasure by visible judgments, the Apostle gives
this advice, 1 Cor. 11. 31.
Let a man examine himself.

If the judgments be public, it will be use-full in our search to proceed
after this manner.

1. Observe what are the most common and public sins What sins especially to
be thought causes of judgment.
of that place or people where the fire of Gods wrath appears. These were the
sins which God himself did as it were with the finger thus point out to his
Prophet, Ier. 7. 17.
See thou not what they do in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem?

2. Mark how far such sins are winked at, and tolerated by Magistrates and
Ministers. For this provokes God to take the sword into his own hands; whence
proceed public and fearful judgments. Instance 1 Samuel 3. 13.
Elies case.

3. Consider how far the contagion of those public sins spreads it
self. For when the infection of a sin is diffused all abroad, far and
near, the Lord is forced to send some public judgment, thereby, as it were
with a fire to purge the air. Dan. 9. 11.
All Israel have transgressed (says Daniel) therefore the curse is powered upon
us.

4. See how far they that profess Religion do yield to the corruption of the
times. For these by their sins much incense Gods wrath, because they
especially cause the name of God to be blasphemed. Witness 2 Samuel 12. 14. Romans
2. 24.
David. The Genesis 6. 2.
commixtion of Sons of God with Daughters of men caused the Deluge.

5. Especially let every one examine himself, and search out his own sins:
and take due notice how far he has followed the sway of the times, and
yielded to the iniquity thereof. Every one ought most to suspect himself: and
to fear lest his sins among and above others, have incensed the fire of Gods
wrath. Every one (if he take due and through notice of himself) may know more
evil of himself, then he can justly suspect of others. For men know their
own inward parts: their very thoughts and imaginations: in which respect
though others commit more outward gross enormities then themselves, yet they
are privy to such a sea of corruptions in themselves, that they have every one
cause to say, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Of sinners I am the chief.

. 5. Of the courses to be taken when sin is found out.
2. Sins the cause of judgment being by such searching found out, we may not
suffer them to remain, and continue to inflame Gods wrath: but as we desire to
have that fire go out, so we must pull away this fuel. So long as How Gods
wrath may be slaked.
fire has fuel to work on, it will not go out: but rather be more and more
hot. Now fuel is pulled away from Gods wrath, 1. When the soul is pricked, and
pierced with sin: when godly sorrow is wrought in the heart: 2 Cor. 7. 9.
such a sorrow as was wrought in the Corinthians. 2. When upon that touch of
heart, true confession of sin is made to God. 1 Ioh 1. 9.
If we confess our sins, God is faithful to forgive us our sins. 2 Samuel
12. 13.
Nathan on this ground pronounced pardon to David. 3. When upon such confession
the mind is otherwise disposed then it was before: loathing the sins which
before it loved: as Luke 7. 38.
she that made a towell of her hair, which had before been laid out to
proclaim her lust. 4. When that loathing works a true and resolved purpose
never to return to those sins again. As he that said, Psalm. 39. 1.
I will take heed unto my ways. 5. When this purpose for the more sure
performing of it, is ratified by solemn promise, vow and covenant. Hereof we
have a worthy pattern of the Jews in Neh. 9. 38.
Nehemiahs time. 6. When faithful endeavor is answerable to such purposes,
promises, vows and covenants: as he that said, Psalm. 56. 12.
Thy vows are upon me, O Lord. As the bond of a Creditor to whom a man that
means honestly is bound, so lies on the debtor, that he is not quiet till it
be discharged, so was the vow which he had made to God, upon him. 7. When above
all, remission and reconciliation is heartily sought of God, and steadfastly
believed. This is principally intended by the atonement hereafter to be spoken
of.


. 6. Of the cases wherein we must seek to slake Gods wrath.
THE foresaid course for averting judgment is to be taken, 1. When the fire of
Gods wrath flameth about our ears, and bath consumed many before our eyes, as
2 Samuel 24. 15.
the Plague did in David's time. 2. When there is but a smoke which shows
that fire is kindled though it flame not forth: as when Moses heard God say,
Exo. 32. 10.
Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, etc. Threatenings of
judgment are to Gods wrath, as smoke is to fire. Such smoke made the
Ninevites repent. Ion. 3. 5.
3. When we observe causes that may kindle and inflame Gods wrath to abound, as
all manner of notorious sins. They were the sins of the people which made
Luke 19. 41.
Christ weep over Jerusalem. By them he gathered that heavy vengeance must
needs fall upon her. 4. Though we apparently see no flame, nor smoke, nor
notorious cause: yet when we have just cause to suspect and fear all, or any
of these. Thus it is noted of Job 1. 5.
Job, that when the days of his childrens feasting were gone about, he sent
and sanctified them, etc. For Job said, it may be that my sons have sinned,
etc. Because he suspected that they might have provoked Gods wrath, he used
means to pacify the same.


. 7. Of putting away sin for removing judgment.
THE forementioned point concerning the removing of Gods judgments does now
in particular, and after an especial manner concern us, The second of July
1625 was the first day appointed for a public fast when there died in that
week 405 of the Plague.
who are even in the flame of the fire of Gods wrath; and thereupon assembled
together by fasting and prayer after a more then ordinary manner to seek grace
and favor of God; that so this day of humiliation may prove a day of
reconciliation. For this end we are this day to enter into a solemn covenant
with God: and as we desire to have this hot fire of the Plague or extinguished
or at least slaked, so to remove the causes which have kindled the same, so
far as we can find them out. When the Jews after the captivity on a day of
fast entered into a new covenant with God, Ezr. 10. 3. Neh. 9. 2.
they put away their strange wives and children, because in taking them they
sinned, and to hold them had been to continue in sin. In like manner, though
we be wedded to our sins as to wives, and our sins be as dear as wives and
children can be, yet must they be put away: else nor our persons, nor our
prayers, nor any services that we perform, can be acceptable to God. Sins
retained are as that Exo. 15. 23.
bitterness which was on the waters in Marah, which made them that they could
not be drunken: and as that 2 King. 6. 5.
heaviness on the axe head which made it sink in the water: and as that Lam.
3. 44.
thick cloud, whereof the Prophet thus says, our prayer cannot pass through
it. Yea as those 2 King. 4. 39.
wild gourds which brought death into the pot. But faith and repentance are as
the tree which was cast into the waters and made them sweet: as the stick which
being cast into the water made the iron swim: as the wind which drives away
a thick cloud; and as the meal which made the pottage wholesome. Wherefore as
Sane ubi prorsus de medio actum suerit omne peccatum, causa qui them omnino
sublata, nec ipse quoque deinceps manebit effectus. Bernard, in Psalm. 91. Sermon
10.
we desire to have our persons, prayers, and other services acceptable to God,
and the fierceness of this pestilence to assuage, yea this and other
judgments to be removed, let us take away the cause of all: let us put away
our sins. The cause being taken away, the effect will quickly follow.

. 8. Of Gods foretelling judgments.
II. See. 2.
GOD foretells what he intends against sinners. This he did by Gen 6 14.
preparing an arc before the flood came: by -- 19. 1.
sending Lot into Sodom before it was consumed: by Exo. 5. 1.
sending Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh before his land was plagued: and by 2 Chro
36. 15.
raising up Prophets, and sending them time after time to the Israelites.

This God does to draw men, if it be possible, to repentance: as Ier. 26 18, 19.
Hezekiah and his people; and Ion. 3 5. Captivitas Iudae orum praedicitur
ventura, ut eum vencrit non casu accidisse videa tur, scd ira Dei. Hieron
Comment in Joel 1. Gods patience.
the King of Niniveh with his people, were wrought upon by this means, and
judgment prevented: or else to make men the more inexcusable, and to justify
Gods severity against men; and to give evidence that the judgments which fall
on men come not by chance, but from God.

1. Hereby have we evidence of Gods long-suffering. He thinks not of wrath till
he be exceedingly provoked. Therefore he is said to be Ion. 4. 2.
slow to anger. And when he is provoked to take vengeance, he threatens before
he strikes. For Lam 3. 33.
he does not afflict willingly. He says it, and swears it, Ezekiel. 33. 11.
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. And well we may believe him
that he is so flow to take vengeance: for vengeance is to him Isa 28. 21.
Extraneum factam suum, all enum opus suum; Peregrinum est opus ab eo. Hieron in
hunc locum.
his strange work, his strange act: a work and act whereunto he is in a
manner forced: which he would not do, if otherwise he could maintain his
honor. They therefore on whom judgment falls, have cause to confess unto
God, and say, Dan 9 7. Hardness of man's heart.
O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of faces:
for we have not hearkened, etc.

2. This manner of Gods proceeding with sinners gives demonstration of the
irard and impenitent heart of man, that will not be brought to yield. Fitly is
such an heart styled Ezekiel. 11. 19 (...)
an heart of stone. For a stone may be broken to pieces, yea beaten to powder,
but never will it be made soft: so such men's hearts may be confounded with Gods
judgments, but will never be mollified nor made pliable to his will. If
threatenings, or predictions of judgments could work on Calamitas praedicitur
ventura, ut agente populo paenitentiam non veniat, que ventura est, si
permans^rit in delictis. Hieron. in Joel. 1.
such, God would never work his strange work. Judgments are foretoid to
come, that people repenting, judgments might not come, which yet will come as
they are foretold if people continue in sin. Read and consider, Ier. 26. 18,
19, etc.

. 9. Of Gods making known his mind to his Ministers.
III. See. 2.
GOD reveals his mind to his Ministers. So he did to Genesis 6. 13.
Noah, -- 18. 17.
Abraham, Exo. 3. 8.
Moses, and other his Prophets. To omit other particulars, in this case it is
thus indefinitely said, Am. 3. 7. Non faciet Deus verbum nisi revelaverit
Prophetis; non quo omnia revelet Prophetis quae in coelo faciat, sed quae
facturus in terris sit. Hier. in Am. 3. Lege plura ibid. Hac de re.
Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secret to his
servants the Prophets.

Not for their own sakes only does God manifest his purpose to his Ministers,
but that they may declare to others what is made known to them. On this ground
says the Lord to his Prophet, Ezekiel. 3 17. Gods providence and prudence in man's
ministry. Ezo 20 19. Luk 1. 12.
Hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. Now by this means
of manifesting his mind, the ministry of man, God shows his providence and
prudence.

1. His providence, in ordaining such a means as is fittest for man's
infirmity: For man can best endure man to speak unto him, and to declare what
is meet for him to know: When God himself delivered his ten Oracles to the
people, they were so affrighted, as they said unto Moses, speak thou with us,
and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die. Yea when
Zachariah an ancient Priest saw an Angel that brought unto him a gladsome
message, he was troubled and fear fell upon him.

2. His Prudence, in ordaining so mean a means as will make trial of man's
respect to God: whether he will give credence and yield obedience to Gods Word,
because it is Gods Word, for the Lords sake, rather then for the messengers
sake. For this are the Thessalonians commended, because 1 These. 2. 13.
when they received the Word of God which they heard of men, they received it
not as the word of men, but as the word of God.

O let us in like manner testify our acknowledgement of Gods providence and
prudence, in receiving, as from God Respect to be showed to Gods Ministers as
to God.
that which by his ministers is delivered unto us. Thus shall we testisie such
respect to God, as will make him to give evidence of his good respect to us.

. 10. Of the grounds that Ministers now have to foretell judgments.
Ob. MInisters have not now such certain knowledge of Gods mind, as of old
the Prophets and Apostles had, to whom God did immediately and infallibly make
known his mind.

Answ. We have a more sure word, namely the holy Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
which are given by inspiration of God. These show what sins do most offend
God, and what do soonest pull down vengeance from God, upon the committers of
them. So as when Ministers see such sins impudently and impenitently
committed, they may well infer that God purposes to send some judgment to
such a people. To this purpose is it that the Apostle reckons up sundry
sins that the Israelites committed in the wilderness, and judgments that
followed thereupon, that we should not sin as 1 Cor. 10. 6. etc
they did, and fall after the same ensample of unbelief or Heb. 4. 11.
disobedience.

On this ground many Ministers well noting the sins of these times, did
foretell that God would bring on this City, or a Plague, or some other
judgment. And in the beginning of the year many did particularly foretell the
Plague it self. Their threatening was little regarded; little or no amendment
followed thereupon: now therefore is the Plague among us.

A public fast was proclaimed to bec kept weekly every wednesday while the
Plague continued.
Now that the Plague is begun, let us (my brethren) be admonished to repent:
and as a fast is proclaimed, so let us keep it after a right manner, (...)
humiliation of soul, and contrition of spirit: renting our hearts, turning to
the Lord: fasting from sin as well as from food. Prepare to meet thy God O
England. This beginning of the Plague is a real demonstration of a greater
Plague yet to come. If by more then ordinary humiliation and conversion Gods
wrath be not pacified, this Plague is like to be greater then ever was before
in our own, or our fathers days; even such an one as shall make this City
empty: and make the ears of such as hear of it to tingle again. The Lion
has roared, who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who can but Am. 3. 8.
prophecy?

. 11. Of the meaning and doctrines of the first part of the 45. Verse of NVMB.
16.
NVMB. 16. 45.Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them
at once.
THE first clause here noted, is an admonition for avoiding the intended
judgment. (...) a radice (...) elevatus suit. In Hiphil clevavit se. Targum
saepe per (...) separavit. Hoc in loco (...) separate vos.
The word translated Get you up, properly signifies to lift up ones self. Yet
the Jews do interpret it often times with a word that signifies to separate
ones self. It is said before (Verse 42.) that the Congregation was gathered
against Moses and against Aaron. Hereupon it is likely that they were afraid,
and with fear cast down (as we use to speak) and in regard thereof the Lord
thus said to them, lift up your selves, or get you up.

Though in the former verse he spoke only to Moses, yet here he uses the
plural number, Get YE up, to show that he had respect to Aarons safety also:
yea and to the safety of all that were not of their conspiracy.

Further, because the multitude gathered together against them, he adds, (...)
from the midst, or from among that assembly. The word translated (...) of
(...) condixit, indixit.
congregation, properly signifies such an assembly as by appointment meets
together. (...)
The word, that signifies the place or time appointed for assembling together,
is derived from the same root. It here implies a multitude that among
themselves appointed and conspired to do what they did.

The particle (...)
THIS has its Emphasis. For it distinguishes this rebellious assembly from
the rest of the Israelites that did not conspire with them.

The particle that joyneth the following clause to this, is a copulative, (...)
AND. It is thus word for word, Get you up from among this congregation, AND I
will consume them: so as it implies that God would not destroy the multitude
that sinned, till they that sinned not with them were separated from them. Our
English imports as much by using a particle that intends the end of doing a
thing, thus, THAT I may consume them. Others expound it with a causall particle
thus, FOR I will consume them. All tends Genev. Engl.
to the same.

The thing intended is set out by a (...)
word that signifies an utter destruction of them all. It is sometimes used in
the better part, and signifies a full, absolute, and perfect finishing of a
thing: as where it is said, Genesis 2. 3.
God ended, or finished, or perfected his work. It is also used in the worse
part, applied to judgment, or destruction, and signifies an utter, (...) LXX
(...). consummavit.
final destruction of all appointed to destruction: as where the Prophet said
to Ioash, 2 King. 13. 19
Thou had smitten Syria, till thou had consumed it. So it is here used.
This is thus threatened because by other judgments they had not been bettered,
but still continued in their obstinacy, as the former histories in this chapter
evidently show.

To aggravate this intended judgment the more, it is added, (...) ut repent.
Chald. (...) Arah. (...) in momento.
at once, or word for word to translate it, as suddenly, or in a moment. Our
English phrase at once, implies a quick, speedy, sudden doing of a thing; as
where Abishai said to David of Saul, let me smite him (...) una vice, uno ictu.
Trem and Iun.
at once: which is 1 Samuel 26. 8.
as if he had more largely said, I will not make much ado, nor belong about
the matter, I will not strike many blows, I will quickly with a blow dispatch
him. Some English Translators expound the word in the text, quickly.

Here have we a mixture of Mercy. Justice.


Mercy in seeking to preserve some. Justice in resolving to destroy others
The former is expressed in an admonition. The latter in a resolution.
The admonition intimates, 1. Gods mind: that he would not have them perish. 2.
Man's endeavor.


Here is noted, 1. Their action: Get ye up 2. The company: From this
Congregation.


The resolution expresses 1. The Author of the judgment. 2. The Kind of the
judgment.


The Author is the Lord. I will, says God. The Kind of judgment sets out
1. The Matter intended, consume them 2. The Manner of doing it, at once.

The Connection of the Resolution with the Admonition ( THAT I may, or AND I
will) implies Gods unwillingnesse to plague the righteous with the unrighteous.

Seven principal Doctrines are here commended to our due consideration.

I. God is not willing that the righteous should perish with the unrighteous.
For he gives advice to such as were righteous to escape, when he thinks of
destroying the unrighteous. II. They that would avoid the judgment that falls
on the wicked, must avoid communion with them. The action here enjoined ( get
you up) intends as much. III. Multitudes conspiring in evil must be left. The
word congregation from which they must go, implies thus much. IIII. Mixture of
the godly with the wicked is a stay of judgment. For by saying, Get ye up AND
I will, or THAT I may consume them, he intimates, that he would not consume the
one till the other were gone. V. The Lord revengeth the rebellious. For he it
is that says, I will consume. VI. Stubbornenesse after some strokes causes
utter destruction. Sroake upon stroke had been stricken before: for the earth
had swallowed up some, and fire had devoured others, yet they persisted in
their rebellion: therefore now says God, I will consume them. VII. Suddenness
adds much to the severity of a judgment. For God intending severity,
threatens to do what he intends at once.
. 12. Of the godlies exemption from the ungodlies destruction.
I. See. 11.
GOD is not willing that the righteous perish with the unrighteous. St. Peter
gives three of the most famous instances that have been hereof since the
beginning of a 2 Pet. 2. 4, etc.
the world. One is of the Angels: (when they that fell were cast into hell, the
other were reserved in heaven.) Another is of the old world: (when it was
drowned, Noah and his family was preserved in the arc.) A third is of Sodom
and Gomorrah: (when they were destroyed with fire and brimstone, Lot and his
two daughters were kept alive.) Thence the Apostle inferres this conclusion,
very pertinent to our purpose, 2 Pet. 2: 9.
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve
the unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished. Ezekiel. 9. 4, 6.
The mark which God caused to be set on the forehead of such as cried for all
the abominations that were done, and this charge given thereupon, come not
near any man upon whom is the mark, shows his mind to wards such as keep
themselves free from sins which cause vengeance. So also such exhortations as
this, come out of her my people, that ye receive not of her plagues. Rev. 18. 4.


Hereby God gives evidence, that Pro. 15. 3.
The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good:
that he can distinguish betwixt such as differ: that he can deal with men, as
they deal with him: that Psalm. 18. 26.
with the pure he will show himself pure, and with the froward he will show
himself froward: and that it is not in vain to fear him, and to keep our
selves unspotted from the world.

. 13. Of the cases wherein Saints have their share in public judgments.
Ob. TRue, may some say, if this were universally and infallibly true, that no
righteous man did at any time perish with the unrighteous. But experience
affoords evidence Servi Dei sanct dupliciter mala temporalia patiuntur, quia
and ab ipsis impij^, and cum ipsis patiununtur. Aug. Epist. 122. ad Victor.
to the contrary. For in all public judgments we see the righteous involved
with the wicked. They may suffer temporal evils two ways: by the wicked, and
with the wicked.

Answ. If the extent of Gods deliverance be rightly conceived, it will be found
to be universally and infallibly true, that God delivers the righteous from
the judgment of the wicked. It does indeed often fall out that righteous men
have a share in some external judgments which the wicked pull upon
themselves, and that 1. When they make themselves accessarie to those common
sins that cause judgment. As Numb. 20. 12 Propeccatis ecrum Deus slagel lat
etiam ipses sanctos suos. Aug. loc. citat.
Moses and Aaron became incredulous in the wilderness as well as the other
Jews whose carcasses fell therein. 2. When the wise Lord knows that greater
evils would befall them, if they should then escape. Thus when the time was
come that God had determined to heap judgment upon judgment till at length
the land of Judah should be made desolate, in the beginning of those days was
2 King. 23. 29
Josiah, that good King Josiah, slain with the sword of the enemy. Yet
because he lived not to see the miseries of succeeding times, he is said 2
King. 22. 20
to be gathered into his grave in peace. 3. When the just God will show the
fierceness of his wrath, how far the wicked have provoked him, to aggravate
the judgment, he takes away the righteous therewith, who are as chariots and
horsemen while they remain. Thus was good 1 Samuel 31. 2.
Jonathan taken away: who if he had lived, might have been a means of
preserving the house of Saul from utter ruin, though David had been King. The
death of righteous Jonathan much aggravated the sin of Saul, and the
judgment that followed thereupon. 4. When the Lord to whom vengeance
belongs, will give the wicked an occasion to expect sure and sore vengeance;
then he makes his Saints a sign and an example unto them. Thus 1 King. 13. 24.
he caused a Lion to slay the man of God, that was seduced by a lying Prophet
to transgress the word of God. In this case says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4. 17.
Judgment must begin at the house of God. And if it first begin at us, what
shall be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of God?


. 14. Of sundry ways of exempting Saints from judgments.
YET has God his ways and means to deliver the righteous in the
forementioned cases, and all other cases whatsoever. As 1. By visible
preservations of them from external judgments: as Ier. 39. 17.
Ebed melech was preserved. 2. By Isa. 57. 1.
taking them from the evil to come: This was before exemplified in good
Josiah. 3. By ordering the judgment so, as it proves a means to them to
honor God the more: and to do more good to such as are better prepared to
accept the good which they do. Thus was Ezekiel. 1. 1.
Ezekiel carried away to Babel in the first captivity, that he might prophecy
in Babylon to the Jews there, Icr. 24. 5.
who were counted good figs in comparison of the Jews that were at Jerusalem,
who were as evil figs. 4. By making the judgment a means of their peace,
honor, and external prosperity in this world. Thus the captivity of Dan. 2.
48, 49
Daniel, and his three companions; and of Est. 2. 17. -- 6. 10.
Esther Mordecai and was a means of higher honor and greater advancement,
then they could in all probable conjectures have attained unto in their
owneland. They were also thereby special instruments of doing much good to the
Church: and their names by that means are more honorable to this day in the
Church of God. 5. By taking them by an external judgment from earth Iusti
vivant etiam quando corpore moriuntur. Aug. cont Adversar. I. eg^s and Prophet.
lib 2. cap. 5.
to heaven, where they live being dead: yea by making the judgment a means to
free them from eternal damnation. Of such as by some extraordinary judgment
died (for its said of them, 1 Cor 11. 30.
many sleep) the Apostle says, -- 32. Sancti qui mala temporalia patiuntur,
habent suas consolationes, and spem futuri seculi. Aug Epist 122. ad Victorian.
when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned with the world. Blessed be that sword, though it be the sword of a
mortal enemy, that opens a passage in the body for the soul to enter into
heaven. And blessed be that sickness, though it be the Plague, that thrusts
the soul out of the bodies prison, to celestial glory and eternal life. So
as in their sufferings they have their comforts and hope of eternal life. Thus
we see how judgments in the forementioned kinds prove blessings: and how the
Saints that seem to perish in them may justly and truly say, We had perished,
if we had not perished: even more justly then he Themistecles sic fisijs suis.
A (...). Plutarchus in vita Themist.
that so said to his children, by reason of great honor and wealth that he
attained unto in a strange country, being banished out of his own.


. 15. Of Gods care of Saints mixed with the wicked.
BE not afrighted, O ye righteous ones, be not afrighted overmuch at the
judgments, though they be terrible judgments, which fall out in the world.
Though by reason of the multitudes of wicked ones among whom ye live in this
world ye be every one forced to complain and cry, Psalm 120. 5.
Woe is me that I sojourne in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar: and
to wish and say, Jer. 9. 2.
O that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of way-fairing men, that I
might leave my people: yet can the Lord single you out, and when he comes to
sweep them with the besome of destruction, set you aside: and as a few
precious jewels in the midst of a great heap of rubbish sift them out, and
preserve them safe to himself, when the rubbish is cast away. It is said of
Christ, that He will thoroughly purge his flower, and gather his wheat into his
garner: but will burn up the chafe with unquenchable Mat. 3. 12.
fire. Men when they fan their corn cannot do it so thoroughly clean, but that
some chafe or tares will remain with the wheat, and some wheat be cast out
with the chafe: witness the offall that remains after the best fanning that
men can make. But Gods fanning, is a through fanning, not a (...).
grain, not a Saint shall be overslipt. This is indeed most properly meant of
the last fanning of the world at the day of judgment: yet in the mean time
does the Lord take notice of every one of his, to provide for them, and in the
most common and general judgments to do that which in his wisdom he sees to
be fittest for them. When Eliah 1 King. 19. 18.
thought he had been left alone in Israel, God knew many more, yea he could
tell the just number of them. Thou may therefore, O faithful one, say of the
Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in him will I trust. Surely he
Psalm. 91. 1, 2, etc.
shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome
pestilence, etc.

. 16. Of believers dying of the Plague.
Quest. HOw is it then that the righteous as well as the unrighteous die of the
Plague?

Answ. 2. Some say that no true believers are taken away with a common Plague.
But this is too bold an assertion, unwarrantable, Putamusne justos aliquos
peste occisos? Quid obstat? poluerunt and ipsi involvi. Nonne and multisancti
experti sunt captivitatem. Mart. Comment. in 2 Samuel 24. Eccl. 9. 2.
uncharitable. To adjudge all to hell that were taken away by that devouring
pestilence which in David's time destroyed 70000 in three days, is an
unmercifull doom. Experience gives evidence that many that have manifested
true outward fruits of a sound faith, upright conscience, honest heart, and
entire repentance, have died of the Plague. Besides the Word of God bears
witness that All things come alike to all. There is one event to the righteous
and the wicked. And how dies the wiseman? as the fool.

2. Others say, that they that are true Saints, and have a -- 2. 16.
true justifying faith may die of the Plague. But yet they add, that there is
a particular says that Saints may have, which will in a common pestilence
keep them safe from that disease. But I demand of such, what warrant and
ground they have for such a faith. To pretend a faith without ground, is plain
presumption. They produce for their ground the 91 Psalm. But if they rightly
mark the scope of that Psalm, they shall find that freedom from the Plague
is there no otherwise promised, then freedom from death in war, then from
hurt of wild beasts if we be among them, then from other dangers and troubles,
yea then honor, and long life. The promise then of preserving believers from
the Sea Domestical Duties on Ephesians. 6. 3. Treat. 1. 103.
pestilence is to be taken as other promises of temporal blessings: so far
forth as God in his wisdom sees it good for them to be delivered. And what
believer would be delivered Nulla causa pro babilior scurrit, our justi homines
laborent plerunque in hac vita, nisi quia hoc ijs expedit. Aug Eo. q quest. 4.
83.
if God sees it not good for him? Yea, what believer would not die of the
Plague, if his wise Father sees it to be the best for him to die of that
disease? 2 Samuel 24. 17. Quid interest utrum sebris an serrum de corpore
solverit. Non qua occasion sed quales ad se exe ant Dominus attendi^ in servis
suis Aug Epist. 122. ad Vict.
David could have been content to have died of this disease if it had so seemed
good to the divine wisdom. For what skilleth it whether sword or sickness,
Plurisie or Plague loose the soul from the body. God especially observes in
what disposition, not by what means his servants depart out of this world to
him.

3. Without question therefore true believers may die of the Plague, and many
have in common infections been taken away thereby: yet in mercy, as was. 13.
Genesis 40. 20, 21, 22.
before showed. And as there was a great difference betwixt taking Pharaohs
chief butler and chief Baker out of prison, the head of them both was lifted
up: but of one to his high office, of the other to the gallows: so can God
make a greater difference betwixt the godly and ungodly, even when he takes
them both out of the prison of this body by one and the same disease, suppose
the Plague. He can hereby advance one to heaven, and thrust down the other to
hell: as he dealt with the two thieves that hung on the cross with Christ.

. 17. Of avoiding communion with the wicked, for avoiding their judgment.
II. See. 11.
THey that would avoid the judgment that falls on the wicked must avoid
communion with them. For this end did Genesis 6. 13.
God cause an arc to be made for Noah and his family to go into from the old
world, that so they might be preserved from the general deluge: and -- 19. 12,
14.
sent his Angels to bring Lot, and such as belonged to him out of Sodom. To
this purpose the people of God were advised to Ier. 50. 8.
remove out of the midst of Babylon, and -- 51. 6.
to deliver every man his soul: which advice is also given, in regard of
spiritual Babylon, Rev. 18. 4.
to come out of her: and that on this ground, that they receive not her plagues.

Saints by separating themselves from the wicked in time of judgment, show
their care to use what means they can for preventing mischief: which is a
point of wisdom commended by the Holy Ghost, who gives this note of a wise
man, Pro. 22. 3.
A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself: but the simple pass
on and are punished. This care of using means for safety, and in the use of
means to depend on God for his blessing, is well pleasing to God. Act. 27. 22,
24 31.
God had promised that none in the ship with Paul should be lost, yet when some
of the ship-men were about to leave the ship, Paul said, Except these men abide
in the ship ye cannot be saved. All lawful and warrantable means are the
visible hand of Gods invisible providence. To reject or neglect means is to
refuse to take God by the hand when he reaches it out unto us, and to follow
his visible direction.

It is therefore foolish presumption, rather then a prudent resolution, either
to accompany those that are as it were in the fire of Gods judgment, or not to
go from them, when a fair and warrantable opportunity is offered. Genesis 19. 14.
This is taxed as a point of folly in Lots sons in law. Iehosaphat too much
failed herein. He heard the Prophet say that 1 King 22. 20, 32.
Ahab should fall at Ramoth-Gilead, and yet he would accompany him thither. It
had almost cost him his life.

. 18. Of flying in time of Plague.
Quest. IS it then lawful to depart from our own place and habitation in time
of Plague?

Ans. Difference is to be made in this case betwixt persons Who may fly.
that are free, and not by any special bond of relation tied to others, and
such as are so bound. As for the former sort, such as are free, I see no just
reason why liberty of escaping should be denied to them.

1. The departure of some may be a means in an infectious air to keep the
infection from violence. Much fuel where fire is kindled increases the
fervor and violence of the fire. Multitudes of people to an infected place,
are as fuel to the fire of pestilence.

2. Such by escaping provide for their own safety, without prejudice to
others. For what prejudice can it be that such as are not by any particular
bond tied to them that tarry, leave them?

3. The departure of some may make much to the benefit and advantage of such as
tarry. For they have the better opportunity of sending succor to them. This
was one reason why the people would not have David go into the field, that he
might 2 Samuel 18. 3.
succor them out of the City.

4. Mat. 10. 23.
It is permitted to such in time of persecution to fly: yea and Mat. 24. 16.
Fugit populus Hebraeorum, ut fides ejus and vita inter fluctus, sibi apperiret
vi am. Ambr. de fug seculi.
in time of war: why not then in time of Plague?

Ob. 1. The Plague is an immediate stroke of God; whereby such as he has
appointed to death are stricken. It is not infectious.

Ans. I grant it to be an extraordinary disease, but not immediate. The kind of
disease, and the effects thereof on man's body, do show that its no more
immediate then many other diseases. If because such as are appointed to death
are stricken with it, means of escaping it might not be used: no means for
avoiding any judgment might be used. For the infection of it, let experience
determine that case.

Ob. 2. It is a fruit of faithlesnesse to shun the Plague.

Answ. No more then to shun other dangers: Men may indeed upon distrust fly:
but that shows the frailty of the person, not the unlawfulness of the action.

Ob. 3. If some fly, all may fly. So the sick be left without succor.

Answ. 1. Some are more bound to venture the hazard then others. As Magistrates
for keeping good order: Ministers for feeding the soul. Near of kindred for
looking to their bodies. Such as are under command, as children and servants.

2. Others are not so subject to infection: as aged.

3. Others are not of such use, but may better be spared: as the poorer and
meaner sort. The people would say to David, thou art worth 10000 of us. 2 Samuel
18. 3.


. 19. Of leaving multitudes in evil.
III. See. 11.
MVltitudes conspiring in evil must be left. It was the commendation of those
7000 in Israel 1 King. 19 18
of whom God took especial notice, that though all -- 10.
Israel worshipped Baal, yet they bowed not a knee to that idol: yea though
Eliah thought himself to beleft alone, yet would not he associate himself
with the multitudes of Apostates. Ioh. 6, 66. etc,
Many of Christ's Disciples went back and walked no more with him. Whereupon
Christ said to the twelve, will ye also go away? But Peter in the name of the
rest answered, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal
life. A worthy resolution. A like resolution was this. Mat. 26. 33.
Though all men shall be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended. O if he had stood to this! Very pertinent to this point is this
prohibition of the Law, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.

The number of men sinning neither extenuateth the sin, nor exempteth from
judgment: but rather aggravateth the sin, and pulls down more severe and
speedy vengeance. Multitudes of sinners are as multitudes of faggots, or other
combustible fuel, which are so much the sooner set on fire: and being once set
on fire do burn so much the more fiercely. The Prophets render this to be the
cause of the fierce wrath of the Lord powered upon the Jews, that They all
transgressed: Ier. 2. 29.
From the least of them even to the greatest of them, from the Prophet even to
the Priest every one deals falsely: -- 6. 13. -- 28.
They are all grievous revolters: -- 8. 6.
No man repents of his wickedness.

Be so far therefore from taking boldness from multitudes of men conspiring
in sin, as on that ground to be the more fearful lest some sudden judgment
should fall upon them. Then especially is the time for such as are upright to
mourn, with fasting and prayer to humble their souls before God, and to keep
themselves unspotted, when they see all of all sorts with greediness and
impudency running into sin. Many are too prone indeed to make that the ground
of their actions, which Hushai in state policy only pretended, when he said, 2 Samuel 16. 18.
Whom all the men of Israel choose, his will Ibe. 17. 23
What got that Machivillian politician Achitophell, by joining with him whom
the greater part of the people chose? Mat. 7. 13. 14. Si pauci sunt qui
inveniunt, prosecto longi pauciores erant qui summum ejus pervenire possunt.
Alijenim in ipsis statim ini^ijs, etc.
The way wherein multitudes run, is the broad way that leads to destruction.
But strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leads to life: and few there
be that find it. And if there be few that find, surely there are fewer that
attain to the end of that way. For some fail in the beginning. others in the
midst, most when they come almost to end. Whereupon our Lord says, that many
are called, but few chosen.

. 20. Of the stay of judgment by reason of the godly mixed with the wicked.
IIII. See. 11.
MIxture of the godly with the wicked is a stay of judgment. When God was
about to destroy Genesis 19. 22.
Sodom, he says to Lot, Haste thee: I can do nothing till thou be gone. 2
King. 22. 19. -- 23. 26. -- 24. 3.
Good Josiah was a stay of those judgments which God had threatened to bring
upon Jerusalem for the sins of Manasseh. Genesis 18. 32.
Had there been but ten righteous men in Sodom, surely it had not bin then
destroyed when it was. Gods respect to his Saints.


Abraham intimates the reason hereof in this Rhetorical communication with
God, Will thou also destroy therighteous with the wicked? That be far from
thee. Shall not the Judge Genesis 18. 24, 35.
of all the world do right? The supreme Lord of all has such respect to his
faithful ones, as he will rather spare many wicked ones for a few righteous
ones, then destroy a few righteous ones with many wicked ones.

Behold here a means of Gods patience and long suffering Cum merita nostra nos
gravant ne diligamur a Deo, relevori apud eum illo, um meritis possmus quos
Deus diligit. Aug Quest su per Exodus l. 2, c. 49.
in the world: which is that mixture of holy ones with the wicked that are in
the world. Were the number of Gods Elect accomplished, and such as are
sanctified taken out of the world, soon would there be an end of all. Many
Nations, Cities, Towns, and other Societies are spared, for some faithful
Saints therein. This surely is the reason of Gods much forbearance toward this
Land, this City of London, and other places in this kingdom. There is a
remnant of righteous persons. These hold up their hands to God ordinarily and
extraordinarily: to their persons, to their prayers has the Lord such respect,
as they do in a manner hold Exo 32. 10.
him, as Moses held God when it was in his mind utterly to destroy all the
children of Israel that came out of Egypt. Act. 27. 24.
God gave to Paul all them that failed with him. It is said that a little
before Heidelberg in the Vpper-Palatinate was taken, their faithful Ministers
were all taken away. The world enjoy all they have by Saints.


O the ungratefulness of the wicked in the world! Through Gods favor to the
Saints here and there dispersed in the world, they that live and enjoy any
comforts in the world are beholding to those Saints, for their peace, plenty,
safety, honors, wealth, liberty, livings, and life it self. Yet in the world
who more hated, scorned, reproched, evilly entreated and persecuted in the
world. Is not this more then monstrous ingratitude?

But how beholding to God are these Saints, to whom the Lord (who is beholding
to none) bears such respect, as not only to spare them, but, for their
sakes, those among whom they live?

. 21. Of Gods revenging the rebellious.
V. See. 11. See more of this point in the Churches Conquest on Exo 17. 14..
68. Divina justitia punit eos qui cor rigi nolant Aug cont. Adimant. cap. 7.
THe Lord revengeth the rebellious. This is true both of such as band
themselves in open hostility against his Saints, and raise armies against his
Church, and also of such as more privately oppose against them that bear his
image, and contumeliously sin against him: as these Conspirators here did.
Lev. 10. 2.
A fire went out from the Lord and devoured Nadab and Abihu. Number. 11. 1.
The fire of the Lord burnt among them that complained against him. -- 33.
The Lord smote the people that lusted with a very great Plague. Romans 13. 4.
I will perform (says the Lord) against Elie, all things which I have spoken
concerning his house. Where men are instruments of punishing such, the Lord is
the principal Author. They are Gods Romans 13. 4.
Ministers, or rather Gods Isa. 10. 5.
rod, staff, and -- 34 6.
sword to smite his people withal.

The Lord takes upon him to revenge, that he may order vengeance as he sees
just cause: either to aggravate or mitigate Lege Tertullianum. lib. 1. cont.
Marcion Qui dixit Deum non ulcisci malos.
it: to continue or to cease punishing: which questionless was the reason that
moved David to say, 2 Samuel 24. 14.
Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord.

As all hope of impunity is hereby taken away, so good ground of penitency is
given. How can any think to escape seeing the everywhere present, all-seeing,
impartial God undertaketh to punish him. Heb. 10. 30.
Vengeance belongs unto me, says the Lord: where upon he infers, I will
recompense. Fear therefore to provoke this avenger. Do not vainly hope to
escape his revenge though thou persist in sin.

Yet if after thou have sinned thy heart smite thee, and thereupon true
repentance be wrought in thee, prepare to meet thy God. Thus may thou either
prevent and keep off all vengeance, as Ion. 3. 10.
the Ninevites did. Or if he have begun to strike, thou may make him 2 Samuel
24. 16, 17.
repent of the evil, and cause him to stay his hand, as David did. It is God
that smites. To him therefore must we look. It was the aggravation of Isreal's
obstinacy, that Isa. 9. 13.
They turned not to him that smote them.

. 22. Of the utter destruction which stubbornenesse brings to men.
VI. See. 11.
STubbornenesse after some strokes causes utter destruction. Lev. 26, 18, etc.
So much is threatened in the Law: and Isa. 1. 5 etc. -- 9. 13, 14. Am. 4 6, etc
by the Prophets declared to be accomplished. Many particular remarkable
instances hereof are recorded in Scripture, Deu. 29 19, etc
that succeeding ages might be the better warned thereby. Genesis 14. 10, 11
Sodom and the Cities that took part with her, were overcome and sacked by the
four Kings that came against them. This was no light stroke: yet it wrought
no amendment. Wherefore not long after Genesis 19. 24.
they were utterly destroyed with fire and brimstone from heaven. Pharaoh and
his subjects were so smitten with Exo. 7. 20. etc
ten several plagues, as gave sufficient demonstration of their folly in
standing out against the great Lord of heaven: yet still continued they to
harden their hearts against God: therefore at length Exo. 14. 28.
he and his whole host was drowned in the Red Sea. The Israelites were often and
sorely punished by many judgments, but no whit bettered by any of them: so as
the Lord was provoked at length to make their land desolate. Lam. 1. 1, etc
This Mat. 3. 10.
phrase which John the Baptist uses (The axe is put to the root of the tree)
imports as much. By the axe he means Gods judgment: by the tree the nation
of the Jews: by putting to the root, an utter extirpation. A tree may be lopt,
and yet stand, and grow and flourish again. But if it be cut at the root,
down falls body, boughs and all. He implies therefore, that whereas God had
formerly by Plague, famine, sword, captivity, and other like judgments lopt
them, and often times made them bare, now he intends to cut their root, utterly
to cut them down, and cast them off.

Gods justice and wisdom, yea and the glory of all his See the Churches
Conquest on Exo. 17. 14. 69.
properties provoke him so to do. If the stubbornenesse of sinners against
lighter judgments might carry it away, man would seem stronger then God, Gods
wisdom and justice would be much impeached: His corrections would be despised:
his Word not regarded. Besides others would be emboldened by the stubbornenesse
of some to carry themselves stoutly against God. Mortal Kings, and other
Governors, Parents and Masters will not suffer their inferiors to carry away
the masterie by stoutnesse. Can we then imagine that the immortal God will
suffer it. He can and will beat down the stubbornenesse of the stoutest.

Humble your selves (brethren) under the mighty hand of 1 Pet. 5. 6.
God. If he threaten, fall down before him, repent, go not on to provoke him
further. If we go on to provoke him more and more, his rod will be turned to a
staff; his staff to a sword, clean to cut us off.

. 23. Of sudden judgments.
VII. See. 11.
SVddennesse adds much to the severity of a judgment. In way of terror
suddenness is often threatened, as where the Lord says, Exo. 33. 5.
I will come up into the midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee. Psalm. 73.
19.
How are they brought into desolation as in a moment? Pro. 1 27.
Their destruction comes as a whirlwind. Deuteronomy. 7. 4.
The anger of the Lord will destroy thee suddenly. Pro. 6. 15.
His calamity shall come suddenly: suddenly shall he be broken without remedy.
Isa, 29. 5.z -- 30. 13. -- 47. 11.
It shall be at an instant, suddenly. Ier. 6. 26.
The spoiler shall suddenly come. The terror of Babylons destruction is hereby
aggravated, in that it was -- 51. 8.
suddenly fallen: yea and of Sodom, which is thus expressed, Lam. 4. 6.
The punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater then
the punishment of the sin of Sodom that was overthrown as in a moment. It is
noted that Genesis 19. 23.
the Sun was risen upon the earth a little before the fire and brimstone fell
from heaven. That rising of the Sun made show, and gave hope of a fair day.
Yet then, even on a sudden was that fair sky turned into a sulphurious and
most dismal sky.

Mischiefs of sudden judgments.
1. Sudden judgments strike men into amazement. So says Eliphaz, Job. 22. 10.
Sudden fear troubles thee. It makes men at their wits end, as we speak.
Instance a sudden and unexpected surprisall by an enemy. 2. Sudden evils not
only confound a man's wit and understanding, but they bereave him of the use of
such means as are useful for his succor. For there must be time for
providing sufficient means. 3. They are a great hinderance to true repentance,
to faithful prayer, and such like spiritual means, whereby the wrath of God
might be pacified, and judgments prevented, or removed. 4. They are evidences
of Gods incensed and implacable wrath. As a man that is fully resolved to
punish, and not to spare, will suddenly do what he intends to do.
This affords matter of instruction and direction.

Instruction in Gods tender respect to us: For though by our sins we have
long and much provoked him suddenly and utterly to destroy us, yet has he
given us many warnings before hand by his Ministers: and Ian. 13. 1624 only one
died. Feb. 3 three. Feb. 10. five. Feb. 17. three, Feb. 24. one, Mar. 17. two.
Mar. 24. eight. 1625 Mar. 31 six. Apr 7. eight. Apr. 14. eighteen. Apr. 31.
eighteen. And after that it increased every week more and more till Aug 18.
when there died in one week 4463 of the Plague. And of all diseases 5205 in
London and in the nine out parishes. Luke 21. 34.
begun this judgment of the Plague by degrees, that so like wisemen we might
foresee the uttermost peril, and answerably prepare our selves.

Direction, to be so watchful over our selves, so well furnished and prepared,
by that spiritual furniture which in the Word is prescribed unto us, that no
evil may suddenly surprise us, nor ordinary nor extraordinary evils, not death
it self, nor the last judgment. Take heed (says the Judge himself) to your
selves, lest at any time your hearts be overchanged, and so that day come upon
you unawares.

. 24. Of the exposition and observations of the last part of the 45. Verse.
NVMB. 16. 45.And they fell upon their faces.
A Remedy for the forementioned calamity is here set out in the practice of
Moses and Aaron. For this Relative THEY has reference to them two especially.
For these rebels Verse. 41, 42, 43, 46, 47.
murmured, and gathered themselves against these two: and they two are said to
come before the Tabernacle: and after this these two take order for cure of
this Plague. See more of these in the Churches Conquest on Exo. 17. 9, 10.
Moses was the supreme Governor and Prince over this people. Aaron was their
chief Priest.

By falling upon their faces, is meant their humble and hearty prayer to God
for this people. Metonymia Adjuncti, vel Signi.
The outward gesture whereby their inward intention was set out is put for
prayer. It is in effect all one as if he had said, They prayed. But yet this
Tropicall speech is not without its emphasis. For it implies, 1. A reverend
respect to the Divine Majesty. For of old when men would testify reverence to
excellent persons, at sight of them they fell on their face, as Ruth 2. 10.
Ruth before Booz, 1 Samuel 25. 23.
Abigail before David. Thus did Genesis 17. 3. 17
Abraham testify his reverence to the All-sufficient God. 2. An holy
astonishment at, and admiration of surpassing excellency and glory. In which
respect Ezekiel. 1. 29.
Ezekiel fell on his face. 3. A fear, which at the apprehension of Gods
terror, and our wretchedness perplexeth the soul. So Dan. 8. 17.
Daniel was afraid, and fell on his face. Luke 5. 8.
4. An humble mind in regard of ones self. This 1 Samuel 20. 41.
David manifested when he fell on the ground before Jonathan. And 1 Cor. 14. 25.
they that are effectually wrought upon by the Word, and have the secrets of
their heart made manifest, in humility falling down on their faces worship
God. 5. Shame and confusion of face for great provocations of Gods wrath. 1
Chr. 21. 16.
This moved David, when he saw the fierceness of Gods wrath for his great
sin, to fall down on his face before the Lord. 6. Earnest and ardent desire
of obtaining what we pray for. In this respect Ios. 7. 6.
Joshua and all the Elders of Israel fell to the earth upon their faces, before
the Ark of the Lord. 7. An agony whereinto one is cast through some inward
trouble of soul, or some outward fearful sight. In the former respect Mat.
26. 38, 39.
Christ fell on his face and prayed. In the latter respect Dan 10. 9.
Daniel lay on his face as in a dead sleep.


Most of these may be applied to Moses and Aarons falling on their faces here
in this text. For Verse. 42.
The glory of the Lord appeared: and the wrath of the Lord was manifested: and
the people had committed a great sin; and a Plague was already begun,
therefore without all question, in reverence to the Divine Majesty, in
admiration of his glory, in some fear, yet in an humble submission to God, in
shame of the peoples in gratitude, and in earnest desire of pardon for their
sin, and removal of the judgment, they fell upon their faces. So as this
gesture implies an extraordinary manner of prayer.

Six Observations hence arise: whereof three concern the action performed,
and three the Persons that performed it.

I. See The Saints Sacrifice on Psalm. 116. 4.
Prayer is a ready remedy for a desperate calamity. Such a calamity was the
peoples here. And this remedy is here with approbation used. II. See The whole
armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18.. 95, etc.
In extraordinary need extraordinary prayer must be used. The sin of the
people and the threatening of God shows the extraordinary need. Their gesture
in falling on their faces, argues their extraordinary prayer. III. See The
Churches Conquest on Exo. 17. 11.. 29.
Inward devotion of the soul must be manifested by an answerable outward
disposition of body: Such a disposition was this falling on their faces. IIII.
See the whole armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18.. 36, etc.
Prayer is to be made for others in their necessities. God bids these that fell
on their faces get them away, that they might be safe, yet they for them that
were in danger, fell on their faces. V. Ibid. 51.
Prayer is to be made for such as wrong us. This people for whom the prayer is
here powered out, murmured, and gathered themselves together against Moses and
Aaron, who here in their behalf fell on their faces. VI. Magistrates and
Ministers are especially to pray See the Churches Conquest on Exo. 17. 12. 40.
for averting public judgments. Such were they who here fell on their faces.
Moses was a Prince, Aaron a Priest.
These Observations are all of them worthy our due observation: but I have
handled them elsewhere, as the places quoted in the margent, show.

. 25. Of the sense and notes of the former part of Verse 46.
NVMB. 16. 46.And Moses said unto Aaron, take a censer, and put fire therein
from off the altar, put on incense, and go quickly to the congregation, and
make an atonement for them.
TO the forementioned remedy of prayer, here is another added: whereby their
prayer was made the more effectual. This is first prescribed in this text: and
then performed in the next verse.

Moses he prescribes: and that on just grounds. For, 1. Moses had a more
immediate inspiration, and more extraordinary revelations then Aaron, or any
other at that time. With him (says the Lord) will I speak mouth to Number. 12. 8.
mouth, even apparently, and not in dark speeches, etc. 2. Moses was the
supreme head, and chief governor on earth at that time of that people. Act.
7. 35.
God sent him to be a Ruler. Number. 12. 11.
Aaron himself calls him, his Lord.


Moses prescribes to Aaron, because 1. Exo. 4. 15.
Aaron was to be Moses his spokesman to the people. Aaron was to be to Moses
instead of a mouth: and Moses was to be to Aaron instead of God. 2. Exo. 28. 1.
Aaron was then made the High Priest: so as -- 30. 7.
to use a censer, to take fire from off the altar, to put incense on the
censer, to make an atonement, belonged to Aaron by virtue of his Priest hood.


The particulars here enjoined were holy rites ordained by God under the Law
for pacifying his wrath.

The Censer was an instrument made of a lasting metal A censer. (...) a
prunas desumpsit
that would not easily melt, as of gold, or brass, fit to hold fire in it,
with a steel or handle to hold it by. The use of it was to hold live, burning
coals on it, that incense being cast thereon, by the heat of the fire it
might send out a smoke of a sweet smell, which the Priest carrying from place
to place, caused the sweet savor of incense to disperse it self, and to be
smelt wheresoever he came. Some of these censers were of brass, for the
ordinary Priests to carry incense up and down the Tabernacle, and Temple: with
Number. 16. 39.
such as these the 250 men that conspired with Korah, and were destroyed with
fire, offered incense. Others were of gold, as 1 King. 7. 50.
those which Solomon made for the Temple: especially that which was made for
the High Priest to carry incense on it into the most holy place, whereof Heb
9. 4.
the Apostle to the Hebrews makes mention.

The fire of the altar here mentioned was of that fire which first fell from
heaven (Lev. 9. 24.) and was commanded to be kept continually burning on the
altar (Lev. 6. 13.) never to go out: with it they burnt all their offerings
that were to be burnt: of it they took to carry incense up and down: all
other fire was counted strange fire (Lev. 10. 1.) They Duo erant altaria: unum
thymia matis, aurcum intrinsecus: and alterum ante templum aeneum
holocaustorum. Hier. Comment. l. 3. in Ezekiel 9.
who used other fire in holy rites, incensed the fire of Gods wrath against
them. (Lev. 10. 2.)

Concerning the altar, there were in the Tabernacle two altars. One for all
manner of oblations. The other only for incense, (Exo. 30. 9.) That a large
one: This a small one. That covered with brass: This with gold. That was set
in the Tabernacle near to the outer court, where when the curtens were drawn,
all the people might see it: this near to the most holy place, (Exo. 40. 5,
6.) and therefore said to be before the Lord, (Number. 16. 12.)

On the great brazen altar the holy fire sent from the Lord, burnt continually.
When fire was to be laid on the golden altar for incense it was fetched from
this. It is probable that at this time Aaron took fire from that altar where
it burnt continually.

Exo 30. 34.
Incense was a sweet perfume made of four most odoriferous Incense.
spices. The first is translated (...) gutta, (...). liquor distillans ex
myrrba, aut cinnamomo.
stacte, a gum that distills out of Myrrh, or Cinnamon. Some translate it pure
Myrrh. The second, (...) Hoc tantum in loco legitur. Haud facile est statuere
quid significes.
Onicha, a kind of spice very clear, which being scraped gives an
extraordinary sweet savor. Some term it clear Gum. The third, (...) Et hoc
in hoc tantum loco legitur.
Galbanum. This name is taken from the Hebrew. It is said to be a liquour
hardened, that is drawn out of sweet Cane growing in Syria. The (...) Inde
Graece (...).
Greek and the Latin express it by such words as our English does, derived
from the Hebrew. The fourth, (...) Inde Graece (...).
pure Frankincense. This among the four is the only common spice: the other
are such as we read not of in any other place: so as it is no easy matter to
tell what kind of spices they were. Sure it is that Exo. 30. 38.
no perfume might be made like that incense which was made of them.

This is styled Exo. 25. 6.
sweet incense, and that fitly, in a double respect. 1. Of the natural savor.
It was exceeding sweet. 2. Of the legal effect, which was to cause a sweet
savor in Gods nostrils. Lev. 16. 13.
The Priest therefore in the smoke and smell of it died not.


Here we see that the Incense was a proper peculiar perfume reserved only for
holy uses. The fire also was holy, such as first came from the Lord, and was
preserved for his services. The altar was likewise for sacred uses, and
finally, the censer. All were ordained of God, and in that respect all of them
warrantable. They were, as other legal types, external, but yet they had
their Evangelicall truths: whereof 36, 37.
hereafter.

These things being thus prepared, Moses charge Aaron to go to the
Congregation, namely that assembly of rebels that was gathered together against
Gods servants; whereof 11. (...) celeriter.
before. And that which Aaron does, he must do with all speed, because the fire
of Gods jealousy was already kindled.

The end of all that which was given in charge, and the effect that would
follow thereupon, is thus expressed, And make an atonement for them.

The copulative particle (...).
AND, whereby the distinct branches of Moses his charge are joined together,
imports the latter branch to be inferred as an end of the former: as if he
had said, offer incense, that thereby an atonement may be made. So this
particle is translated Verse 45. (...)
before, where it is said, Get you up, THAT I may consume them. Yea, it does
also imply a consequence, and an effect that would follow thereupon: as if he
had said, Offer incense, and so thereby thou shall make an atonement for them.
The issue verifieth thus much. For Aaron having done what Moses gave him in
charge, its said Verse 46.
He made an atonement for them.

This phrase, (...)
Make an atonement, is the interpretation of one short Hebrew word, which (if
our English would bear it) might thus be translated, atone.

The Hebrew word properly signifies to cover. (...) oper culum.
The cover which was laid upon the arc, is set out by a word derived from
this; Metaphorically it is applied to sin, and to wrath incensed by sin,
and signifies to cover them: that is to pardon sin, and to pacify wrath. As
where it said, Psalm. 78. 38. (...)
He forgave iniquity: word for word, He covered iniquity. And where in relation
to the wrath of a King, it is said, Pro. 16. 14. (...)
A wise man will cover it, that is, pacify it. It is also simply used, and
signifies to be propitious, favorable, or merciful: as where prayer is thus
made to God, Deuteronomy 21 8. (...) propitius esto erga populum tuum
Be merciful to thy people Israel. It is frequently used, to expiate; that is
to purge away, or take away any uncleanness, so as it may not be imputed: and
to make it fit for holy uses, or to appear before God. Thus it is applied to
things used under the Law, and to persons: as to Lev. 16 33. (...) expiabit.
the holy Sanctuary, to the Tabernacle of the congregation, to the Altar, to
the Priests, and to all the People of the congregation. All the forementioned
acceptions of the word do add much to the clearing of this phrase in this
place, make an atonement. Atonement What atonement is.
(according to the English notation of the word) implies two at one: namely
two that were at odds or variance. Such atonement is as much as agreement, or
reconciliation. This in regard of that odds which is betwixt God and man is
done two ways. 1. By taking away sin, the cause of How atonement is made.
wrath. 2. By pacifying wrath, the effect of sin. Offerings for sin
typified the former. Incense, the latter. Though these may thus be
distinguished, yet can they not be severed. For without sin be taken away,
wrath will not be pacified. And if wrath should be pacified, where is the
benefit thereof, if sin be not taken away. Though therefore the one may be
more expressly specified, yet the other also is there intended. Now because of
the mention of incense here, by atonement here meant, the pacifying of Gods
wrath is most directly set out.

This Relative particle THEM ( (...)
for them) has reference to the forenamed congregation: a congregation of
rebels. Yet is order taken for pacifying Gods wrath justly incensed against
them.

The Sum of this text is a Prescript for pacifying Gods wrath.

In this prescript we have

1. The Persons Charging. Moses Charged. Aaron.
2. The Charge it self: wherein is expressed. 1. The Matter given in charge.
2. The End thereof.

I. In the matter is distinctly set down 1. The Substance. To burn Incense.
2. The Circumstances. Which are two, 1. The Instrument, whereon to lay the
incense: a Censer. 2. The Means, to burn the incense: which is 1. Generally
expressed. Fire 2. Particularly limited. From off the altar.




II. The end is set down by way of charge, which consists of two branches.

In the former you may observe, 1. The Action to be done. Go 2. The Time when.
Quickly 3. The Persons to whom. To the Congregation.


In the latter you may again observe, 1. The Duty to be done. Make an
atonement. 2. The Persons for whom* For them: namely for the Congregation
before mentioned.


Six especial points are here to be noted.

I. Men must do what they do by virtue of their calling. It belonged to Moses
as a Prince and a Prophet to give direction for staying the Plague: and to
Aaron as High Priest it belonged to offer incense. Moses therefore did that
which belonged to a Prince and Prophet. And he appointed Aaron to do that which
belonged to Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
an High Priest. II. Such means must be used to pacify Gods wrath as by Gods
Word are warranted. Offering up Incense, which is the means here to be used,
was expressly warranted by the Word of God, Lev. 16. 12, 13. III. Things
warrantable in their substance must be performed with warrantable
circumstances. For this end the foresaid Incense was to be offered on a Censer,
and to be burnt with fire from off the altar, Lev. 16. 12. IIII. Duties of
mercy must be performed to such as wrong us. This congregation murmured, and
gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron. Yet Moses bids Aaron go
to them, to do a work of mercy for them in this their need. V. Gods wrath is
with all expedition to be pacified. For this end Aaron is charged to go
quickly, that with all possible speed he might make an atonement. VI. There
are means of reconciliation betwixt God and man after Gods wrath is incensed.
The atonement here enjoined gives proof thereof: especially if we weigh the
persons for whom it was to be made. For them, even them that had provoked the
Lord at once to consume them.
These instructions arise from the letter of the history. There is an higher
mystery contained therein, whereof 36, 37, etc.
afterward.

. 26. Ofrespect to ones calling.
I. See 25.
MEn must do what they do by virtue of their calling. 1 Cor. 7. 17. 1 Pet. 4.
10.
As God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one, so
let him walk: and so ordain I in all Churches, says an Apostle. More
particularly he applies this to feverall functions thus, Romans 12. 6, 7, 8.
Having gifts differing, according to the grace that is given to us, whether
prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith: Or Ministry,
let us wait on our Ministry, etc.

See the whole armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 14. Treat. 2. Part. 1. 4.
This is the property of a just and righteous man, to Pro. 20. 7.
walk in HIS integrity. HIS, that is, that which belongs to him by virtue of
his own proper place and function. In this sense it is said, -- 14. 8.
The wisdom of the prudent is to understand HIS way. But -- 20. 3.
Every fool will be meddling: namely in others men's affairs, with the things
that belong not unto him.

As we desire to be accepted of God, to receive comfort to our souls by the
things we do, and thereby to do good to others, let us be well informed in the
duties that by virtue of our own proper function belong unto us, and therein
be faithful and diligent. Much pains may be taken, and diligence used in
other men's matters, and little thanks gotten for all that pains and diligence.
Yea we may bring by such pains and diligence much trouble to our selves, and
yet no comfort in all that trouble. Wherefore 1 Pet. 4. 15.
St. Peter exhorts Christians from suffering as busybodies in other men's
matters. And it is remarkable, that he reckons their sufferings among the
sufferings of malefactors. 1 These. 4. 11.
Study therefore to do your own business. Let Magistrates, let Ministers,
let Husbands, let Wives, let all of all sorts so do.

. 27. Of using warrantable means to pacify Gods wrath.
II. See. 25.
SVch means must be used to pacify Gods wrath as by Gods Word are warranted.
Of old before Gods will was so fully revealed and recorded as now it is, Saints
were wont to seek extraordinary direction of God. As Genesis 25. 22.
Rebekah when she felt children struggling together within her: and Ios. 7. 6.
Joshua when Israel fled before the men of Ai: and Judge. 20. 28.
the other Tribes that fought against the Benjamites: and 2 Samuel 21. 1.
David when there was a famine in his land: and others on other like occasions.
The ordinary course under the Law was, as this here prescribed by Moses in this
particular case (for which there was Lev. 16. 12.
before a more general Law) so burnt offerings: in which respect David gave
this advice to Saul, 1 Samuel 26. 19.
If the Lord have stirred thee up against me, let him smell an offering. Genesis
8. 20, 21
Noah therefore after that great evidence of Gods wrath, the flood, offered
burnt offerings: and it is said that The Lord smelled a sweet savor. So 2 Samuel
24. 25.
David, and that by the advice of a Prophet, to pacify the wrath of God
manifested by a fierce Plague, offered burnt offerings.

What burnt offerings set forth.
As the incense was a type of the intercession of Christ, so burnt offerings, of
the satisfactory, expiatory, and propitiatory sacrifice of Christ Jesus. Yea
they were also visible demonstrations of man's guiltiness. For the beast, laid
on the altar, there lay in his stead that brought it, and showed what he had
deserved, namely not only to be consumed here in material fire, but also for
ever to be tormented in infernal fire: and the penitents bringing of his
offering was a profession of his own guiltiness. This by the way concerning
the end of those offerings which were used to pacify Gods wrath.

As for the general point, that means used to pacify God, must be such as
are warranted: in two especial respects it appears to be most equal. 1. In
regard of God who is to be pacified. 2. In regard of man who is to pacify him.


Gods will, till he himself reveal it, is secret: his counsel unsearchable.
(For Romans 11. 34.
who has known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his counselor?) None
therefore can tell what may please, or appease him, till he make it known of
himself.

As for men, Romans 1. 21.
They are vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart is darkened. How
then can they of themselves invent or conceive what may be well-pleasing to the
most wise God? Take a view of all humane inventions, whether of heathens, or
others, and you shall find them all to be very toys, much unbeseeming Gods
excellent Majesty: yea such as give no satisfaction to wise men, that duly
observe them: no nor to the inventers themselves: and therefore they are still
thinking of adding, altering, and taking away. By man's inventions Gods wrath is
more incensed then appeased. In vain (says the Lord) Mat. 15. 9.
do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.

. 28. Of sacrificing humane blood to pacify God.
In Navigat. Hispan. sub Car. 5. Imper. in insula Carolina, mactatio hominum
legitur. Carthaginenses Saturno excellentiores e filijs suis sacrificaba^t.
Diodor. Sic. lib 20.
WHo can sufficiently wonder at the vain and foolish wit of men, in inventing
such means and courses to pacify Gods wrath, as are so far from being
agreeable to his will, and warrantable by his word, as they are clean contrary
thereunto, and in that respect must needs incense his wrath more and more. The
Heathen of old were wont to sacrifice children, virgins, men, and such like
kinds of humane blood: which the Jews, giving themselves over to all
Heathenish idolatry, learned of them. For where 2 King. 16. 3.
the Heathen gave their children to Molech, 1 King. 11. 7.
the Idol of the Ammonites, which is supposed to be Saturn, Ier. 31. 35.
the Jews also did so: not withstanding that Lev. 18. 21.
the Lord had expressly forbid them so to do: and Lev. 20. 2. Pater silium
tradebat sacerdotibus qui faciebant dues rogos magnos, and inter hos puerum
traducebant. Et quidam moriebantur, quidam superpius manebant. Si pater unum ex
si ijs traduceret, reli quos sire salvos, and patrem in om nibus oe icem
putabant.
made a capital law against all that should so do. As for the Heathen, they
had their Oracles at which they used to ask counsel, and take advice in all
their weighty exploits, and in all their difficulties and distresses: as Number.
27. 21. Judge 20. 18.
the people of God were wont to ask counsel of the Lord. The Heathen supposed
that God gave counsel at those Oracles: but it was the Devil himself who
most egregiously seduced them. For the Holy Ghost calls false gods Deuteronomy. 32.
17. 2 Chro. 11. 15. Psalm. 10^ 37. 1 Cor. 10. 20 Rev 9. ^0.
Devils. Now Joh 8. 44. ^^ge Euripidis, (...). Cicero. Offic. lib 3.
the Devil has been a murderer from the beginning: and ever thirsted after
man's blood. No marvel then, that the counsel and advice of these oracles was,
that for appeasing wrath, or removing calamities man's blood should be
sacrificed. As of old when the Grecians were to depart, after they had burnt
Troy, but were hindered by cross and boisterous winds, their Priest told them
that their Kings daughter must be sacrificed, which thereupon the foolish King
suffered to be done. Ovid. Metam lib 13 sab 2.
Polyxena also the daughter of Priamus and Hecuba is said to be sacrificed to
appease the Ghost of Achilles. Victima vel Phabo sacra m^cteris ad (...) Quam
tulit a sae vo Theudalus host necem. Ovid. in Ibin.
Theudatus or Theodatus King of the Bactrians is recorded to be sacrificed by
Arsace King of Persia to Apollo, after he had overcome him in battle. Frater
ut Ancae, quo sanguine debuit, aras Tinxit, etc. Ibid.
Pigmalion is said usually to sacrifice men to the gods. Vt qui Bistaniae
templo caecidere Minervae. Ibid
The Bistans a people of Thrace, made a law to sacrifice strangers to their
gods. Quique Theonteae Taurica sacra Doae. Ibid.
Taurica Chersonesus a country in the North part of Europe, now by some called
Tartarica the less, had inhabitants that also were wont to sacrifice strangers
to Diana. Aut te devoveat certis Ahdera diebus. Sax^^ devotum grandme plura
petant. Ibid.
The men of Abdera a city of Thrace had a custom every first day of the year
to stone a man to death, and to sacrifice him to the gods, for a prosperous
success of that year. Hered. lib. 4.
The Seythians are reported to sacrifice every hundredth man of the captives
that they took. Plutatch. Paral 38. and Dosith. lib. 3. rer. Sicut
It is recorded that a Plague was raised in Syracuse for incest committed by a
father with his daughter, and that counsel being asked of the Oracle, answer
was made, that both Father and Daughter must be sacrificed to the Gods. i Many
more like instances to like purpose may be given; but these are sufficient to
discover the blindness, and sottishness of the Heathen in seeking to pacify
God with such things as could not but much incense him.

. 29. Of Popish toys to pacify God.
PApists also go two far in using unwarrantable means (such as cannot but
kindle and inflame the fire of Gods wrath) to pacify the same: as men's and
women's whipping of themselves, wearing shirts of hair, going barefoot so many
miles, creeping up and down to this and that place on their bare knees, going
long journies on pilgrimage, to relics and images of Saints, to the holy
land, and if they be not inhabitants of Rome, even thither also to visit it:
giving up their lands, if they have any: yea and leaving their callings to
enter into, and abide in some religious house, as Monastry, Fryery, Nunnery,
Hermitage, or the like: going up and down to beg: living on alms: offering
such and such sums of money at such and such religious places: forbearing
such and such meats: mumbling over so and so many times the Creed, Pater
noster, and Ave-Maria: and to do what else their Ghostly Father shall enjoyne
them by way of penance: though it be to murder Kings or other persons. Yea
further (wherein they go in inhumane cruelty beyond the Heathen) in persecuting
with fire and sword such as refuse to be subject to their Devilish devices.
Neque vero securior ulla via in Ecclesia Dei unquam existimata fuit ad
amovendam imminentem a Domino poenam, quam ut haec paenitentiae opera homines
cum vero animi dolor frequentent. Council. Trid Sess. 14. cap. 8, 9.
The Council of Trent says of some of these and other like works of
penitency (as it calls them) that never any safer way to avert the vengeance of
God was found out in the Church. Haec ipsa opero, quatenus quoad certum modum
in particulari, divinitus mandata non sunt, grata sunt Deo, and sancta, and
vtilia. Bellarm. de Poenit. lib 4. cap. 6. Et paulo ante, satisfactoria esse
affirmat.
And her great Champion though he confess that they are not commanded of God
(only he thus minceth the matter, after a certain manner in particular, not
commanded) yet he boldly avoucheth that they are acceptable to God, and holy,
and profitable: yea and satisfactory. What? Gods vengeance to be turned away by
humane inventions? Humane inventions to satisfy Divine justice? Nor the
excellency of the Divine Majesty will admit, nor the vanity of humane
apprehensions can invent any such satisfactions, any such means as to avert
such wrath. The least that can be said of the best of the foresaid means of
satisfaction, is that of the Prophet, Isa. 1. 12.
who has required them? They may have Col. 2. 23.
a show of wisdom in will worship and humility, and neglecting of the body,
not in any honor. For they are vile and abominable in Gods sight.

. 30. Of performing things warrantable with due circumstances.
III. See 25.
THings warrantable in their substance must be performed with warrantable
circumstances. The many circumstances which God prescribed for doing the things
which he enjoined, give proof hereof. For why should the Divine wisdom be so
careful in prescribing circumstances, if man might be careless in observing
them. Where the Lord enjoyneth the celebration of the Passover, he thus
expresses it, Number. 9. 3.
In the foureteenth day of this month, at even, ye shall keep it in his
appointed season: according to all the rites of it, and according to all the
ceremonies thereof shall ye keep it. If men failed in circumstances, they were
punished as if they had neglected the circumstance. Instance Lev. 10. 1.
Nadab and Abihu, that offered incense with strange fire: and David and the
Priests in his time that 2 Samuel 6. 3.
carried the Arc in a cart which Number. 7. 9. Exo. 25. 14. Number. 4. 15. Deuteronomy. 10.
8. Ios 3. 3.
should have been carried on men's shoulders. Wherefore David being better
instructed by the visible evidence of Gods displeasure on Vzzah, says
afterward, 1 Chro. 15. 13
The Lord made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due
order, etc.

God having prescribed circumstances as well as substances, to neglect the one
or the other is to cross his sacred will. Yea to do things otherwise then he
has appointed, when he has appointed the rites and manner of doing any thing,
is to make our selves wiser then God.

Papists failings in mateall circumstances.
In this respect we have just cause to separate from the Remish Church, though
it be granted, that for substance they hold many of Christ's ordinances. They
have the Word read, and prayers in their Churches, but in an unknown tongue,
which takes away the benefit thereof. They acknowledge Christ their Mediator,
High Priest, Head, and Prophet: but in that they join Saints in heaven as
Mediators, men on earth as true, proper, sacrificing Priests, their Pope a
Spiritual head over the whole Church, and give him power to coin new articles
of faith, they overthrow the forenamed Orthodoxall substances by these
heretical circumstances. So the substance of Baptism which they retain, they
impeach by their additions of cream, spittle, and other like foolish
inventions, and by their false positions about the absolute necessity, and
operative efficacy of the external work. The like might be exemplified in
other ordinances. What warrant have they for creeping to images, prostrating
their bodies before them, offering to them, going on pilgrimages, wearing
haire-shirts, going barefoot, whipping themselves: mewing themselves up in
cloisters, caves, Hermitages, with an infinite number of their own inventions.
Is God pacified with these? Can such things appease his wrath? What then can be
expected for the performance of their ordinances, but this doom of the high
Indge, Mat. 159.
In vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.
And this, Isa. 1. 12.
who has required this of your hand?

Gospellers failings in mate riall circumstances.
I would to God there were no occasion among us given to fear the like doom.
True it is that we have by the Divine providence more and better light then
Papists have, whereby the vanity of their unwarrantable additions to Gods
ordinances are discovered and abandoned, yet many offer up their incense
without fetching fire from the Lords altar. For some that draw nigh unto God
with their mouth, and honor him with their lips, have their heart far from
him. Sincerity of heart is the fire of the Lord, with which the incense of
prayer must be offered up. Others in performing duties of piety so rest in that
which they do, as they look not at all to Christ, who is the Lords altar from
whence alone such fire as is acceptable unto God, can be taken. Others so set
their minds on man's laws, and the penalty thereof, as God, his will, his
honor, conscience to him is not at all respected. In these and other like
cases do men offer their incense with strange fire.

Direction for matter and manner to be fetched from Gods Word. Ephesians. 5. 17. Romans
12. 2. Isa. 8. 20.
It behooves us therefore diligently to search the Scriptures, thereby to
understand what the will of the Lord is: and to prove what is good and
acceptable unto him. Therein we may have sufficient warrant for matter and
manner, for substance and circumstance. To the Law and to the testimony: if
they speak not according to this word it is because there is no light in them,
But what is done according to the warrant and prescript of it, may comfortably
and confidently be done; and that in assured expectation of Gods gracious
acceptance, and bounteous remuneration.

On this ground we may expect a blessing on the duties that we now perform.
For our extraordinary humbling of our selves with fasting and prayer is as
warrantable for pacifying Gods anger, as incense under the Law. Let us from the
Lords altar, his Son Jesus Christ, through faith in him take the fire of
zeal, sincerity, and integrity, and therewith offer our incense; of the
efficacy hereof we shall have occasion afterward to speak.

. 31. Of showing mercy to such as wrong us.
IIII. See. 25. Of praying for enemies. See The whole armo of God on Ephesians. 6.
18.. 51.
DVties of mercy must be performed to such as wrong us. This did he, who took
all occasions to do so himself, give us in express charge, Mat. 5. 44.
Love your enemies, do good to them that hate you. The Law exemplifieth this
general in these particulars. Exodus 23. 4, 5.
If thou meet thine enemies ox or his ass going astray, thou shall surely
bring it back to him again. If thou see the ass of him that hatcth thee lying
under his burden, thou shall surely help him. If mercy must be showed to the
beasts of our enemies, how much more to their persons? In this respect the
Wiseman thus further advises, Pro. 25. 21.
If thine enemy be hungry give him bread: and if he be thirsty give him water
to drink. In like manner, if they have pulled any judgment upon their own
pates, our endeavor must be to help them, to heal them.

1. Thus shall we show our selves to be children of our Father which is in
heaven. For he makes his Son to shine on the evil and on the good, Mat. 5.
45.

Ad omnes faciamus bonum Christus non pro sanctis tantum passus est, sed pro
peccatoribus, etc Aug. de Salutar. Dei. c. 46.
2. Thus shall we be like-minded to him that let slip no opportunity of doing
good to us his enemies, even Jesus Christ our Savior, Phil. 2. 5.

3. Thus shall we give evidence of the holy Spirits abode in us. For the fruit
of the Spirit is in all goodness, Ephesians. 5. 9.

4. Thus shall we Overcome evil with good: which is a Divine property: thus
shall we mollify their hardness, and bow their incensed mind to mildnes and
kindness, Romans 12. 21.

Quando inimicis nostris praebemus beneficia, malitiam eorum bonitate nostra
superamus, and mollimus duritiam, iratumque animam ad molliciem, and
benevolentiam flectimus. Hier. Hedib. quaest, 1
5. And whereas corrupt nature is too too much addicted to revenge, by these
means shall we leave our implacable enemies to Gods revenge, which the Wiseman
thus expresses, Thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head, Pro. 25. 22

So far therefore we ought to be from withholding our hands from doing
mercy, because he, to whom mercy is to be showed, has wronged us, as so much
the rather to take that opportunity of doing good, that it may appear we do
good for goodness sake, without respect of persons, without any partiality.
Woe were it to children of men if God did not do good to his enemies. If we
could overcome our selves, we also should so do. They who are borne again,
whose corrupt nature is altered, will so do.

. 32. Of speedy pacifying Gods wrath.
V. Sec 25.
GOds wrath is with all expedition to be pacified. Exo. 32. 11.
So soon as Moses observed the wrath of the Lord to be kindled, while he was
in the mount, before he came down to enquire after the cause thereof, he
offered the sweet incense of humble and fervent prayer, to pacify the same.
When Ion. 3. 4.
Jonah began to enter into Niniveh, and to threaten Gods vengeance, both King
and people by fasting, prayer, and repentance prevented the judgment. They did
not stay till the forty days respited were expired. The direction of an
Heathen Monarch (but guided by the Spirit of God) is in this case very
remarkable: it was this, Ezr. 7. 17. 21, 23.
Buy speedily Bullocks, Rams, etc. Whatsoever Ezra shall require, let it be
done speedily. For why should there be wrath against the realm? Job 1. 5.
Job was so speedy, as upon suspicion that his children in their feasting
together might have some way or other provoked Gods wrath, offered burnt
offerings for an atonement: Thus did Job every day.

Fierceness of Gods wrath.
Gods wrath is as a fire. ( Psalm 78. 21. Isa. 30. 30. Ier. 15. 14. Zeph. 3. 8.
Saepius ab initio flammam quidam non extin guentes, in magnum devencrant
naufragium. De peccatoribus Chrysostom. Hom. 22. ad Pop.
to fire in Scripture it is often resembled) Now a fire, the longer it is
suffered to burn, the stronger and more violent it waxes. When therefore a
fire is kindled, will not wise men make all the speed that possibly they can to
quench it? The Prophets do thus set out the fierceness of this fire: Deuteronomy. 32.
22.
A fire is kindled in the Lords anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell,
and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations
of the mountains, etc. Nah. 1. 6.
Who can stand before his indignation? And who can abide in the fierceness of
his anger? His fury is powered out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by
him. In regard of the violence of Gods wrath it is also resembled to Isa. 28.
2. -- 30. 28.
A flood of mighty waters overflowing. If waters once overflow and make a
breach, all speed must be used to make up that breach, or otherwise it will
soon become irrecoverable.

The cause of utter destructions.
Hence have we a demonstration of the folly of men, who having incensed the
Lords wrath, continue to add sin to sin, and to lie securely therein, nor
repenting, nor humbling themselves with prayer and fasting, nor thinking any
way to pacify the Lords fiery indignation, till the fury thereof flame round
about them, and that so fiercely, as there is little hope of quenching it. This
is the cause of those desolations and utter destructions that have been
heretofore, or still are made in the world. For, 1. Mic. 7. 18.
The Lord delights in mercy: Were men careful to walk in any measure worthy
of his mercies, his godnesse would be as an ever-springing, and overflowing
fountain sending out sweet streams to refresh us from time to time with all
needful blessings. 2. Isa. 28. 21.
Judgment is his strange work: therefore he uses to threaten it, before he
execute it. If therefore threatening of vengeance did kindly work on men, and
make them humble themselves before the Lord, and turn from their sins, he
would not execute what he threatens. Instance the case of Ion. 3. 10.
Nineveh, and of Ier. 26. 18, 19.
Hezekiah. 3. God is Ion. 4. 2.
slow to anger. Though he be provoked to begin to execute vengeance, yet is he
not hasty in pouring out all the vials of his wrath. He first begins with one.
He first strikes but softely. If then men humble themselves, and confess
their sins with penitent hearts, he will say to his Angel whom he has sent
to destroy, 2 Samuel 24. 16.
It is enough: stay now thine hand.


Deferring repentance, a cause of much mischief.
The cause therefore of Gods severity in executing vengeance, rests in man's
obstinacy. For Psalm. 18. 26. Tamberlane ut Stephan. in Apolog pro Herodoto.
With the froward God will show himself froward. Man persists obstinately in
sin: and God persists resolutely in punishing sin. I have heard of a
General, that was wont to carry with him in his Camp three sorts of flaggs, a
white, red, and black one. And when he first came against a City, he displayed
his white flag, to show, that if without resistance they would yield, they
should upon acknowledging fealty to him, enjoy their lives, livings, and
liberty. If they refused this offer, he then displayed a red flag, to intimate,
that he intended a bloody battle against them. If notwithstanding this
menacing of blood they obstinately stood out against him, he lastly displayed a
black flag, giving them to wit thereby that now nothing was to be expected but
utter ruin and desolation. That practice was somewhat answerable to a Law that
God made for his people, that Deuteronomy, 20. 10, 11.
when they went to fight against a City, they should first proclaim peace:
whereof if they would not accept, they should destroy them all. To apply this;
The preaching of the Gospel is Gods white flag. The seasonable and just
threatenings of his Ministers, his red flag. Execution of judgment by Plague,
famine, sword, or any other like kinds, his black flag. How foolish, how
sottish, how rebellious against God, how injurious to their own souls are
they that not only despise the offer of mercy in the Gospel, but also carry
themselves contumeliously against the threatenings of Gods Ministers grounded on
his Word, and justly deduced from it. Even this is our case: so have we dealt
with God: and thereby provoked him to hang out this black and deadly flag of
Pestilence, whereby so many hundreds are week after week destroyed among us.
This by speedy humiliation and conversion might have been prevented.

Speedy repentance very profitable.
If in any case speed and haste be needful, surely it is most needful, yea and
necessary in appeasing the wrath of God. No fire, no flood like to it. For the
point therefore in hand, what course soever ye take, (having good warrant for
it) That you do, do quickly. Whether the judgment be public or private, on
our selves or others, let us make no delay. Take At the time when this was
preached. viz. Aug. 1625 a public fast was weekly celebrated.
this opportunity now at length offered for public humiliation by prayer and
fasting: and what you outwardly make show of before men, do inwardly and
effectually before God the searcher of hearts. Put off no longer time. Heb. 3.
7, 8.
Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice harden
not your heart. There is just cause to speak to you in such a manner, as in
another case Act. 27. 21.
Paul did to those that were in the ship with him, Ye should have harkened to
Gods Ministers, and not have loosed from your loosed from your covenant with
God, and have gained this loss and harm which by fierceness of the plague
has befallen us. You should (as. 6.
has been noted of Job) upon suspicion have used means to prevent this
Plague: or at least, when one or two in a week died of the Plague in the
suburbs of the City, you should have used all the means that Gods Word
warranted, then and there to have stayed it. Have ye not heard of the counsel
that Eliah gave to Ahab. 1 King. 18. 44.
When there arose a little cloud out of the sea like a man's hand, he said,
prepare thy chariots, and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not. So upon
the sight of the smallest sign, and first beginning of this Plague, we should
have used all warrantable means to have prevented, if it had been possible,
these showers of Gods vengeance which have day after day fallen upon us. But
seeing those opportunities have been too carelessly passed over, let us now be
made more wise. Quickly speedily, as quickly and speedily as possibly we can,
seek yet to quench this fire, to make an atonement for our selves and others
yet living. Considera quam multi modo moriuntur, quibus si haec hora ad agendum
poeni tentiam concederetur quae tibi concessa est, quo modo per attaria and
quam festinanter currerent, and ibi flexis genibus, vel certe toto eorpore in
terram prostrato, tam diu suspirare^t, plorarent, and orarent, donec
plenissimam peccatorum veniam d Deo consequi mercrentur. Tu vero commedende,
bibendo, j^c^ndo and ridendo, tempus o^^ose vivends perdis, quod tibi. in
dulserat Deus ad acquirendam gratiam, and promereadam gloriam. Cogita etiam
quot animae in inserno nunc cruciantur sine spe veniae, and misericordiae. Si
amor Dei te tenere non potest, saltem teneat and terreat timor judicij, metus
gehennae, etc. Bern. de Interiori Domo. cap. 63.
O consider how many have died, who if they had this time for repentance, which
ye have, would fast and pray, and turn from sin, and do what might be done
to obtain pardon. And will ye spend this precious time in eating, drinking,
and sporting, which is affoorded to get grace, and attain to glory? Think
with thy self how many souls are now in hell without hope of pardon and
mercy. If the love of God hold thee not in, at least let the fear of judgment
and terror of hell restrain thee, and affright thee.

. 33. Of atonement with God after his wrath has been kindled.
VI. See. 25.
THere are means of reconciliation betwixt God and man, after Gods wrath is
incensed. As the charge which in this text Moses gives to Aaron, Make an
attoneme^t: so the event which followed thereupon ( Numb. 16. 47
He made an atonement for the people) proves as much. So does this answer
which God gave to Moses his intercession for the people, -- 14, 20.
I have pardoned according to thy word. Memorable in this case is that means
which at first God affoorded to man by the Genesis 3. 15.
Seed of the woman, after he had revolted, and so provoked the Lords wrath. All
the propitiatory sacrifices that from Abels time to Christ's have been offered
up by Saints, give demonstration hereof: especially if the end of them, and the
events following upon the offering of them be duly weighed. The end of them is
thus expressed in the Law, Lev. 1. 4.
It shall be accepted for him to make an atonement for him. The events are thus
set out, Genesis 4. 4.
The Lord had respect to Abel, and to his offering. -- 8. 21.
The Lord smelled a sweet savor. Lev. 9. 23.
The glory of the Lord appeared to all the people. 1 Samuel 7. 9.
The Lord heard him. 2 Samuel 24 25.
The Lord was entreated for the land. 2 Chro 7. 1.
Fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and sacrifices;
and the glory of the Lord filled the house. The many invitations propounded in
Scripture to sinners to come unto God, imply grounds of reconciliation betwixt
God and man. Such are these, Isa 1. 18.
Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord. Pro 9. 5.
Come eat of my bread, etc. Isa. 55. 1.
Come, buy wine and milk without money, etc. Mat. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. Psalm. 34. 8.
O taste and see that the Lord is good. To these for further confirmation, may
be added the many promises of receiving, and accepting such as come, which use
to be annexed to the forementioned invitations. Yea and the embassage which God
has given to his Ministers, who 2 Cor. 5. 20.
as though God did beseech you by us, pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled
to God. But most evidently and plentifully is the point proved by the truth of
all the legal types, Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 25.
Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation: -- 5. 11.
by whom we have received the atonement. That word propitiation has relation
to the Exo. 25. 17, etc.
propitiatory under the Law, translated by our English a mercy-seat: which was
an especial type of Christ, in whom all the mercy of God is manifested to man.
Where Ezekiel. 43. 14. (...).
Ezekiel makes mention of a greater and less settle, The LXX translate it, a
propitiatory: Propitiatorium minus est, quando i^ se Christus formam servi
accipiens and propitiatorium majus quum recepit gloriam, etc. Hier. Comment. l.
13. in Ezekiel. 43.
and St. Hieron applies the greater propitiatory to Christ's Divine nature: and
the less to his humane nature. Thus as God-man is Christ the means of
atonement betwixt God and man.

No reason hereof can be found out in man. For man having once rebelled against
his Creator, persisted in his rebellion: and neither offered to God, nor
sought of God any atonement. Romans 5. 10.
When we were enemies we were reconciled. The whole cause therefore rests in
God: even in his free grace, and undeserved love. For there is a peculiar love
which God bears to man: Tit. 3. 4. (...).
which the Apostle compriseth under one compound word, which signifies, love
of man: and thus sets down the true reason of the forementioned
atonement, After that the kindness, and love toward man of God our Savior
appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us.

. 34. Of Gods peculiar love to man.
1. Chrysostomus in lib. 1. de Prove Dei, elegantissime describit divinam (...).
THis peculiar love of God to man is the rather to be observed by man, because
it is such a love as is proper to him, and on him only conferred. The like
has not been extended to any other creature whatsoever. I need not bring the
senseless creatures, either above in the visible heavens, or below on earth, no
nor any of the living, and sensible, but unreasonable creatures, into
comparison. None can be so senseless, or unreasonable, as to imagine that Gods
goodness extended to them, can be compared to his kindness showed to man.
There remain therefore the Angels only in this blessed contention, about more
love, to be poised with man. The Angels may be distinguished into two ranks,
good and evil. The evil angels, though they stood in as much need of such
mercy to be showed to them as was extended to man, because they implunged
themselves into as deep a gulf of misery, yet was not God pleased to take
such pity of them. Jude v. 6.
He has reserved them in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. The good Angels fell not into such misery: nor
stood in need of such mercy. They were indeed by Christ established in
happiness, but not redeemed from misery. The favor which they primarily had
with God is everlastingly confirmed: new favor is not purchased for them. They
never were at odds with God: no need therefore of atonement, of
reconciliation. This is the transcendent, proper, and peculiar evidence of Gods
love to man. Heb. 2. 16.
He therefore that took not on him the nature of Angels, took on him the seed
of Abraham.

. 35. Of their desperate condition who reject reconciliation.
2. WHat now may be thought of such children of men, as, notwithstanding the
means of reconciliation and atonement, which God has ordained and revealed
for man's good, still stand at odds with God, and maintain enmity against him?
Their case may well be accounted desperate. Infirmi donec medicantes admittunt,
multam habent spem sanitatis: post quam vero in mentis alienationem deciderint,
immedicabiles sunt nullo curante: non propter morbi naturam, sed propter
curantis absentiam. Chrs. Hom. 22. ad Pop.
While they who are sick admit Physicians, and remedies, there is much hope of
recovery. But if like mad men they admit no means for their good, they must
needs be irrecoverable, having none to cure them: not so much for the nature of
the disease, as for want of means to cure them. In this case they may be
supposed to be worse then Devils. Had a Redeemer been given to Devils, and an
atonement by him made betwixt God and them, we cannot but think that they
would most readily and willingly have embraced reconciliation. Yet how many
children of men have there been in all ages, in all places, against whom the
Lord may justly take up this complaint, Mat. 23. 37.
How often would I have gathered you together even as the hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not! And this, Isa. 65. 2.
I have spread out my hands all the day to a rebellious people, which walks
in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts: A people that provokes
me to anger continually to my face. Too too many such there are among us, who
most ungratefully and contumeliously reject all the means which God in his
goodness and wisdom has afforded to allure and draw men to himself. For
means of reconciliation, and salvation, what nation has more plentifully
enjoyed them, then England, and what part of England more then London? But let
the impiety and iniquity, profaneness and licentiousness, drunkenness, and
all manner of uncleanness, swearing and lying, debate and deceit, extortion
and oppression, and other like offenses against God and man, committed in this
bright light of the Gospel, give evidence, whether reconciliation offered on
Gods part be answerably accepted on man's part. Can we now wonder at Gods
judgments among us, and heavy hand upon us? Have we not rather cause to admire
his long suffering and lenity, in that he has so long held his hand from
striking: and in that he now strikes, he does it so gently. For howsoever this
stroke of the Plague considered in it self be heavy: yet compared to our
deserts, it is but light. Lam. 3 22.
It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not.

. 36. Of the penitents comfort in reconciliation.
3. Poenitentes, quid a seipsis suscipit judicatos, Deus absolvit. Cypr. Sermon
de Pass. Christi.
Poor penitent sinners, whose hearts are broken with sight and sense of their
sins, may hence, and will hence receive much comfort, that there is means of
atonement and reconciliation betwixt God and them. For God uses to absolve
such as he observes to judge themselves. This must needs be very cordial to
them. For true penitents that are pierced with sense of their sins, know that
while there remains enmity betwixt God and them, they are in no better estate
then the Devils. They find by the heavy burden of sin oppressing their
souls, and by their deep apprehension of Gods wrath thereupon, that Gods
favor is more sweet then life it self, and infinitely to be preferred before
all contents and delights that this world can afford. To these Isa. 52. 7.
How beautiful are the feet of him that brings good tidings, that publishes
peace, etc. Take notice therefore, O ye poor in spirit, take notice of this
sovereign ground of comfort, There is means of reconciliation betwixt you and
your God. An atonement is made. Comfort your souls herewith. Sufficit mihi ad
omnem justitiam solum habere prepitium, cui soli peccavi. Bern. super Cant,
Sermon. 23.
It is sufficient, and in stead of all righteousness, to have him alone,
against whom alone I have sinned, propitious and gracious in pardoning sin.

Means of reconciliation to be sought.
4. Means of reconciliation being on Gods part affoorded and offered, it
remains as a bounden duty for us, with the uttermost of our power to seek
after it. Yea it gives good encouragement to do our best for partaking of the
benefit thereof. 1. For our duty, shall a matter of so great consequence, so
excellent, so needful, so useful a thing as reconciliation with God be
published and proclaimed to us wretched rebels against God, and should not we
enquire after it? They add much to the heap of their other sins that
neglect this duty. Heb. 2. 3.
How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? 2. For encouragement,
what greater then this, that there is such a thing, that upon due and diligent
seeking, may and shall be had. If God were implacable, irreconciliable, and would
accept of no atonement, then had we cause to be discouraged from seeking it,
but God is so far from being irreconciliable, that he is most easy to be
entreated. Yea by his Ministers he 2 Cor. 5. 20. Mic. 7. 18.
prays us to be reconciled to him. Who is a God like to thee, that pardons
iniquity, etc.


. 37. Of the resemblance betwixt prayer and incense.
HAving handled the means of atonement here prescribed by Moses according to
the letter of the history, we will further endeavor to open the mystery
contained under it.

The principal means was offering incense. This may be considered as a
service to be done by man: or as a Legal Thus (...) est spiritual^s
thymiamatis, quod est c^lius Dei. Hier. Comment. lib. 1. in Hab 2.
type of an Evangelicall truth.

As a service, or duty to be performed on man's part, it set out prayer.

As a type it prefigured Christ's Intercession.

That it set out prayer, is evident by the Psalmists application of the one to
the other, where he says, Psalm. 141. 2.
Let my prayer be set before thee as incense. This also is meant by the Lord,
where he says, Mal. 1. 11.
In every place incense shall be offered to my name.

The resemblance of prayer to incense, is in many respects very apt. For,

1. Exo. 30. 36.
The spice of which the incense was made, was to be beaten very small. So the
heart out of which prayer comes, must be Psalm. 51. 17.
a broken and contrite heart. 2. Lev. 16. 13.
Fire must be put to the incense, and therewith the incense burned. So Mar. 11.
24. Iam. 1. 6.
faith and Iam. 5. 16.
servour must be added to prayer, whereby it is made to ascend to God. 3.
Incense must be burnt Exo. 30. 7.
on the altar, or Lev 16. 12.
on a censer, as Moses here commanded Aaron. So must our prayers be offered on
Heb. 13. 10.
the altar Jesus Christ: who is also as -- 9 4.
a censer. 4. Ezekiel. 8. 11.
Incense being fired ascended up like a cloud. So Rev. 8 4. 2 Chro. 30. 27.
Ion. 2. 7.
do faithful and fervent prayers ascend to heaven where God is. 5. Incense
caused Lev. 16. 12.
a sweet perfume and savor. So is Job 42. 8. Psalm. 69. 31.
prayer pleasing and acceptable unto God. 6. Lev. 16. 13.
Incense was a means to pacify Gods wrath, as here in the text. So prayer. By
Exo 32. 14.
Moses his prayer was Gods anger appeased. 7. Numb. 16. 40
Incense was to be offered up by Priests only. Rev. 1. 6.
So are all Saints made spiritual Priests, and 1 Pet 2. 5.
thereby fitted to offer up the spiritual incense of prayer.
. 38. Of incense typifying Christ.
THat Incense was a type of Christ; may be collected by the Apostles specifying
the Heb. 9. 4.
golden censer, which was only for incense, among other Legal types of
Christ. The golden censer was a type by reason of the incense, for which it was
made: much more therefore must the incense it self be How sundry types may be
applied to Christ.
a type. If it be demanded how the one and the other too could be a type of
Christ; I answer, In regard of several matters appertaining to Christ. Some
types set out one of Christ's natures, others another: Some his person, others
his offices: again, others, special benefits that the Church reaped by
Christ. In a word, the sundry and several types under the Law, set out sundry
and several excellencies that were in Christ, and sundry and several benefits
that issue from him.

That the fitness of the types here mentioned may be the better discerned, I
will parallel, and set out the incense, censer, fire, and altar in such manner
as with good probability may be applied to Christ.

1. The Incense was made of the Exo. 30. 34, 38
best spices in the world. The like perfume might not be made. 1. Christ was
Cant. 5. 10.
the chiefest of ten thousand. Psalm 45. 2.
Fairer then the children of men. None like to him. 2. Incense was to be Exo.
30. 36.
beaten very small. 2. Christ was Isa 53. 5.
bruised for our iniquities. 3. Incense was burnt with Lev. 16. 12.
hot coals of fire. 3. Christ's death was a tormenting death: Zac. 3 2.
He was a brand plucked out of the fire. 4. Incense was put upon a Lev. 16. 12.
Censer. The Censer was of Heb. 9. 4.
gold. Exo. 30. 1. etc
So was the altar upon which it was burnt. 4. Christ Heb 9. 14.
through the eternal Spirit offered himself: then which nothing more precious,
more durable. A golden censer and altar is expressly applied to Christ, Rev. 8.
3. 5. The Incense was brought Lev. 16. 13.
before the Lord into the most holy place. 5. Christ is Heb. 8. 1.
in heaven before his Father, even at his right hand. 6. The smoke of the
Incense like Lev. 16. 13.
a cloud covered the mercyseate. Heb. 8. 1. Isa. 4. 5.
6. Christ's intercession so covers the throne of grace in heaven, as our
sins are not seen. 7. The sent of the Incense was very sweet. Therefore it is
called Exo. 35. 28.
sweet incense. 7. Ioh. 11. 42. -- 16. 23.
Christ's intercession is very pleasing to God. Isa. 42. 1.
Gods soul delights in him. Mat. 3. 17.
He is his beloved Son in whom he is well pleased. 8. Lev. 16. 13, 14.
Incense was carried with blood into the most holy place. 8. Heb. 9. 12.
Christ with his own blood entered into the holy place. Satisfaction and
intercession go together. 9. Numb. 16. 48.
Offering incense was a means of atonement betwixt God and man 9. Christ is 1
Ioh. 2. 2.
the propitiation for our sins. Romans 5. 10.
By him we are reconciled to God: and -- 11.
have received the atonement. 10. 2 Chro. 26. 18
Incense was to be offered up only by a Priest. 10. Heb. 8. 1.
Christ was a true Priest: So fit to make intercession. No Angel, no Saint can
do it.

The type being thus applied to the truth in the particular circumstances
thereof, we will insist especially upon the maine substance here intended,
which is the true means whereby God is appeased, here typified by Aarons
offering incense: namely Jesus Christ the beloved Son of God, his making of
intercession for sinners.

. 39. Of the virtue of Christ's intercession to appease God.
CHrist by his intercession is the only true means of appeasing God. All
Legal rites instituted to this purpose were types hereof. For the whole Law
was Col 2. 17.
a shadow of things to come: but the body is of Christ. He is that Gen 3. 15.
seed of the woman that should bruise the serpents head, and so slay hatred.
Gal. 3. 16.
He is that Seed of Abraham, in whom all nations should be blessed, by reason
of this atonement. He the Heb. 10. 10.
propitiatory sacrifice, he the Ephesians. 5. 26.
cleansing water, he the incense, he the Ioh. 3. 14, 15.
Brazen Serpent, by which such as are stung by sin and Satan are cured. To
omit other types, Ephesians. 2. 14.
He is our peace: 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
He is the propitiation for our sins: 1 Timothy 2. 5.
He is the Mediator betwixt God and man: 2 Cor. 5. 18.
God has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ: Rom 3. 25.
whom God has set forth to be a propitiation. Therefore Hebr. 1. 3.
when he had by himself purged our sins, he sat down on the right hand of
the Majesty on high: where -- 7. 25.
he ever lives to make intercession for us. On which ground the Apostle makes
this holy challenge, Romans 8. 34.
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died: yea rather that is risen
again, and is even at the right hand of God: who also makes intercession for
us. Thus we see how plentiful and evident the holy Scripture is in this
principle of our Christian Faith.

1 Timothy 3. 16.
Christ being true God, Mat. 17. 5.
his Fathers beloved Son in whom he is well pleased: and having Heb. 9. 12.
by his own blood obtained eternal redemption, he has a power and right to
quench the fire of Gods wrath, and to make peace betwixt God and man. The
dignity of his person, and the all sufficiency of his sacrifice have made way
thereto. The like can not justly be said of any other means whatsoever, in
heaven, or in earth. Wherefore 1 Timothy 2 5.
There is one (one only) Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

. 39. Of the vanity of mere creatures intercession.
SVrely they do more incense then appease God, who to the heap of their other
sins add this high pitch of presumption, Intercession of men or Angels. Can
man's invented incense, offered up with strange fire, pacify Gods wrath? For,
intercession of men and Angels is a mere humane invention: never could any
Papist give any good proof for it out of Gods Word: nor ever hereafter can any
do it. That which is not in Gods Word cannot be drawn out of it. This is such
strange fire, as will devour them that use it: even as Lev. 10. 1, 2.
The fire that went out from the Lord devoured Nadab and Abihu: and as Numb.
16. 35.
that which consumed the two hundred and fifty men that (being of the
conspiracy of Korah) offered incense: incense that much incensed the fire of
Gods wrath. To reason the case a little with our adversaries; Why do they not
content themselves with that pure, and sweet incense that Christ our great
Priest offers up? Is it not sufficient? Need any thing, can any thing be
added to the dignity and efficacy of that which Christ does? Can man or Angel
do any thing more then God-man? Are any more beloved of the Father then he?

But they pretend humility forsooth. Sinful men are unworthy to go to so
worthy a Mediator as the Son of God. Therefore they have the Spirits of just
men made perfect in heaven, and the holy Angels to be their Mediators.

Answ. 1. Pretense of humility without warrant of Gods Word is high
presumption. Hypocrisin hu militatis. Oecu men. in Col. 2. 19.
He fitly styled this kind of humility, that styled it, a show, or a mask of
humility, counterfeit humility: And Vulgo dicitur qui divitem affectat
thelo-dives, qui sapientem thelo-sapiens. Ergo and hic thelo humilis dici
tur(i) affectans humilitatem. Aug. Epist. ad Paulin,
he more finely, that by a new coined word, compounded part of Greek, and part
of Latin, called it Thelo-humilitatem, will-humility, voluntary, or affected
humility: which is plain and palpable arrogance.

2. Though Angels and Saints in heaven be more perfect then men on earth, yet
are they not worthy of such an office, as to be Mediators and Intercessors to
God for others. Or this office of Intercession is too much vilified, or
celestial creatures too much dignified and deified by accounting them
Intercessours in relation to God.

3. Christ himself is deprived of one of his prime functions, and honors, by
ascribing it to others: or at least he has copartners, and assistants joined
with him. Which to do is intolerable presumption.

4. The love of Christ to man is thereby exceedingly impeached. For he was made
like to his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in
things pertaining to Hebr 2. 17.
God, etc. This end of his taking our nature on him, is frustrated, if we need
other Mediators to him. To what end is he made man, if there need other
Mediators to present us to him? Wherein appears he to be so merciful, if of
our selves we may not have access to him, who was made as our selves, a Son
of man?

The excellency, necessity, sufficiency, and commodity of Well use, and trust
to Christ's intercession.
Christ's intercession being by the Gospel evidently revealed unto us, it
becomes us to take such notice thereof, and to be so instructed therein, as
we may in all our needs wisely use it, and confidently trust to it.

They wisely use it, that on all occasions, when they approach to God, have the
eye of their soul fixed on Christ abiding in heaven at Gods right hand, and
making intercession, and through his mediation and intercession present their
persons, their prayers, and all their holy services to God the Father.
Especially when Gods wrath is provoked, and any signs thereof begin to
manifest themselves, then to humble their souls at the throne of grace: then
through the intercession of Christ to crave mercy and pardon. That form
wherewith the Church uses to conclude her prayers (through Jesus Christ our
Lord) is a worthy form, and pertinent to the point in hand. In using the words,
our heart ought to be lift up unto Christ, and set on him sitting on Gods right
hand. Yea, though such words be not always expressed, yet every petition made
to God, every thanks offered to him, every thing wherein we have to do with
God, must in mind and heart be intended through the mediation and intercession
of Christ. We read of incense offered with the prayers of Saints, the smoke
whereof ascended before God. This incense is the Rev. 8. 3, 4.
intercession of Christ.

They trust to his intercession, who use no others but his, and in the use of
his, rest confidently that they shall be accepted. Thus may we, thus must we do.
We may do it, because what soever is in us to discourage us, or any way to make
us doubt of acceptance, is so abundantly supplied in Christ, as all matter of
doubt and fear is thereby taken away. We must do it for the honor of Christ,
for the comfort of our own souls. Christ is much honored by the steadfast
faith of his Saints, Thereby the dignity of his person, the merit of his
sacrifice, the favor of his Father, the efficacy of his intercession, and
other his Divine excellencies are acknowledged. The soul of him that in faith
expects through Christ acceptance, cannot but be much comforted. This was it
that much encouraged, and comforted Stephen, even then when his malicious
enemies gnashed on him with their Act. 7. 54, 55.
teeth, that he saw Jesus standing on the right hand of God. That of Stephen
was extraordinary. For the heavens were actually, really opened, and Christ in
that body, wherein he was seen on earth, and wherewith he ascended into
heaven, appeared unto him, being in the highest heaven. Stephens sight was also
extraordinarily quickened, and enabled distinctly to perceive and discern a
visible object so far off. Such an extraordinary bodily sight of Christ is not
to be expected of us. Yet as truly, and to as great comfort of soul may we
with the spiritual eye of the soul, the eye of faith, see Christ sitting in
heaven for us: as it is said of Moses, By faith he endured, as seeing him who
is invisible. Heb. 11. 27.
Thus to eye Christ with his incense, his intercession before God, in dangers
and distresses, in fears and perplexities, while we live, when we are giving
up the ghost, can not but bring unspeakeable comfort to the soul.

. 40. Of the scope of the last clause of the 46 Verse.
NVMB. 16. 46.For there is wrath gone out from the Lord: the plague is begun.
A Reason of the forementioned direction given to Aaron, is here rendered, as
is evident by this causall particle (...)
FOR. The reason is taken from the manifestation of Gods wrath: and confirmed
by an effect or evidence thereof, a plague.

The reason may thus be framed. When Gods wrath is gone out, atonement must be
made. But now Gods wrath is gone out. Therefore now an atonement must be made.


That Gods wrath was gone out, he proves by the effect thereof: which may be
thus framed. When a plague is begun, Gods wrath is gone out. But now a plague
is begun. Therefore, etc.


Here are two points to be considered. 1. The Substance of the reason. 2. The
Inference of the reason.


The Substance sets out 1. The cause. Wrath. 2. The effect. Plague.


The Inference notes out a duty to be thereupon performed, which is to appease
Gods wrath.

First of the Cause, wrath, amplified by the Author whence it came; From the
Lord.

. 41. Of the sense of these words, Wrath is gone out from the Lord.
THe original word translated wrath, signifies a fervor, (...) excanduit
vehemencer.
fierceness, or vehemence of anger. Hos. 10. 7.
The some that arises from the raging and beating of the sea, is set out by
this word. It has affinity with (...) ^ King. 6. 6. (...) (...) lignum.
a word that signifies to cut down: and imports such vehemence of wrath as
moves him that is angry to cut off, or destroy the other. Whereas the Hebrews
have sundry words to express distinct degrees of anger: this is used to
express the uttermost. Deuteronomy. 29. 28. (...) (...) and excand^ centia, and
se^^ore
Moses to set out the fierceness of Gods wrath, uses three several words,
the latter implying more then the former, thus, The Lord rooted them out of
their land in ANGER, and in WRATH, and in great INDIGNATION. The last of these
three is the word used in this text, and notes an higher degree then the two
former.

By this phrase, (...) exivit.
is gone out, a manifestation thereof by an outward evidence is signified. It
is opposed to keeping in, or hiding close and secret. What things men would not
have seen or known, they keep in. What they would have seen and known,
they suffer to go out. In this respect wrath is here said to go out. It
imports, that God was so provoked as he could not keep in his wrath.

From the Lord, or word for word, (...) A facie Iehovae. Trem. and Iun.
From the face of the Lord. When a man is angry, passion will soon manifest it
self in his face, by bringing blood into it, and making it hot, by bending his
brows, by a fierce cast of the eyes, and other like signs. In which respect
wrath is said to come from the face of a man, that is, in and by the face to
show it self. Thus by a Metaphor, and by resemblance to man, when the Lord
does by any visible signs manifest his wrath, it is said to come from his
face; that is, as our English according to the usual acception of the Hebrew
phrase, has translated it, From the Lord.

The great, ineffable, and most proper name of God, Jehovah, is here expressed.
When matters of favor are applied Of the title Jehovah, See the Churches
Conquest on Exo. 17. 15.. 72.
to this name Jehovah, they are much amplified thereby. They are the favors of
Jehovah. But when wrath is attributed to him, it is much aggravated. The wrath
of Jehovah, must needs be a wrath that makes all to tremble.

. 42. Of anger attributed to God.
Of the kinds of affections, See The Saints Sacrifice on Ps. 116. ver. 1. 4.
Ista verba in Scripturis posita non sunt ut aliquam Dei perturbationem
significent: sed quia nihil dignum de Dco dici potest, propterea usque ad ca
perventum est. Aug. contr. Adi mant. c 13. What anger is, in man. Ira est motus
naturalis concept us ex causis, qui solet ad profectum pertinere Delinquentis.
Amb. Comment. in Ephesians. 4.
Quest. IS anger in God?

Answ. Not properly, as in a man, a passion distinct from the Essence. For God
is a most simple and pure Essence. He is all Essence. There is nothing in him
different from his Essence. The things that are attributed unto him, are spoken
of him only by way of resemblance, for teaching sake: to make us somewhat more
distinctly conceive Gods dealing with us. Anger in man is a passion whereby
upon apprehension of some evil done, he is stirred up to punish him that has
done it. The evil that stirs up anger is either a true evil that justly
deserves to be punished, and in that respect anger is deservedly provoked: as
Exo. 11. 8.
Moses his anger was provoked at Pharaohs obstinacy: Or only an evil in
appearance, or in the apprehension of him that is angry: and in that respect
unjustly incensed: as 1 Samuel 20. 30 Si off^nditur debet irosci: si irascitur
debet ulcisci. Nam and ultic fructus est irae: and ira debitum offe^ sae.
Tertul, advers. Marcio^. l. 1
Saul's anger against Jonathan.

Anger attributed to God sets out his dislike of evil and his resolution to
punish evil doers. God can not mistake: the evil at which he is at any time
angry is indeed evil. When any way God manifests his dislike and his
resolution to punish, he is said to be angry. Thus Romans 1. 18.
the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness: that is,
God who is in heaven manifests from thence his dislike of ungodliness, and
his purpose to take vengeance thereof. And because that dislike and purpose to
punish uses to be manifested sometimes by threatening so to do, and sometimes by
putting his purpose into execution, and performing it, such his threatening and
executing of judgment is called the anger or wrath of God. Who can tell (says
the King of Nineveh) if God will turn away from his fierce anger? By Ion 3. 9.
anger he means Ionahs threatening of vengeance: for no punishment was then
inflicted. But where Romans 25.
the Apostle says, Thou treasurest up to thy self wrath, he means
judgment: as is further evident by this phrase, Romans 35. (...) Qui infert iram.
God inflicteth wrath, that is, takes vengcance, as our English turns it.

To apply these, as to dislike, and to purpose to punish sinners, or to
threaten vengeance, or to execute judgment may be attributed to God, so to be
angry. And as Gods threatening, and execution of judgment is less or more
terrible, so his wrath: therefore to manifest and aggravate the terrors
thereof, sundry Metaphors and Epithites are added thereto: as Psalm. 69. 24.
wrathful anger, Deuteronomy. 29 24.
Heat of great anger, 2 King 23. 26
Fierceness of great wrath, Isa. 42. 25.
Fury of anger; and his anger is said to Exo 32. 11.
wax hot, Numb 11 10
to be kindled greatly, Deuteronomy. 29. 20.
to smoke, -- 32. 22. Difference betwixt Gods anger on Saints and others.
to burn unto the lowest hell.

According to the persons with whom God is angry, may his anger be
distinguished: 1. By reason of the flesh in his best Saints on earth, they often
provoke his wrath, as Exo. 4. 14. Deuteronomy. 3. 26.
Mases did, against whom the anger of the Lord is said to be kindled. This
anger is as a Fathers compassion. Of this it is said Psalm. 103. 9. Cum iratus
suerit, m sericordiae recordabitur. Immo vero and ipsa indignatio non aliunde
quam de misericordia est. Bern. de verb. Hab. Sermon.
He will not keep it for ever. This anger arises from his mercy. 2. By reason
of their rebellious disposition others do so far incense his wrath, as it
proves implacable. Against such, says the Lord, 2 King 22. 17
My wrath shall be kindled, and shall not be quenched. Psalm. 21. 9. Dominum ctiam
bonis suis servis succensintem intelligi datur. Aug Quaest. super Ios. lib. 6
The Lord will swallow up such in his wrath. This anger is as the passion of a
Judge.


From all these premises this conclusion follows.

Wrath may come from God. He may be provoked thereto: and that by all sorts,
Saints and others, as has been showed before. Scarce any other thing is more
frequently attributed to God, then anger. Not by reason of any forwardness in
him to anger. For Ion 42.
The Lord is slow to anger, Exo. 34. 6.
Long-suffering, Neh. 9 17.
Ready to pardon: and when he has threatened, or begun to inflict judgment, he
is soon brought to Ion. 4. 2. 2 Samuel 24. 16.
repent him of the evil. But by reason of man's provoking disposition: By sin
(whereunto men are exceedingly addicted) Gods wrath is kindled: by aggravation
of sin, the fire of Gods wrath is inflamed: and by obstinate continuance the
rein, and impenitenty, that flame becomes unquenchable. Now sin, being
contrary to the righteousness of his will, his justice, his truth, his wisdom
and other like Divine excellencies, will not suffer the fire of his wrath to
lie always smothered: but rather stir him up to send it out against
Sublimitas ineffabilis, ut hominibus congruat; humanis sonis significanda est.
Aug, contr. Adimat. cap. 13.
sinners, to scorch them, to burn them, to consume them, if at least they
repent not. Thus an ineffable sublimity, that it may be the more agreeable to
man, is to be set out by words appertaining to man.

. 43. Of the lawfulness of anger.
1. THis great instance of Gods being angry, gives an evident demonstration of
the lawfulness of anger. Nobis hominibus concessum est, ut ad indignae
alicujus rei faciem moveamur? tranquillitatemque me^ it is velut lenis quaedam
aura conturbet, etc. Hier. Comment. l. 2. in Ephesians. 4.
For nothing simply sinful and unlawful is attributed to God. Our Savior who
took upon him our nature was free from all sin. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
He knew no sin. He knew himself better then any other could. Had he had any
sin, he must needs have known it. But he was 1 Pet. 1. 19.
A Lamb without blemish, and without spot: Heb. 7. 26.
Holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners: yet Mar. 35
was he angry. So were sundry Saints on just occasions noted to be angry, yet
not blamed: as Numb. 16. 150
Moses, 2 Samuel 13. 21.
David, Neh. 5. 6.
Nehemiah, and others.

Anger is one of the affections. Affections in themselves are no more evil,
then understanding, will, memory, and other faculties of the soul.

Ob. They are all of them by natural corruption perverted and polluted.

Answ. 1. We may distinguish betwixt the essence of the How anger is good.
soul with the faculties thereof, and the corruption of them which is
accidental. Thus the essence is good, though the accident be evil.

2. That which is corrupted may be renewed. Thus anger and other affections are
accounted good and lawful by virtue of the Spirits renewing them.

2. Ob. Gal. 5 20.
The Apostle reckons wrath among the fruits of the flesh: and Col. 3. 8. How
anger accounted evil.
exhorts to put it away.

Answ. He means wrath and anger as perverted and corrupted. Ephesians. 4. 26.
In another place he implies that a man may be angry and yet not sin.

Quest. Why then is wrath put into the catalogue of such things as are simply
evil, as Col 3. 8.
wrath, anger, maliciousness, Gal. 5. 19, 20.
idolatry, adultery, witchcraft, etc.

Answ. Because it is a violent passion: and by man, though regenerate, very
hardly kept in compass. Moses, a Ira est irrationalis impetus, and canis
impudens. Chrysostom. ad Pop. Hom 30. Number. 12. 3.
man in a great measure regenerate, yea and very meek above all the men which
were upon the face of the earth, yet being on a great cause angry, so exceeded
therein, as he little regarded the Tables wherein God with his own hand had
written the Moral Law, but Exo. 32. 19.
threw them out of his hands, and brake them. So Act. 15 39.
Paul and Barnabas, men endewed with extraordinary spirits, yet being stirred
with anger, grew so hot, as They departed asunder one from the other. The
corrupt flesh ever abides even in the best Saints so long as they abide in this
corruptible flesh: and though they be regenerate, yet much corruption lies as
dreggs at the bottom. Hence is it, that if that person in whom the sweet
liquour of the sanctifying Spirit abounds, be moved in his passions (as sweet
water in a glass having dreggs, being shaken) corruption will arise, and taint
that passion.

Quest. By what means especially is wrath perverted, How is anger perverted.
and made evil?

Ans. By the same that all other affections are perverted: which are generally
two. 1. Mis-placing them. 2. Mis-ordering them.


Anger is mis-placed when it is set upon a wrong object: namely upon that which
is good and praiseworthy. For anger is one of the disliking affections: the
object whereof ought to be evil. Evil is to be feared, and hated, and grieved
for: and at evil we ought to be angry. Cain was angry at Gods accepting his
brothers sacrifice: and Saul at the just praises given to David. Their anger
therefore by reason of Si mihi irascatur Deus, number illi ego similiter
redirascar? Non utique, sed pavebo, sed contremiscam, sed veniam deprecabor.
Ber. super Cant. Sermon. 83.
mis-placing it, was evil. But most evilly mis-applied is their anger, which
is cast on God. Herein Jonah much failed (Ion. 4. 4, 9.) But Cain much more
(Genesis 4. 5.) If God be angry with me, shall I again be angry with him? In no
wise: but I will rather fear, and tremble, and crave pardon of him.

Anger is mis-ordered, when it is unadvisedly, or immeasurably moved. Our Lord
says, that Mat. 5. 22.
he that is angry with his brother without cause or (...) temere.
unadvisedly, or rashly, shall be in danger of the judgment. Ion. 4. 4. Canis
est impudens ira: sed lege audire discat. Si suerit canis in grege tam ferus ut
non obediat jubenti pastori, omnia perdita sunt. Sed si discit audire, utilis
erit contra lupos, and contra piratos, etc. Chrysostom. ad Pop. Hom. 30.
Thus was Jonah angry overrashly, and without cause.

Immeasurably angry are they that so exceed in passion, as inwardly they are
disturbed in their memory, and outwardly manifest as much by outrageous words
and actions: as Saul, 1 Samuel 20. 30, 33.

Had Stoics and others (that hold all passions to be unbeseeming wise men)
well discerned betwixt the nature and corruption of passions, they would easily
have found out their own mistakings. For anger is as a shepherds dog, which
if he be not at his masters call, to run, or return, and do this or that, may
be very pernicious: but if he be ordered by his master, he may be very
profitable against wolves and thieves.

. 44. Of the matter of mourning which the provocations of Gods wrath give.
2. THe maine point that Anger is in God, and wrath may come from him, gives
great matter of humiliation, in regard of the many great provocations thereof
day after day. We know that fire is very fierce where it finds matter to work
upon. Would it not thereupon much grieve and perplexe men, to see desperate
fellows in every house blowing up fire to make it catch hold on houses. More
desperate are impudent and impenitent sinners. For no fire so fierce, so
fearful as Gods wrath. No such means to kindle and inflame fire, as sin to
incense Gods wrath. No such danger and damage can come by any fire, as by the
wrath of God. Were not the patience of the Lord more then ordinary, whereby the
fire of his wrath is kept from flaming Ier 9. 1, 2. Tu hominem quidem
exacerbans, amicos rogas, and pecunia^ expendis, and multos absumis dies
accedens and supplicans: and sive semel, sive his, sive millies te repulerit
irritatus, non recedis, sed magis contendens majorem affer^ supplicationem. Deo
autem omnium exacerbato oscitamus, and recedimus, and deli^ijs, and ebrietati
vacamus, etc. Chrysostom ad Pop. Hom. 46.
out, our houses, our villages, our Cities, our nations, yea, the whole world,
and all therein would soon be utterly consumed. O let not the consideration of
Gods wrath be passed over with an unrelenting heart, or with dry eyes. I am
sure, if it be well weighed, and deeply laid to heart, it will give just
occasion to every one of us to cry out and say, Oh that mine eyes were waters,
and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the
many provocations of the wrath of the Lord. Oh that I had in the wilderness a
lodging of wayfairing men, that I might leave my people, and go from them: For
they are all desperately set to incense the wrath of the Lord more and more,
till they and all they have be brought to naught. Were the terror of the Lords
wrath better known and believed then it is, it would certainly restrain men's
excess in provoking the same: and make them more careful and diligent to
pacify it. If men be incensed, what pains is taken, what friends are used,
what cost is expended, what time is wasted with waiting to pacify them? If the
offender be once, twice, yea many times rejected, yet will he not give over. Is
any such thing done to pacify God?

To aggravate this point, let the Title whereby the Lord The terror of the
wrath of Jehovah. See The Churches Conquest on Exo. 17. 15.. 72. of this title
JEHOVAH. Prove. 19. 12.
is here set forth, be noted. It is JEHOVAH. The wrath of Jehovah: that is, the
wrath of that great God, who has his being of himself, who gives being to
all, on whom all depend, who has power to save, and to destroy, who can
inflict judgments that will make the stoutest to quake, that can cast body and
soul into hell. The Wiseman says, that The Kings wrath is like the roaring of
a Lion. Now consider, when a Lion has espied his prey, (suppose a Lamb, Kid,
or any such thing) and runs and roareth after it, how that silly prey
quaketh and trembles. The Lion has roared, who will not be afraid, Am. 3. 8.
says the Prophet?

Now if the wrath of a King (who is but a mortal man, who may soon be taken
away) who is not able to do what he will, be so terrible; what is the wrath of
the eternal, almighty Jehovah? The foresaid wise man says of the foresaid
wrath of a King, He that provokes him Prove. 20 2.
unto anger sins against his own soul, meaning his temporal life. But he
that provokes Jehovah unto anger, sins indeed against his own soul in the
uttermost Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei viuentis, offendere Creatorem,
recalcitrate Dominantis imperio, qui habet potestatem corpus and animam pouere
in gehennam. Bern Sermon. in festo Mar Magd.
extent that may be, even against his temporal, and eternal life. O then to
hear, or to see any evidence, as now we do, that wrath is gone from Jehovah,
how should it make us to tremble, to humble our selves, to fall down upon our
faces, as Moses and Aaron. 24. Prove. 16. 14.
here did, and to do all that may be to pacify the same. Where Solomon says,
The wrath of a King is as messengers of death, He adds, A wise man will
pacify it. Let us therefore show our selves wise, and be so far from
provoking and incensing the wrath of Jehovah, as we do to the uttermost what
lies in us, to pacify the same. For which there are 27. 30.
directions before prescribed.

. 45. Of the sins which most provoke Gods wrath.
3. IT is an especial point of wisdom to take due notice of those sins
which among others do most provoke Gods wrath: that we may know when to be most
humbled, what to be most watchful against, and against what most to pray. Gods
word gives us best direction herein. Out of it, I will endeavor to collect
such as heretofore have exceedingly incensed him, and caused him in wrath to
execute fearful judgments. They are these.

1. Idolatry. The reason annexed to the second Commandment Pergrave crimen est
idololatria. Ambr. Com. meant in Col. 3. Hinc critur om nis impictas. Aug de
ver^ Relig cap. 37.
gives evidence against this sin, that it exceedingly provokes Gods wrath.
The reason is this, 1 the Lord thy God am a jealous God. Pro. 6 34.
Idololatria^ saepe ac proprie Scriptura sornicationem vocat Aug. de Doct Chr.
lib. 3. cap. 8.
Jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in the day of
vengeance. It is a passion most properly incident to husbands, stirred up
against their wives, and against such as steal away their wives heart, and
commit adultery with them. But Ezekiel. 23 37. Hos. 2. 2.
idolatry is a spiritual adultery. For Ier. 31. 32. Hos. 2. 19.
God is as an husband to his people that profess his name. As adultery
therefore is the most capital crime that a wife can commit against an husband
( Mat 5 32.
thereby the matrimonial bond is broken) so idolatry against God. Judge 5. 8.
Idolaters choose other gods. So they Isa 42. 8.
give Gods highest honor to others. No marvel then that Deuteronomy. 9. 19. Numb 25.
3. Judge. 2. 13, 14.
the fire of Gods jealousy is inflamed against them. Deuteronomy. 6. 14, 15.
This motive against idolatry does Moses much press.

2. Profanation of sacred things, and times. Ezekiel. 43. 8.
The Prophet expressly notes this to be an especial cause that provoked God to
consume his people in his anger. Neh. 13. 18.
Ye bring (says Nehemiah) more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath.
Sacred times, places, and ordinances are in special manner for the honor of
God. To profane them is an high dishonor to God. Just cause there is
therefore for God to be angry with such.

3. Pollution of profession: as when Professors of the true Religion mix
themselves with profane persons, and join themselves with them in marriage,
society, amity, confederacy, etc. Yea, and every way fashion themselves like to
them, in speech, in gesture, in apparel, in pastimes, etc. Genesis 6. 3.
This so incensed Gods wrath against the old world, as he swept them all away
with a flood. 2 Chro. 19. 2
Wrath is said to come upon Iehosaphat from the Lord, for this very thing.
Deuteronomy. 7 4. Rev. 14 9, 10.
By fear of Gods wrath Gods people is often deterred from all such commixtion.
Profession of Gods name is a sacred Romans 2. 24.
thing: it engages God, and brings him to a part or a side. Ezekiel. 36. 20.
By polluting it, his sacred name is blasphemed.

4. Ingratitude, or a dis-respecting, despising, and vilifying of Gods mercies,
favors, and blessings. Thus Numb. 11, 6, 10.
The anger of the Lord was kindled greatly against Israel for their light
account of Manna. And Deuteronomy 32. 18, 19.
he abhorred them, because they were unmindfull of the rock that begat them:
and had forgotten God that formed them. Ingratitude is a sin hateful
Ingratitudinem prorsus odit any ma mea Peremp toria siquidem res est
ingratitudo, hostis gratiae, inimica salutis, Nhilita d^splicet Deo, etc. Bern
deEvang. 7. Panum Sermon 2.
to God and man. It makes God repent him of the kindness he has done: and
thereupon to alter his mind, and to turn favor into fury. On this ground 1 Samuel 15. 11.
it repented God that he had set up Saul to be King: And -- 16. 14.
The spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord
troubled him. Psalm 95. 10, 11.
By Isreal's ingratitude God was provoked in wrath to swear that they should
not enter into his rest. 2 Chro. 32. 25.
Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him: but his
heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, etc.

5. Magistrates abuse of their authority. Hos 5. 10.
The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound: therefore I will
power out my wrath upon them, says the Lord. 2 King. 23. 26.
The Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath wherewith his
wrath was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations that Manasheh
had provoked him withal. Psalm 82. 6. 2 Chro. 19. 6.
Magistrates are on earth as Gods: they bear his image, stand in his room,
are to execute his judgments. By their abuse of their authority God is highly
dishonored, and his image disgraced: so as he can not but manifest his
indignation against such.

6. Ministers perverting their function: and that by encouraging and
emboldening the wicked: and by discouraging and discountenancing the upright.
Ezekiel. 13. 12, 13.
The Prophet thus in the name of the Lord denounces Gods wrath against such
Ministers as build up their wall with untempered mortar, Quia lae^ati estis in
ruina servsrum meorum, cadem persecutio contra vos quoque venict, etc. Hier.
Comment. in Abd.
I will even rent it with a stormy wind in my fury: and there shall be an
overflowing shower in mine anger, and great hailestones in my fury to consume
it. Take instance of the fearful effects of Gods wrath against 1 Samuel 2. 29,
etc. -- 3. 12, etc.
Elies house. 2 Cor. 5. 20.
Ministers also of Gods Word do in another kind bear Gods image, stand in his
room, and are instructed with his counsels. By their perverting therefore of
their function God is much dishonored, and his wrath must needs be much
incensed.

7. Inhumanity, or trampling on such as are cast down. Ezekiel. 35. 5, 11.
Thus did Edom on Israel, they executed cruelty on them in the time of their
calamity, Therefore as I live, says the Lord, I will do even according to
thine anger, etc. On such a ground the Lord also thus in wrath menaceth the
Heathen, Zac. 1. 15.
I am sore displeased at the Heathen that are at ease: for I was but a little
displeased, and they helped forward the affliction. 2 Chro. 28. 6. 7, etc.
Pekah a King of Israel having slain many of the children of Judah, the
children of Israel took of all sorts, even women and children 200000 to carry
them away captives. But a Prophet of the Lord restrained their fury by this
speech, Deliver the captives again: for the fierce wrath of the Lord is upon
you. Such inhumanity, as it is in it self a most odious vice, so more then most
odious in his sight, who is a God of pity and compassion. Psalm. 69. 21, 24.
To them therefore, against such as in thirst gave vinegar to drink, he thus
cries, Power out thine indignation upon them, and let thy wrathful anger take
hold of them.

8. Conspiracy, and joint consent of all sorts in all manner of sins. Ier.
32. 31, 32.
This City (says the Lord of Jerusalem) has been to me a provocation of mine
anger, and of my fury, etc. Because of all the evil which they have done to
provoke me to anger, they, their Kings, their Princes, their Priests, and their
Prophets, and the men of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem. And in another
Prophet to like purpose thus says the Lord, Ezekiel. 22. 30, 31.
I sought for a man among them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the
gap before me for the land, that I should not destory it: but I found none.
Therefore have I powered out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed them
with the fire of my wrath. Genesis 18. 24, etc.
The integrity of some (though but a few among many wicked) is a means to
withold the wrath of him who will not slay the righteous with the wicked. But
when there is none to stand in the gap, how should his wrath be stayed?

9. Obstinacy: when men will not be reclaimed, but hate to be reformed. This
provoked God to say to his own Sicut obdurata corpora and dura non obsequuntur
manibus medicorum: sic and animae obdurate non obsequuntur verbo Dei. Chrysostom. in
Heb. 3. Hom. 6.
people, Ezekiel. 20. 21.
I would power out my fury upon them, to accomplish mine anger against them.
Obstinacy Isa. 5. 24, 25.
after God has given his Law and Word to his people, and given Numb. 16. 32,
35.
former evidences of his wrath against them, most incenseth Divine fury. 2 Chr.
36. 16. Peccantes non dolere magis Deum indignari facit and irasci, quam
peccare. Chrysostom. ad Pop. Hom. ^6. Cui deest fiducia, januam sibi rest piscendi
semolobfirmavit, and ad curriculum aditum interclusit. Chrysostom. pri. par. ad
Theod. laps.
They mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and mis-used his
Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was
no remedy. Not to be moved with sin, more incenseth God, then to sin.

10. Infidelity. By this men put away the only means of quenching the fire of
Gods wrath, Christ, his blood, his intercession. Ioh 3. 36. See more of this
sin in The whole armor of God, on Ephesians 6. 16. Treat. 2. Part 6.. 34.
He that believes not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides
on him. This sin is directly against the Gospel, against the mercy, truth,
power, and other like attributes of God. Numb. 20. 12 Deuteronomy 3 26. Mafignus nihil
non tentat, quo nobis dissidentem cogitationem inserat. Chrysostom prior. Par. ad
Theod.
For this was God angry even with Moses, and suffered him not to enter into the
land of promise. The evil one every way assayes to work dissidence in men.
Thus dealt he with Adam, and prevailed, (Genesis 3. 1.) Thus dealt he with Christ,
but naught availed, Mat. 4. 3, 4.

11. Impenitency. To such an one says the Apostle, Romans 2. 5. De nulla re sic
irascitur Deus, quemodo si peccator superbiat, and erectus ac rigidus non sera.
tur in sletum, nec misericordiam postulet pro delicto. Hier. Comment. l. 3. in
Ephesians. 5.
After thine hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up unto thy self
wrath against the day of wrath. Great is that mercy that by the Gospel is
offered to sinners. That thereby God may not be thought to boulster up sinners,
Repentance is required. Therefore he that came to save sinners, says, Mat. 9.
13. Impoenitentia est delietum maximum, and blasphemia irremissibi lis Bern.
super Cant. Sermon. 38.
I am come to call sinners to repentance. To live under the Gospel of Christ,
and to live in sin, is to pervert the end of Christ's coming, to abuse mercy,
to scandalize the Word of grace. What then can be expected of such, but wrath?
Justly may it be accounted the greatest sin.

12. Apostasy. By this men withdraw themselves from God. Heb. 10. 38.
In them therefore God can have no pleasure. They depart from the comfortable
sunshine of his mercy, and cast themselves into the scalding heat of his
wrath. Moses foretelling the fearful judgments which should befall the
Israelites, as evidences and effects of Gods wrath, shows that every one
could tell the cause thereof. For when all nations should ask, Deuteronomy. 29. 24,
25. Discedens a Domino salutem haberenon potest, Ambr. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 15.
Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this land? What means the heat of
this great anger? Then men shall say, because they have forsaken the covenant
of the Lord, etc. Apostates disgrace the Religion and profession whence they
fall, offend the faithful Professors thereof, grieve the good Spirit of God,
and open the mouths of the enemies of the Gospel against their Profession,
and so give great cause of wrath. Yea, departing away from God, who is the Lord
of life, they cannot have salvation.

. 46. Of the causes of Gods wrath among us.
THat it may appear what just cause the Lord has to power out the vials of
his wrath among us, it will be a seasonable task to take a view of our own
times, and to observe whether the forenamed sins may be found among us. For
too too truly it may now be said of this Land, of this City, There is wrath
gone out from the Lord, the Plague is begun.

In prosecuting this task I will follow the order before Sins provoking Gods
anger rise among us. As, 1. Idolatry.
propounded; and bring those sins which have been proved formerly to have
provoked Gods wrath, to our times.

1. For idolatry, though the bright light of the Gospel has for Since the 17
of Nov. 1558.
many years dispelled the thick cloud of Popery, a detestable idolatry: yet
in many places that cloud gathers, and thickneth again. I pray God it
increase not as 1 Kin. 18. 44.
that cloud which Eliahs servant espied: which though at first it were but a
little one like a man's hand, yet it grew to cover the whole sky, and to cause
much rain. Too many seducers are among us: too great countenance is given to
them. We Ministers have need to inculcate this Apostolical prohibition, 1 Cor.
10. 14.
Flee from idolatry.

2. For profanation of holy things and times, he is blind 2. Prosanation
that discerns it not: he himself is too profane, that is not in his
righteous soul vexed thereat. Prayer, preaching, Sacraments are altogether
neglected, or very carelessly, observed. As for the Lords Day, it is in many
places by many Persons made the Devils day. It is not only in act profaned,
but the profanation thereof too much countenanced, justified.

3. For Pollution of profession, what advantage is thereby 3. Pollution of
Profession.
given to our adversaries. Thence they take occasion of upbraiding to us our
reformation. Yea, the profane among us are hereby justified. For many
Professors are every way as lewd and licentious as they: as vain in their
attire, as corrupt in their speeches, as wanton in their gesture, as deceitful
in their dealing, as uncharitable in their censures, as unmercifull to the
poor, etc.

4. For ungrateful vilifying Gods mercies, I think our 4. Ingratitude.
people exceed therein the Israelites that dwelt in the wilderness. Heavenly
Manna, the Word of life, that plentifully falls among us, is by
superstitious, schismatic, and profane persons loathed. Superstitious
persons wish for Queen Mary's days again. Schismatiques wish there had been
no reformation unless it had been better. The profane cry out of too much
preaching.

5. For Magistrates abusing their authority, all the complaints 5. Magistrates
abuses.
of the Prophets may too justly be taken up against many of ours, if at least
this were a fit place to make complaints of their bribe-taking, perverting
justice, oppressing the innocent, using their power to their own turns, etc.

6. For Ministers perverting their function, many among 6. Ministers faults.
us exceed the false prophets among the Jews. None greater discouragers of the
upright. None greater animaters of the profane. The greatest zeal which they
use to show, is in their bitter invectives against such as make most conscience
of sin. They are too great companions with the baseer and lewder sort.

7. For trampling upon such as are fallen, so inhumane are 7. In humanity Am 6.
6.
many, as they do not only stretch themselves upon their beds, and drink wine
in bowls, while their brethren ^e groaning under sore afflictions: or (like
the Priest and Levite) pass by without succouring such as are not able to
help themselves: Luke 10 31, 32. Job 4 6. Luke 1. 1. 2 Samuel 16. 7, 8
but like Jobs friends charge them with hypocrisy, or like the Jews account
them the greatest sinners, or as Shemei, rail on them: and so give them
(instead of a cup of consolation) vinegar and gall to drink.

8. For conspiracy and consent in sin, when was there more, 8. Conspiracy
then among us. Great ones, mean ones, old, young, male, female, Magistrates,
subjects, Ministers, people, rich, poor, masters, servants, all of one mind to
disgrace integrity and to countenance impiety and iniquity. Insomuch as the
Prophets complaint is too truly verified among us, Isa. 59. 15.
He that refraineth from evil makes himself a prey.

9. For obstinacy in sin, who can open his mouth wide 9. Obstinacy.
enough against men's stubbornenesse. They are impudent and stiff-necked. They
have a whores forehead and will not be Ezekiel. 2. 4. Ier. 3. 3.
ashamed. They bid a kind of defiance to God himself. As they abuse his
mercies, so they despise his judgments. What swearer, what blasphemer, what
drunkard, what adulterer, what fornicatour, what oppressor, what extortioner,
what usurer, what deceiver is reformed by this Plague? So obstinate are people,
as God had need to make the faces of his Ministers strong against their
foreheads. Ezekiel. 3 8, 9.


10. For Infidelity, we Ministers have too great cause to cry out, Who has
believed our report? Were not this sin 10. Infidelity, Isa. 53. 1.
so fast fixed in men's hearts as it is, much more comfort would be received
from the Ministry of the Gospel, and much better obedience yielded thereto.
The Apostle gives this reason of the small profit that was reaped by the
Gospel, It was not mixed with faith in them that heard it. True faith has a
double work where it is kindly wrought. Heb 4 2. Faiths double work.
1. In general, it persuades the heart of the truth of Gods Word. 2. In
particular, it brings the heart to apply that truth to it self, as a truth
which concerns him. The small profit that many reap by Gods Word, the little
use that they make thereof, shows how infidelity bears sway in them. Thus
it comes to pass that they are like the children in the market, that neither
danced to them that piped, nor lamented with them that mourned. Nor promises,
nor Mat 11. 16, 17.
threatenings, nor mercies, nor judgments work upon them.

11. For impenitency, It cannot be denied but that many, yea most, are so
settled on their sins, as they hate to be reformed. 11. Impenitency.
Where are true fruits of repentance to be found? Where shame, where sorrow for
sin? Where turning from sin? Men rather grow worse and worse. Gods judgments
harden their Tantam nactus Pharao lengani mitate^ extrema^ de omnibus dedit
poenas. Chrysostom ad Pop. Hom. 46.
hearts, as they did the heart of Pharaoh. But he paid thoroughly for abuse of so
much patience. If by any occasion their consciences be any whit rubbed, and they
brought through fear and anguish to promise amendment, they quickly show that
no true repentance was wrought in them: But it is happened unto them according to
the true proverb, The dog is turned to his 2 Pet. 2. 22.
own vomit again: and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.

12. For Apostasy, if first we consider inward apostasy 12. Apostasy. Inward.
(which is Rev. 2. 4, 5. 2 These. 2. 10. 11.
a decaying inwardly in former love of truth) too great and just cause of
complaining is given. Many have left their first love, and become Rev. 3. 16.
Outward Apostasy.
lukewarm, as the Laodiceans. Thus a ready way is made to outward apostasy:
which is an open renouncing of the very profession of true Religion, as this
whole land did in Queen Mary's reign. It is much to be feared, that if a like
occasion should be given, a like apostasy would follow.

If these, and other like provocations of Gods wrath among us be duly weighed,
we shall see cause enough to confess that Gods wrath is justly gone out
against us, and that we have deservedly pulled this Plague upon our own pates.

It remains therefore that we thoroughly humble our selves: that we lay open our
soars before our merciful God: that we faithfully promise amendment: that we
give evidence of the entire purpose of our heart in promising, by an answerable
performance. But above all, for the present, that we crave mercy and pardon of
God through Jesus Christ, that he may offer up his sweet incense to pacify his
Father, and cause his destroying Angel, to stay his hand.

. 47. Of the kind of plague here meant.
THe Effect of the forementioned wrath that came from the Lord, is thus
expressed, THE PLAGVE IS BEGVN.

The word translated, (...)
plague is a general word, that signifies any heavy stroke of God. The root
whence it is derived signifies to strike. Exo. 21. 35.
It is applied to an oxes striking, or pushing to death, so to other like
strikings: but most commonly to Gods striking of wicked men with some
extraordinary judgment. As where David said of Saul, (...) Sam. 26. 10. (...)
The Lord shall smite him: meaning so as to destroy him. This word is Exo. 8.
2. -- 12. 23. -- 12. 27. Ios. 24. 5.
often used of Gods smiting the Egyptians when they held the Israelites among
them as bondslaves. Yea, such a word as Exo. 9. 14. (...)
the word in my text is used to set out all those judgments which God brought
upon the Egyptians, called plagues. The word PLAGVE in our vulgar acception
imports an infectious mortal disease, otherwise styled pestilence. Our
English word, plague, seems to be taken from the Plaga.
Latin, and that from the (...) percutio. (...).
Greek: in both which languages it is usually put for a stroke, a blow, a
stripe, a wound, etc. Figuratively therefore, a special put for the general,
it signifies the pestilence. In the Scripture there are also (...) tetigit,
percussit. Inde nomen, (...) plaga. Exo. 11. 1. (...) percussit. Inde nomen
(...) plaga. Deuteronomy. 28. 59.
other words to set out that disease which we commonly call the plague: and
that as general as this, properly signifying strokes, and scourgings: so as
they all imply that a plague is an extraordinary stroke, or scourge of God.
Yet there is in Hebrew (...) cum duplici segol.
a word that is more properly put for the plague: which our English does
commonly translate pestilence. It is the word that God used, when he offered to
David the choice of one of these three judgments, Sword, Famine, Pestilence.
(...) in Piel significat evertere. Inde nomen (...) pestis, quia multi caaem
evertuntur.
The root from whence this word is derived signifies to overthrow, or
destroy. And experience shows that by the plague many are destroyed. Sic
Latin pestis, quia pessundat.
In Latin pestis imports as much, whence the Scots call this sickness the
pest. Sic Graece (...) desicio Quia facit defectum.
The Greek word also intends the like. This latter word pestilence, is more
restrained to one kind of disease, then the former translated plague. Every
pestilence is a plague, because it is an extraordinary stroke and judgment of
God. But every plague is not a pestilence: for all the plagues of Egypt were
not pestilences.

As for the plague here mentioned, though it be not expressed under (...)
that word which properly signifies pestilence: yet was it questionless a
pestilence. For, 1. 2 Samuel 24. 21, 25. (...)
Such a word as this is attributed to the pestilence that in David's time
destroyed 70000 within the space of three days. 2. It was infectious: which
was one reason why Numb. 16. 48
Aaron stood betwixt the dead and the living: that he might keep the living
from being infected by the dead. 3. It was extraordinarily mortal. For Numb.
16. 49.
in a short space there died of it 14700.


Quest. If so many died, how is it said, that the plague is begun?

Answ. In the very beginning of the plague, on a sudden, so many were
destroyed, even as at once. Thus in a very short time, on a sudden there were
found 185000 dead in the Camp of the Assyrians, lying in siege against
Jerusalem.

In these words, The plague is begun, is an effect of Gods wrath.

More particularly we may observe 1. The Matter propounded. The plague 2. The
Manner of expressing it, is begun.


Hence arise two observations. I. A plague is an evidence of Gods wrath. II.
God can make the beginning of a judgment terrible.
The connection of these two clauses, There is wrath gone out from the Lord, The
plague is begun, give proof of the former.

This intimation of the beginning of the plague, Aarons speed in offering
incense, the virtue of that speed, that the plague was stayed, and yet 14700 to
be dead, gives evidence to the latter observation.

. 48. Of a plague as an effect of Gods wrath.
I. See. 47. Indignationem Dei pestilentia subsequitur. Hieron. Comment. in
Isay. lib. 4. cap. 19.
A Plague is an evidence of Gods wrath. The plague which upon David's numbering
the people was inflicted on Israel, is expressly noted to be an effect of Gods
wrath. For first it is said, for demonstration of the cause of that judgment,
that 2 Samuel 24. 1.
The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel: and again that 1 Chro. 21.
7.
God was displeased with David's numbering the people, and Therefore he smote
Israel. Deu. 32. 22, 23.
Where God says, Fire is kindled in my wrath, he adds as an effect thereof,
I will send plagues among them. Ezekiel. 5. 16, 17
There are three arrows of Gods wrath mentioned in Scripture; and the plague
is one of these. The other two are sword and famine.

General and extraordinary judgments are such as always come from the wrath of
God. Instance the judgments which were inflicted on the Israelites in the
wilderness. They were general, as in handling the next doctrine we shall
show: and extraordinary, as the several kinds of them do show. And they are
often noted to come from the wrath of the Lord, Numb. 11. 1.
The Lords anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt among them, and
consumed them. -- 33.
The wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the
people with a very great plague. -- 25. 4.
The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel: and the Lord said unto
Moses, take all the heads of the people, and hang them up, etc. But not to
insist on more particulars, the Psalmist renders this as a general cause of
all the judgments that were inflicted on them, Psalm. 106. 40. A plague is
general and extraordinary.
The wrath of the Lord was kindled against his people, insomuch that he
abhorred his own inheritance. Now experience shows that a plague is both a
general and an extraordinary judgment. General it is, for it uses to spread
far and near, from person to person, from house to house, from street to
street, from town to town, from city to city: and it takes away all of all
sorts, young, old, male, female, weak, strong, mean ones, great ones, etc.
Extraordinary it is, because the immediate hand of God in sending it, in
increasing it, in lessening it, in taking it away, is more conspicuously
discerned then in other judgments. It is observable to this purpose, that when
David chose the plague, he thus expresses his mind, 2 Samuel 24. 14.
Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord.

. 49. Of afflictions as effects of wrath or love.
Quest. ARe not diseases, and other kinds of judgments sometimes sent for
trial, and for other like ends, which are demonstrations of the wisdom, love,
and care of God toward his people, as well as in wrath and vengeance to
destroy them.

Answ. We must distinguish, 1. Betwixt particular or private afflictions, and
general or public. 2. Betwixt kinds of public and general afflictions. 3.
Betwixt the persons on whom calamities are brought, being of different
dispositions though they be mixed together in the same place for co-habition.
4. Betwixt the cause of a judgment, and the effect and fruit of it.


1. Particular and private afflictions are often in love, by reason of Gods wise
and tender care over his children, inflicted on them. Heb. 12. 6.
For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives. And -- 10. See the profitable ends of afflictions in The whole
armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 11.. 2. and Ephesians. 6. 15.. 13.
God chasteneth us for our profit. But we read not of any public and general
judgment, which came not from the wrath of God. Many instances of the
affirmative, that they were effects of wrath, were given before: and the
Scripture affoordeth many more: but not one to the contrary.

2. There are common calamities that fall on all of all sorts: and there are
other more special, that are intended only against professors of the true
Religion: as persecutions made by enemies of the Gospel. 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13
These may be for trial, to their honor that suffer. But a plague is not of
that kind.

3. When public and general judgments come from wrath against sinful
nations, cities, and other societies, there may be some righteous ones mixed
among those wicked ones: and by reason of that mixture they may taste of the
bitterness of that cup that is given to the wicked to drink. Yet the Lord can
so sanctify that See. 15. Sive famen, sive bellum, sive aliud quodcunque
molestum inducat Deus, ex benignitate, and multa dilectione hoc efficit Chrysostom
ad Pop Hom. 7.
common judgment to the Saints that partake thereof, as that which is an
effect of wrath to others, may be a fruit of Gods love to them. Thus a plague
may be sent in wrath against a society, and yet therein Gods love be manifested
to his Saints, either in preserving them from it, or taking them by it to
heaven. In relation to such persons we may truly say, that whether God send
famine, or war, or any other trouble, he does it of his goodness and love.

4. A judgment may at first be in wrath inflicted: and yet upon the sense of
the smart thereof people may be so humbled, and brought to such repentance, as
the nature of that judgment be altered, and prove to be an evidence of Gods
love. Yea such reformation may be wrought thereby, as that calamity (though
general and extraordinary) prove very profitable, and an evidence of Gods
fatherly care over such a people whom he has so purged. 2 Chro. 33. 11, etc.
Instance that fearful judgment that was laid on Israel in Manassehs time.
This latter fruit of Gods love makes not against the former evidence of his
wrath. For on such occasions God is said to repent him of the evil which he
has sent. He was angry: but his anger is turned into favor.

The conclusion then remains true, that a plague (as first sent to a people)
is an evidence of Gods wrath.

. 50. Of the duties to be done when a plague is begun.
A Plague being an effect of Gods wrath, for staying the plague means for
pacifying Gods wrath must be used. So did David. He humbled himself, confessed
his sin, and that with a penitent heart, and offered sacrifice to God. Apply
to this judgment of a plague the directions 4, 5, 6, 10.
before given. And because Moses gives here a direction when this plague
begun, be careful betimes, even at the beginning of a plague to seek to
assuage Gods anger. Hereof also 30.
before. And that ye may be the more conscionable herein, know that plagues
come not by chance, come not by any ordinary course and means. They come from
Gods wrath. Let the directions therefore before given for pacifying Gods wrath
be rather observed, then any physical directions. I deny not but that they
are lawful, needful, useful. But this which I speak of, is more lawful,
needful, and useful. All other without this is nothing at all. In all
diseases Gods help is especially to be sought. It was Asa his fault, that 2
Chro. 16. 12
In his disease he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians. If in all
diseases, most of all in this that is such an immediate effect of Gods wrath,
The Lord is to be sought unto. And so much the rather, because the plague
(among other evidences of Gods wrath) is a most fearful one, as. 71. 72.
hereafter is showed.

. 51. Of the terror of the beginning of Gods judgments.
II. See 47.
GOD can make the beginning of a judgment terrible. I deny not but that the
Lord does often times begin very mildly and gently: as he dealt with the
Israelites in the wilderness, bringing them Exo 15. 23.
to bitter waters, making them to feel -- 16. 3.
the want of bread, and -- 17. 1.
water, (not starving them) and Deuteronomy. 25. 18.
suffering Amalek to smite the hindmost of them: to try if they would learn to
cleave close unto the Lord. But afterward his strokes were more heavy upon
them. Yet he can, and often does make the beginning of his judgments very
terrible. At the first raising of the flood to drown the world, Genesis 7. 11.
All the fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the windows of
heaven. Was it not a terrible sight to behold the waters fall down from
heaven, and rise up out of the earth so fast as they did? Immediately upon the
Genesis 19. 23, 24.
Suns rising on the earth, the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone
and fire from the Lord out of heaven. How fearful a spectacle was that even
at the first sight thereof. The Egyptian plagues give also evidence hereof. So
does the drowning of Pharaoh and his host in the red sea. For while they
confidently pursued the Israelites, supposing to get over as safe as the Exo.
14. 24, 25
Israelites did, on a sudden The host of the Egyptians was troubled, and their
chariot wheels taken off. In a word, storms so arose, and waters so fell upon
them, as they were all soon drowned. Such were many of Gods judgments in the
wilderness. Such 2 King. 19. 35
the destruction of the Camp of the Assyrians: Such Luke 13. 1, 4
their death Whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices, and theirs on
whom the tower of Siloe fell: and Act. 12. 23.
Herod's; and many other like judgments.

Gods almighty power makes his judgments to be very terrible. His infinite
wisdom makes him know when it is fit, at the first, and in the beginning, to
manifest his terror: answerably he does so. For in wisdom he orders all his
actions: and that so as may most make to the glory of his name. Herein Ephesians. 3.
10.
his wisdom is manifested to be manifold, in that he can sometimes by degrees
increasing his judgments, and sometimes by pouring them out at once bring
greatest glory to his name. For by the former kind of proceeding with men, he
gives evidence of his patience and long-suffering, in that though he be
provoked to power out the vials of his anger, yet he is slow to wrath, and
would not that men should perish in his anger, but rather by the beginning of
it, be brought to repentance. By the latter kind, he gives instance of his
terror when he has to do with obdurate, and obstinate sinners.

Having to do with such a God, as can make even the beginning of his judgment
so terrible, how watchful ought we to be, that we provoke him not at once to
power out the vials of his wrath against us? This severity is usually executed
after contempt of milder proceedings (as has been. 22.
before proved) or upon the committing of grievous sins that cry up to heaven
for vengeance, as the sins of Genesis 18. 20.
Sodom did: or upon obdurate and obstinate persons that Psalm. 50. 17, 22
hate instruction. So as men themselves are the cause that Gods strokes are so
heavy. If a Lion that at first tears all to pieces, if a flaming fire that
quickly turns all to ashes, if a raging storm that soon oversets ship with
all that is in it, if other like violent evils that afford no time of seeking
help and remedy be much feared: should not the violent terror of the Lord be
much more feared?

The inference of the beginning of the plague upon the direction to make an
atonement: and that as an enforcement of the reason (as has been showed
before,. 40.) affoords this Doctrine. Gods wrath in the beginning of a
judgment is to be pacified. But hereof we had occasion to treat before.. 32.

. 52. Of the meaning and method of the 47 Verse.
NVMB. 16. 47.And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the
congregation: and behold the plague was begun among the people: and he put
incense, and made an atonement for the people.
THe forementioned charge for staying the plague is here noted to be put in
execution: for it is expressly said, that Aaron took as Moses commanded. That
is, He took a censer, and put fire therein from off the altar; For these are
the things which Moses commanded in the former verse. This word, (...) dibbar
cum dagesh in (...).
commanded is fitly translated. For though usually the word, in the first
conjugation import no more then to speak. Yet In Piel quae dadeshatur.
in the second, an emphasis is added by a doubled letter: and so, especially if
the Person that spoke, Moses, the Prince and chief Governor; and the Matter
spoken, which was a Divine direction for staying the plague, be duly weighed,
it will appear to have the force of a command.

As Aarons obedience in the general substance is commended: so also in the
particular circumstances, which is implied in this particle (...) quemadmodum.
AS, or according to that which. So much the Hebrew imports.

Besides this general, that Aaron took as Moses commanded, some particulars
are expressed: For where Moses charged to go quickly, it is here said that
Aaron (...)
ran, which imports the greatest speed that man can make: for he has not
wings to fly withal. It is added, (...)
Into the midst of the congregation, namely where the plague was hottest, to
show that fear of infection kept not him from executing his function.

And where this reason is rendered by Moses (The plague is begun) to move Aaron
to make speed, the same reason is here again repeated, and (...) and ^cce.
a note of attention prefixed before it (Behold the plague is begun among the
people) to show that he was the rather thereby stirred to make the speed he
made, and to do the deed he did.

Where further Moses commanded to put incense on the fire that Aaron took from
the altar in his censer, it is here said that He put incense.

And to show Gods approbation and acceptance of that which Aaron so did
according to the charge given him, where Moses said Make an atonement for
them, to give Aaron to understand the reason of the charge he gave him: it is
here said, He made an atonement for the people: Declaring thereby that the end
which Moses aimed at was accomplished.

The Sum of this Verse is A remedy used for redress of a plague.


This is 1 Generally propounded, And Aaron took as Moses commanded.

2. Particularly exemplified. Wherein there are four observable points. 1. The
manner of doing what was done: Implied in this particle AS. And expressed in
two branches. 1. The speed he made. He ran 2. The courage he had. Into the
midst of the congregation.
2. The Motive, which moved him the rather to do what he did. The plague was
begun among the people. This is further amplified by a note of attention, or
observation, Behold. 3. The Matter, or thing which was done: He put incense. 4.
The End, or Effect, and Efficacy thereof (And made an atonement) amplified by
the Parties for whom, For the people.


Five useful instructions (besides those which were noted in the charge on the
46 Verse, whereof many of them might be here noted again) are here offered to
our due consideration.

I. Obedience is to be yielded to the good directions of pious Governors.
Moses was a pious Governor: his direction was a very good one. Aaron yielded
obedience thereto: which is here commended, and recorded as a pattern for us
to follow. II. Obedience is to be ordered according to the charge given. Not
only in the general substance, but also in the particular circumstances. This
particle (...)
AS imports as much. So do the particular branches of Aarons obedience, being
answerable to the particulars of Moses his charge. III. Haste must be made to
relieve such as are in distress. When Aaron hears that a plague was among the
people, he runs to succor them. IIII. A good calling may make one bold in
danger. Aaron was a Priest, and by virtue thereof to offer for the people. He
was commanded of Moses to go to the congregation: Therefore he is bold to run
into the midst of the congregation, where the plague was begun. V. Gods
judgments are duly to be observed. The note of observation, BEHOLD, imports
as much.
Of putting incense, and making atonement. See before,. 25, 27, 31, 36, 37,
38. 39.

. 53. Of obedience to Governors directions.
I. See 52. Cum omni vigilantia omne licitum adimpleat. Maxim circa suos
superiores s^udeat id ipsum observare. Bern. in Form. honest, vitae.
OBedience is to be yielded to the good directions of pious Governors. I say
good, such as are lawful and warrantable, because such an one was the
direction here given by Moses, and because if men's directions or commandments
be evil, such as 1 Samuel 22. 17.
Saul's was unto his servants to slay the Priests of the Lord, and as Act 4. 18.
the Rulers was unto the Apostles, not to speak at all, nor to teach in the
name of Jesus, then this Apostolical rule takes place, Acts 5. 29.
We ought to obey Godrather then men. Where further this attribute, pious, is
inserted, it is not to exclude other Governors, as if the commandments or
directions of none but pious Governors were to be obeyed. For Romans 13. 1. etc
Ephesians. 6. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 1. Tit. 2. 9 -- 3. 1.
the Apostles, that wrote to Christian subjects and servants that were under
Heathen Governors 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 18. -- 3. 1.
and Masters, exhorted to obey such, namely in the Lord, so far forth as they
obey not in things forbidden by God, or any way against his will. ( The whole
armor of God. Treat. 1. 6, 96 and Treat. 3.. 51. and Treat. 7.. 38.
Whereof I have elsewhere spoken moreat large.) Yet where Governors are pious,
obedience ought so much the rather to be yielded to them: as the Apostle
advises, where he says, 1 Timothy 6. 2.
They that have believing masters, let them the rather do them service, because
they are faithful. Such an one was Moses, to whose charge Aaron here yielded
obedience. And therefore this attribute, pious, is here inserted. Of this
general point I have treated in The Churches Conquest, on Exo. 17. 10.. 36.

. 54. Of ordering obedience in circumstances aright.
II. See. 52. Obedite ad omne opus bonum. Si bonum est quod praecipit praeses
jubentis obsequere voluntati. Sin malum, etc. Hier Comment. in Tit. 3.
OBedience is to be yielded according to the charge given. In such charges as
God gives, or by faithful Ministers are given from God, this holds good
without any limitation. In charges given by men it must be limited and
restrained by such circumstances as are not against God and his Word.

For the former kind of charges and directions which are Divine, these phrases
of Deuteronomy. 5. 32. -- 17. 20. -- 28. 14. Ios. 1. 7. -- 23. 6. Pro. 4. 27.
Not turning to the right hand or the left: of Number. 22. 18.
not going beyond the word of the Lord to do less or more, or -- 24. 13.
to do good or bad of ones own mind, imply a precise cleaving, and close
holding to Gods Word, so as we swarve from it in nothing, no not in
circumstances. That first phrase of not turning to the right hand or to the
left, implies that Gods Word is as a right way wherein only we must walk to
attain unto happiness: and that being in that way, we may not turn out of it
on any side, any whither. The phrase is used in that promise which the
Israelites made to Edom when they desired to pass through his land. Numb. 20 17.
Let us pass (say they) through thy country: we will not pass through the
fields or through the vineyards, neitherwill we drink of the water of the
wells: we will go by the Kings high way: we will not turn to the right hand
nor to the left, until we have passed thy borders. They hereby profess to
keep themselves only in the highway: and not at any time any where to step
out of it, no not with mind of returning into it again. Thus it imports that
it is not enough in some things to follow Gods direction, and so to walk in
his way: and in other things to swerve from his direction, and so to walk out
of it; but in all things we must follow it. Yea though there be occasions of
sundry sorts, some enticing us one way, others another way, some to the right
hand, some to the left, some more fair in show then others, yet ought we not
to yield to any of them. This charge given to Moses ( Exo 25. 40
Look that thou make them after their pattern, which was showed thee in the
mount) has respect not only to the general matter and substance, but also to
particular manner and circumstances. So do all those Epithites which in Divine
directions and commandments are used to set out the manner of performing
things required.

Josiah did herein testify his respect to God and his Word, 2 King. 22. 2.
He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and turned not aside to
the right hand or to the left: which is -- 23. 25.
afterward thus more fully expressed, He turned to the Lord with all his heart,
and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the Law of
Moses.

For directions and charges which men that are in authority over us, do give,
the forementioned phrase is applied to them. Where God appointed Judges over
his people to decide matters of controversy, he ordained that his people
should do Deuteronomy. 17. 11.
according to the judgment of those Judges, and not decline from the sentence
which they should show, to the right hand or to the left. Ios. 1. 17.
The Israelites profess that they had hearkened unto Moses in all things: and
promise so to hearken unto Joshua.

To yield such obedience to Gods charge, in the matter and manner, in the
substance and circumstances thereof, is a real acknowledgement, not of his
Sovereignty only, and power to command, but of his wisdom also in ordering of
his commands so as good heed is to be given to every circumstance thereof: not
one, no not the least of them being in vain.

This also manifests a very dutiful respect to God, to be conscionable in
performing whatsoever he manifests to be Ne tractemus quare Deus unumquodque
praeceperit; sed quodcunque viderit esse mandatum, hoc pia men's hominis implere
festinet. Hier Comment. in Eccl. 8.
his will: whether to us it seem substantial or circumstantiall. It shows
that we humbly can submit our thoughts to the counsel of God, when we question
not his charge, but readily do whatsoever is commanded.

Such a subjection to our Governors is an outward demonstration of the respect
we bear to that place wherein God has set them over us, and to that authority
which he has given them. They that obey only in such things as themselves
think substantial and weighty, may seem to obey rather for the matter, then
for authority sake: and they that neglect or refuse to observe the
circumstances given in charge, show that they think themselves wiser then
their Governors; and better know how to distinguish betwixt needful, and
not-needfull matters, then their Governors; which favors too rankely of
pride and presumption.

. 55. Of the danger of scanty obedience.
1. MAny men's obedience is hereby discovered to be very scanty and faulty,
especially in relation to Divine directions and commandments: even the
obedience of such as think highly of that they have done. Instance Saul's
obedience. He, it seems, was well conceited of his obedience, when he met
Samuel with this congratulation, 1 Samuel 15. 13.
Blessed be thou of the Lord: I have performed the comman dement of the Lord.
Yet Samuel challenges him of -- 19.
disobedience, and of -- 23.
rebellion. Saul performed the -- 3.
substance of Gods charge: for he -- 7.
smote the Amalakites. But he failed in the -- 3.
extent of that charge, he did not utterly destroy all that they had: he -- 15.
spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen. This took away the glory,
comfort, and benefit of his general obedience. His reward was the reward of
rebellion. 1 Samuel 15. 23.
It cost him his kingdom. Gods indignation against failing in such things as
foolish man may count circumstances, is manifested in the example of that 1
King. 13. 1, etc.
Man of God which was sent to Jeroboam. He faithfully delivered his whole
message: and though the King invited him to tarry and refresh himself, yet he
would not, because the Lord had forbidden him so to do. Yet because afterward
he believed another Prophet against that part of Gods charge, and went back
with him to eat and to drink in his house, it cost him his life: a Lion met
him, and slew him.

Both the substance and circumstances of a charge are grounded on the same
authority. To fail in either of them is to transgress his will that enjoined
the one as well as the other. No marvel then that the doing of one be
blemished by omitting the other.

. 56. Of due respect to every branch of that which is given us in charge.
2. IT behooves us wisely and heedfully to take due and diligent notice of
every charge that is given us in charge, of the particular branches thereof,
and of all the circumstances appertaining thereto, that by a conscionable
observation of them all, we may show our selves Heb. 3. 2.
faithful to him that has appointed us, as God says of Moses: Numb. 12. 7.
He was faithful in all mine house. This is honorable to him that gives the
charge, to be in every part and particle thereof obeyed. This therefore will
also be acceptable to him. In which respects it cannot but be very comfortable
and advantageable to the party himself that performs the obedience. This was
it wherewith Hezekiah comforted himself on his sick Isa 38. 3.
bed: and whereby he was emboldened to call upon God even to reverse that
sentence of death which he had given out against him. For the perfect heart
which he mentioned in his prayer, was that impartial respect which he had to
every thing given him in charge by the Lord. A perfect heart in Scripture
phrase is an entire heart, or the whole heart. And that heart which has
respect to the whole will of God, so far as it is made known unto him, is
most properly the whole heart. If any object that a perfect heart implies a
sincere heart: I answer, that an especial point of sincerity consists in the
foresaid entireness.

. 57. Of speed in relieving the distressed.
III. Sec. 52.
HAste must be made to relieve such as are in distress. When Genesis 14. 15.
Abraham heard that his brother Lot was taken by the enemies, he quickly
gathered an army together before the enemy could escape, and not tarying for
day light, marched by night. It appears that 1 Samuel 11. 11.
Saul did so for the succor of Iabesh Gilead. For he came into the midst of
the host of the enemies in the morning watch: so as he must needs march in the
night time. When the Shunemite saw her son to be dead, but withal was
persuaded that by the Prophet Elisha he might be restored to life, she says to
her husband, 2 King 4. 22. (...) and curram.
Send with me I pray thee, one of the young men, and one of the asses, that I
may RVN to the Man of God. Ioh 4. 49.
The noble man that said to Christ, Sir come down ere my child die, intended
that he should make all the haste he could. So did he that said, Mar. 9. 22.
If thou caust do any thing have compassion on us and help us. Luke 15. 20.
Thus the Father of the Prodigal seeing his son afar off ragged and
ragged, He had compassion, and RAN and fell on his neck.

Thus will succor intended come the more seasonably: thus may it be the more
profitable and beneficial. By making haste much danger (which delaying and
putting off help causes) is often prevented. This both Martha and Ioh 11. 21.
32.
Mary intended, when they said to Jesus, Lord if thou had been here my
brother had not died. If Christ could only have healed the sick, and not also
have raised the dead, that which they said had been to purpose.

. 58. Of the danger of delaying succor.
1. GReat is the inhumanity of them that put off opportunities of affoording
succor to such as are in distress. It is directly against the rule of
charity, that is so affected with a brothers misery, as it will not suffer him
to lie therein a moment beyond the time that it is able to release him. The
wiseman expressly forbids all delay in showing mercy, saying, Say not to thy
neighbor, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give: when thou have it
by Pro. 3. 28.
thee. Good purposes are often times brought to naught by such delays. For at
first sight, or other knowledge of ones misery the bowels of another are moved,
and thereat he purposes to afford him that is in misery the best help he
can. But by putting it off for that present, his compassion is cooled, and his
purpose thereupon altered, and so no succor affoorded. Yea by delaying help,
though the purpose of doing ones best for help remain, help may come too
late: as a pardon when the malefactor is hanged, and a medicine when the
patient is past recovery. To this purpose tends (...) Hector. apud Eurip in
Rheso.
this proverb; It is too late to shut the stable door when the steed is
stolen. It was worthily said of him, who said, I scorn to offer help too
late.

. 59. Of speedy succor.
2. THat we may manifest our true desire of relieving our brothers necessity
according to our ability, let us take the opportunity which by the Divine
providence is offered unto us: and upon the first notice of need, run, and make
all the speed we can to help. Thus shall we show our selves like unto God.
(...), a currendo. Plato in Crat. Macros. l 1. Saturn. c. 13.
The ancient Grecians gave God his name from that Divine property, of running
to help. Mat. 14. 14. Mar. 1. 41. Luke 7. 13, 14.
Of the Son of God it is often noted, that when he saw such and such in misery,
he had compassion on them, and healed, or otherwise helped them: namely then at
that instant when he first saw them. He delayed not his succor, he put it not
off: but presently, instantly gave outward proof of his inward compassion. Ephesians
5. 1, 2.
Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children: and walk in love as
Christ has loved us. And as God and Christ manifest their love to us, by a
speedy and seasonable succor, so let us give proof of our true love. For this
end let us remember those that are in bonds, as bound with them: and them that
suffer adversity, as being our selves also Heb. 13. 3.
in the body. Let us make the case of them that are in misery as our own case.
As we would not that others which are able to help us should suffer us to lie
scorching in the fire of affliction, but with all the speed they can pull us
out: so let us deal with others. A good turn quickly done is doubly done. Bis
dat qui cito dat. Senec. lib. de Benef.


. 60. Of the boldness in danger which a good warrant gives.
IIII. Sec. 52.
A Good calling may make one bold in danger. This is true of such as had the
warrant of an extraordinary calling, and of such as have ordinary warrantable
callings. Exo. 1 c. 3. etc
Moses by virtue of his special calling boldly opposed himself against
Pharaoh, Heb. 11. 27.
Not fearing the wrath of the King. Joshua by virtue of his calling undertook
a war against many mighty nations and kingdoms. So did many of the Judges. 1 Samuel 17. 34.
David on this ground set upon a Bear at one time, and on a Lion at another,
and slew them both. Lev. 13. 2, etc. -- 14. 36, etc.
A Priest by virtue of his calling readily and securely admitted lepers to come
to him, viewed them, touched them, and went into houses infected with leprosy,
to view where, or how far the leprosy had spread it self: yet was the
leprosy infectious.

A good calling is that way wherein God by his Divine A calling is a good
warrant.
providence sets a man, and wherein he has appointed him to walk. Psalm.
91. 11.
In that way he has given his Angels charge over him to keep him. Where we
have Heb. 1. 14.
the Angels to minister for us: and to Psalm 34. 7.
encampe round about us; what need we fear? They will either keep us safe
from danger in this world. Or if it seem good to God to take us out of this
world, they will carry our souls into heaven, as Luke 16. 22.
they did the soul of Lazarus.

For application of this point, it is requisite that we be Who to abide in
plague time.
well instructed by Gods Word in the kind of our calling, whether it be lawful
and warrantable, or no. As for extraordinary callings, they must be warranted
by an extraordinary spirit, which is rare, if at all, in these days. But
ordinary callings have their express warrant in Gods Word. As the callings of
Magistrates, Ministers, Soldiers, Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, Nurses, and Helpers in all kinds of necessities. These
may, these must in their place and calling expose themselves to danger, for
performing the work which by virtue of their place belongs unto them.
Captains and Soldiers must stand against enemies though thereby they endanger
their lives. Magistrates must abide in Cities and other places besieged or
infected with contagious diseases, to see good order kept, to take order for
supply of such necessaries as are fit for all sorts, though by abiding there,
they be in danger. So Ministers must abide in such places, to instruct, direct,
comfort, encourage the people under their charge. So husbands and wives being
one flesh, must have such a tender respect each of other, as not to forsake one
another for fear of infection, or other like danger. Servants also, Nurses,
and others that in such cases take upon them, or by public authority are
appointed to be helpers to such as are infected with the plague, or any other
contagious and infectious disease, are bound to attend such persons, and abide
by them, yea though it be with danger of their own lives. For it is necessary
that such persons be looked unto. To forsake and leave them, that are not able
to help themselves, to themselves, is more then barbarous inhumanity. It is
necessary that some abide by them. Who more bound then they that have an
especial calling thereto? They with greatest confidence may depend on Gods
special providence for protection from infection. If they be infected and die,
they with greatest comfort may yield up their souls into Gods hands, as dying
in that place wherein God has set them. In these cases God has called them to
venture their lives for their brethren, and thereby to give evidence of their
true brotherly love.

Of old, Christians were so charitable in relieving such as were visited with
the plague, as willingly they hazarded their own lives. For proof whereof I
will here set down what Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria reports in an Epistle
to the Brethren in Egypt. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 7. c. 21. The charity of
ancient Christians to their brethren visited with the plague.


Many of our brethren, by reason of their great love, and brotherly charity
sparing not themselves, cleaved one to another, visited the sick of the
plague, and attended upon them diligently, cured them in Christ, which cost
them their lives. And being full of other men's maladies, took the infection of
their neighbors, and translated of their own accord the sorrows of others
upon themselves: fulfilling indeed the common saying, that Friendship is
always to be retained, and departing this life, they seemed the off-scowring
of others. In this sort the best of our brethren departed this life, whereof
some were Ministers, some Deacons in great reverence amongst the common people:
So that this kind of Death for their great piety and strength of faith, may
seem to differ nothing from Martyrdom. For they took the dead bodies of the
Saints, whose breasts and hands, and faces lay upwards, and closed their eyes,
shut their mouths, and jointly with one accord, being like affectioned,
embraced them, washed them, and prepared their funerals, and a little while
after they enjoyed the like themselves. For the living continually traced the
steps of the dead. But among the Heathen all fell out on the contrary. For
scarce had Heathens inhumanity in plague times.
the Pestilence taken place amongst them, but they diverted themselves, and
fled from their most loving, and dearest friends. They threw them half dead in
the streets. The dead they left unburied, to be devoured of Dogs: to the end
they might avoid death, which they could not escape. Behold here the difference
betwixt men that have faith, and faithless men.

. 61. Of public persons forbearing to visit particular persons infected with
contagious diseases.
1. Quest. ARe such as have public callings bound to go to particular and
private persons being infected with the plague to visit them?

Answ. I find no ground in sacred Scripture to bind public persons to hazard
their life in particular men's cases. They are set over a Society, not over one
or two particular persons. Indeed every particular member of the Society
belongs to their charge: and they ought to do what they can to the good of
every particular person under their charge, so far as may stand with the good
of the whole body, and prove no prejudice thereto. But if by visiting
particular persons they should be infected, and by that infection their life
taken away, would not this prove a prejudice and damage to the whole body? Is
it the way, is it the calling of a public person to go into a particular man's
house that is infected? Private persons may every where be found out
competently enabled to do such duties as are requisite to be done to such as
are visited with the sickness: or at least, fit persons that have not public
employments, may be chosen out, and set apart to visit the sick in contagious
places to comfort them, and to see all things meet for them, to be duly
performed.

. 62. Of substituting others in ones place in time of danger.
Quest. WHat if others may be got to supply the places of such as have the
forementioned special callings, may not this supply give dispensation to them
for some absence.

Answ. Questionless difference may be put betwixt persons. Some Magistrates
are of such use in a commonwealth, as it is meet they be, as much as lies in
man, preserved from danger. On this ground when David the King would have gone
out with his soldiers to battle, The people answered, 2 Samuel 18. 3.
Thou shall not go forth. Thou art worth ten thousand of us. Wherefore eminent,
excellent persons may be exempted from abiding in dangerous places, and others
substituted in their name and stead, to preserve peace, keep good order, and
provide necessaries. Provided that they who are substituted be able and willing
to perform the duties whereunto they be deputed. The like may be said of
Ministers. Yea of husbands, parents, masters, and the like: to leave a wife, a
child, a servant infected with an infectious disease to the tendance of others
that are fit and willing to do that duty, and faithful in what they undertake,
is not to forsake wife, child, or servant.

. 63. Of observing Gods judgments.
V. See. 52. Oportet Dei judicia prae oculis haberc: mox mala extincta suerint
omnia. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 2. Hom. 5.
GOds judgments are duly to be observed. Of them says the Lord, Hab. 1 5.
Behold, regard, and wonder marvellously, etc. It is usual in holy writ to
prefixe this note of observation ( Genesis 3. 22. -- 6. 17. 1 Samuel 3. 11. Isa. 13.
17. Rev. 11. 14.
behold) before Gods judgments. Christ intended a serious observation of Gods
judgments, when he said, Luke 17. 32.
Remember Lots wife. See The Churches Conquest on Exo. 17 14.. 65.
The many memorials which among the Israelites were made of Gods judgments,
did imply a due consideration of them.

Psalm. 9. 16. Isa. 26. 9.
The Lord is known by executing judgment. His power, his justice, his hatred
of evil, his jealousy, his truth, his providence, and other his Divine
attributes are evidently manifested in and by his judgments. By a due
observation therefore of them, we have the more knowledge of God, and are
brought the more to trust in him, and to fear him, to be more careful of
pleasing him, more heedfull in avoiding all things that may offend him. On this
ground says the Prophet, When thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants
of the world will learn righteousness. Not heeding Gods judgments takes away
the profit of them.


Behold here one especial reason of the small profit that is made of
judgments which the Lord from time to time executes in the world, They are
not regarded, but are passed over without any right observation of them. Psalm.
28. 5. Isa. 5. 12. -- 57. 1.
The Prophets much complain hereof. It may be that men may take notice of
judgments that fall upon their own pates, at least while they lie under them,
and feel the weight or smart of them. But who almost considers, and lays to
heart Gods judgments inflicted on others? Or judgments laid on himself after
they are removed or taken away? Man's egregious folly and servile disposition is
hereby manifested.

His folly in omitting the opportunity of receiving warning by other men's
harms (as we speak in the proverb.) It is an avidence of Gods great
indulgency to us, to punish others before our eyes: whereas he might justly
punish us for example to others. It is an especial point of wisdom, to make
such use thereof, as to be bettered thereby. But not to regard such a
providence, is notorious folly.

His servile disposition, in regarding strokes no longer then they are laid
upon him, and he feels the smart of them. Thus he provokes God to deal with
him as with a slave: and to add stroke to stroke, judgment to judgment.
Phr^x plagis.


Learn we to be more wise, more ingenuous. Let us apply the forementioned
point of considering Gods judgments All kinds of judgments to be duly
observed.
to all manner of judgments: whether inflicted on others, or on our selves:
whether public or private: whether immediately from Gods own hands, or
mediately from the hands of others, who are Gods instruments: whether sudden or
lingering judgments: whether temporal or spiritual: of what kind or sort
soever. Thus will light arise out of darkness, meat out of the eater, comfort
out of judgment, profit out of punishment. Thus are Gods judgments
sanctified: thus are Saints brought to say, and that by true experience, It is
good for me that I have been afflicted. Psalm. 119. 71.


. 64. Of the sense and scope of the 48 Verse.
NVMB. 16. 48.And he stood between the dead and the living. And the plague was
stayed.
HEre is a circumstance used by Aaron more then is expressed to be enjoined by
Moses: but yet not against any thing enjoined: but that which may rather be by
consequence gathered. For he was to go to the congregation among whom the
plague was begun. He was also to make an atonement: the atonement was not for
the dead, but for the living. To show that it was for the living, he stands
betwixt the living and the dead: leaving the dead behind him: turning his face
to the living; holding the incense before him, that the living might behold the
smoke thereof ascending to heaven for them. Herein he typified the true Of
Christ's intercession, See. 38.
and great High Priest the Lord Jesus Christ, our Mediator, who stands betwixt
us and the destroying wrath of God.

This phrase between the living and the dead shows that the dead fell among
the living, so as the living were in great danger of death.

Hereupon it is inferred, that, the plague was stayed. The word translated
(stayed) properly signifies to shut or hold (...) of (...) occlusit.
in a thing so as it cannot come forth. It is often put for Genesis 16 2. -- 20 18.
Pro 10. 16.
closing up a woman's womb, so as no child can come from thence. And for 2 Chro
7. 13. 1 King. 8. 35.
shutting up, or closing the heavens, so as they cannot send down rain: and
Ier. 20. 9.
for fast holding in of fire, so as it cannot break forth. All these
applications of the word do imply that the Lord by a strong hand held this
plague, which was as a devouring beast, desirous to devour more had more, that
it should do no more hurt.

We have here in this Verse The efficacy of the means which Aaron used.

Two points are particularly expressed. 1. The Manner of using the means. He
stood between the dead and the living. 2. The Effect thereof. The plague was
stayed.


The mention of the living, in the former part, for whose preservation Aaron
stood between them and the dead, gives us to understand, that I. Means is to
be used for preservation of the living.
The mixture of the dead with the living, implied by Aarons care to stand
between them, shows that the living were in great hazard of death, even in
regard of humane means, in a desperate case, and does us further to wit, that
II. Means must be used in most desperate distresses.
The latter part which declares the Effect of the means, as it has relation
to the means used, gives instance, that III. Warrantable means rightly used
prove effectual.
As the said effect of staying the plague, has relation to God, to whom the
incense was offered up, and by whom that effect was brought to pass, it gives
proof, that IIII. God has an absolute power over plagues.


As he sent this plague, whereof See. 48.
before, so he pulls back and restraines this plague; he so closes the mouth
of this devouring beast, as it can destroy no more: he so shuts up and fast
tieth this mad dog, as it cannot bite one more.

. 65. Of using means to preserve the living.
I. See. 64.
Means must be used for preservation of the living. Exo. 32. 28, etc.
After that three thousand of those that came out of Egypt were slain for
worshipping the golden calfe that Aaron made, Moses goes up again to the
mount to pray for their preservation who were remaining. 2 Samuel 24. 17.
So David for those who were reserved after that seventy thousand were
destroyed with a pestilence. This was it which Isa. 37. 4.
Hezekiah desired Isayah to do, Lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is
left: Ier. 42. 2.
and which the remainder of the people after the captivity desired Jeremiah to
do, Pray for all this remnant.

While men live, if they have sinned, they may repent: Benefits of life Eccl 7.
2.
The living will lay things to heart. While they live they may use the gifts
and abilities of mind or body which God has given them to the honor of God,
and to their own, and others good: while they live they may increase in the
good things they have: they may also attain unto more: while they live they
may make sure to themselves the eternal salvation of their souls. Life is the
time of receiving all needful grace: and Gal. 6. 10.
of doing all manner of good. It is Ioh. 9. 4.
the day wherein men may work. Isa. 38. 18, 19
The living, the living, he shall praise thee O Lord. The grave cannot praise
thee: death can not celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit cannot hope
for thy truth. Eccl. 9. 10.
There is no work nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave. In
these respects true is this proverb, A living dog is better then a dead lion.

How foolish, how impious, how sacrilegious are they, See more against praying
for the dead in The whole armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18. 39, 40, etc.
that spend this sweet incense of prayer in vain: as all they do, that offer
it up for the dead. If it were useful for the dead, why did Aaron stand betwixt
the living and the dead? Why did he make a difference betwixt them? Why did he
not offer in cense for the dead as well as for the living?

As we desire to make prayer acceptable to God, comfortable to our own souls,
and profitable to others, let us power them forth for those of whom there may
be some hope: and those are only the living. 2 Samuel 12. 22.
While the child was yet alive (says David) I facted and wept. For these, even
for all sorts of these, in health, in sickness, in safety, in danger, while
they are young, well grown, or old, in what case soever, of what state soever
they be, and for obtaining of what good soever may be needful for them, and
for deliverance from what evil soever they are subject unto, we may, we must
pray.

. 66. Of using means in desperate cases.
II. See. 64.
Means must be used in most desperate distresses. This is especially to be
understood of spiritual means, whereby immediately and directly help is
sought of God, who can help in such cases as men can see no hope of help
therein. Physicians may see good ground to give over a patient, knowing that
according to the ordinary course of nature all the means that they can use
will do no good. But a Christian must never cease to use the spiritual
Catholicon, that general remedy which is fit for any malady, prayer. Note the
instances given in the former Section, and you shall find Moses, David's,
Isayahs, Ieremiahs prayers to be made in desperate cases. 2 Samuel 12. 16.
David's child was questionless in man's eye past recovery, when he fasted, and
lay all night upon the earth, and besought God for it. Much more past recovery
was Isa. 38. 1, 2.
Hezekiah, when God sent him this message, Thou shall die, and not live: yet he
prayed unto the Lord, and was heard. The cases of many that came to Christ for
cure in the days of his flesh, were very desperate, yet found they help.
Among other, Mar: 5. 25.
A woman which had an issue of blood twelve years, and had suffered many
things of many Physicians, and had spent all that she had and was nothing
bettered, but rather grew worse, came to Christ, and was cured. So Luke 13. 11.
The woman whom Satan had bound eighteen years. So Ioh. 5. 5.
the man which had an infirmity thirty and eight years. So sundry Lepers,
Demoniacks, men, women, and children at point of death; and many others visited
with incurable maladies.

Divine power is not limited with any natural bounds: it is not restrained in
that compass which is prescribed to creatures. It can afford succor when
creatures may think no succor can be affoorded. Instance the remedy which God
affoorded to man after his fall.

Yea when men may think the Divine wrath to be implacably incensed, there may
be thoughts of mercy in God. After the Lord had drowned the world, He smelled a
sweet Genesis 8. 21.
savor, and said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground. After he
had threatened to dis-inherit Israel, Moses praying for them, he said, I have
pardoned according to thy word. Number. 14. 20.


What encouragement have we now to continue our instant prayer to God, for
staying this plague that now so rages among us. What though it increase
hundreds every week? Isa 59 1.
Behold the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save: nor his ear heavy
that it cannot hear. Though 2 Chro 20 12
we know what to do, yet let our eyes be upon the Lord. Many thousands are
fallen dead before us: yet are there many living among us. Christ our true
Aaron, our true and great High Priest, he stands betwixt the living and the
dead. He by his intercession will pacify the wrath of his father, and procure
his favor for the living. Only, as they who were stung with fiery serpents,
looked on the Brazen Serpent, so let us with the eye of faith look on Jesus on
high at the right hand of his Father. Let not the multitudes of them that are
dead, nor the present raging of this plague too much daunt us: let us continue
to offer up our incense to God, and expect his time for deliverance, and
deliverance in his time. To encourage us the more hereunto, let the next point
be well noted.

. 67. Of the efficacy of right means.
III. See. 64. Legimus Aaron adversum ignem Israelis populum devorantem
occurrisse and stetisse medium: and opposuisse murumpro salute populi, etc.
Sicut enim murus hosti opponitur, and adversario occurri solet ex adverso
contraque venien ti^ta Dei sententia sanctorum precibus frangi tur Hier. Com.
l. 4. in Ezekiel. 13
VVArrantable means rightly used prove effectual. This might be exemplified
by all those extraordinary means which in Scripture are recorded to be
prescribed, or otherwise warranted by God. But to insist only on such ordinary
means as are warranted to us, and to the whole Church of God in all ages, take
a view of the prayers which Saints from time to time have made unto God for
obtaining good things, and for removing evils: yea of their fastings, of their
tears, of their manifold humbling of themselves, and you shall find them ever
to have been effectual, if they have been rightly used, as I have See The
whole armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18 20, 21, 22, etc 97, 104.
elsewhere more fully declared.

Gods power, wisdom, truth, and other like attributes are engaged in the
means which he himself does warrant. If they being rightly used should fail
in their efficacy, he that has ordained them, might be thought improvident in
choosing such means, or impotent and unable to bring what he intended to
effect: or unfaithful and careless in making that good to his people, which
by his Word he has made them expect. But far are all such things from God.
All things therefore ordained by him shall assuredly be effectual to effect
that for which he has ordained them: if at least there be not a failing on
man's part in the right manner of using them. For we may confidently think and
say, that where warrantable means have failed of their efficacy, the fault
has been in man's using them amiss. An Apostle has taught us so to avouch.
For, says he, Ye ask and receive Iam. 4. 3.
not, because ye ask amiss.

Be wise now in observing what means God has warranted for effecting any
thing that we desire, and also what circumstances he has prescribed for the
right manner of using them Be conscionable and careful so to use those means:
and then in faith depend on God for his blessing. For thus doing take a few
instances.

1. See The whole armor of God on Ephesians. 6 16 19
God has sanctified the Ministry of his Word for What means God has
sanctified. How to be used.
breeding and increasing faith, and other needful Christian graces. Frequent
therefore the Ministry of the Word: attend to it reverently: mix faith with
thy hearing: and unto all add obedience thereunto.

2. See there also 66.
The Sacraments are ordained to seal up Gods promises, for further
strengthening of our faith. Take order therefore for your children in due order
according to the direction of Gods Word to be baptized. And believe the extent
of these promises, Gen 17. 17.
I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee. Psalm 112. 2.
The generation of the upright shall be blessed. Act. 2. 39.
The promise is to you and to your children. 1 Cor. 7. 14.
Your children are holy. And as for the other Sacrament, make conscience of a
frequent participation thereof. But see that you examine your selves, and so
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.

3. See The whole armor of God. on Ephesians. 6. 18.. 20.
Prayer is a prescribed means for obtaining divine benediction on every thing
that we take in hand. Pray therefore continually: lift up pure hands without
wrath: pray in says.

4. Ibid.. 104.
In extraordinary cases, prayer is to be sharpened with fasting. Therefore pray
and fast. In your fasts humble your souls as well as your bodies: make
confession of your sins: and renew your repentance.

5. Ibid., 112.
Vows are warranted for binding us the more firmly to duty: and restraining us
more straightly from sin. Vow therefore in truth, righteousness, and
judgment. Vow with an unalterable resolution to perform what you vow.

. 68. Of Gods power over plagues.
IIII. See. 64.
GOD has an absolute power over plagues. Suddenly, as soon as he will he can
restrain them, and keep them from devouring any more. As he can say to the
sea, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further: and here shall thy proud waves
be stayed: so can be say to the Job 38. 11.
pestilence, So long shall thou continue, and no longer: so many shall thou
destroy, and no more. 2 Samuel 24. 13, 15, 25.
Did not the Lord before hand threaten to send a plague upon Israel in David's
time three days: and answerably it continued till the time appointed? But when
the wrath of the Lord was pacified, the plague was stayed. Exo 8. 12, 13. 30,
31. -- 9. 33. -- 10. 18, 19.
Did he not remove the plagues from Egypt, so soon as Moses prayed unto him?
This power of the Lord over plagues and diseases, was visibly manifested in the
Son of God, while he lived on earth. For he spoke the word, and they went
away: which the Centurion well observing, said to Christ, Mat. 8. 8
Speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.

The Lord, as he is the Creator, so the Governor of all things: nothing can
be without him: nothing can abide longer then he will. He calls, he sends, he
bids come, he bids go away: answerably they come, they go. Psalm. 105. 28.
They rebel not against his word.

As ye desire to have this plague that burns so fiercely among us, and
destroys so many, to be stayed, use the only remedy that is of power to that
purpose, Call upon God to stay it. The plague it self is like a fierce, mad,
mastivedog, that will not cease to bite if he be loose. The Lord of plagues
must chain him up. Yea, it is like ravenous lions, that are ready to tear in
pieces and devour all they can catch. The Lord only can stop the mouth of
this lion, as Dan. 6. 22.
he stopped the mouths of the lions among whom Daniel was cast. All antidotes,
all preservatives, all manner of outward means are nothing without the Lord.
He can preserve whom he will while the plague rages most. He can stay it as
speedily, as suddenly, as thoroughly as he please. Call therefore upon him, turn
unto him, trust on him, and doubt not but that our God that has such power
over plagues, will in his good time, when his work is accomplished upon this
City, and upon this Land, stay this plague.

This is a point of much comfort to such as have assurance of Gods fatherly
love to them, that their Father has an absolute power over plagues.

. 69. Of the meaning of the 49 Verse.
NVMB. 16. 49.Now they that died in the plague were fourteen thousand, and
seven hundred, beside them that died about the matter of Korah.
THe severity of Gods stroke by the forementioned plague is here set down:
and that by the express number of them that were destroyed by that pestilence.
The particle translated IN, ( (...)
in the plague) among other significations often sets out the isntrumental
cause, whereby a thing is effected: as where the Lord says to the Jews that
were in Egypt, I will punish them Ier. 44. 13. (...)
BY the sword, BY the famine, and BY the pestilence. Others therefore thus
translate this text, Of the plague, that is, by it. The plague was the
isntrumental cause of their death. Circumstances show that this plague from
the first beginning to the end of it continued not a whole day. For so soon as
the people gathered themselves together against Moses and Aaron, the Lord
threatened to consume them. Then instantly Moses and Aaron fell on their faces:
and Moses then discerned that the plague was begun: which so soon as he
espied, he bad Aaron quickly offer up incense. Aaron accordingly ran for
incense, brought it, offered it up: and the plague was stayed. These
circumstances duly weighed, who can imagine that there was more then a day
from the beginning to the end of this plague: so as in the space of a few
hours, fourteen thousand and seven hundred died together of a plague. O
terrible stroke!

To aggravate the terror hereof, mention is made of another fearful
judgment, which fell upon that people not long before, thus inferred, Beside
them that died about the matter of Korah. What this matter was, the former part
of this chapter expressly records. It was a conspiracy of Korah, here
mentioned, with Dathan and Abiram, against Moses, the chief Prince; and Aaron,
the chief Priest, appointed by God over the children of Israel. Exo. 6. 18.
This Korah was cosen german to Aaron: for they were brothers children. He
therefore being of an ambitious spirit, scorned that his kinseman should be so
far preferred before him, as to be High Priest: Thereupon he gathers many
of the Princes together to take part with him: supposing by strong hand to
wrest from Aaron the dignity of Priesthood, which the Lord had conferred upon
them. Dathan and Abiram were of another Tribe, the tribe of Reuben. These, as
is probable, had another aim, and that at the chief civil government,
wherein God had set Moses. Reuben being the eldest son of Israel, these two
brothers were Pronepotes. Numb. 26. 5.
under nephews to Reuben, three generations from him: and imagined that they
coming from the eldest son should be the chief overall. Thus having no
regard to the choice which God had made of Moses and Aaron, they would thrust
themselves into places of eminency. The Lord was so highly displeased hereat,
as he destroyed them, and such as took part with them, with two fearful
judgments. The earth suddenly opened and swallowed up some of them alive: and
fire suddenly flamed out upon others and destroyed them. Numb. 16. 35.
Two hundred and fifty are expressly noted to be consumed by the fire. How many
were swallowed up by the earth is not expressed: but it may be conjectured that
they were a great multitude.

This was the matter of Korah here mentioned. Korah was the Ringleader of all.
For Numb. 16. 1.
he is the first mentioned in the conspiracy. -- 5.
He impudently gathered an head against Moses and Aaron, while -- 12.
Dathan and Abiram abode in their tents. Numb. 26. 9.
It is said of Dathan and Abiram, that they strove against Moses and Aaron in
the conspiracy of Korah. So as the conspiracy was Korahs especially. He was the
chief conspirator. The matter therefore here intended compriseth under it,
both the earths swallowing up of some, and the fires consuming of others.

The people that by the earths opening, and fires breaking out perished, are
said to die in the matter of Korah, because his ambition being the first motive
of that rebellion, he was a cause of their sin, and so of their judgment.
Thus their death is imputed to him. They died in his business, about his
matter.

The Sum of this verse is A declaration of the severity of Gods indignation:
which is 1. Propounded, in the number of those that died of this plague, 14700.
2. Aggravated, by other fearful judgments executed the day before. Besides
those that died about the matter of Korah. Here have we, 1. A general
intimation of the judgments. Besides those that died. 2. A manifestation of
the original cause of all. The matter of Korah.



The first point shows, that, I. A plague can quickly destroy a multitude.
The aggravation points at other judgments that were the day before inflicted
on the people, and gives evidence, that, II. God can many ways destroy men.
By causing the earth to open it self, he destroyed some: by fire he consumed
others: yet besides these, 14700. die of a plague.
The manner of expressing the former judgments by relation to Korah, thus, in
the matter of Korah, gives proof, that III. The blood of accessaries lies
upon the principalls. Korahs matter was the peoples death.
In that others died about that matter, it further gives instance, that IIII.
Accessaries make themselves liable to the judgment that falls on the
principal.


. 70. Of a plagues devouring.
I. See. 69.
A Plague can quickly destroy a multitude. Here within less then a day 14700.
are destroyed by a plague. There is mention made before this of a plague,
which, though the precise number of them that died be not expressed, may be
thought to have destroyed as many as this plague, for it is said that, Numb.
11. 33.
The Lord smote the people with a very great plague. After these (but before
they went out of the wilderness) at one time there -- 259.
died in a plague 24000. 2 Samuel 24. 15.
In David's time there died within the space of three days almost three times
24000 of a plague, viz. 70000. 2 King. 19. 35
In Hezekiahs time when Sennacherib came against Jerusalem, there died of a
plague in one night, more then twice as many of the host of Sennacherib, as
did of all Israel in the foresaid three days, viz. 185000. Other histories
relate very great destructions caused by plagues.

Thucydides makes mention of a plague that began at Lib. 2 Belli Pelopon. anno
secundo.
Ethiopia, fell down into Egypt, and Afrique, and into the greatest part of
Persia, and invaded Athens on a sudden, where dying men lay tumbling one upon
another. Their Temples were filled with the dead. Laws of funerals were
broken: every one burying where he could find room. And while fires were made
to burn some dead corpse, others were brought and cast thereinto.

Eusebius records a plague at Alexandria which made Ecclesiast Hist. lib. 7.
cap. 21.
every man to howl through the City by reason of the multitude of dead corpse,
which daily fell. There was not an house where no course was found. And the
Heathen there left their dead unburied, to be devoured of dogs.

At Rome when Camillus died, there died ten thousand Heurm. de peste. cap. 1.
every day of the plague. And under Vespasian and Commodus Emperors, two
thousand were every day taken away with that infectious disease.

Under Justinian a plague with such violence fell upon Bizantium and the
bordering places, as every day there died Alsted. in Thesaur. Chronol. Mirab.
Dei. an. 547. Idem. Ibid. an. 729. Idem. Ibid. an. 1348.
five thousand, and some days ten thousand.

At Constantinople a plague swept away three hundred thousand persons.

Under Charles 4. an Epidemicall plague wasted the whole world for three years
together. At Lubeck it destroyed fourscore and ten thousand: and at Florence
an hundred thousand.

In Petrarchs time so fierce a plague invaded Italy, that Idem. Ibid, an. 1359.
there remained alive scarce ten of a thousand.

But to leave Foreign parts, we will give some instances of the multitudes of
such as have been devoured by the plague in our own Country.

In the reign of Edward 2. there was so grievous a mortality Stow in his
general Chron. of Engl. an. 9. Edw 2. Idem. Ibid. an. 22. and 23. Edw. 3.
of people, as the quick might unneath bury the dead.

In the reign of Edward 3. a far greater plague happened. It came from
beyond. sea into the towns and parts of England joining on the seacoasts in
Dorset-shire, where even as in other countries it made the country void of
Inhabitants, so as there were almost none left alive. Thence it passed into
Devon-shire, and Somersetshire, even unto Bristow, where it much raged. It
came also to Gloucester, Oxford, and London, and finally it spread over all
England, and so wasted the people, as scarce the tenth man was left alive. When
Churchyards were not large enough to bury their dead in, they chose certain
fields appointed for that purpose. For the dead in London The Charter House was
afterward built thereon. Register of the Charter House excarta.
a piece of ground called Spittle-croft, containing 13 acres, without the
bars of West-Smithfield, was purchased, enclosed, and dedicated. In that
place were buried the year following more then fifty thousand persons. Acts
and Monum. an. Edw. 3. 22. An. Dom. 1348.
Two thousand are said to be there buried every day from Feb. 1. till the
beginning of May following, besides those which in other places in and about
the City were buried. Of that plague there died in Norwich from Ian. 1. to July
following, fifty seven thousand an hundred and four, and in Yarmouth seven
thousand fifty two.

In Richard the seconds time, a great pestilence was in Stow. in his general
Chro^. Rich. 2. 15. An. Dom. 1391 Ibid. Edw. 4. 18 An. Dom. 1479
Norfolk, and other countries. Besides other places, in a short time there died
thereof in the city of York eleven thousand.

Under Edward 4. an innumerable company of people died of the plague in London,
and in diverse other parts of the Realm.

In the reign of Henry 8. there was such a plague, as in Ibid. Hen. 8. 5. An.
Dom. 1513
one house, to wit the Minories without Aldgate, there died 27. professed
Nuns, besides lay people and servants in that house.

In the reign of Edward 6. was also a great pestilence.

In Queen Elizabeth's time many English being sent to Ibid Edw. 6. 2. 1548.
Ibid Q. Eliz. anno 4.
New Haven for the safeguard thereof, such a plague there fell, as the streets
lay even full of dead corpse, not able to be removed by reason of the multitude
that perished. From thence the soldiers brought the infection into England.
Besides those that died in other parts of the Realm there died in London
liberties and out-parishes from Ian. 1. 1562. to Dec. 31. 1563. twenty thousand
one hundred thirty and six, besides those which died of other diseases.
Again, from Dec. 29. 1592. to Dec. 20. 1593. there died in London and the
liberries of all diseases 17893. of the plague 10673.

In the first year of King James from Dec. 23. 1602. to Dec. 22. 1603. in
London and the liberties thereof there died of all diseases 38578. Of the
plague 30578.

In the first year of King CHARLES from Dec. 22. 1624. to Dec. 23. 1625. of
all diseases 54267. of the plague 35417.

It has been. 48.
before proved that a plague is an effect of Gods wrath, an immediate stroke
of his hand. Such a stroke must therefore needs be heavy, and destroy many
where it lights, especially when the Lord so strikes therewith, as he will
show that he is angry.

. 71. Of the terror of a plague.
O Make not a tush at a plague: slight it not too much. Why a plague is not to
be made light of.
If we account the lives of men, women and children to be precious, (how
precious a thing life is, has been 63. Lege Flavij Iosephi Antiquit. Iud.
lib. 7. cap. 13. Descriptione^ peslis quae contigit sub Davide. Terrorem istius
morbi ad vivum exprimit.
before declared) we may well think that that which takes away the lives of
many, is to be accounted a terrible thing. I deny not but that in some respects
war, in other respects famine is more terrible then pestilence: which made 2 Samuel 24. 14.
David choose it, rather then either of them. Yet is a plague, if once it grow
to any strength, a fearful and terrible judgment. By it, parents that have
had many children like Olive plants round about their table, have been soon
made childlesse. By it parents, children, husbands, wives, masters, servants,
whole households have been in a very short time swept away. Yea streets, and
villages, and cities have thereby been made desolate. On some it comes more
mildly, and takes them away without any pain, or extraordinary fervor: on
others it falls more violently, casting them into extreme burning fits,
troubling the brain, disturbing the understanding, making them that are
affected therewith, rage and rave, and seek all ways to make away themselves.
Lamentable experience has given too evident proofs hereof. Besides, by reason
of the contagion and infection of this disease, dear friends are kept one from
another, and they that are visited therewith, deprived of many outward helps,
and inward comforts that otherwise they might have. Finally, they that die of
this disease are for the most part deprived of the honor of that decent and
solemn funeral which otherwise they might have: a matter Eccl. 63. Ier. 22.
18. 19.
which God himself has threatened as a judgment: but 1 King. 14. 13 Ier. 34.
5.
promised an honorable, and comely burial as a blessing. In these and many
other respects a plague is justly to be accounted a fearful judgment: which
should make us more fearful of provoking his wrath that has the power over
plagues, to send them when he will, to continue them as long as he will; and to
make them as fierce and violent as he will. See more of this point, 48, 50.

. 72. Of the many means that God has to destroy men.
II. See 69.
GOD can many ways destroy men. Many, many are the ways that are recorded in
Scripture: and yet many many other ways has experience in all ages given
evidence of. We read that from heaven Gen 7. 11.
water fell and drowned the whole world: and -- 19. 24.
fire and brimstone, and destroyed four cities at once; and Ios. 10. 11.
great stones that flew armies of men; and 1 Samuel 7. 10.
great thunders, and Psalm. 18. 14.
lightnings, whereby hosts of enemies have been discomfited; yea and -- 78. 48.
hot thunderbolts: Iud. 5. 20.
the stars in their courses, and Psalm. 35. 5, 6. 2 Samuel 24. 16. 2 King 19.
35. Per culices ac mures integros Barbarorum exercitus sugabat Deus. Chrysostom in 2
Cor. 5. Hum. 8
the Angels of God have destroyed many. All these, and many other means of
destruction has the Lord sent from heaven. On earth he can raise up men
against men to destroy one another, which is most usual: He can stir up
Ezekiel. 14 15.
beasts, and Ier. 8. 17.
serpents, yea Numb 21. 6.
extraordinary fiery serpents, and Exo 8. 6.
frogs, -- 17.
lice, -- 24.
flies, -- 10. 13.
grasshoppers, and innumerable other kinds of creatures. How many kinds of
diseases has God in all ages raised up to afflict and destroy men? What
Physician can reckon them all up. He can make all the elements his instruments
to consume men, and all manner of creatures: yea, he can make new creatures to
be his scourges. Read in particular the Lev. 26. 16, etc Deu. 28. 16, etc
several curses recited by Moses, and we shall find just cause to say, God can
many ways destroy men.

God is a supreme and absolute Lord over all: and can both dispose them to what
work and service it pleases him, and also enable them to effect whatsoever he
puts them unto. So as what he will have to destroy, shall destroy as he will
have it. Yea, his Divine power is then especially manifested, when by vile
things he effects great matters. Tunc maxim manifestatur Dei potentia,
quando per viles operatur magna. Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. 5. Hom. 8.


Is not this Lord now to be feared? Is it safe to provoke his wrath? Does he
not sin against his own soul that provokes him? What if he have inflicted
sore judgments on others, and thou have escaped? Do thou think that God
has no more judgments in store, if thou continuest to provoke him? Were they
that were not swallowed up with Dathan and Abiram, or not consumed with Korahs
accomplices, were they exempted from all other judgments? Were not 14700 consumed
with a plague? Remember this aggravation, BESIDES those that died, etc.
Remember it, and tremble. Thou may escape this plague, and yet perish by
another judgment. Rejoice not because the rod of him that smote thee is
broken: for out of the serpents root shall come Isa 14. 29. -- 24. 17, 18. Pro
qualitate peccati ignem sibi unusquisque succendit. Hier. Comment. l. 14. in
Isa. 50
acockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. Fear, and the pit,
and the snare, are upon thee O inhabitant of the earth. And it shall come to
pass, that he who flees from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit:
and he that comes out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare, etc.
Every one kindles a fire for himself according to the quality of his sin.

. 73. Of the blood of others which principalls bring upon themselves.
III. See. 69.
THe blood of accessaries lies upon the principalls. The Devil is the
chiefest principal of all sinners. He first sinned himself, he first tempted
and drew man into sin. In this respect he is styled Ioh. 8. 44
A murderer from the beginning. Now a murderer pulls upon his own pate the
blood of those that are murdered. The woman who tempted Adam to sin, is said
to be 1 Timothy 2. 14.
In the transgression: whereby among other things is implied, that her own and
her husbands blood lies on her. 2 King. 10. 31
This style given to Jeroboam (which made Israel to sin) shows that he was
the principal in the defection of the ten Tribes: 1 King. 15. 29
answerable therefore was his punishment: and -- 30.
his causing others to sin is rendered as a reason of the severity of his
punishment. Because David was the principal in the murder of Vriah, 2 Samuel
12. 9, 10
his blood is laid especially to David's charge. Thus the desolations that came
upon Jerusalem, after Manassehs time, are said to be 2 King. 24. 3
for the sins of Manasseh, who was the chief ringleader unto those
abominations in which they continued until the captivity, Ier 3. 6. -- 25. 3.
notwithstanding that good Josiah did what he could to make a through
reformation.

Ob. 2 Chro. 33. 12, 13.
Manasseh repented, and had his sin pardoned. How then could he bring others
blood upon his own head?

Answ. Gods pardoning of sin does not extenuate sin; and his taking away
blood from a man's soul, does not imply that that man never brought blood upon
his soul, but rather the contrary: for that which is not on man, cannot be
taken away from him.

For the maine point, it stands with justice and equity, that they who do not
only sin themselves, but also draw others into sin with them, should bear
the punishment of their own and others sins. For in those others he sins.
They are as his instruments. If a man do not only in his mind invent and plot
sin, but also with his body and the parts thereof execute it, he pulls on
himself the greater vengeance. So does he further heap up vengeance against
his own soul, if he proceed on to draw others also to sin. These several
degrees manifest a more wretched disposition, aggravate his sin the more, the
more incense Gods wrath, and so cause greater vengeance.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings; be instructed ye Judges of the earth. All
ye that are in place of eminency, on whom many eyes are cast, whose example
many are ready to follow, -- Componitur orbis Regis ad exemplum. Claud. de 4.
Consul. Honorij.
at whose word many are soon moved to do this or that: be ye wary how you
commit sin your selves, how you manifest any approbation of sin: how you
give any countenance to sin. Abuse not your authority to command any sin,
as 2 Samuel 13. 28.
Absalom did. Abuse not your wit to contrive and advise sin, as -- 16. 21.
Achitophel did. Abuse not your eminency of place by making your selves an
example and pattern in sin, as 2 Chro. 33. 9.
Manasseh did. Abuse not that grace you have with a multitude, to persuade them
to sin, as Mat. 27. 20.
the Priests and Elders of the Jews did. Abuse not that awe and dread wherein
you have your inferiors under you, to compel them to sin, as Dan. 3. 1. etc.
Nebuchadnezzar did. Abuse not that dependence which people have on you, O
Ministers, by speaking well of evil, by strengthening the wicked, as Ier. 23.
14.
the false Prophets did. By these and other like means, whereby you draw
others into sin, you pull the blood of those others upon your own souls.
Now to have not only ones own blood, but the blood of others also to lie upon
him, is a most fearful estate. Thus he does not only as much as in him
lies, draw many into eternal destruction, but also implunge himself more
deeply into hell fire. For, all those sins which others commit by his means,
are as so many heavy waights lying on his soul, pressing it down into
everlasting torment.

This is not to excuse others that are so drawn, as if they should go
scot-free: For in this text it is showed that IIII. Accessaries make themselves
liable to the judgment which falls on the principal. This point is handled
in The Churches Conquest on Exo. 17. 13.. 59.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of the principal points handled in The Plaster for
the Plague, on Numb. Chap. 16. Ver. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49.
A
ACcessaries. 115 123 Afflictions. See Judgments. Afflictions effects of love
and wrath. 86 Afflictions their kinds. 86 Anger. See Wrath. Altars. 35
Atonement, what it imports. 37 Atonement may be made after wrath is incensed.
53 Atonement rejected by desperate ones. 55 Atonement a penitents comfort. 56
Atonement to be sought. 57 Apostasy provokes wrath. 78 82
B
Believers may die of the plague. 21 Boldness caused by a good warrant. 100
Blood of men sacrificed. 42 Burnt offerings what they set out. 41
C
CAlling in all things respected. 40 Calling a good warrant. 100 Calling
requires duty with danger. 101 Censers to what use. 35 Charity of ancient
Christians in time of plague. 102 Charges to be observed in every branch. 97
Christ typified by incense. 59 Christ typified by sundry rites. 59 Christ's
intercession appeaseth God. 61 Circumstances warrantable to be observed. 45 97
Circumstances much failed in by Papists and Protestants. 46 Circumstances order
obedience. 94 Communion with wicked for judgments sake to be avoided. 23
Conspiracy in sin provokes wrath. 76 80
D
DEad not to he prayed for. 108 Delay of succor dangerous. 99 Desperate who
reject reconciliation. 55 Deferring repentance dangerous. 50 Deferring succor
dangerous. 99
Evil. See Sin.
F
FAlling on face in prayer. 32 Fire on the altar. 35 Fiery and fierce is Gods
wrath. 66 73 Flaggs three. 50 Folly to add sin to sin. 50 Foretelling
judgments. 11
G
GOD revengeth the rebellious. 28 God has an absolute power over plagues. 112
God has many ways to destroy. 120 Gods wrath. See Wrath. Godly. See Saints.
Governors abuse of authority causes wrath. 75 80 Governors to be obeyed. 93
H
HVmility pretended is pride. 62 Humane blood sacrificed. 42
I
I Dolatry provokes wrath. 74 79 JEHOVAH adds terror to wrath. 74
Impenitency causes wrath. 78 81 Incense, how made. 36 Incense resembled to
prayer. 58 Incense typisied Christ. 57 Infidelity causes wrath. 77 81
Ingratitude causes wrath. 75 80 Ingratitude of world against Saints. 27
Inhumanity causes wrath. 76 80 Inhumanity of Heathen in plague time. 102
Intercession of Christ typified by incense. 59 Intercession of Christ appeaseth
wrath. 61 Intercession of Christ is to be trusted to. 63 64 Intercession of
creatures vain. 62 Jobs afflictios, of what kind. 56 Judgments. See
Afflictions. See Wrath. Judgments are consequents of sin. 5 Judgments
causes to be searched out. 6 Judgments why foretold. 11 Judgments how now
foretold. 13 Judgments kept from Saints. 17 Judgments how fall on Saints. 18
Judgments a motive to avoid communion with the wicked. 23 Judgments often staid
by mixture of Saints. 26 Judgments to utter ruin caused by stubbornenesse. 29
Judgments sudden very fearful. 30 Judgments extremity caused by delay in
pacifying Gods wrath. 50 Judgments often terrible in the beginning. 89
Judgments to be observed. 104 Judgments general effects of wrath. 85
L
Life's benefits. 108 Living to be preserved by all good means. 107 Love of God
peculiar to man. 54
M
MAgistrates. See Governors. Means warrantable to pacify Gods wrath to be
used. 41 Means to preserve the living to be used. 107 Means to be used in
desperate cases. 109 Means many God has to destroy. 120 Means well used
effectual. 110 Mercy to such as wrong us. 47 Ministers know Gods mind. 12 13
Ministers abuses cause wrath. 76 80 Ministers, how they can foretell judgment.
13 Multitudes in evil to be left. 25
O
OBedience to Governors 93 Obedience with due circumstances. 94 Obedience
scanty, dangerous. 96 Obedience universal. 97 Obstinacy. See Stubbornenes
P
Pacify. See Wrath. Papists toys to pacify Gods wrath. 44 Papists fail in
material circumstances. 46 Plague may take away believers. 21 Plague whether a
cause to fly. 24 Plague properly taken here meant. 83 Plague an evidence of
Gods wrath. 85 Plague what duties it requires. 88 Plagues in sundry respects
so called. 83 In plague time who to abide. 101 In plague time ancient
Christians charity, and Heathens in humanity. 102 In plague public persons
not bound to visit the infected. 103 In plague times others may be substituted
in the room of eminent persons. 103 Plagues in Gods power. 212 Plague soon
destroys many. 116 Plague not to be slighted. 119 Prayer resembled to
ince^se. 58 Principals bring others blood on themselves. 121 Profanation of
holy things and times provokes wrath. 74 79 Profession polluted causes wrath.
74 75 79 Provocations of Gods wrath so many by us, as cause much matter of
humiliation, 79
R
REconciliation. See Atonement. Repentance deferd dangerous. 50 Repentance
speedy profitable. 51 Repentants comfort in reconciliation. 56 Revenge on
rebellious by God. 28
S
SAcrificing humane blood. 42 Saints exempted from judgments. 17 19 Saints often
have a share in judgment. 18 Saints mixed with wicked cared for by God. 20
Saints often stay judgme^ts. 26 27 Sin causes judgment. 5 Sins what
especially cause judgment. 6 Sins to be put away for judgment. 9 Sins
which especially provoke wrath. 74 Sins provoking wrath rife among us. 79 In
Sin leave multitudes. 25 Speed in relieving oppressed. 49 98 99 Speedy
repentance profitable. 51 Speedily pacify Gods wrath. 49 Stoics condemn all
passions. 71 Stubbornenesse causes utter ruin. 29 Stubbornenesse provokes
wrath. 77 81 Sudden judgments fearful. 30
T
TAmberlains 3. flags. 50 Types of Christ many. 59
V
VIlifying mercies causes wrath. 75 80
W
WArrant makes bold in danger. 100 Word of God affoords directions for matter
and manner. 94 etc Wrath. See Judgments. Wrath. What it is. 6 Wrath of God how
slaked. 8 Wrath of God when to be slaked. 9 Wrath of God to be pacified by
warrantable means. 41 Wrath of God incensed by the means which Papists use to
pacify it. 44 Wrath of God speedily to be pacified. 49 Wrath of God a fire,
and fierce. 49 Wrath being incensed atonement may be made. 53 Wrath of God
has degrees. 66 Wrath how attributed to God. 67 Wrath not simply sinful. 69
Wrath how perverted. 70 Wrath of God many ways provoked. 72 79 Wrath of
JEHOVAH terrible. 73 Wrath by what sins especially provoked. 74 Wrath of God
manifested by a plague. 85 Wrongers of us to have mercy. 47
FINIS.
DEARTHS DEATH: OR, A REMOVAL of FAMINE: Gathered out of II SAM. XXI. 1. By
WILLIAM GOVGE.

PSALM. 107. 33, 34. He turns a fruitful land into barrenness for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein. JOEL 2. 13, 14. Turn unto the LORD
your God: for he is gracious, etc.
Who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him?
LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Sign of the Bible, at the great North door of Paul's. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND most worthy of all honor, Mrs. MARY MOORE,
Perpetuity of Grace here, and Eternity of Glory hereafter. Much esteemed, Much
honored,
Gratefulness makes inquisitive. A greatefull mind, both in relation to God,
and also in relation to man, is so affected with kindnesses received from the
one or the other, as it is ever plotting and enquiring what it may do, what it
may render. In relation to God says a grateful Prophet, what shall I render
unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Psalm. 116. 12. In relation to
man says a grateful King, Is there yet any left of the house of Saul, that I
may show him kindness for Ionathans sake? 2 Samuel 9. 1. Let me say it boldly,
for I say it truly. My soul is inquisitive: as in regard of God, what I may
render unto him: so in regard of your self, Good Mrs. Moore, what I may render
unto you. God knows my mind and heart. For he is the Searcher of hearts,
(Ier. 17. 10.) To you it must be made known. For what man knows the things
of a man save the spirit of man which is in him? 1 Cor. 2. 11. My heart
therefore being filled with gratefulness toward you, I have cast this way and
that way how to manifest the same: and that in the best manner that I could:
which I know not better how to do, then by a public acknowledgement of the
grateful respect I bear, and bounden duty which I owe to you: together with
the true and just grounds thereof: which, among many other, are these in
particular.

1. Your ancient and constant respect to me and my Ministry, even from the
first beginning thereof. For thereby you first took notice of me.

2. The many real demonstrations, and evident testimonies of that entire
respect, which from time to time you have given me.

3. Your vouchsafing to take my daughter into your house, under your good
government, and to become a mother to the motherlesse. Among many other, this
is one thing which gives me occasion to say in regard of my last dangerous
sickness, It is good for me that I was afflicted. That sickness was an
occasion of your taking my daughter to your tuition. What is, what ought to be
a fathers care, but (next to the salvation of his own soul) the good
education of his children? What can be more acceptable to him, then approved
means tending to that end? May I then, can I then be unmindfull of her, or
ungrateful to her that has affoorded such means? Have I not cause to be
inquisitive, and to think and say, What shall I render? Render a recompense I
cannot. All that is or can be done, is and can be but a testimony of gratitude.
Such testimonies as are ordinarily presented for new-yeares-gifts, your bounty
(I know) does not expect, will not accept. Noble spirits do herein resemble the
Divine Spirit, which does good for his own sake, for goodness sake. All the
recompense which they expect is a grateful acknowledgement of the kindness
they show, of the goodness they do. This from my heart I do here before all that
shall cast their eyes upon this Dedicatory Epistle.

There are, beside these particular, other more general motives, which induce
me to prefixe your worthy name before this treatise: As, 1. the eminency of
your endowments, which make this style Mrs. Mary Moore (at least in their
judgment who well know you) more eminent, then such titles of honor as are
conferred upon many of your sex. 2. The excellency of your parts, which enable
you with judgment to read such treatises as are published to the view of all.
3. The correspondency of your disposition to the most principal points of this
treatise. This treatise is of famine, and of means to remove it, or restrain
it, and keep it from excess. Piety toward him that causes plenty and
scarcity: Prudence in well ordering present abundance: Providence for the
future: Compassion in times of want: Liberality to such as need: Contentment in
that whereunto God calls: Patience in all judgments: Diligence in searching
after the causes thereof: Conscience in using the means warranted and
sanctified for averting judgments: Confidence in greatest necessities are
principal points handled in this treatise. The naming of the particulars is
enough to give evidence of the sutablenesse of your disposition thereunto.

The present necessity of the times, wherein bread the staff of man's life is
so scarce, have drawn my thoughts to meditate on the subject matter handled in
this treatise (which is in one word, FAMINE) that I might stir up my self
and others to take notice of the beginning of Gods judgment: that wisely we
may seek the Lord betimes, and use all good means for moderating and removing
this instant dearth, and for preventing the like, or any other heavier judgment
for the future. So as I cannot think such a subject at such a time to be
unseasonable: if at least the Composer of the Treatise were able answerably to
handle it. But as it is, I have made bold to dedicate it to your patronage;
whom, for the reasons before rendered, and many other like to them, I judge to
be as fit thereto, as the treatise it self is fit for the present time. In all
greatefulnes it is presented unto you. With all kindness let it be accepted of
you. As for recompense, To him that is ready graciously to accept, and able
plenteously to reward all goodness done for his sake to any of his, knees are
humbly bowed at the Throne of his Grace, by

Black Friars, London. 1. Ian. 1630. Your Worships Remembrancer WILLIAM GOVGE.

A Table of the principal Points handled in DEARTHS DEATH, on II SAM. XXI. I.
. 1. OF the meaning of the text. 129. 2. Of the resolution and observations of
the text. 133. 3. Of famine a judgment. 134. 4. Of the effects of famine. 135.
5. Of preventing famine by procuring plenty. 138. 6. Of the sins which cause
famine. 139. 7. Of moderating a famine. 141. 8. Of removing famine. 143. 9. Of
promises for succor in famine. 145. 10. Of instances of Gods preserving in
famine, and removing famine. 146. 11. Of famine in a pious polity. 147. 12. Of
the causes of judgments under good Governors. 147. 13. Of punishing
predecessors sins in their successors time. 148. 14. Of mis-judging a
profession by outward judgments. 150. 15. Of duties which judgments under
pious Princes require. 151. 16. Of long continued famine. 152. 17. Of duties by
reason of long famine. 153. 18. Of searching out causes of judgments. 154. 19.
Of Governors care in public judgments. 155. 20. Of seeking to God for
removing judgments. 157. 21. Of Gods causing famine. 157. 22. Of the means of
famine ordered by God. 158. 23. Of enquiring of God in and by his Word. 161.
24. Of the extremity of famine in the last siege of Jerusalem. 163. 25. Of
extremity of famine, where were no invasions of enemies, nor sieges, but
immediately from Gods hand. 168. 26. Of famines in England. 170. 27. Of uses to
be made of the terriblenesse of famine. 171
DEARTHS DEATH: OR, A Removal of Famine, gathered out of II SAM. XXI. I.
. 1. Of the meaning of this text.
2 SAMUEL 21. 1.Then there was a famine in the days of David, three years,
year after year, and David enquired of the Lord.
A Remedy for a famine is here set before us. Such a remedy as removed the
famine where it was used. For it is said, Verse 14.
After that, God was entreated for the land: that is, such satisfaction being
made for the sin which provoked Gods wrath, and brought the famine upon the
land, Gods wrath was appeased, and thereupon the famine removed. (...) exoratus.
The word translated, entreated, signifies, by entreaty to be moved to do what
is desired. Now David besought the Lord, to remove that famine, and God granted
his desire.

(...)
The first particle is a copulative particle, and properly signifies, and; yet
is it often used as a conjunction of time; especially when it coupleth histories
together. Therefore not unfitly is it here translated, then.

But great question is moved about the time, when this famine In what year of
David the famine began.
should be. Whether after all the forementioned histories of Absaloms
rebellion, and Shebaes defection, or before them.

That which has given occasion to this question, is a computation of time set
down for the beginning of Absaloms rebellion, thus, And it came to pass after
forty years that 2 Samuel 15. 7.
Absalom said, etc. Those forty years are supposed to be the forty years of
David's reign. Which if it be granted, this famine can neither follow after
Absaloms rebellion, nor be about that time. For David reigned but forty years:
and this famine continued three years.

To take away all question, some say that this and other histories following to
the end of this book, are not set down in just order of time: but, as
memorable matters, are Per (...). Pet. Mart. Comment. in hunc loc. Tremel, and
Iunius an notat. in 2 Samuel 24 1. utraque haec historia (aempe de Fame and
Peste) per (...) temporum ultimoloco penitur.
added after the former histories that depended one upon another.

It cannot be denied but that the Scripture sometimes so transposeth histories.
Neither will I much contend about the transposing of these histories. No great
inconvenience will follow thereupon. Yet the ground of all seems not to be
very sound. For by many arguments it may be evinced that those forty years
before mentioned, are not to be accounted the forty years of David's reign.

For first, beside that there is no mention of David's reign in that place, the
phrase is thus expressed in the original, (...) a fine 40 annoru^.
From the end of forty years. Now its more probable that David ended his
reign rather within the forty years, then beyond them. Because both in sacred
Scripture, and other writings, the year wherein a King dies is computed in
the years of his reign: so as, if David had reigned full forty years, and
entered into another year, he would in a round reckoning have been said to
have reigned one and forty years. Now if Absalom began his rebellion at the
end of forty years, and David reigned no longer then forty years at the most,
how could so many things as are noted of Absaloms rebellion, and the
consequences following thereon, be done in so short a time?

2. In the time of Absaloms rebellion it is said of David, 2 Samuel 17. 8.
He is a man of war, and will not ^odge with the people. Yea, David himself
offered to go out in battle against Absalom. -- 18. 2.
Yet, 1 King. 1. 1.
before David died, such frigidity fell upon him, as with clothes they could
not keep him warm, but were feign to bring a young virgin to lie in his
bosom. How can such an alteration be thought to be in so short a time?

3. All the histories recorded of David in the eight last chapters of the first
of Chronicles, were without all question after Absaloms rebellion. How then can
that rebellion be imagined to be in the end of David's fortieth year?

The forty years therefore from the end whereof Absaloms rebellion began, must
needs have relation to some other thing then the reign of David. As to the
beginning of the Diem pro tempore accipe Hier. Comment. l. 5. in Isay 19. Dies
pro annis numeratur. Ibid lib 7. in Esa. 16
regal government: or to Samuels first anointing of David: or to some other
memorable matter. And so this, and the histories following, may well follow as
they are set in order of time.

The time at large is said to be (...)
in the days of David: that is, in the time of his reign. For the time of a
Kings reign is said to be 1 Samuel 14. 52. 1 King. 4. 25. -- 14. 30. Days what
they imply. Genesis 47 9.
his days.

This word, days, is used 1. To put them in mind of their short continuance on
earth. For our continuance is but of days, soon gone. When Iaakob would set
out the brevity of his life, he thus expresses it, The days of the years of
my pilgrimage. And Job, thus, Are not man's days as the days of an hireling?
And David, thus, Thou have made my days Job 7. 1.
as an hand breadth. Psalm 39. 5.


David here mentioned, was a King: and the best King that ever swayed Scepter.
His name according to the notation (...) a David (...) Dod amicus, and (...)
dilectus. 1 Samuel 13. 14. Acts 13 22. 1 Samuel 18. 16. Psalm. 16. 3.
of it, imports a lovely or friendly one. He was amiable and lovely before
God and man: and friendly to all Gods people. He was a man after Gods own
heart. And all Israel and Judah loved him. In the Saints was all his delight.

(...)
Famine imports want of food for nourishment of the body. It comes from a
word that signifies to hunger.

The famine here mentioned continued three whole years together: and therefore
after he had mentioned three years, he adds, Tribus annis continu is. Trem.
and Iun.
year after year: that is, as the former English Translaters turn it, three
years together.

The course which David took for removing the famine, was to enquire what
course the Lord would prescribe: which is thus expressed, David enquired of the
Lord: word for word in the original thus, (...)
Sought the face of the Lord.

By the face of God is meant the manifestation of his presence: and in that
respect its often translated the presence of God, as where its said, Genesis 3. 8.
(...)
Adam hid himself from the presence of God (Hebr. from the face of God) And
where God says, My presence shall go (Hebr. my face.) Exo. 33. 14. (...)


Quest. What may be here meant by seeking the face, or presence, of the Lord?

Answ. Enquiring of the Lord what might be the cause of that famine, and
wherewith he might be pacified. They that thus translate it, Asked counsel of
the Lord, rightly aim at the meaning of the phrase.

Quest. How did David here enquire of the Lord?

Answ. The particular manner is not expressed. Diverse manners are in other
places set down. For, David 1. Sometimes by the High Priest enquired of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 22. 15. This was the most ordinary way, appointed by the Lord,
Exo. 28 30. Numb. 27. 21. 2. Other times by an extraordinary Prophet, 1 Samuel
22. 5. and 2 Samuel 7. 2. Josephus the Jew says, that the Prophets made answer
to David about this famine. 3. Yea, many times also by himself, humbly
presenting Davidi Prophetae dixerunt velle Deum, etc. Item, David audiens ex
Prophetis Deum velle, etc. Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 7. c. 12.
his supplication to God for direction, 1 Samuel 23. 2. and 2 Samuel 5. 19.


It is most probable that David here enquired of the Lord by the most solemn
and approved way, which was by the Priest. And that, for that end, he went to
the Ark of God; and in that respect may fitly be said, to seek the face of
the Lord.

. 2. Of the resolution and observations of this text.
THe Sum of this text is, A means for removing a Famine.

The Parts are two. 1. A Description of the Famine. 2. A Declaration of the
Means.


In the Description we have 1. The thing described, expressly set down. There
was a famine. 2. The aggravation thereof: and that by two circumstances. 1. The
time wherein it fell out. Set out by the King that then reigned. In the days
of David. 2. The continuance thereof: which is 1. Generally expressed, Three
years. 2. Particularly exemplified, Year after year.




In the declaration of the means there is observable 1. The person that used
the means, David. 2. The action that he did, sought, or enquired. 3. The
object, or party of whom he enquired, Of the Lord.


This text thus opened, affoords six considerable observations.

I. A famine is a judgment. So is this famine here mentioned: which moved
David to enquire about it. The cause of this famine rendered by the Lord, in the
latter end of this verse, and the course which David took for removing it, do
evidently prove that this famine was a judgment. 2. A famine may be under a
pious Governor. If ever there was a pious Governor, David was he. Many worthy
commendations are given of him: yea, he is made a pattern of a good Governor.
Therefore 1 King. 3. 14. -- 11. 38.
God himself sets his example as a pattern before his successors. And --
15. 11. 2 King. 18. 3. -- 22. 2.
good kings are thus commended, He did that which was right in the eyes of the
Lord as did David. And evil kings are thus discommended, 2 Chro. 28. 1. 1 King
14. 8.
He did not that which was right in the sight of the Lord, like David. Yea, of
such as halted, in some things doing that which was good, in other things that
which was evil, it is said, 1 King. 11. 4. -- 15. 3.
His heart was not perfect as the heart of David. Yet there was a famine in the
days of David. III. A famine may long continue without intermission. The
famine here mentioned continued three whole years together. A long time. IIII.
Causes of judgments are to be sought out. The inquiry here mentioned
imports as much. V. Chief Governors ought to be most solicitous in public
judgments. David the King is herein set out as a pattern. VI. God is to be
sought unto for removing judgments. So David here enquires of the Lord.
. 3. Of famine a judgment.
I. See 2.
A Famine is a judgment. As a judgment it is Lev. 26 26, etc. Deuteronomy. 28. 23,
38 53.
threatened in the law, and put into the catalogue of the curses, that were
fearful judgments: and Isa 51. 19. Ier. 42. 16. Ezekiel. 6. 12.
by the Prophets, who were raised up to denounce Gods judgments aforehand to
his people. Ezekiel. 5. 16. 2 Chro. 20 9. Ier. 24. 10. -- 27. 8.
Where the Scripture mentions three sharp mortal arrows of the Lord which
he uses to shoot as judgments against children of men, famine is one: one of
the sharpest. 2 Samuel 24. 13.
These three arrows, as three sore judgments, were brought to David for him to
choose one of them to be shot against him, but he would not choose famine.
Where the Lord says, Deuteronomy. 32. 23, 24.
I will spend mine arrows upon them, in amplification thereof he adds, They
shall be burnt with hunger, Joel. 1. 2, etc. -- 2. 1, etc.
Famine is the judgment which the Prophet Joel does most pathetically bewail:
and for removing whereof he calls the whole land to prayer and fasting. 1
King. 8. 35, 37.
Famine is one of the judgments which Solomon in his effectual prayer at the
dedication of the temple earnestly deprecateth and prays against.

In the Ecclesiastical histories of the Primitive Churches, it is recorded
that a very sore famine fell out in the dominions Eusebius. Eccle siast. Hist.
lib. 9 cap. 7. and 8. Niceph. Calist. Ecclesiast. Hist. l. 7. c. 27. and 28.
of Maximinus the Emperor, upon his publishing of cruel and bloody edicts
against Christians. This Maximinus was the author of the seventh fierce and
fiery persecution. In his Edicts he laid the blame of all public judgments
on Christians. But the foresaid famine, together with a fearful plague
accompanying the same, besides sundry rebellions and insurrections, gave
evident demonstration of Gods indignation against that Emperors cruelty.

. 4. Of the effects of famine.
IF the effects of famine be duly considered, it will appear that it is a most
sore and fearful judgment. Lege Joseph. de bello Iud. l. 6. cap. 11, 14, 16.
and 1. 7. c. 7, 8


1. It brings such as have had abundance, enough for themselves and all that
belong unto them, yea and much overplus for the relief of others, to extreme
penury and beggary. It exhausteth all the money that the rich have, and forces
them to sell away all their goods, cattle, and lands, (Instance the Egyptians
who sold all to Joseph, Genesis 47. 18, 19.) and to let go any thing: as Iaakob,
who let his darling Famis extremitas patris amorem dicit. Chrysostom. Hom. 64. in
Genesis 43.
Benjamin go into Egypt (Genesis 42. 11.) Extremity of famine overcame the fathers
love.

2. It depriveth poor men of means to work and labor for their living. The
Prophet, (Zac. 8. 10.) speaking of times of famine, says, There was no hire
for man, nor any hire for beast. Thus means of livelihood were taken away.

3. It makes men hard-hearted against the cries of such Qui ex opulentioribus
esse videbantur, multitudine petentium absterriti, postquam innumera
praestilissent, immitem and rigidum animum induebant, verentes ne eandem and
ipsi cum petentibus brevi paterentur egestate^. Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. l. 9. c. 8.
Fames tanta est in Phrygia or^a, ut necessario incolae patriam relinquerent.
Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 11. c. 16. Abraham habuit dies malos, quando a same
mutabat regionem, and quaerebat ^ibum. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 33. Fames admodum
exerevit: adeo ut homines ad irrationalium animantium alimenta sint conversi.
Niceph. Eccl Hist. l. 10. c. 35. Rebus necessarys desicienti^us prohibitis,
insolitis, and exitiosis alimentis u^ebantur. Ibid. l. 15. c. 10.
as starve. For men that have for the present, fear that the famine may bring
them to want, and thereupon refuse to give to others. Yea dear and tender
mothers are forced to stop their ears against the cries of their young
children, having nothing to feed them withal, Lam. 2. 12. and 4. 3, 4.

4. It forces such, as otherwise would deal justly, to use fraudulent and
violent means to get their living. So much does he intimate, who praying
against extreme poverty, renders this reason, Least I steal (Prove. 30. 8, 9.)
and he who said; Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his
soul, when he is hungry, Prove. 6. 30.

5, It puts men upon dangerous attempts, and makes them desperate: according to
the proverb, Hunger makes men break through stone walls. The desperate
resolution of the hunger-starved lepers gives instance hereof, (2 King. 7. 4.)
It was this, Let us fall unto the host of the Syrians. If they save us alive,
we shall live: and if they kill us, we shall but die. We got our bread, say the
Jews, with the peril of our lives, Lam. 5. 9.

6. It makes many, if at least they can get passage, to fly their country; and
so voluntarily to banish themselves. Abraham and Isaak, by reason of famine,
went to countries where they supposed themselves to be in great danger for
their wives (Genesis 12. 10, 12. and 26. 1, 7.) A famine caused Iaakob with all
that belonged to him, to go down into Egypt. (Genesis 46. 6.) and Elimelech with
his family to go to Moab (Ruth. 1. 1.) and the Shunemite with her household to
go to the Philistines, (2 King. 8. 2.)

7. When people know not whither to go, or can not go from the place where they
are (as in a city besieged) it brings men to feed on the coursest things that
they can get. As on horse bread, on all manner of roots, on acorns, on horses
and asses, on mice, rats, and all kind of vermin, on doves dung, on leather,
and any other thing that can be chewed, and swallowed. Yea it brings such
gross things to high prices, 2 King. 6. 25.

8. It causes men to be inhumane, and to eat one another Vt ma^res filios
suos commederent obsidionis necessitas coercuit. Aug de Mirab. S. S. l 2 c. 26.
Lege Chrysostom. advers vituper vitae Monast. l 1 de Maria quadam commedente filium
suum. ex Joseph Hist. de bello Iud. l. 7. c. 8. Fame tantopere invalescente,
homines victus ratioxe mutata in aegritudines inciderunt. Niceph. Eccl. Hist l.
15. c. 10. Pestilentia semper famem and penuriam sequitur. Hier. Com. in Ezekiel.
16. l. 4 Majorem habet poen am languor diuturnus, quam citissimuus exitus Aug.
Epist. 122 ad Victorian. Quidam pallidi, and sum macilenti, perinde atq.
simulachra quaedam, rerum omnium egeni, hinc and inde oberrantes, proni in
trivijs ipsis concidebant. Niceph. Ecclesiast. Hist l. 7. c. 28.
flesh, (Zac. 11. 9.) and not to spare the nearest and dearest they have. For
it causes husbands to eat the flesh of their wives: wives of their husbands:
parents of their children: tender mothers of their children newborn, (Deuteronomy.
28. 54, 55, 56, 57.) There is an express instance of this kind of inhumanity
in the siege of Samaria. (2 King. 6. 29. Read also Lam. 2. 20.)

9. It moves men to eat their own flesh, (Isa. 9. 20. Eccl. 4. 5.) This has
been often observed of such as have been hanged alive in chains.

10. It procures sundry diseases. Among other sicknesses, the infectious, and
mortal, and most uncomfortable sickness, the pestilence follows most
commonly on famine. Experience of all ages has given evidence to the truth
hereof.

11. It causes the most miserable death that can be. It first takes away all
the glory and beauty of a creature: it makes the flesh to pine all away, and
the skin to cleave to the bones. Then comes on a lingering death, more
intolerable then any speedy torture. The Prophet thus with much passion and
compassion sets it out. The Nazarites were purer then snow: they were whiter
then milk: they were more ruddy in body then rubies: their polishing was of
sapphire: Their visage is blacker then a cole: they are not known in the
streets: their skin cleaves to their bones: it is withered: it is become like
a stick. (Lam. 4. 7, 8.) And again, Our skin was black like an oven because of
the terrible famine (Lam. 5. 10.) Hence he makes this inference, They that are
slain with the sword are better then they that are slain with hunger: for
these pine away, etc. Lam. 4. 9. Our Ecclesiastical histories also relate that
in time of famine men being pale and extremely lean, even as very images,
destitute of all things, wandered up and down, fell grovelling in the streets,
etc.

. 5. Of preventing famine by procuring plenty.
FAmine being a judgment, and (as by the forenamed effects thereof is
evident) a fearful judgment, it will be our wisdom to do what in us lies
to prevent it, or to Sec 7.
moderate it, or to Sec. 8.
remove it.

For preventing Famine, we must 1. Observe such duties as procure plenty.
Plenty how procured.
2. Avoid such sins as cause famine.


For procuring and continuing plenty, Col 1. 10.
Walk worthy of the Lord, unto all well pleasing: being fruitful in every
good work. Thus the Lord finding thee to be a fertile soil, he will sow all
manner of needful seed plentifully in thee.

To this worthy walking is in particular required,

1. An acknowledgement that the plenty which thou have comes from God. Hereof
we have a worthy pattern in him who said to the Lord, Psalm. 145. 15, 16.
The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due
season: thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living
thing.

2. Thanksgiving to God for what thou have: and for the refreshing and benefit
thou reapest thereby. Deuteronomy. 8. 10.
This is expressly commanded to this end.

3. An using of what thou have to the glory of God, accorcording to this
Apostolical direction, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God.
Gods creatures are used to his glory, when (besides the forementioned
acknowledgement of Gods providence in giving them, and blessing him for them)
we endeavor in the use and strength of them to be the better enabled to do
that work which God appoints us to do: And when we bestow some of that which
God bestows on us, upon pious uses, which after a peculiar manner tend to the
honor of his name. To this tends Salomons advice, Prove. 3. 9.
Honor the Lord with thy substance. -- 10. Mal. ^. 10.
Plenty is expressly promised hereunto.

4. Charity to the poor. Thus thou sowest such seed, as will bring forth a
plentiful crop. To this kind of seed the Apostle applies this proverb, 2
Cor. 9. 6.
He that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully. Somewhat more directly
says the Wiseman, Prove. 11. 25.
The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that waters shall be also watered
himself.

5. Providence in laying up against a dear year. Thus Vir justus providet
multo antea. quo futurae penuriae succurri possit. Chrysostom Hom 64 in Genesis 41.
may the abundance of one year make supply of scarcity in another year, and
future want be prevented. By such a provident care in summer, Bees, Ants, and
other like unreasonable creatures have abundance in winter. Pro 6. 6.
To such creatures we are sent for instruction. Genesis 41. 48, 54.
Joseph by such a provident care brought it to pass, that when a dearth was in
all lands, there was bread in all the land of Egypt. And if the famine had not
continued so long as it did, the store which Joseph laid up, might have made
plenty, notwithstanding a years famine or more.

. 6. Of the sins which cause famine.
2. THe sins which cause famine are in general Lev. 26. 26. Deu. 28. 23, 38
Peccata gravia nec nitra nec herba bovis d^lui possunt: sed gravioribus tormen
lis indigent. Hier. Com. lib. 1. in Hier. 2.
all such notorious, public, crying sins as so far incense the wrath of
God, as thereby he is provoked to execute some public and heavy judgment,
whereof famine is one, and not one of the least, as has been 3. 4.
before showed. These sins are Sec A Plaster for the Plague, on Number. 16. 46
45. Dei beneficia ad i'los referunt, qui cultorum suorum animas perdiderunt.
Hier. Comment. lib 1. in Os. 2.
elsewhere reckoned up.

The particular sins which the Holy Ghost notes in special manner to be
forerunners and causes of famine, are these that follow and such like.

1. Superstitious attributing of plenty to other authors then to the only God
from whom all plenty comes. So did the Jews that said, Ier. 44. 17.
When we burnt incense, and powered out drink offerings to the Queen of
heaven, we had plenty of victuals. Hereupon -- 26, 27.
the Lord swear that they should die of famine. So where Israel said, Hos. 2. 5.
My lovers gave me my bread, and my water, my wool, and my flax, mine oil,
and my drink, the Lord answers, -- 9, 12.
I will take away my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season
thereof, etc. I will destroy her vines and her figtrees. etc.

2. Ingratitude. It is Gods usual dealing to take away from ungrateful
persons the blessings which he has bestowed on them. God gave the Egyptians
seven years of Genesis 41. 53, 54. Omnia auseret Deus, ut qui ex copia datorem
non senserant, sentiant expenuria Aug. loc. citat. Lege Chrysostom. Tom. 2. Hom. 29.
Quae hunc habet titulum, Quod nemo laeditur nisi a seipso. Ibi copiose disser
it contra m^nsarum affl^entiam. Leg^ item Sermonem ipsius contra luxum and
crapulam. Tom. 5.
extraordinary plenty. They were not thankful. God therefore gave them seven
years of such scarcity, as all the former plenty was utterly consumed. God will
take away all from such, that they who by plenty discern him not to be the
giver of all, may discern it by want.

3. Perverting of plenty to gluttony, drunkenness, and all excess. Of them
that used to rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong drink,
that continue until night, til wine inflame them: and the Harp, and the Viole,
the Taebret, and Pipe, and wine are in their feasts, it is said, their
honorable men are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst, Isa. 5.
11, 12, 13.

4. Prodigality: or a lavish spending of that abundance which God gives.
Christ exemplifieth this in him that is commonly called the prodigal child.
Through his prodigality he brought himself to such penury, as He feign would
have filled his belly with the husk that the swine did eat, and no man gave
unto him, Luke 15. 13, 16.

5. Insensiblenesse of their misery who are in want: To them that stretch
themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock: that drink
wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments: but are not
grieved for the affliction of Joseph: The Lord said, The banquet of them that
stretched themselves shall be removed, Amo. 6. 4, 6. 7.

6. Cruelty to strangers that live among us for succor. Lege Ambr. Offic l. 3.
c 7. De non arcend^ peregrinis urbe tempore famis.
Such were the Gibeonites that lived among the Israelites. (Ios. 9. 15.) Upon
these Saul executed much cruelty: and for that cause God sent this famine, 2 Samuel 21. 1. If uncharitableness to strangers, much more to our own poor,
must needs incense Gods wrath, and move him to withdraw plenty even from the
rich, and make them to want.

7. Rejecting the Word of God, which is the bread of life. To those that said
to the Prophet Jeremiah, Prophecy Quomodo quis poterit, etiam cui saxeum cor,
lantum contemptum non gravatim far. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. in Gen 1. de contemp tu
verbi. Pseudoprophetae prespera promittendo supplanta^t populum Dei. Hier.
Comment l. 3 in Ier. 15.
not in the name of the Lord, thus said the Lord of host, Their sons and
their daughters shall die by famine, Ier. 11. 21, 22. By want of corporal food
God does visibly demonstrate their folly in despising spiritual food.

8. Ministers soothing of people with conceit of plenty, when the Lord
threatens famine. Of the Prophets that said, Ye shall not see the sword,
neither shall ye have famine, the Lord said, The prophets prophesied lies in my
name; I sent them not; By sword and famine shall those prophets be consumed.
And the people to whom they prophecy, shall be cast out in the streets of
Jerusalem, because of the famine and the sword, Ier. 14. 13, 15, 16.

9. Refusing to subject our selves to that yoke and government under which God
will have us to be, Ier. 27. 8, etc. For, such a government is a means of
enjoying that which is needful for us. But resisting the same is a means of
spoiling us of all.

10. Wilful standing out against such means of provision as God affoordeth
because it is not pleasing unto our selves. As when an enemy besieges a city,
and there is no hope of means to raise the siege, nor sufficient in the city
long to hold out: and by the enemy conditions for preserving of life are
offered: by standing out too stiffly in this case, God is provoked by famine to
destroy such men in their city. So dealt God with the Jews, Ier. 21. 9. 2
King. 25. 3.

. 7. Of moderating a famine.
FOr moderating a famine when it is begun,

1. Provision must in time be sent for to such places as have plenty. Genesis 42.
1, 2.
So did Iaakob.

2. They who are abroad must stir up such as have plenty to be mindful of
those that are pressed with famine, and send succor to them. 2 Cor. 8. 1, etc
Saint Paul was very diligent herein.

3. More then ordinary diligence in every ones place and calling must be used:
that all of all sorts may eat their own bread. Thus will not some few have
the burden of many lying upon them, which much increases a famine.

4. Moderation in diet must be used, and that by those that have greatest
store. That which is spared may be for supply to those who have nothing at all.
A little scarcity by immoderate lavishing soon produces a great famine.

5. Frequent fasts must be made by those that have plenty: and what is spared
at such fasts, given to those that have not sufficiency. Thus many may be
sustained by that which a few do ordinarily spend.

6. Then especially must men observe the counsel of Christ, to invite to their
table the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the blind. Luke 14. 13.


7. Public provisions must be wisely distributed: according to the
distribution of Manna, whereof they had Exo. 16. 18.
every one according to his eating: that is, according to the number of persons
in a family, and according to their age, stature and strength.

8. Magistrates must be more then ordinarily careful in preserving peace and
keeping good order: that neither the rich and mighty oppress the poor and
weak (as he that having many flocks and herds of his own, took from a poor
2 Samuel 12. 2, 3, etc.
man that had but one little ewe lamb, that lamb to entertain a traveller
that came to him:) nor the poor and needy felloniously and violently take from
the rich. In time of famine Magistrates must be the more diligent and careful,
because fear of want will make them that for the time have enough, oppress
others: and present sense of want will move them that have nothing, by hook or
crook to get what they can. And what is violently or fraudulently gotten,
will be lavishly spent: and so the famine prove to be the greater.

9. Ministers must be the more careful to feed their people with the bread of
life: that by the plenty and sweetness thereof, they may the more patiently
and contentedly bear the want of bodily food. This is the means to instruct
men, both to be full, and to be hungry: both to abound and to suffer Phil. 4 12.
need. Such instruction will make famine much more tolerable.

10. All of all sorts must with patience expect the time and means which God
shall give for succor, and not prescribe time or means to God. Much less
murmr against God, or charge him with any evil, or refuse to wait on him,
supposing that he can not or will not afford any succor: as he who said, This
evil is of the Lord: what should I wait for the 2 King. 6. 33. -- 7. 2.
Lord any longer? And as the other that said (when Elisha prophesied of much
plenty, and that suddenly) Behold if the Lord should make windows in the
heavens might this be? Meditation on Gods promises for succor in famine, is of
special use to work patience.

. 8. Of removing famine.
Means of removing famine are such as these.

1. Humiliation, and that especially for. 6.
the sins whereby God has bin provoked to se^d famine. 2 Chro. 7 13, 14.
This means even in this case is expressly prescribed by God himself, and a
promise made of success thereto. That it may be the more effectual, it must
arise inwardly from the soul, and be manifested and helped by fasting, weeping
and mourning, Joel. 2. 12.

2. Confession, and that both of our own guiltiness, and also of Gods justice
in depriving us of his creatures. Solomon Confessio hostia est Deo. Aug. Enar.
in Psalm. 95.
compriseth as much under this phrase, 1 King. 8. 35.
Confess Gods name. We have a worthy pattern of this kind of confession in
Dan. 9. 4, etc
Daniels prayer. For this end Examination of our own inward corruptions, and of
our former course of life, yea and due observation of the public and common
sins of the times and places wherein we live, is very requisite: that thus,
if it be possible, we may find out those particular sins, which have in
special incensed Gods wrath, and provoked him to afflict us with famine: and
as we find them, so in particular to confess them: as they, who said, 1 Samuel
12. 19.
We have added unto all our sins this evil, etc.

3. Conversion. Joel 2. 12.
This is also expressly prescribed: and 2 Chro. 7. 14.
to this promise of succor is made. Conversion must be answerable to
confession. It must be universal, from all manner of sin, whereof we shall
find our selves guilty, and Ex fide poeniteat: credat hanc esse medicinam, etc.
Aug. de ve^a and falsa poenit. cap. 13.
whereto we shall find our selves addicted: and particular from those
especially, for which we have cause to fear that God has sent famine among
us. To confess such sins, and not to turn from them, is to mock God, and
the more to incense his wrath against us.

4. Satisfaction for wrongs done to man: at least if the wrong be such as God
is moved to revenge. This I do the rather here note, because it is a means of
removing the famine mentioned in my text. For when David had made satisfaction
for the wrong done to the Gibeonites, God was entreated for the land, 2 Samuel
21. 14.

5. Supplication. Joel 1. 14. 2 Chro. 6. 28, 29 -- 7. 13, 14.
This is the most principal means of all. All the other are but preparations
hereunto. This is likewise prescribed, and a promise of prevailing thereby
annexed thereunto. Iam. 5. 18.
It has been used and proved to be effectual.

6. Faith in Gods promises. This must be added to prayer. Both Christ Mar. 11.
24.
and Iam. 1. 6.
his Apostles require as much. Gods promises have their true and proper effect
only in such as believe: and to them they are effectual, either for sufficient
supportance, or for a good deliverance.

7. Charity to the poor. For God will succor such as are ready with their
uttermost ability to succor others. This is especially for such as have corn,
or other provision in store: to bring it forth, and give it freely, or at least
to sell it at a cheap rate to the poor. Blessing is promised to him that
sells it: namely, to the poor, and at a reasonable rate, Prove. 11. 26.

. 9. Of promises for succor in famine.
Quest. ARe there any particular promises for help in famine, and deliverance
from it?

Answ. Yes, very many: as many as in any other like case. Some of the
particulars are these. 2 Chro. 7. 13, 14.
If I shut up heaven (says the Lord) that there be no rain, or if I command
the locusts to devour the land, if my people shall humble themselves, and
pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways: then will I hear
from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land. Hos. 2.
21, 22.
In that day I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they
shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and
the oil, and they shall hear Iezreel. Joel 2. 18, 19.
Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people, yea the Lord
will answer and say unto his people, Behold, I will send you corn, and wine,
and oil, and you shall be satisfied therewith. Zac. 8. 11, 12.
Now will I not be to the residue of this people, as in the former days, says
the Lord of hosts. For the seed shall be prosperous: the vine shall give her
fruit, and the ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their
dew. Zac. 10. 1.
Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain: so the Lord shall
make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one grass in the
field. Mal. 3. 10.
Prove me now says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven, and power you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it.

Job 5. 20.
In famine he shall redeem thee from death.

Pro. 10. 3.
The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish.

Psalm. 33. 19.
Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: upon them that hope in
his mercy: to keep them alive in famine. -- 37. 19. See A Plaster for the
Plague. on Numb. 16. 45.. 12, 13, 14. 15.
In the days of famine they shall be satisfied.

. 10. Of instances of Gods preserving in famine, and removing famine.
THat the forementioned promises may with the stronger confidence be rested
upon, take instance of How the righteous are exempted from judgment.
Gods performing them. Genesis 12, 10, 17
When in Abraham's time there was a famine in the land where he sojourned, he
went down into Egypt, where the Lord kept him and his wife in safety. -- 26.
1, 2.
When again there was a famine in Isaaks time, God directed him whither to go.
-- 45. 5. -- 50. 20. Psa. 105. 16, 17
God sent Joseph purposely before hand into Egypt to preserve Iaakob and all
that were with him in famine. 2 King. 8. 1.
By his Prophet God advises the Shunemite with her house to sojourne where was
plenty, when he intended to bring a famine on Israel. 1 King. 17. 4. 16.
Miraculously did the Lord provide for Eliah and the widow of Zarephats in
famine. So did he for the Israelites in the wilderness. Exo. 16. 13, 14
When they wanted bread and meat, extraordinarily he provided Manna and Quails
for them: and -- 17. 6.
when they wanted water, he brought it out of a rock for them. So Judge. 15.
18, 19.
for Sampson, when he was ready to die for thirst, God extraordinarily provided
water. 1 King. 18. 42
At Eliahs prayer, after Gods wrath was pacified, on a sudden, rain, having
been withheld three years and an half, fell down abundantly. 2 King. 6.
28. -- 7. 6, etc.
Samaria being so long besieged as they began to eat their children, the Lord
on a sudden with an extraordinary terror caused the enemies to fly, and to
leave all their provision to the Israelites, so as they had all manner of food
in great plenty.

These visible and extraordinary evidences give sensible demonstration of Gods
power and pity: how able and ready he is to succor people in their
extremities. And due notice is the rather to be taken of these, that we may
know that when by more ordinary means succor is affoorded, it is the Lord
that orders and disposes those means: and his providence is to be
acknowledged therein, as much as if extraordinarily he did what is done.

. 11. Of famine in a pious polity.
II.. 2. Ecce in adventu justi fames, and fames validat and non turbatur
justus, neque aliquid humanum patitur: Chrysostom. Hom. 32. in Genesis 12.
FAmine may be under a pious Governor. Besides the instance of David mentioned
in this text, it is expressly noted of the three great Patriarchs, who in their
days were the supreme Governors of Gods Church, that Genesis 12. 10. -- 26. 1.
-- 46. 5.
there was such famine in each of their times, as they were all of them forced
from their own habitations, and so journed in strange countries. Ruth 1. 1.
In the days of the Judges there was a famine in the land. Now all the Judges
(except Abimelech, a cruel and tyrannical usurper) were pious Governors,
extraordinarily stirred up by God, and extraordinarily gifted and assisted by
him. Yet in their days there was a famine: and that as the Ruth 4. 18, etc.
generation of Pharez gives evidence, in Deborahs time, who (though a woman)
was one of the best Judges.

. 12. Of the causes of judgments under good Governors.
1. THe best Governors have many times most impious subjects under them: the
cry of whose sins, they being many and impudent, more incenseth Gods wrath
against a nation, then can be pacified by the piety of a righteous Governor, or
of a few righteous subjects, though they be men of extraordinary endowments.
For thus says the Lord by one prophet, Ier. 15. 1.
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not be toward this
people. And by another thus, Ezekiel. 14. 14, 16.
Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in the city, they should
deliver neither son nor daughter. 2 Samuel 24. 1.
In David's time the anger of the Lord was so kindled against Israel, as he
moved David against them. Ier. 3. 6, 10. Josias vir sanctus non sclum
peccatorem populum suis virtutibus non salvavit, sed and ipse in peccatis
illius mortuus est. Hier. Comme^t. l 4. in Ezec. 14.
In the days of good Josiah Judah waxed rebellious: so rebellious, as that
pious King was so far from preserving that sinful people, as he himself
died for their sins. No marvel then that God send famine, and other sore
judgments upon a land in the time of pious Governors to punish such subjects.

2. The most pious Governors do often also themselves give too just cause unto
God to say, Rev. 2. 4.
I have somewhat against you. It is in the register of truth recorded, what he
had against Numb. 20. 22.
Moses and Aaron, against 1 Samuel 2. 29.
Elie, against 2 Samuel 12. 9
David, 1 King 11. 9.
Solomon, 2 Chro. 16. 10
Asa, -- 19. 2.
Iehosaphat, -- 26. 16.
Vzziah, -- 32. 25.
Hezekiah, and -- 35. 22.
Josiah. And without all contradiction these were some of the best Governors
that ever the Church had.

3. God does sometimes treasure up the sins of predecessors, and extend his
wrath unto succeeding generations. Excellent things are spoken of Josiah and
his Government; yet at the end of all this dismal doom is added, 2 King. 23.
26
Notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath,
wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations
that Manasseh had provoked him withal. In our text we see how God treasured up
Saul's bloody sin till David's time.

. 13. Of punishing predecessors sins in their successors time.
Quest. HOw can it stand with Divine equity and justice that succeeding ages
should be punished for the sins of their predecessors?

Answ. They are not simply and only judged for their predecessors sins. The
sins of predecessors do only aggravate judgments inflicted on successors.

True is that of Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 18. 14, 17.
If a wicked father beget a son that sees all his fathers sins which he has
done, and considers and does not such like, he shall not die for the iniquity
of his father. He shall surely live. Yet withal is that of the Law as true,
Exo. 34. 7.
the Lord visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children. We must
therefore distinguish betwixt children. There are children which no way make
themselves accessory to their fathers sins: but rather abhor them, and pray
that they may not be laid to their charge. These shall not bear their fathers
iniquity.

There are other children which tread in their fathers Quomodo Sanctorum merita
descendunt ad posteros, sicut David and caelerorum: sic peccatorum flagitia, si
liberi, nepotesque similia gesserint, ad posteros perveniunt. Hier. Comment. l.
3. in Hier. 15.
steps, and commit like abominations, or at least do not consider their fathers
sins, to be humbled for them, or to make such satisfaction for them as is
meet, and to remove the evil effects of them: but some way or other make
themselves accessory thereto: and in that respect are visited for them. As the
virtues of predecessors descend to their posterity, as David's and others: so
the wickedness of sinners shall fall upon their posterity, if their children,
and childrens children do the like things.

In Iosiahs days, 2 King. 23. 2, etc.
though he himself did what lay in him to redress the remainder of his
forefathers abominations, yet Ier. 3. 6. 10.
the people were not thoroughly reformed. 2 King. 23. 26.
That therefore which is noted of Gods remembering Manassehs abominations in
Iosiahs days, was not in regard of Josiah: for it is said, that 2 King. 22. 20.
he should be gathered into his grave in Deus non exaudiet Moysen, aut
Samuelem, quoniam consummata sunt scelera populi delinquentis. Hier. Comment.
l. 3. in Hier. 15.
peace: but it was in regard of the people who continued to cleave to the
sins of Manasseh, notwithstanding all the care that Josiah took for an
universal reformation. For God will not accept the intercession of his best
Saints, when the wickedness of a sinful nation is full, and in that kind
perfected.

As for Saul's sin, 1. David had not redressed it as he might and should have
done. The slaying of the Gibeonites was a public fact, and that against a
public agreement, and oath: so as David could not be ignorant thereof. He
might therefore, and ought to have enquired of the remnant of the Gibeonites
what satisfaction he should make: as he did being put in mind of Saul's sin by
Divine oracle.

2. It may be thought that the people had their hand as accessaries in slaying
the Gibeonites. For it is said that 2 Samuel 21. 2.
Saul sought to slay the Gibeonites in his zeal to the children of Israel and
Judah. They therefore are justly punished with this famine.

3. Saul's sons were a wicked offspring of a wicked stock: and retained their
fathers evil disposition. For Saul's house is styled -- 1.
a bloody house. Under his house, his children are comprised. The Lord
therefore purposing to root out all his posterity, takes this just occasion.
And by this means David's fact in rooting them out is more justified before all
the people: the envy thereof taken from him: and his kingdom the more secured
to him and his posterity. In hoc Dei Creatoris clementia demonstratur. Non enim
truculeliae est and severitatis, ir a^ tenere usque ad tertiam and quartam
generationem: sed signum misericordiae paenam differ peccati, etc. Hier.
Comment. lib. 5. in Ezekiel. 18.


Herein therefore the clemency of the Creator is manifested: for it is not a
part of severity and cruelty to withhold wrath till the third and fourth
generation, but a sign of mercy to defer the punishment of sin. For when
he says, The Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant
in goodness, and adds, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, and upon the childrens children, he shows that he is of such
compassion, that he does not presently punish, but defers the execution of
punishment.

. 14. Of mis-judging a profession by outward judgments.
IT being so evident that famines befall pious polities, it Audlant qui temere
and incircu^ specte loquuntur, and divinant, dicentes quoniam quispia madvenit
sames facta. Ecce etiam in adte^tu justi fames, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 32. in Genesis 12.
must needs be a perverse ground of censure, to question a Religion and the
truth thereof by reason of such an event. Was there any true Church in the
world, but the Church of the Jews, while that polity stood? Yet was there no
external judgment from which that was not exempted. A Religion may be sound
and good, though the Professors thereof (through their unworthy walking) pull
many judgments upon their own heads: 1 Cor. 11. 30.
The Church of Corinth in the Primitive and purest time thereof, provoked God
to judge them in this world. Yet was the Religion which they professed, taught
them by an Apostle: the Religion I say, not their abuse thereof. There is a
better touch-sto^e to try the truth of Religion by, then external events. 1
Pet. 4. 17.
Judgment must begin at the house of God. Pro. 11. 31.
The righteous shall be recompensed in the earth. Shall then that be accounted no
Church where judgments are? Or they not righteous, who on earth are
recompensed? Well may we judge, that God inflicteth no judgment without a just
cause. But a false Religion is not the only cause of judgment. Wherefore
neither judge other Churches in their Religion because of famine, plague, or
other like judgments befall them: nor think the worse of thine own
profession, especially when thou have evidences of the correspondency thereof
to Gods Word, for such causes.

. 15. Of duties which judgments under pious Princes require.
WOrthy directions are affoorded even to pious Governors and their people, by
this public judgment which God laid on Israel in David's time.

Governors must therefore

1. Make the best enquiry they can into former times: and take notice of such
public crying sins as have been committed, and not expiated either by any
public judgment on Gods part, or by any public humiliation and
satisfaction on peoples part. Such sins are treasured up. Vengeance may be
executed for them in succeeding times. Successors therefore ought to do what
lies in their power to make an atonement in such cases.

2. Be careful over their people to keep them in good order: That as they
themselves profess, affect, and maintain true Religion, so their subjects may
subject themselves thereto, and show forth the power thereof. Not common A
Principibus non requiruntur opera tantum trita and vulgaria, sed ut sapia^t
alijs, ut vivant alijs, ut illis praeluccant omni virtutum genere. Martyr.
Comment in 2 Samuel 21. 17.
and ordinary works only are required of Governors: but that they be wise for
others, live for others, and shine out to them in every kind of virtue.
Otherwise, the sins of subjects (notwithstanding the piety of their
Governors) may pull down public vengeance.

As for people under pious Governors,

1. They may not be secure and careless, much less dissolute and licentious,
because they have such Governors, as if no judgments could fall on a land in
the time of good Governors. God has many ways to punish such people even in
such times: As by inflicting such judgments, as prove greater plagues to the
common people, then to their Governors: as this famine was. (For famine for
the most part lies most heavy on the meaner sort:) Or by giving over their
Governors to commit such sins as will pull down public judgments: as he
gave over David: or by taking away their Governors, as he took away Josiah, 2 Samuel 24. 1. 2 King. 23. 26, 29.
and then pouring out the vials of his indignation.

2. They must live in obedience to the pious laws that are made by their pious
Governors. For continuance of Divine blessing upon a land, there must be like
Governors, like Subjects: each worthy of other.

Finally, Governors must pray for their subjects: and subjects for their
Governors: that thus one may be heard for another, and one keep judgments
from another. Otherwise, A famine may be in the days of David.

. 16. Of long continued famine.
III. 2.
A Famine may long continue without intermission. Here was a famine of three
years, year after year. 1 King. 18. 1. Luke 4. 25. Iam. 5. 17.
In Eliahs time a famine continued three years and six months. Genesis 41. 30.
-- 45. 6.
In Egypt and all the land of Canaan a famine continued seven years together.
2 King 8. 1, 2.
The like was in Israel in Elishaes time. In the time of the Judges a famine
continued ten years, as by probable arguments may be conjectured. For, Ruth 1.
2.
Elimelech with Naomi his wife went into Moab to sojourn there by reason of a
famine in Israel. -- 6.
When Naomi heard that the Lord had visited his people in giving them bread,
she arose to go into her own country. But from the first coming of her
husband into Moab, to this her returning, she had dwelt -- 4.
about ten years in Moab.

1. God suffers famine to lie the longer on men, that the smart of his stroke
might be the more sensibly felt: and Why famine is long continued.
his judgment not lightly regarded. For they who at first think nothing of
famine, supposing that they have store enough laid up till the famine be gone,
by the long continuance of it are brought to exhaust all their store: and when
they know not whither to turn their eyes, to lift them to God in heaven.

2. Men's continuance in sin many times provokes the Lord to continue his
judgments on them. 1 King 18. 18
While the Israelites continued in Eliahs time to worship Baal, the famine
continued. But -- 39, 4^
so soon as they acknowledged the Lord to be God, rain fell down from heaven
abundantly, whereby the famine was removed.

3. It is long, in famine, as in other judgments, before men use to seek
after the true cause thereof. But they are ready to lay it on this wrong cause,
or that wrong cause. As 1 King 18. 17
Ahab laid the cause of the famine in his days on Eliah: and 2 King. 6. 31
Iehoram his son on Elisha. And Ier. 44 18.
the Jews in Ieremiahs time, on the reformation of their idolatry: and Tertus.
in Apolog advers. Gent c. 40 Cypr. Tract. 1. contr Demetr. Eusebius. Eccles. Hist.
lib. 9. cap. 7.
the Heathen in the time of the Primitive Churches, on Christians. Men are more
prone to pick out false causes, then to search out the true cause. It appears
to be long ere David took a right course to find out the true cause. Three
years had first passed over, But when men have long wearied themselves in
searching after false causes, and observe by continuance of famine that they
miss of the right cause: they are forced to take another course, and to fly to
God for help. On this ground faith the Lord, I will go and return to my place,
till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face: in their affliction
they will seek me early.

. 17. Of duties by reason of long famine.
MVch wisdom may be learned from this kind of Gods dealing with men, in long
continuing famine; as the directions following demonstrate.

1. When there is any cause to fear a famine, See. 5. 6.
do what lies in thee to prevent it, and that so much the rather, because it
may long continue if once it begin. Evils that long continue are the more to be
feared, and (if it be possible) prevented.

2. When a famine is begun, See A Plaster for the Plague. on Numb. 16. 46..
50, 51.
in the beginning thereof humble thy self before God: seek to pacify his
wrath betimes. Thus may thou at least prevent the extremity of famine: and
move God the sooner to remove it.

3. Provide before hand, for a long time. Genesis 41. 48. Joseph sanctus
quemadmodum sames in posterum vinceretur provida ordinatione disposuit. Amb.
Offic. l 3. c. 6.
We have herein a worthy pattern in Joseph. Many cities besieged by enemies
have been forced to surrender themselves to the enemy for want of laying up
sufficient store for a long siege: which if they had done, the enemy might
have been forced to raze his siege, before the city were taken.

4. In famine possess thy soul with patience, (Luke 21. 19.) Such judgments
as use long to continue, require Quamdiu est tempus famis, to lerandum est
durandum est, perseverandum est usque in finem. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 32.
the more patience. He that by reason of the extremity of a famine said, This
evil is of the Lord: what should I wait for the Lord any longer? (2 King. 6.
33.) wanted patience. Had he waited a little longer, he should have had good
experience to say, Lam 3. 26.
It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord.

. 18. Of searching out causes of judgments.
IIII. Sec 2.
CAuses of judgments are to be sought out. Ios. 7. 13, etc.
The advice which God himself gave to Joshua, when the Israelites fled before
the men of Ai, tends hereunto. So does this exhortation of the Prophet, Lam. 3.
40.
Let us search and try our ways. It was a usual course with the people of God
so to do. Genesis 25. 22.
When Rebekah felt children struggling together in her, she said, Why am I thus?
Judge. 20. 23, 27.
When the Israelites were twice overthrown by the Benjamites, they both times
asked counsel; namely, about that matter. Though Saul were a notorious
hypocrite, yet herein he imitated the custom of Gods people, 1 Samuel 14. 38,
etc.
in searching out the cause of Gods displeasure. The frequent expostulations of
Gods people in time of judgments, add further proof hereto: such as these,
Exo. 5. 22.
Wherefore have thou so evil entreated this people? -- 32. 11.
Why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people? Judge. 21. 3.
Why is this come to pass in Israel? ser. 2. 14.
Why is Israel spoiled? The Psalms and Prophets are full of such.

The finding out of the true cause of a judgment, is a ready Auferamus malorum
sontem, and omnia morborum sistent fluenta. Chrysad Pop. Hom. 46.

Sublata causa tollitur effectus.


way to remove a judgment: we find this true in bodily diseases. Such
physicians as are most skillful in searching and finding out the cause of a
disease, are most successful in curing the disease. For it is a principle
verified by all sciences, Take away the cause, the effect follows. They that
well find out the cause of a judgment, will be careful (if they feel the smart
of a judgment) to pull away that cause. Which if it be rightly done, the end
why God inflicted the judgment is accomplished. God having his end, he will
soon cease to strike.

That which was. 16.
before noted of the reason of the long continuance of judgments on children
of men, is here further confirmed: namely, men's negligence in searching after
the true causes of them: The power, jealousy, and justice of that God (whose
mercy moves him upon removal of the cause to remove the judgment) will not
suffer him to take away a judgment till the cause thereof be taken away. And
how shall it be taken away if it be not known? How shall it be known if it be
not searched after? Wherefore let all diligence be hereunto given, whenever
we see any evidences of Gods wrath: or have any just cause to suspect that it
is incensed against us.

. 19. Of Governors care in public judgments.
V. See. 2.
Chief Governors ought to be most solicitous in public judgments. So have
been such as have been guided by the Spirit of God: as Numb. 16. 46
Moses, Ios. 7. 6.
Ioshuah, Judge. 4. 6.
Deborah, 1 Samuel 7. 5.
Samuel, 2 Chro. 14. 11
Asa, -- 20. 3.
Iehosaphat, -- 32. 2, etc.
Hezekiah, and others.

1. To the charge of chief Governors belong all that are under their
government. So as the care not only of their own souls, but also of all their
subjects souls lies on them. They are as shepherds to their flock.
Therefore (...). 1 Pet 5. 4. (...) I say 44. 28. A (...). Homer I liad. ^.
(...). Xenophontis dictum,
Christ the King of Kings and most supreme Governor over all is styled the
chief Shepherd: and other Governors are called Shepherds, both by the Holy
Ghost, and also by other authors. For the charge and care of a good shepherd
and a good King are much alike. If any through their neglect of any warrantable
means perish, their blood shall be required at their hands.

2. Chief Goverours have not only liberty themselves to use such means as
are prescribed for removing public judgments; but also power to enjoyne and
command all under their authority to do what in such cases the Lord requires.
2 Chro 34. 32
Josiah caused all that were found in Jerusalem, and Benjamin to stand to the
covenant which he had made with God.

3. They being public persons, their example is a great inducement to others
to imitate them. So as their care provokes many to be careful in using all
good means to remove the judgment.

4. They bear Gods image, and stand in Gods room: in which respect their
solicitous care is both more acceptable unto God, and more availeable for
effecting that which they aim at. For on the contrary side, their sins are
more heinous Regum ac Principum, and praepositorum scelere, populi plerumque
delentur. Hier. Comment. in Ier, 15. lib. 3.
and more pernicious then the sins of private persons. Insomuch as a whole
people is often destroyed by the wickedness of Governors.

Oh that such as are in high and eminent places, that are set over others, and
are as Gods on earth, were of the same mind that David was! That they were
thoroughly affected with the public judgments that are from time to time
inflicted on their land! That they were careful and conscionable in using the
means which in Gods Word are sanctified for removing judgments! Then
assuredly would public judgments be neither so sierce, nor so long.

Let our prayer be to God daily for our governors, that the Lord would make
them especially sensible of public judgments, and conscionable in doing
their parts for removing them. So shall God have the honor, they the comfort,
we the profit and benefit. Otherwise, if Governors sin, Quicquid delirant
Reges plectuntur Achvi. Hor. Epist. l. 1. Epist. 2. ad Lol.
their people are like to feel the smart of it, as in David's time, 2 Samuel 24.
1, etc.

. 20. Of seeking to God for removing judgments.
VI. See 2.
GOD is to be sought unto for removing judgments. Observe all the instances 18.
before given of seeking out the causes of judgment, and you shall find them
all to prove the point propounded of seeking to God. Unto all which 1 King. 8
35, etc.
the worthy pattern of Salomons prayer made at the dedication of the temple
may well be added. Psalm. 10 15. Amos 5. 4.
God himself directs us to seek succor of him. Isa. 8. 19. -- 55. 6. Zeph.
2. 3.
His Prophets do much press as much. Jer. 50 4. Zac. 8 21.
This is made a property of such as are effectually called of God, and Hos. 5.
15.
on whom judgments do kindly work. 2 King. 1. 3. Isa. 9. 13. -- 30. 1.
The contrary, that men should seek of others, rather then of God, is justly
and sharply upbraided to them.

Isa 45. 7. Amos 3. 6.
It is God that inflicteth judgments on children of men: Who then but he
should be sought unto for removing them but the Lord? No creature can take away
that which the Creator sends, but the Creator himself. As this is most true
of all manner of judgments: so in particular of that which we have in hand,
which is famine: whereupon I will a little more insist in the Sessions
following.

. 21. Of Gods causing famine.
THat God sends famine upon a land, is most evident by these and other like
proofs.

1. Gods own testimony. For expressly he says of himself, Amos 4 6, 7.
I have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in
all your places, etc.

2. Deuteronomy. 28. 23, 38.
Gods threatenings of this judgment. The things which God threatens come from
God.

3. Genesis 41. 16, etc. 1 King. 17. 1. 2 King 8. 1. Act 11. 28.
Predictions of famine, by such as were endued with the spirit of God. For God
reveals to such what he intends to do. And upon such revelations men of God
have foretold famines.

4. Deu. 11. 14, 15 Psalm. 145. 16.
The plenty which comes from God. For if God be the giver of plenty: surely
the want of plenty, yea and famine too, must needs be from him. For what is
famine, but a want of such things which the Lord gives to sustain us? And
whence comes that want, but from Gods withholding and not giving such things?

5. The causes of famine; See 6. Deuteronomy. 11. 16, 17 1 King. 8. 36. Psalm. 107. 34.
which are sins against God. Sins against God provoke Gods wrath. Gods wrath
incensed inflicteth judgments. See 3.
Among other judgments which are effects of Gods wrath, famine is one of the
principal. Famine therefore must needs come from God.

6. The means and secondary causes of famine, which are all ordered by God.
For secondary causes do all depend on the high primary cause, which is Gods
will. Psalm. 119. 91.
All are his servants. That this may more evidently appear, I will instance it
in such particular means as are registered in Scripture, and there noted to be
ordered by God.

. 22. Of the means of famine ordered by God.
Means of famine are such as these.

1. The heavens withholding rain. For the earth is dry of its own nature:
being dry it can yield no fruit. The ordinary means of watering and
moistening it, is rain from heaven. Where that is withheld, the earth waxes
dry and barren: and living creatures want that sustenance which should
maintain their life. But it is God that causes the heavens to withold
rain. Lev. 26. 19.
I (says the Lord) I will make your heaven as iron, and your earth as brass.
Iron can not dissolve into water, nor brass yield out fruit. The meaning then
is, that heaven over them should yield no rain, nor the earth under them,
fruit. More plainly says the Lord in other places, Isay 5. 6.
I will command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. Amos 4. 7.
I have withheld the rain from you. I caused it to rain upon one city, and
caused it not to rain upon another city. As an evidence hereof, Iam. 5. 17. 1
King. 17. 1.
Elias prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth
by the space of three years and six months.

2. The heavens showring down rain in such unusual abundance, as thereby the
fruits which the earth has brought forth are destroyed: especially in harvest
time. We have few instances hereof in Scripture: For Judea was under an hot
climate: so as often they wanted rain, but seldom had too much. Our Northern,
cold Regions of the world are most punished with overmuch rain: which often
causes dearth and famine. Yet that this unseasonable and overflowing abundance
of water is ordered by God, is evident by that great instance of the Genesis 7.
11, 12.
general deluge: and by that extraordinary instance of 1 Samuel, 12, 17.
thunder and rain, that at Samuels prayer fell in a day of wheat-haruest. This
phrase, Pro. 28. 3.
A sweeping rain which leaves no food, shows that of old there was such
immoderate rain as caused famine. And this speech of the Lord himself, Ezekiel.
38. 22.
I will rain an overflowing rain, and great haile-stones, shows, that God
orders immoderate rain.

3. Barrenness of the earth. For Psalm. 104. 14.
God brings forth food out of the earth. And for their sustenance, Psalm. 115.
16.
The earth has he given to the children of men. If therefore the earth where
men abide be barren, there must needs be dearth and famine. But it is the Lord
that makes a land barren. Psalm. 107. 34.
He turns a fruitful land into barrenness. In this respect it is said, 1
Cor. 3. 7.
Neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that waters: but God that
gives the increase.

4. Very sharp winters, extraordinary frosts, snow, hail, blasting, mildew,
rotting of seed under the clods, and such like means as destroy corn and
other fruits, before they come to maturity for man's use. These are expressly
noted to 1 King 8 37 Iocl 1. 17.
cause famine, and to be Amos 4. 9.
ordered by God.

5. Psalm. 105. 34. Nah. 3. 15.
Locusts, grasshoppers, cater-pillars, canker-wormes, palmer-wormes, and other
like hurtful creatures which often by their innumerable multitudes eat up all
the grass, corn, herbs, and fruits of the earth whereby men and beasts are
nourished: and so Joel 1. 4.
cause famine. These God calls his -- 2. 25.
great army. They are therefore at his command, disposed by him.

6. Enemies. These often bring great famines: and that by Judge. 6. 4.
destroying the increase of the earth, and all manner of cattle, and leaving
no sustenance: For they kill, and burn, and spoil all that they can, when
they enter into others lands. Yea and by blocking up people within narrow
compasses: girting and besieging their towns and cities, so as they can not go
abroad to use any means for supply of their wants. The forest famines that
ever were, have been caused this way. 2 King. 6. 25.
Enemies long besieging a place, force the enclosed to eat the flesh of asses,
the dung of doves, and any thing that they can chew or swallow. Yea, it forces
them Deuteronomy 28. 53. 2 King. 6. 29.
to eat their own children. Now enemies which so afflict others, are Gods
Isa. 10. 5. 15.
rod, staff, axe, saw, Ier. 50. 23.
hammer, Isa 34 5, 6. Ier. 12. 12.
sword, Ier. 43. 10. Pestis (...) implicata saepissi^^ grassatur. Niceph.
Eccles. Hist l. 7. c. 28,
servants.

7. The plague. Many are thereby taken away: others moved to depart from their
callings, and means of maintaining themselves, and providing for others.
Whence follows penury and famine. We 1 King. 8. 27. Ezekiel. 7. 15. Ier. 24 10.
often in Scripture read of plague and famine joined together. For the one is a
cause of the other. Famine breeds pestilence: and pestilence causes famine.
(...) fames (...) pestis utranque a (...) deficeit. Vide supr. 4. distinct. 10.
The ancient Graecians do set them out by words very like, which come from the
same root.

8. Perishing of grain, fruit, and other kinds of food in store: or in the
places where it is laid up. For it often falls out that Monopolists, and
ingrossers of corn, and other commodities, do heap up, for their own private
gain, all the provision they can get: which being so heaped together, by
heat, or moisture, or some such other means, mustieth, putrifieth, and is
made unfit for use: or by mice, rats, and other vermin is consumed: or by fire
devouted: or some other way destroyed: whence follows famine. That such
courses of engrossing commodities have of old been used, is evident by this
proverb, Prove. 11. 26.
He that withdraws corn the people shall curse him. That God has an hand in
the spoil of such treasures is evident by Nah. 2. 9.
Gods threatening to spoil, where there is no end of store.

9. Deficiency of virtue in such means as men have. This is comprised under
this phrase of Lev. 26. 26. Psalm. 105. 16.
breaking the staff of bread: and Isa. 3. 1.
Taking away the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water. That
Metaphor is taken from an old man, who being not able to stand upright of
himself, has a staff to lean upon, and thereby is supported: or from a rent
which is held up by the staff in the midst of it: if ye break, or take away
that staff or stay, down will the old man, or the tent fall. This staff of
bread, and stay of water, is that virtue which by the Divine providence is in
them of nourishing such as eat the one, and drink the other. It is therefore
by some translated, the strength of bread, and the strength of water. By others
the vigor and power of Fortitudo panis, and fortitudo aquae, I^em robur panis
and robur aquae. Hier in Esaias 3. Vis and vigor panis and aquae. Calvin in Isay
3. 1. Fulcimentum. Vatab.
bread and water. Take away this virtue from bread and water, they are as if
they were not: of no use, of no benefit. Now it is God only that gives, or
takes away this staff: and in that respect causes famine.

As in these, so in all other means of famine the Lord has an overruling
providence: so as these secondary causes give witness to this, that God
sends famine: and that therefore God is to be sought unto for removing, and
taking away famine.

. 23. Of enquiring of God in and by his Word.
Quest. HOw may we now seek of God? a The means of old used, are now no more
of use.

Answ. In general, God requires no other means of seeking him, then what he
himself has ordained. In particular, we have as sure and certain a means
for enquiring of God, as ever the Church had: which is his written Word. This
means he who says, We have a more sure word, (2 Pet. 1. 19.) And he who long
before that said, To Habent ubi quae rerent Christum. Habent, inquit, Moysen
and Eliam, id est, Legem and Prophetas Christum praedicantes: secundum quod and
alibi aperte, Scrutamini Scripturas, in quibus salutem speratis. Illae enim de
me loquuntur. Hic erit. Quaeri. e and invenietis. Tertul. de Praescript. Haeret.
the law and to the testimony, If any speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them, Isay 8. 20. This was it which he, who in
this text is said to enquire of the Lord, made his counselor, his lamp and
light, Psalm. 119. 24, 105.

This oracle of God first declares the causes of famine: whereof before. 6. If
hereunto we impartially bring the testimony of our own conscience, we may
soon find what causes hereof are in our selves: and how far we in our
persons have provoked the Lord to judge us. If further we bring a wise
observation of the times wherein, and of the persons among whom we live, we may
also find what are the common and public causes of the judgments which God
inflicteth.

2. This oracle shows what means may be used for well ordering or removing
that judgment whereof the causes are found out. The means noted before,. 8.
are all prescribed in Gods Word.

3. It also reveals such Divine promises of blessing a right use of such
means as are therein prescribed, as we may with much confidence rest on a good
issue.

Let this therefore be the general use and close of all, that in famine and
other like judgments we do as David is here noted to do, enquire of the Lord:
enquire of him in and by his word: and withal, as David here also did, follow
the directions prescribed by the Lord in his Word; then shall we be sure to
have such an issue as David had, expressed in these words, God was entreated
for the land. 2 Samuel 21. 14.


. 24. Of the extremity of famine in the last fiege of Jerusalem.
BEcause reference is often made to the history of Flavius Josephus of the
wars of the Jews concerning the extremity of famine in the last siege at
Jerusalem, by the Romans in the days of Vespasian the Emperor, I think it
meet in the end of this Treatise distinctly to relate the said history so far
as it concerns the famine.

The famine of the City, and the desperation of the Joseph de Bello Iud. lib. 6
cap. 11. Houses broken up and searched for corn.
thieves both increased alike, every day more and more; so that now there was
no more corn found. Wherefore the seditious persons brake into the houses, and
searched every corner for to find corn; and if after their search they found
any, then they did beat the owners for denying it at the first; and if they
found none, they tortured the householders, as having more cunningly hidden it:
And whosoever was yet strong of body and well liking, him they presently
killed; for hereby they deemed him to have store of food, or else he should not
have been in so good plight of body as he was. And they that were pined with
famine, were by these barbarous seditious people slain, who esteemed it no
offense to kill them, who would shortly after die, though they were left alive.
Many, both rich, and poor, secretly exchanged all that they had for one
bushel of corn, and All exchanged for bread.
presently shutting themselves in the secretest room of their houses, some of
them did eat the corn as it was unground: others made bread thereof, as
necessity and fear required. No man in the whole city sat down to eat his
meat on a table, but greedily taking it, not boiled from the fire, they (even
raw as it was) did ear it. Most miserable was this manner of living, and a
spectacle which none without tears was able to behold; for the strongest still
got the most, and the weakest bewaild their misery: for now famine was the
greatest calamity they endured. And nothing does arm men more then shame: for
during this famine no reverence Food snatched out of one another mouths.
was had toward any man: for wives took the meat even out of their husbands
mouths, and children from their parents, and mothers even from their infants,
which was the most lamentable thing of all. No body had now any compassion,
neither did they spare their dearest infants, but suffered them to perish even
in their arms, taking from them the very drops of life. Yet could they not
eat thus in such secrecy, but presently some came to take away from them that
whereon they fed. For if in any place they saw any door shut, presently
hereupon they conjectured that they in the house were eating meat, and
forthwith breaking down the doors, they came in; and taking them by the
throat, they took the meat out of their mouths already chewed, and ready to
be swallowed down. The old men were driven away, and not permitted to keep
and defend Cruelty used to get food.
their food from being taken from them: the women were drawn up and down by
the hair of the head, for that they hid between their hands some part of
their meat, and would not forgo it. No pity was now remaining, neither to old
age, nor infancy, but they took young babes eating, their mouth full of meat,
and not permitting it to be taken out of their mouths, and threw them against
the ground. Now if any one had prevented these thieves, and eaten their meat
before they could come at them, then they were more cruel; and the other so
much more tyrannously handled, as having committed some greater offense against
them. They also devised most barbarous and cruel torments to extort food from
others: for they thrust sticks or such like into the cavity of men's yards, and
sharp thorny rods into their fundaments: and it is abominable to hear what
the people endured to make them confess one loaf of bread, or one handful of
corn which they had hidden.

The restraint of liberty to pass in and out of the City Ibid. cap. 14.
took from the Jews all hope of safety, and the famine now increasing,
consumed whole households and families, and the houses were full of dead women
and infants: and the Multitudes die of famine.
streets filled with the dead bodies of old men: And the young men swollen like
dead men's shadows, walked in the market place, and fell down dead where it
happened. And now the multitude of dead bodies was so great, that they which
were alive could not bury them, neither cared they for burying them, being now
uncertain what should betide themselves. And many endeavoring to bury others,
fell down themselves dead upon them as they were burying them. And many being
yet alive, went unto their graves, and there died. Yet for all this calamity
was there no weeping nor lamentation, for famine overcame all affections. And
they who were yet living, without tears beheld those, who being dead, were now
at rest before them. There was no noise heard within the City, and the still
night found all full of dead bodies: and which was most miserable of all, the
thieves at night came and took away that which covered the dead bodies
nakedness, and went laughing away, and in their bodies they proved their
swords, and upon pleasure only thrust many through yet breathing. Yet if any
have desired them to kill him, or to lend him a sword to kill himself, that so
he might escape Death desired by the famished.
the famine, they denied him.

What need I recount every particular misery? Mannaeus the son of Lazarus
flying to Titus out of the gate, Ibid. cap. 6.
that was committed unto his custody, and yielding himself unto him, recounted
unto Titus, that from the time that the Romans army was placed near the City,
from the foureteenth day of April, unto the first of July, were carried out
Multitude die of famine.
of that gate he kept, a hundred, fifteen thousand, and fourscore dead
bodies; yet was not he the keeper of the gate, but being appointed to pay for
the burying of the dead at the charges of the City, was forced to number the
dead bodies. For others were buried by their parents, and this was their
burial, to cast them out of the City, and there let them lie. And certain
noble men flying unto Titus after him, reported that there were dead in all the
City six hundred thousand poor folks which were cast out of the gates, and the
others that died were innumerable: and that when so many died that they were
not able to bury them, that then they gathered their bodies together in the
greatest houses adjoining, and there shut them up. And that a bushel of corn
was sold for a talent, which is six hundred crowns: and that after the City
was compassed with a wall that now they could not go out to gather any more
herbs, many were driven to that necessity, that they raked sinkes and privies
to find old dung of oxen to eat; Dung eaten.
and so the dung that was loathsome to behold, was their meat.

An infinite multitude perished within the City through Ibid lib. 7. cap. 7, 8.
Food violently snatched away
famine, so that they could not be numbered: for in every place where any show
or sign of food was, presently arose a battle, and the dearest friends of all
now fought one with another, to take the food from other poor souls, neither
did they believe them that were now a dying for famine, but the thieves
searched them, whom they saw yielding up the ghost, thinking that they dying
for famine, had hid about them some food, but they were deceived of their hope,
being like mad dogs, greedy of meat, and fell against the doors like drunken
men, searching the self-same houses twice or thrice together in desperation,
and for very penury they eat whatsoever they light upon, gathering such things
Things loathed eaten.
to eat, as the most filthy living creatures in the world would have loathed.
In brief, they did eat their girdles and shoes, and the skins that covered
their shields, so that a little of old hay was sold for four Attiques. But
what need is it to show the sharpness of this famine by things that want life?
I will recount an act never heard of, neither amongst the Greeks, nor any
other barbarous people, horrible to be rehearsed, and incredible, so that I
would willingly omit this calamity, least posterity should think I lie, had I
not many witnesses hereof, and perhaps should incur reprehension, not fully
recounting all accidents of them that are dead.

A certain woman named Mary, dwelling beyond Iordane, A mother kills and eats
her own child.
the daughter of Eleazar of the town of Vitezokia, which signifies the house
of Hysope, descended of noble and rich parentage, flying with the rest unto
Jerusalem, was there with them besieged. Her other goods the tyrants had taken
from her, which she had brought from beyond the river into the City, and
whatsoever being hid, escaped their hands, the thieves daily came into her
house, and took it away, whereat the woman greatly moved, cursed them, and
with hard speeches animated them the more against her, yet no man either for
anger or compassion would kill her, but suffered her to live to get them meat,
but now could she get no more, and famine invaded her with rage and anger more
then danger. Wherefore by rage and necessity she was compelled to do that which
nature abhorred, and taking her son unto whom she then gave suck, O
miserable child (quoth she) in war, famine, and sedition, for which of these
shall I keep thee? If thou continue amongst the Romans, thou shall be made a
slave, yet famine will prevent bondage; or else sedition worse then them both.
Be therefore meat for me, a terror unto the seditious, a tragical story to
be spoken of by posterity, and that which is only yet heard of amongst the
calamities of the Jews. Having thus spoken, she slew her son, and did sees
the one half of him, and did eat it, the rest she reserved covered. Presently
came the seditious, smelling the sent of that execrable meat, threatening
presently to kill her, except she forthwith brought some of that unto them
which she had prepared. Then she answered that she had reserved a good portion
thereof for them, and presently uncovered that part of her son which she had
left uneaten; at which sight they trembled, and a horror fell upon them. But
the woman said, this is truly my son, and my doing, eat you of it, for I my
self have eaten thereof. Be not more effeminate then a woman, nor more
merciful then a mother. If Religion make you refuse this my sacrifice, I have
already eaten of it, and will eat the rest. Then the seditious departed,
hereat only trembling, and scarcely permitting this meat to the mother.
Presently the report of this heinous crime was bruited all about the City, and
every man having before his eyes this excerable fact, trembled as though
himself had done it. And now all that were vexed with this famine, Chrysostom.
advers. vitup. vitae monast. l. 1. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 6. Niceph.
Hist. Eccles. l 3 c 7.
hastened their own deaths, and he was accounted happy that died before he felt
this famine.

This history of a mothers eating her own child, is related also by
Chrysostom, Eusebius, Nicephorus, and other ancients.

. 25. Of extremity of famine, where were no invasions of enemies, nor sieges,
but immediately from Gods hand.
TO the forementioned extremity of famine caused in Jerusalem, by reason of
enemies blocking them up, it will not be unseasonable to add a relation, out
of our Ecclesiastical histories of extreme famine where were no enemies: that
we who perhaps do (by reason of our long continued peace) think our selves
secure enough from fear of enemies, may notwithstanding fear Gods more
immediate revenging hand, even by famine now beginning, after that the plague
is mitigated. The history is this.

The inhabitants of the cities of Maximinus, sore pined away with famine and
pestilence, so that one measure of Eusebius Eccles. Hist l 9. c. 8. Niceph.
Eccles. Hist. l. 7. c 28. Famine and Plague together.
wheat was sold for two thousand and fifty Attiques. An infinite number died
throughout the Cities, but more throughout the countries and villages, so that
now the sundry and ancient demaines of husbandmen were in a manner quite done
away, for that all suddenly through want of food and grievous malady of the
Pestilence were perished. Many therefore sought to sell unto the wealthier
sort, for most Dearest things sold for slender food.
slender food, the dearest things they enjoyed. Others selling their
possessions by pieces, fell at length into the miserable peril of extreme
poverty: others gnawing the small shreded tops of green grass, and withal
confusedly feeding on certain venomous herbs, used them for food, whereby
Unwholesome things eaten. Noble women forced to beg.
the healthy constitution of the body was perished and turned to poison.
Diverse noble women throughout the cities, driven to extreme need and
necessity, went a begging into the country, showing forth by their reverend
countenance and more gorgeous apparel, an example of that ancient and free
manner of feeding: Certain others whose strength was dried up, tottering to
and fro, nodding and sliding much like carved pictures without life, being not
able to stand, sell down flat in the midst of the streets, grovelling upon the
ground, with their faces upward, and stretched out arms, making humble
supplication that some one would reach them a little piece of bread: and thus
lying in extremity, ready to yield up the ghost, cried out that they were
hungry, Cries of the starved.
being only able to utter these words. Others which seemed to be of the
wealthier sort, amazed at the multitude of beggars, after they had distributed
infinitely, they put on an unmercifull Famine makes unmercifull.
and sturdy mind, fearing least they should shortly suffer the like need with
them that craved Wherefore in Dead lie in streets.
the midst of the market place, and throughout narrow lanes, the dead and bare
carcasses lay many days unburied, and cast along, which yielded a miserable
spectacle to the beholders. Yea many became food unto dogs, for which cause
chiefly Men food for dogs.
such as lived, turned themselves to kill dogs, fearing least they should
become mad, and turn themselves to tear in pieces and devour men. And no
less truly did the plague Plague kills such as are kept from famine.
spoil every house and age but specially devouring them whom famine through
want of food could not destroy. Therefore the rich, the Princes, the
Presidents, and many of the Magistrates, as fit people for a pestilent disease
(because they were not pinched with penury) suffered a sharp and most swift
death. All sounded of lamentation, throughout every narrow lane, the market
places and streets. There was nothing to be seen but weeping, together with
their wonted pipes, and the rest of Minstress noise. Death after this (waging
battle with double armor, to wit, with famine and pestilence) destroyed in
short space whole families.

. 26. Of famines in England.
TO other instances of great famines let me add such as have happened in
England: that thereby we may the better discern what we in this our own country
are subject unto.

In King William the Conquerours days there was such a Stow in his general
Chro^ of Engl. In the 5. year of W. Conq. 1069.
dearth through all England, especially through Northumberland, and the countries
next adjoining, that men were feign to eat horseflesh, cats, dogs, and man's
flesh. For all the land that lay betwixt Durham and York lay waste without
Inhabitants, and people to till the ground for the space of nine years, except
only the territory of Beverlake.

In King Henry the thirds reign was a great dearth and pestilence: so that
many poor folks died for want of victuals: Ibid. H. 3. 18. 1234. Vermin in
corn hoorded up in time of dearth.
and the rich men were stricken with covetousness, that they would not relieve
them. Amongst these is to be noted Walter Gray, Archbishop of York, whose
corn being five years old, doubting the same to be destroyed by vermin, he
commanded to deliver it to the husbandmen that dwelt in his mannours, upon
condition to pay as much new corn after harvest; and would give none to the
poor for Gods sake. But when men came to a great stack of corn nigh to the
town of Ripon belonging to the said Archbishop, there appeared in the sheaves
all over the heads of worms, serpents, and toads. And the Bailiffes were
forced to build an high wall round about the corn, and then to set it on fire,
least the venomous worms should have gone out and poisoned the corn in other
places.

In King Edward the second his days a great dearth increased Ibid. Edw. 2. 9.
1315. Dearth through abundance of rain in harvest. Horses, dogs, children, men
eaten.
through the abundance of rain that fell in harvest, so that a quarter of
wheat was sold before Mid-sommer for 30 shillings, and after, for 40 shillings.
An high rate in those days. The beasts and cattle also, by the corrupt grass
whereof they fed, died: whereby it came to pass, that the eating of flesh was
suspected of all men. For flesh of beast not corrupted was hard to find.
Horseflesh was counted great delicates. The poor stole fat dogs to eat. Some
(as it was said) compelled through famine in hid places, did eat the flesh of
their own children: and some stole others which they devoured. Thieves that
were in prison did pluck in pieces those that were newly brought amongst them,
and greedily devoured them half alive.

When Henry 6. reigned, scarcity and dearness of corn Ibid. H. 6. 18. 1440.
forced men to eat beans, pease, and barley, more then in an hundred years
before. Bread-corne was so scarce in England, that poor people made them bread
of Fern-roots,

In the time of King Henry the eight there fell such rain in November and
December, as thereof ensued great floods, Ibid. H. 8. 18. 1527. Famine caused
by much rain.
which destroyed cornfieldsd, pastures, and beasts. Then was it dry till the 12
of April: and from that time it rained every day and night till the third of
June, whereby corn failed sore in the year following.

Again in the time of the said King, such scarcity of bread was in London, and
in all England, that many died for Ibid. H. 8. 19. A president for Princes.
default thereof, The King of his goodness sent to the City of his own
provision 600. quarters, or else for one week there had been little bread.
The bread-carts coming from Stratford-Bow toward London, were met at Mile-end
by the Citizens: so that the Major and Sheriffs were forced to go and rescue
the said carts, and to see them brought to the markets appointed.

Many more instances of exceeding great dearth in other Kings times might be
added, but these are sufficient.

. 27. Of uses to be made of the terriblenesse of famine.
BY the forementioned instances of famines in this our and, it is manifested
what may befall us: how patient the Lord is toward us: what cause we have to
fear God, and to take heed how we provoke him to inflict even this judgment,
which may prove very fearful, as has been proved: and finally, how it
stands us in hand, when there is cause to fear a famine, or when a famine is
begun, to search out the causes thereof, to confess before God our sins, to
turn from them, humbly, heartily, earnestly, extraordinarily, with weeping,
fasting, and prayers to supplicate mercy of the Divine Majesty. We have a late
evidence of the efficacy of such means used. For in the year 1626 it rained
all the spring, and all the summer day after day for the most part, until the
second of August, on which day by public Proclamation a Fast was solomnly
kept thorowout the whole Realm of England, and Principality of Wales, as it
had by the same Proclamation been solemnized in the Cities of London and
Westminster and places adjacent, on the fifth day of July before. On the said
second of August the sky cleared, and rain was restrained, till all the
harvest was ended: Which proved a most plentiful Harvest. Thus the famine
threatened and much feared was withheld. So as Gods ordinances duly and rightly
used are now as effectual as ever they were.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index of the special Points of this Treatise of Famine.
A
ABundance exhausted by famine. 135 Accessaries to sin. 149 Acknowledge
plenty to come from God. 138
B
BAnishment of men's selves caused by famine. 136 Barrenness of earth causes
famine. 159 Bread bought at high rates. 165
C
CAterpillars cause famine. 159 Charity to poor. 139. 144 Children how
punished for fathers sins. 148. 149 Child by own mother eaten. 167 Clemency
defers judgments. 150 Cold excessive causes famine. 159 Confession of sin.
143 Conversion from sin. 143 Corn violently taken away. 166 Corn at an high
rate. 166 Corn hoorded up eaten by vermin. 170 Cries of the starved. 169
Cruelty to strangers. 140 Cruelty occasioned by famine. 164
D
Days how taken. 131 David what it signifies. 132 David punished for Saul's
sin. 149 Dearth. See Famine. Death desired in famine. 165 Death by famine
miserable. 137 Decay of grain and other food causes famine. 160 Deferring
judgment a part of clemency. 150 Diseases from famine. 137 Desperatenes caused
by famine. 136 Dogs eaten by men. 170 Dogs eat men. 169 Drunkenness causes
famine. 140 Dung eaten in famine. 136. 166
E
ENemies cause famine. 160 Englands fearful famines. 170 Enquire after God
how we may. 132 Inquiry to be made of God in and by his Word. 161 Extremity of
famine by sieges. 163 Extremity of famine other ways. 168
F
FAith in Gods promises. 144 FAMINE.
Famine in David's time, when. 130 Famine a judgment. 134 Famines effects. 135
Famine how prevented. 138 Famine by what sins caused. 139 Famine how
moderated. 141 Famine how removed. 143 Promises for succor in Famine. 145
Famine removed: and persons therein succored. 146 Famine in pious polities.
147 Famine long continued, and why. 152 Famine long continued, what duties it
requires. 153 Famines causes to be searched out. 153. 154 Famine caused by
God. 157 Famines means what they be. 158. 159. 160 Famines means ordered by
God. Ibid. Famine makes unmercifull. 169 Famine causes cruelty. 164 Famines
extremities. 163. 168 Famine forces to eat any thing. 168. 170 Famines
fearful in England. 170 Famine caused by much rain. 171 Famine fearful by
siege. 163 Famine what uses it teaches. 171
Fasts frequent in famine. 142 Fathers sins how punished in their children.
148. 149 Flesh of men's own selves eaten by famine. 137 Food of any thing made
by famine. 136 Food bought with dearest things. 168 Food snatched out of others
mouths. 164. 166 Food made of unwholesome things. 168 Frost overmuch causes
famine. 159
G
GLory of God to be aimed at in the use of all things. 138 Gluttony causes
famine. 140 GOD.
God how enquired after. 132 God able and ready to help in extremity. 146 God
to be sought unto for removing judgments. 157 God causes famine. 157 God
orders means of famine. 158 God to be enquired in and by his Word. 161
GOVERNOVRS.
Governors though good may have famine in their days. 147 Causes of
judgments under good Governors. 147 Duties which judgments under good
Governors require. 151 Governors care in public judgments. 151. 153
Governors as shepherds. 156 Governors power to command others. 156
Governors examples. 156 Governors to be prayed for. 152. 156. 157 Governors
piety must not make people secure. 151. 152
Grasshoppers cause famine. 159
H
HArd heartedness caused by famine. 136 Houses broken up for corn. 163
Humiliation for sin. 143
I
IMpious subjects cause judgments in the time of pious Princes. 147 Inhumanity
from famine. 137 Injustice caused by famine. 136 Ingratitude causes famine.
140 Insensiblenesse of others misery. 140 IVDGEMENTS.
Judgments continued by sins continuance. 153 Judgments under good
Governors. 147 Causes thereof. 147 Judgments no rule to judge a profession
by. 150 Judgments under pious Governors, what duties they require. 151
Judgments causes to be searched out. 151. 154 Judgments causes found out a
means to remove judgments. 155 For removing Judgments God to be sought to.
157 Judgments deferred through clemency. 150

L
LEather eaten in famine. 136. 166 Locusts cause famine. 159
M
MAgistrates. See Governors. Magistrates care in famine. 142 Manassehs sins
punished in Josias time. 149 Ministers vain soothing. 141 Mother eats her
own child. 167 Multitudes die of famine. 165
N
NOble women by famine made beggars. 169
O
OBedience to pious Governors. 152
P
PAtience in famine. 154 Pious polities and Princes not exempted from
judgments. 147 Pious Princes often provoke Godswrath. 148 Plagues arise from
famine. 137 Plagues cause famine. 160 Plague kills such as kept from famine. 169
Plenty how procured. 138 Plenty from God. 138. 139. 158 Predecessors sins
punished in their successors. 148. 149 Prodigality procures famine. 140
Profession mis-judged by outward judgments. 150 Promises for succor in
famine. 145 Examples of accomplishing such Promises. 146 Provide against a
dear year. 139. 141. 154
R
Rain wanting causes famine. 158 Rain overmuch causes also famine. 159
S
Saul's sin why punished in David's time. 149 Secondary causes ordered by God.
158 Sieges cause great famine. 163 Sins which cause famine. 139 Sin
continued cause of continuing judgment. 153 Staff of bread. 161 Starveds
cries. 169 Strangers not to be ill handled. 140 Subjects must pray for their
Governors. 152. 156. 157 Subjects obedience. 152 Subjects impiety brings
judgment in the time of pious Princes. 147 Successors punished for
predecessors sins. 148. 149 Superstitious attributing plenty to false
authors. 139 Supplication in famine. 144
V
Vermin consume corn hoorded up. 170
W
WAnt of rain a means of famine. 158 159 Winters over sharp cause famine. 159
Word of God the means to enquire of him. 161 Word of God rejected causes
famine. 140. 141
FINIS.
THE CHVRCHES CONQVEST over the SWORD: Set out on EXODUS Chap. XVII. Verse VIII,
etc. to the end. Hereunto is added, THE EXTENT OF GODS PROVIDENCE: On MAT.
Chap. X. Verse. XXIX, XXX, XXXI, Occasioned by a Downe-fall of Papists. AND, THE
DIGNITY OF CHIVALRY: Raised out of II. CHRON. VIII. IX. By WILLIAM GOVGE.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Sign of the Bible, at the great North door of Paul's. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, ROBERT, Lord RICH, Baron of LEEZ, and Earl of
WARWICK. AND, TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the Countess of WARWICK, His most
worthy Consort. All Honor that may make to their true Happiness. Right
Honorable,
THE Divine Providence (whereby all things are wisely ordered) has by a most
sacred, near, firm, and inviolable band knit you two together, and made you
one. Most meet it is therefore that the like honor be done, and the like
respect testified to the one as to the other: especially where there is just
cause of an answerable respect: as the Author of this Treatise here dedicated
to your Honors, has for the dedication thereof to you both. For,

SIR,
THis Treatise treats of War. Your Lordship is known to be a Man of War.
It sets out Joshua, a General of an undaunted spirit. Your spirit has been
proved to be such an one. It shows how Moses, when he tarried at home, was
very sollicitous for his countrymen in the field. And is not such your care?
Upon mention made of Moses, there comes to my mind this great commendation (
He is faithful in all my house) given to him by God himself. Faithful he was
in his own observation of al Gods ordinances which belonged to him. Who of so
emine^t a place, more eminent then your Honor herin? Faithful he was also in
deputing to the Lords service men fit for their function. The abundance of able
and faitDhfull Ministers in Essex, and other places where the Patronage of
Church Livings appertains to yr Honor, is the seaie of your Faithfulness in
this respect. The greater is the glory of this kind of piety, because therein
you do patrissare, tread in the steps of your worthy Father of blessed memory.
What infant could not be copious in setting out the dignity of this piety,
whereby God is so much honored, his Church edified, many distressed
consciences comforted, and millions of souls saved. There is yet further a
more particular bond of relation which binds me in person and pains to yield
all homage unto yr Honor, that is, the small inheritance I hold within your
Lordships Royalty at Hadly in Essex. Hereto I might add the benefit of your
Predecessors charity on the Free-Schoole at Felsted in Essex, where I was
trained up three years together: and the continual favors which from your
youth you have showed to me, your self as well as I being trained up at Eaton,
and thence coming to Cambridge.


MADAM,
THere are in this Treatise many points concerning Devotion: not unfit for a
devout Lady: such an elect Lady as S. John dedicated his Second Epistle unto: a
Lady whom all that knew the truth loved in the truth, and for the truths sake:
a Lady whose children walked in the truth: an evidence that the Lady who loved
the truth her self, was careful to communicate that to her beloved children,
which she had found to be sweet and comfortable to her own soul. And this for
the Mothers honor does the Apostle there mention. I that have long known your
Honor (even from the childhood of your now well grown daughters, two worthy
Ladies, and been acquainted, as with your religious care in their good
education, so with your own pious course of life, wherein I make no question
but that still you continue) could not omit so fair an opportunity of
testifying that duty which I owe you. Hereby that which is made public for
the view of all, is in special dedicated to your Honor, that having a
particular interest therein, you may be more diligent in perusing it. The
principal points herein handled, which may best whet on your pious devotion,
concern Prayer, the Manner of performing that Heavenly duty, the Power and
Efficacy thereof, when it is made in faith, and the benefit of persevering
therein, at least so long as just occasion gives occasion of persisting
without fainting. These and other like points are handled in this Treatise,
which may be (as I suppose) useful to your devout mind.


By these and many other enducements has he been emboldened to tender this
small evidence of much respect to your Honors, who, as he humbly craveth a
gracious acceptance, so he faithfully promises to continue at the Throne of
Grace

Your Honors Sollicitour, WILLIAM GOVGE.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE, AND MOST WORTHY OF ALL HONOR, SIR NATHANAEL RICH (...).
SIR,
YOur own Worth, The public good Service which you have done to this State,
The true Zeal which to the Honor of God, and Good of his Church you have on
all occasions manifested, do all challenge all the honor that can be done to a
man of such desert. The ancient acquaintance which has been even from your
childhood betwixt you and me, The entire familiarity that was betwixt us while
we were Students in Cambridge, The Continuance thereof by mutual Latin
Letters about Scholasticall disputes, (Bono enim literarum eadem fere absentes,
quae si coram essemus consequimur) when we Cic Epist. Famil.
were parted, And finally, the many favors which in this time of acquaintance
you have showed me, do, in special require of me all grateful remembrance.
For, (...). Wherefore having here an opportunity of giving public testimony
of the high esteem I have of you, and of the reverend respect I bear to you,
I do most willingly take it. (...). Theoc. in Ait.
It was the commendation of the golden age, that a friend would testify all
the respect he could to his friend. True it is, that in regard of your noble
birth, your eminent dignity, your excellent endowments, there is betwixt us (to
use the Arist. Ethic. Lib. 5.
Philosophers phrase) (...). But yet (as another Plat lib. de Leg 6.
Philosopher says, (...). His Aphorism may fitly be applied to friends, who
though in sundry respects they be unequal, yet unequal things to them become
equal. To this tends that which Saint Hier. Comment. in Mic 7
Hierom has taken from the Orator, Amicitia pares aut accipit, aut facit. In
confidence of your true friendly mind to me, I have made bold to testify
mine to you, and that by prefixing your noble name before this Sermon of The
Extent of Gods Providence. In regard of the smalnesse of it, it is indeed but
as a little Pamphlet, and (as here published) but an Appendix to a larger
Treatise; Yet a Treatise dedicated to your right honorable Kinseman, the Earl
of Warwick: and in that respect I suppose it may be the better taken. The
manner of setting out that divine matter of Gods Providence, is according to my
accustomed manner, very plain. But I remember a Proverbiall speech in use
among the Jews, noted by Drusius that great Hebrician, to be Ioh Drus Sent,
vet. Sapient.
among the Aphorisms of loses the son of Judas (which, I am persuaded, you
also have read) (...) Ne respice cantha rum, sed id quod in co est. The
occasion of this Sermon (which was a Downfall of Papists too audaciously
gathered together to hear a Iesuited Priest preach) is remarkable. The like (I
suppose) has not in our days been heard of. Remembrances of divine
Judgments are useful to Gods Church as well as Memorials of his Mercies. To
this purpose that Adage which the forementioned Drusius attributes to Simeon
the son of Gamaliel, Ioh Drusloc. citat.
is not impertinent. It is this (...) (...) Mundus consistit per veritatem, per
judicium, and per pacem. I suppose he under stands by judgment, as men's just
and equal dealing one with another, so likewise Gods just dealing with
children of men, both in rewarding the pious and righteous, and also in
revenging the impious and unrighteous. Read, Judge, Favor

Vesterrimum, Veterrimum (...), WILLIAM GOVGE.

A Table of the Principal Points handled in The Churches Conquest, In the
Extent of Gods Providence, and in the Dignity of Chivalry.
. 1. OF the Resolution of the History. 177. 2. Of Amaleks malice against
Israel. 182. 3. Of invetered hatred. 185. 4. Of undue beginning war. 188. 5.
Of the title Israel. 191. 6. Of the Churches assaults in this world. 192. 7. Of
Amaleks inhumanity. 195. 8. Of base advantages which malicious enemies take.
197. 9. Of the interpretation and observations of Moses his charge to Joshua.
200. 10. Of Princes protecting their people. 203. 11. Of preparing to great
exploits. 205. 12. Of keeping out enemies. 206. 13. Of the lawfulness of
war. 209. 14. Of the lawfulness of war under the New Testament. 210. 15. Of
other objections against the lawfulness of war answered. 212. 16. Of warring
with Christians. 213. 17. Of the necessity and benefit of war. 214. 18. Of
just wars. 214. 19. Of soldiers encouragement in just war. 217. 20. Of
opposing violence to violence. 218. 21. Of using means. 219. 22. Of the
gestures of prayer. 221. 23. Of standing in prayer. 224. 24. Of the time and
place of Moses his prayer. 225. 25. Of the Rod which Moses used. 226. 26. Of
the Resolution and observations of the latter part of the ninth Verse. 229. 27.
Of joining prayer with other means. 230. 28. Of their care who tarry at home
to pray for them that go to war. 232. 29. Of manifesting our inward desire by
our outward gesture. 233. 30. Of seeking help of God in time. 235. 31. Of
praying in any place. 237. 32. Of taking good notice of that for which we pray.
238. 33. Of strengthening faith by Gods former works. 240. 34. Of the benefit
of a persuasion of others prayers. 243. 35. Of Ioshuahs obedience. 245. 36. Of
yielding obedience to Governors. 245. 37. Of going to war upon command. 247.
38. Of the meaning, method, and doctrines of the tenth verse. 249. 39. Of
assisting one another in extraordinary prayer. 252. 40. Of Magistrates and
Ministers care to seek help of God in public need. 253. 41. Of performing
the promises which we make of praying for others. 254. 42. Of the
interpretation and resolution of the 11. verse. 256. 43. Of the power of
faithful prayer. 258. 44. Of continuing to pray. 263. 45. Of fainting in
prayer. 265. 46. Of prejudice of failing in prayer. 266. 47. Of the uncertainty
of war. 268. 48. Of the interpretation and resolution of the 12. Verse. 272.
49. Of considering others weakness. 275. 50. Of supporting others weakness.
276. 51. Of that dispensation which is yielded to man in divine matters. 280.
52. Of bearing one another burden. 282. 53. Of Union of spirits. 283. 54. Of
that stability which the weak may receive by others supportance. 284. 55. Of
the meaning and doctrines of the 13. Verse. 286. 56. Of attributing success in
war to Generals. 287. 57. Of the success of war well waged. 28^. 58. Of the
overthrow of such as begin war. 291. 59. Of the punishment of accessaries.
292. 60. Of the lawfulness of shedding blood in war. 292. 61. Of the
meaning, method, and matter of the 14. Verse. 297. 62. Of Gods causing Records.
301. 63. Of man's ministry in writing divine records. 302. 64. Of registring
matters of moment. 303. 65. Of sake keeping public records. 303. 66. Of
memorials of judgments. 304. 67. Of rehearsing matters of moment. 305. 68 Of
Governors observation of Gods former dealing. 308. 69. Of Gods avenging. 309.
70. Of Gods vengeance extending to man's utter ruin. 310. 71. Of Gods revenge
in every place. 312. 72. Of the interpretation of the 15. Verse. 313. Of
Jehovah. 315. 73. Of the Resolution and Instructions of the 15. Verse. 322. 74.
Of the care which Governors must have of public piety. 323. 75. Of giving
public praise for public deliverances. 325. 76. Of memorials of Gods
mercies. 326. 77. Of ascribing the glory of deliverances to God. 327.. 78. Of
the mind and method of the 16. Verse. 329. 79. Of remembering Gods inalterable
resolution. 332. 80. Of Gods swearing vengeance. 333. 81. Of Gods undertaking
his Churches quarrels. 337. 82. Of man's implacablenesse making God implacable.
338. 83. Of wars desolations. 339. 84. Of the continuance of Gods vengeance.
340. 85. Of the evils of war. 342. 86. Of the better part put to the worst in
war. 346. 87. Of the good of war notwithstanding the evils thereof. 347. 88.
Of war the sorest of Gods judgments. 348. 89. Of delighting in war. 350.
90. Of Christians backwardness to war. 350. 91. Of circumspection in waging
war. 351. 92. Of war kept out of a land. 352. 93. Of Englands deliverances
since Q. Elizabeth began her Reign. 353. 94. Of Gods Providence to England in
King James his time. 359. 95. Of Englands troubles from the Conquest to Q.
Elizabeth. 361. 96. Of peace. The benefits and excellencies thereof. 367
A Table of the principal Points handled in The Extent of Gods Providence.
. 1. OF the meaning of the Text. 373. 2. Of the Sum and Resolution of the
Text. 376. 3. Of the extent of Gods Providence. 377. 4. Of the grounds of the
extent of the divine providence. 378. 5. Of chance. 379. 6. Of Gods Providence
extending it self to things below. 381. 7. Of despising mean means. 382. 8.
Of Saints not fearing men. 383. 9. Of eying God in all affairs. 386. 10. Of
submitting all our purposes to Gods will. 387. 11. Of Contentedness. 389. 12.
Of ascribing the glory of all deliverances to God. 390. 13. Of ascribing the
glory of judgments to God. 392. 14. Of a downfall of Papists. 393
A Table of the Principal Points handled in The Dignity of Chivalry.
. 1. OF the Sum of Text and Sermon. 409. 2. Of such as are fit or unfit for
war. 410. 3. Of the property of men of war. 411. 4. Of preparation for
war under a Prince of peace. 412. 5. Of the principal points of the Text.
414. 6. Of the honor of a soldiers function. 414. 7. Of double honor due to
such as exercise arms. 416. 8. Of encouragement to Artillery Gentlemen. 418.
9. Of drawing more to the Artillery Garden. 419. 10. Of valor requisite for
soldiers. 419. 11. Of the damage of timorous soldiers. 421. 12. Of
righteousness making valorous. 422. 13. Of wickedness making timorous. 423.
14. Of courage against spiritual enemies. 424. 15. Of preparation for war in
peace. 425. 16. Of the benefit of Artillery Gardens. 428. 17. Of the
commendation of Artillery Gardens. 429. 18. Of warlike recreations. 430. 19. Of
neglect of Artillery exercises. 431. 20. Of applying all to the present
Artillery Gentlemen. 432
THE CHVRCHES CONQVEST over the Sword, Set out on Exodus Chap. 17. Verse. 8, etc.
to the end of the Chapter.
. 1. Of the Resolution of the whole History.
THE history of the Israelites in the wilderness is a visible representation
of Gods governing his Church in this world. The Apostle therefore having culled
out sundry choice instances, makes this inference upon them, These things were
our examples. 1 Cor. 10. 6. -- 11.
And this, These things happened to them for ensamples: and they are written for
our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore, as other
histories of holy Scripture, so these especially, are to be read and heard, not
as mere records of ancient times, but as presidents wherein we may learn what
God expects of us, and what we may expect of him.

Among other particulars, the history recorded in the latter part of the 17.
chapter of Exodus, from the beginning of the 8. verse, to the end of the
chapter, is very remarkable in it self, and very seasonable for our times,
wherein so many Amalakites assault the Israel of God.

The Sum of this history is

A Narration of a glorious victory.

The parts are two 1. A Description of the Battle. 2. A Declaration of the
Event.


In setting out the Battle, he shows 1. The Assault. 2. The Defense.


The Assault is 1. Expressed in two words Came. Fought.
2. Amplified by the Persons. Place.



Verse. 8. Then came Amalek and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
The Persons are Assaulting. Amalek. Assaulted. Israel.


The Place was Rephidim.

In the Defense are noted 1. The Means. 2. The Success.


The Means are of two sorts 1. External. 2. Internal.


Verse. 9. And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with
Amalek.
The External means are set out by a charge, verse. 9. obedience thereto, verse.
10.


The Internal by Promise. verse. 9. Performance. verse. 10.


In the Charge are expressed the Persons. Matter.


The Persons Giving The charge, Moses The Persons Receiving The charge, Joshua.


The Matter is 1. To prepare for war. Choose us out men. 2. To wage war Go
out. Fight with Amalek.



Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in mine hand.
The more to encourage Joshua hereunto, Moses adds his promise of using
internal means. In which promise are four observable points.

1. The Action promised. I will stand. 2. The Time when. Tomorrow. 3. The Place
where. On the top of the hill. 4. The Instrument with which. With the rod of
God in mine hand.
Verse. 10. So Joshua did as Moses had said unto him, and fought with Amalek.
And Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
Ioshuahs obedience to the forementioned charge being every way answerable
thereto, is set down, 1. Generally. So Joshua did as Moses had said unto him.
2. Particularly in the most principal branch thereof, And fought against
Amalek.


Verse. 11. And it came to pass when Moses held up his hand that Israel
prevailed. and when he let down his hand Amalek prevailed.
The Performance of the Promise is 1. Generally propounded. 2. Particularly
exemplified.


In the General we have 1. The Persons. 2. The Preparation.


The Persons are Principal. Moses. Assisting. Aaron. Hur.



The Preparation is by ascending to a fit place where they might see the
Armies. They went up to the top of the hill.

Verse. 12. And Moses hands were heavy, and they took a stone and put it under
him, and he sat therein: and Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, the one on the
one side, and the the other on the other side: and his hands were steady unto
the going down of the Sun.
Before the particular exemplification of the foresaid promise, The Issue
thereof is inserted; which is different according to the occasional signs.
Here therefore are 1. Two differing signs. 2. Two differing issues.


Both these do answer each the other. The first sign is of a steady faith,
Moses held up his hand. The second is of a weak faith, He let down his hand.


1. The issue answerable to the first is that Israel prevailed. 2. The issue
answerable to the second, that Amalek prevailed.
In the particular exemplification of the performance of the foresaid promise
the actions of two sorts of persons are described.

1. Of the Principal: Moses. 2. Of the Assistants Aaron. Hur.

The Actions of the Principal are actions of 1. Weakness. 2. Steddines


His Action of weakness was before expressed, verse. 10. (He let down his
hand) but is here implied, 1. By the cause thereof, Moses hands were heavy. 2.
By the means he used. He sat on a stone.


The Actions of the Assistants are of two sorts. Both which are amplified by
the benefit that thereupon followed.

The first kind of action was to procure him ease, in two phrases 1. They took
a stone. 2. They put it under him.


The second was, to assist him themselves.

In this latter is expressed 1. The Matter, what they did. Aaron and Hur staid
up his hands. 2. The Manner, how they did it. The one on the one side, and the
other on the other.


In the benefit that followed thereon, is noted 1. The Steadiness of the
Principal. His hands were steady. 2. The Continuance thereof. Until the going
down of the Sun.


Verse. 13. And Joshua discomfited A malek and his people with the edge of the
sword.
The Success was very successful. It was Victory: which is 1. Implied, in
this word discomfited. 2. Amplified by the Persons. Means.



The Persons are the Conqueror. Joshua. Conquered Amalek His people.



The Means was, with the edge of the sword.

Verse 14. And the Lord said unto Moses, write this for a memorial in a book,
and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua.
The Event following upon this Battle, was a Memorial of it.

The Memorial was of two kinds. One enjoined by God. The other made by Moses.


In the former there is 1. A charge. 2. A reason thereof.


In the Charge we have 1. The Persons. 2. The Matter.


1. The Person who gave the charge. God. 2. The Person to whom it was given.
Moses.
For I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
The Matter consists of two branches. The former notes 1. The thing enjoined.
2. The end thereof.


In the thing enjoined is noted 1. The action. Write this. 2. The Instrument
wherein. In a book. The end is, For a Memorial.


The latter notes 1. The action to be done. Rehoarse it 2. The person before
whom. In the ears of Joshua.


The Reason is taken from Gods purpose against Amalek, which was utterly to
root him out.

In setting down hereof are noted the Persons Action.


The Persons are 1. Destroying, God. I will. 2. Destroyed. Amalek.


The Action is a severe jadgement. Whereof we have 1. The kind. Put out the
remembrance. 2. The extent. Utterly from under heaven.


The Memorial made by Moses is 1. Related. verse. 15. 2. Justified. verse. 16.


Verse. 15. And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Iehovah-Nissi.
In the Relation is expressed 1. The Thing done. Moses built an altar. 2. The
Title given to it. He called the name of it Iehovah-Nissi.


Verse. 16. For he said, Because the Lord has sworn that the Lord will have war
with Amalek from generation to generation.
The Memorial which Moses made is Justified by the Reason thereof. Which is 1.
Generally implied in these words. For he said, Because. 2. Particularly
expressed, and taken from Gods implacable wrath against Amalek. In expressing
whereof is declared 1. The Ratification of the Doom. 2. The Aggravation of the
Doom.


The Ratification is by Gods oath. The Lord has sworn.

The Aggravation is 1. By the kind of judgment. The Lord will have war with
Amalek. 2. By the Continuance of it. From generation to generation.


. 2. Of Amaleks malice against Israel.
EXODUS XVII. VIII. And Amalek came, and sought with Israel in Riphidim.
THe first point in the Narration of this glorious victory, (...) compeni
videtur a (...) popule, and (...) Chald. in Hiphil, percussit. Atque ita
dicitur, populus percutiens. Ambr. Hexaem. l 1 c. 4. sic, Per interpretationem,
Amalech, rex accipitur iniquorum. Who meant by Amalek.
is the Assault. Wherein the Assaulter, Assault, Assaulted, and Place of
Assault being all expressed, I will begin with the Assaulter, who is here said
to be Amalek.

As his name was, so wash. The name Amalek has a double notation applied to
it. The first is this, a smiting people. The other, which is given by an
ancient Father, is this, A King of the wicked. That which shall further be
spoken of Amalek, will give evidence to both these notations, and demonstrate
that he was a smiting people, and a King of the wicked.

Amalek (as also Israel) is a collective word: it compriseth under it the
posterity of Amalek, even that people, that nation that descended from him. Now
Amalek, the man that was the first head, and stock of this distinct nation,
from whom the name was primarily taken, was Esaus grandchild, or nephew, For
Amalek was the son of Eli Genesis 36. 4, 12. 1 Chro. 1. 34, 35: 36.
pkaz, and Eliphaz the son of Esau, and Esau the son of Isaaek, and brother
of Iaakob, who was also called Israel. So as the Amalakites were within three
degrees of the same stock whereof Israel was.

1. Ob. The posterity of Esau were called Edomites. How then can the Amalakites
be thought to come from Esau? Genesis 36. 8, 9. -- 25. 30.


Ans. The legitimate posterity, such as were borne of his wives, or his sons
wives, were indeed called Edo mites. But Amalek was the son of Esaus son by
a concubine: Gen 36. 12.
and therefore severed from Esaus stock: so as he himself was counted head of a
stock.

2. Ob. Moses makes mention of the Amalakites above Genesis 14. 7.
an hundred years before Amalek the son of Eliphaz was borne.

Ans. Moses uses that title Amalakites by way of Anticipation: De exemplis
anticipationis tum nominum tum rerum, vide Prolegomina Perkinst praefixa
Harmoniae Bibl.
which is to give that name to a place, or to the Inhabitants of a place,
whereby they were called, when the history that makes mention of them was
written, though at that time whereof the history writes they were not so
called. Now Moses lived long after Amalek was borne: and because the posterity
of Amalek in Moses his time lived in that country which Cheder. laomer and the
Kings which were with him, destroyed, he says that they destroyed the country
of the Amalakites; that is, the Country where the Amalakites afterward dwelt.
Kadesh is so named in that place. Genesis 21. 14, 31
Such figurative phrases are frequent in Scripture.

It remains then that the Amalakites and Israelites came all from Isaak: so as
in relation to him they were of the Amalech figuram portat Diaboli. Cypr de
Exhort. Mort. cap. 8. Evidences of Amaleks malice against Israel. Number. 24. 20.
same stock. Yet were the Amalakites as malicious enemies against the
Ifraclites as ever were any. He therefore spoke a truth, that said, Amalek
carries the shape of the Devil. Of their enmity the Holy Ghost gives these
evidences.

1. They were the first that enemie-like set upon Israel, after their escape
out of Egypt through the Red Sea. This Balaam acknowledges where he says,
Amalek was the first of the nations, meaning (as our last English Translators
have noted in the margin of that place) The first that warred against Israel.
2. They could not long keep in their malicious mind against Israel: for before
the third month of their being in the wilderness they assault them. 3. They
set upon Israel without any cause, or provocation on Isreal's part. Israel had
not as yet taken arms Exo 19. 1.
against any. 4. What they did they did most basely. For they laid 1 Samuel 15.
2. Deuteronomy. 25. 18.
wait for Israel in the way when he came up from Egypt: and smote the hindmost
of them: even all that were feeble behind them, when they were faint and weary.
5. Notwithstanding that they were here discomfited by Israel, yet after this
they take advantage against them: and when some of Israel went up to the top of
the hill without Moses their guide, and the Arc their confid^nce, the
Amalakites with the Canaanites smote them, and discomfited them Number. 14. 45.
even to Hormah. 6. They joined with the King of Moab, and with the children of
Ammon, and went and smote Israel. Judge 3 12, 13.
7. They joined with the Midianites, and with the children of the East to
spoil Israel, leaving them no sustenance, nor sheep, nor ox, nor ass. Judge
6. 3, 4.
8. The answer which God made to Israel in these words, Judge. 10. 12.
The Zidonians, and the Amalakites, and Maonites did oppress you, etc. And
this phrase which Samuel uses to 1 Samuel 15. 33.
Agag, thy sword has made women childlesse, imply many mischiefs which Amalek
did to Israel. 9. In David's absence, and while the Israelites are in camp
against the Philistines, the Amalakites invade Ziklag 1 Samuel 30 1, etc
that belonged to David, and burn it, and take the women captive, and go away
with all the spoil thereof. 10. Haman that cruel enemy of the Jews, who
sought utterly to root out the whole nation, was an Amalakite. For Est. 31.
their Kings were called Agag, as the Egyptian Kings, Pharaoh. Hereupon is
Haman styled an Agagite, who was an Amalakite. 11. The Psalmist puts them
into the Catalogue of Isreal's implacable enemies. Psalm. 83. 7.
12. Gods oath against them gives evidence of their malicious Exo. 17. 16.
mind against Israel. 13. So do the many charges which God gives for their --
14. Deuteronomy. 25. 17. 1 Samuel 15. 3, 26 -- 28. 18.
utter destruction: and Gods displeasure against Saul for sparing them.
These evidences do sufficiently show what malice Amalek had against Israel:
whereof no just cause was given on Isreal's part: but such as these on Amaleks
part.

1. The brood was a bastard brood. It issued from an illegitimate Reasons of
Amaleks hatred of Israel Genesis 3^. 12.
stock. Now commonly such as are basely borne, even they and their issue are of
ill dispositions. Instance Ismael, Ammon, Moab, Abimelich the base son of
Ierubbaal, and many others. God therefore would not have a bastard enter into
his congregation, even to his tenth generation. Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
2. The inveterate hatred of their ancient predecessor Genesis 27. 41.
Esau against Jacob was propagated to this his posterity. 3, There was no fear
of God in them. Now where no Deuteronomy. 25. 18. Genesis 20. 11.
fear of God is, there is no restraint of malice, or of any other corruption.
4. The divine blessing which accompanied Israel: for an envious eye is evil
because of others good. Mat. 20. 15.
5. The Arabians (among whom the Amalakites are reckoned) living much on
spoil, the Amalakites saw that good booties might be had from Israel: and at
this time they well understood what jewels and treasures Israel had brought out
of Egypt. 6. The Amalakites had forsaken the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
whom Israel still professed: and so were of a contrary religion. Malicia sons
peccati est. Amb. Sermon. 15 in Psalm. 118. v. 3

From that which has been delivered concerning Amaleks malice, this may well
be inferred, that Malice is the fountain of all evil.

3. Of inveterate hatred.
THe implacable hatred of the Amalakites gives evidence, Malicia si (...) si
ue si. Hier Comment in Eccles (...) qui proposi^o (...). Chrysostom. Deminic. 22.
post Pentecost.
that

Inveterate hatred is hardly satisfied. It ends not with a man's life, but is
often propagated to posterity. Amalek received it from his grandfather Esau and
propagated it to his posterity. The forementioned instances give abundant proof
hereof. The like may be exemplified in the other branch of Esaus posterity, the
Edomites; and in the Ishmaelites and Hagarens, the of spring of Hagar, Abraham's
concubine: Psalm. 83. 6, 7. Ier. 48. 27. -- 49. 1. Ezekiel. 25. 3, etc Am. 1. 11,
13. Obad 10. Zeph. 2. 8, 9.
and in the Moabites and Ammonites, the progeny of Lot. The Prophets are full
of expostulations and exclamations against all these, for their bitter hatred
against Israel, manifested by all the occasions that they could take of doing
any mischief unto them. Though there was a nearer propinquity betwixt all
these and the Jews, then betwixt them and other nations, yet their hatred was
more against the Jews then against any other nation; so as they were ready to
join with others against the Jews, and when by others the Jews had been
overthrown and captivated, they would insult. How implacable and insatiable
was the hatred of the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and other Jews against
Christ and his Apostles? To omit the many instances that for proof hereof
might be gathered out of the histories of the Evangelists, of the Acts of the
Apostles, St. Paul bears this witness against them, They killed the Lord
Jesus, and 1 These. 2. 15.
their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, etc. Ecclesiastical histories
give instances of like hatred and malice of others in succeeding ages. And we
in our age have found woeful experience of as much in the hatred of Papists and
others against us.

Wrathful and revengefull affections, whereof malice and Malice of an
increasing nature.
hatred are not the least, are of a spreading and increasing nature: like fire,
the longer it continues (especially having matter to work upon) the further it
spreads it self, and the hotter it waxes. But the forenamed affections can
never want fuel. Goodness it self, by reason of the malignant disposition of
such as are malicious, becomes fuel to Semper contra virtutem insanit malicia.
Chrysostom. in Genesis 6. Hom 23. The power of Satan. and depth of corruption in
natural men.
the fire of malice and hatred. These fiery affections therefore may fitly and
justly be added to the number of those things that are never satisfied, nor
will say, It is enough. (Pro. 30. 15.) Especially against truth and virtue is
malice always mad.

Both the power which the God of this world has over the men of this world,
and also the deep rooting that corruption has taken in the hearts of natural
men, is hereby Quid longius a voluntate diu ina quam malicia? Plane chaos
magnum inter nos and illam firmatum est in hac part: cumsemper eum delectet
praestare beneficia, and ingra'is no bis e contra suggerat affectio crudel
ssima and innoxijs velle nocere. Bern. in Quadrag. Sermon. 6.
manifested. That which so far spreads it self, which so long continues,
which is so unsatiable, as we heard malice and hatred to be, must needs have
fast and deep rooting. And the fire which is ever and anon flaming forth, must
needs be blown up by some means or other. Now the Devil is he, that is ready
at all turns, where he observes fire to be, to blow it up. And, where he is
suffered so incessantly to incense the fire of malice, what can we else think
but that he there bears a great sway; yea that he has the whole rule? A
matter of much humiliation. For what is more contrary to the Divine nature?
Surely in this respect there is a great gulf betwixt it and us. For where he
is always delighted in doing good, on the contrary, the pernicious affection
of malice does work in us a desire to do wrong even to such as are harmless.

How wise and circumspect ought we to be, that are of Others malice must make
us the more wary
the Church of God, so long as we live in this world, that we give not
unnecessary advantages to such malicious persons, whose wrath is implacable,
whose hatred is unsatiable? So long as there are Israelites in the world, there
will be Amalakites. So long as there are people that profess the name of the
true God, there will be malicious enemies that for their profession sake will
work them all the mischief that possibly they can. As there is a direct
contrariety betwixt truth and error, so there is an imbred antipathy betwixt
professors and maintainers of the one and the other (as is betwixt the wolf
and the lamb) by reason of that malicious and mischievous disposition that is
in enemies of the truth. The nearest bonds of nature are in this case little or
nothing regarded. For, the brother will betray the brother to Mat. 10. 21.
death: and the father the son: and the children will rise against the
parents, and cause them to die.

Among other reasons of this immortal fewde against worshippers of the true
God, and professors of the true Religion, this is one of the chief, that
Truth is a light, that discovers the evils that lie hid in darkness. Now the
nearer that such as are of the light are to such as live in darkness, the more
conspicuously are their evil deeds discovered: which makes them the more fret
and fume.

What wonder is it, if the like fall out in our days? Before our days it was
so: and after our days it is like to be so, Papists to Protestants are as
Amalakites to Israelites. We see therefore that no propinquity of country,
kindred, neighborhood, or the like, can restrain their malice, but they are
ready to take all advantages they can against us. Their profession being
palpable Antichristianisme, this their malice against us is an evidence that
our Religion is true, and Orthodoxe Christianity: which may minister unto us no
small comfort against their bitter hatred of us.

. 4. Of undue beginning war.
II. THe evidence of the Amalakites malice is noted in these two words, came,
fought. The first word, (...) (...).
came, implies that the Amalakites first set upon the Israelites. The other,
and fought, imports an hostile attempt against them, whereby the Amalakites
thought to have utterly destroyed the Israelites. (...)
The word signifies to devour and consume, as well as to fight against; or to
join both together, it signifies by fighting to consume. In allusion
whereunto David says of the ordinary instrument of war, 2 Samuel 11. 25
The sword devoureth one as well as another. And where Deuteronomy. 32. 24. (...)
(...) sumpti, comesti, excsi. Malice provokes to do wrong.
Moses speaks of devouring, he uses this word.

From this evidence of their malice we may infer, that

It is a property of a malicious enemy first to seek others destruction: or
causelessly to begin war. This is noted as an evidence of the malicious mind
of the Exo. 14. 5, 6.
Egyptians, Number. 21. 1.
Canaanites, -- 23.
Amorites, and of all those enemies which invaded and annoyed the Israelites,
in the time of the Judges and Kings. On this ground the Prophet makes this
complaint, Psalm. 120. 7.
I am for peace, but when I speak they are for war. And often does he
complain that -- 35. 7, 19. -- 69. 4.
without cause they laid a net for him, without cause they dug for his
soul: wrong fully they were his enemies, they hated him without cause: -- 109.
3.
they fought against him without cause: -- 119. 161.
they persecuted him without cause: Lam. 3. 52.
They chased me sore (says the Church) like a bird without cause.

Malice has no respect to equity or honesty, nor to honor or reputation. It
only cares to satisfy its own venomous End that malicious aim at.
humor, which (as we heard before) can never be satisfied. It is therefore
impatient at all delays. It is ready to take all opportunities of doing
mischief, whether they be just or unjust: whether there be cause or no cause.
And whereas that light of understanding which is in men, even as they are
reasonable creatures, might somewhat direct them in points of common equity and
policy, malice, like a thick cloud, arises before that light, and so obscureth
and hides it, as no direction can from thence be taken. Herein then men offend
against the light of nature. For the Heathen Philosophers who had no other
light, accounted that Summa quidem authoritate Philosophi, quicquid justum sit,
id utile etiam esse censent. Cic Offic. l. 2. Complex est honestatis semper
utilitas, and utilitatis honestas. Amb. Offic, l. 3. c. 14.
which was just and honest to be profitable: and nothing but that. Profit is
always a companion of honesty: and honesty of profit.

Ob. Were the two sons of Jacob, who first set upon the Shechemites and slow
all the males among them, (Genesis 34. 25.) and Joshua, who went and fought
against the Canaanites, and utterly destroyed them, Ios. 12. 7, etc. and David,
who went and smote the Philistines, Moabites, Edomites, Syrians, and other
nations, (2 Samuel 8.) were these and others of the people of God-blinded with
hatred, and whetted on with malice, in that they first set upon their enemies?

Answ. 1. All particular actions of such as are otherwise good men are not
every way justifiable, and imitable. Instance that of Genesis 49. 7.
Simeon and Levi which their old good father by divine instinct cursed.

2. That which those sons of Jacob did, they did not altogether without
cause. They did it in Genesis 34. 31.
revenge of the dishonor done to their sister. But this is not altogether to
excuse them. For their anger was fierce, and their wrath was cruel.

3. As for Ioshuaes rooting out of the Canaanites, he was How war justly
begun.
not moved thereto by malice, because he did it not of his own motion, but by
express Ios. 1. 1.
charge from God himself. For the Canaanites by their extreme wickedness had
deserved utterly to be rooted out of their land: God therefore (the supreme
Lord over all nations) made Joshua his Minister to execute his just judgment
upon them.

4. The enemies whom David subdued, had before his time done exceeding great
wrong to Israel; that therefore which he did was partly as a just punishment of
their unjust wrongs, (for lawful war is a public execution of public
justice) and partly as a means to secure Israel for the time to come from
further wrong. These premises duly considered, it may truly be said that David
never began Nunquam David nisi lacessitus bellum intulit. Amb. Offic. lib. 1
cap 35. Deus hoc providit ne David prior illis inferret bellum, ne videretur
ingratus. P. Martyr. Comment. in 2 Samuel 5. 17. Fories and magnanimi sunt
habendi, non qui faciunt, sed qui propulsant injuriam. Cic Offic. l. 1.
wa^re, but provoked thereto. Of the Philistines it is in special said, that
when they heard that David was anointed King over Israel, all the Philistines
came up to seek David, (2 Samuel 5. 17.) that is, to prevent David by giving the
first onset, and beginning war. For God so ordered it, that David should not
begin war against them, least he might seem ungrateful.

By these answers the difference betwixt wars begun lawfully on just causes,
and unlawfully and maliciously upon no just ground, may be discerned.

The application of this point especially concerns Kings, Princes, States,
Generals, Captains, Soldiers, and all such as wage war, to take heed that
inward passion, hatred, malice, undue desire of undeserved revenge, or any such
like unjust and unwarrantable provocation whet them not on to begin war. They
are to be accounted truly valorous, The issue of unjust war begun.
and magnanimous, not who offer, but who protect from wrong. I shall afterward
( 18.) have occasion to treat of the just causes of lawful war. In the mean
let notice be taken of the ill success that such wars have. Not to insist on
this of Amalek, or of other malicious enemies of the Church, let the woeful
issue of Josiah his going to fight 2 Chro. 35. 20, etc.
against Necho King of Egypt without any just cause on Nechoes part, be noted.
If God punished this fault so severely in such a worthy, such a beloved one as
Josiah was, who not in hatred, or malice, but upon rash suspicion, and
unadvised policy went out and fought against Necho, how can they, whom malice
sets on work in like cases, look to escape the revenging hand of a just God?
Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: much more the wicked and
the sinner: Pro. 11. 31.

. 5. Of the title Israel.
Cum Dco invaleseens, est in terpretatio Israelis. Tertul advers. Marcion l. 4.
III. THe party assaulted was Israel. Israel was a name given to Abraham's
grandchild, who was first called Jacob. But in memory of his steadfast faith,
whereby (...) b comp^nituo ex (...) principatum obtinuit, and (...) Deus. Est
igitur (...) Princeps Dei, nut qui principalem potentiam obtinuit a Deo.
he is said to prevail with God, who wrestled with him, he was called Israel,
Genesis 32. 28. The word is compounded of two words, the one signifies to
obtain principality, or to prevail: the other is the name of God: so as it
signifies (as the Holy Ghost himself expounds it) a Prince that has power
with God. So does the Prophet Hos. 12. 3. (...) principent se gessit cum Deo.
Hosea also expound the meaning of this word: for in relation to this name
Israel he says of him that was so called, He had power with God, or he behaved
himself princely with God. This being a title of much honor, and a name which
gave evidence of Gods great favor to him, and of his strong faith in God. It
was first given to Genesis 32. 28.
Jacob himself.

2. To an -- 33 20. (...) Deus, Deus Israelis. Vel, ut Trem. and Iun. sic
Altar Dei sortis, Dei Israelis.
altar that Jacob built to God, which was called, God, the God of Israel, or
(as some by inserting the word, altar, expound it) thus, The altar of the
strong God, the God of Israel.

3. To all the Posterity of Iaco^b: who as they are called Gen 32. 32.
The children of Israel, so also are they called -- 47. 27. -- 48. 20.
Israel. And this name was in common given to all the twelve Tribes that
descended from the twelve sons of Jacob, till the Tribe of Judah together
with the Tribe of Benjamin, that bordered next to Judah, and lay part within
him, grew so populous and so potent, as it got a peculiar name to it self,
which was 1 Samuel 18. 16. 2 Samuel 5. 5.
Judah, and the other ten Tribes retained this name Israel. This distinction
betwixt 1 King. 12. 19, 20.
Judah and Israel was afterward more inviolably ratified, when by the
apostasy of the ten Tribes from the house of David in Rehoboams time, Israel
under the reign of Jeroboam and his successors became one kingdom, and Judah
under the reign of David's lineage became another.

4. By a Trope the land where the children of Israel inhabited is styled Lev.
20. 2.
Israel.

5. By another Trope the Church of God, whether Jews or Gentiles, is called
Gal. 6. 16.
Israel.

6. By a kind of propriety it is applied to God, who is styled Isa. 37. 16.
The God of Israel, -- 21.
The Lord God of Israel, Isa. 1. 4.
The holy one Israel, -- 24.
The mighty one of Israel, 1 Samuel 15. 29.
The strength of Israel, etc. Or, as some interpret some of those phrases, The
holy Israel, The mighty Israel, meaning the holy and mighty God.

In this place, Israel, being a collective word, is put for all the posterity
of Jacob that came out of Egypt through the Red Sea, assembled in the
wilderness: which congregation was at that time the only visible Church of God
on earth. So as in this instance we may behold the Condition of Gods Church in
this world.

. 6. Of the Churches assaults in this world.
GODS true Church is subject to assaults in this world. Every age from the
beginning of the world gives too evident demonstration hereof. Thus much was
at first prefigured by Cains rising up against Abel, and slaying him: (Genesis 4.
8.) and the like has been verified time after time, even Turbabatur mare,
fluctuabat navicula. Navicula Ecclesia est, Mare se^ulum est. Aug. Enar. in
Psalm. 92.
till this our time. Fitly in this respect is the world resembled to the sea,
and the Church to a ship therein. As well may a ship in the sea be free from
storms, and waves beating upon it, as the Church from assaults.

That enmity which is betwixt the seed of the serpent, and of the woman, (Genesis
3. 15.) is an especial cause hereof. The seed of the one is of a contrary
disposition to the seed of the other: and there is an inbred antipathy betwixt
them (as we heard before,. 3.) This is not so much to be understood of the
visible serpent, as of the spiritual serpent, to whom it Quod si de sensi bili
serpente haec dicta sunt, multo magis accipienda sunt haec de spirituali
serpente. Chrysostom in Genesis 3. Hom 17.
does much more agree. As well therefore may calves where lions, and lambs
where wolves, and hares where hounds, and mice where cats, and birds where
buzzards are, think to be quiet, secure and safe, as the Church in this world.
The Devil himself as a roaring lion walks about seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. And he is the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. As a God he
reigns and rules in this world: and the men of this world do subject
themselves to him as to their God: wherefore he is also styled Ioh. 12. 31. --
14. 30.
The Prince of this world, and his hellish brood Ephesians. 6. 12.
worldly governors. By this spirit are all the men of this world guided, he
Ephesians 2. 2.
works in them. He is their father, and Ioh. 8. 44.
the lusts of their father they will do. Prince and Subjects therefore will (in
what they can) annoy the Church, which is the kingdom of Christ

Ob. Is not Christ able to maintain and preserve his Church against all that
the enemies thereof can do against it?

Ans. He is able, and will so far preserve it, as Mat, 16. 18.
The gates of hell shall never prevail against it. That therefore which is
done against it, is done by his See The whole armor of God Treat. 1. Part. 3.
22, 27.
permission, and that with respect had to Ibid Part. 2.. 2. and Treat. 2. Part
5. 13.
his own glory, and his Churches good. Many reasons tending to those ends may
be gathered from this particular instance of suffering Israel to be assaulted
by Amalek.

He suffered this in regard of his own glory, to manifest

1. His providence in taking care of them, as to provide Gods glory set out by
atte^pts against his Church.
things needful, as Manna, and water, which he had done not long before, so to
protect them from things hurtful, as the attempt of Amalek was.

2. His power in enabling them who were unacquainted with wars, and destitute
of warlike preparations, (being lately delivered from a long bondage wherein
they and their fathers had lien) to vanquish so potent, and well prepared an
enemy.

3. His truth, in beginning to accomplish that promise which was made to him
that was first called Israel, to him, I say, and to his seed that should also
be called Israel, Thou shall prevail with men.

4. His justice in revenging so malicious an enemy as Amalek Gen 32. 28.
was: and causing him to fall into the snate that he laid for Israel.

5. His wisdom, in turning that to Isreal's advantage, which the enemy intended
to his great damage: as is manifest by the reasons following, which show how
God herein aimed at Isreal's good. For hereby 1. At their entrance into the
wilderness an evidence is Enemies assaults prove good to the Church.
given of that success they should have when they should come into Canaan: so
as their faith might thus be much strengthened. 2. A means was affoorded to
furnish them with armor. For Amalek coming prepared against Israel, by the
victory which Israel had, was spoiled of all his preparation. 3. An occasion
was given of exercising them to war before they entered into Canaan. 4.
Joshua, their Generals authority and courage was evidenced before hand. Uses
of the Churches assaults. Vltima Ecclesiae nota est foelicitas temporalis.
Bellarm. controvers. 2. l. 4. c. 18. de notis Eccles, At contra, August. de
Civit. Dei. l 2. c 23. Ne magni pendamus terrenam foelicitatem, quae malis
etiam plerunque conceditur.
5. The power and efficacy of prayer was demonstrated.


The forementioned condition of the Church, to be subject to assaults, 1.
Discovers the uncertainty of that note which by many is pretended to be a
note of the true Church, Temporal felicity. If this were so, Israel was no
true Church, nor they of whom Christ said, In the world ye shall have
affliction, Ioh. 16. 33. 2. It instructs us in the difference betwixt the
Militant Church here on earth, and the triumphant in heaven. Nor Satan, nor any
other enemies of the Church can enter into heaven to assault it there. 3. It
puts us in mind to be always well prepared against assaults. The greater
danger we are subject unto, the better furnished, and fore-armed we ought to
be. This providence See The whole armor of God. Treat. 1. Part 3.. 2. and Part
4. 10.
must be manifested in regard both of corporal, and also of spiritual dangers
whereunto we are subject. Yea the Israel of God, they who are of the true
Church must apply this to themselves. For it was Israel against whom Amalek
fought. 4. It affords comfort to such as are assaulted, that notwithstanding
God suffer Amalek to come and fight against them, yet they may be Gods Israel.
5. It is a means of making Christian unity more firm Vbicunque a perditis ista
commissa sunt, ibi ferventius atque perfectius unita^ Christiana proficit. Aug
Bonefac. Epist. 50.
and perfect; yea, and of causing more and more to increase. For the more
fiercely Christians are assaulted, the more closely will they cling together.
6. It is a motive to make us willing to be dissolved, when it shall seem good
to the Divine providence, because so we shall be translated to the Triumphant
Church, where is freedom from all assaults.


. 7. Of Amaleks inhumanity.
IIII. THe place where the assault is here said to be, was Rephidim. This was
the name of one of the places where the Lord was pleased that Israel should
make a station in the wilderness. It was in number the Number. 33. 15.
tenth from their coming out of Egypt: but the seventh from their passage
through the Red Sea. For they had made three stations before that passage through
the Sea. All these journies were made within the space of two months. For
(...) in novil^^io.
in the beginning of the third month after their escape out of Egypt, they
went from Rephidim to Exo. 19. 1.
Sinai.

The name of the place is here expressed,

1. In general, to verify the truth of the history. For, circumstances of
Persons, Times, Places, and such like, make much to the confirmation of the
truth of an history.

2. In particular, to aggravate the malice of the Amalakites, who set upon them
so soon after their coming out of bondage, before they had time well to
settle themselves. For having traveled ten several journies (whereof one was
Exo. 15. 22, Number. 33. 8.
three days long, others might be as long, if not longer) in the space of two
months, at the most, they could not be long settled. Besides, in their journies
they were often brought to great straits: as at the Red Sea, where Exo. 14. 9.
Pharaoh pursued them furiously, and had almost over-taken them: and when -- 15
22.
after three days journey they found no water: and -- 23.
the first water that they met with, was so bitter, as they could not drink of
it. And at another station they -- 16. 3.
wanted bread, and meat, having nothing at all to eat. And after that again
they came to this -- 17. 1.
Rephidim, a dry and barren wilderness, where were no rivers, springs, wells,
ponds, or any other ordinary means to afford them water to drink.

Questionless the Amalakites dogged the Israelites after they were come through
the Red Sea; and thereupon knew how weary they must needs be, and to what
straits they were brought, and in particular, how destitute of water this
Rephidim (the place where they set upon them) was. For, the Holy Ghost to
aggravate their malice, thus sets it out, 1 Samuel 15. 2.
Amalek laid wait for Israel in the way when he came up from Egypt. Deuteronomy. 25.
18.
He smote the hindmost of them, even all that were feeble behind them, when
they were faint and weary. The immediate connection of this history with the
former, thus, And Amalek came, (or, as our English Translatours for more
perspicuity, turn it, Then came Amalek) imports (...)
as much: For it is as if he had said, Israel had now been wearied with much
travel, and disquieted with many distresses and wants, and was now in a place
destitute of all ordinary provision, And in this case Amalek comes and fights
against him. An evident demonstration of much inhumanity, and more then savage
cruelty.

. 8. Of the base advantages which malicious enemies take.
MAlicious enemies are ready to take all the base advantages that they can. If
the particulars. 7.
noted of Amalek be well observed, in him we shall find the doctrine verified.
The like is noted of the posterity of these Amalakites, 1 Samuel 30. 1, 2
while David and his men were out of Ziklag, the Amalakites surprise it, smite
it, burn it with fire, and carry the women away captive. More basely dealt the
Egyptians with the Israelites, when they had them fast in their own land. For
first Exo. 1. 11, 13.
they afflicted them with burdens, and made them serve with rigor, and made
their lives bitter with hard bondage. Then they -- 16.
took order with the midwives to kill all their male children in the birth.
Yea, because the midwives obeyed not so cruel a charge, -- 22.
the King commanded all the people to cast all the male children of the
Israelites into the river. It was a most inhumane, base, and barbarous
advantage which the Edomites took against the Israelites when the Babilonians
had overcome them, and caused them to fly hither and thither for their lives,
Obad. 14.
to stand in the cross ways to cut off them that did escape, and to deliver
up those that did remain in the day of distress. The base advantages which
Saul sought against David, and the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and other Jews
against Christ and his Apostles, and other enemies, heretics, and idolaters
against the professors of the Gospel, especially Papists against Protestants,
do further give abundant proof of the foresaid proposition. But, not to insist
on particulars, the Psalmist does indefinitely thus set out the disposition of
the wicked against the righteous, He sits in lurking places of the villages:
in the secret places does he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set
against the poor: he lies in wait secretly as a Lion in his den: he lies in
wait to catch the poor: he does catch the poor when he draws him into his
net. He croucheth and humbles himself that the poor may fall by his strong
ones, Ps. 10. 8, 9, 10 Herein they show themselves like to the most hateful
creatures. Fraudulenta vulpes soveis se latibulisque demergens, noune indicio
est infructaosu^ esse animal odioque dig^u^. Amb Hexaem l 6 c 3. Stratagems in
war.
The deceitful Fox hiding himself in ditches and secret places, is he not
thereby manifested to be a hurtful and hateful creature.

Quest. What may be thought of stratagems used in war, such as Genesis 14 15.
Abraham's setting upon his enemies by night: Ios. 8 3, etc.
Ioshuaes sending men by night to lie in wait against Ai, and when the men of
war were drawn out of it, to set the city on fire: Judge 1. 24.
The house of Joseph's enticing of a man of Luz to show them the way into the
city where he dwelt, whereby they had opportunity to smire the city: -- 3 21.
Cum justum bellum susciperit, utrum aperta pugna, utrum in sidijs vincat, ni
hill ad justitiam interest. Aug. Quaest. super Ios. l. 6. c. 10. Prudenti^, and
fortitudinis est vel decipere vel supe rare adversarium u^cunque potueris.
Hier. Comment. l. 5. in Ezech. c. 17
Ehuds sudden and secret thrusting of his dagger into Eglons belly: and other
like warlike wiles: what may be thought of these, are they to be reckoned in
the number of base advantages?

Answ. No, if they have any special direction from God, or inward motion of
his Spirit, (as Joshua and Ehud had) or if at least the war be just, and no
falsehood, envy, malice, cruelty, or inhumanity be mixed with the wiles that are
used. For these are the things that make advantages to be base. The mind of him
that takes such advantages is a base mind: he has no respect to points of
honor and honesty, as was before noted. (. 4.) Nemo qui fortitudinis gloriam
consecutus est, insidijs and malicia laude^ est adeptus Cic. Offic. l 1.
No man, no not among the Heathen, that got the glory of valor, got praise by
treacheries and malice. They hated treachery, and all base advantages. If any
of the adverse part, offered to act a perfidious part, such was the true
valorous mind of some of them, as they would return the perfidious person to
his own Lord and Master, of him to receive condign punishment. Among others,
memorable is the pattern of Curious in this point. Dux Romano rum cum ad cum
adversarij regis medicus advenisset, pollicens daturum se regi venenum, vinctu^
cu^ ad ho ste^ remisit. Amb. Offic. l. 3. c. 14.
That Roman Captain, when the Physician of the adverse King came to him, and
promised to poison his Lord, he sent him bound back again to the enemy. As
memorable is the practice of the whole Senate of Rome in that kind. For when
Camillus the Consul encamped against the Falcisci, a traitorous School master,
who had most of the Noble-mens children committed to his tuition, under
pretense of carrying them forth to walk, brought them into the enemies Flor,
Histor. Rom, l. 1. c. 12.
tents, that his countrymen might thereupon be drawn to yield to the enemy.
But the Senate of Rome so detested that treachery, as they stripped the
treacherous pedant naked, gave rods to the boys, that they might whip him
back again to the city which he would have betrayed.

Many other like instances might be given, whereby generous Generals have
showed, that undertaking a trial of Qui virtutis certamen susceperat, nollet
fraud vincere. Non enim in victoria honestatem ponebat: sed ipsam, nisi
honestate quaesitam, victoriam turpem pronunciabat. Amb loc. citat.
virtue and valor, they would not get the victory by fraud. For they did not
place honor and honesty simply in victory, but accounted victory base, unless
it were obtained by honesty.

This mischievous mind of malicious enemies, gives just occasion to those that
have such enemies (as all true Professors of the true Religion have) to be the
more prudent and circumspect in keeping themselves from their snares and
ginnes. On this ground does Christ give this express charge, Be wise as
serpents, Mat. 10. 16. Many of Salomons proverbs tend to this purpose. We have
worthy patterns hereof in David, 1 Samuel 20, etc. who wisely avoided Saul's
snares; and in the Jews, Ezr. 4. 3. that returned from the captivity in
Zerubbabels time, and in p Nehemiahs, Neh. 4. 9, etc. and sundry other true
servants of God. Now because by all the wisdom that we have, we cannot avoid
all their wily and subtle plots, we must ever depend upon the Lord, and call
on him as David did, to turn their counsel into foolishness, 2 Samuel 15. 31.
And to Keep us from the snares that they lay for us, and from the grins of the
workers of iniquity, Psalm. 141. 9. Or, if we be over-taken, then to pull us out
of the net that they have laid for us. Psalm. 31. 4. Thus if we make God our
refuge and hiding place, we may be sure to be safe. For they are safe whom the
Lord does keep.

. 9. Of the interpretation and observations of Moses his charge to Joshua.
EXODUS XVII. IX. And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out,
fight with Amalek, etc.
THe relation of the 1.
Defense which was made against Moses de aqua nomen accepit. Amb Hexaem. lib
cap. 2. Verum nomen significat ex aqua servatum Moysen. Nam aquam Aegyptij Moy
vocant. Flav. Joseph cont. Apion l 1. (...) servare. liberare. (...) Iehosua.
Number 13. 16. Nati nomina a parentibus accipiebant, non quidem ex se, sed a Deo
mente impellebantur, Qui antequam fiant praeseij suturorum, quales post
crementum aetatis suae futuri essent posteriori tempore vegeti in nominibus
Hebr. designabantur. Cypr. Tract. de Sina and Sion.
Amaleks assault here begins. Wherein the External Means, as they are laid
down in a charge, are first expressed, and that so, as both the Persons giving
and receiving the charge, and also the matter given in charge are mentioned.

The Person that gave the charge was Moses. (And Moses said.)

Act 7. 35.
Moses at that time was the Prince, and chief Governor over Israel. Exo 2. 10.
He was called Moses because he was drawn out of the waters. For the (...)
axit.
Hebrew root signifies to draw out. Josephus the Jew renders another reason
of the name Moses; For, says he, the Egyptians call water moy.

The Person to whom the charge was given was Joshua (Moses said to Joshua.)

The word whence Joshua, or Iehoshua is derived according to the proper
notation thereof signifies to save, or deliver. Certainly by divine instinct
this name was given to the man that is here meant. For children of old received
names from their parents by divine instinct. They having knowledge of things to
come before they were, by Hebrew significant names declared to future ages what
they should be after some increase of age. For this particular person Joshua,
here in this place he was the General of that army whereby Israel was saved
and delivered from the Amalakites. And after Moses death, he was the chief
Governor and General that saved Israel from the Canaanites, and other nations
that were rooted out by him. Wherein he was a type of Jesus, whose name if it
were written in Hebrew, would be the very same, namely Iehoshua. The Greeks
therefore for Joshua or Iehoshua write Jesus, Acts 7. 45. Hebr. 4. 8.

At this time, when Moses gave this charge, Joshua was none of the chief
Princes of the Tribes. For the chief Prince of Ephraim (of which Tribe Joshua
was) was Number 1. 10.
Elishama. Indeed -- 13 2, 3, 8.
Joshua is reckoned among those that were sent to search the land of Canaan,
who are called Rulers and Heads: but they were not the chief Rulers and Heads,
but Exo. 18. 21, 25
such as are mentioned to be made by Iethroes advice, Heads over the people,
Rulers of thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, etc. As for Joshua, he was after this,
Moses his Minister, Exo. 24. 13. Numb. 11. 28. Yet at this time was he
appointed the General of the Lords army: partly because of his valor, and
partly because of that high calling whereunto he was to be deputed to conquer
the Canaanites.

Ob. After, this Joshua is styled a young man. (Exodus 33. 11. Numb. 11. 28.)

Answ. 1. The latter place may word for word be thus translated, Joshua the
son of Nun the servant of Moses from his youth: that is, who had served Moses
from his youth. (...) a juvenlute sua. Trem and Iun. Ita etiam Chald. Paraphr.
2. Senior is aetatis servuli dicuneur pueri a Dominis: non aetatem exprimentes,
sed conditionem. Amb. de Abr. l. 1. c. 9.


2. Servants of elder age are called lads, or youths, or young men: as some of
the Lord Majors servants are called. So as this title does often signify rather
the condition of men, then their age.

The Matter of the charge contains in it words of preparation, (Choose us out
men) and execution, (Go out, fight with Amalek.)

The first word of the preparation ( (...)
choose) implies a careful and diligent choice upon good trial and proof.
Isa. 48. 10. (...)
Where God says, (...)
I have chosen (or proved thee) in the furnace of affliction, this word is
used: as also, 2 Samuel 6. 1.
where it is said that David gathered together all the (...)
chosen (or choice, or chief) men of Israel. This particle ( (...).
us) is an usual redundancy in the Hebrew tongue. Yet is it not without an
Emphasis, implying thus much, choose for us, for our use, for our good, for the
better success to us.

The last word of the preparation ( (...) plurali numero ponitur pro (...) See
the Dignity of Chivalry. 3.
men) imports the kind of men that were to be chosen, namely, such as might
truly be called MEN, Valiant and valorous men.

The Charge for execution consists of two clauses. The first, (go out.) He
means, out from the congregation of the Israelites, or from the camp where
they were, into the open field where the enemies were.

Two weighty reasons may be given hereof. 1. To prevent the enemy, and to keep
him from entering in among all the people. 2. To pitch where Moses (that
intended to pray for them) might the better see them: that so by sight of them
his spirit might be the more quickened, and his prayer the more sharpened.


The last clause of the execution (fight with Amalek) shows the maine action
to be done, (fight) and the object or person with whom, (with Amalek.)

The action is expressed in the very same word that was 4.
before applied to the enemy; but the circumstances give evidence that there it
is used in one respect, here in another.

1. There for assault, here for defense. 2. There for offering wrong, here for
maintaining right. 3. There for an effect of malice, here of justice. 4. There
for an action without good warrant, here with the best warrant that can be,
Divine precept.
Thus the same thing for substance may be done lawfully, or unlawfully. War
may lawfully be waged: and war may unlawfully be waged. Circumstances make
much to the goodness or badnesse of an action.

Who are comprised under this last word Amalek has been showed. 2.
before.

The maine scope and drift of this charge is to use fit means for preventing
that mischief which Amalek yet further intended against them. The means was to
send out a well furnished army against him.

This Charge then commends to us seven observations.

I. Princes must provide for their peoples protection. Moses said
So did Moses whom God made a Ruler over Israel: he provided temporal and
spiritual means. He sent forth an army, and he himself lift up his hands for
Isreal's protection.

to Joshua,
II. Men deputed to weighty works ought to be prepared thereto before hand.
Joshua was to be the man that should conquer the Canaanites; He therefore is
here made General forty years before.

Choose us out men,
III. Military men must be choice men. The charge here given for choosing men
imports as much.

And go out,
IIII. Enemies must, as much as may be, be kept out. The charge here given is to
go out, namely to meet the enemy before he enter.

Fight
V. War is warrantable. It is here commanded by him that ordered his commands
by special warrant from God.

with Amalek.
VI. Violence with violence may be resisted. Amalek with open hostility fought
against Israel: Israel therefore is commanded with open hostility to fight
against Amalek.

VII. Approved means are to be used for attaining our desired ends. This is a
general doctrine arising from the principal intent of this charge, whereunto
all the forenamed particulars do tend. Moses here desiring to have the
Israelites freed from these mischievous Amalakites, gives order for using the
best ordinary means, which was by force of arms to vanquish them.

. 10. Of Princes protecting their people.
Sicut obedientes oportet esse qui reguntur, sic etiam Rectores and Principes
vigilantes esse decet. Chrysostom. Hom. 34. in Heb. 13.
I. PRinces must provide for their peoples protection. As they who are under
government must be subject, so it becomes Governors and Princes to be
watchful for the good of those that are under their charge. So was Moses here:
and so all good Kings, Princes, Judges, and other supreme Rulers and Governors
have been from time to time. Many have put their own safety in hazard to
save their people. Instance those who in their own persons have gone to war,
and been Generals themselves over the armies which they have gathered together
for their peoples protection. Thus have done, not only Judges who were
extraordinarily and purposely stirred up to deliver the people, as Othniel,
Ehud, Shamgar, Barak, Gideon, Iephthah, Sampson, and such others: but also
Kings, both such as were immediately chosen of God, and such as by lineall
descent came to the crown, as Saul, David, Abijah, Asa, Iehosaphat, and
others. Kings of old were wont to be Generals in war. In this respect it may
be said of them, as Iephthah said of himself, They put their souls in their
hands, that is, they jeoparded Judge 12. 4.
their lives. It was the protection of her people whereby Esther was moved to
attempt that which made her say, If I perish I perish. It was also the like
cause that made Nehemiah undertake a long journey from Shushan to Jerusalem,
Est. 4. 16. Neh. 2. etc.
and there to oppose himself to the envy and malice of the Jews enemies. That
which the Bramble is feigned to Judge. 9. 16.
say, is a speech proper to a King, and it properly appertains to him to say,
If in truth ye anoint me King over you, then come and put your trust under my
shadow. A King ought to be as a shadow under which his people may put their
trust. Read Psalm. 72. 4, etc. Lam. 4. 20.

That dignity and authority which Governors have over Governors dignity is
for their subjects welfare. Deus pro utilitate communi principatus instituit.
Chrysostom. Hom 6. in 1 Timothy 6.
their people, is not simply and only for their own exaltation, but for the
preservation and protection of them over whom they are set. They are Ministers
of God to them for good, Romans 13 4. Of David (whom God made King over Israel)
it is said, The Lord brought him to feed Jacob his people, etc. Psalm. 78. 71.
And to Saul (whom the Lord anointed King over Israel) it was said, Go, and
utterly destroy the sinners, the Amalakites, and fight against them, etc. 1 Samuel 15. 17, 18. They must therefore feed their people, and fight for them: if
not in their own persons, yet by using their power and authority to leavy
armies, to send forth armies, to furnish armies with all things needful for
them, and to give such directions as shall be meet. So did Moses here, who went
not out in his own person: So David, when he saw it meet for himself to tarry
at home, sometimes he sent forth Ioab, and all the host of the strong men;
other times he sent forth others, and gave directions what to do, 2 Samuel 10. 7.
and 18. 2. and 20. 4, 6. The very order of nature accommodated to the peace
Ordo naturalis mortalium paci accommodatus, hoc poscit ut suscipiendi belli
authoritas and consilium penes principes sit. Aug cont. Faust. Manic. l, 22. c.
75.
of men, requires thus much, that the authority and counsel of undertaking
war should be in the power of Princes.

Happy are those people and polities that have such Princes; that like
Mordecai, seek the wealth of their people, (Est. 10. 3.) that preserve them in
peace, that protect them from peril.

Pray for such. Be thankful for such. Be subject and obedient to such. Give to
such their due. Such are worthy of double honor: and the double honor of
maintenance and reverence is to be yielded to such.

. 11. Of preparing men to great exploits.
II.. 9.
MEn deputed to weighty works ought to be prepared thereto before hand. Thus
Jonathan, the heir to the crown of Israel, if his fathers wickedness had not
forfeited it, was in his fathers time much exercised to war. 1 Samuel 14 4. --
31. 2.
Because God intended that David should be King over Israel, and subdue many
enemies, his employments were such before hand, as he could not but be much
better thereby prepared to do what he did when he was King. For first he had
occasion given him to 1 Samuel 17. 34, 48.
graple with a Lion and a Bear: then with a Giant: after that with the -- 18.
27. -- 23. 5.
Philistines, -- 27. 8.
and the Geshurites, and the Gezrites, and the -- 30. 17.
Amalakites. Yea, Saul's fierce persecuting him was no small means to prepare
him the better for his kingdom. 2 Chro. 11. 22.
Rehoboam showed himself wise in making his son Abijah whom he deputed to
the kingdom, Ruler among his brethren. The reason that moved Judge. 8. 20.
Gideon to carry his first borne son Iether to the war, and to put him to
slay the kings that were taken, was without all question to prepare him for
future exploits, and to put boldness, courage, and spirit into him.

To this end tend all seminaries and means of education, as, Schools,
Colleges, Universities, Innes of Court, Incorporations, Companies, and other
such like Societies, so Artilery and Military gardens, and all sorts of
trainings and exercising of arms, yea and such kind of recreations as make men
fitter for war; such as the Olympian and Isthmian games: and shooting,
playing at wasters and foines, all manner of fencings, and other like in use
among us.

Preparation before hand enableth men much better to manage matters then
otherwise they could. Experience makes expert. Of those that came to establish
David in his kingdom, it is said, that being expert in war they could Vsus
promptos facit. 1 Chro 12. 33, 38.
set a battle in array, and lead an army.

They who intend to do their country service by standing for the defense
thereof against enemies, may here learn to take occasion betimes of
acquainting themselves with the war. And in case there be not enemies, by
fighting with whom experience may be learned, to exercise themselves in
trainings at home. See The Dignity of Chivalry. 7, 16, 17, etc
For which purpose Artilery gardens and Military fields are useful: and
therefore to be maintained, and frequented.

. 12. Of keeping out enemies.
III. See. 9.
MIlitary men must be choice men. Of this sufficient is spoken in the Dignity
of Chivalry.

IIII. See. 9.
Enemies must, as much as may be, be kept out. I say, as much as may be,
because the power of enemies may be such, as they can not be kept from entering.
Before Deborahs time there was Ind. 5. 8.
war in the gates. And in Hezekiahs time, though he did what he could to
prevent the enemy, 2 King. 18. 13, 17.
Senacharib took the strong cities of Judah, and encamped before the walls of
Jerusalem. But if possibly they can they must be kept out. The phrases of Luke
14. 31, 32
meeting an enemy, or sending to him while he is yet a great way off, used by
Christ in the parable, import as much. So does also the care that wise Princes
and States have had in this case. Judge. 3. 10.
Othniel WENT OVT to war. So did that wise and mighty Prince 2 Samuel 8.
David: he fought with many enemies on every side: but he went out to them all.

The many frontier towns, walled cities, forts, garrisons, and other
provisions against enemies invasions, which prudent Kings have in all ages
been wont to make, do manifest their care in keeping enemies from entering
among their people. Solomon, though he were a Prince of peace, yet wisely to
prevent the worst, 2 Chro. 8. 5.
Built cities fenced with walls, gates, and bars. And -- 9. 25,
he had four thousand stalls of horses and chariots, and twelve thousand
horsemen, whom he bestowed in the chariot-cities, that upon all occasions they
might be ready to go out against enemies. Though Rehoboam manifested much folly
in rejecting the counsel of his fathers sage counselors, yet he showed more
after-wit and wisdom -- 11. 5. etc.
in building fenced cities in Judah and Benjamin, and fortifying strong holds,
and putting captains in them, and store of victual, and shields, and spears.
The like is recorded of -- 14. 6, 7.
Asa, -- 17. 2. etc.
Iehosaphat, -- 26. 9 etc.
Vzziah, -- 27. 3, 4.
Iotham, -- 32. 5, 6.
Hezekiah, -- 33. 13, 14.
Manasseh after his repentance, and others.

Thus many dangers and mischiefs are prevented, wherinto people, by enemies
entering in among them, might otherwise fall. Sundry of the Tribes of Israel,
through too much security, suffered Iebusites, Canaanites, Amorites, and other
enemies to dwell among them Judge 1. 21, 27, 29, etc.
a point of folly taxed by the Holy Ghost) whereby they became snares and traps
to the Israelites, and scourges in their sides, and thorns in their eyes. What
in the proverb is said of a troublesome guest, may Turpius ejicitur quam non
admi^itur h^spes. Vel hostis. Ovid. de Trist. lib. 5. Eleg 6. Intelligences
useful.
more properly be said of a mortal enemy. There is worse ado to cast him out,
then to keep him out.

For application of this point,

1. The best care that can be must be taken for good intelligence: that the
purposes and plots of enemies may be prevented in the beginning before they
come to any maturity. Gods care in giving extraordinary intelligence by his
Prophet to the King of Israel, of his enemies projects, 2 King 6, 8, etc
gives evidence that it is a point of wisdom to get by all lawful means what
intelligence we can. The advice which David gave to Hushai concerning
intelligence was not unlawful, 2 Samuel 15. 34 etc.

-- 17. 14. etc

1 Samuel 19. 2, 11.

-- 23. 9, 25.


but very useful, as the issue proves. David was often preserved by that
intelligence which he had of Saul's purposes against him.

2. So soon as any true notice is given of an enemies purpose against us, all
good speed must be used to withstand him. Expedition is a principal point of
warlike policy. Expedition useful.

Genesis 14. 15.

Ios. 10. 6, 9. (...).

Veni, vidi, vici, Caesar inter pom pae fercula trium verborum praetulit
titulum,

Veni, vidi, vici, non acta belli significantem, sed celeriter consecti notam.
Sueton de 12. Caesar. l. 1.


Hereby Abraham soon recovered what five Kings had lost in battle. When the
Gibeonites sent to Joshua for succor, this message they sent, Slake not thine
hand, come up to us quickly and save us. Joshua therefore came unto them
suddenly, and went all night. Alexander got his many and great conquests by
putting off no opportunity, nor deferring time. Julius Caesar (another great
Conqueror) thus expresses his expedition, I came, I saw, I overcame. I came
to such a place, I saw it, and instantly set upon it and overcame it.

3. Least enemies should rise, and be upon us before we can have intelligence
of their purpose, or notice of their approaching, it is very needful to have
means to descry them before they be among us. The coming of Iehu upon Ioram
Means to descry enemies afar off.
was very sudden. Yet by reason of the continual watch that was kept, he was
descried afar off. And, had not God raised up Iehu to execute vengeance on
the house of Ahab, some mischief might have been prevented thereby.

4. So well prepared should kingdoms, nations, and cities Sufficient defense
in a land Imminente bello, intus fide, for is ferro, non aurose muniunt:
quatenus armati and non ornati hostibus melum incutiant. Bern. ad Mil. Temp.
cap. 4.
be, as if an enemy should suddenly invade them, yet not prevail against them,
and overrun them. For this purpose (according to the situation of the place)
ought they to be provided. Islands environed by the sea, with good shippings.
Cities and towns in Continents well fenced. Expert soldiers and munition of
all sorts in all places: yea and continual trainings, and military exercises
for preserving seminaries of soldiers.

Let the issue of Laish her security, and want of intelligencers, of watchmen,
and of other means by which her people might in time have gone out against the
Danites, and preserved their city, be a warning to all countries.

. 13. Of the lawfulness of war.
V. See. 9.
War is warrantable. Abundant proof is hereof given in holy Scripture,
(whence all sufficient warrant for any thing is to be fetched) as appears by
these arguments following.

1. Saints not ignorant of Gods will, nor reproved of God Illi bella gesserunt,
ut tales victorias appareret Dei volun tate praeslari. Aug. contr. Faust.
Manich. lib. 22. cap. 76.
in this case, have waged war: as Abraham, Joshua, extraordinary Judges, and
the best of the Kings, with many others.

2. They have asked counsel, and received direction from God for waging war,
Judge. 1. 1. and 20. 28. 1 Samuel 23. 2. and 30. 8. 2 Samuel 5. 19.

3. They have prayed for assistance herein: their prayers have in this case
been heard: and they answerably have been thankful for success herein, Number.
21. 2. 2 Chro. 14. 11. and 20. 6. Psalm. 18. 1, etc.

4. Their wars are testified to be waged in faith, Heb. 11. 33, 34.

5. God has of himself (when no prayer has for that end been made by man)
expressly commanded his people to fight against enemies, Number. 31. 2. Ios. 6. 2.

6. God has visibly showed himself a principal party in war and is styled a
Captain of his peoples host, Josh. 5. 14, 2 Chro. 13. 12.

7. God has given directions for well waging war, Deuteronomy. 20.

8. Part of the spoils taken in war were to be dedicated to God, Numb, 31. 28.

9. The Lords holy Priests were appointed to go with their holy trumpets unto
the war for the soldiers better encouragement, Numb. 10. 9. 2 Chronicles. 13. 12,
14.

10. Victory in war is promised as a blessing, Lev. 26. 7, 8, etc.

11. God is said to teach men's hands to war, and fingers to fight, Psalm. 18.
34. and 144. 1.

12. Battles are styled wars of God, and the Lords Battles, 1 Samuel 18. 17.
and 25. 28. 2 Chro. 20. 15.

13. God himself is styled A man of war, and the Lord of hosts, Exo. 15. 3.
1 Samuel 1. 11.

. 14. Of the lawfulness of war under the New Testament.
1. Ob. ALL these proofs are taken out of the Old Testament, 1. Ob. No proof
for war out of the New Testament Answ.
which gives not sufficient warrant to Christians.

Answ. 1. The ground of the objection is unfound. For in many things the Old
Testament gives even to Christians as good warrant as the New. 2 Timothy 3. 16. 2
Pet. 1. 21.
The Old Testament is as truly divine as the New. And many things therein
contained concern all ages of the Church to the end of the world.

2. The kind of the forementioned reasons is such as is agreeable to common
equity, and must in that respect be extended to all times.

3. Though no particular arguments could be diducted out of the New Testament,
yet because the Old is so plentiful in proofs for war, the New is the more
sparing. For the New Testament uses less to insist on those points whereon
the Old has much insisted. Instance the Sabbath, usury, removing land-markes,
and other the like.

4. The Church in those times whereof the New Testament records the history,
had no outward settled state; but was under such civil Governors as were of a
contrary profession, as Heathen Emperors and Lords. No marvel then that the
New Testament speaks no more then it does of war.

5. The scope of the New Testament is rather to set out the spiritual kingdom
of Christ, and the spiritual government of the Church, then civil outward
polities and kingdoms of men: and therefore is the more sparing in this point
of war.

6. The New Testament does also afford sufficient warrant Arguments in the New
Testament for war.
for war: as is evident by these following reasons. 1. Si percutere gla^io
omnino ^a^ non est Christiano, cur ergo Praeco Salvatoris contentos sore suis
stipendijs militibus indixit, and non potius omnem militiam interdixit. Bernad
Mil Temp. c. 3. Vide Aug contra Faust. Manich. l. 22. c. 74.
When professed Soldiers, who lived on that profession, being powerfully
wrought upon by John the Baptists ministry, asked him (for their future course
of life) what they should do, he counsels them not to leave that profession,
but well to use it, to be content with their wages, (Luke 3. 14.) not to
return their wages back again. Thus he justifies their calling. For in an
unlawful calling they might not continue, nor receive wages for it. 2. Fidem
laudavit Centurionis, non illius militiae desertionem imperavit. Aug. loc.
citat. Sane^ cum occidit malefactorem, non homicida, sed, ut ita dicam,
malicida, and plane Christi vindex in his male agunt, and defensor
Christianorum reputatur. Ibid.
Centurions, who were principal persons in war, are commended for those
graces which were in them, and for the evidences they gave thereof, without any
reproof or dis-allowance of their warlike profession, Matthew. 8. 10. Acts 10.
4. 3. Wars waged in the Old Testament are commended in the New, Heb. 11. 33,
34. 4. Michael and his Angels are brought in fighting with the Dragon and his
Angels, Rev. 12. 7. 5. The victories which the Church under the New Testament
shall have over her enemies is foretold, Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 19. 6. The
Magistrates sword is justified. But he bears the sword as well to subdue open
enemies abroad, as to punish evil subjects at home, Romans 13. 4. With that
public sword when he slays a malefactor he is not to be counted a slayer
of men, but a destroyer of evil men, and Christ's avenger of those that do
evil, and a protector of Christians.


. 15. Of other objections against the lawfulness of war, answered.
2. Ob. CHRIST threatens that All they that take 2. Ob. See. 20.
the sword shall perish with the sword.

Answ. 1. That and such like principles concerned the Jews, and others that
lived before Christ as much as Christians.

2. They all are against private revenge. But war is a public execution of
justice.

3. The forementioned threatening is in special to be applied to the hour,
wherein Christ would give himself to the power of his enemies, and would not
be rescued by the power of Angels: much less by the sword of man.

4. He would show how his kingdom was protected: not as humane kingdoms, by
dint of sword.

3. Ob. We are commanded to have peace with all men.

Answ. That, and other such like precepts are limited 3. Ob. Heb. 12. 14. Romans
12. 18.
with such provisoes as these, If it be possible, and, As much as lies in you.
On our part there must be no occasion of breaking peace, or making war. Yea
if we can on lawful and meet terms make peace, we must do our best therein.

4 Ob. It was foretold of Christians that they should 4. Ob. Isa. 2. 4.
beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning-hookes:
and that nation should not lift up a sword against nation, nor learn war any
more.

Answ. Those and such like prophetical phrases are somewhat hyperbolicall; they
express that entire amity that should be betwixt true Christians: and the
alteration of their nature by the Spirit of grace. So as the difference betwixt
nature and grace is very lively set out thereby: to which purpose tend those
other high transcendent hyperbolicall phrases of the Prophet Isay, Chap. 11.
Verse. 6, 7, 8, 9.

. 16. Of warring with Christians.
5. Ob. TO yield that war may be made against Infidels, Idolaters, and other
open enemies of the Church, yet may it not be made against Professors of the
Christian Faith.

Answ. 1. Some that outwardly profess the Christian Faith may be as great
enemies to the true Faith, as plain Infidels. I know (says Christ) the
blasphemy of them that say Rev. 2. 9.
they are Jews, and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan. Papists profess
the Christian Faith, yet are Anti-Christians, the directest and deadliest
enemies that Christ's true Church ever had. The ten Tribes that with Jeroboam
revolted from the house of David, professed themselves to be the people of the
true God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and yet were deadly enemies to
Judah, and the children of Judah often waged war against them, and that justly
and lawfully: 2 Chro, 13, 15
and the Lord helped them therein. What can Papists plead more then the
revolting Israelites could. Papists profess the true God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: So did the Israelites the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Papists
are baptized: Israelites were circumcised. Papists retain the holy Scriptures;
so did the Israelites, as much of them as was then written. Were it not too
great a digression, I could easily demonstrate how Papists have much further
started from the true Christian Faith, then the Israelites did from the Law of
Moses.

2. The cause of war is more to be respected then the persons against whom it
is waged. If Protestants should give just occasion of war, war might justly
be undertaken against them. Before the division of the ten Tribes from the
rest, the rest of the Israelites fought against the Judge. 20. 28. 2 Samuel 2. 13.
2 Samuel 18. 7. -- 20. 6.etc.
Benjamites, and that by Gods advice. David also was forced to fight against
the men of Israel that took part with Ish bosheth: and after that with
Absalom; and after that with Sheba the son of Bichri.

. 17. Of the necessity and benefit of war.
War is a kind of execution of public justice: and a means of maintaining
right. For often there is such conspiracy of many men together in doing wrong,
and so obstinate and violent they are therein, as by no admonitions,
persuasions, threatenings, penalties of Law, or ordinary means of executing
justice they will be restrained. And so insufferably ambitious are some, and so
insatiably covetous, as no dignities or jurisdictions will content them, no
revenewes or profits will satisfy them. Were not such men restrained, and
suppressed by force of arms, none should live in quiet, none should possess
or enjoy any thing besides themselves. So as the iniquity of men causes a
necessity of war: and the benefit that thence arises causes pious and
righteous men to use it. By it a free and quiet profession of the true Faith is
maintained: peace is settled: kingdoms and commonwealths are secured: lands
and inheritances quietly possessed: all manner of callings freely exercised:
good In ipsis rebus bellicis iusta bella, an iniusta sint, spectandum. Amb.
Offic l. 1 c. 35. Ita fere Aug. Quoest. super Ios. l. 6. c. 10.
laws put in execution: due justice executed: ill minded persons kept under:
and many evils prevented. I deny not but by war the clean contrary is often
effected, and all things thereby put out of order. But then war is abused. We
speak of the just and right use of war. For this is in warlike affairs
especially to be considered, whether the wars undertaken be just or unjust.

. 18. Of just wars.
Ne bella per Moysen gesla miretur aut horreat, quia and in illis divina secu
tus inperia non soeviens sed obediens fuit. Aug. cont. Faust. Manich. l. 22. c.
74. Et Quoest. super Ios. l. 6. c. 10
Quest. What wars may be counted just and lawful?

Answ. To make a just and full answer, wars must be distinguished.

1. There have been wars extraordinarily made by express charge from God. As
the wars in Moses his time against Sihon, and Og, and the Midianites, (Number. 21.
21, 33. and 31. 1.) and the wars in Ioshuahs time. No question must be made
of them, because they had the best warrant that could be, Gods command. If any
will make those wars a pattern to root out kingdoms and nations as Moses and
Joshua did, let them show the like warrant.

2. Ordinary wars are either defensive or offensive.

Defensive war is that which is undertaken to defend Defensive war
our selves or friends from such wrongs as enemies intend, or attempt against
us or them: whether the enemies be foreign or domestique.

This war whereunto Moses sends Joshua, was defensive, against a foreign
enemy which wronged these Israelites themselves, and first set upon them.

The war wherein Joshua aided the Gibeonites against the five Kings that
besieged them, was defensive in the behalf Ios. 10. 7. 2 Samuel 3. 1. -- 18. 7.
-- 20. 6. Offensive war. The causes thereof. Bellum ipsis pietatis materia
siebat. Chrysostom. ad Pop. Ho^. 14. Si qua gens vel civitas quae bello petenda est,
vel vindicare neglexerit quod a suis improbe factum est, vel red dear quod per
iniurias ablatum est, bellum est iustum. Aug. Quaest. super Ios. l. 6 c. 10.
Iusta bella defi niri solent, quae ulciscuntur iniurias. Ibid.
of friends against foreign enemies.

David's war against the house of Saul, and against them that took part with
Absalom, and Sheba, was defensive against domestiques.

No question can be made of the lawfulness of such wars as these are.
Necessity forces men thereto.

Offensive war is when enemies are first set upon: which according to the
causes given of offending an enemy, may be as just as defensive war. The
causes are such as these. 1. Maintenance of Truth, and purity of Religion. This
moved the Israelites in Canaan to think of making war against their brethren
on the other side of Jordan, Ios. 22. 12. In this respect the wars of the
Kings of the earth against Antichrist are commended, Dan. 11. 40. Rev. 17. 16.
2. Recovery of that which is unjustly taken away. For this end the Israelites
in Samuels and David's time set upon the Philistines to recover the cities which
they had taken away, 1 Samuel 7. 14. 2 Chronicles. 18. 1. This also was the cause of
Abijahs war against Jeroboam, 2 Chro. 13. 5. 3. Execution of vengeance on such
as have done public wrong. This reason does God render of sending Saul
against Amalek, 1 Samuel 15. 2. For such a cause David made war against the
Amonites, 2 Samuel 10. 7. 4. Drawing away enemies from some dangerous plot that
they have in hand. Thus to draw Saul from pursuing David, God stirred up the
Philistines to invade Israel. Thus 1 Samuel 23. 27. 2 Chro. 16. 3.
Asa set upon Baasha, to hinder the bulwarks which Baasha was making against
Judah. If Asa had not distrustfully hired wicked instruments, he had done well
in his war. 5. Weakening the power of open and professed enemies. For this end
David set upon all enemies of Israel round about. 2 Samuel 8.
6. Subduing of rebellious subjects that gather head, and will not be brought
under law. For this end Abel of Bethmaachah was besieged by David's men. 7. To
help and assist friends and allies in like cases. So 2 Samuel 20. 15.
Abraham fought against them that with other Sodomites had taken Lot captive.
Genesis 14. 14.



Provided notwithstanding that before men enter into war, whether defensive
or offensive, all good and fair Cautions in going to war. Non sane inter vos
aliud bella movet, litesque suscitat, nisi irrationabil is iracundiae motus,
aut inanis gloriae appetitus, aut terrenae qualiscunque possessionis cupiditas:
talibus certe ex causis neque occidere neque occumberetutum est, Bern. ad Mil.
Temp. c. 2, etc. Vide item Aug. cont. Faust. Manich. l. 22. c. 74.
means be used, to move enemies voluntarily to do what is just and equal. The
advice which the Apostle gives about going to law, (1 Cor. 6. 1, etc.) may
fitly be applied to going to war. We have good patterns herein, not only in
the Israelites toward their brethren, (Ios. 22. 13. Judge. 20. 12, 13.) but
also in Iephthah toward the Ammonites, (Judge. 11. 12.) Yea the directions
given in the Law tend much to this purpose, Deuteronomy. 20. 10, etc.

This caution observed, in faith may men on the forenamed grounds wage war.
But if nothing besides the motion of unreasonable passion and anger, or
ambition and vainglory, or desire of any earthly possession whatsoever, do
provoke men to war, surely for these causes it is not safe to kill or to be
killed. Soldiers were of old gravely and justly reproved for undertaking
combats in such cases.

. 19. Of soldiers encouragement in just war.
THat which has been delivered of the lawfulness of war cannot but afford
matter of much comfort and courage to such as are called to just war. They
may on this ground go in faith, with much confidence, cheerfully, and
courageously. If there be peace betwixt God and their own souls, if they have
truly repented of all their sins, if their persons be justified as well as
their cause warranted, they may not only call upon God, and that in faith, for
his assistance and blessing, and depend on him for the same, but also
undauntedly meet death in the midway, and comfortably commend their souls
into Gods hands. What need he in Quid vel vivens vel morieus metuat, cui vivere
Christus est, and mori lucrum. Bern. ad Mil. Temp c. 1. Eisihosies nos
perimant, nullum tamen ad animas periculum migrat: neque salutem illam
sempiternam violare possunt. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in 1 Timothy 2.
life or death fear, to whom to live is Christ, and to die is gain, Phil. 1.
21. Though enemies destroy the body, yet no danger comes thereby to the soul:
neither can they impeach eternal salvation. There is much comfort in breathing
out our last breath in Gods work. It is a kind of Martyrdom. For a soldier to
die in the field in a good cause, it is as for a Preacher to die in a pulpit.
Upon the cautions before noted, this assuredly will be the issue, If a soldier
get the day, or otherwise escape with his life, they that set him on work are
too too ungrateful if they do not abundantly reward him. Herein if man fail,
assuredly the righteous Lord will not fail. For, whatsoever good thing any man
does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free, Ephesians.
6. 8. In particular, The Lord will certainly make them a sure house that fight
the battles of the Lord, 1 Samuel 25. 28. If Quam gloriosi revertuntur victores
de praelio, quam beati moriuntur Martyrs in praelio. Bern. loc. citat.
in this work of the Lord, in his war, he be slain, his soul shall be more
then a conqueror, triumphing in heaven over all sorts of enemies. They may
therefore be secure. O how gloriously do such with victory return from war!
how blessedly do such as Martyrs die in battle!

. 20. Of opposing violence to violence.
VI. Sec 9.
VIolence may be resisted with violence. If any course may be accounted
violent, surely war is one of those courses. To omit the. 13. Lex talionis.
forementioned proofs for the warrant of war, Deuteronomy 19. 21. Exo. 21. 23, 24,
25.
the law of requiting like for like makes much to this purpose. Thus dealt 1 Samuel 15. 33.
Samuel with Agag, when he said to him, As thy sword has made women
childlesse, so shall thy mother be childlesse among women. So dealt. Judge 1. 6,
7.
Judah with Adonibezek, whose thumbs and great toes they cut off: for so had he
dealt with 70 Kings. Many like evidences are recorded and justified in holy
writ.

Thus are violent, cruel, and hard-hearted men by a sensible demonstration
brought to see their perverse and mischievous disposition. As the forenamed
Adonibezek confesses, saying, As I have done so the Lord has requited me.

Ob. How can this resisting of violence with violence stand with those
Christian principles, Resist not evil, Recompense to no man evil for evil.
Avenge not your selves, Quid est non reddere malum pro malo, nist abhorrereab
ulcis^e^di libidine? Quid est accepta iniuria ignoscere malle quam persequi,
etc. Aug. Macellino. Epist. 5.

Hoc fit ut vincatur bono malus, immo in homine malo vincatur bogo malum.

Ibid. Vide Aug. contr. Faust. Manich l. 22. c. 76.


Mat. 5. 39. Romans 12. 17, 19.

Answ. 1. The resisting of violence here intended is a public execution of
justice: but that which Christ forbids is private revenge. The latter
phrase, avenge not your selves, is an exposition of the former.

2. Christ's words are to be taken comparatively, thus. A Christian must be so
far from revenge, as rather suffer a double wrong.

3. They imply a readiness to forgive, again and again.

4. They import a Christian virtue, of overcomming evil with goodness and
patience, Romans 12. 21.

Learn wisely to discern betwixt persons, and cases: thoroughly sift and
examine your own passions: let your hearts be seasoned with a true fear of
God, and love of man: let it be enflamed with a zeal of Gods glory: set good
ends before you, and aim at them: be well instructed in the means whereby you
may attain to those ends; and then take courage and resolution to your selves.
Deal with wicked men, as wicked men are to be dealt withal: fight against
them that fight against you: with the froward show your selves froward, (as the
Lord himself does:) despise them that despise you: show as much scorn of
them, as Psalm 18. 26. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
they can do of you. This is to answer a fool according to his folly, and to
keep him from being proud in his own conceit, Pro. 26. 5.
from insulting over you, and from taking advantage against you. There be times
and occasions when mischievous enemies are not to be yielded unto, no not an
hairs breadth. By opposing undaunted courage against their stout boldness,
they may be beaten at their own weapon.

. 21. Of using means.
VII. Sec. 9.
APproved means are to be used for attaining our desired ends. The parables
which our Lord uses about providing that which may be sufficient for an
intended building, and about casting how to meet an enemy that is coming
against him, (Luke 14. 28, etc.) give good evidence to the truth of this point.
Wherefore such Saints as have been guided by the Spirit of God, even in those
wars whereabout God himself has sent them, and to which he has given
assurance of victory, have been careful to use means. For this end Ios. 1.
12, etc.
Joshua required all the men of war that were of the Reubenites, Gadites, and
half the Tribe of Manasseh, that quietly enjoyed their possessions on the
other side of Jordan, to go over before the rest of the Israelites, armed to
help them. On the contrary Judge 5. 23.
Meroz is cursed for not affording aid to help the Lord against the mighty.
The means. 12.
before noted for keeping out enemies tend to the point in hand.

Of such use are means, as if they be wanting, God will not do the thing that
is expected to be done. Though Acts 27. 24, 31
God had given to Paul all that sailed with him, yet when the mariners (who are
ordinary means to advise, and help in dangers on the sea) were about to leave
the ship, Paul said, except these abide ye cannot be safe. So as ordinarily
there is a kind of necessity that means be used. Yea we often read of means
used in extraordinary matters. Exo. 8. 17.
The dust of the earth was struck, that out of it lice might arise to plague
Pharaoh. -- 9. 8, 10.
Ashes of the furnace were sprinkled into the air to cause boiles to break
forth upon man and beast in Egypt. -- 17. 6.
The rock was struck with a staff to make water flow out of it. 2 King 4. 41.
Meal was cast into the pot, to make the pottage wholesome.

The use of means makes much to the manifestation Gods glory in the use of
means.
1. Of Gods providence, in affording meet means. 2. Of his wisdom, in ordering
means fitly. 3. Of his goodness, in blessing means.


And thus more occasion is given of calling upon God for his blessing on the
means which are used: and of praising him when we see the fruit and benefit of
means: yea and of humiliation when we observe means to be wanting, or to be
ineffectuall.

1. Ob. 1 Samuel 14. 6.
There is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or by few, and 2 Chro. 14,
11 Means have respect to Gods will.
by them that have no power.

Answ. 1. In speaking of means no question is made of Gods power. For he that
without any means made all things, can do what else pleases him without means.
But the question is of his will; whether he that has sanctified such and such
means, for such and such purposes, will effect matters without the means which
he has appointed for effecting them.

2. The question is of Gods ordinary manner of working. Now Gods ordinary
providence in ordinary matters is the ground of our faith, rather then his
extraordinary power.

2. Ob. Judge. 7. 2, 4.
God restrained Gideon in using the means that in his case were ordinarily used.

Answ. The Lord tieth not himself to ordinary courses, God not tied to means.
as he has tied his creatures, who can not go beyond the bounds which he has
appointed to them. So as herein lies a difference betwixt the Creator and
creatures. For the manifestation of this difference it pleased God sometimes to
do great matters with small means, (yea and Exo. 17. 28.
with no means at all,) and to cause those particulars to be recorded, that
all ages might know what of himself he is able to do.

3. Ob. Means use to draw men's minds from God: and Abuse of means.
to make them dote too much on means.

Answ. That is the abuse of means. Means are by such considered only in
themselves, and not in the principal agent who makes them effectual. Such
were the Israelites, to whom the Prophet thus, Isa. 31. 1.
Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on horses, and trust in
chariots because they are many, and in horsemen because they are very strong:
but they look not unto the holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord. Thus
they severed things, which were to be joined together, God and means: means
being the hand of the divine providence whereby he works such and such
things. Quamvis credamus in Deum, faciamus tamen quae facienda sunt ab
hominibus in praesidium salutis, ne praetermittentes ea Deum tentare videamur.
Aug. Quaest super Gen l 1. c. 102.
Means therefore (in the right use of them) give occasion of beholding God, of
calling on him, and praising him. Daily food, apparel, sleep, works of our
calling, and other like means whereby we are sustained, work such effects in
those that are piously minded. Wherefore though we believe in God, yet let us
do those things that are to be done by man for our safety, lest letting slip
such means we may seem to tempt God.

It will therefore be our wisdom in every thing that we take in hand, 1. To
observe what means are warranted for the effecting Rules for using means.
thereof. Out of Gods Word we may have sufficient direction in this case. 2. To
be diligent in using those means. Many promises Pro. 10 4. -- 12. 11.
are made to the diligent, especially in Salomons Proverbs. 3. Sec. 27. Psalm.
127. 1.
To call on God for his blessing on our endeavors. Except the Lord keep the
city, the watchman waketh but in vain. To neglect means is an extreme in the
defect, implying too great security. To rely only on means is an extreme in
the excess, implying too much insolency. God is tempted both ways. The middle
therefore is the best and safest course, which is, in the use of means to
rely on God for his blessing.


. 22. Of the gestures of prayer.
EXODUS XVII. IX. To morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of
God in mine hand.
Vide. 1. and 9.
THe Internal means, as promised on Moses part to be used by him, are here
set down. Wherein 1. the action undertaken by him is thus expressed, I will
stand. This gesture of the body is put for an action of the mind Metonymia
adjuncti. Signum prore significata.
signified thereby, which is prayer. For standing was of old an usual gesture
of prayer. It never was the only gesture. For the Scripture expresses many
other: whereof some were gestures of the whole body; others of particular
members thereof.

There are three especial gestures of the whole body. 1. Standing. 2. Bowing.
3. Prostrating, or lying all Gestures of prayer.
along. 1. Of Standing, more anon. 2.. 23. 1. Bowing.
Bowing was used as an action of much reverence: and that for the most part,
when they testified their thankful acceptance of some special favor. Read
for this Exo. 4. 31. and 12. 27. 2 Chro. 29. 29, 30. Neh. 8. 6. 3. Prostrating,
or lying all along testified much humiliation, and dejection of the soul. Read
for this, Ios. 7. 6. 2. Prostrating.
2 Samuel 12. 16. Ezra. 10. 1. Mat. 26. 39.


The gestures of the particular parts of the body are many more: as, 1. Lifting
up eyes. This gives evidence of our expectation of help from above: and of
our faith fixed on him 3. Lifting up eyes.
who is in heaven. For the eye in prayer when it is lift up uses to stand
fixed: in which respect Christ is said to lift up his eyes, and to look to
heaven, (Ioh. 11. 41. Mat. 14. 19.) Pronaque cum spectent anima lia caetera
terra^, Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque videre Iussit, Sec. Ovid Metamorph.
l. 1 See the Saints Sacrifice on Psalm. 116.. 25. 4. Lifting up hands.
and David expressing prayer by this phrase, adds the reason thereof, thus, I
will lift up mine eyes unto the hills from whence comes my help, etc. (Psalm.
121. 1, 2. and 113. 1, 2.) Herein lies an apparent difference betwixt man and
other creatures. For where other creatures look downward, man's countenance is
made more erect. And where other creatures have but four mustles in their eye,
man has a fifth to lift the eye upward. 2. Lifting up hands, or spreading them
abroad. Hereby we manifest that we can find no succor in our selves: but are
ready to receive it from him on whom we call, and to whom we stretch our hands.
Thus Solomon in his solemn prayer, spread forth his hands toward heaven, and
under this phrase sets out the prayer of others. (1 King. 8. 22, 38, 54.) So
does David, (Psalm. 141. 2.) and Jeremiah, (Lam. 3. 41.) 3. Casting down eyes.
This testifies an holy shame, and 5. Casting down eyes.
confusion of face by reason of a man's unworthiness, and unfitness to appear
in Gods sight. Take instance hereof in the penitent publicane, (Luke 18. 13.)
and in devout Ezra, Ezr. 9. 6. 4. Knocking the breast. Contrition of heart, and
compunction 6. Smiting breast.
of spirit, godly sorrow and grief is hereby manifested. In such respects the
forenamed Publican is said to smite his breast, Luke 8. 13. 5. Renting
clothes, pulling hair off the head and beard: 7 Renting garments, etc.
these are gestures which Ezra used, (Ezr. 9. 3, 5.) to which may be added the
penitent woman's tears, with which she washed the feet of Christ, and her
wiping them with the hair of her head, Luke 7. 38. Deep apprehension of sin,
and much aggravation of grief is by these and other like unusual gestures
declared. 6. Kneeling. This is the most usual and proper gesture for prayer.
For examples, read 2 Chro. 6. 13. Ezra 9 5. 8. Kneeling.
Dan. 6. 10. Luke 22. 41. Act. 7. 60. and 9. 40. and 20. 36. and 21. 5. 8.
Kneeling. Deum genu posito adoramus, and fixo in terram poplite magis quod ab
eo petimus, impetramus. Legimus enim and Paulu^ in littore sic orasse: and
geniculationes in oratione praeceptas. Hier. Comment. lib. 2, in Ephesians. 3.
The very act of prayer is implied under this gesture, Ephesians. 3. 14. Psalm. 95. 6.
That homage which we owe to God, that reverend respect which we bear to him,
that honor which we desire to yield to him is hereby testified.


All these gestures (as occasions serve) well beseem those that call upon God.
But because here mention is made only of standing it shall be sufficient to have
named the other.

. 23. Of standing in prayer.
EXODUS XVII. IX. I will stand.
FRequent mention is made of standing at prayer. For proof whereof, among
others, take notice of these 9. Standing. Stantes oramus quod est signum
resurrectionis. Aug. Ianuatio Epist. 119. Et de Sermon. Dom. in monte ^ 2.
Scriptures, Genesis 18. 22, 23. and 24. 13. 1 Samuel 1. 26. Neh. 9. 2, 4, 5. Mat.
6. 5. Luke 18. 11, 13. Mar. 11. 25. Christians in the Primitive Church on the
Lords days, and also on sundry other Festivals did use to pray standing.

In many respects does this gesture well become the divine exercise of prayer.
1. It is a reverend manner of presenting ones self to God. 2. It is an outward
means of raising men's hearts and thoughts from earth to heaven. For in this
kind of gesture is the head raised furthest from the earth, nearest to heaven.
It is not so in bowing, sitting, kneeling, lying. 3. It is a testification of
our acknowledgement of Gods Sovereignty, authority, and dignity. Therefore among
men, inferiors stand before them under whose command they are, 1 King. 3. 16.
and 10. 8. Dan. 7. 10. 4. It is a sign of steadfast faith in prayer. It is often
put for a gesture of steadiness: and opposed to leaning, wavering, reeling, 1
Cor. 16. 13. Ephesians. 6. 13, 14.


Hereby Moses might then imply 1. That he would present himself before the
throne of God for them. 2. That he would elevate his heart, and lift up his
desires to heaven. 3. That he would do what he did with due reverence, and
respect to Gods excellency and sovereignty. Stabat Moses expectans fidem
coelestium promissionum. Amb Comment in Psalm. 118. Ser. 19.
4. That he would with the best steadfastness of faith that he could pray for
them, expecting the truth of divine promises.


Thus he shows that on his part he would not be wanting to do what belonged
to him, that they might be the more stirred up to do on their part what
belonged to them, and that all might with the stronger confidence expect a good
issue. Therefore this he professes to do before hand, thus, (as our English
translates it) I will stand. Or, (to turn it word for word) (...) in Niphal
Benoni. Me consistente. Trem. and Iun.
I standing, which implies a continuance in doing what he undertook to do,
together with an outward manifestation thereof. For by saying, I will stand, he
means as much as if he had said, I will pray, and you shall see that I pray.

This gesture of standing being proper to prayer, shows what they may do who
are so thronged as they cannot kneel. They may stand. So as it takes away
their pretext who in strait pewes sit at prayer, because forsooth they cannot
kneel. But I conceive that where a man can sit, he may much better stand.

. 24. Of the time and place of Moses his prayer.
THe time which he limiteth for performing the forementioned duty is not much
delayed, nor far put off: but rather the first opportunity is taken. For this
word, (...)
tomorrow, has relation to Amaleks setting upon them, and implies the next
day: sooner then which, an army could not have been gathered together.

The place also is expressed. (On the top of the hill.) At the time that Amalek
set upon them they were in a vallie, or in a plain, and there Joshua went out
against them. But Moses Why Moses went up to the top of an hill.
goes to the top of an hill near to that vallie, and that for sundry just and
weighty reasons: as, 1. That he might the better discern the battle, and know
whether Israel or Amalek had the better, and answerably order his prayer.
Quando flamus ad orationem, vigilare and incumbere ad preces toto cord
debemus. Cypr. Ser. 6. de Orat, Dom. Vtiliter orationis tempore etiam
corporalis loci secretum quaerimus. Bern de Ascens. Dom. Sermon. 4. Clamat cor
nostrum sublimita te cogitationum. Amb. Comment. in Psalm. 118. Ser. 19. verse. 1.
2. That Joshua and his soldiers might behold Moses lifting up his hands: and
thereby be the more encouraged. 3. That he might be the more quiet and free
from disturbance and distraction, (which he could not have been, if he had
remained in the plain among the people: or if he had been in the army.) For
when we set our selves to prayer, we must set our selves thereto with the whole
heart Therefore in time of prayer we may usefully seek secrecy of place. 4.
That by the open sight of heaven, his spirit might be the more cheared, his
thoughts more elevated, and so his prayer the more sharpened, and his faith the
more strengthened. For by the sublimity of our thoughts our heart is enlarged.


By all these we see that he chose a very fit place for his purpose.

. 25. Of the rod which Moses used.
EXODUS XVII. IX. With the rod of God in mine hand.
MVch is spoken of the rod here mentioned. But what kind of rod it was, is not
agreed upon by all. (...) inclinavit, declinavit.
The word, according to the notation of it, signifies a thing to lean on. The
strength of bread is set out by this word, and styled (...) panis baculum. Lev.
26. 26.
the staff of bread. That also whereupon wicked men do repose their trust and
confidence, is by this very word expressed, and called (...) baculum impioru^
Isa 14. 5.
the staff of the wicked. (...) cum chirik significat tectum. Cum patach,
baculum.
A bed, whereupon a man lies and rests himself, is signified by a word
which comes from the same root, and has the very same letters, though not
the same points: wherein the LXX being somewhat mistaken, do translate the
Hebrew word that signifies a bed, by a Greek word that signifies a staff:
which gave occasion to that seeming difference betwixt Moses and him that wrote
the Epistle to the Hebrews, about Isreal's bowing himself (...) ad caput lecti.
upon the beds head, (as it is in Genesis 47. 31.) and (...) Super extremo baculi
sui.
Upon the top of his staff (as it is in Heb. 11. 21.) Both which may well
stand together. For, being an old man and weak, he was feign to have a staff
to rest on, and leaning thereon, he bowed toward the beds head. By the
forenamed notation, and usual acceptance of the word it appears that that
which is here translated a rod, was not a wand, (as some would have it) or a
riding stick: such rods are not to be leaned upon: Isa. 10. 15.
The Prophet Isaiah (where he makes an express difference betwixt a rod and a
staff) uses (...)
another word to set out a rod, and (...)
the word of this text to set out a staff. The rods which the chief of every
Tribe used to have, have this (...) Number. 17. 2.
title: which questionless were such as prime Officers at Court use to have,
called White-staves. The first time of mentioning the rod here spoken of, was
when Exo 3 1. -- 4. 2.
God appeared to Moses as he was keeping sheep. Whence some (and that not
without probability) do gather, that this, which is translated a rod, was a
shepherds crook. But were it a shepherds crook, or a staff, or a wand, in
regard of the use that we may make thereof, all is as one. This is it whereof
God said to Moses, Exo 4. 17.
Thou shall take this rod in thine hand wherewith thou shall do signs.

Wonders done with Moses his rod. De mirandis factis per virgam Moysis. lege
Hieron. Comment. in Ezekiel. 29. lib. 9.
Many admirable things are noted of this rod. By it, 1. It being turned into a
serpent, the rods of the inchanters, which seemed also to be serpents, were
swallowed up, Exo 7. 10, 12. 2. The waters in the rivers of Egypt were turned
into blood, Exo. 7. 20. 3. Dust was turned into lice, Exo. 8. 17. 4. Thunder,
hail, and lightning fell, Exo. 9. 23. 5. An East Wind was raised, which
brought grasshoppers, Exo. 10. 13. 6. The Red Sea was divided, Exo. 14. 16. 7.
The rock gave out water, Exo. 17. 6. 8. The victory here mentioned was
obtained, Exodus 17. 9.


Why called the rod of God Virga Dei dicitur quae primum dicta est virga Aaron,
postea vero virga Moysis, sic ut dicitur spiritus Heliae qui est spiritus Dei,
cujus particeps factus est Helias, etc. Aug. Quaest. super. Exo. l. 2, q. 65.
This rod is here, as in other places, called the rod of God, because 1. God
appointed Moses to use it, Exo. 4. 20. 2. God promised that wonders should be
done by it, Exo. 4. 17. 3. God wrought the miracles that were done by it: so
as, it was Gods instrument, Exo. 3. 20. 4. It was a visible memorial of Gods
mighty power, Exo. 17. 5, 6.


It is also Exo. 7. 9, 12, 19. -- 8. 16, 17.
sometimes called Aarons rod, because God appointed Aaron to use it in working
the first miracles that were wrought in Egypt. And it was most usually styled
-- 9. 23. -- 10. 13. -- 14. 16. -- 17. 5.
Moses his rod, -- 4. 2.
because it first belonged to him before any miracles were wrought by it: and
because he most used it.

This Rod, Moses here promises to take with him in his hand, that being in the
mount, he might hold it up as the Lords standard: and that both in regard of
himself, and also in regard of the soldiers in the field.

For himself, that by looking on it he might be put in mind of Gods former
works manifested by that rod: and so have his faith the more strengthened.

For them in the field, that they might have a visible evidence of his sted
fastness in calling upon God for them: and so be the more encouraged.

. 26. Of the resolution and observations of the latter part of the ninth verse.
EXODUS XVII. IX. To morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of
God in mine hand.
THe maine Scope of this promise made by Moses, is to assure those whom he sent
forth into the field to fight, that he for his part would not be wanting to
assist them with his best prayers. For in this promise is a description of his
manner of praying for them.

More particularly we are to observe

1. The Person that makes the promise. I, says Moses, that went not with
them. 2. The Substance of the promise. This may be distinguished into four
branches. 1. The Matter, or particular thing that is promised, will stand. 2.
The time when. Tomorrow. 3. The Place where. On the top of the hill. 4. The
Instrument wherewith. In setting down whereof there is noted 1. The Instrument
it self. With the rod of God. 2. The Manner of using it, In mine hand.


1. The Inference of this promise upon the charge given to Joshua, (the charge
being for providing good outward means, the promise, of earnest prayer) gives
us to understand that, I. Prayer must be added to other preparations.
2. The Person that promises to pray being one of those that tarried at home,
and went not out to the war, gives instance, that, II. Prayer for good
success in war is to be made by such as tarry at home.
3. The phrase whereby the thing promised is expressed (will stand) being an
external gesture of prayer, shows, that, III. Inward devotion of heart is to
be manifested by the outward disposition of body.
4. The Time prefixed (to morrow) being before the battle was ended, declares,
that, IIII. Succor must be sought of God in season.
5. and 6. The Place being first on an hill, which was in the open field: and
then on the top of the hill, whence the army might be seen of Moses, implies,
that, V. Any place may be fit for prayer. VI. Knowledge of that for which
prayer is made is an especial means to sharpen prayer.
7. The Rod which he takes with him, being the rod of God, wherewith God had
before wrought many wonderful works, imports, that, VII. Consideration of
Gods former works is of special use to strengthen faith.
8. The Manner of using it, by holding it in his hand, namely to this end that
Joshua and other soldiers might see it, intimates, that, VIII. Persuasion of
others prayers adds much courage in dangerous employments.


. 27. Of joining prayer with other means.
I.. 26.
PRayer must be added to other preparations. When Genesis 32. 6, etc
Jacob heard that his brother Esau was coming against him with 400 men, he
took the best order that he could either by presents to pacify his brother,
or, if some of his company were slain, yet to make an escape with others: but
withal he prays to God for protection, yea in prayer he wrestled till he
prevailed. Judge. 11. 29, 30.
Iphthah leads out against the Ammonites a well furnished army: yet voweth a
vow unto the Lord. Now a vow is an evidence of earnest prayer. Though his
particular vow be not to be justified, yet his manner of going to war is
commendable. Samuel does, 1 Samuel 7. 5, etc
as Moses here, he gathers Israel together to fight against the Philistims,
and promises to pray for them. The 2 Samuel 23. 8, etc.
number of worthies, and the -- 24. 9.
multitude of valiant Soldiers that David had, bear witness to his prudence
in preparing external means: and his many Psalm. 7. 1, etc. -- 25. 2, 19, 20.
-- 44. 1, etc.
prayers recorded in the Psalms, give evidence of his piety in seeking help
of God. 2 Chro. 17. 12, etc. -- 20. 3.
Very much is spoken of Iehosaphats great preparations: yet when he heard of
the approach of enemies, by fasting and prayer he sought help of God. So many
other faithful Saints. After that the Apostle had exhorted Christians to be
strong in the Lord, and to put on the whole armor of God, wherewith he shows
how a Christian may be armed from top to toe, he adds this exhortation, Ephesians
6. 10, 18 See The whole armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18. 1.
Pray always with all prayer, etc.

Means without Gods blessing are of no use. Psalm. 127. 1.
Except the Lord build the house they labor in vain that build it: Well
therefore says the Psalmist, -- 44. 6.
I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me. But See The whole
armor of God on Ephesians. 6. 18. 18, 22.
prayer is that which God has sanctified for obtaining his blessing, and his
help. To this purpose is prayer exceeding, powerful. It has always (if at
least it were made aright) obtained victory.

What now may we judge of them that think prayer then only needful when other
means fail? To say the least of them Reprehension of such as separate prayer
and other means.
they show themselves apparently ignorant of the supreme power of God in
ordering means: which are so subordinate to the divine providence, as without
it they are of no use at all: and withal they show very little zeal of Gods
glory. For were there not an absolute necessity of prayer, and that in regard
of some benefit to themselves, it appears that prayer as it is a part of Gods
worship, and a means to set out Gods honor, should never be made by them.

If in this case neglect of prayer be such a point of impiety, what is it to
enterprise war with masks, enterludes, plays, and such kind of sports? Can a
blessing be expected in such courses?

Set this pattern of Moses before you, all of all sorts. Whether other means
fail or abound, let not this of prayer Nibil est tam arduum atque disf^ile
quod non Deo adiuvante planissimum atque expeditissimum fiat. In ipsum itaque
suspensi, ab eo auxilium deprecantes, quod instituimus quaeramus. Aug. de lib.
arbit. c. 6.
be neglected. This makes a supply where other means are wanting. This makes
other preparations successful. Let therefore all armies be sent forth by
Christian Princes with more then ordinary prayer. Thus may we in greatest
distresses be sure of succor. For there is nothing so hard but with Gods help
it may be made easy. On him therefore let us depend: of him let us seek
help, and so accomplish our purposes.

. 28. Of their care who tarry at home to pray for them that go to war.
II. See. 26.
PRayer for good success in war is to be made by such as tarry at home. So
did 1 Samuel 7. 9.
Samuel. -- 4. 13.
Elies waiting for news out of the army, implies that his prayer was not
wanting. Psalm. 60.
That solemn form of thanks which David gave to God upon Ioabs return with
victory, gives proof of his praying for the armies. Gen, 14. 20.
So does Melchizedechs congratulation of Abraham's victory.

1. Gods honor is engaged in the success of such as profess Gods truth.

2. Their cause ought to be accounted a common cause of all that are of the
same profession.

3. Christian sympathy, and the Communion of Saints should make us account
others dangers, and others success as our own.

4. If they which go out to war, be of our own country or nation, by their
overthrow we incur hazard: by their victory the more safety is brought to us
that tarry at home, yea we all partake of the benefit of the spoils which they
make of enemies, the whole kingdom is enriched thereby if they be great.

If these be not sufficient motives to enforce the equity of the forenamed
duty, what can be sufficient?

Remember therefore what Vriah said, The Arc, and Israel, 2 Samuel 11. 11.
and Judah abide in tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my Lord are
encamped in the open fields, shall I then go into my house to eat and to
drink? He, when he was at home was as much affected with the armies in the
field as if himself had been there. Can any then be so careless of them as
not to pray for them?

Assuredly, if Magistrates, and Ministers, if great ones, and mean ones were
more conscionable in performing this duty, better success might be expected.
But so far are most from obtaining a blessing upon the armies that go forth,
as rather on the contrary (Achan like) they trouble the armies Ios. 7. 1. 25.
that are sent out, by provoking Gods wrath against them, through their impiety,
and profaneness, lewdness, and licentiousness. Such either pray not at all:
or they make their prayers to be an abomination to the Lord. For, he that Prove.
28 9.
turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be
abomination. Thus wicked persons are betrayers of such as (out of the places
where they dwell) go to war.

. 29. Of manifesting our inward desire by our outward gesture.
III. See. 26. Flexo corpore men's est erigenda ad Deum. Bern. medit. devo c. 6
INward devotion of heart must be manifested by the outward disposition of
body. As the many gestures which in Scripture are recorded and approved, being
used by Saints in prayer (whereof before,. 22.) do afford good proof to the
point, so also the manifold expressions of prayer by sundry gestures proper
thereto: as such as these, Psalm. 123. 1.
I lift up mine eyes: Ephesians. 3. 14.
I bow my knees, that is, I pray. Psalm. 95. 6.
Let us lift up our hands: Lam 3. 41.
Let us kneel, that is, let us pray. Psalm. 141 2.
Let Animus in gestu corporis apparet, Gestus corporis signum est mentis.
Corporis gestu animus proditur. Bern. de modo been viv. Scr. 9. Benefits of
outward gestures in prayer
the lifting up of my hands be, that is, let my prayer be. So here in this
place, I will stand, that is, I will pray.

As in other cases, so also in prayer, the mind appears in the gesture of the
body: for this is a sign of that. So as by the manifestation of our inward
devotion by our outward gesture, God is more honored, others are made like
minded, and our own spirits are quickened.

1. For God, he is by that means glorified both in soul and body: as we ought
in both to glorify him, 1 Cor. 6. 20.

Ob. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and
truth, Ioh. 4. 24.

Answ. True. But what then? Is he not therefore to be worshipped in body? Fie
on such a consequence. Indeed God is most especially to be worshipped in
Spirit. All outward worship without it is altogether in vain, Isay. 19. 13.
But Gods delight in the spirit does not imply a dislike, or no liking of a
manifestation thereof by the body. He that said in regard of an upright manner
of performing the things which we do, Take heed that ye do them not before men
to be seen of them, Mat. 6. 1. said also in regard of our zeal to Gods glory,
Let your light so shine before men as they may see your good works and
glorify your father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 16. What therefore God has
joined together, let no man put asunder, Mat. 19. 6.

2. For others, our outward gesture manifesting our inward affection, they may
be brought to add their prayers also, and join with us, (as they who saw the
company of Prophets prophesying, prophesied also among them, 1 Samuel 19. 20.) or
at least say Amen to our petitions, and desire God to grant them, as old Elie
did, when he understood how Annah had powered forth her soul before God, 1 Samuel
1. 17.

3. For our selves, by the outward gesture of the body our own spirits within
us are much affected. For there is a sympathy betwixt soul and body. Bowing
the body in prayer, as it testifies the humiliation of the soul, so it makes
the soul to stoop somewhat the lower. Beating the breast does somewhat the more
break the heart; lifting up eyes or hands raises up the heart; spreading the
arms abroad enlarges the desire of the heart; standing erect makes the soul
the more steady. Exhortation to use seemly outward gesture in prayer.


Let us on these grounds both declare and help the inward faith and fervency,
devotion and contrition of our souls by the outward gestures of the body.
There needs no great labor after outward, gesture, if at least there be true
devotion in the heart. The parts of the body are so commanded by the soul, as
they will soon declare the intent thereof. This is evident by the private
prayers which persons truly devoted do make. For when they are alone, and no
creature present to take notice of the outward gesture, according to the
affection of the heart, when it is indeed fervent, the eyes will be cast up, or
cast down, the arms spread abroad, the hands lift up, or beating the breast,
the body cast prostrate upon the ground, and other like gestures performed.
They who use to pray privately and fervently, know this to be true.

I urge not this outward gesture, to make men play the hypocrites. Far be
such intents from my mind. Men are too prone to make show of more then is in
them: they need no provocations thereto. Besides hypocrisy is so odious in
Gods sight, as it makes our best works abominable: Isa. 66. 3.
But that be referred to him who searches the heart, and knows the inward
thoughts of men: and to every ones conscience, that will excuse or accuse him.
I urge a manifestation of inward affection, and that by such outward gestures
as are Gestures in prayer how ordered.
1. Warrantable by Gods Word. 2. Agreeable to the action in hand. 3. Answerable
to the inward affection.


. 30. Of seeking help of God in time.
IIII. See. 26.
SVccour must be sought of God in season. Zeph. 2. 2.
Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the chafe, before the
fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, etc. seek the Lord. Isa. 55. 6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found: call upon him while he is near. Amos 4.
12.
Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. Meet him before he is gone, meet him before
he have caused his wrath to fall. Genesis 32. 9.
So soon as Jacob heard that his brother was coming against him, he makes his
prayer to God. He put it not off to the evening. Yet -- 24.
when the evening was come, and so he freed from distractions, he returned to
prayer again, and more earnestly wrestled with God. 2 Chro. 14 11.
Before Asa began to fight with the Ethiopians, he sought assistance of God. So
did -- 20. 3.
Iehosaphat, and other pious princes. So soon as Exo. 32. 11.
Moses heard God speak of wrath, before he went down to see the cause
thereof, he fell down before the Lord, to turn it away: and -- 31.
when he had seen the cause thereof, he went again unto the Lord.

Thus, much evil may be prevented, which otherwise De occurrendo periculis in
tempore, lege Chrysostom. in initio orat. 1. advers. sud.
could not be redressed. A fire when once it begins to flame out, cannot so
easily be quenched, as it might before hand have been kept from flaming and
burning. A breach, which might with small cost and pains have been prevented,
when it is made, often proves irrecoverable. Great was the folly of the
Israelites in the time of the Judges, who used not to cry to the Lord, till
they were sorely oppressed by their enemies. And this was the cause that
sometimes they received (when they called upon God) such an answer as this,
Go, and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the
time of your tribulation. Judge 10. 14.


O that we were wise to mark the opportunity and to take it! Commonly (like
fools) we think of our cloakes when we are well wet: and think of shutting
the stable door when the steed is stolen, or of making our house safe and sure
from thieves when we have lost our goods. Many seek not to God till necessity
forces them. When the enemy has got the day, when the plague rages and has
destroyed many, when people die every where for want, then (it may be) solemn
prayer shall be made, and a fast proclaimed. Hereby as the folly of men is
discovered, so too just cause is given for their prayers to be suspected in
regard of the soundness of them: yea God is hereby provoked to leave men
without succor, because they sought it not in time.

. 31. Of praying in any place.
V. See 26. Omnis locus ad meditandum co^. gruus est. Bern Medit devot, c 6.
ANy place may be fit for prayer. This doctrine is to be limited according to
the occasions of prayer. For, for public prayer, at least in times and places
where liberty is granted to frequent public assemblies, See The whole armor
of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18. Treat 3. 84.
public Churches set apart for Divine Service, are fittest. But where just
occasions are offered of praying in other places, in any place may that divine
duty be performed. 1 Timothy 2. 8.
I will (says the Apostle) that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands.
The charge of Luke 18. 1.
praying always, and 1 These ^. 17.
without ceasing, implies as much. If occasions of prayer being offered, we
forbear to pray, because we are not in this or that place, those precepts can
hardly be kept. But in particular, we read of approved prayers made, as Act. 31.
in Churches, so -- 10. 30.
in houses, -- 9. 39, 4.
in chambers, Mat 6. 6.
in closets, Act. 10. 9.
on house-tops, Genesis 24 63.
in fields, Luke 6. 12.
on mountains, Act 16. 13.
by riverssides, Ion 1. 14.
in ships, -- 2. 1.
in a whales-belly, 1 King 19. 4
in the wilderness, and where not?

Mat. 18. 20.
Wheresoever prayer is rightly made, there God after an especial manner is
present: now Exo 3. 5. Magis valet petentis affectus quam petitionis locus. Aug
de unit. Eccles. c. 16.
Gods special presence makes any place holy, and in that respect fit for
prayer.

And such respect has God to the true desire of his Saints, as wheresoever by
prayer they make it known, there will God most graciously accept it. Instance
the forementioned instances. His promises for hearing prayer are without any
limitation of place: so as, in any place we may expect the accomplishment of
them.

What a dotage is it therefore so to dote on any one kind of place, as never to
pray but in such a place. Or superstition blinds such men's eyes, or
profaneness possesses their hearts. It is much to be feared that the prayers
which they seem to make in the places which they pretend most to affect, are
but cold prayers. If the Spirit of supplication had'any heat in them, it would
be like that hot vapor that is compassed in a cloud, or got into hollow places
of the earth, which rather then not find a vent, will rent the cloud asunder
with a thunderclap, or make the earth to quake. They lose much holy
acquaintance and familiarity with God, that are so nice, as not offer to meet
with him except in such or such a place.

Wise Christians will rather sanctify every place with this heavenly duty.
Their house, their chamber, their closet, their bed, their table, and other
like places shall be sanctified Vbicunque fueris intra temetipsum ora. Si long
fueris ab oratorio, noli quaerere locum, quoniam tu ipse locus es. Si fueris in
lecto, aut in alio loco, ora: et ibi est templu^. Bern. Medit. devot. c. 6.
therewith. If they be in a journey, their Innes and places of repast shall
therewith be sanctified. So their ship, and cabin, if they be on the sea. So
their tent, or the field, if they be in war. So every place according to the
present occasion. By a pious mind well devoted to Godwards, and by a
conscionable performance of this principal duty of piety; it may be said of
any place what Jacob said of the place where he saw his vision, This is none
other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven, Genesis 28. 17.

. 32. Of taking good notice of that for which we pray.
VI. See. 26.
KNowledge of that for which prayer is made is an especial means to sharpen
prayer. That which made Genesis 32. 9.
Jacob to wrestle with God, was the danger wherein he saw his household to be.
When 2 King. 19. 14
Hezekiah saw and read the letter that Senacherib sent, then was his spirit
extended to prayer. The knowledge that 2 Chro. 14 11.
Asa, -- 20. 2, 3.
Iehosaphat, Neh 1. 4.
Nehemiah, and other good Kings and Governors had of the danger of their
country, made them earnest in prayer with the Lord for succor. It is often noted
of Christ, that when he saw such and such miseries of people, his bowels were
moved, he hand compassion on them. In particular, Mat. 9. 36.
when he saw the people scattered without a shepherd, he incited his Disciples
to pray for them.

Sight and other means whereby we may have true intelligence of the needs and
straits whereunto such as we respect and affect are brought, work deep
impressions of compassion, which moves our inward bowels, and after a sort
enforces us to afford them the best aid we can. Now they who know how
beneficial prayer is in all needs, are thereupon moved as earnestly as they
can to pray for them.

To stir us up to pray for those that are in distress, let us enquire and
take notice of their estate and affairs. Nehemiah Neh. 1. 2.
was very inquisicive after the estate of the Jews that had returned from the
captivity, whereby it came to pass that he was so helpful to them both by his
prayer, and otherwise. But what the eye sees not, the heart rueth not. Things
not known are not regarded. Assuredly if we saw, or on assured knowledge
believed what the distresses of many Churches in other places are, and of many
persons in our own country, our spirits would send forth more prayers for them,
then now we do, (if other succor also were not afforded them.)

Here, by the way note what wrong they do who bring The ill consequences of
false news.
false reports to men's ears: as, reports of victory, when people are
overthrown. 1. They to whom the report is brought are deceived, and made to
believe an untruth. 2. They of whom the report is made, are by the false report
deprived of that help which otherwise they might have had. 3. God himself is
mocked, in that that which is not done, is acknowledged to be done by him, and
so when prayer should be made, praise is given for that which is not.


We have not a mountain to go to the top of it, and to Cur malum fama? quia
velox, an quia plurimum mendax? quae ne tune quidem cum aliquid very affert,
sine mendacij vitio est, detrahens, adjiciens, demutans de veritate. Tertul in
A polo. get. cap. 8. Solet sama mentiri. Aug. Bonefac. Epist. 106.
behold all the battles of the Churches, as Moses here on the top of an hill
beheld the Israelites fighting. We must have knowledge of foreign affairs
(as Nehemiah had) by report. If that report be false, how shall we order our
prayers? Yet there is commonly such uncertainties in rumors and reports, as
fame is said to be an evil thing. For even then when it declares some truth,
it is not free from the blame of lying, in that it takes away from the truth,
or adds thereto, or some way or other alters it. It is not therefore without
cause said, that fame uses to lie.

Yet if men be not rash in receiving every uncertain report, they that with an
honest heart make their prayers according to the report which they receive, may
have this comfort, that their sacrifice of prayer is acceptable to God: and
that thereby God takes notice of their disposition, how they would be
affected, if it went so or so with the Church.

But for the comfort of such as are in distress, howsoever pious and pitiful
men may be misinformed about their case, God is in heaven, and better sees
all their distresses, then Moses on the top of his hill could see Isreal's
straits. And whereas Moses could only pray for succor, God can give them
succor: God, I say, who to every drop of compassion that is in man, has in
himself an ocean of compassion: and answerable to his compassion has both
will and power to help. A point of much comfort.

. 33. Of strengthening faith by Gods former works.
VII. See 26.
COnsideration of Gods former works is of special use to strengthen faith.
Hereby was Jacobs faith much supported, and therefore he thus pleads and
presses Gods former works, when he was in danger, Genesis 32, 9, 10,
O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the Lord which said
unto me, return unto thy country, etc. I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant, etc. So
2 Chro. 20. 7.
Iehosaphat, Neh. 9. 6. etc.
the Levites in Nehemiahs time, and many others. This was 1 Samuel 17. 34, etc.
Psalm. 22. 4. -- 77. 11, 12. -- 143. 5.
David's usual practice. Therefore -- 105. 5.
he exhorts others to remember the mavelous works which God has done, his
wonders, and the judgments of his mouth.

Gods former works give evident demonstration, as of his power, what he is able
to do, (for what he has sometimes done he is able always to do) so of his
will, what he is willing, as he sees occasion to do. For the Lord never does
what he is unwilling to do. Now evidence of these two, Gods power and will, are
two strong props to support our faith.

Ob. It follows not that because God sometimes did How Gods former
extraordinary works strengthen our faith.
such and such things, he will ever do the same. Never did he in any nation the
wonders that he did in Egypt and in the wilderness.

Answ. Though he do not by the same visible, extraordinary, and miraculous
means succor his Church and People, yet thereby his Church is taught to
believe that he sees and observes his peoples distresses, that his compassion
is moved thereat, that though in his wisdom he suffers them to lie some time
therein, yet it is not his will that they should utterly perish: and therefore
he will assuredly deliver them. Thus the Apostle pressing the promise which God
in particular made to Joshua, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, makes
this general inference thereupon, So that we, (we Christians that live so many
years after Ioshuaes time) we may boldly say the Lord is my helper, I will not
fear, etc. Heb. 13. 5, 6. Though we cannot therefore expect the same
particular Quis est qui considerat opera Dei, quibus regitur and administratur
totus hic mundus, and non obstupescit obruiturque miraculis. Aug in Ioh. 2.
Tract 8. Faciem quodam modo ponentes ad ea quae fecit, dorsum ponimus ad
artificem qui fecit. Ibid.
works of God to be done for us, that of old were done for others, yet the
generals we may and ought to believe, that that God which provided for, and
delivered of old such as trusted in him, is still able, and willing to provide
for and deliver such as now trust in him. These generals expect from God. As
for the means and manner of doing it, refer them to his wisdom. He ever
remains the same God, as in his power, so in his will, affection, and
compassion toward such as trust in him. He can by sundry means bring things to
the same issue. If thoroughly and advisedly the usual works of God were
considered, even those whereby the whole world is ruled and governed, who would
not be astonished, even as at miracles, and by the miraculousnesse of them be
strengthened in faith? But many turning their faces to the works that are done,
turn their backs to him that did them. Whence it comes to pass, that neither
God has the glory which belongs to him, nor man that profit which otherwise he
might reap from the works of God.

Gather now, ye that trust in the Lord, gather what evidences Observe Gods
former works.
ye can by Gods former works of his power, and will. Often meditate thereon;
plead them in prayer before God. In your catalogue of Gods former works be sure
you leave not out such as are done in your days, and to your selves in
particular, whereof upon experimental evidence you may say to God, mavelous
are thy works, and that my soul knows Psalm. 139. 14.
right well. The works which were brought to Moses his mind by holding up this
rod were such as were done in his days, before his eyes, by his ministry. Such
works as are done in our days, and to our selves, make the deepest impression:
and have the most effectual and mighty operation. Such were they whereby Jacob
and David were strengthened Genesis 32. 10. 1 Samuel 17. 56.
in their faith. Though we have not such a visible sign of Gods former works,
as this rod was which Moses held up, yet we have as good and sure stays for
our faith to rest upon. For, we have Gods works recorded in Gods Word, a Word
of truth. And we may say, as the Psalmist does, We have heard with our ears, O
God, our fathers have told us Psalm. 44. 1.
what works thou did in their days, in the times of old. And God has in
our days, and before our eyes done such works, as give us sufficient ground to
trust in him. We have memories to retain them. We have minds to meditate on
them. We may (if we will) register and record them. What could Moses his rod do
more then al these? Though we want that external sign, yet we have the
substance. And by a right use of what we have, our faith in God may be
strengthened, as Moses was by the use of this rod. Ruminate therefore on Gods
bringing in the Gospel in King Henry the 8 days. On establishing it in King
Edward the 6 days. On the courage, comfort, and constancy that he gave to
Martyrs in Queen Mary's days. On the restoring of the Gospel in blessed
Queen Elizabeth's days. On the many victories then given: especially in 88. On
the many deliverances from Papists treasons: especially in 605. As occasion is
offered seriously ponder and meditate on these and other like works of God, and
thereby shall thou find much vigor infused into thy faith. Withal well note
the promises of God. For, this rod which Moses took up to the hill was a sign
of Gods promise. Take this rod in thine hand (says God) wherewith Exo. 4. 17.
thou shall do signs. Gods promises are the most proper groundwork of faith:
as I have The whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6, 16. Treat. 2. Part. 6 71, etc.
elsewhere showed.

. 34. Of the benefit of a persuasion of others prayers.
VIII. See. 26.
Persuasion of others prayers adds much courage in dangerous employments.
This was one reason why Number. 10. 9.
God in his Law ordered that his Priests should go with their silver trumpets
into the armies of his people, that by that sign his people might be assured
of the Priests prayers, and be thereby the more encouraged. 2 Chro. 13. 14
Thus were the people in Abijahs time much encouraged. This questionless was
the reason why Judge. 4. 8.
Barak was so importunate to have Deborah go with him to the war. Her sex
might make him think that she was not fit to lead an army, or to fight. But he
knowing her to be a Prophetess, did also know that her prayers would be
availeable with the Lord: and withal he thought that the sight of the battle
would extend her spirit the more earnestly to call upon the Lord for them. Did
not this persuasion encourage him, who speaking of his troubles, said, Phil. 1.
19.
I know that this shall turn to my salvation through your prayer.

Gods people being acquainted with Gods Word, thereby know that God is the
fountain of all blessing, and that prayer is the means of receiving all
needful blessing from him, and that the prayers of others are availeable with
God Mulium valent preces in communi multorum. Hier. Comme^t. in Romans 15.
as well as their own, and that when others prayers are joined with theirs,
they are so much the more powerful. How can they then but be the more
encouraged by their persuasion of others prayers for them. Of craving others
prayers, See The whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 19. Treat. 3. 137.


Good cause there is for this very cause, when any go about any weighty,
difficult, or dangerous work, or when they are in any dangers or fears, to
crave the prayers of such as they count faithful: as 2 King. 19. 4.
Hezekiah did of Isayah. And for them of whom this duty is desired, by solemn
promise to bind themselves to do it, as 1 Samuel 12. 23.
Samuel did, that so they who desire it may have the more cause to believe that
it shall be performed. And if the work enterprised be public, meet it is
that a fast be proclaimed, and public prayers enjoined for their good
success. By these public prayers more notice may be taken of the many
prayers that by many persons are made for them, and so they be the more
encouraged.

By a sound and good argument from the less to the greater A minori. Christ's
intercession a ground of encouragement. Merito mihi spes valida est in eo qui
sedet ad dextram tuam, and te interpellat pro nobis: alioquin desperarem. Aug.
Confess. l. 11. c 43.
it follows, that they who are well instructed in the articles of the
Christian faith, and answerably do believe in Christ, cannot but have much
comfort and encouragement in all their lawful enterprises, be they never so
difficult or dangerous, because they cannot be ignorant that Christ, in whom
they believe, is on an higher hill then Moses here was, even in heaven at Gods
right hand, making intercession for them. Whom, though he be invisible, they
may see with the eye of faith, as Moses by faith saw him who is invisible, He.
11 27. Now Christ's intercession is more then all the prayers of all ye Saints,
though their spirits were all joined together, in presenting one and the same
petition to God. For Christ's intercession is that sweet incense that is in it
self acceptable to God, and that, mixed with the prayers of the Saints, makes
them acceptable, Rev. 8. 3, 4. Let us therefore have our eye of faith fixed on
Christ at Gods right hand in heaven, holding up his hands continually, and
making intercession for us. The eye of faith may in this kind work as much
boldness, as the sight of Stephens bodily eye did, when he saw Jesus standing
on the right hand of God, Acts 7. 55.

. 35. Of Ioshuaes obedience.
EXODUS XVII. X. So Joshua did as Moses had said unto him, and fought with
Amalek.
See. 1.
THe obedience of Joshua to Moses his charge is first generally propounded, and
then distinctly exemplified: both of them in the former part of the tenth
verse, which is so expressly set down, as there is no ambiguity at all. For all
the material words, as 9.
Moses, Ibid.
Joshua, 2.
fought,. 4.
Amalek, have been before explaned.

Out of the two parts of this text naturally arise these two observations. I.
Obedience is to be yielded to Governors. Moses was at this time a Prince; the
supreme Governor over all Israel. Joshua therefore who was one of Israel, and
under his command, did as Moses had said unto him. II. They who are sent by
lawful authority unto a lawful war, must go. Moses his charge was a lawful
authority. War (for defense of a people against a malicious and injurious
enemy) is a lawful war. Therefore Joshua goes. He fought with Amalek.


. 36. Of yielding obedience to Governors.
See The Plaster for a Plague, on Numb. 16. 47.. 53, 54, 55, 56
I. OBedience is to be yielded to Governors. This is a principal branch of
that Honor which is required in the fifth commandment. It is particularly and
expressly enjoined to all sorts of inferiors under authority: as to Ephesians 6. 5.
Servants, -- 1.
Children, -- 5. 22.
Wives, Heb. 13. 7.
People in relation to their Pastors, Act. 10. 7.
Soldiers to their Generals and Captains, and 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14 Romans 13. 1.
Subjects in relation to supreme and subordinate Magistrates.

The Apostle much presses this point, and inforceth it by four special
arguments, Romans 13. 1, 2, etc. 1. The Author of Government, and Ordainer of
Governors. (The powers that be are ordained of God.) Though it be true which
the Prophet says, (Hos. 8. 4.) They have set up Kings but not by me: they have
made Princes and I knew it not: namely in regard of particular persons set up,
and in regard of the manner of setting them up: yet the Power it self, and
Government, is of God. 2. The good or benefit of Government. (He is the
Minister of God to thee for good.) Governors therefore are advanced to their
eminent places, not simply for their own honor, but for the good of their
subjects. They who rightly and duly subject themselves, procure good to
themselves. Such as are rebellious, are injurious to themselves. 3. The evil
of sin in resisting Government. Whosoever resists the power resists the
ordinance of God. He does therefore offend thereby not men only, but God also,
which is a sin. 4. The evil of punishment following thereon. They that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. A fearful doom. Take for
instance the examples of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16. Upon these and
other like grounds Christians are exhorted to be subject for conscience sake,
Romans 13. 5. and for the Lords sake, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Both which intend one and the
same thing. For the conscience is subject to God alone: so as that which is
done for conscience sake is done for the Lords sake.


This for the general of yielding obedience to Governors, may suffice. For if
these motives, Gods ordinance, Our own good, Avoiding sin, and, The
punishment of sin, be not sufficient, what can be sufficient? I hasten to the
particular, of soldiers obedience to their Governors charge about going to In
militia disciplina non deest, obedientia nequaquam contemnitur. Ber. ad Mil.
Temp. c. 4.
war, which is here in special expressed and intended. For among them
discipline is most necessary. Therefore in well ordered armies discipline is
not wanting, nor obedience despised.

. 37. Of going to war upon command.
II. See. 35.
THey who are sent by lawful authority unto lawful war, must go. What war
may be counted lawful 18. Quando Imperator dicebat, producite aciem, ite
contra illam gentem statim obtemperabant. Aug. Enar in Psalm 124. Vide Aug.
contr. Faust. Manich. l. 22, c. 74. Itur and reditur ad nu^um ejus qui praeest.
Bern, ad Mil. Temp. cap. 4.
has been showed. Lawful authority, is the command of such as God has set
over us, especially of the supreme Governor: which command may come to us
either immediately from the governor himself, or mediately by such as he sets
under himself over us. For, says the Centurion, I am a man under authority,
and have soldiers under me, and I say to one, go, and he goes; and to
another, come, and he comes, Mat. 8. 9. A proof pertinent to the point in
hand. For what does a Centurions bidding a soldier, go, imply, but a sending
of him to such or such a service in war? Joshua (22. 2.) for this commends
the obedience of the Reubenites, Gadites, and half the Tribe of Manasseh.
Vriah so far obeyed in this case, as he lost his life, 2 Samuel 11. 16, 17. I
say not this to justify David's or Ioabs command: but to demonstrate the extent
of Vriahs obedience.

Authority is given for this end, to observe what may be best for the state
wherein they have their authority; and answerably to order matters. In ordering
whereof, there being many cases wherein the very life of some particular
persons is to be put in hazard for preservation of the whole state, God has
given this power to supreme Magistrates to appoint whom they see best,
according to that which Moses said to Joshua, Choose us out men. If men chosen
might refuse to go, to what purpose are they chosen? Soldiers owe Exequendi
jussa bellica ministerium milites debent paci salutique communi. Aug. cont.
Faust. Manich l. 2. c. 75.
to common peace and safety, the service of executing their Governors commands
of waging war.

Ob Has one man power over another life?

Answ. 1. Going to war does not necessarily presuppose loss of life. Many
return home from war, not only with their lives, but also with much honor
and wealth.

2. Many are the cases warranted by God, wherein some hazard their lives for
others, as Esth. 4. 16. Judge. 5. 18. Phil. Miles Christi securus interimit,
interit securior. Sibi praestat cum interit: Christo cum interimit. Cum
occiditur ipse, non perijsse, sed pervenisse cognoscitur. Mors ergo quam
irrogat Christi est lucrum: quam excipit, suum. Bern. loc. citat. Non est
potestas nisi a Deo, vel jubente, vel sinente. Cum ergo vir iustus, si forte
sub rege homine etiam sacrilego militet; recte possit illo iubente bellare,
civicae pacis ordinem servans: cui quod iubetur, vel non esse contra Dei
praeceptum certum est, vel utrum sit certum non est; it a ut fortasse reum
regem saciat iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem militem ostendat ordo
serviendi. Aug cont Faust. Manich. l. 22. c. 75.
2. 30.

3. If in this case a soldier die, he dies in his way, and in the work of
God: so as, his death may be his best advantage. God having given his Angels
charge over all his, when they are in war, they will either keep them from
death, or when they die they will take their souls, as they did the soul of
Lazarus, to carry it to bliss. Therefore with much confidence he slays his
enemy, with greater confidence he is himself slain. He does a good turn to
himself if he be killed, and an acceptable thing to Christ if he slay his
enemy. When he is slain, he is not destroyed, but perfected. The death which
he inflicteth is Christ's gain: and which he suffers, his own gain.

The application of this point of obedience in particular concerns such as
are or shall be commanded, as Joshua here was, to fight with the enemies of the
Church and State: that they testify their obedience readily, with good
conscience and courage, and that for the Lords sake.

Quest. What if Christians be under the subjection of Idolaters, or Infidels,
ought they at such a Kings command to go to war?

Answ. An ancient Father gives this answer. There is no power but of God,
either commanding, or permitting it. Therefore a righteous man, if happily he
serve as a soldier under a King that is even a sacrilegious man, he may
rightly war at his command, keeping the order of civil peace: who is either
assured that that which is commanded is against no command of God, or is not
sure whether it be so or no, so that, perhaps the iniquity of commanding may
make the King guilty, but the order of serving may prove the soldier to be
innocent.

. 38. Of the meaning, method, and doctrines of the tenth Verse.
EXODUS XVII. X. And Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
See. 1.
THe performance of that promise which Moses made, V. 9 is here generally
propounded. The performance is expressed almost in the same words wherein the
promise was propounded. In the promise, Moses said, I will stand on the top of
the hill. In the performance it is said, Moses went up to the top of the hill.
Only here is not mentioned the rod of God in his hand: but here are added two
Assistants that went with Moses, which were Aaron and Hur.

Of Aaron much is spoken in other places. His name was agreeable to his
function. For, Aaron imports a teacher; and Priests (whereof he was the first
and chiefest) were Summum Sacerdotium ab Aaron cepisse definimus Aug. quaest
super Levit l. 3. q. 23.
teachers: whereupon it is said, The Priests lips should keep knowledge: and
they should seek the law at his mouth, Mal. 2. 7. This Aaron was elder brother
to Moses, Exo. 6. 20. For, they died both in the same year; and Aaron was 123
years old, Numb. 33. 38, 39. And Moses but a 120 Deuteronomy. 34. 7. Yet was Moses
preferred before Aaron. For in that God says to Moses of Aaron, He shall be thy
spokesman unto the people, he imports a Principality in Moses, and a Ministry
Cum dicit tibi loquetur ad populum, satis indi cat in Moyse Principatum, in
Aaron Ministe rium. Aug. Quaest. super. Exo. l 2. q. 10.
in Aaron: which is yet further confirmed, in that it is added, Thou shall be
to him instead of God, Exo. 4. 16.

Many and great were the prerogatives conferred on Aaron. For,

1. He was chosen to assist Moses in the messages which from God were sent to
Pharaoh, and in the wonders which were done in Egypt, Exo. 4. 30. and 5. 1.
For, Aaron could speak well, Exo. 4 14. 2. When Moses was absent 40 days,
Aaron was appointed chief Governor in his room, Exo. 24. ^4. and 32. 1. 3.
Aaron was the first that was anointed High Priest, Vestem sumebat Aaron, qua
eius summitas appareret. Aug. loc. citat.
and clothed with the glorious priestly ornaments, Exodus 29. 5, etc. 4. The
Priesthood was conferred upon Aaron and his seed by a perpetual covenant.
None else might execute the services appertaining thereto, Lev. 7. 36. Number. 18.
8. Number. 16. 40. 2 Chro. 26. 18. 5. In testimony of Gods choice of Aaron, his
rod only among all the rods of the heads of Israel, did bud, blossom, and
bring forth ripe almonds: and thereupon it was kept as a perpetual memorial
before the Lord, Numb. 17. 8, 10. Hebr. 9. 4. 7. Aaron was to make an
atonement when Gods wrath was kindled: and when multitudes died of the plague,
he stood betwixt the living and the dead: and the plague was stayed, Numb. 16.
46, 48. 8. Aaron both in regard of his external function, and also of his
internal disposition is styled The Saint of the Lord, Psalm. 106. 16.

Ob. He made a golden calfe, Exo. 32. 4. He with Miriam murmured against Moses,
Numb. 12. 1. He was incredulous, Numb. 20. 13.

Answ. These were indeed great sins. and manifest fruits of the flesh: but
only particulars. The disposition of his soul, and general course of life
was holy. Which of the Saints had not their blemishes? As the flesh may be in
the soul where the Spirit is: so in such a soul may some fruits of the flesh
sprout out.

9. Aaron was an especial type of Christ, Heb. 5. 4, 5.

Ob. Melchizedech was the type of Christ, Heb. 5. 6.

Answ. Melchizedech was a type in sundry eminent prerogatives, which are noted
by the Apostle, Heb. 7. But yet in the office it self, the office of
Priesthood, Aaron was also a type.


By these particulars noted of Aaron, it plainly appears that he was a fit
assistant to Moses in that solemn duty of prayer continued a whole day.

The other that assisted Moses is called (...)
Hur. His name according to the notation of it, does imply a Magistrate. The
garment with which Mordecai was clad when King Ahashuerosh advanced him to
Magistracy, has this Epithet given unto it. It is translated (...) Hest. 8,
15.
white. Governors of old were wont so to be arrayed. (...) 1 Kin. 21. 8, 11.
Neh. 2. 16. -- 5. 7 Isa. 34. 12. Quos Propheta (Ier. 27. 20.) nu^cupat (...)
Targum (...) Principes.
A word of the same root in the plural number is often used to set out Nobles,
Governors, Rulers, or Elders in a commonwealth.

Whether this were his proper name, or a name of his place, is not very
certain: But most certain it is that he was made a Magistrate in that State.
Hereupon when Moses was to be absent some while from the people, he says,
(Exodus 24. 14.) Behold Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any matters
to do, let him come unto them: namely to Aaron, for matters spiritual, and to
Hur for matters temporal. Moses iussit fratrem Aaron and sororis Mariae virum
nomine Vrion sibi assistere, etc. Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 3. c. 2.
Flavius Josephus renders this reason of Moses his taking these two, Aaron and
Hur with him, that the one was his brother, the other his sister Miriams
husband. But of this latter we have no evidence in Scripture. Evidence we have
(as has been showed before) that Hur was a Prince and Governor of the people.

The reasons of going to the top of the hill, are before declared,. 24.

In setting out the Performance of the forementioned Promise there are offered
to our consideration, 1. The Persons. 2. Their Preparation.


The Persons are Principal. Moses. Assistant Aaron. Hur.



Their Preparation is set out 1. By their Action. Went up. 2. By the Place. To
the top of the hill.


The addition of two other Persons as Assistants, to the Principal, shows,
that, I. In extraordinary prayer mutual assistance of Saints is useful.
The distinct kinds of Persons, as Moses the chief Prince and Prophet, Aaron
the Priest, Hur a Magistrate under Moses, declare, that, II. Men of eminent
place in Church and Commonwealth are most bound to crave divine succor in
time of need.
The action, together with the place, having relation to the promise made, verse.
9. gives evidence, that, III. Prayer promised must be performed. Of desiring
others prayers, See The whole armor of God, Treat 3. 144, 148, etc.



. 39. Of assisting one another in extraordinary prayer.
I.. 34. Hanc orationis legem servaverunt tres pueri in camino ignis inclusi,
consonantes in prece, and spiritus consensione concordes. Cypr. Ser. 6. de
Orat. Dom. Vide plura ibid hac dear. Of joining together in prayer, See The
whole Armor of God, Treat. 3.. 91. Dum in praesenti seculo sumus orationibus
invicem possumus adiuvari Hier. Comment l. 3. in Gal 6. Mutuis votis nos
invicem foveamus, custodiamus, armemus. Cyp. Epist. 7. Papae.
IN extraordinary prayer mutual assistance of Saints is useful. It is
expressly recorded that Hezekiah the King, and Isaiah the prophet (both of them)
prayed and cried to heaven when Sennacharib invaded Jerusalem with an huge
host. The destruction of that host followed thereupon, 2 Chro. 32. 20, 21.
Esther, as she sent to the Jews to fast for her, so she and her maidens fasted
together, Esth. 4. 16. Daniel, though a man powerful in prayer desired the
assistance of his three companions, when he begged an extraordinary favor of
God, Dan. 2. 17. 18. Yea, Christ himself, the Mediator betwixt God and man,
when in the days of his flesh he withdrew himself to that extraordinary
prayer which he made that very night wherein he was apprehended, took three of
his prime Disciples, and calls on them to watch and pray, Mat. 26. 37, 41.

Mutual assistance of Saints makes prayers much more powerful and effectual
then otherwise they would be. For, the fervor of one man's spirit joined with
another, is as fire put to fire, whereby the heat is much greater. Iron
sharpneth iron: so a man sharpneth the countenance of his friend, Pro. 27. 17.
That is, society, and mutual communion betwixt friends, is of as great force
to quicken each others spirit, and so to cheer up their countenance, as
whetting iron upon iron is to sharpen it. This proverb is best verified in the
communion of Saints about holy duties, and especially in mutual prayer:
whereby we may much cherish, support, and encourage one another.

This pattern of these three Worthies, Moses, Aaron, and Hur, is most worthy
our due observation, and that as often as any weighty and just occasion is
offered. Let it not therefore be enough in extraordinary cases to make our
ordinary prayers. And as we set our selves more then ordinarily to perform
this duty, so let us (suspecting our own weakness and dullness) take the
help of some choice ones, who in such a case may be a good help unto us.
Provided that the good laws of Church and Commonwealth under which we live be
not herein scandalously violated, and we our selves brought Nos
incomparabiliter plu, quan, Petrus and Paulus or ati^num fraternarum auxilijs
indigemus. Aug Probae Epist. 12. cap 16
into such troubles, as the enduring thereof cannot minister unto us any sound
ground of comfort. But for the point, the best that be need the prayers of
others. The Apostles in their time craved and obtained this help. We do beyond
comparison much more need the help of others prayers.

. 40. Of Magistrates and Ministers care to seek help of God in public need.
II. See. 38.
MEn of eminent place in Church and Commonwealth are most bound to crave divine
succor in time of need. Thus have good Kings and other Magistrates, Quomodo
populus debtor est primitiarum offerendarum Principi, sic Princeps debtor est
populi offerre pro pro co victimas. Hier Comme^t. l. 14. in Ezec. 45 Sacerdoles
debent Dominum deprecari pro populo. Idem in Joel 2.
and good Priests, and other Ministers done in all ages. Instance the examples
of Ios. 7. 6.
Joshua, and the Elders of Israel in his time, of 1 Samuel 7. 9.
Samuel, of 2 Chro. 13 14.
the Priests in Abijahs time, of -- 14. 11.
Asa, -- 20. 6.
Iehosaphat, -- 32 20.
Hezekiah and Isaiah.

Magistrates and Ministers have the charge not only of their own souls
committed unto them, but also of all the members of the Commonwealth and
Church. So as by a double bond they are tied to the forenamed duty. One, in
regard of their own safety; the other in regard of the safety of such as are
committed to their charge. For the preservation hereof there is no other means
comparable to that which is here intimated, A faithful seeking of succor from
God.

Besides, among other persons, their prayers (caeteris paribus) are most likely
to prevail with God, because by virtue of their public functions they
sustain the persons, and stand in the room of all that are under them.

Take notice hereof you that are in eminent places either in Church or
Commonwealth. By your conscionable care herein, give occasion to your people
that are under you to bless God for setting you over them: give them occasion
to pray for you; yea, to pray that God would hear your prayers for them. Thus
will they esteem you, as 2 Samuel 18 3.
David's people esteemed him, worth ten thousand of them. Thus will they
readily, willingly, cheerfully be subject to you, and yield to you in every
thing your due. This is the best means of knitting hearts of people to their
Magistrates and Ministers.

. 41. Of performing the promises which we make of praying for others.
III. Sec. 38.
PRayer promised must be performed. When Pharaoh felt the heavy hand of God to
lie upon him, he desires Moses and Aaron to pray for him. They (desirous to
show how much rather they would that he should submit himself for his own and
peoples preservation to the good pleasure of God, then by his fierce wrath be
destroyed) make promise to pray for him, and answerably they made conscience to
perform their promise: whereupon it is noted, that Exo. 8. 12, 32.
they went out from Pharaoh, and cried unto the Lord. Yea, though -- 9. 30, 33.
he knew that when the judgment was removed, Pharaoh would again harden his
heart, yet was Moses faithful in performing his promise. 1 Samuel 7. 5, 9, 10.
Samuel having made a promise to pray for Israel, when the Philistims were
assembled against them, he so cried to the Lord, as the Lord thundered with a
great thunder upon the Philistines, and discomfited them. Yea, he acknowledges
it to be -- 12, 23.
a sin to neglect to pray for the people.

And surely it is an heinous sin: especially after promise of doing it, is
past. For, in this case there is a double bond broken. 1. The bond of love and
mercy, whereby we are bound to pray as occasion requires, though we have not
promised so to do. 2. The bond of truth and fidelity, wherewith our own mouth
(by making promise) has bound us. Psalm. 19 4.
Promise is to be kept in many things that are prejudicial to us. How much
more in such duties as we are necessarily tied unto, whether they be promised
or no.


We have just cause, on this ground to call to mind what occasions have been
offered to draw us to make promise of this duty: and withal to consider
whether we have made good our promise or no. Questionless, there has been
much failing herein. It is usual for Christians on all occasions, when they
are in any want, or distress, when they part one from another, when they write
one to another, both to desire, and also to promise this mutual Christian
help of prayer. But if examination be made of the performance of such
promises, even they that are forward and frequent in making them, will be found
exceeding backward and negligent in performing them. Be persuaded that this
careless neglect of that whereunto ye are so doubly bound, is a great sin.
Repent of that which is past, and for the time to come be more faithful and
conscionable. Such a promise is not far from a vow. The more tender ought we to
be of breaking it. Of the two, it is better not to promise, then to promise,
and Melius est non promittere, quam promittere and non facere. Hier. Comment.
l. 13 in Ezec. 44.
not perform what we promise. But let not this keep men from promising. For
mutual prayer being in it self a bounden duty, we ought by promises to draw
on our selves thereto. Promise therefore, and perform.

. 42. Of the interpretation and resolution of the eleventh Verse.
EXODUS XVII. XI. And it came to pass when Moses held up his hand that Israel
prevailed: and when he let down his hand Amalek prevailed.
The Sea 1.
Issue of Moses his being upon the mount is here noted to be different,
according to the steadiness or weakness of his hand.

The first phrase, And it came to pass, or word for word, (...)
And it was, is an usual transition in Scripture. dialect, whereby one point
is knit to another.

By Moses holding up his hand is meant the steadiness of his faith in prayer.
Metonymia Adiu^cti.
The outward sign is put for the inward thing signified thereby. We have. 22.
before showed that by lifting up of hands (as this action has relation to
God, and that in prayer) is meant a desire and expectation of Divine help, and
a readiness to receive it. Holding up hands, implies a continuance therein
without fainting. (...) a (...) Hiphil.
The Hebrew word is of such a conjugation, as intimates both a reciprocation,
and also a continuance of the action. (...) quoad.
The particle prefixed before this clause, and translated, when, imports as
much: for it signifies, so long as: in which sense it is used in the very next
clause of this verse.

(...) a (...) Tremel. quieti dabat.
The other word translated, let down, in the conjugation wherein it is used,
signifies, to give to rest, or to make to rest. This is ordinarily done upon
weariness.

It appears hereby that Moses waxed weary with holding up his hands, and
being weary, to rest them, let them down. Whereby it is implied, that in his
continuance to pray, his spirit waxed faint, and his faith weak, which made
him somewhat to intermit that duty.

As therefore Israel had the better, while Moses with a steadfast faith
continued to pray for them: so while, through weakness, he intermitted that
duty, the enemy had the better.

The Sum of this verse is, A demonstration of the power of faithful prayer.

This is manifested by the difference betwixt persisting therein, and desisting
therefrom. Answerably there are two parts of the forenamed Sum. 1. The
joyful effect of persisting in faithful prayer. 2. The woeful event of
desisting therefrom.


In both these there is one thing implied, another expressed.

In the former, 1. The Cause is implied; which was, that Moses somewhile
continued steadfast and fervent in faithful prayer, signified by holding up his
hand. For where it is said, When Moses held up his hand, is it not intimated,
that he did hold up his hand?

2. The Effect is expressed, Amalek prevailed.

In the latter likewise, 1. The Occasion is implied, which was that Moses
somewhat fainted in spirit, failed in the vigor of his faith, and intermitted
to pray as he had begun. This is signified by letting down his hand. If he had
not at all let down his hand, why is mention here made thereof? Why was such
means used to enable him to hold it up the more steddily, as is noted in the
next verse? But, to put this out of all doubt, in the next verse it is expressly
said, that Moses hands were weary.

2. The Event is thus expressed, Amalek prevailed.

1. From the General Scope of this verse, (whereunto every clause therein
tends) I observe, that, I. Faithful prayer is powerful.


2. From the Connection of the Cause (which is, Moses his holding up of his
hand) with the Effect (which is, Isreal's prevailing) and that by this particle
of time, when, or, (...)
so long as, I collect, that, II. By continuance in faithful prayer divine
succor is continued.


3. From that which is implied by Moses letting down his hand, I infer,
that, III. Saints are prone to faint in their fervency of prayer.


4. From the Event following thereupon (Amalek prevailed) I gather, that, IIII.
Intermission of faithful and fervent prayer often proves very prejudicial.


5. From the different issue of this war, that one while Israel prevailed,
another while Amalek prevailed, I conclude, that, V. War is wavering.
Success therein sometimes hangs one way, sometimes another way.


. 43. Of the power of faithful prayer.
I.. 42. Dignior sequetur effectus, quem serventior praecedit affectus. Aug.
Probae Epist 121. Impetravit efficaciter quod petijt, quia fideliter
postulavit. Cypr, Sermon. 6 de Orat. Dom.
Faithful prayer is powerful. By faithful prayer I mean,

1. The prayer of a faithful man, such an one as Moses was, Numb. 12. 7. St.
James styles such an one a righteous man, and says of his prayer, that it
avails much, James 5. 16.

2. The prayer of such a man made in faith. For so was this prayer of Moses.
The holding up of his hand implied the steadiness of his faith: and St. James
gives this title to effectual prayer, Prayer of faith, Iam. 5. 15. Much in
Scripture is spoken of the Sea The whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18. Treat.
3. Part. 1. 22, etc.
power of prayer; and all is spoken of such prayer as is here meant. The
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the
upright is his delight, Prove. 15. 8. The upright use to pray in faith: the
wicked cannot do so. By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice
(Heb. 11. 14.) then Cain. Many and admirable are the things which the Saints in
all ages have done by faith, Hebr. 11. But where faith has failed, the divine
power has been stinted, Mat. 13. 58. and 17. 20. Heb. 3. 19. Not without cause
therefore does the Lord put in this proviso of faith, where he speaks of
prevailing by prayer, Mar. 11. 24. What things soever ye desire, when ye pray,
believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. So his Apostle, Iam. 1.
5, 6. If any man lack, let him ask of God, but let him ask in faith, nothing
wavering. The faith of those who sought and found help of Christ in the days
of his flesh, gives good proof hereof. Mat. 8. 13. and 9. 2, 22. and 15. 28.
Mar. 9. 23. Luke 7. 50. It is recorded of the Christians Niceph Calist.
Ecclesiast. Hist. lib 4. cap. 12. citat hanc historiam ex Apologia quae a
Tertulliano edita est pro fide ad Senatum. Romans Vide Oros. lib. 7. cap. 15.
in the Primitive times of the Church that When Marcus Antoninus waged war
against the Germans, his army was brought to a desperate case, through great and
long thirst: and that the legion of Christian soldiers fell on their knees
after their accustomed manner, praying and craving help of God; and that that
thing, as a new and unaccustomed matter, struck a great terror into the
enemies. And that, while the Christians prayed, another greater matter fell out
beyond their imagination and expectation. For, the enemies were stricken down
with many strokes of thunder: and the army being even ready to perish with
thirst and want of water, was refreshed. So effectual surely were the prayers
of Christians. Profane Historians, who have written of the Roman Emperors,
have related as much. I have the rather transcribed this history, because it is
somewhat pertinent to the pattern of Moses here noted in the text.

Faithful prayer is that means which God himself, the almighty and all
sufficient God, the original fountain of all Faith the means to receive all
blessing from God Nemo or at nisi quod credit and sperat. Bern. super Missus
est, Sermon 4.
blessing-hath sanctified for receiving from him whatsoever he in his wisdom
sees meet to be done for, or given to any of his children. So that, it is as a
conduit pipe, conveying all needful blessing from that high fountain in
heaven, to us on earth. In this respect, to him, who said unto the Lord, If
thou can do any thing help us, Christ gave this answer, If thou can
believe, all things are possible to him that believes, Mar. 9. 22, 23. On the
other side, when he was among them that believed not, He could do there no
mighty work, Mar. 6. 5.

Ob. This tying of divine blessing to faith, which is a gift and grace in man,
seems to impeach the infinite and unlimited power of God.

Answ. Nothing less. For, faith is not the proper, primary, Man's faith
impeacheth not Gods power.
and principal cause of any divine blessing, but only a means subordinate to
the divine providence. It does therefore no more impeach Gods power, then any
other means. There are among others, three especial considerations which
evidently demonstrate that faith more manifests then empaireth the power,
providence, wisdom, and other attributes of God. They are these.

1. God himself works in man this gift of faith. Ephesians. 2. 8.
Faith is the gift of God.

2. God himself has appointed and sanctified this means. No creature has
imposed it on him.

3. The blessing which by faith comes to any, is obtained, not by any worth
or virtue of faith as it is an act of man, but merely by reason of that order
which in wisdom God has appointed for receiving from him such and such
blessings.

Good cause we have therefore, all of us that are faithful, in all things
wherein we stand in need of any special favor, succor, and blessing from the
Lord, to hold up our hands to God, as Moses here did, by faithful prayer to
seek it of him, and expect it from him. For, assuredly the prayer which shall be
Quae fidelis and fervens oration suerit, caelum sine dubio penetrabit: unde
certum est quod vacua redire non poterit. Bern. in Quadragess, Sermon 4
faithful and fervent, will pierce heaven: from whence, it is certain, it can
not return empty. Wherefore, when spiritual enemies assault us: when we find
any effects of Gods displeasure lying on us: when we enterprise any weighty
business: when we observe great need, and find want of any grace: when enemies
invade us: when a plague enters among us: when a famine begins to pinch: yea
when we have just cause to fear any of these: when an army by land, or a fleet
by sea is sent forth for our own defense, or for succor to our friends or
allies: for obtaining or re-gaining any public, or private blessings,
temporal, or spiritual, on our selves or others: for preventing or removing
like evils: on all occasions let us hold up our hands: let us make faithful
and fervent prayers to God.

Of praying we spoke. 27.
before.

The manner of praying with a steadfast faith (signified by holding up the hand)
is the point here to be especially observed. For, faith to prayer is as fire to
powder. In it the life, vigor, and power of prayer consists. By faith prayer
flies The power of prayer consists in faith. Grandis fidei clamor; Amb.
Comment. in Psalm. 118. Ser. 19. ver. 1.
up to heaven, as Daniels did, Dan. 10. 12. By faith it is made acceptable to
God, as Abels was, Hebr. 11. 4. By faith it prevails with God, as Jacobs did,
Hos. 12. 4. By faith it turns away Gods wrath, as Moses did, Exo. 32. 14. By
faith it obtaines sufficient grace, as Paul's did, 2 Cor. 12. 9. Faith added to
prayer makes it powerful in all things, and profitable to all things. Pray
therefore, and pray in faith. Thus hold up thy hand.

For help herein, observe these directions.

1. Take good notice of Gods promises, and well acquaint thy self therewith.
Gods promises are the only, true, proper Directions to pray in faith. Of Gods
promises, how they are the ground of faith, See The whole Armor of God, on
Ephesians. 6. 16. Treat. 2. Part. 6,. 71, etc.
ground of faith. What is promised, may, and must be believed. What is believed
without a promise, is not justly and duly believed. It is rather rashly and
audaciously presumed.

2. Meditate on Gods properties, such as these. 1. His supreme Sovereignty,
whereby he has an absolute command over all. 2. His Omnipotency, whereby he is
able to do any thing. 3. His All Sufficiency, whereby, as he has all treasures
in himself, so he can give what he will to whom he will. 4. His Omni-presence,
or being every where, whereby he takes notice of all things. 5. His
unsearchable wisdom, whereby he disposes all things to the best. 6. His
Free Grace, whereby he is moved for his own sake to do good to such as are
unworthy in themselves. 7. His Rich-mercy, whereby his bowels are stirred at
the miseries of his children, and moved to succor them. 8. His Truth, and
faithfulness, which makes him perform all his promises. 9. His perfect
Justice, which makes him judge and revenge those that unjustly wrong and vex
his Church. 10. His fierce Wrath and terror, which makes him a consuming fire
to his enemies. 11. His Immutability, which shows him to be such a God still
to us, as of old he was to his Church.

3. Fix the eye of thy faith on Jesus Christ thy Mediator, sitting at Gods
right hand, and making intercession for thee: by virtue of which intercession
thy person and prayers are made acceptable to God, so as, in much confidence
and steadfastness of faith thou may expect a gracious acceptance.

4. Call to mind Gods former works. How these are of use to strengthen faith
has been showed. 33.
before.

5. Wait and expect Gods leisure. Praescribe no time to him. Hab. 2. 3. See The
whole armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 17. Treat 2. Part. 7. 3, 8, 9.
There is an appointed time. This can not be prevented, nor shall be overslipt.
To be persuaded hereof, and answerably to wait patiently and contentedly, when
at first we are not heard, will much settle and strengthen faith. Hope, like a
good daughter, nourishes faith.

6. Let thy soul be so qualified when thou prayest, as thy faith be not
quailed with the evil disposition of the heart. The right qualification of the
soul consists much in the true intent, bent, and inclination thereof, when
in truth it intends that which is acceptable to God, and the bent and
inclination of the will is thereunto. For, howsoever our good intents,
endeavors, and performances are no causes of faith, yet, as effects and signs
they so quicken the spirit, as they make a man both more show forth, and better
use his faith then otherwise he could. And on the contrary, See The whole
Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18. Treat. 3 Part. 1.. 20.
sin damps the spirit: and a purpose of sinning is to faith, as water to
gunpowder. This he well understood, who said, Psalm. 66. 18.
If I regard iniquity in mine heart, the Lord will not hear me. Thus therefore
he professes to prepare himself, -- 26. 6.
I will wash my hands in innocence, so will I compass thine altar, O Lord.

7. When the spirit is heavy, and the soul perplexed; when doubting and fear
arises in thy heart; when that sweet inward sense, joy, and comfort whereby
faith uses to be supported, fails in thee; then let thy judgment and
understanding sustain thy faith: labor by evident arguments taken from Gods
promises, and other grounds of faith before mentioned, to convince thy soul,
that God hears thy prayer, accepts thy person in Christ, and will do that
which in his wisdom he sees to be most fit for thee. Reason and expostulate
the case with thy soul. Say as the Psalmist did in such a case, Why art thou
cast down, O my Psalm. 42. 11.
soul? and why art thou disquieted in me? Hope thou in God; for I shall yet
praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God. There are two props
to support our faith. One Two props of faith.
is an inward comfortable apprehension, a sweet sense and assured persuasion of
Gods fatherly love to us wrought by the spirit of comfort. The other is good
knowledge and understanding of the true grounds of faith, as Gods promises,
properties, and former dealings with others and our selves, the mediation of
Christ, etc. When the former fails men, by the latter they may support and
sustain themselves. This latter keeps many which want the former from
despair: For it makes them not to dare to distrust.

8. To all other means add prayer. Pray as he that said, Mar 9. 24.
Lord I believe: help my unbelief. Pray for the spirit of supplication. For,
there is Zac. 12. 10.
promise made thereof. Pray for faith, which is showed to be the life of that
gift. So did the Apostles, Lord increase our faith, Luke 17. 5. So did Christ
pray for Peter's faith, that it might not fail, Luke 22. 32. In praying for
faith, and for steadfastness thereof, Nisi sides data esset orare non posset.
Aug. Sixto Epist. 105.
pray in faith. For, where no faith is, there can be no effectual prayer.

. 44. Of continuing to pray.
II. See 42.
BY continuance in faithful prayer divine succor is continued. Thus much an
Angel from heaven testifies, when he says to Daniel, Dan. 10. 12.
From the first day that thou did set thy self to humble thy self before
thy God, thy words were heard. This, as it is true in regard of long holding
out, and continuing prayer at one time by reason of the need of present and
continued succor from God, so also is it true in regard of frequent and
constant returning unto prayer time after time. Exo. 30. 7, 8.
The morning and evening incense which was constantly to be offered every day
unto the Lord, prefigured as much. 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9
Paul being long buffeted by Satan, prayed thrice, that is, often, and all the
while found sufficient assistance. Acts 12. 5.
Prayer being made of the Church for Peter, he found assistance all the while
he was in prison, and deliverance out of prison. Luke 22. 42, 43, 44.
Christ continued to pray all the while he was in his agony, and returned to
prayer again and again, and found sufficient supportance, Heb. 5. 7.
He was heard in that he feared.

The delight which God takes in faithful prayer, the desire which he has to
give evidence of his fatherly acceptance of his childrens conformity to that
order which he has prescribed, his faithfulness in performing to the
uttermost his promises for hearing prayer, together with other motives arising
from his own goodness, are the causes of his ordering and disposing his
blessings according to his Saints prayers.

As. 27.
before we were taught by prayer to seek succor of God, so here we are
further directed for continuance of succor to continue in prayer. The whole
Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6, 18. Treat. 3. Part. 2. 98.
Of long continuance in prayer at one time: Ibid.. 118, 120.
Of praying every day, and keeping our set times for prayer: Of Ibid. 137, etc.
all perseverance in prayer, I have spoken elsewhere. It shall be sufficient here
to propound some cases whereunto such continuance, as is here in my text
implied, may be applied.

1. If any be in sight of an army as Moses here was, they must do as Moses here
did. Cases wherein prayer is to be continued.


2. If an army of land-souldiers, or a fleet of sea-souldiers be sent forth,
prayer more then ordinary must be daily continued for them, till we hear of
the issue.

3. If a Parliament, or any other solemn assembly do meet about weighty
matters, while that assembly continues, prayer for it must be continued.

4. If King, or other Magistrate of good note and name, of good use and proof:
if a faithful and powerful Minister; if parent, husband, wife, master, or any
to whom we are by any special relation bound, be in any danger by sickness or
otherwise, prayer is to be continued for them, till we see some issue.

5. If any by reason of the stone, gangrene, cancer, sistula, or any other
torturing and dangerous disease be under the Chyrurgians hand to be cut, or to
have any member cut off, prayer for Gods assistance and blessing is to be
continued.

6. If children be put forth to be trained up to any calling, or if we be about
any marriage for them, for continuance of gods blessing, continual prayer must
be made.

So in sundry other cases like unto these.

Intermitting, or ceasing prayer before it is meet, does often prove See The
whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18. Treat. 3. Part. 2.. 116.
very prejudicial. It was such an occasion that made Elisha the Prophet angry
with Ioash King of Israel for smiting but thrice with his arrows on the
ground. Moses vincere adversarium non potuit; nisi postquam stabilis in signo
allevatis jugiter manibus perseveravit. Cypr de Exhort. Martyr. cap 8.
Thou should (said he) have smitten five or six times: then had thou
smitten Syria till thou had consumed it. 2 King. 13. 19. Here in this place
we see that Moises could not overcome the enemy, till with steadfastness he
persevered holding up his hands with the rod of God in them.

. 45. Of fainting in prayer.
III. See 42.
SAints are prone to faint in their fervency of prayer. These phrases ( Psalm 69
3.
I am weary of my crying: mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. -- 73. 26.
My flesh and my heart fails. -- 77. 3.
I complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed. -- 42. 6, 11.
O my God, my soul is cast down within me. Why art thou cast down, O my
soul? why art thou disquieted in me?) These and many other such like phrases
used by Saints, give too great evidence of their pronenesse to faint. Mat. 14.
30.
Peter's sinking when he walked upon the waters. -- 8. 25, 26.
The Disciples fear when a storm arose. -- 26. 40, 41.
Their drowsinesse when Christ took them with him in the garden to pray, do
all manifest their pronesse to faint, to wax heavy, and dull.

Christ in that place gives this reason hereof, See The whole Armor of God, on
Ephesians. 6. 18. Treat. 3. Part. 5 134.
The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.

As this, it being a fruit of the flesh, an evidence of the corruption of our
nature, ministers much matter of humiliation, so, it being no other kind of
corruption but that which the best Saints are subject unto, it affords matter
also of consolation: so as we need not be overmuch dejected at our pronesse
thereto, seeing it is that condition that none (while they remain in the
flesh) are exempted from. And this is one use that we may make of such
weaknesses as are noted to be in such as the Holy Ghost registreth in the
Calendar of true Saints.

Yet are we not hereupon to sooth our selves too much in our weaknesses: but
rather this pronesse to faint should make us with our uttermost power Heb. 12.
12.
to lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees: to rouse up our
souls, and to quicken our spirits when we go to prayer. Directions hereunto
have been given The Whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18. Treat. 3. Part 5.. 136.
Periculum est si sit oralio tepida, and non ex viva affectione procedens. In
ascensu languescit, and deficit eo quod non habet vigorem. Bern in Quadragess,
Sermon 4
elsewhere. There is danger if prayer be cold. It faints and fails in the
ascent thereof, because it has no vigor.

. 46. Of the prejudice of failing in prayer.
IIII. Interdum graviter impeditur oration a pusittanimitate spiritus. Bern Ioc,
citat.
INtermission of faithful and servent prayer often proves very prejudicial.
Here it was an occasion of the enemies prevailing against his Church. It
endangered Peter's life, (Mat. 14. 30.) for it was the cause of his sinking in
the water. In this kind of fainting may be reckoned 1 Samuel 10. 8. -- 13 8, etc.
Saul's preventing the time that Samuel had appointed to come to him: which cost
him his kingdom: and that wearisomnesse which is taxed in the Jews that said,
Am. 8. 5.
when will the New-Moones and Sabbaths be gone? and said of the services which
they performed to the Lord, Mal. 1. 13.
Behold what a weariness it is. Of a faint spirit which Iam. 1. 627.
the Apostle opposes to faith, he says, Let not that man think that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord.

1. To intermit faithful prayer while the occasion remains, is to intermit
the means whereby the blessing desired is to be obtained. It is as if (before
the battle be ended) soldiers should cease to fight, or runners in a race
fall down and lie still, before they be come to the goal.

2. By such fainting and intermitting prayer, as the weakness of flesh in man
is manifested, so the power, truth, wisdom, goodness, and other divine
properties are impeached. How then can it be thought but that much prejudice
must needs come to such men thereby.

The reason why men's prayers do in the issue prove fruitless, Information in
the cause of fruitless prayers.
may hence be gathered. They faint, they fail, they intermit, they give over
praying before that for which they pray be accomplished. When any judgment
public or private is beginning, or is feared, as plague, famine, sword,
restraint of liberty, or the like, hearty, earnest, extraordinary prayer is often
made, yea and fasting added thereto: but if God seem to tarry long before he
remove that judgment, men think it in vain still to wait, (as he who said, 2
King. 6. 33.
What should I wait for the Lord any longer?) and so loose the fruit of their
former prayers, by not following them, and continuing to hold out till the time
appointed of the Lord. The like may be said of prayer for obtaining special
blessings, given over.

How fitly now may that general encouragement of the Apostle, ( Gal. 6. 9. See
The whole Armor of God, on Ephesians 6. 13. Treat. 1. Part 4 12.
let us not be weary of well doing) yea and the reason thereof (for in due time
we shall reap if we faint not) be applied to prayer. There is nothing
whereunto continuance and perseverance is more requisite then prayer. Of the
benefit of perseverance in prayer we spoke 44. Necessitatibus implicatus or a
fortiter and dic Deo quod habes in Psalmo, In necessitatibus meis erue me. Aug.
Bonifac. Epist. 70.
before. Here we see the prejudice of the contrary. If therefore desire of
good, or fear of evil be motives of force, there are motives of force to
provoke us to all perseverance, and in holding out to be fervent. Therefore
when thou art in straits be ardent, and instant in prayer, and say to God as
thou art taught, (Psalm. 25. 17.) O bring thou me out of my distresses.

. 47. Of the uncertainty of war.
V. See. 42.
War is wavering. Sundry proverbiall sentences are used in Scripture which
give evidence hereto: as, 2 Samuel 11 25.
The sword devoureth one as well as another. 1 King. 20. 11
Let not him that girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that puts it
off. Eccl. 9. 11.
The battle is not to the strong. Time and chance happens to all. Pro. 21.
31.
The horse is prepared against the day of battle: but safety (namely in
battle, or victory) is of the Lord. Ier. 50. 23.
How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken? 1 Samuel 15. 33.
As thy sword has made women childlesse, so shall thy mother be childlesse
among women. Judge. 1. 7.
As I have done, so God has requited me. Take for instance the Kings that upon
their conquest over Sodom and Gomorrah were overthrown by Abram, Genesis 14. 11,
15. And the Amalakites that sacked Ziklag and were surprised by David, 1 Samuel
30. 1, 17. All ages have given woeful demonstrations hereof. I will (in that
innumerable variety of instances which might be produced, insist only on such
as show how the Church and people of God have had the worst in battle. Ios. 7.
4.
Victorious Joshua and his army not only here, but after he began to conquer
Canaan, fled before their enemies. Judge. 20. 21, 23
The eleven Tribes were twice put to the worst by the Benjamites, and after
that the Benjamites utterly vanquished by them. Judge. 3, etc.
The Israelites were often overthrown by their enemies in the Judges time, and
in the Kings time. Valorous David was forced to fly from 1 Samuel 21. 10.
Saul, and from 2 Samuel 15. 14
Absalom. 1 Samuel 30 1.
David's city was spoiled and burnt by the Amalakites. 2 Chro. 25. 11 22.
Amaziah that overthrew the Edomites was soon after overthrown by Ioash King
of Israel. Not to insist on any more particulars, The manifold complaints of
the Church in this case give further evidence to the truth thereof. They are
such as these, Psalm. 44. 7, etc
Thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that hated us.
But thou have cast off and put us to shame, and go not forth with our
armies: Thou make us to turn our backs to the enemy, etc. There are many
more like these thorowout the Scripture. The heathen by their experimental
Levissimus saepe casus ex victo victorem, ex victore victum exercitum reddit.
10. vian. de bello Neopolit.
observations were moved to acknowledge as much.

True it is that wars are ordered by God: so as this uncertainty of war is
not without him. And yet is it not through any neglect or impotency in him. Our
God is not like the Gods of the Heathen, who by such as took them for gods are
accounted oftentimes unable to help in battle: yea -- antiquo memores de
vulncre poenas Exigit alma Venus -- Ovid. Metamorph lib. 14. De Mart a Diomede
vulnerato. Homerus Iliad. b (...). 1 Samuel 3. 18. 2 Samuel 15. 25.
when they came themselves to succor such as they favored, they are said to
be wounded. But our God is far from any such impotency. He is able at all
times to make whom he will victorious. Only in his wisdom he sees it meet
sometimes to suffer enemies to have the better over his people. Though we could
see no reason why he should suffer enemies to prevail, yet ought we to lay our
hands upon our mouth, and not dare to impeach his power, wisdom, justice,
truth, or any other of his infinite, excellent properties; but rather to say as
good old Elie did, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And as
David, If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again.
But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee, Here I am; let him do to me as
seems good to him. Yet in Scripture many weighty reasons are implied, to
demonstrate to us the equity of Gods providence in this particular. Some of
these reasons are such as these that follow.

1. To cause his Church and people more narrowly and Why God suffers enemies
to prevail over his Church.
thoroughly to search themselves. For many evils many times are so closely
conveyed and concealed, as unless God by some visible judgment force men to
search it out, it may lie and fester, and so cause the greater mischief. This
was the chief cause that moved God so to leave Joshua and his army, Ios 7. 10,
etc.
as they fled before the men of Ai,

2. To punish some scandalous sin whereby the profession of godliness is
slandered. This reason God himself renders 2 Samuel 12. 10.
of those crosses which by the sword befell David. Thus did God punish the
Israelites for their presumption. Number. 14. 44.


3. To bring people to sound and solemn repentance. Judge. 20 26.
This fruit was manifested in the eleven Tribes, after they had been twice
foiled by the Benjamites.

4. To show that victory comes not merely from Judge. 20. 17. etc
man's preparation. For, after that the foresaid eleven Tribes had lost at one
time two and twenty thousand men, and at another time eighteen thousand, then
God gave them the victory.

5. To turn the boasting of enemies to their greater shame and damage: as
that advantage which the Philistims got against Sampson did. Read for this
purpose Isa. 10. 5, etc.
the just insultations over the proud King of Assyria.

6. To give evidence of his wisdom and power in casting down and raising up
again; according to that which 1 Samuel 2. 6, 7.
is said of him, The Lord kills, and makes alive: he brings down to the
grave, and brings up: he brings low and lifts up. On this ground, when
David was forced out of his native country, and the city which he had in a
strange country was spoiled and burnt by enemies, and his own -- 30. 6.
soldiers spoke of stoning him, he encouraged himself in the Lord his God.

7. To make men more fervently, instantly, and constantly to call upon God: as
Moses here did. For observing that when his hands fell, Amalek prevailed, he
used all the help he could to keep his hands up and steady, as is noted in
the next verse.

Good ground of hope and comfort is hereby ministered to Hope to such as are
overcome.
such as sometimes have the worst in war, and against whom enemies have
prevailed, that the stream may turn, that they who are overthrown may rise
again, and the conquered prove conquerers. For, the Lord, who is the orderer
and disposer of the success of war ever remains the same, as wise to know
when to suffer Amalek, and when Israel to prevail, as able to give victory to
the conquered, as ready to hear the cries of those that are overthrown, and
to receive such as thereby are brought to renew their repentance, as careful
of his own honor, as observant of enemies insultations, as ever he was. Let
us wisely observe the ends of Gods permission in this case, (whereof some are
noted) and answerably make use thereof. These times give just occasion
Mis-judge not such as are vanquished.
to make a wise application of this point. Enemies as hateful to God as Amalek
was, have in many places had the upper hand of such as have had as true notes
of the true Church as Israel had. What then? shall we hereupon impeach God of
injustice, or make question of the truth of their religion, or, so load them
with sin, as if they were the greatest sinners of all. Far be that from us.

1. Concerning God, we ought not to suffer a thought to arise in our minds,
derogatory to his justice: but if any such do begin to rise, presently to quash
and suppress them. God in justice may make Idolaters his rod (as he did the
Heathen, Isa. 10. 5.) to punish those that are of the true Religion. But after
the rod is thus used, to what end is it but to be cast into the fire?

2. Concerning the difference of religion betwixt Protestants and Papists, we
are not to judge of it by event and success in war. There are other more
sure evidences grounded on Gods Word, which give such demonstrations of the
truth of the one, and falsehood of the other, as we may pawn life, soul, and
eternal salvation, upon the truth of that which we profess: and renounce
salvation, if Popery be the means of attaining thereto.

3. Concerning their sins, whether they be more or greater then the sins of
others that are of the same profession, but not so trampled upon as they, we
are to leave to the determination of the highest Judge. The Lord has given us
a wise caveat in this case, Luke 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Let us believe and hope the best; and do as Moses here did, be more earnest in
prayer for them, Judge. 20. 26. Ios. 7. 6, etc. Number. 21. 2.

To conclude, when the cause of war is just, the danger or conquest of a
Christian is to be balanced by the affection of the heart, not by the issue of
war. The issue of the combat can not be ill where the cause of the combatant
is good: as the Ex cordis affectu non belli eventu pensatur vel periculum, vel
victoria Christiani. Si bona suerit causa pugnantis, pugnae exitus malus esse
non peterit: sicut nec bonus judicabitur finis, ubi causa non bona, and
intentio non recta praecesserit. Si in voluntate alterum occidendi, te potius
occidi contigerit, moreris homicida, Quod si praeval^s, and voluntate superandi
vel vindicandi forte occidis hominem, vivis bomicida. Non autem expedit sive
vivo sive mortuo, sive victori, sive victo esse homicidam. Infoelix victoria,
quae superans hominem, succumbis vitio. Bern, ad Mil. Te^p. c. 1
issue may not be accounted good, when a good cause and right intention has
not gone before. If with a mind of slaying men thou art killed, thou die a
murderer. But if thou prevailest, and in desire of conquest and revenge thou
slayest another, thou live a murderer. But it becomes not a Christian,
whether he live or die, be a conqueror, or be conquered, to be a murderer.
Unhappy is that victory where a conqueror of man is conquered by sin.

. 48. Of the interpretation and resolution of the twelfth Verse.
EXODUS XVII. XII. But Moses hands were heavy, and they took a stone and put it
under him, and he sat thereon: and Aaron and Hur staid up his hands, the one
on the one side, and the other on the other side, and his hands were steady
unto the going down of the sun.
THe performance of Moses promise generally propounded in the tenth verse, is
here more distinctly exemplified. Where first the cause of Moses letting down
his hands (whereof Verse. 11.
before) is thus expressed, Moses hands were heavy. Verse. 11.
When he spoke of holding up, he used the singular number, hand: but here
making mention of his heaviness, he uses the plural number, hands: whereby
we are given to understand that first Moses lift up one hand, and that waxing
weary, he took the rod in the other hand, and lift up that: and so continued to
change from hand to hand, til both hands were weary. The wearines of Moses
hands is set out by the heavines of them. For, if a man's hand be held up long,
and steddily without stirring, it will wax numne by reason of want of blood,
and coldness of that blood which is. That spirit which quickneth the members
of a man's body is in the blood: blood failing, or waxing cold, the member for
want of spirit, and the vigor thereof, becomes heavy, (as by experience we may
observe in dead corpse:) and heaviness of a man's hands makes him weary in
holding them up. Weariness then (which is an humane infirmity) was the cause
of Moses letting down his hands: whereby, as by an outward sign, the weakness
of his faith, and fainting of his soul and spirit is set out: as was noted 42.
before.

To help Moses infirmity, Aaron and Hur finding a great stone (the best means
that in that place they could find for Moses ease) they bring it to the place
where he stood, and so set it as he might conveniently sit upon it, and
continue the better to hold up the rod of God: the stone was like one of them
which Joshua caused to be set in Jordan, a massy Ios. 4. 9.
stone. The same title is given to them and this.

That which some allege, as the end of laying this stone (...)
by Moses, that he might rest his elbow on it, can not well stand with this
clause following in the text, and he sat thereon.

As for means to settle his hand, and to make it the more steady, it is added,
And Aaron and Hur staid up his hands. They put their hands under his elbow, and
by their arms, the one on the one side, the other on the other side, kept his
hands that they could not sway aside one way or other.

By this external assistance, and supportance of Moses hands in regard of his
bodily weakness, their joining of spirits with his, their mutual faithful
prayers are signified.

Such help did the forementioned assistance bring to Moses, as his hands
which were before so heavy and feeble as he was forced to let them fall,
remained steady: and that not for an hour or two, but all the day, even until
the going down of the sun: which implies, that his spirit was so revived by
their mutual and joint prayers, as with much alacrity, and great ardency he
continued to pray all the day long.

Here then is declared, The benefit of mutual prayer.

More distinctly here is offered to our consideration, 1. The Need thereof. The
Help thereof.


The Need is 1. Expressed, in these words, Moses hands were heavy. 2.
Exemplified, by the means used to supply that Need.


The Means were of two sorts. 1. One for his Body. 2. Another for his Hand.


The Means for his body was a stone.

In setting down hereof is noted 1. How it was prepared. 2. How it was used.


The Preparation is noted in two actions. 1. They took a stone. 2. They put it
under him.


The use of it is in this phrase, He sat thereon.

In setting down the means for his hand, is showed, 1. What was done. Aaron
and Hur staid up his hands. 2. How it was done. The one on the one side, the
other on the other.


The help received hereby was perseverance, and that so long as was need. Here
then we have, 1. The vigor which Moses received. His hands were steady. 2. The
continuance thereof. Until the going down of the sun.


The weakness here manifested in Moses gives instance, that,

The best Saints are subject to dullness in pious duties. Hereof before in. 45.

The means used to support him in this his weakness, and the benefit received
thereby is here especially to be insisted upon.

Of the Persons here assistant to Moses, which were Aaron and Hur, sufficient
has been spoken,. 38, 39, 40.

1. The notice and care that Aaron and Hur took of, and about Moses weakness,
gives proof, that, I. Due consideration is to be taken of one another
weakness.


2. The means which they use in taking a stone, and putting it under him,
shows, that, II. All good means must be used to support our brothers
weakness.


3. Moses manner of using the means ( he sat upon the stone) being a gesture
not very proper to prayer, yields example, that, III. Man's weakness gains
dispensation for circumstances in divine matters.


4. The Action of Aaron and Hur, who stayed up Moses hands, affords evidence,
that, IIII. We must be are one another burdens.


5. The Manner of doing it, One on the one side, the other on the other side,
implies, that, V. Union of spirits is very helpful.


6. The event following hereupon, that Moses hands were steady, declares, that,
VI. The weak are strengthened by aid from others.


7. The continuance of all that was done, until the going down of the sun, as
it amplifieth the point before mentioned of the strength which they that faint
may receive by aid from others, so it gives demonstration, that, VII. If need
require prayer must be long continued.


Hereof read The whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18. Treat. 3. Part. 2.. 98. and
Part. 6.. 137, etc.

. 49. Of considering others weakness.
I. See. 48.
DVe consideration is to be taken of one another weakness. Many are the
exhortations of Scripture tending hereunto, such as these, Phil. 2. 4.
Look every man also on the things of others. Heb. 10. 24.
Let us consider one another, etc.

The pitiful aspect which the Luke 10. 30.
Samaritan cast upon the wounded man commended by the Lord, and the Priests and
Levites unmercifull passing by, reproved in the parable, do further give good
evidence to the equity of the duty.

Notice and consideration of our brothers need is the ground of that compassion
which may be wrought in our bowels, whereby we are moved to afford the best
succor that we can. It is often noted of Christ that Mat. 14. 14. Luke 7 13.
he saw such and such, and had compassion on them. Ezekiel. 16. 6.
Yea God himself thus expresses the occasion of that compassion which he
showed to his Church, When I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted, etc. God
here takes upon him the affection of man, whereby he shows what may in man
move compassion.

O that men would be watchful one over another, to observe wherein their
brother faints or fails, and afford what help and succor they can, as
Abishai did to David, 2 Samuel 21. 15, 16, 17. Herein we should prove as Gods one
to another. Thus might Governors do much good to their Subjects, and Subjects
again to their Governors: So Ministers to their People, and People to their
Ministers: So, Husbands and Wives, Neighbors and Neighbors, Friends and
Friends, yea all of all sorts. We are all one flesh, mutual members of one and
the same body. Let us therefore be of like affection one to another, and as
ready to help and succor each other, as one member is to succor another.
Howsoever Cain most un-brotherly, yea very butcherly said, Am I my brothers
keeper? yet he ought to have been his brothers keeper, as all of us are, and
therefore as keepers of Genesis 4. 9.
one another, we ought to consider one another.

. 50. Of supporting others weakness.
II. See. 48.
ALL good means must be used to support our brothers weakness. To this tend
such admonitions as these. Isa. 35. 3. 1 These. 5. 14.
Strengthen ye the weak hands, and comfort the feeble knees. Comfort the
feeble minded, support the weak. Act. 20. 35. (...), etc.
Hereunto the Apostle puts a must, which imports a necessity, ye ought (or ye
must) support the weak. The Greek word translated, support, is often used for
(...). Plut. in Fab.
under-propping a thing ready to fall: and Luke 1. 54. Vide Bezoe annot.
majores in hunc loc and in Act. 20. 35.
for taking one that is weak by the hand to raise him up. A fit Metaphor for
the point in hand. That which is noted of Christ's taking by the hand such as
were Mar. 1. 31.
weak, Mat. 14. 31.
ready to sink, yea, and Mar. 5. 41.
dead, when he meant to raise them, gives evidence of the equity of the
forementioned duty. God himself does hereby testify that goodness which is
in him, and that care which he takes of men in their weakness: for, says he,
Ezekiel. 34 16.
I will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen ohat which was sick.
Hereupon his people are encouraged in their weakness to seek succor of him:
Hos. 6. 1, 2.
Come, say they, Let us return unto the Lord: for he will heal us, He will
bind us up, he will revive us, He will raise us up. In this respect the Spirit
of God has this title Ioh. 14. 26.
Comforter, by a kind of property given him. For our better stability, Psalm 91.
11.
God has given his Angels charge over us to keep us, etc. If thus the Father,
Son, Holy Ghost, and holy Angels be so tender over us, as in our weakness to
support us, should not we use all the good means we can to succor and support
one another in our weaknesses?

Many motives there be to press this point. As, Motives to succor one another.


1. That propinquity which is betwixt children of men, who are all one flesh.
Hide not therefore thy self from thine own flesh, Isa. 58. 7.

2. That Condition wherein all are, and whereby they are Considerare debemus,
quod aegritudinem sive animae, sive corporis, quam in homine alio videmus,
etiam nos habere possumus. Hoc ergo exhibe amus, etc. Aug. deverb. Apost. Sermon.
21.
subject to such necessities, as may need others succor. The Apostle
therefore, where he presses this duty of restoring others, infers this
motive, Considering thy self, least thou also be tempted, Gal. 6. 1.

3. That humanity which becomes our nature, whereby we give evidence that there
are such bowels in us as are moved at others necessities. Christ therefore
took unto himself our nature, that he might give evidence thereby that he was
merciful, Heb. 2. 17. It is inhumanity not to be touched with others needs.

4. That mercy which is required to be showed to asses and oxen, which, lying
under their burdens are to be helped up. And are not men more worthy then asses
or oxen? Exo. 23. 5. Deu. 22. 4.

5. That Sympathy which is in other creatures. Even unreasonable creatures are
ready to run at the cry of such as are of their own kind. Should reasonable
men have less sympathy then unreasonable beasts? Lam. 4. 3.

6. That efficacy of regeneration, which of Wolves, Leopards, Lions Bears,
Aspes and Cockatrices, makes Calves, Lambs, Kids, and Children, Isa. 11. 6,
etc.

7. That pity and compassion, that readiness and forwardness that is in God
to succor and support us in all our weaknesses, (whereof before.) Be ye
therefore followers of God. Be ye merciful as your father is merciful, Ephesians.
5. 1. Luke 6. 36.

By our willingness and readiness to succor such as need our succor, we
gain assurance and give evidence that our corrupt nature is altered.

Do they well consider the foresaid Propinquity or Necessity Reproof of such
as neglect the weak and ueedy.
whereunto themselves are subject, or common Humanity, or that Mercy which
should be showed to beasts, or have they any natural Sympathy, or good
evidence of their Regeneration, or can they be thought to be children of God
like to him, who see their brother fall or faint, or through infirmity need
succor and supportance, and yet be no whit moved thereat, nor use any means,
nor afford any help to sustain and support him? Let such consider the end of
Luke 16. 21, etc.
Dives, and the Mat. 25. 41, etc.
doom denounced against those that omitted duties of courtesy, humanity, and
charity. Iam. 2. 13. Derision and oppression of the weak.
For he shall have judgment without mercy that has showed no mercy.

What then may be thought of them that put a stumbling block before the weak
to make them fall: or being fallen, deride and scorn them? The law implies
that there is no fear of God in such: for, where it expressly says, Thou shall
not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind, Lev. 19. 14.
it adds, but shall fear thy God, and thereby implies, that a true fear of
God will keep men from such inhumanity. This is noted to be the cause of the
fearful judgments that fell upon Obad 10, etc.
Edom, and Icr. 48. 27.
Moab; their deriding of Israel in her affiction, and oppressing her when she
was pressed down. Genesis 9. 22, etc
Remember Cham. Vrgere jacentes, aut praecipitantes impellere certe est
inhumanum. Cic. pro. C Rab. Post.
The very Heathen counted it an inhumane thing to trample upon those that were
thrown down: and to thrust on those that were tumbling down headlong.

Exhortation to succor the weak. Col. 3. 12.
Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies,
kindness, etc. As you see the weakness of a brother, do what you can to
support him. If he be weary, and cannot stand so long as he should, let him
have something to sit thereon, as Aaron and Hur here did to Moses. And in other
cases, (as Job was to the unspeakable comfort of his soul when Satan by
himself and others did what he could to shake his faith, and to deprive him of
all comfort in his God) be Job 29. 15, 16.
eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, a father to the poor, etc. Thus, as ye
do that which is acceptable to God, and profitable to your brother, so also
that which may be very available to your selves. Mat. 7. 2.
For, with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again. On these and
such like grounds says the Lord, Mat. 5. 7.
Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Men will be ready on
all occasions to show mercy to such. Thus Ruth who was as a staff to her old
mother in law, found Boaz to be as a staff to her: and he renders this reason
of the kindness he showed to her, Rut. 2. 11.
It has fully been showed me all that thou have done to thy mother in law
since the death of thine husband. But, if men should forget, or not respect the
kindness and goodness that is showed to such as are in need, God will
assuredly recompense it: as he recompensed the kindness which Joseph showed to
Pharoahs Butler, Genesis 40. 23.
and which David showed to Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 10.
though the one was forgotten, and the other not respected. With the merciful
God will show himself merciful. Psalm. 18. 25.


. 51. Of that dispensation which is yielded to man in divine matters.
III. See 48.
Man's weakness gains dispensation for circumstances in divine matters. Thus
Genesis 47. 31.
Jacob being old and weak worshipped God in his bed, manifested by his bowing
of himself upon the beds head, and was therein accepted. For, it is said that
he did it Heb. 11. 21.
in faith. Thus the Ios. 5. 5.
Israelites all the while they were in the wilderness ( Number. 9. 17.
Where they were on a sudden, whenever the cloud arose, to remove from place
to place) had a dispensation for circumcision. Thus 1 Samuel 21. 6.
David in his need had a dispensation to eat the shewbread: And -- 1. 22.
Hannah to tarry at home, and not to go to the Temple while she gave her child
suck. But to cease from reckoning up more particular instances, this general
manifestation of Gods mind concerning mercy, (g I desire Hos. 6. 6. Mat. 12. 7.
Per hoc ubi scriptum est, misericordiam magis volo quam sacrificium, nihil
aliud quam sacrificio sacrificium praelatum oportet intelligi: quoniam illud
quod ab hominibus appellatur sacrificium, signum est very sacrificij. Porro
autem misericordia verum sacrificium est. Aug. de Civ. Dei. l, 20. c. 5.
mercy and not sacrifice) gives good warrant for the foresaid dispensation. For
by sacrifice he means external rites and ordinances, wherein and whereby
worship is performed to God: by mercy, such substantial duties as tend to man's
good. Thus he prefers sacrifice to sacrifice. Sacrifice consisting on external
rites, to sacrifice of substantial duties: which are to do good, and to show
mercy. With such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13. 16. These therefore
are the true sacrifices.

All external rites are ordained especially for man's help and good. If
therefore they stand in opposition to it, or hinder it, they fail of their
maine end, and so are not of that use for which they are ordained: and
thereupon give place, and have a dispensation to be omitted.

Ob. This is to prefer the second Table before the first, and consequently
man before God.

Answ. Nothing less. For, the substance of the first Table gives not place to
the substance of the second. but the circumstance of the first to the substance
of the second. Indeed if the substance of each Table should come in opposition,
the second Table should give place. Instance Abraham's readiness to sacrifice his
son at Gods command. (Genesis 22. 2, etc.) For, obedience to Gods express
charge is of the substance of the first Table. Saul therefore in sparing Agag,
though it might seem to be a work of mercy, sinned. For, this indeed is to
prefer man before God, 1 Samuel 15. 23.

The pretense which hypocrites make of piety in a diligent Hypocrites taxed.
observation of the external rites appertaining thereto, and yet in the mean
while regard neither mercy nor justice, is hereby manifested to be a very vain
pretense. Christ denounces a woe against such as devour widows houses, and
for a pretense make long prayers, Mat. 23. 14. The thousands of rams, and
ten-thousands of rivers of oil offered by such hypocrites are nothing in Gods
sight. To do justly, and to love mercy is that which the Lord requires, and
which is much more acceptable to him, Mic. 6. 7, 8.

For our parts, let it be our care first to put difference betwixt circumstance
and substance: and then to prefer this to that. For this end we must labor
to have our understanding well enlightened by Gods Word, and our hearts filled
with an holy fear of God, and true love of man. Thus shall we discern what is
to be preferred before other, and so wisely order the things we do, as our
brother may be pleasured, our selves not prejudiced, and God best pleased. It
is an evidence of Gods great and good respect to man, thus to give a
dispensation in matters concerning himself, for man's good. As occasion is
offered either in regard of our own or others need, let us wisely make use
thereof. God would have us use that liberty which in his goodness and wisdom
he is pleased to grant us. Thus may sick persons pray in their bed, (Isa. 38.
2.) or if they cannot themselves pray, have others to pray for them, (Iam. 5.
14.) and weak persons not well able to kneel, pray sitting, as here Moses
did: and they that cannot come to Church, have the benefit of Gods ordinances
at home.

. 52. Of bearing one another burden.
IIII. See. 48.
WE must bear one another burden. Gal. 6. 2.
The Apostle gives this in express charge to Christians: and presses it by
that Romans 12. 15.
sympathy which becomes them, manifested by weeping with them that weep: and
Heb. 13. 3.
by remembering them that are in bands as bound with them, etc And to show that
he pressed on others no more then he practiced himself, thus he professes, 1
Cor. 9. 19, etc.
I have made my self servant to all. Unto the Jew I became as a Jew: to them
that are under the Law, as under the law: to them that are without law, as
without law: To the weak became I as weak: I am made all things to all men
that I might by all means save some. And again, 2 Cor. 11. 28, 29.
There comes upon me daily the care of all the Churches. Who is weak and I
am not weak? who is offended and I burn not? Though this were a worthy
pattern surpassing all other mere men that ever I heard of, yet is it far
surpassed by him of whom it is said, Isa. 53. 4. Dilectionis officium est,
invicem onera portare. Aug. de verb Apost. Sermon. 21 Leo incidit in plagas;
Rugire licet: exire non licet. Mus repit in cuniculos laqueorum: nodos
corrodit: Leo e plagis evadit. Aesop. Fab 14. Cum in hac vita sumut, onera
nostra invicem portemus, ut adeam quae caret omni onere pervenire possemus.
Aug. loc citat.
Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, etc.

1. This is an especial fruit of love, which we all owe one to another, Ephesians.
4. 2. Romans 13. 8.

2. It is such a work of charity as we our selves may stand in need of, Gal. 6.
1. A lion may stand in need of the help of a mouse to gnaw asunder the cord
wherewith he is hampered. Moses a worthy one, here needs the supportance of
others.

3. It is such a work of charity as may raise men ready to fall, and so help
them in the way that leads to eternal life, and bring them thither where
none shall be pressed with any burden at all.

4. Hereby as by a means we our selves may attain to that life. For, God
himself is ready to ease those of all their burdens, even of those burdens
that would press them down to hell, whom he observes to be forward in easing
their brethren of their burdens. Thus will that of Christ be verified, Blessed
are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5. 7.

That this duty may be the better performed, due consideration is to be taken
of one another weakness, whereof before,. 49.

. 53. Of union of spirits.
V.. 48.
Union of spirits is very helpful. This is true of all things wherein men have
occasion to deal together. As Councellers of State in matters of State: Judges
in matters of justice and equity: Ministers in matters of religion: Physicians
in physic for men's bodies: Artizens in matters of their trades: and so others
in other affairs: but especially Believers in the holy and heavenly duty of
prayer. This is it which in this place is especially intended. For mutual
help herein, Christians in the Primitive Church, even in the first and best
times thereof, are said to continue Act. 2 46. (...) of (...) similis, vel
idom: and (...) animus. Vnanimiter, concorditer: uno animo, uno cord.
daily with one accord in the Temple. The Temple was the house of prayer. There
therefore they prayed, and that with one accord: that is, with one spirit, one
mind, and one heart. Thus it is again said, Act. 4. 24.
that they lift up their voice with one accord: their spirits were joined
together, and as one spirit in that powerful prayer which they made. When many
so consent together, in the Hebrew dialect they are said to be Judge. 20. 1. Neh
8. 1. (...) tanquam vir unus. i unanimi consensu.
as one man: because their minds did so consent, as if they had not been the
minds of many, but the mind of one man. Daniel well knew the benefit of union
of spirits in prayer, Dan. 2. 17. So Ester 4. 16. Joel 2. 16.

1. Union of spirits is like the gathering together of many fagots, which make
a fire the more fierce: or like much powder laid together, which sends forth a
bullet much further then otherwise it would fly. Thus many spirits united make
prayer much more fervent, and force it the higher, even as high as God is. To
cry mightily unto God, the King of Nineveh caused all his people with one
accord to pray Ion. 2. 8. When the Christians prayed with one accord, the place
was shaken where they were assembled together (Act. 4. 24, 31.) to show the
spiritual violence of such prayer.

2. Prayer is as sweet incense, Psalm. 141. 2. Union of spirits therein, is as
the mixing of many sweet spices, which cause the more fragrant savor. Yea,
this union is as an harmony of many voices or instruments, which make the
music much more melodious. Mat. 18. 19. (...) De consensu vocis, seu soni
(...) proprie dicitur.
The word whereby the Evangelist sets out consent in prayer, implies as
much.

3. Union of spirits is an especial means to quicken and sharpen one another
spirits; as iron sharpneth iron, Prove. 27. 17, 19.

Strong motives these are to frequent public assemblies; to bring all the
family together to prayer: for husbands and wives to join together: so
friends, etc.

. 54. Of that stability which the weak may receive by others supportance.
VI. See. 48.
THe weak are strengthened by aid from others. The words which are used in
exhortations to that duty of succouring the weak import as much, which are
such as these, Isa 35 3.
strengthen, Act. 20. 35.
support, 1 These. 5. 14.
comfort, Gal. 6. 1.
restore, etc. If the weak could not by others supportance be strengthened,
supported, comforted, restored, in vain were those duties pressed. But as Genesis
45. 27.
the spirit of Jacob revived when he heard that Joseph lived, as 1 These. 3. 7.
Paul was comforted by the good tidings which Timotheus brought him of the
Thessalonians faith, and as Dan. 10. 19.
Daniel was strengthened by the Angels encouragement, so other weak ones by
such means as have been afforded them. 2 King. 5. 13.
Naaman began to have some seed of faith by his servants seasonable admonition.
1 Samuel 19. 7. -- 20. 2. -- 23 16.
David was comforted by Ionathans often coming to him. 2 Chro. 32. 8.
Hezekiahs people rested themselves on the comfortable words that he spoke to
them. Ezr. 5. 1, 2. Hag 1. 14.
Zerubbabel and the Jews with him were greatly encouraged by the prophesies of
Haggai and Zechariah. Neh. 2. 18.
And their posterity strengthened their hands to build the city by Nehemiahs
coming to them, and encouraging them. Mat. 8. 27. -- 14 27. -- 17. 7. Luke 24.
52. Ioh. 20. 20. -- 21. 7.
Often were the Disciples after great fear much comforted by Christ's presence
and consolatory speeches.

God, who has enjoined this means of helping and supporting one another, will
give his blessing thereunto when it is rightly used: and what God blesses
shall be effectual to that whereunto it is used: so as in faith we may expect a
good issue from our endeavors in this kind.

As this effect which uses to arise from that mutual help and succor that is
offered to such as are weak, aggravateth their inhumanity who refuse or
neglect to do what they might for strengthening the weak, and establishing the
feeble, (for, if through want of help they fall and perish, they, who might
have restored and set them up, make themselves accessory to their destruction;)
so it is a very forcible motive to provoke us with all care, diligence, and
good conscience to perform the fore named duties of. 48.
considering our brothers weakness, of 49.
using all good means to support the same, yea and of. 51. Cervi cum fretum
transeunt sic se ordinant ut onera capitum suorum quae gestant in cornibus,
super invicem portent, ita ut posterior super anteriorem cervice porrecta caput
collocet. Et quia necesse est unum esse qui caeteros praecedens, non antese
habeat cui caput inclinet, vicibus dicuntur id agere etc. (...) fretum
transcunt, etc. Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 21
putting under our own shoulders, and bearing his burden. For our labor
herein will not be lost. As Moses was here enabled by Aaron and Hur well to do
that which of himself he could not have done so well, so may thou whosoever
expect a blessing in that which thou do answerable to thine endeavor: and
also in they weakness find like help from others. It is reported of Hearts, that
by ones bearing up another head, which is by reason of their horns so heavy,
as it would drown them in the sea, they are enabled safely to swim over the
sea, till they come to firm land. For, they use so to dispose themselves, as
the latter lays his head on the formers hind parts. And because it is
necessary that one of them be first, that first after he has some while led
the rest, comes behind all: and in like manner do the rest in their course.
Thus every one as he is wearied by swimming before, is refreshed by coming
behind, and resting on another. Thus may Christians refresh the wearied.

. 55. Of the meaning and doctrines of the thirteenth Verse.
EXODUS XVII. XIII. And Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with the edge
of the sword.
See. 1,
THe success of all before noted is in this verse set down. It was a glorious
Conquest.

The Conqueror is here said to be the forementioned Joshua. He being the
General of the victorious army, the victory is by a Synechdoche, attributed to
him. The General is put for the whole army under his command: as it uses in
other places of holy writ, yea and in other Historiographers to be.

The word ( (...) et dejecit. (...)
discomfited) whereby the victory is expressed, signifies so to overthrow one
as he is not able to rise again. The contrivit. Chald. and Sir. ponunt (...)
pro (...)
Hebrews do set out the meaning of it by a word that signifies to break to
pieces. (...) fugavit.
The Greek LXX turn it by a word that signifies to put to flight.

The enemies subdued are comprised under this collective word Amalek, whereof 2.
before. By his people, are meant such as took part with the King, or chief
heads of the Amalakites: whether they were of the same or another stock. This
clause, His people, is added to show that they who had any hand in his unjust
war, had their share in the just vengeance.

The instrument wherewith they were punished is here said to be the edge of the
sword, or word for word, (...)
the mouth of the sword. For as a mouth devoureth that which enters into it,
so a sword by the sharp edge of it destroys that which is stricken with it.
Therefore the very name of (...) Gladius. Vastitas. Desolatio.
a sword in Hebrew signifies destruction: and a sword is said to 2 Samuel 2. 26.
-- 11. 25.
devour.

The setting out of this success points out five observable points.

I. The issue of war is especially attributed to the General. For, only
Joshua the General is here mentioned, he is said to vanquish the enemy.

II. Lawful war well waged proves prosperous. The success expressed by
Joshua's discomfiting the enemy shows that this war was prosperous. And in
Scripture the success which God gave to his Church of old is recorded, to show
what his Church in succeeding ages may in like cases expect.

III. They that first begin war may have the worst in war. For, Amalek
first began, and Amalek was discomfited.

IIII. Accessaries make themselves liable to the judgment that falls on the
Principal. For, the people, even they that took part with Amalek, are
destroyed, as well as Amalek.

V. Enemies in war may lawfully be slain. For, this expression of the
instrument wherewith they were discomfited (with the edge of the sword) shows
that they were slain: and that which was here done by Joshua, was lawfully
done. God approved it.

. 56. Of attributing success in war to Generals.
I. See. 55.
THe issue of war is especially attributed to Generals. Genesis 14. 19.
Melchizedek blessed Abraham only, for the victory which he with his
confederates obtained. The many and great conquests which were made under Ios.
10 41.
Joshua and 2 Samuel 8. 1, etc
David are attributed to them alone. Many more like instances might be given
out of sacred writ and other histories. The pompous triumphs which Generals
made among the Graecians, Romans, and other nations give evidence hereunto.

The prowess, courage, wisdom, and other like warlike What depends on good
Generals.
virtues of Generals and Commanders, make much, under the divine providence to
the obtaining of victory. The marshalling of the army depends wholly on their
direction. They at their discretion cause alarms or retraits to be sounded. By
their example, by their encouragements or discouragements, the whole army is
much animated or daunted. Hence is it that a good General is accounted 2 Samuel
18. 3. Chab^ias solebat dicere, terribiliorem esse cervorum exercitum Leone
duce, quam Leonum agmen ducente Cervo. Plut. in Apotheg
worth ten thousand others. The name of an experienced and victorious General
has often frighted the enemies. Yea, it is said, that an army of Staggs whose
General is a Lion, is better then an army of Lions whose General is a Stagge.
We read therefore that after God had raised up a Judge to deliver Israel, and
that the Judge had given proof of his valor, Judge. 3. 11, 30 -- 8. 28.
the land had rest all his days: whereby is implied that the enemy durst not
take up arms against him. Terrible was the name of Joshua to the Canaanites,
of David to the Philistines, of Iehu to the Achabites, of Hazael to the
Israelites, of the Machabites to the Nations, of Achilles to the Trojans, of
Hector to the Graecians, of Cyrus to the Babylonians, of Alexander to the
Persians, of Epaminondas to the Macedonians, of the Scipioes to the
Carthaginians, of Hanibal to the Romans, of Caesar to the Gauls, of Scanderbeg
to the Turks, of the Black Prince to the French, and so of other valiant
Generals to their enemies.

Generals in this respect have more then ordinary need of wisdom,
watchfulness, prowess, justice, temperance, industry, What requisite for good
Generals.
and other like warlike virtues. Yea also of all others it behooves them to be
at peace with God, to have faith in him, as Heb. 11. 32.
Joshua, Gedeon, Baruk, Sampson, Iephte, David, and other pious and victorious
Generals had. For, so great matters lying on them, as has before been noted,
so much being expected from them, and so much attributed to them, in case the
battles which under them are fought, have good success, great reason that they
especially be fitted with all things, that (as means) may produce a good issue.

It is also an especial point of prudence for Princes and Military exercises
to be maintained.
States to maintain Artilery and Military exercises, not only in time of
war, but at all other times, though never so peaceable, that so men might be
fitted to be Generals, and Vsus magister optimus, Cic. pro C. Rab. Spartanorum
resp. tanti habebatur apud singulas nationes, ut non classem, non militem, non
aurum ab ea peterent sed unum Spartanorum ducem: quo accepto, se tutos
arbitrabantur. Patric. de regn lib. 1. tit. 13.
other Commanders in armies. Continual exercise is an especial help
hereunto. For, Use makes ready, and expert. It is the best master that can be.
The State of the Spartans gave good proof hereof: For, thereupon they were so
highly accounted of by all nations, as they would not desire of them shipping,
soldiers, coin, or any such like provision, but a Spartan Captain: which if
they obtained, they thought themselves safe. But of these Artilery exercises I
have The Dignity of Chivalry.
elsewhere more largely spoken.

. 57. Of the success of war well waged.
II. See. 55. David nunquam nisi consulto Domino bellumadorsus est. Ideo in
omnibus victor praelijs. Ambr. Offic. lib. 1. cap 35. Unlawful wars
unprofperous.
Lawful war well waged proves prosperous. Many many instances out of holy
writ may be produced for proof of the truth hereof: but not one I dare boldly
say, to the contrary. We do indeed often read of many wars, wherein the better
have had the worse, and the wicked have devoured men more righteous them
themselves. But it has been either because those better have undertaken wars
not warrantable, or else not well waged the same. The war which Iehosaphat
undertook with Ahab, was not warrantable: For, beside that 2 Chro. 19. 2.
He should not have helped the ungodly, -- 18. 14, etc.
a Prophet foretold him that God liked not that war. -- 35. 20, etc. Lawful
wars not well waged
The war also that Josiah undertook against Pharaoh Nechoh was unlawful.
For, Nechoh intended no evil against him. No marvel therefore that the war
of the one and other, though otherwise they were good men, was unprosperous.
The like may be said of the batteli betwixt Amaziah and Ioash, wherein Amaziah,
who in mere pride without just cause provoked Ioash to fight, was overthrown.
But Ios. 7. 10, etc.
the war which Joshua waged against the men of Ai, though lawful in the kind
of it, was not well ordered, because he did not before he entered the field,
search his army to see whether any accursed thing were therein, or no. Nor was
Iud. 20. 21, etc
the lawful war of the Israelites against the Benjamites well ordered,
because they went about to punish sin in others before they had purged their
own souls of sin. 1 Chro. 10. 13
Saul before he entered into that battle wherein he and his sons and many of
the Israelites were slain, asked counsel of one that had a familiar spirit
and not of the Lord. 2 Chro. 36. 13. Ezekiel. 17. 18.
Zedekiah perfidiously and perjuriously maintained war against Nebuchadnezar,
and was overthrown. If a view be taken of all those wars wherein Gods people
have bin foiled by their enemies Quos arma and equi, and milites, and
machinamenta capere non potuerunt, hos peccati natura vinctos hostibus
tradidit. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in 1 Timothy 2. Why wars prosperous.
at any time, by diligent search it may be found, that some fault or other in
Gods people has been the cause that they have been given over into the power
of their enemies. Such as arms, and horses, and soldiers, and engines could
not overcome, sin has delivered (as bound) to the enemy. But whenever they
well ordered just wars they always prospered.

In such wars Gods honor is engaged: so as his people if they should be
foiled, might justly say unto him, What will thou do unto thy great name? Ios.
7. 9.

They who in their war expect good success (and who Just wars to be undertaken.
goes to war that expects not good success?) let them first be sure that
their war be just and warrantable, and then very circumspect in the manner of
waging it: that that which is lawful may be lawfully prosecuted. Thus may they
confidently promise unto themselves victory. True it is, that when Heathen with
Heathen, Idolaters with Idolaters, wicked men with wicked men make war, the
issue of war is Incerti casus pugnarum: Marsque communis. Cicer. in Orat pro
Mil.
uncertain: For, God engages himself on neither side; but now uses one
side, then another, as seems good to his secret and unsearchable counsel, to
be his scourge to punish the other side. But in his peoples wars the case is
otherwise, in case they go along with him, and fight not without good warrant
from him, nor swerve from the directions which he prescribes to them. Such
wars are Gods wars, 1 Samuel 17. 47 -- 25. 28.
the battles of the Lord, which he can and will prosper. Ios. 5. 14.
That which was once visibly represented to Joshua, is always really performed
in all such wars, The Lord is the chief Captain and General in them. In
faith therefore may such wars be waged, and with confidence may good success
in them be expected.

. 58. Of the overthrow of such as begin war.
III. See. 55.
THey that first begin war may have the worst in war. I say, may have,
because there may be just cause of beginning war, and answerably God gives
good success thereto: so as it cannot be generally said, that all in all cases
that first begin war go by the loss. Experience of all times gives evidence
against this. But yet that this may so fall out, like experience gives
demonstration. Instance Number. 21. 23, 33.
Sihon, Og, Ios. 10. 5.
the five Kings of the Amorites, -- 11. 5.
Iabin with all that took part with him, Judge. 11. 12.
the Ammonites in Iephtahs time, 1 King. 20. 21
the Aramites in Ahabs time, 2 Chro. 20. 23
the Moabites, Ammonites, and Edomites in Iehosaphats time, and many other of
the Churches enemies at other times. Yea also the Number. 14 44.
Israelites when they first went out to set upon the Amalakites and Canaanites,
and upon the Judge. 20. 21.
Benjamites, and again upon the 1 Samuel 4. 1.
Philistines, and upon the 1 King. 22. 4.
Aramites, and others.

Many do often most unjustly, either for no cause, or for slight causes, or for
wrong causes, in the pride of their What makes offensive war unprosperous
heart, puffed up with ambition, or inflamed with undue revenge, or fraughted
with malice, or set on work by some other corrupt humor, undertake war:
which being a public execution of justice, is for the most part very fierce
and fearful, and therefore not to be undertaken without just, weighty, and
necessary cause, even such as by no other lawful means can be accomplished.
No marvel then that they who unjustly, or unadvisedly and rashly thrust
themselves into war, be made sensibly to feel the smart of their folly.

Well therefore may that proverbiall speech which Ahab used to Benhadad, be
applied to such as are over-forward to war, Let not him that girdeth on his
harness boast himself 1 King. 20. 11.
as he that puts it off. Let men be slow to war; and not enter thereinto
without urgent necessity.

. 59. Of the punishment of accessaries.
IIII. See. 55.
ACcessaries make themselves liable to the judgment which falls on the
principal. In this case 22000 of the Aramites were slain by David for coming
to succor Hadadezer, David's enemy. And at another 2 Samuel 8. 5.
time 700 chariots, 40000 horsemen, and their Captain, beside -- 10. 18.
many other soldiers for taking part with the Ammonites 2 Chro. 22 7, etc.
against David. This was the occasion of Ahaziahs ruin: he went out with Ioram
against Iehu.

Such as are Accessaries animate the Principal to do what Vidisti cos lenonis
agere officium in regis gratiam, etc. Quapropter non ipse s^l^u, sed and omnes
qui adhaerebant, poenae suerunt participes. Chrysostom. Hom. 32. in Genesis 12. 2 Samuel
10 19. 2 Chro. 18 31. and 19 2.
he does: who, if he were not backed and strengthened by Accessaries, might be
restrained from attempting such acts of hostility as by the assistance of
Accessaries he attempteth. Just therefore it is, that they who take part in
others sins, should also have a part in their punishment.

Fear therefore to aid the wicked. Had the fore-wit of the Aramites been as
good as their after-wit, many thousands of them had saved their lives: for,
after two overthrowes it is said, the Aramites feared to help the children of
Ammon any more. This had almost cost Iehosaphat his life. Sharply therefore was
he reproved by the Prophet.

. 60. Of the lawfulness of shedding blood in war.
V. See. 55. Secure dissipentur gentes quae bella volunt, and abscindantur qui
nos conturbant. Bern. ad Mil. Temp c 3.
ENemies in war may lawfully be slain. If Gods command, Saints practice,
Gods approbation, and remuneration, yea and his vengeance on them that spared
such enemies as should have been slain, be sufficient warrant, sufficient
warrant is not wanting for this point.

1. For precept, Moses from God says to the Israelites, Number. 31. 3.
Avenge the Lord of Midian; -- 17.
kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that has known
man. And Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 3.
Smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not, but
slay both man and woman, etc. And the Lord himself, Ezekiel. 9. 6.
slay utterly old and young.

2. For practice, note the patterns of Genesis 14. 17.
Abraham, and of the people of God under Number. 31. 7.
Moses, Ios 8. 22.
Joshua, 2 Samuel 8. 2.
David, and others guided by the Spirit of God.

3. For Gods approbation, we have a memorable instance thereof by the ministry
of Melchizedek, a Priest of God, Heb. 7. 1.
who met Abraham as he returned from the slaughter of the Kings, and blessed
him.

4. For Gods remuneration, The continuance of Iehu his reign 2 King. 10. 30.
unto the fourth generation for flaying Ahabs stock, And Ezekiel. 29. 19.
the reward which the Lord gave to Nebuchadnezzar. for destroying Tyrus are
evident proofs.

5. For Gods vengeance on such as did not slay those enemies that should have
been slain, there is instance in 1 Samuel 15. 13 19.
Saul, and 1 King 20. 42
Ahab.

When enemies are slain, it is in a defensive or offensive war. If in
defensive war, then there is no other way to preserve our own lives from
such as band themselves together in arms but by slaying them. They show that
they seek the lives of them against whom they come. The slaughter therefore of
enemies is but a preservation of our own lives. And the blood which in
defensive war is shed, is shed se defendendo, in defending ones self: which
was never counted unlawful. Such are a cause of their own death. And he that
is the cause of death is more infault then Qui causa mortis est, potius in
culpa est quam iile qui occidit. Aug. Macedon. Epist. 54.
he that kills.

As for offensive war when it is rightly undertaken, it is either for some
unsufferable wrong done, or for just fear of wrong in time to come. In such a
case, war is a public execution of justice. So that it is as lawful in
these cases for soldiers to slay true enemies, as for executioners to put to
death malefactors, arraigned, condemned, and delivered to them for that end.

Besides, by slaughter of enemies, the land against which they are enemies has
rest, and security: as towns and high ways are safe and quiet by executing
thieves. This effect of destroying enemies is often noted in Scripture, Judge. 3.
10, 11, Cum homo ab homine occiditur, multum distat utrum fiat nocendi
cnpiditate, vel injuste aliquid auferendi, sicut a latrone, an ulcisc endi vel
obediendi ordine, sicut a judice, sicut a car^ifice^an evadend^, sive
subveniendi necessitate, sicut interimitur hostis a milite. Aug. Ib.
30. and 5. 31. 2 Chro. 15. 15. and 20. 30. Thus just and due causes of slaying
enemies must rightly be observed. For, when one man is killed of another, there
is great difference, whether it be done with a desire of wrong and robbery, as
thieves do, or in course of punishment and obedience to law as Judges and
executioners do, or through necessity of avoiding danger, and affording succor,
as soldiers do.

Ob. David seems to be branded for slaying so many enemies as he did. For, as
a reason why he was not thought fit to build the Temple, it is said to him,
Thou have shed blood abundantly, and have made great wars, etc. Thou have
been a man of war, and shed bloods. 1 Chro. 22. 8. and 28. 3.

Answ. This is not upbraided to David as a crime, or as a matter of ignominy.
For, it was his glory that he 1 Samuel 25. 28.
fought the Lords battles; and Heb. 11. 32.
for that he is put into the catalogue of Gods Worthies. But first thereby is
implied that David could not have such leisure as was meet for so great a work
as the Temple was: which is more fully expressed by Solomon in these words, 1
King. 5. 3.
David my father could not build an house unto the name of the Lord his God,
for the wars which were about him on every side, etc.

2. The building of that Temple was a type of the building of the spiritual
Temple, the Church of Christ. The builder thereof must be an answerable type of
the builder of the spiritual Temple, who was Isa. 9. 6.
the Prince of peace. Thus Soldiers need not be daunted at the blood which
they shed in war.
much does God himself thus intimate to David: 1 Chro. 22. 9, 10.
A son shall be borne to thee which shall be a man of rest, etc. He shall build
an house for my name, etc.

The good warrant which soldiers have for slaying their enemies in war,
gives good encouragement to them for Miles hostem, and judex, vel Minister
ejus, n^centem, non mihi videntur peccare cunshominem occidunt. Aug. de lib.
arbitr. l. 1. c. 4.
a cheerful going to war, and for valiant fighting therein. And though by
their valor much blood may be shed, yet they need not be any more daunted
thereat, then Judges, Iuries, Executioners, and other Ministers of Justice for
putting many malefactors to death. Soldiers are no more guilty of blood in
slaying enemies in war, then Ministers of Justice in putting capital
malefactors to death. It is indeed a matter of pity, and it ought to move our
bowels of compassion that people should be so wicked and desperate, as to give
occasion to have their blood shed: but, the occasion being given, Deuteronomy. 13. 8.
-- 19. 13.
pity must be laid aside. Ier. 13 14. Ezekiel. 5 11. Zec. 11. 6.
God himself in such cases casts off pity. Wherefore, shedding of blood in
just war is so far from unlawful cruelty, as it is a point of most
warrantable equity. Pity in this case may prove the ruin of the city: and
more prejudicial to a State, then tolerating thieves, murderers, traiters,
and such other pernicious malefactors.

Only that which is lawful must lawfully be used: to Directions about killing
enemies.
which end receive these few directions.

1. Show that thou delightest not in blood. Shed no more then of necessity
(through the obstinacy of enemies) thou art Pagani necandi non essent, si
quomodo aliter possent a nimia infestatione, seu oppressione fidelium cohiberi.
Bern. ad Mil. Temp. cap 3. Magnum Babyloniae crudelitatis indicium est, ne
senibus quidem pepercisse: quorum aetas etian, interhostes venerabilis est.
Hier. Com in Isa. 46 In what cases no mercy to any.
forced to shed. If enemies yield, and relinquish their hostility, spare them.
Read the charge which the divine law gives to this purpose, Deuteronomy. 20. 11.

2. Slay not such as cannot hurt thee, as weak women, aged men, and young
children. This exception the Law expressy makes, Deuteronomy. 20. 14.

Ob. In other places Gods people are commanded to slay men and women, infant
and suckling, 1 Samuel 15. 3. Answerably the Israelites dealt with many of their
enemies, They utterly destroyed all, both man and woman, young and old, etc.
Ios. 6. 21.

Answ. 1. Particular charges make extraordinary cases: as Genesis 22 2.
the charge given to Abraham for sacrificing his son. Extraordinary cases are
not exemplary. They are rather matters of admiration then imitation.

2. The people who were so to be dealt withal were by God devoted to utter
destruction: Some, because their land was given by the supreme possessour of
heaven and earth for an inheritance to his people. The Law therefore that
speaks of sparing enemies, has this exception, Deuteronomy 20. 16.
But of the cities of those people which the Lord thy God does give thee for
inheritance, thou shall save alive nothing that breaths. Others were devoted
to destruction because of their implacable hatred, unsatiable wrath, and
intolerable wrongs against the people of God: As Exo 17. 14. Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18,
19. 1 Samuel 15. 2, 3.
Amalek.

3. If enemies will hearken to no conditions of peace: but obstinately stand
out to the very uttermost, in such a case says the Law, Deuteronomy. 20. 13. Cur
irasceretur Deus adversus Chaldaeos quos ipse misit ad capiendum Israel?
Respondit, illos abusos esse crudelitate sua and plus imposuisse plagarum, quam
Dei ultio flagitabat. Hier. Comment. in Isa. 46. In what cases enemies may be
tortured.
Thou shall smite every male with the edge of the sword.

3. Put not those whom thou flayest to exquisite torments. God protests
against the Syrians (Am. 1. 3.) for their cruelty, in that having overcome
Gilead, they threshed the inhabitants thereof with threshing instruments of
iron: and against the Ammonites, who ripped up the women with child of Gilead,
Am. 1. 13.

Quest, May not enemies in any case be tortured?

Answ. Yes. 1. In case of question: when otherwise they will not confess the
truth.

2. In case of talio, or requiting like for like: as Judge. 1. 6, 7. (...).
Radamanthi jus, ut Arist. Eth. l. 5. c. 8.
the Israelites dealt with Adonibezek, whose thumbs and great toes they cut
off. For so had he done to threescore and ten Kings before.

3. In case of revenging unsupportable insolences and injuries. Hereby was 2 Samuel 12. 31.
David moved to put the Ammonites under sawes and harrowes of iron, etc. For
they had -- 10. 4.
Villanously entreated the Ambassadors whom David in kindness had sent unto
them: which was an insolency against the law of nations.

4. In case of treachery, perjury, and breach of fidelity. For this cause Ier.
39. 6, 7.
Nebuchadnezzar slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and then put out
his eyes.

4. What thou do against thine enemies do in love. 4. Slay in love
Love their persons though thou hate their practices. Mat. 5. 44.
Pray therefore for them. Pray that God would turn their hearts, and move them
to cease from their hostility, or pardon their sin. Thus pious Magistrates will
pray for the salvation of their souls whose bodies they adjudge to death. 5.
Avenge not thy self.


5. Take heed of making that public execution of justice an occasion of
executing private revenge: 2 Samuel 3. 27, 29.
So dealt Ioab with Abner, 1 King. 2. 32.
which pulled vengeance on Ioabs head.

. 61. Of the meaning, method, and matter of the foureteenth Verse.
EXODUS XVII. XIIII. And the LORD said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in
a book, rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for I will utterly put out the
remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
The Sea. 1.
Event following on the forenamed victory, remains to be handled. It was a
Memorial thereof: and that of two kinds. One enjoined by God. The other made
by Moses. The former of these is here noted in this 14. verse: which consists
of two parts. 1. To make a Memorial of it. 2. To rehearse it before Joshua.


The primary and principal Author of the memorial here mentioned, is
Jehovah, the LORD; The Minister is Moses, of whom we have spoken on the 9.
Verse.

This charge was here given to him, because he was the Lords Prophet to the
people, and the Recorder of Canonical Scripture at that time.

The means of making this a memorial is writing it in a Benefits of writing
things
book. Things written remain. Herein lies a difference betwixt speaking and
writing, that things uttered by Vox audita perit, littera scripta manet.
speech, if they be not at the time of uttering fast laid up in a strong
memory, they vanish in the air; or if they be not remembered, they only who
are then present when they are uttered, have the benefit of that uttering. But
things written remain again and again to be read: to be read by those that
are present at the writing, or far absent: yea, not only at that time but in
future ages. Thus, that the covenant which the Israelites made with God might
not vanish with the making of it, Neh. 9. 38.
they write it. And that all people near at hand and far off might take
notice of the decree both for destroying, and also for rescuing the Jews, the
Est. 3. 12.
one, and the -- 8. 9.
other decree were both written. And that future ages might reap benefit by
the mercy of God manifested in former ages, it is said, Psalm. 102. 18.
This shall be written for the generation to come.

Writing is then especially of use in the forenamed respects, when things are
written in a book. Loose papers are like loose broomes: soon scattered and of
little use. But books are of sheets of paper rolled, and bound up together: so
as they may easily, and are ordinarily kept year after year, age after age.

Q. What book may this be thought to be?

Answ. Because it is not expressly set down, men's conjectures thereabouts are
various. Tostatus Quaest. in hunc loc.
Some think that it was the book of the wars of God, mentioned, Number. 21. 14.
Or the book of Iasher, mentioned 2 Samuel 1. 18. which they suppose to be one and
the same book. Osian de
Others, that it was a book then extant, but now lost. The notes in the former
English translation take it to be the book of the law: meaning thereby, as I
take it, this very book of Exodus. So do Tuis Commentarijs de rebus istis: ut
infr. 34. 27. and Deuteronomy. 31. 9. Trem. and Iun. in annot. in hunc loc. Sic fere
Calvin Simler. and alij.
other judicious Expositors take it. This exposition carries most probability.

Under this particle, (...)
this, the whole history before mentioned is comprised.

This word, (...)
memorial is added to show the end why God would have this history written:
namely, to be read of their posterity: that thereby they might have before them
an evidence of Amaleks malice against them: and of Gods goodness toward them.

The other part of Gods charge is to rehearse that which was to be registered
before Joshua. (...) Insere in aures Iehoschuae. Trem. and. Iun.
Word for word, Put into the ears of Joshua; meaning thereby that Moses should
often instruct Joshua in this evidence of Gods protection of his people from such
a malicious enemy as Amalek was. For, God would that Joshua should succeed
Moses: and that Joshua should root out the nations which inhabited the land
that God gave to the Israelites: and therefore for his encouragement he would
have him often to set before him this victory.

A more particular reason of the foresaid memorial is rendered by God himself
in the words following, as the first particle being a causall conjunction
imports ( (...)
FOR) For I will utterly put out, etc.

The word translated (...)
put out, is applied to such things as being oilie or greasy, or otherwise
foul, are clean wiped. The (...).
Greek words whereby the LXX do ordinarily interpret it, import also as much.
This word is used where the Lord thus sets out the desolation of Jerusalem:
2 King. 21. 13.
I will wipe Jerusalem, as a man wipeth a dish: wiping it, and turning it up
side down. Here the city is resembled to a dish, the inhabitants thereof to
the filth that cleaves thereto, when such inhabitants are destroyed, the city
is said to be wiped of them. Genesis 7. 23.
It is also applied to Gods wiping or sweeping away the whole world with the
flood. And to Isa. 43. 25.
Gods wiping away our sins: which are as thoroughly taken away as any thing can
be. The word therefore it self implies an utter extirpation, or desolation.
But the kind of phrase adds much emphasis thereto, which is this, in wiping
away I will (...)
wipe away. Our English not unfitly thus expresses it, I will utterly put out.

What is it that shall so utterly be put out? Not some of the meaner sort: not
such as rise up in arms: not some of the chiefest: not some of one sort, or
some of another only: but Amalek: the whole stock, the whole nation: and that
so thoroughly, so utterly, as none shall be preserved to reserve and raise up their
name again. Therefore God says, I will utterly put out the remembrance of
Amalek. And that not only out of that part of the earth where they then lived,
but (...) Vbivu terrarum suerit, quam late patet coelum, Trem and. Iun. in hunc
loc.
from under heaven, that is, from every part of the earth that is any where
under the cope of heaven. Deuteronomy. 25. 19.
In this very sense is this phrase used of Amalek in another place: and of --
9. 14. -- 29. 20.
others in other places.

Here have we in Sum, A manifestation of Gods indignation against malicious
enemies of his Church.

This is further set out by the Certenty Extremity
thereof.

The registring shows the Certenty.

Their utter ruin the extremity.

The registring of it is done two ways. 1. By writing it. 2. By rehearsing it.


In setting down the former are noted the Persons. Matter.


The Persons are Principal. The LORD. Ministerial. Moses.


The Matter declares 1. The Thing enjoined. Write in a book. 2. The End
thereof. For a memorial.


In setting down the latter are also noted the Thing to be done. Rehearse it,
Person before whom. In the ears of Joshua.


In declaring the extremity of the judgment, he notes 1. The Revenger. I
will, says the Lord. 2. The Revenge.


The Revenge is aggravated by the Kind. Put out the remembrance. Extent. From
under heaven.


From this Manifestation of Gods indignation, as it is here described, ten
especial points of instruction may be collected.

1. The Principal Person that first appoints this Record, the LORD, shows,
that,

I. God of old was the author of records.
2. The Minister, Moses, gives instance, that,

II. God uses man's Ministry in preserving records for his Church.
3. The action enjoined, Write this, proves, that,

III. Memorable matters are to be registered.
4. The Instrument wherein it was to be written, a book, declares, that,

IIII. Public records are to be safe kept.
5. The End why this is to be written, (for a memorial) argues, that,

V. Judgments on enemies of the Church are to be kept in memory.
6. The other part of the charge, concerning the rehearsing of that which was
registered, implies, that,

VI. Matters worth record must be rehearsed.
7. The Person to whom that which was written must be rehearsed (in the ears
of Joshua) intimates, that,

VII. Governors of Gods Church must especially be acquainted with Gods former
dealings.
8. The chief Author of the judgment here mentioned (I will, says the Lord)
gives evidence, that,

VIII. It is God that avengeth.
9. The kind of judgment (put out the remembrance) imports, that,

IX. God may be provoked to the utter ruin of a people.
10. The extent of this judgment (from under heaven) evinceth, that,

X. There is no place of safety from Gods revenge.
. 62. Of Gods causing records.
I. See 6.
GOD of old was the Author of records. This is true of the most ancient,
admirable, approved, and every way the best records that ever were: which (...).
by an excellency and super-eminency are called Mat. 21. 42.
Scriptures, Romans 1. 2.
Holy Scriptures. For of them says an Apostle, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God: and another, 2 Pet. 1. 19, 21
No prophecy in Scripture is of any private motion, etc. but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

God would have, not the present age only, but also all succeeding ages to
reap benefit by the evidences of his wisdom, power, mercy, justice, and other
his divine properties: and therefore caused the records of them to be written.
This the Holy Ghost expressly notes, saying, Rom 4 23, 24.
It was written for us. 1 Cor. 10 11
All these things are written for our admonition. Romans 15. 4.
Whatsoever things were written afore-time were written for our learning.

They too too ungratefully slight this evidence of the divine providence, who
seek to conceal from the people these Records, as Papists do, or they which
may, but will not search them, as too many careless Protestants.

It is Christ's charge, Ioh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures. It was Timothies commendation, that 2 Timothy 3. 15.
from a child he had known the holy Scriptures. There are no records more
worthy to be searched. They are able to make thee wise unto salvation.

. 63. Of man's ministry in writing divine records.
II. See. 61.
GOD uses man's ministry in preserving records for his Church. To omit the
particular mention of the several penmen of several Scriptures, St. Peter
indefinitely says of them all, 2 Pet. 1. 21.
Men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. His meaning is, that men wrote
the holy Scriptures. Exo 31. 18.
One only record God himself wrote with his own finger; namely, the Law. Yet
therein he used Exo. 34. 1.
man's ministry, both in preparing the tables whereon he wrote it, and in Deuteronomy.
10 4, 5.
showing them to the people, and preserving them.

Thus would God honor our nature, in making men penmen of that which he
indicted. And thus would he draw us on to give due heed to man's ministry in
dispensing his Word.

To object against the Scriptures, that they were written by men, and thereupon
the less to esteem them, is to cross the wisdom of God, and to pervert that
which for our good he has ordered. The Thessalonians are commended for
receiving the word preached not as the word of men, but as it is indeed, the
word of God. So will it be our commendation 1 Thessalonians. 2, 13.
to receive the holy Scriptures, not as registers and records of men, though
they were written by men; but, as they are indeed, the records of God himself.

. 64. Of registring matters of moment.
III. See. 61.
MEmorable matters are to be registered. Besides the great number of such
memorable matters as are registered in the holy Scriptures which the Church now
has, it is evident that many more were recorded. Instance the things recorded
in the Number. 21. 14.
book of the wars of the Lord: in the 2 Samuel 1. 18. Ios. 10. 13.
book of Iasher: in the 1 King. 14. 19
book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel: -- 4. 33. Prima historiae lex
est, ne quid falsi dicere audeat, deinde ne quid very non audeat, etc.
in the book of Salomons philosophy: and in other like public records.

Thus will they be useful to posterity.

In this respect the pains of such as write Chronicles and Histories is
commendable: if at least they be conscionable in recording nothing but truth;
and all the truth: and wise in Vide plura apud Cic. de Orat. lib. 2. de legibus
historiae consriben do. Vide item Vossium de Art hist. cap. 9, 10.
putting difference betwixt slight and weighty matters: that they stuff not
their histories with trivial things. Thus shall the worthy works of men done
in one age be presidents for many ages. The names of worthy ones shall live
after their bodies are dead: and they who are born after their departure
receive much benefit by them.

. 65. Of safe keeping public records.
IIII. See. 61.
PVblique records are to be safe kept. For this end Deuteronomy. 10. 5.
the tables, in which the ten commandments were written, were put into the
arc. And -- 31. 26.
other laws also, yea and the curses added to the transgressions thereof were
put in the side of the arc: 2 King. 22. 8, 11, 10.
where being found many hundred years after, an excellent use was made of
them. And Ier. 52. 14.
Jeremiah commanded those evidences, which were for assurances of the peoples
return out of captivity, to be put in an earthen vessel. They were wont of
old to anoint their rolls in which they recorded their monuments, Nec titulus
nimio, nec cedro charta notetur. Ovid de Trist. l. 1. Eleg 1.
with a liquour that came out of cedar trees, which kept them from rotting, and
made them last the longer. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Veritatem facili est ab Ecclesia
sumere, cum Apostoli, quasi in depositorium dives, plenissime in tam
contulerint omnia quae veritatis sunt, uti omni^ quicunque velit, sumat ex ca
potum vitae Iren. de Haer. l. 3. c. 4. Polid or. Virg. de rerum inventoribus.
lib. 9. cap. 7.
The Church for this end is styled the pillar and ground of truth, because it
is a faithful keeper and preserver of the Oracles of God. So as truth may
easily be fetched from it. For, the Apostles have laid up in it as in a rich
treasure, all truth most fully. So as any that will may fetch from thence
drink of life.

The benefit of records is lost, if they be not safely kept. That which is not,
cannot be of use.

We have in this respect great cause to bless God for the benefit of printing.
An act very admirable in it self; and very advantageous to Church and
Commonwealth. Thereby are all sorts of monuments safely kept. Few things put
once to print, especially if they be of any special account, are utterly lost.
For so much may by a few be printed in a day, as hardly can be written by many
in a year: whereby such store of books of all manner of learning are to be
had, as none may seem to be wanting. Yea all sorts of authors are thereby
preserved. The memory therefore of John Cuthemberg a German, who first invented
this art in Maguntia, is worthy of all honor.

. 66. Of Memorialls of Gods judgments.
V. See. 61. See A Plaster for the Plague, on Number. 16. 47.. 63.
IVdgements on enemies of the Church are to be kept in memory. So many
judgments as are recorded in Scripture are so many proofs hereof. More
particularly the visible monuments and memorials of them. As Genesis 19. 26.
the pillar of salt whereinto Lots wife was turned: Exo. 12. 27.
The Passover, and -- 13. 14.
dedicating of the firstborn to God: Number. 16. 38, etc.
The broad plates which were made of the Censors of Corah and the other
conspirators with him: The sundry names which thereupon were given to places,
as, Genesis 11. 9.
Babel, or confusion: Number 11. 3.
Taberah, or burning: -- 21. 3.
Hormah, or destruction: Ios. 7. 27.
The vallie of Acher, or trouble: Compare 2 King. 14. 7. with 2 Chro. 25. 12.
Iocktheel or rock; Est. 9. 26.
Purim, or lots: Ezekiel 39. 11.
The vallie of Hamon Gog, or multitude of Gog, with other the like.

By such memorials, ground of courage, and that, generation after generation,
is given to Gods Church against all that their enemies plot or practice against
them: and matter of terror is by them given to enemies. For, they give
evidence of that which God has done for his Church against the enemies: and so
make the Church expect, and their enemies fear the like. For, both the one and
the other know that God is ever like himself.

Hence as an use of this point follows the next observation.

. 67. Of rehearsing to others matters of moment.
VI. See. 61.
MAtters worth record must be rehearsed. They must be often spoken of an related
to others. Exo. 12. 17. -- 13. 14. Deuteronomy. 6. 20.
The Law expressly enjoins this. This among like means of instruction is
intended in that Genesis 18. 19.
commendation which God gives of Abraham, of instructing his household. For,
God revealed the judgment which he intended to bring on Sodom to Abraham,
because he knew that he would command his household to fear God, the rather
because of the evidence of that judgment. When Iethro, Moses his father in
law, came to see him, he related to him Exo. 18. 8.
all that the Lord had done unto Pharaoh, etc.

By this means memorable matters, worthy to be known far and near, in ages
present and to come, are divulged and propagated, to the greater praise of God,
whose praise is thus spread abroad, and to the edification of many more then
were present at the first working of those remarkable things.

This especially concerns Ministers, whose office it is to declare, as the
counsel of God revealed in his word, so also the will of God manifested in his
works: especially, such works as are done in their own days: which, being
more fresh, use to be the more diligently attended unto, and the more carefully
heeded. In this respect it will be their wisdom, to take due notice themselves
of the memorable works of God, yea, to be inquisitive after them, and to do
what they can to have true and certain intelligence thereof, that so they may
rehearse them to others, and instruct their people to make the right use
thereof.

This also concerns others that have charge of others, as, Parents, Masters,
Tutors, and other Governors, often to rehearse in the ears of those that are
under them the remarkable works of the Lord.

Yea, because we are all keepers one of another, it behooveth private
Christians, as they have occasion to meet together, to rehearse in the ears
one of another such memorable matters as may according to the subject thereof,
minister matter of humiliation and supplication, or of exultation and
gratulation. We have a good pattern hereof in Cleophas, and his companion.
Luke 24. 14.


Commendable in this respect is that Act of Parliament which was made in the
third year of the reign of King JAMES, for an annual grateful remembrance
of our more then ordinary deliverance from the Gun. Powder Treason. It is
answerable to that act which was made by Esther and Mordecai, Est. 9. 26.
for keeping the days called Purim. The annual celebrating of the fifth of
November, being enjoined by Act of Parliament, Ministers and people make
conscience of observing it: and thence many Ministers take occasion year after
year to set out before their people the unnatural inhumanity, unsatiable
cruelty, and perfidious treachery of Papists: and so bring people into an utter
detestation of that more then Heathenish Idolatry. Very well did our learned
King JAMES, in that speech which he made to both houses of Parliament upon the
discovery of that divelish powder-treason-plot, observe, that No other sect of
Heretics, not excepting Turk, Jew, nor Pagan, no, not even those of
Calicute, who adore the Devil, did ever maintain by the grounds of their
religion, that it was lawful, or rather meritorious (as the Romish Catholics
call it) to murder princes or people for quarrel of religion. And although
particular men of all professions of religion have been some thieves, some
murderers, some traitors, yet ever when they came to their end and just
punishment, they confessed their fault to be in their nature, and not in their
profession. These Romish Catholics only excepted. Preservations therefore,
and deliverances from such mischievous persons are the best preservations and
deliverances: most worthy to be remembered thoroughout all generations: that
thoroughout all generations due praise may be given to God. If See the
Discourse of discovering the powder treason, in the works of King JAMES.
the horrible mischief intended by that powder plot, if the near approach of
the time of accomplishing that plot before it was discovered: and if the manner
of discovering the same be well weighed, we cannot but discern that there
was just and great cause for preserving both an annual, and perpetual
memorial thereof.

Though like public memorials of all the judgments Private memorials of Gods
judgments.
which God inflicteth on the enemies of the Church be not made: yet it
behooveth particular Christians to take special notice of them, so far as
they come to their sight and hearing, and to make some private records of them
to themselves: that thereby they may the rather be provoked both to fear God,
and also to trust in him.

Private means of keeping in memory Gods judgments, are such as these, frequent
meditation on them, often mentioning them in our praises to God, much conferring
with others about them, declaring them to our posterity, writing them in
private records of our own, and other such like.

. 68. Of Governors observation of Gods former dealings.
VII. See. 61.
GOvernors of Gods Church must especially be acquainted with Gods former
dealings. When God intended to make Moses a Governor over his people, he tells
him that he is Exo 3. 6.
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, thereby putting him in mind what great
things he had formerly done for those three Patriarchs and their children. Ios.
1. 6.
God implied as much in the charge which he gave to Joshua, of meditating in
the book of the law, wherein the great works of the Lord as well as laws were
registered. Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
The like charge on the like ground was given to Kings. But most pertinent to
this point is -- 3. 21.
Moses rehearsing to Joshua the conquests made of Sihon and Og. 2 Samuel 7. 9.
Thus by Gods appointment Nathan puts David in mind of the former works of
God. The like did 2 Chr. 15. 2.
Azariah to Asa; and 2 King. 19. 25
Isaiah to Hezekiah.

Governors over others being by such means well instructed in the mind and
power of God, and thereby brought to fear God, and to trust in him, have
opportunity according to their calling to instruct and encourage others: so as
the benefit which they reap thereby may prove a singular benefit to many
others.

The application of this point, as it concerns Governors themselves, to use
all diligence in acquainting themselves with Gods former works: especially such
as concern his Church, the preservation of it, and the destruction of the
enemies of it: so it concerns their Chaplens, and such Ministers as in any
particular relation belong unto them, to rehearse in their ears, and declare
unto them the mavelous works that God has done for such as fear him, and
rest upon him.

. 69. Of Gods avenging.
VIII. See. 61. See also The Plaster for the Plague, on on Number. 16. 45 21.
IT is God that avengeth. The Lord challenges this as his own prerogative.
Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
To me (says he) belongs vengeance. Romans 12 19.
Vengeance is mine. Justly therefore does the Psalmist give this title to him,
Psalm. 94. 1. (...)
God of vengeances: and by an (...).
elegant figure thus doubles it, O Lord God of vengeances, O God of vengeances.
So the Prophet Nahum, and that with somewhat more emphasis, Nah. 1. 2.
God is jealous, and the Lord revengeth; the Lord revengeth, and is furious:
the Lord will take vengeance of his adversaries.

Gods absolute sovereignty, almighty power, infinite justice, incomprehensible
wisdom, perfect hatred of sin, indulgent care over his Church, and other like
divine properties give proof hereof. For,

1. It is a part of supreme or absolute sovereignty to take Gods properties
manifested in destroying enemies.
vengeance of such as obstinately rebel against his will; and seek to do what
mischief they can to his servants and Saints.

2. By so doing he gives evidence of his almighty power, whereby he is able to
subdue his Churches enemies: and shows how Act. 9. 5.
hard it is to kick against the pricks.

3. Just revenge is as true an effect of justice, as due reward. Romans 2. 5, etc.
The Apostle therefore exemplifieth the righteous judgment of God in both.

4. His incomparable wisdom is manifested by ordering the evil plots and
practices of wicked men so as they tend to the ruin of the contrivers of them.
Psalm 9. 15.
They are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net that they hid is
their foot taken.

5. Execution of due vengeance of sin is an apparent demonstration of his
hatred of sin.

6. By that vengeance which the Lord executes on enemies of the Church, the
Churches tranquillity and security is maintained, and Gods providence over her
thereby manifested. On these premises it may well be concluded, that Psalm. 9.
16. Judgment on enemies ministers comfort to Saints.
The Lord is known by judgment which he executes.

1. Great consolation hence arises to the Church of God. God is their Lord.
What if their enemies be many, mighty, malicious, sedulous, yet are they under
the power of him who is the Protector of the Church. Their power, their wit,
their breath is in his hands, to take away all as he will. On this ground Heb.
13. 6.
We may boldly say, The Lord is my helper: and I will not fear what man can
do unto me.

2. When we see judgment executed on the Churches God to be praised for
enemies destruction.
enemies, we are to take notice of the principal agent therein, and to say,
This is the finger of the Lord: and answerably to give him the glory thereof,
as Exo 15. 6.
Moses, 2 Samuel 22. 1, etc.
David, and others.

3. The terror of the Churches enemies must needs be Gods executing vengeance
terror to wicked.
much aggravated by this, that God takes upon himself to execute vengeance.
For, this Lord is an almighty, ever-living, just, and jealous God. His strokes
are heavy. There is no avoiding them, no enduring them. His vengeance is
endless, and easelesse, merciless, and remedilesle. It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living God, Hebr. Deus just vindicans tradit
impios in concupiscentias aliorum nocere volentium, sua semper incommutabili
aequitate servato. Aug. ad Simplic. l 2. Quaest. 1.
10. 31.

Quest. How does God revenge?

Answ. Sometimes by causing judgments to descend immediately from himself (as
on Sodom, Genesis 19. 24.) and sometimes by giving men over to the desire of such
as have a mind to work misehiefe: but so as he always keeps safe his own
immutable justice and equity.

. 70. Of Gods vengeance extended to man's utter ruin.
IX. See 61.
GOD may be provoked to the utter ruin of a people. Instance Genesis 6. 7.
the old world, -- 19. 24, 25.
Sodom and Gomorrah, the Number. 21. 32.
Amorites, Ios. 11. 14.
Canaanites, and other nations utterly rooted out by Israel. As much is proved
by these and such like phrases frequent in the Prophets, Nah. 1. 14.
No more of their name shall be sown, Ier. 48. 42.
They shall be destroyed from being a people, Isa. 13. 19.
They shall be as the destruction of God in Sodom and Gomorrah.

Quest. When was Amalek (of whom this utter desolation was here threatened)
utterly destroyed?

Answ. This was not done at once: but, at several times, by degrees. If Saul
had faithfully executed 1 Samuel 15. 3.
the charge of God, by him had this denunciation been executed. But, yet then
it was -- 14. 48. -- 15. 7, 8.
in part performed: -- 30. 17.
afterward more fully by David. For, after David's time we read little of any
of them.

Extremity of judgment is sometimes executed, 1. To give instance of Gods
almighty power. For, Psalm 47. 2, 3.
by utter ruinating of kingdoms and nations, he shows, that no power can
stand against his almighty power. 2. To give proof of the severity of his
wrath: which, being kindled and not quickly quenched, burns up whole nations.
3. To give demonstration of his patience in sparing such as stand: for, he that
rooteth out some nations, can as easily root out others, one after another, as
he did the seven nations before Israel. Deuteronomy. 7. 1.
4. To give evidence of the intolerablenesse of men's impiety and iniquity. For,
such severity of vengeance shows that men's sins are grown to Afulnesse: so
as the land vomiteth them out. Genesis 15. 16. Lev. 18. 25.



What need is there now that men take heed of adding sin to sin: and of
aggravating sin by obstinacy, impudency, and other See A Plaster for the
Plague, on Number. 16. 45.. 22.
such like circumstances. Assuredly as sin is multiplied and aggravated, so
shall judgment also; especially when multitudes run on headlong to sin. And if
lighter judgments prevail not, God will not cease till he have utterly
ruinated them. This of old was threatened; this in former ages has Lev. 26. 18,
32.
been executed. Now God still remains to be the same God, as just, as jealous,
as powerful as ever he was. With the froward he will show himself froward. To
them that are unsatiable Psalm. 18. 26.
in sin, God will be implacable in wrath.

. 71. Of Gods revenge in every place.
X. See. 61.
THere is no place of safety from Gods revenge. Ier. 16. 16.
Behold (says he) I will send for many fishers, and they shall fish them, and
after I will send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every
mountain and from every hill. After that the King of Babel had destroyed the
greater part of the Jews in their own country, and carried many of them
captive into Babylon, a remnant of them continuing obstinately in their wicked
courses, thought notwithstanding Ier. 44. 12.
that in Egypt they might be safe; but even there also the hand of the Lord was
stretched out against them, and destroyed them.

Ier. 23. 23, 24.
Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God a far off? Can any hide
himself in secret places that I shall not see him? Do not I fill heaven and
earth? Psalm. 139. 7, etc.
Whither then shall any go from his Spirit, or whither shall he flee from his
presence? etc.

The only safe course, when Gods wrath is provoked, and the fire of his
indignation flameth forth, is, not to fly from him, but to fall down before
him; as David did when he saw the Angel that smote the people with pestilence.
God uses to spare such as at the apprehension of his displeasure 2 Samuel 24. 17.
humble themselves in his presence, when from every place under heaven he
destroys such as impenitently persist in sin.

. 72. Of the interpretation of the fifteenth Verse.
EXODUS XVII. XV. And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it
IEHOVAH-NISSI.
See. 1.
IN this verse the Memorial which Moses made of the forementioned victory, is
recorded. In memory thereof he is said to build an altar.

The proper use of altars was to offer sacrifices on them. The (...)
Sacrificium. (...) Altar.
notation of the original word imports as much. The frequent Lev. 9. 7.
charge to offer upon the altar: and the answerable Genesis 8. 20.
practice of Saints in offering sacrifices on altars do further prove as much.
Yet also were they made for monuments, as is evident by Ios. 22. 26, 27.
the apology which the Reubenites, Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh made
for the Altar which they built; whereby they deny that it was for sacrifice,
and affirm that it was only for witness. Both these ends and uses were here
questionless intented by Moses. This word, (...) aedificavit, extruxit.
he built, shows that it was now newly made, and that upon occasion of the
victory. The particular name given to it, imports a memorial. The kind of
name implies a gratulation, Ios. 8. 31.
which of old was testified by erecting altars, and offering sacrifices thereon.

This was thus done at this time because the Tabernacle was not yet erected,
nor the Priesthood settled on Aaron and his posterity.

The particular name here specified word for word is this, (...)
Jehovah my banner.

(...) erexit vexillum Isa. 10. 18. Nam (...) significat erigere.
The root or primary word from whence the word translated banner comes,
signifies to lift up a banner, or ensign, or to hold up a standard. Now
banners use to be erected in armies, that by the sight of them soldiers might
know whether to come, or to go, or where to stand. In allusion whereunto the
preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles whereby they were called into the
Church, and there directed what to do, is resembled to the Isa. 11. 10. -- 13.
2. -- 18. 3.
lifting up of a banner, or ensign.

Ier. 4. 21. -- 51. 12.
Banners use also to be set up on the walls or towers of cities that are taken
by conquest, to show that they are in the conquerors power.

Here this title banner has relation to Moses his holding up his rod on the
top of the hill, and that as a banner or standerd, as was before noted in the
end of. 25. And by this title shows that it was the Lord who caused the
banner to be held up in the field, and to remain steady after the enemy was
discomfited: that is, who afforded succor in the battle, and gave such
success, as like victorers they continued to hold up their banners. The LXX
Greek Translators of the Bible in that respect well express the meaning of
the word, thus, The Lord my refuge: and St. Hierom thus, (...).
Dominus exultatiomea, vel exaltatiomea.
The Lord my rejoicing, or my lifting up.

In this title Moses uses the first person and singular number, thus, (...)
my banner, partly in relation to this forenamed particular act of holding up
the rod (testifying hereby that it was not any virtue in the rod held up, or in
his act of holding it up, whereby the victory was obtained: but merely the
succor and success which the Lord gave) and partly in opposition to such as
are out of the Church, and enemies thereto: so as, the Israel of God, the
Church of God are comprised under this particle, MY: and thus the Church is
under this first person brought in, saying, The Lord MY banner, not the banner
of aliens and enemies.

Of the title JEHOVAH.
THis title Jehovah was accounted by the Jews themselves Nomen omnipotentis
Dei quatuor literis Hebraicis scribitur, and apud Iudaeos vocatur ineffabile.
Hieron. Comment. in Ezekiel. 16.
to be ineffable, not meet to be uttered: because it sets out the
incomprehensible, and unutterable essence of God. They therefore though in holy
Scripture they find written and printed the letters and vowels of this name
Jehovah, yet pronounce it not. But where they find (...) Adonai Elohim. Genesis 2.
4.
Jehovah expressed, they read Adonai, which is pointed with the same pricks,
and also signifies Lord. And where (...) Adonai Elohim. Gen 15. 2. (...)
Elohim Adonai. Psalm. 68. 20 In priori exemplo Adonai praeponitur Iehouae In
posteriori postconitur. In utroque scribitur cum Chirick sub Vau, and
pronunciatur Elohim.
Jehovah is joined with Adonai, that Adonai might not be twice together
pronounced, it is pointed with the pricks of Elohim, thus, Iehovih, and
answerably they read it Elohim, which word signifies the mighty God. To
confirm this course of pronouncing Jehovah with other words, they allege that
the blasphemy for which the Moungrill of an Egyptian Father, and Israelitish
mother was stoned to death, was an open pronouncing of that ineffable name
Jehovah, in the proper letters and vowels thereof. This they gather out of this
phrase, Lev. 24. 11. (...) Et expressit, seu pronunciavit illud nomen: and
maledixit.
He pronounced that name, and cursed: that is, by pronouncing that name, he
cursed. What was that name? Even this ineffable name Jehovah. Yet further do
the Jews proceed in their seeming high esteem of this name. For, where they
compute their numbers, as the Graecians do by letters: (...) Iod
the first and (...) He
the last letters of this name Jehovah, make up that name (...) Psalm. 135. 4.
Iah, which is an abbreviation of Jehovah, and in effect imports as much: and
according to their ordinary computation makes up the number of fifteen. (...)
Iod
The first letter imports ten, the latter (...) He
five. They in their numbering will not use those two letters together: but
instead of the first, (...) Teth
a letter that signifies nine, and (...) Van
another instead of the latter, that signifies six: as if we instead of
fifteen, should name nine-six. It seems that the Heathen had heard something
of this excellent name: and thereupon named their god Jupiter, of (...) and
Pater; which to join both together, sounds Iapater: and in another case
Iovem, in relation to Jehovah. And this reason is rendered of the Jews
forbearing to pronounce Jehovah, that they might take away all occasion from
the Heathen of imagining their god to be Jehovah. Howsoever, there was a savor
of too much superstition in forbearing the sound, and letters of these high and
excellent names Jehovah, and Iah: and their reasons produced bear not full
weight at the balance of the Sanctuary, the holy Scriptures: yet shall they be
a witness and evidence against many Christians, who over lightly esteem,
Deuteronomy. 28. 58. (...) Nomen illud gloriosissimum, and reverendissimum Jehovah
Deum tuum.
and take in vain this glorious and fearful name, The Lord thy God: which is
directly a breach of the third commandment, to which a terrible penalty is
annexed.

Not the Jews only, but also the LXX Greek Translators of the Old Testament,
were very tender in using this name Jehovah. They do not therefore translate
according to the sound, and sillables, and letters of the Hebrew word: but
according to the sense and meaning thereof: and so turn this Hebrew word
Jehovah, by a word that signifies (...).
LORD: wherein the Compare Psalm. 110. 1. with Mat. 22. 44. And Ier. 31. 31, 32,
33, 34. with Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Penmen of the New Testament, Apostles and Evangelists imitated them.

In imitation hereof, those learned and judicious Divines, who by King JAMES
his special command were appointed to translate anew the holy Scriptures into
the English Tongue, very rarely use this word Jehovah in English: but turn it
thus, The Lord. Yet, that the reader might know when this word Lord is put for
Jehovah, they caused it to be printed in four capital letters, thus, LORD. So
as, whenever ye find LORD so printed, know Jehovah is there expressed in the
original, or at least Iah, which we have showed to be an abbreviation of
Jehovah. Psalm. 136 3. -- 97. 5. Isa, 1. 24. Ios. 3. 11.
Adonai is also a name given to God, and signifies Lord: but it is not so
proper to God as Jehovah: therefore though, when it is applied to God, it
signifies, and is translated Lord, yet is it not printed in four capital
letters, as the words before Genesis 18 27. Psalm. 2. 4. (...) the LORD
mentioned, except when it is pointed with the same vowels that Jehovah is: and
is put for Jehovah. So other names of God, translated Lord, and God. For, there
are ten especial names names applied to God in sacred Scripture (as an ancient
Ten Hebrew names of God Hieron. in Epist. ad Mar cc^.
Father well skild in the Hebrew tongue has set them down together.)

The first is (...) Jehovah: which sets out, among other excellencies, the
eternity and selfe-existency of God.

The second is (...) Iah: which is a diminitive of Jehovah, and notes out the
self same things.

The third is (...) Ehejeh asher Eheje I am that I am. This title shows that
God is as a circle which has neither beginning nor end, but contains all
things within the circuit of it. It implies Gods incomprehensiblenesse,
immutability, and all sufficiency.

The fourth is (...), a strong God. This especially declares Aquila translates
(...) Trem. and Iun. Deum fortem.
the omnipotency of God.

The fifth is (...) Elohim.

The sixth is (...) Elohe.

These two are the plural number of (...) El, the strong God: and as it, so
they import the omnipotency of God. But yet further they imply another, and a
deeper mystery, namely, the Trinity of Persons. For evidence thereof, either
and both of these two last recited names, being applied to God, though they be
of the plural number, use to be joined with words of the singular number.
Witness the first clause of the Bible, (...) Bara Elohim, word for word, Gods
created; that is, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost
created. The word of the plural number sets out the Trinity of Persons. The
word of the singular number joined with it, sets out the Unity of the Deity in
the Trinity of Persons.

The seventh is (...) Shaddai All-sufficient. This title gives apparent
evidence of Gods All Sufficiency in himself, and to all his creatures.

The eight is (...) Elion, Altissimus, The most High. This implies the
surpassing dignity, excellency, and high Sovereignty of God, which is over and
above all.

The ninth is (...) Tsebaoth Lord of Hosts. That God Dominus exercituum, quod
exercitus omnes pro arbitrio suo agit. Trem. and Iun. in Psalm. 24.
which orders all armies at his own pleasure, protecting such as are on his
side, and giving them victory against all their enemies, and subduing and
vanquishing all that are against him; so as this title sets out Gods protection
of his Church against all her enemies.

The tenth is (...) Adonai Lord. This is derived from a (...) Basis.
word that signifies a foundation, or the foot of a pillar: so as this title
shows that that Lord who created all things, does also sustain and preserve
them. It is a proof therefore of his providence.

Of all these, Jehovah is the most proper name of God: Jehovah Gods most proper
name.
and sets out most excellencies in God. It is never in Scripture attributed
to any but to God. Some of the other names of God are sometimes attributed to
Angels, sometimes to men, as, Genesis 19. 2. -- 24. 9.
Adonai, and Psalm. 82. 1. -- 85.
Elohim. But Jehovah never.

Indeed a modern Vorstius de Deo. Disput. 2. de Numin. Dei.. 19.
Heretic has lately published the contrary: and gives these instances
following of the title Jehovah attributed to creatures.

1. This text which we have in hand, (Exo. 17. 15.) where says he, the altar
is styled Jehovah.

Answ. Jehovah simply in it self is not attributed to this Altar. But a
compound word, Iehovah-Nissi, Jehovah my banner. He might to like purpose have
alleged the title which Abraham gave to the place where he was about to
sacrifice Isaac, which is this, Iehovah-jireh, Jehovah will (...) d Genesis 22 14.
provide. And that title which Gideon gave to the Altar which he made to God,
and called Jehovah shalem, Jehovah (...) e Judge. 6 24.
peace, that is, Jehovah is a God of peace: or, Jehovah will give, or, has
given peace. But, all these, and other like to these, are to no purpose for the
point in question, there being a great difference betwixt a simple and compound
name. Besides, these titles had not so much respect to the altars and place
whereunto they were attributed, as to Jehovah himself: as the very phrases do
imply. They were only memorials of Iehovahs protection, and providence, and
peace. Who can imagine otherwise, but that these phrases, Jehovah is my banner,
Jehovah will provide, Jehovah is peace, have respect to Jehovah himself.

2. A second instance which he gives of a creature to which the name Jehovah
is attributed, is the Arc of the Covenant. For proof whereof he alleges
Psalm. 24. 7, 8. and 47. 5.

Answ. In neither of those places quoted, no nor in either of the Psalms
mentioned, is any mention or iutimation of the Arc. Both the Psalms are
typical, and prophecy of Christ, and his joyful coming. So as the title
Jehovah in both those places is attributed to Jesus Christ, true God, true
Jehovah.

3. The third and last instance, is of Angels, who, he says, are styled
Jehovah. And thereof gives these proofs, Genesis 16. 13. and 18, 13, 20, 22. and
19. 17. and Exo. 3. 4. and Judge. 13. 22, 23.

Ans. For, Genesis 19. 17. Jehovah is not there mentioned at all. For the other
places, if they be well marked, it will be found that they all speak of the
Angel of the Covenant, Christ Jesus.

Thus then it remains true that Jehovah is a title proper to God alone,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. This one word consisting of three sillables
especialy such three sillables as they The excellencies of this title Jehovah.
are, set out the unity of the Deity in the Trinity of Persons.

The three syllables contain the notes of all times. The ^ Ie
first the time to come. The (...) Ho
second the time present. The (...) Vah
third the time past. Thus this title given to Christ, (...). Rev. 1. 4.
which is, and which was, and which is to come, is an express interpretation
of Jehovah.

It consists only of Literae quiescentes.
letters of rest (as the Hebrews call them) to show that there is no rest till
we come to Jehovah: and that in him we may safely and securely rest.

It is observable that Jehovah is not mentioned till God had finished all his
works, and rested. Then immediately is it expressed. Namely, in Genesis 2. 4. That
is the first place wherein Jehovah is expressed.

It is ever simply used. It never has any, Vt (...) He Demonstrativa.
demonstrative note before it; as This Jehovah, that Jehovah: nor any Vt
pronomina (...).
affixe or pronoune after it (which in English goes before) as my Jehovah, thy
Jehovah, his Jehovah: nor is it used in In regimine.
government, as Jehovah of Israel, Jehovah of the Jews, Jehovah of the
Gentiles. If at any time it have relation to any peculiar persons, another
title is added to it, thus, (...) Exo. 3. 15.
Jehovah the God of your fathers. Nor is it declined: nor has it the plural
number: as other names of God.

We heard before that Jehovah sets out Gods eternity and selfe-existency.

1. His eternity, in that it contains all times, future, present, and past. In
relation hereunto says the Prophet, (...) Isa. 63. 16.
Thy name is from everlasting, or for ever.

2. Jehovah sets out also Gods selfe-existency. For, it comes from a (...) or
(...)
root that signifies to be. And where God had declared this to be his name,
(...) Exo. 3. 14.
I am that I am, and again, I am (which phrases do apparently imply his being
of himself: from whom all others receive their being, and are preserved) these
are interpretations of Jehovah. And thereupon having thus expressly set out the
meaning thereof, he adds in the Exo. 3. 15.
next verse, Jehovah the God of your Fathers has sent, etc. As if more
distinctly he had said, whereas I thus styled my self, I am that I am: and, I
am: know that it is I Jehovah, that, Am that I am. And this, I am that I am,
and, I am, sets out the meaning of my name Jehovah.

3. Jehovah declares the immutability of God. For, it contains all times; Now,
to have been, without limitation of any beginning, to be, namely the same in
all times, to be to come, without any intimation of any end, must needs imply
an immutability. This interpretation of the name Jehovah (I am that I am) gives
further demonstration of this property (Immutability) to be comprised under it.
Therefore God himself thus says in regard of this his name, I am Jehovah, I
change not. Mal. 3. 6.


4. Jehovah implies his Fidelity. For, where there is immutability of essence,
there must needs be stability in word. God himself declares that thus much is
intended by this name. For, where he says, Exo. 6. 3. Vide Trem. and Iunij an
not. in hunc. loc.
By my name Jehovah was I not known to them, he means, that though he made
many promises to them, especially concerning their possession of Canaan, yet
did he not show himself to be Jehovah, an accomplisher of his promises. That
he reserved to future Generations. And even then when he spoke this, he began
to bring them out of bondage into Canaan, therefore he says, when he sent
Moses to them, Jehovah the God of your fathers has sent, etc. that is, that
God which made such and such promises, will now show himself Jehovah, an
accomplisher of his promises: therefore he has sent to bring you out of Egypt.
This is evident by this which God himself says, Exo. 66.
I am Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the
Egyptians. They have little skill in the Hebrew text, who imagine that the name
Jehovah was not known before God here spoke to Moses. Genesis 24.
Immediately after the first Sabbath in Paradise, when God had finished all his
works, frequent mention is made of Jehovah, and that in Abraham's, Isaacs, and
Jacobs days. So as in the place where God says, By my name Jehovah was I not
known to them, not the name it self, but the forementioned sense and meaning
thereof must needs be meant.

Other divine excellencies might be produced out of this name Jehovah, but
these are sufficient to show the equity of that which the Law thus expressly
requires, Thou shall fear this glorious and fearful name JEHOVAH Deuteronomy. 28.
58.
thy God.

. 73. Of the resolution and instructions of the fifteenth Verse.
THe Sum of this Verse is, A thankful memorial of a memorable victory.

More particularly we may note, 1. The Person that makes the Memorial, Moses.
2. The Kind of Memorial.


This latter is expressed 1. By a monument made, He built an altar. 2. By a
name given to it, And called the name of it Iehovah-Nissi.


1. The Person (Moses, of whom before) was the Prince Moses
and chief Governor of the people at that time, whence I collect, that,
Chief Governors ought to take chief care for public acts of piety.
2. The Altar here built was for an eucharisticall or gratulatory sacrifice,
which was a public testimony of public built an altar
and solemn thanks. Whence I observe, that, Public praise is to be given to
God for public deliverances.
3. The giving a name to this Altar, shows that he would and called the name of
it
have it remain as a memorial. Whence I infer, that, Memorials of Gods
mercies are to be made.
4. The particular name (Iehovah-Nissi) has reference to Moses holding up his
hands, with the Rod of God therein, Iehovah-Nissi.
as a banner. Whereby he shows his acknowledgement of the Lord to be the
giver of that victory. Whence I may conclude, that, The glory of deliverances
is to be ascribed to God.


. 74. Of the care which Governors must have of public piety.
I. See. 73.
Chief Governors are to take chief care for public acts of piety. Genesis 18.
19.
God himself bears witness to Abraham's care herein. -- 35. 1, etc.
It was also a charge which God expressly gave to Jacob: whereof he took
especial care. Where we read of altars built to worship God, we shall find
them erected by chief Governors: such as -- 8. 20.
Noah, -- 12 8.
Abraham, -- 26. 25.
Isaac, -- 33. 20.
Jacob, and others, who in their life time were of highest authority in the
Church of God. So other acts of piety were ordered by them under God. Exo. 3 5.
1, etc
Moses ordered all the duties of piety in the wilderness. David in time of 2 Samuel: 5. 19.
war and -- 21. 1.
famine sought the Lord: and -- 24. 25.
in time of plague built an altar to pacify Gods wrath. Yea he -- 6. 17.
brought the Arc to aresting place: 1 Chro. 23. and 24. and 25. and 26.
appointed the orders and offices of Priests and Levites, and 1 Chro. 28. 11.
made the pattern of the Temple. Solomon his son 2 Chro. 3. 1.
built the Temple, -- 4. 1, etc.
made all the holy vessels appertaining thereto, and -- 6. 1, etc.
dedicated the same. Asa 2 Chro. 14. 3, etc.
reformed religion, and -- 15. 12.
entered himself with his people into a covenant with God. Iehosaphat -- 17. 7.
sent Levites into his cities to teach the people: and in fear of danger -- 20.
3.
proclaimed a fast. -- 24. 5.
Ioash took order for repairing the Temple. -- 29. 3, etc.
Hezekiah, -- 34. 3, etc.
Josiah, aad Neh. 13. 8, 9.
Nehemiah purged corruptions crept into the Church, redressed abuses, and 2
Chro. 30. 1. -- 35. 1.
caused the holy feasts of the Lord to be observed. Thus Christian Emperors,
Neh. 8. 9, 16.
Kings, and other supreme Governors in their dominions, have accounted it a
duty belonging unto them to take care of the Church of Christ, and to appoint
orders for matters of religion and piety. Constantine the Great, who was the
first Christian Emperor, being established in his royal government, Eusebius. de
vita Constant. l 2.
made laws for the peace of Christians, and a free profession of their
religion, and worshipping of the Lord Jesus Christ. Ibid.
He rooted out idolatry every where: and Ibid. l 3.
opposed himself against the errors and heresies that had crept into the
Church. Ibid. l. 3.
He convocated the first general Council at Nice, and sat President therein.
Ibid.
He built and adorned many Churches. Ibid.
He wrote sundry letters to Bishops time after time, for well ordering matters
of piety and Church-affaires. Ibid l. 4,
He promoted sundry Bishops to their places. Ibid.
He was careful to see the Lords Day sanctified. Ibid.
He caused piety to be observed, and God to be worshipped in his armies. He
procured the holy Scripture to be dispersed every where. In fine, he makes
this profession of himself. Hunc mihi prae omnibus finem praepositum esse
debere judicavi, ut in sanctissima Ecclesiae Caetholi cae multitudine, una
fides, sincera charitas, and consentiens erga Deum omnipotentem religionis
cultus conservetur. Eusebius de vit. Constant. l 3.
I acknowledge that this end, above all others, is to be set before me, that in
the holy company of the Catholic Church, one faith, sincere charity, and an
uniform worship toward almighty God, be preserved. Much also might be declared
of Theodosius, and other ancient Christian Emperors care about matters of
piety. The made many edicts and laws thereabouts. Solicitudo clementiae tuae
in Catholic a Ecclesia nihil impacatum, nibil vult esse diversum. Leo Papa ad
Theodos. Epist. 12.
An ancient Bishop of Rome thus writes to Theodosius: The care of your Clemency
will suffer nothing in the Catholic Church to be tumultuous nothing factious.
Yea Pro integritate fidei Catholicae Christianissimum Principem oportet esse
sollicitum. Idem. Epist, 10
the same Bishop says, that, It behooves a Christian Prince to be careful for
the integrity of the Catholic faith. I would the latter Popes of Rome had
been, and still were of that opinion. If they were, they would not usurp such
authority as they have done, and still do over Christian Princes, to the
disturbance of their States. But to come to our own time and country. King
Henry 8. put down the Popes Authority, and began a reformation of Religion.
Edward 6. perfected that reformation. Queen Elizabeth restored it. King James
and King Charles continued it. Thus by the divine providence this title
Defender of the Faith, is most justly put into our Kings style.

To this end, namely to defend the faith, maintain religion, and advance
piety, has God given them that supreme authority which they have, to be in all
causes temporal and ecclesiastical over all persons, in their dominions under
Christ supreme Governors. 2 Chro. 9. 8.
He has set them on his throne, and given them his own title. For, he says
of them, Psalm. 82. 6.
Ye are Gods, children of the most high. And to show that their authority is
not only for State Policy, but also for Church-piety, they are styled Isa. 49.
23.
Nursing Fathers of the Church; and they are made keepers of both tables. Thus
both their power and their place require of chief Governors an especial care
of public piety: whereby they shall give evidence of their own pious
intention and affection: and also draw on others under their government to be
like minded.

See 40. See also Dearths Death on 2 Samuel 21. 1.. 15.
As this puts Magistrates themselves in mind of their duty, so it teaches
subjects to pray for them, that they may do what by virtue of their place they
are bound to do, and by their obedience to such pious orders as their pious
Governors prescribe, to encourage them in their pious care.

. 75. Of giving public praise for public deliverances.
II. See. 71.
PVblique praise is to be given to God for public deliverances. Such was the
praise that for the public a Exo. 15. 1, 20 21.
deliverance from Pharaohs tyranny, was given by Moses. For, it is said, that
Moses, and the children of Israel, and Miriam, and all the women, sang praise
unto the Lord. The women came out with timbrels and dances, and answered the
men: so as it was most public. Judge. 5. 1, etc.
Such was Deborahs and Baraks kind of praising God: and 2 Chro. 20 26
Iehosaphats after his deliverance from the Moabites, Ammonites, and
Inhabitants of Mount Seir. Such are many of David's Psalms. The phrases of
praising God Psalm. 22. 22.
in the midst of the congregation: -- 26. 12.
in congregations; -- 35. 18.
in the great congregation, among much people: -- 116. 18, 19.
in the presence of all Gods people: in the courts of the Lords house; in the
midst of Jerusalem.

By this kind of praise God himself is more glorified, our own hearts are
more quickened, and others are incited to imitate us.

They who content themselves for public blessings with an inward ejaculation
of the heart, or with secret praise in a secret place betwixt God and
themselves, or with private praise in a family, or among some private friends,
though what they do in this manner they do well, yet come short of that which
they ought to do.

O let our hearts be filled with such zeal toward God, as to take the
occasions which by the divine providence are offered us of setting out Gods
praises in the most solemn, and public manner that we can. Thus shall we
show that we can distinguish betwixt Gods blessings, and in some measure carry
our selves answerably to him: that, as he blesses us not only with private but
also with public blessings, so we will praise him, not only privately, but
also publicly. Of public praise, see more in The Saints sacrifice, on Psalm.
116.. 91, 114, 116. Of directions for solemn praise, see The whole Armor of
God, on Ephesians. 6. 18.. 73.

. 76. Of memorials of Gods mercies.
III. See. 73.
MEmorials of Gods mercies are to be made. Besides the names. 65.
before noted for memorials of Gods judgments (which import also his mercies
toward his people as well as judgments on their enemies) there are many
others which directly point at his mercies. As many Genesis 4. 25. -- 5. 9. -- 17.
19.
names given to children, which the Lord, as an especial blessing gave to his
Saints: and -- 17. 5, 15. -- 32. 28.
other names, which as memorials of special favors God gave to men and women:
and -- 16. 14. -- 32. 2. 2 Chro. 20. 26.
names also of places, which were given as signs and evidences of more then
ordinary benefits conferred on Gods people: and other visible monuments of
memorable mercies, as, Exo. 16 32, 33
The pot of Mannah, Ios 4. 9, 20.
the stones which were set in the mid dest of Jordan, and in that place where
the Israelites (having passed through Jordan) encamped: Lev. 23. 42.
The booths which were appointed every year to be made. 25. 54, 55.
Freedom of servants in the year of Iubile: and sundry other like to these:
yea, all the Sacraments instituted in the Church.

By such memorials the memory of Gods mercies is kept fresh: thereby men are
the more, and oftener provoked to praise God for them. Yea, thus Gods mercies
manifested in one age are propagated to many ages: whereby many ages have
matter of praising God ministered unto them: yea and of believing in God, and of
hoping for like mercies from him. For, God is the Lord that changes not. These
Mal. 3. 6.
memorials therefore giving evidence of what God has been able and willing to
do, they give cause to hope for like mercies on like occasions. So as such
memorials are honorable to God, and profitable to present and future ages.

Take notice hereof O ye Saints, to whom the Lord vouchsafes such mercies as
are worthy to be had in everlasting remembrance: let them not slip out of your
minds. Where public memorials of them are wanting let private Christians make
the best private memorials of them that they can.

. 77. Of ascribing the glory of deliverances to God.
IIII. See. 71.
THe glory of deliverances is to be ascribed to God. Genesis 33 20.
The altar which Jacob built, and the name which he gave to it implied as much
as the altar which Moses here built, and the name which he gave to it. For, God
having delivered him as from many other dangers, so in particular from that
revenge which his brother Esan intended against him, Gen 33. 20. (...)
he names the altar which he built El-Elohe, Israel, the God, the God of
Israel. Yea Gen 35. 1.
God himself commanded Jacob for this very end to build an altar to him: which
he did, and -- 7. (...)
called the name of the place El Bethel, the God of the house of God. The name
which Abraham gave to the mount, where Isaac (being bound upon the altar to be
sacrificed) was delivered, tended to the same end, even to testify that God
was the deliverer. The name was this, Genesis 22. 14. (...)
Jehovah jireh, The Lord will see. So did Genesis 16. 14. (...)
this name, Beer lahai-roi, The well of him that lives and sees me, which
Hagar gave to that well of water which the Angel showed her when she and her
son was ready to perish for want of water: and that which Genesis 32. 30.
Jacob gave to the place where he prevailed with the Angel, which was Peniel,
The face of God. (...)
For, of that name he renders this reason, I have seen God face to face, and
my life is preserved. Many other such titles are noted in Scripture, wherein
the name of God is expressed, to show that they ascribed their deliverances to
God. But more expressly is this proved by those hymns which after deliverances
were penned, wherein God is acknowledged to have given deliverance, as those
which Exo. 15. 1.
Moses, Judge 5. 1.
Deborah, 2 Samuel 22. 1.
David, Isa. 38. 9.
Hezekiah, and others set forth. To show that these patterns are a president
for others. We have express precepts to enforce the same. Where David reckoned
up many deliverances which God gave to his people, he infers these
exhortations, 1 Chro. 16. 23, 28.
Sing unto the Lord all the earth; show forth from day to day his salvation.
Give unto the Lord, ye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord glory and
strength. And again, Psalm. 68. 34. Exitus bellorum ex Dei pendere judicio
docet Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 5. cap. 22.
Ascribe ye strength unto the Lord: that is, acknowledge that that strength
which you have to withstand and overcome your enemies is given you of God, and
give him the glory of it.

Whatsoever the means be that are used by men, it is God that gives
deliverances, Psalm. 18. 50. He weakneth the power of enemies, he infatuateth
their counsels, he disappointeth their plots; He gives wisdom, strength,
courage, and success to his people. It is therefore most just and equal, and
that which is but due, that the glory of that which God gives be given to him.

Kingdoms and Nations, Kings and Generals, Cities, and See The Saints
Sacrifice, on Psalm. 116. 78 See also in The Whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18.
Treat. 3. Part. 2. 59, etc.
other Societies, Soldiers, and all sorts of people, yea private and
particular persons, all and every of you take you notice of the deliverances
you have from enemies, and from other dangers and damages; take notice withal
of the author and giver of them; answerably let your hearts be so affected
therewith, that you may be provoked to give the glory to whom it is due. You
have the profit and benefit of deliverances: shall not he that gives them,
have the praise and glory of them? As Jehovah was in the title of the memorial
here made by Moses, so let the Lord be in your mind, and in your tongue, so often
as you have occasion to think or speak of the deliverances which God gives
you: that as he here says, The Lord my banner, so you may say, The Lord my
rock, and Psalm 18. 2.
my fortress, and my deliverer, etc.

. 78. Of the mind and method of the sixteenth Verse.
EXODUS XVII. XVI. For he said, Because the Lord has sworn that the Lord will
have war with Amalek from generation to generation.
THis verse may be taken as a reason of that which went before, as the causall
particle, FOR, prefixed before it by our English and sundry other Translators,
shows. The reason is taken from Gods implacable wrath against Amalek. Because
God was inalterably resolved utterly to destroy Amalek, therefore was there a
memorial of this first beginning to subdue them: that by this memorial
succeeding ages might be encouraged to war against Amalek, as occasion should
be offered, in assurance of victory. The Hebrew has an ordinary copulative
particle (...)
AND, and he said; But that copulative is often used for a causall conjunction.
Besides, there is a proper causall conjunction in the beginning of the next
clause, (...)
BECAUSE. This must needs have reference to that which goes before; as if he
had said, A memorial of this victory is made, because the Lord is resolved to
destroy Amalek.

The phrase whereby Gods resolution is expressed, word for word is this, The
hand upon the throne of the Lord. Or, (...) Manus super solium Domini. Or,
Manum super solium Dominus.
The Lords hand upon the throne. This is a form, or a rite of swearing. As
among us, for ordinary persons to lay their hand upon a book: for noble men,
to lay their hand upon their breast; for a King, to lay his hand upon his
Throne. Sometimes the lifting up of the hand implies an oath, as where Abraham
says, I have lift up my hand to the Lord. Genesis 14. 22.
Thus the Lord expresses his oath, Deuteronomy. 32. 40.
I have lift up my hand to heaven: and here, as spoken of a King it is said,
The Lords hand upon the throne. The word translated (...)
UPON, does often signify AGAINST (as where it is said, Psalm. 2. 2. (...) (...)
They took counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed)
Hereupon Quia manus Hamaleki fuit contra sol^um Iah, bellum Iehovae in
Hamalekum, etc. Iun.
some apply this phrase to Amalek, as if the name Amalek being supplied, it
were thus read, Because the hand of Amalek is against the throne of the Lord,
the Lord will have war with Amalek, etc. Thus they make the former part of
this verse a reason of the latter. This is a good congruous sense, and true in
the substance of it: but not altogether so agreeable to the Hebrew words as the
other, of Gods oath.

Ob. The name of the Lord is twice expressed thus, The Lord has sworn that
the Lord, etc.

Answ. That is an Hebrew phrase often used, and that to set forth the distinction
of persons: as where it is said, The Si quis illud, Pluit Dominus a Domino, non
de Patre and Filio accipit sed cundem a scipso depluisse dicit. anathema sit.
Socrat. Hist. Eccles l. 2. c. 3.
Lord rained from the Lord, (Genesis 19. 24) that is, God the Son rained from
God the Father. The primitive Church was so confident in this exposition of
that text, as they pronounced anathema against such as took it otherwise.
Among other anathemaes annexed to the Nicene Creed, this is one; If any does
not take this, THE LORD rained FROM THE LORD, of the Father and the Son, but
says that the same rained from himself, let him be anathema.

The matter or thing sworn is thus expressed, (...)
War shall be to the Lordwith Amalek. The sense whereof is well given in this
English phrase, The Lord shall have war with Amalek. The Lord is said to do
that which by his appointment and direction his people did. The war here
mentioned was an effect of an irreconciliable enmity, and a means of that
which was before mentioned, an utter putting out of the Verse 14.
remembrance of Amalek: which, because it was not at once done, but by degrees,
time after time, he adds this phrase, (...)
from generation to generation, even till they should be utterly destroyed.

In Sum, this verse sets out Gods irreconciliable enmity against malicious
enemies of his Church.

Herenote 1. The inference. For said he, because. 2. The Substance.


In the Substance we have, 1. The Persons betwixt whom the enmity is The Lord.
Amalek.
2. The Manner of Expressing Executing
that enmity.


It is expressed by a form of oath, The Lord has sworn.

In the execution thereof is set down 1. The isntrumental means thereof,
war. 2. The continuance therein, from generation to generation.


The particulars afford six useful instructions.

I. What God reveals to be inviolably determined must by man be heedfully
remembered. Because God had sworn to extirpate 1. The Inference.
Amalek, Moses makes a memorial thereof. II. Man's wickedness forces God to
swear vengeance. 2. The manner of expressing Gods enmity.
For, so much does this metaphor of Gods laying his hand upon his Throne
import. III. God undertakes his Churches quarrel. For it is said, The LORD
will have war. 3 One of the parties betwixt whom the enmity is.
IIII. They are malicious and implacable enemies against whom Gods wrath is
implacable. Such were they, who are comprised under this word Amalek. 4. The
other party.
V. War is a means of utter ruin. For, to put out the remembrance of Amalek,
war is here threatened. 5. The means of executing vengeance.
VI. Divine vengeance may continue age after age. For, here war is threatened
to continue from generation to generation. 6. The continuance.

. 79. Of remembering Gods unalterable resolution.
I. See. 76.
What God reveals to be inviolably determined must by man be heedfully
remembered. The Lord having caused his servant John to reveal things which Rev.
1. 1, 3.
must in future times come to pass, to show that men ought to be careful in
remembering them, he pronounces him blessed that reads and hears that
prophecy.

The Lord that determines all things to fall out according to the counsel of
his own will, determines also means for accomplishing the same. Now, by a
heedfull remembrance of the things determined being by God revealed, as in time
we observe means for executing that which we know to be determined, we may be
instruments in accomplishing the good pleasure of the Lord: which we can not so
well do, if the thing it self be out of mind and memory. For this very end
were there memorials of this purpose of God against Amalek, that by remembrance
of that purpose, as occasions in time to come were offered, they might do what
in them lay to root out Amalek.

It behooveth us on this ground well to observe what parts of Gods irreversible
counsel are now under the Gospel revealed: and to keep them well in memory.
To instance this in some particulars, these following are as inviolably set
down, as this of Amalek.

1. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.
The destruction of that great adversary of the Christian Church, Antichrist,
whom the Lord shall consume. And Rev. 17. 26, 27
there are certain Kings into whose heart God has put to fulfill his will,
which is, to hate the whore, to make her desolate and naked, and to eat her
flesh, and to burn her with fire.

2. The calling of the Jews. For, beside the many prophesies of those ancient
Prophets that were before Christ, Romans 11. 25. 26
Saint Paul expressly reveals the determined counsel of God concerning this
point, whereof he would not have Christians to be ignorant.

3. A bringing in of Romans 11. 25.
A fullness of the Gentiles: at which time the many differences which are now
betwixt Christian Churches, shall be taken away: and a far better union betwixt
nations even in matters of religion established.

Among other means of remembering these, whereof. 66.
before, we ought often to call upon God for the accomplishment of them, and that
because they are absolutely promised.

. 80. Of Gods swearing vengeance.
II. See. 76.
Man's wickedness forces God to swear vengeance. Hereunto Psalm. 95. 11. Number.
14. 21, etc
the Israelites in the wilderness provoked God: and 1 Samuel 3. 14.
the house of Elie: and Ier. 22. 24.
Ieconiah: and Ezekiel. 17. 16.
Zedekiah: and Am. 6. 8.
the ten Tribes that revolted from the house of David: and Ezekiel. 5. 11.
the children of Judah while they lived in their land, and Ier. 44. 26.
after they were gone into Egypt: and -- 46.18.
the Egyptians: and Zeph. 2. 9.
the Moabites and Ammonites: and Isa. 14. 24.
the Assyrians and Babylonians: and sundry Non ideo Deus jurat, quod fide
credentis indigeat, etc. Deus cum loquitur fidelis est: cujus sermo sacramentum
est. Non enim propter sacramentum fidelis omnipotens Deus:sed propter Deum
etiam fidele sacramentum est. Amb. de Cain and Abel. l. 1. c. 10. Quia illud
verius solemus credere quod jurejurando firmatur, ne nostra claudicet fides,
jurare describitur Deus, Amb. loc. citat.
other as well as these Amalakites mentioned in this text.

What may be the reason that the Lord should swear? Is it not enough for him
to threaten? Surely in regard of himself, and his own divine properties it is
enough. God does not swear, because he needs credit. Every word of God is true
and faithful: and it is as an oath. For, God is not faithful by reason of his
oath, but by reason of God, his oath is true and stable. For, he is able to make
good every word that comes out of his mouth; al in heaven and earth cannot
hinder the execution thereof: and in this kind when by his word his truth is
engaged, he will without failing do what he is able to do. The reason therefore
of Gods oath rests on man, who is prone to make slight account of Gods word,
who has a stiff neck, an hard heart, an obstinate spirit. Wherefore to
terrify him the more, the Lord by oath binds himself to take vengeance. As
on the contrary, Because we are wont to believe more steadfastly that which is
confirmed by an oath, that our faith should not waver, God is said to swear.
So as the Lord in tender respect to the weakness of his children, who by
reason of the flesh in them, are prone to make question of Gods promises, does
bind them with his oath, (as he did to Isa 54. 9.
Noah, to Genesis 22 16.
Abraham, to the Exo 13. 5.
other Patriarchs, to Psalm 89. 3.
David, and to other Saints) so by reason of the wickeds incredulous
disposition, God binds his threatenings with his oath.

1. This gives evidence of the corruption of nature, which Man's slownes to
believe.
is so possessed with infidelity, as more then ordinary means must be used to
work our hearts to give credit to that which ought upon the least intimation
to be with all reverence Sihominibus affirmantibus se vera dicere, etiamsi non
addant sermoni juramentum, credere solemus, quis adeo furiosus esse potest, ut
non credat Conditori omnium rerum, praesertim iuramento interposito. Theodor
Dialog. 1.
believed. God is the Lord God of truth, (Psalm. 31. 5.) He can not lie, (Tit.
1. 2.) It is impossible that he should, Heb. 6. 18 His bare word is more then
all other arguments or inducements whatsoever can be used to work faith. Yet
is it by corrupt man little regarded. If we use to believe men, when they
avouch that they tell truth, who can be so mad, as not to believe the Maker of
all things? especially when he interposeth his oath? O the infidelity of man's
heart to God ward! Must God be put to his oath, and forced to swear? What
matter of humiliation does this minister unto us?

2. Much terror must this needs minister to such as Gods oath for vengeance,
terror.
provoke God thus to ratify vengeance against them. There can be no hope for
such to escape. For, by an oath he that swears binds himself to that which
Quibus juravi in jra mea. Magnus terror. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 94.
he swears to do. The bonds of an oath are such as these.

1. A calling of one to witness for that which is spoken. Instance this form
of oath used by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1. 23.
I call God Bonds of an oath.
for a record upon my soul.

2. An appointing of one to be a Judge of what is said, which this phrase, Gal.
1. 20.
before God I lie not, imports.

3. A making of one to be an avenger, if that which is sworn be not so. So did
she that thus swore, Ruth. 1. 17.
The Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.

4. A pawning of something for the truth of that which is sworn. He pawned the
life of his Sovereign, who thus swore, Genesis 42. 15.
By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go hence, etc.

5. An imprecating of some evil to ones self, if it be not as he swears: as
Number. 5. 20.
that form of oath which by the law is prescribed to a woman suspected of
uncleanenesse.

By all these bonds does God in his oath bind himself. For, z Having no
greater to swear by, makes himself witness, judge, and avenger of what he
swears. Heb. 6. 13.
He swore by himself. The things also which he pawnes are most precious to
him, as, his Ier. 51. 14.
Soul, his -- 44. 26.
Name, his Am 8. 7.
Excellency, his Psalm. 8. 35.
Holiness, his Isa. 62. 8.
Right Hand, and Strong Arm, and here his Exo 17. 16.
Throne. Yea, he does also by way of Psalm 95. 11.
Imprecation bind himself, but so as the thing imprecated is never expressed.

By the way note, that in all the forms of Gods oath he has relation only to
himself: whereby is evicted that Jurat per semetipsum, ut vel juranti Deo,
credas alium Deum omnino non esse Tertul advers. Marcion. lib. 2.
there is none above him, none equal to him: no God but he.

Can any now imagine that that whereunto God so binds himself shall not be
performed? Or that any can free themselves from his wrath, when he is provoked
to swear vengeance. O ye that thus far provoke the great Lord of heaven and
earth, tremble and quake at his oath. Shall such a Lion roar, and the beasts
not tremble? The Kings wrath Loqui Dominum magnum est. Quanto magis jurare
Deum? Iurantem hominem debes timere, ne propter ju rationem faciat quod contra
voluntatem ejus est, quanto magis Deum qui nihil temere iurare po left? Aug.
Enar. in Psalm. 94.
(even a mortal Kings) is as the roaring of a Lion, Pro. 19. 12. as messengers
of death, Prove. 16. 14. Who so provokes him to anger sins against his own
soul, Pro. 20. 2. What is it then to provoke the wrath of the King of Kings?
Yea, so to provoke it, as to force him to swear in wrath that he will be avenged
on them? It is a great matter for the Lord to threaten vengeance: how much more
to swear it? We have cause to fear when a man swears, least by reason of
his oath he do what he would not. How much more ought we to fear when God
swears, who swears nothing rashly?

3. It will be our wisdom to take notice of such particular sins as God does
bind himself to revenge, that we may the more carefully avoid them. They are
such as follow. 1. Infidelity, especially when God has plainly revealed his
purpose, and made many promises, and by his oath confirmed the same, Deuteronomy. 1.
34. 2. Distrustfulnesse, and doubting of good success in that which God gives
in express charge, Deuteronomy. 4. 21. 3. Idolatry, whereby the true God is forsaken
by those to whom he has made known himself: and false gods set in his room,
Ier. 44. 26. 4. Profanation of holy things: which manifests a disrespect of
God himself, Ezekiel. 5. 11. 5. Toleration of such as are impious against God:
whereby men are honored above God, 1 Samuel 3. 14. and 2. 29. 6. Contempt of
Gods word. For, what is that but a contempt of God himself? Ier. 22. 23, 24.
7. Perjury: which is a kind of daring God to take vengeance, Ezekiel. 17. 16. 8.
Light esteem of Gods favors: and continual murmuring at his providence,
Psalm. 95. 11. 9. Indolency, and want of compassion at the miseries of Gods
people, Am. 6. 8. 10. Insultations over the Church of Christ in her calamities,
and when enemies prevail against her, Zeph. 2. 9. 11. Oppression of the poor,
Am. 4. 1, 2. and 8. 7. 12. Insatiable cruelty against such as fall into their
clutches, Isa. 14. 24.


. 81. Of Gods undertaking his Churches quarrels.
III. See. 76.
GOD undertakes his Churches quarrels. What else does that import which Ios, 5
13, 14.
Jehovah appearing to Joshua in the shape of a man with a sword drawn in his
hand, said, As a captain of the host of the Lord am I now come? In this
respect is the Lord stilled Exo. 15. 3.
a man of war: and the wars of Gods Church are styled 1 Samuel 18. 17.
wars of God. As one evidence hereof, God has often visibly showed himself by
extraordinary means to fight for his: as Exo. 14 24, etc.
in the Red Sea against Pharaoh: Ios 6. 20.
by causing the walls of Jericho to fall down without warlike instrument: --
10. 11.
by casting down great stones from heaven upon enemies: Judge 3. 31.
by enabling a man to kill 600 with an ox goade: -- 7. 8. 12.
by giving victory to 300 against an army that for multitude were as the sand
of the sea: -- 15. 8.
by the extraordinary strength which he gave to Sampson: 1 Samuel 7. 10.
by scattering enemies with a great thunder: -- 14. 13, etc.
by putting an army to flight at the sight of two men: 2 Samuel 5. 24. 1 Samuel 14,
15. 2 King. 7. 6.
by affrighting enemies when none appear against them: Judge. 7. 22. 2 Chro.
20. 22.
by stirring up enemies that have conspired together against the Church to
destroy one another: 2 King. 19. 35
by sending his Angel to destroy in one night 185000. To these visible
evidences may be added such phrases in Scripture, as ascribe the waging of
war, discomfiting of enemies, and victories to the Lord: such as these, Exo.
14 25:
The Lord fights. Ios. 10. 10.
The Lord discomfited them, and slew them. Judge 7, 22.
The Lord set every man's sword upon his neighbor. 1 Samuel 14 15.
The earth was stricken with fear by God. 2 Samuel 5. 24.
the Lord goes out to smite the host.

This the Lord does both to encourage his people, and also to daunt his enemies.

Fear not therefore O Church and People of God. 2 Chro. 20. 20
Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established. Romans 8. 31.
If God be for us who can be against us? Well may we on this ground say, 2 King
6. 16.
They that be with us are more then they that be with them.

And know O ye enemies that you have more then flesh and blood to fight against
you: even the Lord of hosts in whose power your breath is. Act. 9. 5.
It is hard to kick against the pricks.

. 82. Of man's implacablenesse making God implacable.
IIII. See. 76.
THey are malicious and implacable enemies against whom Gods wrath is
implacable. How malicious and implacable enemies the Amalekites were, against
whom the Lord swears, has been showed. 2.
before. Little (if at all) better minded were the Ier. 46. 18, 19.
Egyptians, Zeph. 2. 9.
Moabites, Ammonites, Isa. 14. 24, 25.
Assyrians, Babylonians, and other enemies against whom God with like
resolution did swear vengeance. These phrases, 1. Sam. 2. 30.
They that despise me shall be despised. Lev. 26. 23.
If ye walk contrary to me, I will walk contrary to you, says the Lord Isal.
18. 26.
With the froward thou will show thy self froward. These and such like phrases
show, that it is men's implacablenesse which makes God implacable.

When men are dealt withal according to their own dealings, God is justified,
and men are brought to sight of their folly: whereby if repentance be not
wrought in them, their black mouths will be stopped, and kept from barking
against Gods severity.

1. They that desire to understand Gods mind against them, let them take notice
of their own mind against God and his Church.

2. They that desire that God should cease smiting before they are consumed,
let them cease to provoke Gods wrath. Fire will burn so long as fuel is put
to it.

. 83. Of wars desolations.
V. See. 76.
War is a means of utter ruin. When God would have the Canaanites and other
nations whose land he had given to Israel, to be rooted out, he stirs up Ios.
12. 6, 7.
Moses, Joshua, and the Israelites under them to make war against them. By
war was 2 King. 17. 6.
Samaria, and -- 25. 9.
Jerusalem ruined. So was the spacious and populous city of Troy. It was made
as an open field. The four great Monarchs Iamseges est ubi Troia fuit. Ovid.
in Epist. Penel. ad Vliss.
of the world that made many places in the world desolate, did what they did in
that kind by war. Experience of all ages gives too evident proof of the
truth hereof.

Wars ordered by God are the instruments of his wrath and justice against
impenitent people: in justice therefore they cause utter ruin in such causes.
As for men that delight in war, they are commonly cruel and merciless. No
marvel then though they, where they can, utterly destroy all before them.

Should men now delight in war? True it is that lawful it is, and necessary,
as has been proved. 13.
before. But, it is man's iniquity that makes it a lawful remedy, and
necessary. It is directly contrary to comfortable and profitable peace, and in
that respect styled Isa. 45. 7.
evil.

O take heed of provoking the Lord of hosts, least to other lighter judgments
he add this the heaviest external judgment, and so bring us to utter ruin.
2 (...) 14.
Let me not fall into the hand of men. By men are wars waged. Whence it comes
to pass that the evils there of are many and great.

. 84. Of the continuance of Gods vengeance.
VI. Sec. 76.
DIvine vengeance may continue age after age. The extent of that vengeance
which is denounced in the law gives evidence hereof: for it says, that, Exo.
20. 5. -- 347. Number. 14. 18.
The Lord visits the sins of the fathers upon the children unto the third and
fourth generation. This in particular is threatened against Isa. 13. 20. Ier. 50
39.
Babel, that executed much cruelty upon the people of God. By a prophetical
spirit the Psalm. 109. 13.
Psalmist imprecateth as much against the enemies of Christ.

1. Romans 2. 4. 2 Pet. 3. 9.
Gods patience and long suffering is one cause hereof. For, he does not utterly
destroy and cut off all at once that give him cause so to do, to try, if by
forbearing the extremity of vengeance, they or their posterity may be brought
to repentance. Read Ier. 26. 18, 19, etc.

2. Gods jealousy, and fiery indignation is also a cause of the continuance of
vengeance. For, his wrath is such a lasting fire, as if it be once kindled, it
cannot easily be put out. The Law before the forenamed denunciation premiseth
this cause, Exo. 20. 5.
The Lord is a jealous God.

3. Men's persisting in their impiety, they and their posterity is another cause
hereof, and that the more immediate and meritorious cause: which Ier. 44. 21,
22.
the Prophet expressly upbraideth to the rebellious generation of the rebellious
Jews. The law mentions this cause in this clause, Exo. 20. 5.
Of them that hate me.

Here have we a ready answer to such as take boldness to Eccl. 8. 11.
themselves, because they behold not the whole wrath of God powered out at once.
But here they may learn that God can have war with his enemies generation
after generation: now slaying some, then others, and at length all. It was
above 400 years before all Amalek was utterly destroyed: yet here by Joshua
were many slain. After this, more by Judge. 6. 33.
Gideon, yea -- 10. 17.
more also by other Judges. By Saul they were 1 Samuel 14. 48.
once, and -- 15. 7.
again smitten: and finally, by -- 30. 17.
David they were utterly vanquished. And whereas, many generations after this,
Est. 3. 1.
Haman the Agagite, who was of this stock, got some head, the Lord had war
with him, and destroyed -- 7. 10.
him, and -- 9. 10.
his posterity.

Let children of wicked parents, and succeeding generations of impious
predecessors take heed how they tread in the wicked footsteps of such as have
gone before them: especially where there are ensigns displaid of Gods battles
against them. For, in such cases he uses to have war from generation to
generation. Be not as your wicked forefathers were. But cease yet to sin
against God, that he may cease to war against you. We have worthy presidents
hereof in 2 Chro. 29. 6, etc.
Hezekiah, and -- 34. 20, etc.
Josiah. Hitherto of such particular observations as arise from the words of
this history. Now further, in that, War is here noted to be the means of
Gods executing his fierce wrath on an obstinate people, it is requisite that
the evils of war be distinctly noted, and, for aggravation thereof the
benefits of peace.


. 85. Of the evils of war.
1. FOr war multitudes of men are gathered: and those for the most part
lusty, stout, and strong men. In such multitudes it is scarce possible to have
none but such as fear God. Many, many armies there have been in all ages,
wherein not one, that truly feared God, could be found. Very few armies have
been heard of, whereof the greater Quis finis fructusve secularis huius non
dico militiae, sed malitiae Bern. ad Mil. Temp. c. 2. Quis ense accingetur, and
non contraria lenitati and iustitiae exercet? id est dolum, and asperitatem,
and iniustitiam: propria scil. negotia praesiorum. Tertul. advers Iud. and
advers. Marcion. De militum vio lentia, lege Chrysostom. Hom. 76. ad Pop.
Quovalidior est, eo promptior ut inseriorem opprimal Ambr. Offic l. 1. c. 35.
Erat ubique iustitium ob bellorum frequentiam. Hier, in Zac. 8.
part have been men truly religious, and men fearing God: but rather impious,
licentious, and violent persons. Where multitudes of such are assembled
together, what mischiefs may not be feared?

2. For war men use to be furnished with all kind of deadly weapons, and
mortal munition, whereby soldiers are the more emboldened to all manner of
outrages: much cruelty is thereby occasioned. Hence it comes to pass that men
assembled in armies account all that they can come by, be it by hook or
crook, right or wrong, to be as their own. So as the places through which they
pass, and where they make any stay, suffer much prejudice by them. Instance
the Danites that robbed Michah, (Judge. 18. 16. 17, 25.) This undoubtedly was
the cause that moved John the Baptist to warn the soldiers that came to be
instructed by him to take heed of doing violence, Luke 3. 14. For, the more
potent men are, the more forward they are to oppress others. And as for
justice, it uses to sleep when war most waketh

3. To maintain war, rich treasures are often exhausted, subjects much
oppressed, many husbands taken from their wives, parents from their children,
masters from their families, all sorts of men from their callings. Trades
thereby do much decay, and lands are often left untilled. Yea of those that are
so pressed out to the war, many never return home again: whereby it comes to
pass that many women are made widows; many children fatherless, many old,
impotent parents childlesse, and other friends friendlesse, to their utter
undoing.

4. In war many are brought into most lamentable distresses, and yet no
comfort, no succor afforded unto them. Some in the battle have an arm, a leg,
or some other limb cut off, whereby they are disabled to help themselves; and
yet though they call and cry for help, no man pittieth them: but often lie
trampled upon by men and horses to their greater torture. Among other ends of
Flutes, Fifes, Trumpets, Drums, and such like loud sounding instruments in
war, this is said to be one, that the complaints and cries of wounded men
might not be heard. If some of these by their own pains, or help of their
fellow soldiers being wounded get out of the army, they may notwithstanding
feel the smart of their wound, and find the loss of their limbs or senses to
their dying day.

5. By war many are taken captives, whom malicious and mortal enemies (so
taken) often put to exquisite torments: as the Syrians, who threshed Gilead with
threshing instruments of iron, Am. 1. 3. and the Edomites, who ripped up the
women with child of Gilead, Am. 1. 13. and the Moabites, who burnt the bones of
the King of Edom unto lime, Am. 2. 1. and Adonibezek, who having cut off the
thumbs and great toes of 70 Kings, made them gather their meat under his
table, Judge. 1. 7. and the Caldees, who slew the sons of Zedekiah before his
eyes, and then put out the eyes of the said King, and bound him with setters of
brass, etc. 2 King. 25. 7. and the Philistines, who took Sampson, and put out
his eyes, and bound him with fetters of brass, and made him grind in their
prison house, Judge. 16. 21. Others taken by enemies, though they be not so
tortured, yet may be made perpetual slaves.

6. By war strangers and enemies invade others countries and kingdoms, enter
into them, thrust out the true Lords thereof, take away lands and inheritances,
with all their goods and cattle from the true owners: abrogate good laws:
make cruel edicts; deprive people of their privileges and immunities: make
noble men mean; rich men poor: free men slaves: deflowre men's wives, ravish
their virgins, rip up their women with child, trample on old folks, toss
little children on pikes, cause weeping, wailing, and bowling by reason of
their savage cruelty in every place. Good cause therefore had the Psalmist to
pray, that there be no breaking in, nor going out; that there be no complaining
in our streets, Psalm., 4^. 14.

7. By war more blood uses to be shed then any other Cerne cruento borrore
castrorum bella ubique divisa. Madet orbis mutuo sanguine, etc. Cypr. Epist.
lib. 2. Epist. 2. ad Donat.
way. Heaps upon heaps are thereby made of dead corpse. We read of 70000
destroyed by a plague thorowout all Israel within the space of three days, 2 Samuel 24. 15. But by the sword there were slain in one battle (which may well
be supposed to be in one day) 500000: and of whom? of children, of old, poor,
impotent persons? such as for the most part are taken away by plague and
famine? No verily; but 500000 choice men, 2 Chro. 13. 17. We read of huge hosts
indefinitely set down, so as they may be supposed to consist of many hundred
thousands, so vanquished, and destroyed, as none escaped, 2 Chro. 20. 24. Yea,
we read of whole cities, one after another utterly destroyed: even all that
were in them, man and woman, young and old, and ox and sheep, and ass with
the edge of the sword, Ios. 6. 21. and 10. 28, 30, 32, 33, 35, 37, 39, 40. When
God would utterly destroy a stock and all appertaining thereto, the sword has
been used as his instrument to effect that judgment. Instance the case of
Jeroboam and Baasha, 1 King. 15. 29. and 16. 11. Yea and of Ahab also, 2 King.
10. 11. The Amorites likewise, Canaanites, and other nations were utterly
rooted out by the sword.

8. In war most unnatural slaughters are often committed. For, it may and often
does fall out that one brother warreth Mart cadunt subiti per mutua vulnera
fratres. Ovid. Metamorph. lib. 3. fab. 1.
on one side, and another on the contrary side: So father and son: and other
near kinsfolk, and dear friends. Whence it comes to pass that a brother
kills a brother, a father a son, a son a father, a kinsman a kinsman, a
friend a friend: By war the eleven Tribes had almost utterly destroyed the
Tribe of Benjamin, which made them weep sore, Judge. 21. 2 It cannot be
otherwise thought but that in the bloody wars betwixt the house of Saul and
the house of David, and betwixt Judah and Israel, many a kinsman slew one
another. This when it is known, pierces so deeply into the soul, as no cure
can ever be made thereof. Oedipus Senec. Traged 3 quae dicitur Thebais Idem
Traged 5 quae dictur Oedipus. Caecil Stat. in Theb. Ovid in Ibin and 3 Fast.
having understood that in a conflict he had killed his father, (though he did
it ignorantly and casually, yet) he pulled out his own eyes in revenge of
himself. The two sons of Oedipus, namely Eteocles and Polynices, waging
war one against another, slew each the other. Telegonus also killed his own
father in a tumult. These woeful accidents do most usually happen in civil
wars.

9. By war not only living persons are slain, so as towns, cities, and
nations have been dispeopled, but corn fields burnt, fruit trees cut down,
barnes, garners, and other like places filled with all kind of grain, and
other provision for man and beast, destroyed and consumed: towers and walls
beaten down: houses of men, and houses of God, even sacred temples set on
fire, and burnt down to the ground. The most sacred house of God that ever
was, that glorious Temple which Solomon built was not in this kind spared, 2
King. 25. 9. Yea famous cities, and towns, and kingdoms have by war been
made heaps of rubbish, and desolate wildernesses, full of briars and thorns,
and habitations for wild beasts, dragons, owls, and other doleful creatures.
For proof read Isa. 7. 20, ^4. and 13. 20, etc. and 17. 1, 2. and 34. 9, etc.
Ier. 50. 39 40. Zeph. 2. 13, 14. Judge. 9. 45. Thus the sword is not only
terrible to present living creatures, but also to all sorts of creatures in
present and future ages. As a Sicut torrens qui valde excurrit and inundat,
omnia secum rapit and perdit, ita and barbari illi invaserunt omnes genecs, and
perdiderant, Chrysostom. Hom 35. in Genesis 14.
flood which runs with a strong stream, and overfloweth, carries away and
destroys all, so barbarous soldiers invade and destroy all.

10. By war the juster cause, and better part is often overthrown, and put to
the worst. Herein (if in any other thing) is the proverb verified, Might over
comes right. For, it falls out in war where multitudes are gathered on
the one side, and on the other, as it does in single combats, and duels. The
stronger and skilfuller, the more experienced and more active man may have the
worse cause, and yet overcome the other, though the juster person. Hence is it
that Infidels take occasion of insulting over Christians, Idolaters over
Worshippers of the true God, and the unrighteous over the righteous. The
Prophets stood amazed hereat: and in an humble manner expostulated the case
with God, as, Hab. 1. 13, etc. Lam. 4. 20. Psalm. 44. 9, etc. and 74. 4, etc.
and 79. 1, etc.

. 86. Of the better part put to the worst in war.
Quest. Has not God the ordering of battles? Does not he give victory to whom
he will? Is there any restraint to the Lord to save by many or by few? If so,
why has not the better part always the better success and victory?

Answ. Most true it is that the issue of war is disposed by the Lord: and
that it is nothing with him to help, whether See. 77. 2 Chro. 14. 11.
with many, or with them that have no power. Yet can we not thence in far
that the better side shall always have the victory. For,

1. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out, Romans
11. 33.

2. They who are accounted the better persons, and have the better cause, may
have some secret causes in them deserving punishment, for which the Lord wisely
and justly suffers them to fall into their enemies hands: and so gives them
occasion to search out that which lies hid, Josh. 7. 13.

3. Though the persons which wage war, and the cause for which it is waged,
be righteous, yet their manner of waging may be such as God be justly provoked
thereby to give them over to their enemies, as he did the Israelites when they
went about to revenge the villainy of the men of Gibeah, Judge. 20. 21. Saints
may be too confident in their own might and wit. They may be zealous in
punishing others sins, and yet harbor secret sins among themselves. They
may enter battle without seeking the Lord aright. For these and other like
reasons may the Lord suffer them to fail in their attempts.

4. The unrighteous often prevail against the righteous, that thereby they may
be Gods rod to punish his children. But what privilege is this to the
unrighteous? what damage is it to the righteous? The rod, when Gods work is
done, shall be cast into the fire. The Saint being a child of God that is beaten
therewith, will thereby be bettered.

5. As for the Lords saving with few against many, and with them that have no
power against such as are mighty, and every way well furnished to the war, it
is true in regard of Gods almighty and extraordinary power. But ordinarily
success is given according to the means that are used. So as if the worse part
be better prepared with men more in number, and more valiant, and with more
store of better munition, ordinarily they get the upper hand thereby. In this
respect Christ gives advice to consider how an enemy is prepared, and
answerably to go out against him, or to seek peace with him, Luke 14. 31, 32.

. 87. Of the good of war notwithstanding the evils thereof.
Quest. HOw can such evils of war stand with the lawfulness and usefulness
of war. 13, 14, etc.
before noted?

Answ. 1. The lawfulness of war arises from the. 17. Ex animo hominum
vitioso bellum erumpit. Chrysostom. in Mat. 10. Hom. 36.
necessity thereof: and the necessity of war from the iniquity of men.
Because ambitious and injurious men cannot otherwise be restrained then by
war, or because there is no other way to punish such malefactors, it is
lawful and needful after such a manner to draw out and use the sword of the
Lord against them.

2. The. 17.
usefulness of war arises from the good effects that issue from a just
undertaking, a wise managing, and a prosperous finishing of the same. But, the
evils of war arise from the ill disposition of such as are without just cause
incited thereto, and being armed with power, abuse the same to the satisfying
of their inhumane humor. Many evils arise from the supreme authority of a
Monarch, when he turns it into a tyranny: yet is such a supreme authority most
warrantable and profitable.

. 88. Of war the sorest judgment.
The evils of war being such as have been. 84.
showed, we may well infer these conclusions following.

I. War is the heaviest of Gods judgments. There are three public
judgment called Ezekiel. 5. 16.
evil arrows. Arrows, because they are sharp and deadly; piercing to the
very heart of a man. Evil, by reason of their effects, the evils and mischiefs
which they work. In this respect says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32. 23.
I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them. Gods
arrows are called instruments of death, Psalm. 7. 13. The three most fearful
judgments, which are most usually called Gods arrows, are Plague, Famine,
Sword. The sorest of all these is the Sword. Evident is this by the answer
which David gave to Gad, who from the Lord put those three to his choice. One
of them must be endured: but which of them, he himself might choose. Thereupon
he supplicated against the sword, in these words, Let me not fall into the
hands of man. Hereby he 2 Samuel 241 14.
showed that he accounted the sword the most terrible judgment: and withal
intimates the reason thereof: because it is put into man's hands; so as Plague
and Famine is more immediately ordered by God, then War. Men are made the
instruments thereof. And their anger is fierce, and their wrath cruel. Yea,
they prove many times insatiable in their Genesis 49. 7. Homo homini lupu^. Plaut
in Asinar.
cruelty: as wolves when they enter among a flock of sheep. For (as it is in
the proverb) Man is a wolf to man: as cruel one to another, as a wolf to
sheep: one undermining, one devouring another, as they can get any advantage
one against another.

Besides, war more usually causes both plague and famine, then either of
them causes war. If a plague rage a city or country, enemies will be afraid
to send an army thither, least they be all infected and destroyed with the
plague. So if famine through scarcity of food destroy the inhabitants of a land,
enemies will forbear to invade it (especially if they be not able to bring
with them provision enough for horse and man to so remote a place) fearing
least they and their cattle be all starved. Thus these two judgments may be
some means to avert war. But war ordinarily causes plague and famine.
These Lev. 26. 25, 26. Ier. 14. 12. Ezekiel. 6. 11.
three, Sword, Pestilence, Famine, are very often joined together: and for the
most part, Sword is put in the first place, as the cause of the other two.
Plagues often arise from multitudes of people thwacked together, from noisome
savours, from want of clean shiftings, from unwholesome food, from infected
air, and other like causes which are ordinarily occasioned by war:
especially, when people are by enemies blocked up, and have not liberty to go
abroad, and to provide for themselves.

In Jerusalem, when it was besieged by the Babylonians Ier. 21. 6, 7.
there was a great pestilence, and much famine: but much greater Joseph. de
Bello Iud. l. 6. c. 11.
when it was besieged by the Romans. The first great plague that was in Queen
Elizabeth's days was brought into England by the soldiers that came from Stow
in his general Chron. of Engl. an. 4. Eliz.
New haven that was somwhile besieged, and after taken by the enemy.

Of famine caused by war, see Dearths Death, on 2 Samuel 21. 1.. 22. 24.

If war be an usual occasion of plague and famine, it must needs be the
greatest of them: and if of them, surely the greatest of other judgments.

. 89. Of delighting in war.
II. NO true Christian can, or may delight in war. He may. 17, 18.
on just cause wage war: but there is a great difference betwixt the doing of
a thing, and delight therein. God does afflict, and grieve children of men, but
not Lam 3. 33. (...) ex cord suo.
from his heart, willingly. Judgment is Isa. 38. 21
his strange work, his strange act. So ought war to be unto Christians. A
true Christians heart is possessed with true charity. But charity delights
not in spoils, in wounds, in pains, and tortures, in blood of men, nor in any
other evils that war ordinarily causes. They are therefore destitute of true
Christian charity, and in that respect, no true Christians that simply desire
war, that without just and urgent cause raise war, that with delight
enbroile themselves therein. They are worse then savages, yea then savage
beasts. Though the Lord made many of the Heathen his rod to correct his people:
yet because they delighted in shedding blood, the Lord brought heavy judgments
upon them: as on Ashur, Isa. 10. 5, etc. on Babylon, Isa. 14. 4, etc. Ier. 50.
23, 24. Hab. 2. 7, 8. on Mount Seir, Ezekiel. 35. 5, 6. Yea also upon the house of
Iehu, who destroyed the stock of Ahab, Hos. 1. 4.

. 90. Of Christians backwardness to war.
III. CHristians ought to be very backward to war. The evils thereof are
ordinarily so many, as they should make a Christian try all other fair means
for retaining or recovering his own, and for preventing or redressing wrongs,
then by war to seek the accomplishing of his desire. Christians should be
affected to war as the Apostle would have them to law, 1 Cor. 6. 1, etc. They
ought not to use it but in the last place, after all other good means have
been used, as a desperate remedy, when no other remedy will serve the turn.
Urgent necessity should force Christians to war. The evil effects of war
cannot but be very grievous to a true Christian soul. How then may he be
forward to that which causes such evil effects? See the caution even for just
wars, before given in the latter end of. 18.

. 91. Of circumspection in waging war.
IIII. GReat circumspection must be used in waging war. Many evils ordinarily
arising from war, if men be not watchful over themselves, pride, wrath,
revenge, cruelty, and many other corruptions, whereunto our nature is much
prone, will soon find occasion to display themselves, by reason of that power
which men gathered together in an army, have. David, a man in a great measure
renewed, Act. 13. 22.
yea a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 25. 22.
being accompanied with an army of valiant men, upon a discurtesie offered unto
him by a churl, was so incensed with rage, and enflamed with revenge, as he
vowed, and swore to destroy all that pertained to that churlish Nabal, before
the next morning. If such a man, by reason of his warlike power, was so soon
provoked to so great an evil, what will not war provoke others unto,
especially if they be confident in their power, and get any advantages against
their enemies. Wherefore, to prevent the evils of war, such as have just
occasion of waging war, must look to their manner of waging war, and lay aside
al malice, envy, wrath, revenge, desire of blood, cruelty, and other inhumane
passions: and continually walk before him, carrying themselves as in the
presence of God, ordering all their actions according to the word of God; yea
and often looking to God, calling upon him, and doing such things as in the good
success of them may give them just cause to praise God. Thus may we avoid the
ordinary evils of war.

. 92. Of war kept out of a land.
V. IT is a blessing to have war kept out of a land. War being a cause of
many evils, to have war kept out, is to be freed from those many evils. This is
that case, whereof the Psalmist thus says, Psalm 144. 15.
Happy is that people that is in such a case. This was the happiness of
Salomons reign; for, 1 Chro. 22 9
God gave him rest from all his enemies round about. As a blessing on
Iehosaphat and his kingdom, it is recorded, that, 2 Chro. 17. 10
The fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdom of the lands that were round
about Judah, so that they made no war against Iehosaphat.

Thrice happy is England in this respect, that under the blessed government of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and our now (and long may be be our now) royal
Sovereign, King Charles, has been preserved from war, the cause of many
evils, and from the many evils of war. It cannot be denied, but that in
blessed Queen Elizabeth's days, there was much war: and that many attempts
were made by enemies abroad, and traitors at home to disturb our Peace,
extirpate our Religion, and ruinate our State: but they all turned to the
increase of our happiness, in that we are delivered from them all, and so
preserved from the evils of open hostility, and privy conspiracy, as those
attempts proved through the divine providence more glorious, and many ways
beneficial to Sovereign and Subjects, to Church and Commonwealth, then
ignominious, or any way prejudicial.

That there may be better notice taken hereof to enlarge our hearts the more to
praise God, and to move us the more securely and confidently to cast our care
on him, I hope it will not be unseasonable here to set down a particular
catalogue of such deliverances from the foresaid evils, as God has given us
since the beginning of that blessed Queens reign.

. 93. Of Englands Deliverances, since Queen Elizabeth began her Reign.
1. GOD preserved Queen Elizabeth from death in the time of her sister Queen
Mary. For, being charged with conspiracy in the case of Sr. Thomas Wyats
rising, but most unjustly, was sent as a prisoner to the Tower An. Dom. 1553.
1. Mar.
of London. Her death was in those days many ways plotted, but by the divine
Providence all those plots were disappointed.

2. When by the death of Queen Mary the Crown and Kingdom by just and
unquestionable title descended on her, the whole Land professed a religion
contrary to the Religion 17. Nov. 1558.
which she professed, and the Peers and Commons were then assembled in
Parliament, and that with purpose to settle Popery (as it is likely) more
firmly in this land; yet did the Lord move their hearts then and there to
acknowledge her title, and that by the mouth of Doctor Heath, then Archbishop
of York, and Lord Chancellor of England, so as she was forth with openly
proclaimed Queen of England, and answerably with as great joy and rejoicing as
ever Prince was, received by her Subjects.

3. Being crowned, she found a potent Prince, namely, Henry the second then the
French King, to endeavor to set An Dom. 1559. Reg. 2.
up another title of Mary then Queen of Scots, who was married to Francis his
son. To them they gave this title, Francis and Mary by the grace of God, of
Scotland, England, Franciscus and Maria Dei gratia Scotiae, Angliaeo and
Hiberniae Rex and Regina.
and Ireland King and Queen. Answerably they quartered the Arms of England
with the Arms of Scotland. To settle the said Mary in the room of Queen
Elizabeth, an army was sent out of France into Scotland, to join with the
Scots, and to invade England: and the Pope was dealt withal to declare
Elizabeth to be an heretic and illegitimate, and Mary to be the true Queen
of England. But by the Divine Providence all this vanished as smoke into the
air. For, the Scots refused to join with the French against England. Yea,
they desired and obtained aid of Queen Elizabeth to thrust the French out of
Scotland.

4. Philip King of Spain earnestly desired marriage with An. Dom. 1559 Reg. 2.
Queen Elizabeth, notwithstanding his late marriage with Queen Mary sister to
Queen Elizabeth. Now because Gods Word expressly forbids one man to mary two
sisters, he pretended to get a dispensation from the Pope. But all his
endeavors about so impious a matter, naught prevailed with so pious a Prince.
Wherefore he endeavored to make a marriage betwixt Queen Elizabeth, and
Charles, son of Ferdinand then Emperor, and uncle to the said Philip. All was
to bring the Kingdom of England to his own lineage and family. But neither
could this attempt take effect. Whereupon Philip King of Spain became an utter
enemy to that royal Queen, which enmity (through the divine providence) turned
to Queen Elizabeth's glory.

5. Arthur Poole of the race of George Duke of Clarence, An. Dom. 1562 Reg. 4.
of the house of York, with sundry of his kindred and alliance conspired to
set again on foot the title of Mary Queen of Scots, and to bring an army out
of France into Wales, to make their challenge good; but they were before the
execution of their plot discovered, and themselves condemned.

6. After the forementioned emulation, yea, and enmity betwixt King Philip of
Spain, and Queen Elizabeth, one Pope after another was much solicited by
Spanish and other Papists to excommunicate that pious Prince, upon pretense of
heresy. But till she was made able to stand out against all her enemies, God
kept away those thunderbolts under Pope An. Dom. 1569 Reg. 11. The form of
this excommunication is in the very words thereof recorded in Camden. Annal.
rerum Anglic. and Hibern. Reg. Elizab. part. 2. MDLXX.
Paulus 4. and Pius 4.

7. Pope Pius 5. a man of a fierce and fiery disposition, was so far wrought
upon, as in the most solemn manner that he could, excommunicated, and
anathematized blessed Queen Elizabeth, and caused a brief thereof with his
leaden bull annexed thereto, to be fastened to the gate of the Bishop of Londons
palace near Paul's Church, by one John Felton, who being apprehended,
confessed the fact, and received condign punishment on a gibbet before the
said gate. This excommunication caused many troubles on man's part: but withal
as many preservations and deliverances on Gods part.

8. The Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, through An. Dom. 1570 Reg. 12.
promises of aid from the Pope and Spaniard, raised up a rebellion against
Queen and State in the North-parts: but were soon discomfited. The Earl of
Northumberland was taken and beheaded. The other Earl fled beyond sea, and
ended his days in a poor and mean estate.

9. John Story Doctor of Law, a spy to the Duke of Alva, An Dom. 1570. Reg. 12.
conspired with one Prestol, a man much addicted to magic, and a subject to
the King of Spain, against the life of Queen Elizabeth. He sent advertisement
to the Duke of Alva, how he might invade England, and make Ireland revolt. God
bringing this treason to light, both Story and Prestol were by a Parliament
adjudged guilty of high treason. Thereupon they received their just demerit.

10. The Bishop of Rosse practiced with sundry English An. Dom. 1571. Reg. 13.
men to intercept Queen Elizabeth, and to trouble the Parliament then sitting,
that so another Queen might be set up instead of Elizabeth. But there fell out
such mutual mistrust among the Conspirators, as their plots turned to their
own damage.

11. John Duke of Austria, ambitiously affecting the kingdoms of England and
Scotland, dealt with the Pope and An. Dom. 1576. Reg 18.
King of Spain for aid against England. For a pretense of title thereto, he
sought marriage with the next heir. But in the midst of his ambitious
projects he suddenly died.

12. Thomas Stukely an English fugitive plotted with two Popes, Pius 5. and
Gregorius 13. to lead forces into Ireland, An. Dom. 1578. Reg 20.
there to join with the Rebels, and to conquer it for Pope Gregory's bastard
son. For this purpose he was made General of 8000 Italian soldiers. But by
the persuasion of Sebastian King of Portugal he went with his troops into
Mauritania and was there slain.

13. Nicolas Sanders an English Priest went further, for he with a banner
consecrated by the Pope, and an army of An. Dom. 1580. Reg 22.
Spaniards entered into Ireland, joined with the Rebels, caused a great
insurrection, but to the overthrow of himself and all that took part with him.

14. Robert Parsons, Edmund Campion, and other Seminaries An. Dom. 1581. Reg.
23.
and Incendiaries were sent by the Pope from Rome into England, to draw the
Queens subjects from their allegiance, to prepare them to a change, and to
take part with foreign powers when they should be sent into England. Campion,
Sherwin, Kirly, and Briant were convicted and condemned of high treason, and
answerably executed. But their divelish attempts turned to a greater restraint
of Papists in England, and a greater security of the Queens Majesty, and her
State.

15. John Somervill was apprehended as he was coming An. Dom. 1583. Reg. 26.
in a desperate manner to kill the Queen, being moved thereto (as he himself
confessed) by reading certain popish books written against the Queen by
Seminaries. Being condemned, in New gate he strangled himself.

16. William Parry Doctor of Law, made promise and An. Dom. 1585 Reg. 27.
vow to kill the Queens Majesty, and for that end obtained of the Pope, an
absolution for the fact before it was committed. But God struck his heart with
such terror, as though he had opportunity, yet he put it off so long, as at
length his purpose was discovered, and he received the just reward of a traitor.

17. John Ballard a Romish Priest, stirred up the fiery spirits An. Dom. 1586
Reg. 27.
of certain Popish Gentlemen to undertake to kill the Queen, as she should go
abroad to take the air: which though they had vowed to do, yet was their
unnatural treason discovered before they had the opportunity to do it. At
their arraignment they were found guilty of high treason against the Queens
person, of stirring civil wars in the Realm, and of practicing to bring in
foreign power. Fourteen of them were as traitors executed.

17. William Stafford a young Gentleman, and one Moody An. Dom. 1587. Reg. 29.
a desperate man, were by a foreign Ambassador lying in England, persuaded
to kill the Queen. But the plot was discovered before it was effected.

19. The inveterate hatred of Philip King of Spain An. Dom. 1588. Reg. 30.
against Queen Elizabeth, and his unsatiable ambition and desire of enjoying
England as his own; was at length openly manifested by an huge navy, supposed,
and thereupon entitled invincible, set to sea against England. But the Lord of
sea and land soon disappointed their hopes. The navy was dissipated on the
sea, and England secured.

20. Rodericke Lopez a Jew, Physician in ordinary to her An. Dom. 1593. Reg. 35.
Majesty, upon promise of 50000 crowns to be sent him out of Spain,
undertook to poison the Queen. But before the hire came, the treason was
discovered, and the traitor executed.

21. Patrick Cullin an Irish Fencer, was hired by English An. Dom. 1594. Reg.
36.
runagates in the Low Countries to kill the Queen: and with that purpose came
over: but intelligence being given thereof, he was apprehended and executed.

22. Edmond York and Richard Williams hired in like An. eodem.
manner to the like, namely to kill her Majesty, and to set on fire her navy
with balls of wildfire, were prevented and executed.

23. Edward Squire being in a ship on sea, taken by the An. Dom. 1598. Reg. 40.
Spaniards, and brought into Spain, was there suborned and directed by Richard
Walpoole an English fugitive and a Jesuit to poison the Queen, by laying a
strong poison (which the Jesuit there gave him) on the pommell of the saddle
whereon the Queen should ride: that she laying her hand thereon, might carry
the sent thereof to her nose, and thereby receive it into her body: which if
she had done, it had been her death. Never any treason came so near to the
execution as this. For the traitor Squire observed his direction, did the deed,
and that, immediately before the Queen rid forth. But the divine providence
kept her from touching the pommell with her hand. Yet the treason was
discovered, and the traitor received condign punishment.

24. The Earl of Tyrone, an Irish man, having been some while in Spain,
returned from thence An. Dom. 1599 Reg. 41.
with a rebellious mind, and raised by the assistance of the Spaniard and
popish faction in Ireland a rebellion. More damage accrued to Queen and State
by this rebellion, then any other way all her days. Yet through the constant
providence of God this rebel also was brought under, and that land secured.

25. There was a plot for removing some of the Queens An. Dom. 1600 Reg. 42.
chief Officers and Counselors from her: which (if it had not been prevented)
might have proved dangerous to her Person and State: and so much the rather
because there were Papists which had a great hand in that conspiracy. Therein
therefore was the divine Providence manifested by preserving her Majesty in
safety.

26. Henry Garnet Superior of the Jesuits in England, Robert Tresmond
Jesuit, Robert Catesby, Francis Tresham, An. Dom. 1602 Reg. 44, 45.
and others, in the name of all the Romish Catholics in England, employ
Thomas Winter into Spain, to obtain an army from Spain to join with the
forces of Papists in England, to change the government, and religion thereof.
There being then hostility between Spain and England, the motion was readily
embraced by the Spaniard; and 100000 crowns promised to help forward the
business. But before any thing could be effected, Queen Elizabeth, full of
Queen Elizabeth was borne at Greenwich, 7. Sept. 1533. and died at Richmond,
24. Mar 1602. She began her reign 17. Nov 1558 and ended her reign with her
life 24. Mar. 1602.
years, in peace, on her bed, ended her days: being 69 years, 6 months, and
17 days old: a greater age then any other King or Queen of England from the
Conquest attained to. She was about the age of David King of Israel when he
died: who lived the longest of all the Kings of Israel and Judah. She reigned
44 years, 4 months, and 7 days.

Doubtless many more treasons were intended and plotted against her, then are
recorded: but she was kept so sure and secure under the wings of the Almighty,
whose truth she constantly maintained (herein especially showing her self to
be SEMPER EADEM, always the same) as no open hostility, no privy conspiracy
ever prevailed against her. Her preservation much made to our security. The
remembrance therefore thereof ought ever to be fresh among us, that so long as
the benefit thereof continues, which will be so long as true Religion
continues among us, due praises may be yielded to her and our Protector.

. 94. Of Gods Providence to England in King James his time.
1. THe day of Queen Elizabeth's departure out of this life, was the day long
expected by Papists, as a day 24. Mar, 1602.
for rooting out our Religion, and altering our government. For, Pope Clement
8. had sent the year before two Bulls, to interdict all claim or title to the
Crown of England, though never so directly and nearly interessed by descent, to
all such as would not by their best endeavors promote the Catholic cause,
and by solemn and sacred oath religiously subscribe thereto. But God who
approves our Religion, and detesteth their superstition, or rather idolatry,
made all their hopes utterly frustrate. For, in the setting of one Sun
immediately arose another, and that in full brightness, to the unspeakable
Occubult sol: nox nulla secuta est.
comfort of all true hearted Englishmen, and to the utter astonishment of all
popish enemies of this flourishing State. In the same morning wherein Queen
Elizabeth died, Queen Elizabeth died about two in the morning. About eight
King Iumes was proclaimed at Court: and about eleven in Cheape-side An Dom.
1603 Reg. 1.
was King James first at the Court gate, and then at the Cross in Cheap side,
with wonderful great acclamations, and all manner of manifestations of joy,
proclaimed King. An especial evidence of the divine providence.

2. In the first year of his Majesty's reign, before he was solemnly
anointed and crowned, Watson and Cleark two Romish Priests, conspired with
others, some noble men, some Knights, and some Gentlemen, to surprise King
James, and Prince Henry, presuming on foreign forces for aid and assistance,
thereby to alter religion, and to set up such Officers of State, as they
thought best. But their plot before it came to execution was discovered, they
condemned, some of them executed, others spared through the Kings clemency.

3. Garnet and Tresmond Jesuits, with Catesby and Tresham before mentioned,
notwithstanding the death of Queen Elizabeth, when they saw that King James
defended the same faith, continued to solicit the King of Spain to send an
army into England, to join with the forces of Papists here, for extirpation of
Religion. But the King of Spain being then in treaty with the King of England
about peace, refused to hearken to any such motion. Thereupon they (together
with other unnatural and traitorous subjects) plotted the matchless,
merciless, devilish, and damnable gun-powder-treason, whereof before,. 67. If
ever the The day appointed to blow up the Parliament with gun powder, was 5.
Nov. 1605. Reg. Iacobi 3.
eye of the divine providence did show it self watchful for the safety of
England, it was in the discovery of this plot before it came to execution.
Wherefore among other deliverances, this is to be had in perpetual remembrance.

4. If we consider the great hazard wherein blessed Charles, (then Prince, now
our royal Sovereign) was in going to Spain, and returning from Spain, on
land and sea; and withal if we well weigh the admirable and unutterable
benefits which we enjoy by his happy reign over us, we shall find just cause
to put the day of his safe arrival to England, 6. October. 1623 Reg. Iacobi 20.
into the catalogue of days of memorials of Gods merciful Providence over
this Kingdom. From that day the crests of Papists fell down: especially after
the downfall of many An Dom. 1623 26. Oct. stilo vet. 5. Nov. stilo novo.
of them at a Romish Priests sermon in Blacke-Friers, London.

Of the forementioned deliverances much more is recorded in Camdens Annals,
Bishop Carltons Collections, Speeds History, and other Chronicles of England.

For my purpose it is enough to have pointed at the heads of them.

Yet because contraries laid together do more lively set out (...). Dixit
Arist. Rhet. 3. 2
each other in their own proper colors. Hereunto shall be annexed another
brief catalogue of such troubles as in former Princes times from the Conquest,
(for to go higher is not much requisite) have fallen out to the great prejudice
of Kings and Kingdom: that thus Gods blessing on us under the reigns of
Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles (by whom our light and life, the
Gospel is still continued among us) may be the better discerned.

. 95. Of the troubles of England from the Conquest to Queen Elizabeth's time.
1. WIlliam, Duke of Normandy, surnamed The Conqueror, 1066. Oct. 14
got the crown with much blood, having slain Harold the King immediately
before him, two of his brothers, and 67974 English men. He changed many of the
laws and customs of England. He defaced many Churches, and depopulated sundry
towns to make a forest for beasts: where two of his own sons were
strangely slain. The Danes to recover the Crown, in his days invaded the
land, burnt York, and slew 3000 men. The Scots likewise about the same time
made great spoil in England: and spared nor sex nor age. Much trouble was in
the land all his time. Being in France, and there setting a town on fire, he
rode so near the fire, as his horse with the heat thereof gave such a leap, as
it brake the rimme of his belly, whereof he died, in the 21. year of his
reign, and 64 of his age. Being dead, he was denied burial till much
mediation was made, and a great composition paid.

2. William Rusus son to the Conqueror, having an elder 1087. Sep. 9.
brother then living, came not without difficulty to the crown. He had much
war, both with his elder brother Robert, and also with his younger brother
Henry. In his time were many wars with the Scots, and Welsh, much English
blood spilt, and himself casually slain by one of his subjects with an arrow
shot at a stag, in the 13. year of his reign, and 43 of his age. His corpse
were carried toward Winchester in a colliers cart.

3. Henry 1. youngest son of William the Conqueror, 1100. Aug. 1.
put Robert his elder brother by the crown: whence arose many broiles. He
getting the mastery over his brother, imprisoned him, and cruelly put out his
eyes. He had much war with the Welsh. All his children, but Mawde his
daughter, with 160 persons were drowned together. He died of a surfeit in the
36. year of his reign, and 65. of his age.

4. Stephen with perjury usurped the kingdom, from the 1135. Dec. 2.
foresaid Mawde. Besides some wars abroad, he had continual civil jarres
at home: by reason whereof he was taken prisoner, and forced in the end to
leave the heir of his opposite to be his successor. He died of an Iliacke
passion, mixed with the Emeroids, in the 19. year of his reign. His body
after it was interred, was taken out of the lead, and cast into a river.

5. Henry 2. son of the foresaid Mawd, through his incontinency 1154. Oct. 25.
with Rosamond, set his own wife and children against him, which caused
perpetual unquietness in his kingdom. In one battle at Edmondbury 20000
were taken and slain. He adopted his son (who labored to disthrone him) in
the government: and having much embroiled the kingdom, he grew so
discontented, as he cursed his children, and the day of his birth, and in much
perplexity ended his days in the 35. year of his reign, and 61. of his age.
Being dead, his people fell to spoil all he had, and left himnaked.

6. Richard 1. son to Henry 2. having in his fathers life 1189. Iul. 6.
vowed a journey to the Holy Land, had his kingdom in his absence usurped by
John his younger brother. Much trouble thence arose in England. On notice
thereof, Richard hasted home: but in the way he was taken prisoner by the Duke
of Austria. Whence though he were after 17 months imprisonment with a great
ransom released, and restored to the Crown, yet both he and his hingdome were
in continual trouble. As he was besieging a castle, which would have yielded
unto him, if only their lives might be saved (but he would not accept it on
any condition) he was shot with a poisoned arrow, and thereof died, in the 10.
year of his reign, and 45. of his age, and was buried at his fathers feet;
whom he confessed he had betrayed.

7. John younger brother to the foresaid Richard, notwithstanding 1199. Apr. 6.
Arthur son to his elder brother, and true heir to the Crown, by might got
the Kingdom. But himself and his subjects, either with others, or among
themselves were in continual broiles, and had many unsuccessefull wars with
French, Scots, and Welsh. He was opposed by his Lords, deposed by the Pope,
poisoned by a Monk, in the 18. year of his reign, and 51. of his age.

8. Henry 3. eldest son of the foresaid John, began his 1216. Oct. 19.
reign when he was not full 10 years old, and the State very troublesome. The
miseries of his reign were almost infinite, by Invasions, Rebellions,
Exactions, and the sundry calamities that follow such disasters. Lewis the
French King entered the land, many of the Barons took part with him. On both
sides very many were slain. The King himself by his Barons, with his brother
Richard King of Almain, and his son Prince Edward, taken prisoners. There
were then slain 4500. He died in the 57. year of his reign, and 67. of his
age.

9. Edward 1. was enbroiled in war against the Sarazens when his father died.
There he received three wounds 1272. Nov. 16,
with a poisoned knife by a treacherous Assasine: but by the daily licking of
his ranckling wounds with the tongue of lady Elenor his wife, he is said to be
cured. With much glory he returned home, and was victorious against the Scots
and Welsh. Yet those victories were not achieved without the expense of much
English blood. He died as he was going with a mighty host against the Scots, in
the 35. year of his reign, and 68. of his age.

10. Edward 2. (son to Edward 1.) was one of the most miserable Kings that have
reigned in England. The 1307. Iul. 7.
Northern parts were overrun and harried by the Scots. In the battle which
was called the white battle, 3000 Yorkshire men were slain by the Scots. Rob.
Bruise King of Scots invading England, burned all the country before him. He had
much civil war with his Barons: and much blood was shed on both sides. He
was at length himself imprisoned and deposed, in the 20. year of his reign,
and 42. of his age: and about 8 months after cruelly broached to death withan
hot iron spit.

11. Edward 3. son of Edward 2. came to the Crown in 1326. Ian. 25.
his fathers lifetime, by his fathers forced resignation thereof. His reign
was indeed glorious by foreign victories, but the Kingdom was much exhausted
of men and money, through sundry expeditions into Scotland, France, and Spain,
which occasioned great complaints of his Subjects. In his time Southampton was
burnt by Pirates, and Carlisle, with other places by the Scots, to the loss and
vexation of many Subjects. At the time of his death all of all sorts forsook
him. Only one Priest is said to be with him, when he gave up the ghost, in the
51. year of his reign, and 65. of his age.

12. Richard 2. grandchild of Edward 3. came young to 1377. Iun. 21.
the Crown: and by ill counsel and ill courses occasioned many Invasions,
Oppressions, Insurrections, Rebellions, and last, the deposition of himself,
and untimely death. Whereupon ensued that fatal division betwixt the two houses
of York and Lancaster, in pursuit of which quarrel were 13. maine battles
fought: three Henry 6. Edward 5. Richard 3.
Kings besides himself, Hen. 6. his son. Edw 5 his brother.
two Princes, heirs apparent, 12 Dukes, one Marquess, 18 Earls, one
Viscount, 23 Barons, besides Knights, and Gentlemen innumerable, were slain.
Richard 2. was deposed in the 23. year of his reign, and murdered about five
months after in the 34. of his age.

13. Henry 4. as he got the Crown by violence, so he held it by force, not
without continual fear, having all his 1399. Sept. 29.
reign either wars abroad, or conspiracies and insurrections at home, which
cost the lives of many Nobles and Commons. He died in the 14. year of his
reign, and 46 of his age.

14. Henry 5. son to Henry 4. spent most of the time of 1412. Mar. 20.
his reign in wars in France. Very victorious he was therein: but hastened
his death thereby, and in the 10. year of his reign, and 34. of his age:
leaving his crown to an infant. What followed thereupon is now to be showed.

15. Henry 6. son of Henry 5. was crowned in the first 1422. Aug. 31.
year of his age with the Crowns of two Kingdoms, but that of France which
his father won, was soon lost: and this of England was twice plucked from his
head in his life time. Many bloody battles were fought in England betwixt the
two great factions of York and Lancaster: wherein many thousand subjects
perished. This King at length was taken and imprisoned, the Queen his wife
exiled, his son and heir killed, his Counselors slain, the Crown conferred
on his corrivall, in the 39. year of his reign, and he himself murdered in
the 50. of his age.

16. Edward 4. being of the house of York, obtained the Crown with much
blood, there being in one battle slain 1460. Mar. 4.
36776 English men. There were civil wars almost all his reign. He was
taken and imprisoned, whence escaping, he was forced to fly the land: but
returning with much hazard to his person, and death of many subjects, recovered
the Crown, but so as his children had little joy thereof. On a sudden after a
sort he died, in the 23. year of his reign, and 41. of his age.

17. Edward 5. Son of Edward 4. was for the space of two months and 16 days
accounted King, but never 1483. Apr. 9.
crowned. For, he was murdered in the Tower, in the first year of his reign,
and 12. of his age.

18. Richard 3. brother to Edward 4. a bloody tyrant, usurped the Crown,
caused his Nephew (then King) together 1483. Iun. 22.
with his brother, to be murdered, many of his Nobles and others to be put to
death, so as all his reign, death, and slaughter never ceased till himself
was slain, and brought like an hog all bare, on an horses back to his grave,
in the 3. year of his reign, and about the 40. of his age.

19. Henry 7 the next living heir of the house of Lancaster, having vanquished
Richard 3. obtained the Crown, 2485. Aug. 22.
married Elizabeth the heir of the house of York, and thereby united those two
distracted houses. Yet was not his reign without troubles. The Crown being
gotten with hazard and much blood, he was maligned by the Duchess of Burgundy,
who set up first a Lambert, then a Perkin Warbeck, to disquiet him. Wars he
had in France. Insurrections there were in the North, Rebellions in Cornwall,
besides many grievances which his Subjects complained of. He died in the 24.
year of his reign, and 52. of his age.

20. Henry 8. son of Henry 7. by a just title came to a 1509. Apr. 22.
settled throne. He that will read Sir Walter Raleighs preface to his history,
shall see enough (if not too much) of the tronbles of this Kings times. He
ended his reign, and life in the 38. year of his reign, and 56. of his age.

21. Edward 6. son of Henry 8. in his childhood came 1546. Ian. 28.
to the crown: yet in his days the brightness of the Gospel shined forth:
but so as there wanted not clouds of troubles: The Kingdom being engaged in
war with France and Scotland: the country troubled with insurrections in
Norfolk and Devonshire: and the Court and Counsel distracted into faction:
whereby the Kings two uncles, the Lord Protector, and Lord Admiral came to
violent deaths: which hastened, or hindered not, the Kings: and that in the 7.
year of his reign, and 17. of his age.

22. Mary eldest daughter to Henry 8. came with much 1553. Iul. 6.
difficulty to the Crown. Another Queen was first proclaimed at London. But
that storm lasted not long: for, 9 days after at London also was Mary
proclaimed Queen. As for the continuance of her reign, some may remember,
most have heard, and all may read how dangerous and doleful those smoaky days
were. Many hundreds were burnt then for the Gospel sake; many more were forced
to fly their country, and exile themselves: Callis, that for very many years
before had appertained to the English, was lost: which loss is thought to make
so dead a wound in her heart as it could never be healed. In the last period of
Queen Mary's days, many imprisoned and adjudged to the fire for the cause
aforesaid, were released by her departure out of this world, in the 6. year of
her reign, and 43. of her age.

Though God were pleased to cause the light of his Gospel to appear in King
Edwards days, yet for a surer settling of it, he suffers it to be sealed by the
blood of many worthy Martyrs in Queen Mary's days. Since which time to the
immortal glory of God, and the eternal salvation of many thousand souls, it
has been continued among us 63. years. So (Lord) let it continue till the
coming of thy Son unto judgment.

By this brief narration of the troubles of former times, let any indifferent
Reader judge, if God have not reserved us to the best times that ever England
had: both in regard of the Gospel of peace, so long enjoyed: and also in
regard of the peace of the land so long continued. The benefit whereof follows
next to be declared.

. 96. Of peace and the benefits thereof.
See. 88.
The last conclusion which as a just consequence I infer from the evils of
war, is this.

VI. PEace is a good thing. War and Peace are contrary each to other. As many
evils arise from war, so many benefits from peace. Good therefore it is, as
in the kind of it, so in the effects that arise from it.

By peace lands are freely tilled: orchards, gardens, vineyards, and other like
fruitful places tended: all manner of cattle increased: all kind of trading
followed: inheritances, and what else of right appertains to men, quietly
possessed by the true owners thereof: children well educated: old men well
nourished: Schools and Universities maintained: The Gospel with free liberty
preached: all Gods ordinances observed: good laws duly executed: wrong doers
suppressed: men respected according to their places and dignities: opportunity
afforded for exercising such abilities as God bestows on any: mutual
communion made of such good gifts as God in any kind conferreth on several
persons: poor men set to work, and relieved: plenty procured: means for
sickness, and all manner of maladies, afforded: decent burial performed: and
many other like benefits obtained: of all which by war men are very often
spoiled, and deprived.

Peace is the maine end of just and lawful war. All the benefits 17.
before noted to arise from war, are enjoyed in peace; and are therefore
attributed to war, as effects thereof, because by war peace is procured, and
secured. No marvel then that Christians are so much called upon, Rom 12. 18.
If it be possible, and as much as in them lies, to have peace with all men.
And that Mat. 5. 9.
the peacemakers are pronounced blessed. And Pro. 12. 20.
joy is to the counselors of peace. And it is an usual blessing to say, 1 Samuel 25. 6. 1 Chro. 12. 18.
Peace be to you. Yea Deuteronomy. 20 10. Pax and concordia omnibus hominibus amantur,
and omnibus hominibus sunt necessariae. Bern de modo been viv. Sermon. 7.
God would have peace proclaimed to enemies before they were invaded by war.

Peace is it that is loved of all, and is necessary for all.

Peace as an especial blessing of God has in all ages been promised by God
to his Church. (Lev. 26. 6. 1 Chro. 22. 9. 2 King. 22. 20. Isa. 26. 12.)

Prophets have thereupon incited Gods people to pray for peace, as for a
blessing. (Psalm. 122. 6, 7. Ier. 29. 7.) Yea Angels do desire peace on earth,
Luke 2. 34.

Peace according to Gods own promise, and his peoples prayers, has as a
blessing been given them, Iud. 3. 11, 30. 1 King. 4. 24. 2 Chro. 17. 10.

Saints have answerably been thankful unto God for peace as for a great
blessing, Psalm. 29. 11. and 55. 18. and 147. 14. On the contrary, God has
threatened as a judgment to the wicked that they shall have no peace, Ier. 12.
1^. and 30. 5. Rev. 6. 4. And as a judgment peace has been taken away from
people, Ier. 16. 5.

Such is the excellency of peace, as the high and great Lord is styled Rom 15.
33.
the God of peace: 2 Thessalonians 3. 16.
the Lord of peace: and his Son, Luke 10. 6.
the Son of peace, Isa 9 6.
a Prince of peace, Ephesians. 2. 14.
our peace: yea he that was the most lively type of Christ, Heb. 7. 2.
King of peace: and Gal. 5. 22.
peace is reckoned up among the fruits of the spirit, and Prove. 3. 17.
all the paths of wisdom are said to be peace, and Gods covenant Number. 25. 12.
the covenant of peace, and Christ's Gospel Ephesians. 6. 15.
the Gospel of peace, and Ministers of the Gospel Isa. 527.
publishers of peace, whose feet in that respect are said to be beautiful.

Finally, peace makes an heaven on earth. In heaven it Differamus omnes lauds
pacis ad illam patriam pacis. Ibi eam before laudabimus, ubi eam before
habebimus. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 147.
shall (without any interruption of war, or other jarre) be fully enjoyed.
Let us therefore put off all further praise to that country of peace, where,
through a more full fruition thereof, we shall be enabled more fully to set it
forth. Only by this that has been spoken of peace, let it be well considered
how evil war is, which deprives us of this precious pearl, Peace.

What cause have we in this respect to praise God for the prosperous reign of
blessed Queen Elizabeth, who by the wars which she had, procured and settled
this peace: as also for the quiet reign of that great Peacemaker, King James,
by whom peace was continued to the time of our now royal Sovereign, King
Charles, whom the God and Lord of peace in peace long continue among us, that
we and our posterity may long enjoy peace, and partake of the benefits of
peace, particularly of the Gospel of peace, and thereby be brought unto
eternal peace. Amen, Amen.

As a further demonstration that the Peace which we have long enjoyed, and the
troubles of former ages, are ordered by the divine providence, Hereunto is
added, A Treatise of the Extent of Gods Providence, set outin a Sermon preached
the 5. of Nov. 1623. occasioned by the downe-fall of Papists in a Chamber at
Blackfriars ten days before. THE EXTENT OF GODS PROVIDENCE, Set out in A
SERMON, PREACHED in Blackfriars Church, U. Nov. 1623. On oocasion of the
Downe-fall of Papists in a Chamber at the said Blackfriars, 1623. Oct. 27.
stilo vet. Nov. 5. stilo novo. By WILLIAM GOVGE.

Expaviscis in minimis? Lauda magnum. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 148.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Sign of the Bible, at the great North door of Paul's. 1631.

THE EXTENT OF GODS PROVIDENCE: Set out in A SERMON, preached in Blackfriars
Church, 5. Nov. 1623. on occasion of the Downe-fall of Papists at a Jesuits
Sermon in a Chamber at the said Blackfriars, 1623. Oct. 27. stilo vet. Nov. 5.
stilo novo.
. 1. Of the meaning of the text.
Mat. 10. 29,Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? and one of them shall
not fall to the ground without your Father.
30,But the hairs of your head are all numbered.
31.Fear ye not therefore: ye are of more value then many sparrowes.
THE maine Scope of the latter part of this Chapter, from the sixteenth verse
to the end, is to encourage Christ's Disciples in special, but in general, all
Christians against all that (for their vocation and profession sake) can by man
be done to molest or annoy them.

Among other arguments tending to that Scope, one is with much emphasis pressed
in this text. The argument is taken from Gods Providence: and enforced by the
extent of that Providence. In expressing hereof every word has his weight.

1. Among Creatures upon which the divine Providence exercises it self, not
the glorious Creatures in heaven, but such as are (...).
upon earth, are culled out to give evidence thereof.

2. Among creatures on earth, choice is made not of such as are Lords, or bear
the divine image in their reasonable soul, but of an unreasonable creature, a
bird.

3. Among unreasonable creatures, is culled out, not the greatest Quis
disposuit membra pulicis and culicis ut habeant ordinem suum, etc. Aug. Enar.
in Psalm. 148.
as the whale in the water, the elephant or lion on the earth, the eagle in the
air, but a little bird, a sparrow.

4. Among these little birds, the least is mentioned and expressed by a (...)
passerculus. dimin. of (...) or (...).
diminutive, little sparrow.

5. The more to manifest the meandness of this creature, the price thereof is
set down: which is the least price in use, a farthing. Here also to amplify
the meannesse of this price, a diminutive is used, a (...) minutus assis.
little farthing. And as if one little sparrow alone were not worth any price
at all, (...). Providentia Dei quinque passeres qui venduntur dipondio,
gubernantur. Hier. Comment. l. 3. in Ephesians. 5.
two sparrowes are said to be sold for one little farthing. Yea, in Luke 12. 6.
five of them are said to be bought for two little farthings.

6. To declare the divine Providence to extend it self not only to the
several kinds of creatures, but also to every particular, it is added, (...).
not one of them.

7. To prove that the most casual things are ordered by Gods providence, he
says not of this little bird, it is fed, or preserved, but it (...).
falls not, indefinitely. Now there are many ways whereby little birds fall
to the ground. If they be killed they fall down. When they want meat they fall
down. They fall down to gather strawes and feathers for their nests. They often
fall down on mere casualty, flying from tree to ground, from bush to ground,
and from other places to the ground, on a kind of wantonness: yet in all
these, or any other particulars, this falling down to the ground is ordered by
the divine Providence.

8. To show, that yt God which orders all the forementioned matters, is the
same God, who has so far respected man, as to give him the greatest gift that
possibly he can give to any creature, and whereof any creature can be made
partaker, (namely Jesus Christ his only begotten Son, in him to adopt us to
be his children, and to provide for us as for his children) he uses this note
of special relation betwixt God and man, (...).
your father: implying thereby that he may not, that he cannot be thought to
neglect those children of men, whose father he is in an especial manner.

9. To amplify all very emphatically, by an interrogation he propounds the
point, (...).
Are not? etc. whereby he appeals to common experience, and makes even
themselves to be Judges of the case: as if he should say, Enquire of any man:
yea you your selves tell me if it be not so and so.

10. To make us the better to apprehend the scope of all Mat. 10. 31.
that has been said concerning Gods Providence, Christ himself makes
application thereof to us in verse 31: and that with an elegant amplification,
in these words, Ye are of more value then many sparrowes. He says not simply,
you are as good; but transcendently, more worth. Again, not many (...).
of you as good as one sparrow, or one of you as one sparrow; but one of you
more worth then many sparrowes. And so much (...).
does this indefinite phrase imply, ye are, that is, every one of you is of
more value, etc.

Hitherto Christ has set out one instance of the divine Providence, taken from
one of the least of unreasonable creatures. He adds another instance
concerning the least of those things which appertain to man, and that is, his
hairs.

In setting down this he is also very emphaticall; for, every word has his
weight.

VERSE XXX.
But the very hairs of your head are all numbered.

1. (...).
Hairs may well be accounted one of the meanest things that belong to man.
Philosophers account them rather excrements then any essential parts of the
body: yet the divine Providence is extended to these.

2. Where hairs grow, commonly many grow together: yet they are (...).
all objects of Gods Providence.

3. Of all parts of man's body, the greatest number of hairs use to grow on the
head, yet the very hairs of your (...).
head are ALL numbered.

4. The hairs of the head are innumerable: yet by God are they all (...). Vbi
numerus est, scientia numeri demonstratur.
numbered, to show, that the eye of Gods Providence takes particular notice of
each and every of them.

5. He does here make another particular application of this extent of the
divine Providence to themselves in special, Hier. Comment. in hunc Ioc.
in this relative particle, (...).
your head.

. 2. Of the Sum and Resolution of the Text.
THe Sum of this Text is An encouragement against all that man can do.

Hereof are two parts 1. The ground 2. The kind
of encouragement.

1. The ground is taken from Gods Providence. And it is 1. Propounded, Verse.
29, 30. 2. Applied, Verse. 31.


Its propounded in two instances. 1. The least of creatures in use. 2. The
least of things appertaining to man.


Hence two arguments of encouragement may be drawn from the less, as the
schools speak. A minori.


The first may be thus framed. That God which has his providence exercised on
sparrowes, has it much more excercised on Saints. Si parva anima^i^ and vilia,
absq Do authore not decidunt: and in omnibus est prodentia, etc. Hier. Ibid.
But your God and Father has his Providence exercised over sparrowes.
Therefore your God and Father has his Providence much more exercised over you.
The proposition is thus proved. That God which extends his Providence to
things of small value, does much more extend it to you that are of more value.
But your God, etc. Therefore your God, etc.


The second argument taken from the least of things appertaining to man, may be
thus framed. If God by his providence number all your hairs, much more your
days. But the first is true. Therefore the second.


The Kind of encouragement is in this Inhibition. Fear ye not.

. 3. Of the extent of Gods Providence.
THe General point which I infer from all that has Omnia Dei providentia
and iustitia gubernantur. Hier. Comment l. 2. in Hierim. 9. Dominus omnia
novit, omnia continet, omnia sua maiestate dispensat. Idem. Comment. l. 12 in
Esa. 41.
been said is this.

The divine Providence extends it self to all things.

This General may well be inferred from the particulars in the text, as has
been before noted.

It may further be proved by that induction of particulars tending to this
purpose which God himself brings in, Job 38. and 39. and 40. and 41. As also
by another induction which the Psalmist brings in, Psalm. 104. And by that
which Christ himself mentions, Mat. 6. 26, 28 concerning Gods feeding of
fowls, and decking of Iillies. Experience gives further evidence hereunto, in
that many creatures seek to destroy others, and yet none are utterly
destroyed, but all preserved. In the sea the greater fish feed on the less,
yet are the less exceedingly multiplied. In wildernesses beasts are a prey one
to another, yet the most silly of them (that are a prey to others) are still
continued. Thunders, lightnings, storms, tempests, earthquakes, frosts,
droughts, inundations, and other like casualties often destroy much food which
the earth brings forth for man and beast and are occasions of many other
evils: yet by the divine Providence sufficient food is preserved for all
creatures, and all the foresaid evils redressed. Natural men are as wolves,
tigres, devils one to another: yet by the divine Providence polities and
societies are preserved.

As for things appertaining to Man, in this Text mention is made of hair, in
other places it is noted of the very Mat. 5. 36.
color of hair, and the very Mat. 6. 27.
stature of man is ordered by Gods Providence.

Seeing the divine Providence extends it self to such things, what can be
imagined whereunto it should not extend?

. 4. Of the ground of the extent of the divine Providence.
GOD thus extends his Providence to all things, that he may bring them to such
ends as himself has appointed. Which are in general, 1. His own glory. 2.
His childrens good.


Gloria Dei sedet in scientiae multitudine: and tunc manifestatur, quando
cuncta rei providentia manifestantur: nec fortuito quid fieri, nec dicere
quempiam Hier Comment. l 3 in Ezec 10. Ios. Hall. B. of Exet. in his Medit and
Vows. Cent. 3. ^. 15.
Gods glory is the most principal and supreme end of all. At that he aimed in
his eternal decree, Romans 9. 23. And in giving the first being to his
creatures, Prove. 16. 4. At that also he aims in all things that are done at
any time in any place. In which respect it is said, that the whole world is
full of his glory, Isa. 6. 3.

Ob. Many of the things here below, are so mean, and base, as they may seem
to impeach the divine Majesty to be busied about them.

Answ. A reverend Father of our Church gives this answer. There is not the
least action or event, which is not overruled and disposed by a Providence:
which is so far from detracting ought from the Majesty of God, for that the
things are small, as there can be no greater honor to him, then to extend his
providence to them because they are infinite. Yea, further the Psalm. 113. 5, 6.
Psalmist notes it as a branch of Gods incomparable glory, to stoop so low as
to order the things on earth.

But I would be informed how it can impeach his glory who made all creatures,
even the least and meanest that be, to preserve and govern them by his
Providence. Who shall order them, if not he that made them?

As at the next (but subordinate) end, God in his Providence aims at his
childrens good. In regard hereof, Romans 8. 28.
All things work together for their good. Yea God by the hand of his
Providence which he has in all things, turns the evil purposes and
practices of men to the good of his children, Genesis 50. 20.

If God should not at all meddle with the things here below, surely those two
forenamed ends, could not be so well accomplished.

. 5. Of Chance.
Such being the extent of Gods providence as has been showed, the conclusions
following may well be inferred.

I. FOrtune is a mere fiction. Fortune, I say, as commonly it is taken, in
opposition to Gods Providence. For, Stultitia, and error, and caecitas fortunae
nomen induxit. Lactan. Instit 3. 29.
folly, error, and blindness has brought in the name of Fortune. What
fortune or chance is, to take it positively as a distinct thing that may have a
being, none ever could tell. It is a mere fancy, and vain conceit, or rather
a plain deceit of man's idle brain. Yet Tesacimus fortuna Deam, coeloque
l^camus. Iuvenal.
the Heathen have set her in the number of their goddesses, and placed her in
heaven. Parant fortunae mensam, nihil ad Deum pertinere credentes: sed vel
stellarum cursu, vel vary tate fortunae omnia gubernari. Hier. Comment. l. 18.
in Esa. 65.
They prepare a table for fortune, believing nothing to belong to God, but all
things to be ordered either by the course of the stars, or by the mutability
of fortune. Yea, not only the vulgar, but many others also among those that
profess Christianity, dote too much upon her, and attribute too many things
unto her, whereby God is robbed of much honor. I know not any one other thing,
whereunto, more of those things which are done by God, are attributed, then to
fortune, or chance, or luck, (for these are but several titles which are used
to set out one and the same thing.) Commonly those things which are most
immediately done by the divine Providence, are ascribed to Fortune. For, when
they see not any apparent external cause of a thing, they conceit it to be
done by Fortune. How frequent in men's mouths are those phrases, good luck, ill
luck: By good fortune I got this: It was my ill fortune to lose this. Yea,
Christians have learned of Heathen Philosophers to entitle all the external
good things of this world with this style, goods of Fortune: and still that old
distinction of good things is retained, Goods of the Mind, (as knowledge,
wisdom, temperance, and all sorts of such virtues) Goods of the Body (as,
Health, strength, beauty, Bona animi, Bona corporis, Bona fortunae.
etc.) Goods of Fortune (as, Honor, Wealth, Peace, etc.)

The Heathen by this phrase, Goods of Fortune, employed that all the things of
this world were ordered and disposed by their goodesse Fortune.

Ob. The Holy Ghost in sacred Scripture uses this title chance: Luke 10. 31.
(...)
By chance there came down, etc. and seems to attribute all thereto, in this
phrase, Eccl. 9. 11.
chance happens to them all.

Answ. Chance or Fortune is taken two ways, either for a cause of it self,
opposed to the divine providence, as the Epicures, other Philosophers, and many
of the vulgar take it: So the Philistims use it, 1 Samuel 6. 9. or else for the
hiddennesse or secrecy of a cause; when the cause of a thing is secret and
hidden from us, then it is said to fall out by chance; whereby is meant the
secret appointment, disposing, and providence of God. Providentiam Dei quae ad
ho mines pertinet, nonnunquam Fortunam appellant, quia efficiat multa
improvisa, nec opinata nobis propter obscuritatem, ignorationem^ causarum Cic
Academ. 1
Some of the wiser among the Heathen discerned, and affirmed as much: namely,
that the Providence of God, so far forth as it concerns man, is sometimes
called Fortune, because it effects many things, to us unawares and unthought
of, by reason of the obscurity and ignorance of causes.

In this latter sense the Holy Ghost uses the word chance: Nihil aliud in
rebus casum vocamus, nisi cujus ratio and causa secreta est. Aug contr. Acad.
l. 1 Nihil fit nisi quod aut ipse facit, aut fieri ipse permittit. Aug. de Bon.
Persev. l. 2. c. 6.
whereby it excludes man's projecting or determining this or that, not Gods
Providence. To it there is no chance or fortune at all. Thus God is said to
deliver him to a man's hand, whom we suppose to be killed by chance. (compare for
this purpose Exo. 21, 13. with Deuteronomy. 19. 4, 5.) Yea the whole disposition of a
lot, is said to be of the Lord, Pro. 16. 33. So as there is nothing done, seem
it to us never so casual, but God either does it or suffers it to be done.
Fortune, as opposed hereunto, is a most detestable idol.

. 6. Of Gods Providence extending it self to things below.
II. See. 5.
GODS Providence extends it self to things here below. If to all things (as
has been proved,. 3.) then to things under heaven. The instance here in my
text given of sparrowes, and the other particular instances noted in the
general doctrine, give express evidence hereunto.

These inferior things under heaven, by reason of their mutability, manifold
infirmities, and contrariety one against Quidam Philosophi ex siderum cursu
atque constantia suspicantur esse in ^oe^e stibus providentiam: and terrena
contemni, dum nihil redi, nec iuxta ordinem in terris geritur. Hier. Comment l
3. in Ezekiel. 8. Lege Aug. Enar in Psalm. 188. cont. istud delirium.
another, do stand in most need of a divine Providence. And surely the divine
Providence will most manifest and exercise it self, where is most need
thereof. In this respect God is said to be A Father of the fatherless, a judge
of the widows, a preserver of the stranger, etc. Psalm. 68. 5. and 1469.

This extent of the divine Providence to things here below, I do the rather
note, because many Philosophers, and others also have limited and bounded Gods
Providence within the circuit of the celesticall orbs. Such were those whom
Eliphaz taxes, Job 22. 13, 14.

That they may not seem to be mad without reason, they give this ground, that
in heaven all things are carried with an unalterable course and constancy, but
on earth nothing is done according to order.

Answ. 1. This latter assertion, that nothing is done according to order, is
most false.

2. The seeming disorder of things here below, is so far from giving evidence
against the divine Providence about them, as it does rather strongly evince
that Gods Providence reaches so far. For, notwithstanding their disorder, by
the divine wisdom they are brought to good ends. How could all things (being
so disordered, yea so contrary one to Romans 8. 28.
another) work together for good to them that love God, were it not that they
are ordered and governed by the divine Providence?

Let this extent of Providence to these inferior things be the rather noted,
that we may thereby be brought to discern the wisdom of God, to call upon
him, to trust to him, to depend on him, and patiently to expect a good issue in
all things whatsoever do, or may befall us.

. 7. Of despising mean things.
III. See. 5.
Mean things are not to be despised. Nothing whereunto God extends his
Providence is to be despised. But we have heard how God extends his
Providence to the meanest things. This is true of unreasonable creatures. How
much more true is, it of reasonable? which are not only governed by the divine
providence, but also created after Gods image, redeemed by the blood of his
Son, sanctified by his Spirit, and reserved to eternal glory in heaven. That
this consequence of not despising that whereof God takes care, is a good and
just consequence, is evident by the like, thus inferred by the Apostle, Let not
him Romans 14. 3.
that eats despise him that eats not. For, God has received him. So as he
whom God receives, is not to be despised.

On this ground many proud despisers of others are justly to be taxed, as,

1. Such as the proud Pharisie, who was so conceited in Luke 18. 10, etc
his own righteousness, as he despised the humble, contrite, penitent
Publicane, who, according to Christ's own determination, went down to his house
justified rather then the other.

2. Such hard-hearted and unmercifull men, as the Priest and Levite were, who
seeing a poor man robbed, stripped, Luke 10. 30, etc
wounded, and left half dead, passed by him (though they saw him in that
pitiful plight) the one on the one side, the other on the other side, but
affoorded him no succor at all.

3. Such as take occasion from the infirmities of men to abuse them, and to
scorn them. The Law gives two instances, instead of many, by way of
prohibition, thus, Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block
before the Lev. 19. 14.
blind.

4. Such ungratious children as mock their father, and despise to obey their
mother. A fearful judgment is passed Pro. 30. 17.
against such. The ravens of the valley shall pluck out his eye, Deuteronomy. 27. 16.
and the young eagles shall eat it. Yea, he that sets light by his father or
mother is pronounced accursed.

5. Such undutifull servants as take occasion from their masters meannesse,
weakness, age, poverty, or any other infirmity to contemn them. Thus was he
in his affliction dealt withal, who said, They that dwell in my house, and my
maids count me for a stranger. I am an alien in their sight. I Job 19. 16, 17.
called my servant, and he gave me no answer, etc.

. 8. Of Saints not fearing man.
IIII. See. 5.
SAints of God need not fear sons of men. I mean not here by fear that
reverend respect which inferiors owe to their superiors, who by virtue of
their dignity bear the image of God, and in that respect are styled Gods,
Psalm. 82. 6. and by virtue of their place stand in Gods room. For this is that
Honor which the Law requires, 1 Samuel 8. 7:
Exodus 20. 12. and the Apostle advises Christians to yield this fear to whom
it is due, Romans 13. 7. But a dread, terror, or perplexity of mind by reason of
any evil. The meaning then of the point is this, Saints need not fear any
evil that men can do against them. This consequence Christ himself infers
from the forementioned extent of Gods Providence, Mat. 10. 29, 31. It must
needs therefore be a just consequence. And to show that it is a matter of
moment, worthy of all due regard, he does here three several times inculcate
it, viz. ver. 26, 28, 31. In many other places of Scripture is fear of men, so
as here forbidden. In special manner note, 1 Pet. 3. 14. where the meaning of
this word is thus most fully unfolded, (...).
Be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled. For instances take the
examples of Heb. 11. 23. 27
Moses and his parents, of Psalm 118. 6.
David, Ezr. 8. 22.
Ezra, and the Jews with him, Neh. 6. 11.
of Nehemiah, Luke 13. 32.
Christ, his Act. 4. 19. Providentiam cateris creatur is non negamus: curam
sponsa vindicat sibi. Bern. super Cant. Serin. 68.
Apostles, and of all Martyrs in all ages.

Good grounds there are for Saints to be of undaunted spirits. For,

1. Gods Providence, extending it self to the meanest creatures (as has been
proved) it must needs be much more exercised upon the best of creatures, as
true Saints are. They are the children of God, the spouse of his Son, the
temple of his Spirit. They are a peculiar treasure unto him above all people,
though all the earth be his, Exodus 19. 5. Though therefore Gods general
Providence be upon every creature, yet the Spouse of Christ, the Church, and
every member of it, every true Saint, challenges the special care of God, as
a prerogative to it self. The Church is Christ's cure. He has therefore the
greatest care of it: and it may cast her whole care on him, 1 Pet. 5. 7. and
boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto
me, Heb. 13. 6.

2. All that man can do, can but Mat. 10. 28. Luke 12. 4.
touch the body: it cannot reach to the soul. Now, the body is but the outward
part of a man, a mortal part, subject to much misery. Therefore all that man
can do at the most, is but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4. 17. So as the uttermost
which man can do, in comparison of the evil which reaches to the soul, is
little to be accounted of, not to be feared.

3. Man can inflict nothing upon the body, which may truly and properly be
called evil: or which may make it miserable. Degradation from offices,
Deprivation of goods, Restraint of liberty, Reproach, Disgrace, Torture,
Execution of death, Denial of burial, and other external crosses like unto
these, are so far from making Saints miserable, as through the divine
providence they turn to their advantage. Heb. 10 34.
Loss of goods may prove a gain of grace: Act. 16. 25.
Restraint of outward liberty, a means of greater freedom of conscience: 1
Cor. 4. 13.
Disgrace, a motive for God the more to manifest his approbation: Heb. 11. 35.
Torment, an occasion of easing the mind: 2 Cor. 4. 17.
Death of body, an entrance into eternal life. What evils can they be, which
bring so great advantages to men?

4. If they should be evils, God can protect and deliver from them all. (Of the
many ways of exempting Saints from judgments, see The Plaster for the
Plague, on Number. 16. 45.. 12, 14.) What cause then is there to fear man for any
thing he can do?

Take to your selves therefore, O believers, who are well instructed in the
extent of Gods providence to all creatures, and thereupon in his care over you,
and protection of you, take to your selves an holy boldness, and an invincible
courage against all that man can do. Take to you the resolutions of them that
in truth and faith said, Psalm. 118. 6.
The Lord is on my side: I will not fear: What can man do unto me? Dan. 3. 17.
Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery forna^ce:
and he will deliver us. O be not so affrighted with shadows, as upon the sight
of painted fire to startle back into true burning fire. So do they who to
avoid persecution, deny the truth: or to avoid reproach, prove profane. These
are no fruits of faith in the extent of Gods Providence.

. 9. Of eying God in all affairs.
V. See. 5.
GOD is to be beheld in all our affairs. If a sparrow fall not to the ground
without him, what do we, what can we do without him? And if his hand be in all
that we do or can do, ought we not to take notice thereof, to behold it, well
to observe it, and mark whereto it tends? Does God from heaven look down
upon us on earth, and shall not we from earth life up eyes and hearts to him
that is in heaven? The Psalmist indefinitely says of all, even Psalm. 145. 15.
all creatures, The eyes of all look up unto thee, O Lord. And shall not the
eyes of all reasonable creatures, shall not the eyes of all that are made new
creatures, look up unto God? That God which in his surpassing glory is in
heaven, in and by his working Providence, is on earth also; and (as he that
well knew what he said, truly said) works hitherto, Ioh. 5. 17. He that
wrought six days in creating all things, Manifestum est nequaquam nostra
industria, sed providentia Dei ^liam ea perfici, in quibus ipsi videmur
operari. Chrysostom. in Mat. 6. Hom. 22.
works to this very day, and so will do all the days of this world, in and
by his Providence. Thus those very things which we our selves seem to work,
are more truly effected and perfected by Gods Providence, then by our
diligence. Let us therefore enterprise nothing without him. Except the Lord
build the house, they labor in vain that build it: except the Lord keep the
city, the watchman waketh but in vain. It is vain for you to rise up early,
to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows; namely, unless the Lord put to
his hand.

Learn hereby to commend all thine affairs to the divine Providence. Depend
thereon all thy life long. So do on thy deathbed. If thou have children,
comfort thy self herein, that though thou (their earthly Father) may be
taken from them, yet thine and their heavenly Father, who is not only a mere
spectator, and beholder of all things, but a disposer and orderer of them by
his wise and just Providence, ever remains to work with them, to work for
them, if at least they will put their trust in him, and depend on him. Commend
thy soul therefore, commend thy children, and all thou leavest behind thee, to
his providence, when thou art departing out of this world.

. 10. Of submitting all our purposes to Gods will.
VI. See 5.
VVHatsover is by man intended, must be submitted to Gods will. Without God a
sparrow falls not to the ground. And without God nothing can be effected by
man. Prove. 16. 9.
A man's heart devises his way, that is, a man may with himself plot and
purpose this and that, But the Lord directs his steps, and brings the
purposes of man Quicunque hominum gressus rectum iter incedunt, non sit hoc
liberate humani arbitrij, sed gubernatione illius, cui dicit Esaias, Omnia
opera no stra operatus es nobis. Hier. Comment. l. 2. in Prove 20 Luke 12. 19.
to what issue God himself please: according to the proverb, Man may purpose,
but God will dispose. So as the good success which men have, comes not from
their projecting, nor from any freedom of man's will, but from the guidance of
him, to whom the Prophet Isaiah says, Thou have wrought all our works in us,
or for us, Isa. 26. 12.

Justly therefore does the Apostle (Iam. 4. 13, etc.) tax their bold
presumption, who without thought of God, or of his overruling providence,
peremptorily say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a city, and
continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain, whereas ye know not
what shall be on the morrow, etc. This was the proud conceit of him, who by an
heavenly voice is called Fool, for saying to his soul, Soul, thou have much
goods laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. The
doom which was denounced against him upon that conceit, gives evidence that
he was an egregious fool. It was this, This night thy soul shall be required
of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? Thus we see
what it is to purpose or promise any thing without the Lord.

On the contrary, they questionless were well instructed in this all-ruling,
and overruling Providence of God, who in all their purposes had ever a
reservation to God, as he that said, 1 Chro 13. 2.
If it be of the Lord let us send abroad, etc. and he also that said, 1 Cor. 4.
19.
I will come to you shortly if the Lord will. And again, Act. 18. 21.
I will return to you again, if God will. St. James where he taxed the
forementioned profane and overperemptory speeches, gives this direction for
submitting our purposes to the divine Providence, Ye ought to say, if the Lord
will, we shall live, and do this or that. This is not to be taken, as if we
should to every sentence that we utter add this clause, If God will, but that
we should be so well instructed in the divine Providence, as to know nothing
can be done without the will of God, and thereupon ever to have in our minds
that reservation, If the Lord will. Thus by submitting our wills to Gods will,
we shall be sure both to have our wills effected, yea also that to be effected,
which is the best. Gods will, will we, nill we, shall be accomplished. If then we
will nothing, but that which may stand with Gods will, in the effecting of Gods
will, our will must needs be effected. And because Gods will orders and
disposes all things to the best, on the same ground, that which we will must
needs fall out to the best. But suppose our will should wish any thing that God
would not have: what skilleth it? We may know what we would have: but God
knows what we should, and shall have. It is therefore much better that our
purpose and desire be crossed, if at least it be contrary to Gods, then
effected. If Gods counsel and determination be accomplished (as accomplished
it shall be) it is enough. My will therefore shall take the pattern of our
Saviors for her guide, and in all cases say as he did in a most extreme case,
O my Father, not as I will, but as thou will, Mat. 26. 39.

O how impious, sacrilegious, and blasphemous, yea, atheistical and Luciferian
was that speech of a Pope, who being forbid by his Physician a meat that he
liked, replied, that Julius 3.
he would have it in despite of God. Such are the thoughts (if not the
speeches) of many presumptuous spirits.

. 11. Of Contentedness.
VII. See. 5.
Contentedness is requisite in all estates. The extent of Gods Providence
giving evidence to Gods disposing and ordering all estates, if men rest not
content in their estate, they manifest a discontent at his Providence. Surely
he had an eye on Gods Providence ordering his estate, who in his great
affliction said, Psalm. 39 9.
I was dumb and opened not my mouth, because thou (Lord) diast it. And he, who
having heard a judgment denounced against him, which would make a man's ear to
tingle again, replied, 1 Samuel 3. 18.
It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. In like manner, 2 Samuel 15.
26. -- 16. 11.
David, Job 1. 21.
Job, Isa. 39. 8.
Hezekiah, and others, manifested great contentednes in great extremities. But
most pertinent to our purpose is this of S. Paul, Phil. 4 11, 12.
I have learned in whatsoever state I am therewith to be content. I know both
how to be abased, and I know how to abound: every where, and in all things I am
instructed both to be full and to be hungry: both to abound and to suffer need.
1 Timothy 6. 10. Heb. 13 5.
To this contentedness we are all exhorted by him that had so well learned it
himself.

Well it beseems the sons of God, children that have so high and heavenly,
so potent, so prudent, so provident a Father, whose Providence extends it
self, as to all creatures not the least excepted, so to every thing that
appertains to them (seem it never so small, as to their hair, the number
and color thereof, and to the just pitch of their stature) well (I say) it
beseems children that have such a Father, to rest contented with that estate
wherein he sets them. Whatsoever the present estate of Saints is, God has
set them therein. On this ground, as when we are in high and honorable places,
when we abound in wealth, when we have good health, when we enjoy peace, or any
manner of prosperity, we ought to be persuaded that these are good for us: so
on the other side, when we are in mean places, when we are pinched with
poverty, when we are visited with sickness, when we are molested with sundry
troubles, when we are pressed with all manner of adversity, to be persuaded
that even these latter estates are best for us, at that time when, and so long
as we are in them. For our estate, of what kind or condition soever it be, is
disposed by our Father before mentioned; and he knows what is fitter for us,
then we can know. Therefore the Lord here in this text, speaking of the extent
of the divine Providence, puts them in mind of this Father, saying, A
sparrow shall not fall to the ground without YOUR FATHER. Faith herein will
make us thankful for all manner of prosperity, as proportioned out unto us in
wisdom and love by this our Father: and patient under all manner of adversity,
as laid upon us in like wisdom and love by the very same Father. This is
rightly and truly to be (...). praesentibus.
content with things present, or with such things as for the present we have:
or with the estate wherein for the time we are.

. 13. Of ascribing the glory of all deliverances to God.
VIII. See. 5.
THe glory of all deliverances is to be ascribed to God. For by that Providence
which extends it self to all things, deliverances from enemies, from dangers,
from distresses, from all manner of evils, are obtained. But that is the
Providence of God. To whom then, if not to him shall the glory thereof be
ascribed? Hereof we have spoken The Churches Conquest, on Exo. 17. 15.. 77.
before.

Only here learn we to apply this general point, to such particular
deliverances as God has given unto us. Considering therefore that this our
land, which has now for many years enjoyed the bright, pure, comforting,
sanctifying, and saving light of the Gospel, lay for many hundred years
together in the dismal and damnable darkness of Popery, we are often to call to
mind, and duly to meditate on the means and times whereby and wherein the
divine providence has brought into our land, this light, to discover and drive
away that (worse then Egyptian) darkness of Popery. For instances take these.

1. John Wickliffe about the year 1371 in the reign of Edward 3. even in the
midst of popish darkness, held out the light of the Gospel, wherewith many in
those days were enlightened. This fire, by the abundance of ashes which the
Romish Clergy heaped upon it, lay, after the death of John Wickliffe, smothered
up: yet were those ashes raked away, about 40 years after by John Hus, and the
sparks of that fire so blown up, as dazzled the eyes of the Papists, and made
them mad again, against those that labored to bring out those sparks.

2. Henry 8. disanulling the Popes usurped authority in England, had by Act of
Parliament, the title of Supreme An. Dom. 1534
Head of the Church in his own dominions, conferred upon him, and liberty
given him to reform abuses crept into the Church. Thereupon he made Articles,
and sent out injunctions for removing images, reading Divine Service and the
Holy Scriptures in English, preaching Gods Word, catechizing children, and
performing other duties of piety, so as the Gospel began to shine forth
somewhat brightly in England, till about six years after through the six
articles established An. Dom. 1540
by Act of Parliament, a cloud was gathered before that bright light. That Act
for establishing the six articles, was among the common sort styled the Scourge
with six strings. For many were therewith scourged to death. The heads of those
six Articles were these.

1. Transubstantiation established. 2. Communion in both kinds excluded. 3.
Priests marriage prohibited. 4. Vows of chastity warranted. 5. Private Masses
allowed. 6. Auricular Consession justified.
3. Edward the 6. coming to the Crown, dispelled the cloud of those six
Articles, yea and from the mist of other popish remainders, so as in his time
the Gospel shined out in her full brightness. But yet about six years after,
by his death a thicker and darker cloud, then was in the days of Henry 8.
gathered together in Queen Mary's days, and over-shadowed the whole Land.
Then instead of the heavenly light of the Gospel, an hellish light of burning
fire brake out to the destruction of many.

4. Queen Elizabeth by re-establishing the Gospel, as it An. Dom. 1558
were by the brightness of the sun, put out the forementioned fire, and so
settled the Gospel of peace in this land, as now 73 years we have enjoyed with
it, much external peace.

These have been very special deliverances, which have apparently been
wrought by the divine Providence. They ought often to be thought on: that our
hearts may be the more inflamed to give the glory of them to God.

To these might be added many other evidences of Gods Providence, in preserving
the foresaid Queen Elizabeth from many plots and treasons against her Person
and life; as also in preserving our late King James of blessed memory, and our
now royal Sovereign. But the heads of these have been distinctly set down
before,. 93. 94.

. 14. Of ascribing the glory of judgments to God.
IX. See 5.
THe glory of judgments on the Churches enemies is to be ascribed to God. For,
by the forementioned Providence are they executed. He is the God of vengeance.
Hereof we have spoken Churches Conquest, on Exo. 17. 14. 66, 69.
before.

Only here I suppose it to be most meet to make a particular and true
narration of that judgment which The Downfall was Oct. 26. 1623. This
preached 5. Nov. next following.
ten days ago befell the Papists in this parish: whereof there are many
uncertain reports spread abroad.

. 15. Of a downe-fall of Papists.
An Dom 1623
I Do the more confidently publish this history, because I was an eyewitness
of many of the things therein related, and heard, from the mouth of such as
were present at the sermon, the other things. For, upon the first hearing of
the destruction of so many persons as by that Downe-fall lost their lives, our
Constables forthwith caused the gates of our Precinct (it being enclosed about
with walls and gates) to be shut, and raised a strong guard from among the
Inhabitants, to keep the house where this accident fell out, and to prevent
tumult about it. Thus through the favor of the Constables and Watch, who were
all my neighbors, I had the more free and quiet access, to view the dead
bodies, and to ensorme myself in all the material circumstances of that
accident: and that I did so much the rather, because the Bishop of London (that
then was) sent to me to inform my self thoroughly of the whole business, and
send him a narration thereof under my hand: whereupon I did not only view
matters my self, but caused Carpenters to search the timber, to take the
scantlings thereof, and to measure the rooms. I was also present with the
Coroner, and his Inquest, at their examining of all circumstances about the
business. And where my Lords Grace of Canterbury sent to me, to come to him,
and to bring with me the best evidence I could, I got the Foreman and others of
the Jury, and four persons that were present at the sermon, and fell down with
the multitude, but by Gods providence escaped death, and one that stood without
the door in hearing, but fell not: all these I got to go with me to Lambith,
where I heard the witness which they gave to my Lords Grace about the matter.
One that fell with the rest and escaped death, was Mr. Gee, a Preacher, of
Lankashire: two other were a son and servant of a Citizen in Paternoster
Row. The other also were men of good understanding, able to conceive what they
saw and heard, and to relate what they conceived.

ON the Lords Day, being the 26. of Oct. (as we in England, according to the
ancient account of months and days in Christendom, do reckon the time) but
the 5. of Nov. (as the late Gregorian account reckons it.) The occasion of the
great concourse.
On that day a common report went up and down, far and near, that one
Drurie, a Romish Priest would preach in the afternoon, in a fair house in
Blackfriars London, whither they that would, might freely come to hear him.

Upon this Rumor (fame also setting an high commendation on the excellency of
the man's parts, and eminency of his gifts) very many, Protestants as well as
Papists, Scholars as well as others, assembled thither about three of the
clock in the afternoon.

A Description of the place.
The room where they were assembled was a long garret, the uppermost story of
an high edifice, built with stone and brick.

The maine mansion house was inhabited by the French Ambassador.

To the foresaid garret there were two passages. One out of the Ambassadors
withdrawing chamber, which was private. The other more common, without the
great gate of the said mansion house.

Under the garret was a great square chamber, which one Redyate another Popish
Priest had hired for himself. Whereunto Papists much resorted, to make
confession, and hear mass.

Under that, the foresaid withdrawing chamber of the French Ambassador. And
this withdrawing chamber was supported with arches of stone: being immediately
over the entrance into the great house.

At the South end of the garret, and on the West side thereof, there were
bedchambers and closets which other Priests had hired.

The bedchamber at the South end was severed from the other part of the garret
only by a partition of Wanscote, which was taken down for the Sermon-time. The
length of the garret from North to South was almost 40 foot. The breadth but 16
foot. For, it was within the roof: and so gathered in narrower then the room
below it: which was about 20 foot square.

The two forementioned passages met on one pair of stairs leading to the said
garret, which had one only door entering into it.

The great concourse of people.
More came to this place, then possibly it could hold, so as many could not get
in, but returned back again. Others went into the foresaid Redyats chamber,
and tarried with him. The whole garret, rooms adjoining, door, and top of
stairs were as full as could be.

In the garret were set some stools, and chaires for the better sort. Most of
the women sat on the floor, but most The preparation made.
of the men stood thronged together. About two hundred are supposed to be there
assembled. About the midst of the room was a chair and a little table
before it for the Preacher.

All things thus prepared, and the multitude assembled, The Preachers manner of
entrance.
about three a clock the expected Preacher, having a surplice on him girt about
his middle with a linen girdle, and a tippet of scatlet on both his shoulders,
came in, being attended upon by a man carrying in one hand a book, and in the
other an houre-glasse.

So soon as he came to the table prepared for him, he kneeled down, with show
of private devotion a little while. Then rising up, and turning himself to the
people, he crossed himself, and took the foresaid book (which was said to be
the Rhemish Testament) out of the hand of the man that followed him: and the
houre-glasse being set upon the table, he opened the book, and read the
Gospel appointed (according to the direction of the Romish Calender) The Text.
for the 21 Sunday after Pentecost, as that was. That Gospel is recorded by
St. Matthew, chap. 18. 23, etc. The text being read, he sat down in his
chair, and put on his head a red cap, over a white linen one turned up about
the brimmes.

He made no audible prayer at all: but having read his text, he first spoke
something of the occasion of it (it being the Parable of forgiving debts:) and
then propounded three especial points to be handled out of it. The principal
points handled.
1. The debt we owe to God. 2. The mercy of God in forgiving it. 3. Man's
unmercifulness to his brother.


Having insisted some while on the misery of man by reason of the debt wherein
he stands bound to God; he passed on to declare the rich mercy of God, and the
means which God had afforded to his Church for partaking thereof. Among these
he reckoned up the Sacraments, and especially pressed the Sacrament of Penance,
as they call it.

He was discoursing on these points about half an hour, when on a sudden the
floor whereon the preacher and the The dismal fall.
greater part of his Auditory stood, fell down with such violence, as
therewith the floor of the chamber under it (where Redyate before mentioned
and some company with him, were) was borne down: so as both the floores, the
beams, girders, joyces, boards and seelings, with all the people on them, fell
down together upon a third floor, which was the floor of the French
Ambassadors withdrawing chamber, supported with stone arches, as aforesaid.

Here by the way, the Providence of God in the preservation of the Ambassador,
is remarkable. This withdrawing The Ambassador absent.
chamber was next to his bedchamber. He had often recourse thither. It was said
by his Attendants that that very afternoon. he was in that withdrawing
chamber: and that not long before the sermon he came out of it to go to the
Court.

There being a partition on the South side of the middle chamber which reached
up to the floor of the garret, and How many of the Auditory fell not.
supported it, that part of the garret which was beyond that partition
Southward, fell not: so as all the people thereon were safe. Only they had no
way to get out. For, there was but one entrance into the garret, which was at
the North-West corner. Hereupon some through amazement would have leaped out of
a window, almost forty foot from the ground. But the people without told them
of the danger if they leapt down, and so kept them from that desperate
attempt. At length by breaking the wall on the West side, they discerned
chambers adjoining thereto: and through the hole which they made, they crept
into those chambers, and were saved.

All that stood on the staire-head at the door leading into the garret, were
also saved. For, the stairs were without the room, and nothing fell but the
floores: nor walls, nor roof.

Among those that fell, many escaped: for, some of the Who fell, but escaped
death.
pieces of timber resting with one end on the wall, and with another on the
third floor that yielded not, both such as abode upon those pieces, and such
as were under them, were thereby preserved. A Minister that was there and fell
with He himself told me this story.
the multitude, through the providence of God fell so betwixt two pecces of
timber, as that timber kept his upper parts from crushing, and helped him, by
his clasping about the timber, to pull out his feet from among the dead corpse.

Among others the present preservation and future destruction of Parker is very
remarkable. This Parker was a One that escaped death in the fall, shortly after
drowned.
kind of factor for English Seminaries and Nuns beyond sea, especially at
Cambre. He so dealt with two brothers of his in England, as he obtained of one
a son of his, and of another a daughter, to send them to religious houses (as
those superstitions places are called) beyond Sea. This Parker took his
Nephew, a youth of 16 years age, to the forementioned fatal conventicle,
where Drury preached. Both these, Parker and his Nephew fell with the rest. The
youth there lost his life, but Parker himself escaped with a bruised body,
being a corpulent man. So far was he from praising God, as with much
discontent he wished that he had died for his Nephew, and said, that God saw
not him sit to die among such Martyrs. Strange Martyrs! Yet not so strange, as
those martyrs which died under gallowses and gibbets for treason. Such are
Romes martyrs. But about ten days after this Parker shooting London bridge with
his foresaid Niece, whom he was conveighing over Sea, both were cast away in
the Thames. Judge hereby (O Parents) whether God be well pleased with
committing your children to Papists for education.

But to return to our story.

Others there were, that were pulled out alive, but so bruised, or so spent for
want of breath, as they died within few hours after, others within few days
after.

The floor of the chamber immediately over this, where Causes of their death.
the dead corpses lay, being fallen, there was no entrance hereunto, but through
the Ambassadors bedchamber: the door whereof was closed up by the timber of
the floores that fell down. The walls of this room were stone: only one
window therein, with extraordinary cross iron bars. Thus, though Smiths and
other workmen were sent for, yet it was more then an hour before succor
could be afforded unto them.

When passage was made for others, I had access into the room, and viewing
the bodies, observed some (yet but few) to be mortally wounded or bruised with
the timber; others to be apparently stifled, partly with their thick lying one
on another, and partly with the dust that came from the seeling that fell.

On the Lords Day night when they fell, there were numbered The number flaine.
91 dead bodies: whereof many of them were secretly conveyed away that very
night. For, there were a pair of water stairs leading out of the garden,
appertaining to that house, into the Thames.

On the morrow following the Coroner and his Inquest coming to view the
bodies, found remaining but 63.

Of those that were carried away, some were buried in a Their burial.
burying place within the Spanish Ambassadors house in Holborn, among whom the
Lady Webb was one, the Lady Blackstones daughter another, and one Mistress Vdall
a third. Master Stoker and Master Bartholomew Bavine were buried in S. Brides
parish. Robert Sutton, John Loccham, and Abigail Holford in S. Andrews
Holborne; Captain Summers wife in the vault under Blackfriars Church, and her
woman in the Churchyard.

For the Corpses remaining two great pits were dug, one in the fore-court of
the said French Ambassadors house, 18 foot long, and 12 foot broad, the other
in the garden behind his house, 12 foot long, 8. foot broad: In the former pit
were laid 44 corpses, whereof the bodies of the forenamed Redyat and Drury were
two. These two wound up in sheets were first laid into the pit: and a partition
of loose earth to sever them from the rest. Then were others brought: some in
somewhat a decent manner, wound up in sheets: but others in a more lamentable
plight, the shirts only of the men tied under their twist: and some linnentied
about the middle of the women: the other parts of their body naked: one poor
man or woman taking a corpse by the head, another by the feet: and so piled
them up almost to the top of the pit.

The remainder were put into the other pit in the garden.

Their manner of burial seemed almost (if not altogether) as dismal, as the
heap of them when they lay on the floor whereupon they last fell.

No obsequies or funeral rites were used at their burial. Only on the day
after, a black cross of wood was set upon each grave. But soon was it by
authority commanded to be taken down.

Thus they being interred, through search was made about the cause of the
failing of the timber. The timber of The scantling of the timber that brake.
each floor was laid together: and the measure of the Summiers that brake,
taken.

The maine Summier which crossed the garret was ten inches square. Two girders
were by tenants and mortaises let into the midst of it, one just against
another. The Summier was knotty where the mortaises were made: whereupon being
over-burdened, it knapt suddenly asunder in the midst

The maine Summier of the other floor that fell was much stronger, being 13
inches square, smooth and sound every where, no knot in it: neither did the
girders meet so just one against another. Yet that also failed: not in the
midst, as the uppermost, but within five foot of one end, and that more
shiveringly, and with a longer rent in the timber, then the other. For, this
chamber was almost full with such persons as coming too late to get into the
sermon, went into Redyats chamber. Besides, it did not only bear the weight
which lay on the upper floor, together with the weight of that floor that
fell, but also received all that weight with a sudden knock; and so the massy
timber shivered in two, as suddenly as the other knapped asunder, and the
people were irrecoverably down (before they could fear any such thing) on the
third floor, which was above 20 foot from the first.

If this be not an evidence of the eye and hand of the divine Providence, both
seeing and ordering things below, what evidence can be given thereof?

True is that of the Wiseman, All things come alike to all. Eccl 9. 2.
There is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, etc. There is nothing
that befalls any one, but may befall every one. And even such an accident may
befall an assembly of true worshippers of God, as either the floor to fall
under them, or the roof and walls to fall upon them. For,

1. The judgments of God are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out,
Romans 11. 33.

2. He has other means to put difference betwixt his Saints and others, then
external events.

3. He will have his to fear always, (Prove. 28. 14.) and always to depend on
him.

Yet notwithstanding where we see judgments executed on sinners when they are
in their sin, when they are impudent and presumptuous therein, not to
acknowledge such to be judged of the Lord, is to wink against a clear light.
Psalm 9. 16.
God is known by the judgment which he executes. To suppose then that the
judgment which he executes is no judgment, is to put out that light which he
affords of making known himself. Dan 4. 3 c, etc
Shall Nebuchadnezzar while he is vaunting of his great Babylon, be bereft of
his wits? Act. 12. 22, etc.
Shall Herod while he is priding himself in the peoples flattering applause,
be eaten of worms? Hest. 3. 8. -- 5. 14. -- 6. 4. -- 7. 10.
Shall Haman while he is practicing to destroy all the people of God, and
intending to hang Mordecai on a gallows of 50 foot high, be hanged thereon
himself? 2 King. 19. 37
Shall Sennacherib while he is worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god, be
slain by his own sons? Judge. 16. 30.
Shall the house where the Philistines met to make sport with Sampson, fall
upon their heads? Shall these and such like judgments overtake men in the very
act of their sinning, and yet be accounted no judgments, no evidences of the
divine providence, no signs of his indignation? Then let all things be ordered
by chance: or rather let there be no order at all.

For the Conventicle where the forementioned Downfall was, It was for the
greater part of Papists, who are palpable idolaters, whose doctrine is a mass
of ancient heresies, who are by Law interdicted the execution of ministerial
functions, who at this time gave outbefore hand that such a priest should
preach, who made choice of a spacious place, who let the door be open for all
comers, who taking advantage at some present connivence, most audaciously and
impudently, without fear of God or man did what they did. Now for such, in
such an act, after such a manner done, so many of them, by such a means to be
taken away, what can be said or thought, but that This is the finger of God.
For to end as I began, Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing? And one of
them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of
your head are numbered.

THE DIGNITY OF CHIVALRY, Set forth in A SERMON, PREACHED before the Artillery
Company of LONDON, June xiij. 1626. The second Edition. By WILLIAM GOVGE.

EXODUS 15. 3. (...) The LORD is a Man of War.

CHRYSOSTOM. ad Pop. Hom. 14. (...). Antiquitus Deus Dux erat bellorum. LONDON,
Printed by George Miller for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the Bible, at the great North door of Paul's. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR HVGH HAMMERSLY, Knight, one of the Aldermen and
Coronels of the honorable City of LONDON, and President of the Martial
Company, exercising Arms in the Artillery Garden. AND, To all the Captains
and Gentlemen of the said Company, Such valor as may make them victoriously
stand against all sorts of Enemies. Worthy President, Captains, and Gentlemen,
Semel, and secundo, and tertio (ni fallor) petijsti a me, ut tibi tuisque
commilitonibus scriberem exhortationis scrmonem, asserens vobis non parum fore
adiutorij, si quos armis non possum, literis animarem. Bern Prolog. in Ser. ad
Mil. Temp.
AS by a free Election of you all, I was called to preach that which is here
presented to you, so by the first motion and earnest solicitation of many of
you, I am induced to publish it. How far mine own purpose was from any such
purpose, God is my witness. How far your desire prevailed to alter that my
purpose, this evidence is an apparent evidence. Among other motives mentioned
by you that in the name of the rest were Solliciter in this business, this,
which by some of you was alleged, most prevailed with me, that the more common
this Sermon was made, the more commodious it might be to your Company. How my
poor pains may add any advantage to your important employments, I know not.
This I know, and do openly acknowledge, and publicly profess, that my heart
is set upon your Artillery Company: I love it: I admire it: I honor it: I
praise God for it: I will continue to pray to the Lord of Hosts for his
blessing upon it: and to my poor power, I will do what I can, for the
advancement thereof. As one, though a very mean and weak proof thereof, I
do here dedicate to you in particular, that which by your means, and for your
sake is divulged to all in general. I confess, that as the matter thereof, so
the manner of handling it, is somewhat differing from my ordinary course. For,
I had respect to the kind of Auditory before which I spoke. Among Soldiers I
endeavored to speak Souldier-like. If offense be taken at matter or manner, I
shroud my self under your shields for defense. Now that you have brought me
forth into the open field, and set me up to be gazed on, and baited at by the
differing censures of diverse censors, leave me not to shift for my self. Be
not backward to patronize what you have been forward to produce. I may the
rather expect all just defense from you, because by appearing somewhat
otherwise in your Assembly then I use to do in my usual Auditory, I take you,
worthy President for my president, yea all you valiant Captains, and other
Gentlemen, whom I make as one Patron, for my pattern herein. Me thinks, O
prudent President, when in a forenoone I see you sitting, and giving advice
among the wise Senators of our City, and in an afternoon marching before the
Martial Gentlemen of your Company, me thinks the same man is not the same
man. But of old, such has been the demeanor of those who have been gifted
for the one and the other place, to be both grave Senators and brave Soldiers.
Such were Brutus, Scipio the one and the other, Camillus, Marius, Pompey,
Caesar, and many other who were both Togati and Armati, prudent Consuls, potent
Captains. The like I may say of all you Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden: You
that are, wheresoever you are, in your persons the same Persons, do with that
decorum observe the business which you are about, as in your ordinary
vocation, and Military profession, you seem to be other and other men. Hereby
you manifest your prudence and providence. Prudence, by fitting your selves to
that which is fit for the present. Providence, both by improving the time of
peace, and making the best advantage thereof in the duties of your particular
callings, and also by preparing your selves against the time of War, and
preventing the damage which might otherwise thence ensue. Nulli qui est de
putatus ad aliquod officium, licet id per quod suo officio incongruus redditur.
Vnde clericis omnino non licet bella gerere, etc. A quin. 2 2. quaest. 40. Ar
tic. 2.
So well have I ever approved this your course, as, if my coat and calling had
been answera ble, long ere this, I had endeavored to have been of your
Artillery Company. But, for those whose education appertains to me, I verily
purpose, and openly profess, that if ever any Son of mine be a Citizen of
London, and of sufficient ability, I will endeavor to have him a member of
this your Company. Of which mind, I would more persons and parents were. If
they were, and their childrens mind (when they are of age) answerable thereto,
both City and Kingdom would be much more honored and secured by this and
other like Societies. My desire is therefore, that this which is likely to come
to the view of many more then at first heard it, may prevail with those many,
to doc as you do, and to add able men and availeable means to the
advancement of your Company. To conclude, if any advancement (O noble
President, Captains, and Gentlemen of the Artillery Company) may any way by
your desire to have that, which once your selves heard, lie open to the view of
all, be attained, the end of yielding to your desire is obtained. For this end
therefore, humble and hearty prayer is and shall be made (to him that has
power to move the minds of all men according to his own mind) by him that
promises to be

Blackfriars London. Iul. 10. 1626. Your daily Orator, WILLIAM GOVGE.

THE DIGNITY OF CHIVALRY, Set forth in A SERMON, Preached before the Artillery
Company of LONDON, 13. June. MDCXXVI.
. 1. Of the Sum of Text and Sermon.
II. CHRON. VIII. IX. (...).
THEY were MEN of WAR.

THE Dignity of Chivalry (a point very pertinent for this present appointment)
is the Pearl that is enclosed in the casket of my Text. Hereof that you may
take the better view, I will set open this casket in your sight. Be pleased
therefore to take notice of the general Scope whereat the Holy Ghost aims in
this Chapter: thereby you may discern that the forenamed point, The Dignity of
Chivalry, is not violently wrested, but properly arises out of my Text. The
Sum of this Chapter is A Declaration of the Magnificence of Solomon. Among
other evidences thereof this is one, that his native Subjects, Children of
Israel, THEY were MEN of WAR. The original expresses none but words of
weight: Circumstantiall words, which are as bonds to knit word to word, it
leaves to be understood. There are therefore three only words in the
original, all which set out the Dignity of Chivalry, and that by the Persons,
their Property, and Part whereunto they were put. The parts of the Text.
The first word (...) THEY, notes out Singular Persons. The second, (...) MEN,
a Special Property. The third, (...) WAR, a Select employment.


THEY were MEN of WAR.. 2. Of such as are fit or unfit for war.
IN the two verses before my Text, it is said, that there were left of the
Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizites, and the Hivites, and the
Iebusites, who were not of Israel: 2 Chro. 8. 7, 8.
and that being left, they were so brought under, as Solomon made them to pay
tribute. They might therefore have been put to any office or work that the
King would: yet were not THEY MEN of WAR. They were too mean and unmeet
persons, for a function so high and honorable. On Who not fit for War.
the contrary, in the words immediately before my Text, it is said, Of the
children of Israel, did Solomon make no servants for his work. They being men
of better note and name, were 2 Chronicles. 8. 9.
reserved for a more honorable employment, which my Text thus expresses, THEY
were MEN of WAR; which words are inferred on the former, by way of
opposition, with this adversative Particle BUT. They were no servants for
work: BUT THEY were MEN of WAR. As the meaner and baser sort were made
servants for work, so Who fit for War.
the better and excellenter sort were made Soldiers for War. THEY were MEN of
WAR. Nor Hittites, nor Amorites, nor Perizites, nor Hivites, nor Iebusites,
BUT Israelites, THEY were MEN of WAR. No Slaves, no Captives, no Aliens, no
Forrainers, but Freemen, Freeborne, Native Subjects, Natural Citizens, THEY
were MEN of WAR. Thus this relative particle (...) THEY, as here it is used,
is to be taken (...) with an excellency, as importing some eminency of the
Persons here meant. This choice then of Persons makes much to the Dignity of
Chivalry.

. 3. Of the property of men of War.
2. AS there was choice made of persons in regard of their outward privilege,
Israelites, Natives, Citizens: Elegit Deus ex fortissimis Israel and ad bella
dectissimos. Bern. ad Mil. Temp. cap 4.
so also in regard of their inward property. For the second word of my Text,
(...) MEN, though it be often used for mortal men, subject to many miseries, yet
is it also put for (...) valorous men, and attributed to those choice men which
were taken out of the twelve several Tribes of Israel, and sent to spy the
Land of Canaan. Yea, this very word Numb. 13. 2, 3.
is twice used in that exhortation which the Philistims use to encourage one
another, when they heard that the Ark of the LORD was brought into the host of
the Israelites: and it is used to set out valor and courage in men. For thus,
word for word it may be translated, Be men: some translate it thus, Play the
MEN: Others thus, Quit you 1 Samuel 4. 9. (...) estote viri. (...) S^is viri.
like MEN. (...) by transposition of a letter, are (...) Men of place and
power, Commanders, Captains. Thus the MEN here meant, may be distinguished
from the vulgar, common sort of men. The Hebrews put such a difference betwixt
(...) and (...) as the Grecians do betwixt (...) and (...), and the Latins
betwixt Vir and Homo. (...) imports such an one as has in him (...) Fire,
Life, and Spirit: but (...) a man of the earth. Vir by the Latins is so called
of virtue and prowess: but homo ab humo, as (...) of the earth. In Greek,
they most properly are styled (...). Herod. in Polym.
(...), who are (...), virtuous, valorous, magnanimous: but all of all sorts
(...). Our English is herein penurious, it wants fit words to express this
difference: We call all, whether mighty or mean, Men: yet sometimes this word
MEN in our tongue has his Emphasis, as in these and such like phrases, They
have played the MEN. They have showed themselves MEN. They are MEN indeed. Thus
in the English translation of the Scripture it is used, I Cor. 16. 13. Quit you
like MEN. And 2 Samuel 10. 12. Let us play the MEN. That the word here in my Text
is so to be taken, is evident by comparing this with like places. Those valiant
men that came out of sundry Tribes to David in Hebron, to turn the kingdom of
Saul to him, of whose courage 1 Chronicles. 12. 23.
and Prowess much is spoken, are styled with the words here in my Text, (...)
Men of War. -- 38. Iocl 27. -- 3. 9. 2 Chro. 17. 13.
The Prophet Joel applies these two phrases (...) Mighty Men, and (...) Men of
War, to the same persons. Where the magnificence of Iehosaphat is set out as
Salomons magnificence is here set out, in Jerusalem there are said to be (...)
Men of War, and by way of exposition they are further styled (...) Mighty men
of valor. They were therefore choice Men of courage, Men of valor, that are
here meant in my Text: so as their Property does further set out the Dignity of
Chivalry. In that, though Natives only and Israelites were deputed to the
employment here mentioned, yet not all sorts of Natives and Israelites, but
such as were well reputed of for virtue and valor, and fit for their
employment.

. 4. Of preparation for war under a Prince of Peace.
3. THese Natives of name, select Subjects, Men of mighty minds, to what
employment were they appointed? Even to War. They were men of WAR. What
need might there then be thought to be of Men of War? Had all the Nations
round about proclaimed War against Israel, as in Ioshuas time? Or was War
within their Ios. 9. 1, 2.
gates, as before Deborahs days? Or were their enemies Judge 5. 8. Judge. 15. 11.
Rulers over them, as when Sampson began to be a Judge in Israel? No such
matter. What then? Was this the time to take revenge of Isreal's enemies for
former wrongs, to secure the Land of them, and to bring them under subjection?
Surely no: All that, was sufficiently done by David, that mighty man of War.
Solomon now reigned. Solomon 2 Samuel 8. 1, etc.
that Prince of Peace. His name proported Peace. For, Solomon had his
denomination from (...) Peace. Peace also was promised to be in his days. Both
the forenamed Name of Peace, and also the promise of Peace are expressly
mentioned by God himself, where he thus speaks to David, Behold a Son shall
be borne to thee, who shall be a man of rest: 1 Chronicles. 22. 9.
and I will give him rest from all his enemies round about: for his name shall
be Solomon: and I will give peace and quietness to Israel all his days. This
Solomon was herein an especial Type of the great Prince of Peace, Christ
Jesus, who is Our Isa. 9. 6. Ephesians. 2. 14.
Peace. In that then, where there was no fear of danger, nor any instant,
urgent necessity required, in a time and place of Peace, under the reign of a
Prince of Peace, They, of whom you heard before, They were Men of WAR. Surely
preparation for War, Exercises thereto, Martial discipline, Artillery
tacticks, and Military trainings are matters of moment, commendable and
honorable, not tobe rejected or neglected, but duly to be respected, and daily
practiced, at all times, in all places, whether of peril or peace. This third
and last branch therefore (as it is here set down) even the Part which the
forenamed Persons performed, amplifieth the Dignity of Chivalry. For, They were
Men of WAR.

. 5. Of the principal Points of the Text.
THus have I cleared the general Scope of my Text, and laid open to your view
this promised Pearl, the Dignity of Chivalry: by showing how every word of my
Text eyeth that mark, and every part and particle thereof much advances the
same. With your good patience I purpose to dive yet more deeply into the depth
of my Text. For the three Parts raised out of the three words thereof, as they
have been opened before you, (namely, 1. The singular Persons, THEY, 2. Their
special Property, MEN. 3. Their select Employment. WAR.
THEY were MEN of WAR.)

These three points (I say) afford to our heedfull consideration these three
useful Observations. The three principal points of the Text.
I. The Artilery profession is an honorable function. II. Military men must be
of mighty minds. III. In peace to prepare for War, is a principal part of
prudence.


Of these in order: and first of the first.

. 6. Of the honor of a Soldiers function.
THe Artillery profession is an honorable function.

To treat much of the Artillery profession, before this Artillery Company,
would be to act Cum Phermio de Imperatoris officio, and omnire militari sic
dixisset, ut cae^^ri qui illum audirent vehementer essent delectati, Annibal
interrogatus quid de illo Philosopho iudicaret, respondit, multos se deliros
senes saepe vidisse, sed qui magis quam Phormio de^raret, vidisse neminem. Cic.
de Orat. lib. 2.
Phormio his part before so many Annibals as are here present. You all know
that the Artillery Profession is a Military Discipline, whereby choice persons
are instructed and enabled well to manage weapons of War, orderly to march in
their due place, wisely to encampe, and skilfully to embattaile. That to be
trained up hereto, and well exercised herein, is an honorable function,
belongs to me, and to the matter in hand, to prove. How it appears by my
text to be an honorable function, ye have heard. Hittites, Amorites,
Perizites, Hivites, Iebusites, and such like servile persons coming from a
base offspring, The soldiers profession, and honorable function.
were counted unworthy hereof. In Israel Israelites, Children of the ever
renowned Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Men of highest and greatest
esteem, THEY were Men of War. That function whereof base people were counted
unworthy, and whereunto Men of best account must be deputed, is (...), without
contradiction an honorable function. To like purpose it is noted that Abraham
Genesis 23. 6. -- 14. 14.
himself, that Prince of God (as he is for excellency sake styled) trained up
in Artillery exercises, not bondslaves, bought with his money, but such as
were borne and brought up in his house, whom he had in high esteem. THEY were
Men of War. Where as old Ishai, an understanding and wise man had eight
sons, the three most honorable of 1 Samuel 17. 12, 13.
them all, even the three eldest, were trained up in an Artillery profession,
THEY were Men of War. And though David, being the youngest of all, were by
his Father deputed to be a shepherd, yet his brave mind affecting more
honorable employments, whereunto also he was incited 1 Samuel 17. 32, etc.
by divine instinct, he would needs prove to be a man of War, and indeed
proved to be an approved Man of War. Saul himself though a King, Jonathan,
that lovely Jonathan, -- 18. 27, 30. Who of old were men of War.
the Kings Son and heir, other of his brethren, all Kings Sons, THEY were
Men of War. Of old, the best of a Nation, best in blood and birth, as Kings,
Princes, Nobles, their children and kindred: best in stature and propernesse of
body, as the three tall, proper sons of Ishai: best in courage, valor, and
strength, as they whom Saul chose to follow him: best any other way, THEY were
Men of War. 1 Samuel 14. 52.
What shall I more say? For the time would fail me to speak in particular of
Joshua, Gedeon, Iepthah, David, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and other like
worthies, royal persons, that were trained up in the Artillery Profession, and
thereupon waged many battles valiantly and victoriously. THEY were Men of
War. We read of few battles in Scripture, wherein Kings, or other chief
Governors had not their place and part. In Assyria, Persia, Greece, and Rome,
the four great Monarchies of the World, and the most famous States that ever
were among the Heathen, all that in any excellency surpassed others, and were
chosen to high and honorable places, for the most part, THEY were Men of
War. The like may be noted of other well disciplined and well governed
polities. Most of our Dignities and Titles of honor have risen from Artillery
exercises, and Military employments. Imperatores Emperors, were at Titles of
honor most due to men of War.
first Generals of armies: Duces Dukes, were Captains of bands: Comites
Earls, were Lieftenants, or Provosts-Marshalls: Milites Knights, were choice
Soldiers: Equites Esquires, were horsemen in War. These and other like
honorable titles were at first given to men, because THEY were Men of War.
The honor of Knighthood is known properly to belong to such as have well
deserved in War. Our Ancestors got their greatest renown by warlike
affairs. Can any now deny the Artillery profession to have Maiores nostri
summam rebus bellicis retulere gloriam. Ambr. Offic. l. 1. c. 35. Things
requisite to make men fit for War.
been accounted an honorable function? Many honorable parts and endowments
are requisite to make a man expert in the Artillery profession, as, Soundness
of judgment, Sharpness of wit, Quickness of conceit, Stoutnesse and courage
of mind, Vndauntednesse in danger, Discretion mixed with passion, Prudence,
Patience, Ability and Agility of body, and of the several parts thereof, with
the like: all which do demonstrate that the function whereunto they are
required, is an honorable function.

Matter both of Enducement and also of Encouragement does this first
observation afford.

. 7. Of double honor due to such as exercise Arms.
ENducement to men of place, power, and parts, to Governors, to Nobles, to
Rich men, to all that can any way add any honor to this profession, to do what
they can to the advancement of that which is in it self so honorable (as has
been showed) and worthy of all the honor that can be done unto it. The Apostle
makes mention of a double honor. 1 Timothy 5. 17.
That double honor is Countenance and Maintenance: both which are most due to
this profession; and most meet it is that both be given thereto. By this double
honor have Honos alit arts. Cic. Tusc. quaest. lib. 1.
all professions in all ages been brought to that perfection whereunto in any
kind they have attained. The respect and reward which of old has been
afforded to valorous, and courageous, well exercised, and well experienced
Captains and Soldiers in the four forenamed Monarchies, made them so abound
with Men of War, as the whole world was made to tremble at the hearsay of
them. When once a question was moved, why after Virgils time there were no more
such excellent Poets as he was, such an answer as this was made:

Sint Mecanates non deerunt Flacce Marones: Virgiliumque tibi vel tua rura
dabunt. Martial. l. 8. Epigr. 56.
Good Poets thrive where liberal Patrons live:
Their countries will another Virgil give.
An answer very pertinent to the point in hand: and fitly it may be applied to
Captains and Soldiers, who undoubtedly will abound in number, and grow very
expert in all warlike exercises, where they are plentifully sustained, and
highly honored. Were Artillery Gardens, and Military Fields for Martial
discipline and warlike trainings, fostered and honored thorow-out this land,
as it is meet they should be, Greece could have no cause to boast before
England of her Achilles, Diomedes, Themistocles, Pericles, Pyrrhus, etc. nor
Rome of her Scipioes, Horatij, Fabij, Pompeis, or Caesar's. Means among us are
more wanting then Men, or Minds. Oh that this Enducement might prevail with
Men of Means, to afford the honor of Regard, and honor of Reward to this
Artillery profession which is so worthy of double honor.

. 8. Of Encouragement to Artillery Gentlemen.
THe Encouragement concerns you, the Commanders and other Members of this
commendable and honorable Company. Howsoever your Profession and practice be
rejected or neglected by such as ought most to respect it, yet it being
honorable in it self, be encouraged to go on therein. The practice of a good
thing is then most commendable, when, for the goodness of it, it is practiced.
The puissant Princess Deborab, that rose up a Mother in Israel, and a Judge
therein, with admiration said, of such as offered themselves willingly, My
heart is on them. Had your Mother Judge. 5. 9.
London, or your Grandmother England a tongue to express her mind, she would
with like approbation say to you, that show your selves not only (...) willing,
but also (...) forward to all Martial exercises, My heart is on you: yea the
heart of him that loves them that do good things cheerfully and willingly,
and can and will honor them that honor him, his heart is on you. He accepts
the good things which are done of the doers own accord, without compulsion by
others, or remuneration from others, he accepts them as done for his own
sake. For Compare Romans 13. 5. with 1 Pet. 2. 13. 2 Chronicles 17. 16
that which is done for conscience sake, is done for the Lords sake. In this
respect it is said of Amasiah the son of Zichri a great Captain and
Commander of two hundred thousand mighty men of valor, under King Iehosaphat,
that he willingly offered himself unto the Lord: that is, he undertaking his
function willingly, he did it as to the Lord. Thus of you that are of the same
mind Quoniam sibi mercedem ab homine non quaesrvit, a Deo accepit, sicut
legimus, etc. Ambr de Abr Pat. l. 1. c. 3
it may be said, ye offer your selves willingly to the Lord. And will not the
Lord graciously accept such? Abraham, who in this kind nor expected nor
accepted reward of man, heard God thus speaking to him, Fear not Abraham: I am
thy shield, and thine exceeding great reward.

. 9. Of drawing more to the Artillery Garden.
GIve me leave to extend this Encouragement to such as are not yet of your
Fraternity, nor have yet given their names to be of your Society, I mean such
as are in the flower of their age, of sufficient stature and strength, well
able to afford time and means for Artillery exercises, to offer themselves
readily and chearefully to this honorable service. The time which may be, and
usually is spared from your particular callings, cannot be better spent,
(exceptis semper excipiendis, except duties of piety and charity, whereby all
other things are seasoned and sanctified) I say vacant hours cannot better be
spent then in the Artillery Garden, and in the practice of Martial discipline
there exercised, as shall. 16.
afterward be more fully cleared.

But thus much of the first point, your honorable Function.

. 10. Of valor requisite for Soldiers.
THe next concerning your Valorous Disposition, is this.

Military Men must be of mighty minds. They must be Men indeed, and able to
play the Men. The sign of difference Tria arbitror esse necessaria praelianti:
ut scil. strenuus industriusque miles, and circum spectus sit ad se servandum,
and expeditus ad discurrendum, and promptus ad feriendum. Bern ad Mil. Temp. c.
2
betwixt such as were fit and unfit for War, that God caused Gedeon to
observe for retaining some, and dismissing others, tends to this purpose. The
sign was this: They which lapped water with their tongues were entertained:
They which kneeled down to drink were cashiered. The Reason was this. They
that kneeled down to drink, manifested thereby a luskish, sluggish
disposition, and desire to soope up their bellies full. The other that took up
water in their hands, and lapped it with their tongues, showed that their mind
was so on their work which they had to do, as they would not tarry to kneel
down; they would only lap and be gone, a little for present necessity, so
much as might somewhat slack their thirst, and refresh them, was sufficient.
Gods appointing such only to be retained for War, proves the point in hand.
Much more the express precepts which by God himself and his Ministers, were
given unto those that were set apart for War, to be valiant, and courageous.
When God deputed Joshua to be General over all Israel, he gave him this
express charge, Be strong and of a good courage: which he further thus
enforces, Have not I commanded thee? Be Ios. 1. 6.
strong and of a good courage: Be not afraid, neither be thou -- 9.
dismayed. The like charge did Moses in the name of the Lord give to all
Israel, that were deputed to War, in these words: Be strong and of a good
courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them. Yea, God ordained it for a
perpetual Law, that when Deuteronomy. 31. 7.
his people were to go to War, this Proclamation should be made, What man is
there that is fearful and faint-hearted? let him go and return unto his
house. This Law God commanded Deuteronomy. 20. 8.
Gideon, to proclaim before his army. The equity thereof was so clearly
discerned by the very light of nature, Judge. 7. 3.
as many of the Heathen put it in practice: by name, Iphicrates the Athenian,
and Epaminondas the Theban. If such as are fearful and faint-hearted be not
fit for War, neither De Israelitarum virtute in bell is gerendis lege Aug. de
Mirab. S* Script. l. 2. c. 34. Iud 20. 17. (...) 2 Chronicles. 13. 3.
are they fit to be trained up in Martial Exercises. Most meet it is that
Military Men be of mighty minds. It is usual with the Holy Ghost to set out
such men as were trained up and set apart to War, to set them out by their
power and prowess. Of those four hundred thousand men, that out of all the
Tribes of Israel were chosen to fight against Benjamin and Gibeah, of every one
of them it is said that he was (...) Vir belli, a true Man of War, a valiant,
a mighty man. Of those many hundred thousands which Ioab numbered in David's
time, it is said that they were valiant men that drew swords, even every one of
them (as the Hebrew phrase implies.) And of those many hundred thousands also
which out of Judah and Israel were gathered together in two armies to fight one
against another in Abijahs, and Ieroboams time, it is said that they were The
Hebrew is very emphaticall, (...) the emphasis whereof being observed by the
LXX. is thus expressed, (...) mighty in might.
valiant men of War, mighty men of valor: which commendation is also given
to those many troops of trained soldiers which Iehosaphat maintained in
Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 17. 13. When David purposed to take vengeance of Ammon for
the indignity and ignominy which was offered to his Ambassadors, he sent Ioab
and all the Host of the Mighty men against them. Before the good Spirit of God
left Saul, when he saw any strong 2 Samuel 10. 7. 1 Samuel 14. 52.
man, or any valiant man, he took him unto him, namely to train him up in
Martial discipline. Of David himself, and 2 Samuel 17. 10.
of such as followed him, it is said, that all Israel knew that he was a mighty
man, and they valiant men. And of those that came to him in Ziklag, it is said
that they were Mighty 1 Chronicles. 12. 1, 2, 8, 21.
Men, mighty men of valor, that could use both theright hand and the left: men
of might; men of War; fit for the battle; that could handle shield and
buckler: whose faces were like the faces of Lions, etc. Does not this frequent
mention of the might and valor of such as were for War, show, that they that
take upon them to be Military men, must be of mighty minds; and that timorous,
weak, and feeble persons are not fit for the Artillery profession?

. 11. Of the damage of timorous soldiers.
Where God first enacted the forenamed Law, that no fearful persons should
go to War, he renders this Reason, Least his brethrens heart faint like
his. Lamentable Deuteronomy. 20. 8.
experience has given too great evidence of the truth hereof. A few
white-liverd, faint-hearted soldiers have often been the ruin of a great
strong Army which has been put to rout by reason of their fainting, and
yielding, so as such men are more fit to stoop down to a sithe, then to take
up a sword, to lift a pitchforke then to toss a pike, to handle a mattocke
then to hold a musket, and to carry a bush-bill rather then a battell-axe. But
on the other side, of such use are valiant men and valorous minds, as their
courage may supply the want of number: and though they be but few, not fear
the face of many. It is noted that Abraham armed three hundred and eighteen,
to express not the Numeravit 318 Vt scias non quantitatem numerised meritum
electionis expressum. Amb. de Abr. Patr. l 1 c 3. 2 Samuel 23. 8, 9, etc. 1 Chronicles
12 14. Levit 26. 8.
number of many, but the worth of choice ones. Well weigh the mighty and great
exploits that were achieved by David's Worthies, by reason of their valor and
courage, and you shall find, that a few courageous men to great armies of
cowards, are as so many Lions to whole herds of dear: Five may chase an
hundred, and an hundred put ten thousand to flight. Is it not then most meet
that Military Men be of mighty minds?

. 12. Of Righteousness making valorous.
IN applying this point. I will give you a divine direction for attaining to
that which has been proved to be so requisite, valor and courage. The
direction is grounded on one of Salomons Proverbs, which is this, The wicked
fly when no Pro. 28. 1.
man pursues: but the righteous are bold as a lion. Righteousness then makes
men valorous, wickedness timorous. Quis tam sortis quam sanctus Amb. Offic. l
1 c 39. Who to be accounted righteous. Psalm. 14. 3. Rom 3 10. Impavidus
profecto miles, and omni ex part securus, qui ut corpus ferro, sic animum
fidei lorica induitur, utriusque nimirum indutus armis, nec daemonem timet, nec
hominem. Bern, Sermon. ad Mil, Temp c. 1.
They who know who are righteous, who wicked, cannot but acknowledge the truth
of this proverb. A righteous man cannot be here thought to be such an one as
has in every part, point, and degree fulfilled the Law of righteousness
according to the exact rule thereof. So there is none righteous: no not one.
But in Gospel-phrase he is accounted righteous, that by true Faith applying to
his soul the blood of Christ, for purging away all his unrighteousness, and
laying hold on Christ's righteousness, to be justified thereby, does his
uttermost endeavor to keep a clear conscience before God and Man. This man
of all others must needs be the most valorous, whose soul is fenced with the
brestplate of righteousness, and shield of Faith, as well as his body, with
armor and weapons of steel. He fears nor Devil nor man. His conscience
will make him fight in none but a good cause. His Faith will make him
courageous in that cause. If in his body he be wounded, he has Pro. 18. 14.
a Spirit to sustain his infirmity. No passion can so supply the want of blood
and support a man, as this Spirit. Might of mind may overcome the force of
fire. But if the earthen vessel of S. Laurentius animi virtute vincebat ignis
naturam. Amb. Offic. l. 1 c. 41. Et sihostes nos perimant, nullum lamen ad
animas periculum migrat, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. in 1 Timothy c. 2. Sive in lecto, sive
in bello quis meritur, preciosa erit sine du bio in conspectu domini mors
sanctorum. Coe^erum in bello tanto profecto pretiosior, quanto gloriesior.
Bern. loc. citat.
his body be so broken, as it can no longer retain this spirit, then flies it
upward to the place of rest and triumph, passage being made for that righteous
soul to ascend to the society of the souls of just men made perfect: so as
the supposed conquest over such anon is the cause of his triumph, and makes
him more then a Conqueror. The death of his Saints is precious in the sight of
the Lord. But in War so much more precious it is, by how much more glorious.
Get faith therefore and a good conscience, get them, and keep them, and they
will keep you from faint-heartednesse: they will put life, and spirit, and
virtue, and valor into you: they will make you fit for the Artillery
profession: they will make you men indeed, true military men, of mighty minds.

. 13. Of wickedness making timorous.
ON the contrary side, A wicked man must not every one be accounted, that has
committed any sin, (for All have sinned:) but such an one as loves
wickedness, and lives therein, and that without true repentance. Faith Romans
3. 23.
which is accompanied with repentance, receives absolution from God.
Absolution from God makes sins to be as not committed. For, the blood of
Christ, which cleanses us from all sin, cleanses all that believe and
repent. But infidelity 1 John 1. 7.
and impenitency lay all sins open to the wrath and vengeance of God.
Knowledge and conscience thereof cannot but fill the soul with many fears and
terrors: whence Lev. 26. 36. D. Barlow in his Sermon preached at Paul's Cross.
March 1. 1600. being the next Sunday after the execution of the late Earl of
Essex.
it comes to pass that such wicked men fear and fly, when none pursues
them. Thus much is expressly threatened against such wicked men. I will send,
says God, a faintness into their hearts, and the sound of a shaken leaf
shall chase them, and they shall fly as flying from a sword, and they shall
fall when none pursues, etc. It was the speech of the valorous Earl of Essex,
that Sometimes in the field encountering the enemy, the weight of his sins
lying heavy upon his conscience, being not reconciled to God, quelled his
spirits, and made him the most timorous and fearful man that might be. Take
heed therefore, O ye Captains, Commanders, and other Members of the Artillery
Company, take heed, as you would have your inward disposition fit for your
outward profession, of suffering sin to lie up on your souls. Let your
function be a motive to make you try the truth of your conversion. Be ye
righteous, that you may be indeed courageous.

. 14. Of courage against spiritual enemies.
ANd to take occasion from your external profession to put you in mind of your
spiritual condition, which is, to be Soldiers of Christ's bands, under his
colors, whose Artillery Garden is the Church Militant, where your Martial
discipline in which you are daily trained up, is not for recreation and
pastime, but in very good earnest, to conquer, unless you will be conquered,
and that in a combat of great consequence, wherein no earthly, but an heavenly
inheritance is fought for, and for attaining thereto, not liberty of this
world, but of the world to come, not a temporal, but eternal life is in great
hazard. If ye overcome, ye are free for ever, and gain an inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven. If
ye be overcome, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
ye are perpetual slaves to Satan, that malicious enemy, who will hold you
with everlasting chains under darkness in torture and torment endless and
easelesse, merciless and remediless. To put you in mind, I say, of this your
spiritual condition, know that if valor, and the forementioned ground thereof
be so requisite, as has been showed, against bodily enemies, which are but
flesh and blood, how much more against spiritual enemies, which are not flesh
and blood, but principalities and powers. These especially, we ought to resist
steadfast in the Faith. The chief spiritual enemy of our souls, the Devil,
from whom all our other spiritual enemies receive their strength and courage,
is like a Wolf, and that as in fierceness, so in fearfulness. A Wolf, if
he be stoutly resisted, will fly away, but if he be fearfully shunned or
yielded unto, then he will the more fiercely assault, and more greedily
devour. Even so the Devil: Resist the Devil and he will fly from you. Give
I am 4. 7. Libentius te insequitur adversarius fugientem, quain sustineat
repugnantem and audecius insislit a lergo, quam resistat in faciem. Bern.
Epist. 1. ad Rob. Nepot. suum. Ephesians. 6. 10, 11. 1 Cor. 16. 13.
place, and yield, and he will the more eagerly pursue, and the more easily
prevail. Neither, if he prevail, will he any whit the more spare thee for thy
yielding to him, but rather the more proudly insult overthee. Wherefore, my
Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: Put on the
whole armor of GOD, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the
Devil. Being thus armed, Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like men,
and be strong: stand courageously, and ye shall stand victoriously.

. 15. Of preparing for war in peace.
HItherto ye have heard of the Honor of your profession, and of the Valor
required by virtue thereof. The last point notes the necessity and benefit
thereof, which is this. In peace to prepare for War, is a principal part of
prudence.

The most prudent Prince that ever governed people, put in practice this point
of policy: even Solomon, to whom God said, I have given thee a wise and an
understanding heart, 1 King. 3. 12.
so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any
arise like thee. This Solomon enjoyed much peace, and had a promise to enjoy
peace all his days, and had no cause to fear any assaults or invasions of
enemies, all the nations round about being brought under by his Father David:
Yet this Prince of Peace built fenced cities with walls, gates and bars, and
chariot-cities, and cities of horsemen, and had his 2 Chronicles. 8. 5, 6 9.
trained men of War, which are here noted in my Text; yea, to show his store
of warlike provision, it is expressly noted, that he had 40000 stalls of horses
for his chariots, 1400 1 King. 4. 26. 2 Chronicles. 1. 14. Abraham's Artillery Garden.
chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen. The first Father of that stock, wise
Abraham, whose house was a place of peace, (for the fear of God fell upon all
nations round about him, they honored and reverenced him, they accounted him a
Prince of God) yet had this Abraham his Artillery Garden, wherein Genesis 14. 14.
The number by Patent granted to the Artillery Company of London, is 500. which
number was not full at the time of preaching this Sermon.
were trained up and fitted for War, such as were borne and brought up in his
house: the number of which Company I suppose was greater then the number of
your Company. For, at once on a sudden he armed and led to the War more then
three hundred trained men. And it is not likely that he left his house
destitute of all defense. He had questionless many more of that his Artillery
Company. Now note the benefit hereof. On a sudden, in a time of necessity, and
case of extremity, he had them ready to rescue five Kings, that were
overthrown by their enemies. To press this pattern yet further for the point
in hand, the Holy Ghost notes that Melchizedek King of Salem, whose name
declared him to be a King of Righteousness, whose nation showed him to be a
Prince of Peace, this Melchizedek King of Genesis 14. 18 19. 20. Heb. 7. 1, 2.
(...).
Salem, met Abraham with his forenamed troops, blessed him and them, gave good
entertainment to them all, and congratulated their return, giving thereby an
evident demonstration of his approbation of Abraham's providence and prudence in
maintaining an Artillery Garden for his house. The condition of Iehosaphats
Kingdom (who was the fourth son that by lineall descent came from Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 17. 10, 11, 13, etc.
and sat on his Throne) was much like to Salomons. For the fear of the Lord
was upon all the kingdoms of the land that were round about Judah, so that
they made no war against Iehosaphat: But in Testimony of amity, they sent him
year after year many presents: Yet he placed sorces in all the fenced cities
of Judah, and set garrisons in the Land, and had eleven hundred and threescore
thousand Men of War, mighty men of valor that waited on him, besides those
whom he put in the fenced cities through out all Judah. Admirable it is, and
(but that the word of truth records it) incredible, that in so small a Kingdom
as Judah was, there should be so many trained, expert, valiant men of War, as
were in Iehosaphats time. When Judah and all Israel were joined together, even
all the twelve Tribes in one Kingdom, that Kingdom was nothing so spacious as
England is. For, some of our Shires are larger then some of their Tribes were:
and yet our Shires are in number above four times more then their Tribes were:
For, we have In England 39. in Wales 13.
above four times twelve shires. How far then do the three Kingdoms under
the Dominion of our Sovereign, England, Scotland, and Ireland, how far do
they exceed in spaciousness, the Kingdom of Iehosaphat? Yet question may be
made, whether in these three Kingdoms, there be so many score thousands of
trained Soldiers, well disciplined men of War, mighty men of valor, as
there were hundred thousands in Judah. We account twenty or thirty thousand a
great Army, fifty thousand a royal Army. What then an hundred thousand? What
an hundred thousand eleven times multiplied, and threescore thousand added
thereto? All these were under their Captains, by name, Ready for War,
Waiting on the King, to be sent forth at his command: and yet all the fenced
cities, which were very many, well replenished with Garrisons, over and above
those 1160000. Surely they counted it an honor and safety to their land to
have store of trained soldiers, men expert, and ready for War at all times.
Therefore frequent mention is made thereof. To omit other particulars, in
David's time, Ioab gave up the number and sum of fifteen hundred and seventy
thousand men of War, and yet left two 1 Chronicles. 21. 5.
Tribes un-numbred. Surely there must needs be many Artillery Gardens, and they
well replenished, Martial discipline must needs be there much exercised, where
were so many thousands, yea hundred thousands trained up to War. If the
wiseman might send men to the Ants to learn of them Pro. 6. 6, etc.
to provide meat in the summer, and to gather food in the harvest, much better
may men be sent to such worthy patterns as were guided and approved by God, to
be always provided with expert Soldiers trained up to War, even in times of
peace. A maine difference is herein put betwixt wisemen and fools. We have a
proverb that says, A fool will take his cloak in foul weather. But a wise
man takes it with him at all times. He knows that a bright sunshine day may
be soon turned into a cloudy rainy day. Peace is not like the unmovable
mountains, but rather like to the variable sky. Wisdom teaches men to
forecast the worst, that they may be provided against the worst, yea and
thereby prevent the worst. It is an old and true Motto, Pax armis, Peace is
procured, preserved, secured by preparations and provisions for War.

. 16. Of the benefits of Artillery Gardens.
WHere are many Artillery Gardens, and they much frequented, and Martial
discipline therein daily and duly exercised, Amity with such Kingdoms will be
earnestly desired, and welcomely embraced: Kings of such Kingdoms will be
admired of their friends, and feared of their foes: Subjects of such Kingdoms
will find just and kind entertainment in foreign parts: Natives and Allies
will be secured: All manner of callings freely exercised: Lands and inheritances
quietly enjoyed: Enemies danted: Invasions and insurrections prevented: and
many, many evils avoided. They who reverence nor God nor man, where they see
or hear of an over-mastering power, will be kept within compass; and though
conscience do not alter their inward disposition yet constraint will order
their outward conversation. But on the contrary, by fearlesse and careless
security, The damage of neglecting Arms.
by neglect of Artillery and Military exercises, by want of men meet for War,
whole Cities and Kingdoms are often made a booty and prey to their enemies, and
suddenly ruinated. Instance Laish, they were a people that were at quiet and
Judge. 18. 27.
secure, and the Danites on a sudden smote them with the edge of the sword, and
burnt their Cities with fire. For a City and Nation to be without Artillery
Gardens, is as dangerous as for a traveller to be without a sword.

If the forementioned patterns of prudent Princes, and wise Statesmen,
recorded and approved in Gods Word, for training up armies of men in warlike
exercises, and that in times and places of peace: If the many great benefits
which thereby arise and acrue to a Land and Kingdom, and the many great
mischiefs which are like to follow, upon a careless neglect thereof, be motives
of force, motives of force are not wanting to prove, that, In peace to prepare
for War, is a principal part of prudence.

. 17. Of the commendation of Artillery Gardens.
THe Application of this point, does as nearly concern this Artillery Company,
as any of the former, both for justification, and also for approbation and
commendation thereof. Were our days more halcyon, more quiet and peaceable then
they are, or were they more free from fear of danger then they are, yet were
your Artillery exercises lawful, needful, useful. True it is, that they are
not in pitched fields, pede pes, and cuspide cuspis, face to face, foot to foot,
spear to spear against enemies. They are in a quiet City, in a time of peace
among your selves. They are like the Olympian games (instituted Plutarch. in
Vita Thesei.
by potent and prudent Hercules) and the Isthmian sports (ordained by Theseus
in imitation of Hercules) as delightsome preparations for war. They are like to
the Pyrrick dancing (...). Eustat. (...). Athen. (...). Plat.
which was invented by Pyrrhus, called armed dancing, because it was performed
by men clad in armor, and warlike dancing, because it was a representation of
sundry kinds of battles, and a means to make them well to weld their Armor in
War. They are like those warlike sports and pastimes which were practiced by
Cyrus when he was a youth, and by his coequals, and play-fellowes. They are
delightsome recreations. But what then? Are they therefore not lawful? Or not
needful? Or not useful? He is too severe and censorious, and Xenoph de Cyri
instit l. 1. Idem de Cyri min. Exped l. 5.
goes beyond the liberty of Gods Word, that condemns all recreations, all
delightsome pastimes. He is too improvident and imprudent, that conceives
nothing needful or useful, whereof there is not necessary use in that present
and instant time wherein it is used.

. 18. Of warlike recreations.
WEre your Artillery exercises only for recreation, they are the best
recreations that can be used. Were there at this time no need or use of them,
they may be herafter of absolute necessity. Delight in the things which men do,
swalloweth up the pains that is taken about them, makes men the more diligent
and constant in their exercises, and brings them to the greater experience
and perfection therein. Not only expert soldiers, but experienced Captains
also are made by Military recreations used in Artillery Gardens. So as if
suddenly Armies were to be raised of more men then all the Military Companies
can afford, yet might sufficient store of Captains, and other Commanders and
Officers be taken out of your Companies to govern and guide, to instruct and
encourage such as for want of former exercising were altogether inexperienced.
Of the fifty thousand that out of Zabulon came to David in Hebron, by way of
commendation, it is said that they could set a battle in array, and lead an 1 Chronicles. 12. 33, 38.
army. This implies, that by their practicing of Artillery exercises, they
were all able to lead and order armies, to set them in array, and go before
them. Besides the policy of other nations and ages, our Ancestors will
discerned the need, use, and benefit of such recreations as might fit men for
War: which moved them to make such strict Statute Laws for the exercise of
shooting, as they did: For,

1. Every Master of a Family (except spiritual men, and Justices 9. Statute in
33. year of Hen. 8.
of one Bench or other) was to exercise shooting himself.

2. He was to keep bows and arrows continually in his house.

3. He was to bring up those that were in his house in the exercise of shooting.

4. If he suffered any betwixt the age of 7 and 17, son or servant to abide in
his house without bow or arrows a month together, for every such default he
was to pay 40 shillings.

5. If a servant took wages, his Master might buy him bow, and arrows, and
deduct the price out of his wages.

6. If any manservant betwixt the years of 17 and 60, that took wages, were a
month without bow and arrows, for every such default he forfeited 6 shillings
and 8 pence.

In those days guns (the sure and sore messengers of death) were not so in use
as now they are. Strength and skill in shooting was it that made our English
nation famous for War. Their exercise thereof in time of peace, and that for
recreation, made them so expert as they were therein, at times of War. The Genesis
48. 22. Ios. 24 12. 1 King. 22. 34. 2 King. 6. 22. -- 9. 24. -- 13. 15, etc. 1 Chronicles. 5. 18. -- 8. 40. -- 12 2. -- 17. 17. -- ^6. 14. -- 35. 23. Psalm. 44. 6.
-- 76. 3.
frequent mention of bows and arrows, in Scripture, as instruments of War,
shows that of ancient time they have been used to that purpose: and 1 Samuel
20. 20.
Ionathans using his bow and arrows for recreation, shows that of old among
Gods people such recreations were used as might the better fit men to War. The
men of Gibeah without question from their youth were exercised in sport, to
sling stones at a mark, or else they could never have attained to such
extraordinary skill, as to Judge. 20. 16. 1 Chronicles. 12. 2.
sling stones at an hairs breadth and not fail. The skill which the men of
Benjamin (of which Tribe those Gibeonites were) are after this noted to have in
slinging stones with the right and left hand, shows, that this was an usual
exercise of the youth and men of that Tribe.

Such recreations in peace as are preparations unto War, justly deserve to be
reckoned up among those necessary vocations whereby Polities are preserved: and
while you are exercising your selves therein, you are employed in your calling,
and you go on in that way, where in God promises to give his Angels charge
over you, to bear you up in their hands, Psalm. 91. 11, 12.
least you dash your feet against a stone.

. 19. Of neglect of Artillery exercises.
When I duly weigh that little which has been said, and withal consider how
much more might be said of, and for the warrant, honor, need, use, and benefit
of your Artillery profession, I cannot sufficiently wonder at the blindness,
carelesnes, improvidence, and security of this our age, in neglecting and
dis-respecting a matter of so great consequence, so nearly concerning the
glory, tranquillity, and safety of the whole land, and of all societies and
several persons therein. Me thinks that it is more then meet that every City
and Corporation, if not every Town and Village throughout the Land, should
have an Artillery Garden: and that the great populous Cities, especially
LONDON, should have as many Artillery Gardens, as it has Wards: and that
public allowances should be afforded to such as willingly offer themselves to
these Military exercises. I have heard of liberal legacies and bountiful
donations given for making Cawsies, mending Highways, building Bridges, and
other such like works, but little or nothing for purchasing and maintaining
Artillery Gardens, and the Warlike exercises appertaining thereto. I cannot
therefore much wonder that there are no more such Companies as yours is, and no
more of your Company.

. 20. Of applying all to the present Artillery Gentlemen.
But because every rare thing is precious, I rejoice that you are of those,
who, by how much the more rare they Quia omne rarum pretiosum, gaudeo te de
illis esse, qui quanto rariores, tanto apparebu^t gloriosiores. Bern. Ep 1. ad
Rob. nep suum.
are, by so much the more glorious they appear to be. By you it must be
effected, if it be effected, that the ancient English name and Renown for
Martial discipline be preserved (if not repaired also) and propagated to
posterity. Be not therefore now slack in prosecuting that which you have so
well begun. Be diligent to keep your training days, and to exercise your
arms, that such as by much practice are well experienced, may be presidents
and patterns to others: and those others by like constant practice may attain
to answerable experience. Let no discouragements dismay you. The less
encouragement you have from others, the greater is your praise, that so
willingly take such pains at your own cost, to make your selves serviceable
for the defense, security, and safety of the Land and Kingdom where you live.
In you my Text is in our days and Land verified; for of you it may be truly
said, THEY were MEN of WAR.

FINIS.
Since Englands Deliverances (noted in The Churches Conquest,. 93.) were
printed, I found a remarkable one omitted, which I had rather should be here
set out of place, then not set down at all. Mr. Camden thus relates it.
OVt of the smothered fire of the rebellion in the North, there brake forth as
it were out of the embers, a new flame, at Naworth in Cumberland near the wall
of Severus, called Picts Wall: kindled by Leonard Dacres second son to
William Lord Dacres of Gillesland. This Leonard Dacres (when the Lord Dacres
his Nephew by his elder brother died) stomacked much that so goodly an
inheritance was come by law to his Neeces (whom the Duke of Norfolk their
father in law had betrothed to his sons) and commenced suit against them:
which, when it proceeded not according to his desire, he fell to plotting and
practicing with the Rebels. But when they had taken up the banners of Rebellion
sooner then he thought, and were proclaimed Enemies to their Country, whiles he
was at Court, he was admitted to salute the Queen, tendering her his best
service against the Rebels, and in that respect was sent home again. By the
way (as was found afterward) he imparted counsels with them by Messengers
that went between him and them: and encouraged them, promising great matters
from the Ambassadors of foreign Princes: and amongst other things, that he
(having levied men in the Queens name) would make away the Lord Scroope Warden
of the West March, and the Bishop of Carleole: which when he could not effect,
he sent letters of Commendations after the Earls that were flying to the
Scots, seized upon the Castle of Greistoke and other houses belonging to the
Dacres, fortified the Castle of Naworth as his own inheritance, and under
color of defending his own and resisting the Rebels, gathered together 3000
of the Rank-riders of the borders, and some others which were most devoted to
the Dacres, which in that tract was a name of great reputation. Against these
marches the Lord Hunsdon with the old garrison soldiers of Barwicke. The
Rebels not trusting to their strong holds, march forth to encounter him: and a
three cornered battle flanked on every side with horsemen, receive him at the
little river Gelt. The fight was maintained on both sides very sharply: and
Leonard (though he were crook-backed) omitted nothing that could be required in
a most valiant Leader: but after very many of his men were slain, he left the
victory (though with small joy) to the Lord Hunsdon, and withdrew himself into
Scotland hard by: from whence shortly after he crossed the Seas into the Low
Countries, and died a poor man at Lovaine: so as it seems his father was not
much deceived, who upon his deathbed, prayed God to send him much sorrow for
his disobedience.

After the forementioned defeat a letter (26. Febr. 1569.) was drawn and
presented by the Secretary of State unto her Majesty to sign: which was a
letter of thanks to the Lord Hunsdon for his good service in that overthrow:
it being the very first act (as that letter intimates) that ever was executed
by fight in field in her time against any rebels. With that letter, which she
sent but did not sign, she wrote of her self and with her own hand on the
same leaf this ensuing letter, which by the help of a Gentleman my friend and
neighbor, I came to sight of. And, because it is worthy of all memory,
pertinent to the forementioned story, full of encouragement to faithful
Subjects and valiant Soldiers, and for the honor of that noble Family so
nearly all^ed to her, and since so honored by his Majesty, I have made bold to
publish it word for word, not altering one syllable or letter therein, nor the
manner of expressing or placing her name.

Your loving kinneswoman Elizabeth R

I Doubt much my Harrie wither that the victory given me more joyed me or
that you were by God appointed the instrument of my glory and I assure you for
my countries good the first might suffice but for my hearts contentation the
second more pleased me It likes me not a litell that with a good testimony of
your faith there is seen a stout courage of your mind that more trusted to the
goodness of your quarrel than to the wekenes of your number Well I can say no
more beatus est ille servus quem cum Dominus venerit inveniet faciendo sua
mandata And that you may not think that you have done nothing for your profit
though you have done much for your honor I intend to make this jorny somewhat
to increase your livelode that you may not say to your self perditur quod
factum est ingratae.


AN ALPHABETICAL Index of the special Points noted in The Churches Conquest,
The Extent of Gods Providence, and The Dignity of Chivalry.
A
Aron. What it signifies. 249 Accessaries punishment. 292 Advantages basely
taken by malicious. 197 Altars. Their use. 313 AMALEK.
Amalek, Whence he came. 182 Amaleks malice against Israel. 183 Amaleks
inhumanity. 195
Arms to be exercised. 429 ARTILLERY.
Artillery men encouraged. 418 Artillery Gardens. 429 Artillery Gardens
benefits. 430 Artillery exercises too much neglected. 428, 431
Articles six in Henry 8. days. 391 Arrows and bows of much use. 430
ASSAVLTS.
Assaults against the Church. 192 Gods glory set out by such Assaults. 193
Assaults prove good to the Church. 194
Assist one another in extraordinary prayer. 252
B
BAnner. Use of Banners. 313, 314 BLOOD.
Blood in war may be shed. 292 Blood which David shed. Why it kept him from
building the Temple. 294 Rules about shedding Blood. 295
Burden of one another to be borne. 282 See Weak. Bows and arrows of much
use. 430
C
CHance. See Fortune. Christ's intercession ground of encouragement. 244 CHVRCH.
Churches assaults. See Assaults. Church why suffered to be over thrown by
enemies. 269, 346 Churches quarrels undertaken by God. 337
Consider others weakness. 275 Contentedness. 389 Continuance in prayer. 263
See Prayer. Courage against spiritual enemies. 424
D
Defense sufficient ought to be in a land. 208 Defensive war. 215
Deliverances public to be publicly praised. 325 Deliverances to be ascribed
to God. 327 Deliverances of Q. Elizabeth. 353 Deliverances of King James. 359
Desolations of war. 339, 345 Despise not mean things. 382 Devil. See Satan.
Devotion inward to be manifested by outward gesture. 233 Downe-fall of Papists
in Blackfriars. 393
E
ELizabeth, Englands Q. deliverances. 353 Her letter to Lord Hunsdon. 434
ENEMIES.
Enemies to be kept out. 106 Enemies why suffered to prevail over the Church.
269 Enemies in what cases they may be tortured. 296 Enemies destruction a glory
to God. 309 Enemies judgment comfort to Saints. 310 Enemies spiritual with
courage resist. 424
Enmity betwixt godly and wicked. 186, 187 Englands troubles. 361 Evils of
War. 342, etc Expedition needful. 235, 236
F
FAITH.
FAith strengthened by Gods former works. 241 Faith makes prayer powerful. 258
Faith the means to receive blessing from God. 259 Faith impeacheth not Gods
power. 260 Directions to pray in says. 261 Faith supported by Gods properties.
261
Faint in prayer the best may. 265 Fainting in prayer prejudicial. 266 Fear
not man. 382 FORTUNE.
Fortune a fiction. 379 Fortune robs God of his glory. 380 Fortune a secret
providence. 381

G
GEnerals have the honor of good success in war. 287 Generals need many
virtues. 288 Generals of old, Kings. 415 GESTVRE.
Gestures of prayer many. 222 Gesture to manifest inward devotion. 233 Gestures
of prayer have many benefits. 234 Gestures of prayer how ordered. 235
GOD.
God to be praised for enemies destruction. 309 God avengeth. 309 Gods
vengeance extends to man's ruin. 310 Gods vengeance in every place. 312 Gods
help to be sought in time. 235 Gods former works strengthen says. 240 Gods
ten names. 317 Gods properties a prop to faith. 261 Gods properties in
destroying enemies. 309 God to be praised for deliverances. 327 God swears
vengeance. 333 God how made implacable. 338 God to be eyed in all affairs. 386
Gods will to be submitted unto. 387
GOVERNOVRS.
Governors to protect their people. 203 Governors dignity for peoples good.
204 Governors to seek help of God in public need. 253 Governors to be
acquainted with Gods former dealings. 308 Governors to be obeyed. 245
Governors care of public piety. 323
Gun-powder-treason. 306, 360
H
HAtred. See Malice. Help to be sought in time. 235 Hill a fit place for
prayer. 226 History. See Record. Honor double to soldiers. 416 Honorable is
the profession of war. 414 Honorable titles from war. 416 Hope to such as
overcome. 270 Hur. What it signifies. 251
I
James King of Englands deliverances. 359 JEHOVAH. The mysteries of this title.
315 Implacablenesse of man makes God implacable. 338 Inhumanity of Amalek. 195
Intelligences useful. 207 Intercession of Christ ground of encouragement. 244
Joshua, why so called. 200 Israel. What it signifies. 191 Judgment. See
Vengeance. Judgments to be remembered. 304 Judgments when to be accounted
vengeance on sinners. 400
K
KIll. See Blood. King James his deliverances. 359 King of Englands troubles.
361 Kneeling in prayer. 223
L
LIfe of Subjects to be hazarded on command. 247, 248 Luck. See Fortune.
M
MAgistrates. See Governors. Maintenance due to men of war. 417, 432 Malice
of Amalek. 183 Malice hardly satisfied. 185 Malice of an increasing nature. 186
Malice of others must make us wary. 187 Malices end. 189 Malice takes all base
advantages. 197 Malice provokes to do wrong. 188 Man not to be feared. 383
Mean things not to be despised. 382 MEANS.
Means approved to be used 219 Means have respect to Gods will. 220 Means tie
not God. 220 Means how abused, or well used. 221 Means and prayer. 230
Memorials of mercies. 326 Memorials of Gods judgments. 301 Ministers to seek
help of God in public need. 253 Mis-judge not such as are vanquished. 271
Moses, why so called. 200 Moses rod. 226
N
News if false causes ill consequences. 239 Notice to be taken of that for
which we pray. 238
O
OBedience to be yeolded to Governors. 245 Obedience in going to war. 247
Observation of Gods former dealings. 308 Offensive war. 215 Causes thereof.
215 Offensive war how unprosperous. 291 Oath of God. 333
P
PApists Downfall in Black Friars. 393 PEACE.
Peace. The benefits and excellency of it. 367, etc Peace no infallible note of
Church. 194 In Peace prepare for war. 413 425
Perseverance in prayer. 263, etc Places fit for prayer every where. 237 Piety
public to be ordered by Governors. 323 Power of faithful prayer. 258 Praise
for enemies destruction. 310 Praise public for public deliverances. 325
PRAYER.
Prayers gestures many. 222 Prayer to be added to other means. 230 Prayer for
success in war to be made by such as tarry at home. 232 Prayer manifested by
gesture. 233 Prayer to be made in time. 235 Prayer in any place. 237 Prayer to
be made for that whereof we take good notice. 238 Prayers of others much
encourage. 243 Prayers of others to be craved. 243 Prayer requires assistance.
252 Prayer promised to be performed. 254 Prayer in faith powerful. 258 Prayer
how in says. 261 Prayer continued powerful. 263 Prayer when to be continued.
264 Prayer of faint spirits. 265 Prayers faint prejudicial. 266
Prepare for war in peace. 413 425 Preparation to great exploits. 205 PRINCES.
See Governors. Printing when invented. 304 Professors of truth why hated. 188
Promises of prayer to be performed. 254 PROVIDENCE of God.
Providence extends it self to the least creatures. 374 and to the least
things. 376 Providence extent. 377 Grounds thereof. 378 Providence on things
below. 381
Public piety to be ordered by Governors. 323 Public praise for public
deliverances. 325
Q
QVarrels of Church undertaken by God. 337 Queen Elizabeth's deliverances. 353,
etc
R
REcreations warlike. 429 430 RECORD.
Record things. 303, 307 Records caused by God. 301 Records divine by man's
ministry. 302 Records of matters of moment. 303 Records public to be safely
kept. 303
Remember Gods unalterable resolution. 332 Rehearse to others matters of
moment. 305 Resist spiritual enemies. 424 Revenge is Gods. 309 Righteousness
makes valorous. 422 Rod of Moses. 226 Ruin by war. 311, 339, 342, etc.
S
SAints may faint in prayer. 265 Satan's power in natural men. 186 Satan to be
resisted. 425 Seek help of God in time. 235 SOVLDIERS.
Soldiers hazard lives. 248 Soldiers may shed blood. 294 Soldiers
encouragement. 217 Soldiers trainings. 428, etc See Artillery. Soldiers many
in Israel. 427 Soldiers profession honorable. 414 Soldiers double honor.
416 Soldiers must be valorous. 420 Soldiers timerousnesse dangerous. 421
Spirits united helpful. 283 Standing at prayer. 224 Stratagems in war
lawful. 198 Success in war of Generals. 287 Successful war. 289 Support
one another. 276, 284 Swearing attributed to God. 333
T
Timorous soldiers dangerous. 421 Timerousnesse from wickedness. 423 Tortured
when enemies may be. 296 Trainings of soldiers. 428, etc Treasons against. Q.
Elizabeth. 354, etc Treasons against K. James. 359 Treason of gunpowder. 306,
360
V
Valor requisite for soldiers. 420 Valor from righteousness. 422 Vanquished
have hope. 270 VENGEANCE. See judgment.
Vengeance is Gods. 309 Vengeance of God to man's ruin. 310 Vengeance of God in
every place. 312 Vengeance sworn by God. 333 Vengeance long continued. 340
Victory attributed to Generals. 287 Violence with violence opposed. 218 Union
of spirits helpful. 283
W
War. Undue beginning thereof. 188 War, how justly begun. 190 Wars issue
when its unjustly begun. 190 Wars stratagems. 198 War lawful. Many
arguments to prove it. Objections answered. 209 etc 347 War with Christians
may be made. 213 Wars necessity and benefit. 214 Wars, what are just. 214
War defensive. 215 War offensive. Causes thereof. 215 War limited with
cautions. 216 War to be undertaken on command. 247 War wavering. 268, 346
War well waged successful. 289 Wars just to be undertaken. 290 War
first begun may prove worst. 291 In War blood may be shed. 292 Wars ruins
and other evils. 339, 342, etc In War better part often put to worst. 346 War
the sorest judgment. 348 War not to be delighted in. 350 War to be avoided
by Christians. 350 War to be waged with circumspection. 351 War to be kept
out of a land. 352 For War who fit, or unfit. 419, 420 For War prepare in
peace. 425 From War titles of honor. 416 Men of War. See Soldiers. Warlike
men's property. 411 Who of old men of War. 415 To men of War what
requisite. 416 Warlike recreations. 429, 430 Weakness of others to be
considered. 275 Weakness of others to be supported. 275 Weakness of man
gains dispensation in divine matters. 280 Weak much succored by others
supportance. 284 Wickedness makes timorous. 423 Wickliffe. 391 Will of men to
be submitted to Gods. 387 Works of God formerly done strengthen faith. 240
Works of God formerly done to be observed. 241 Wonders by Moses rod. 227
Writing a great benefit. 297 Wyles to be wisely avoided. 199
FINIS.

