The gospelles of dystaues.

Isengryne.
dame Abu^de


Isengryne.
dame Abu^de


THere ben many men at this day the which alleggeth and grou^deth their
words / and reasons on the gospelles of the dystaues / and knows full little
of what importance and auctoryte they ben of / nor who was ye wise
doctouresses and the first inuentouresses / and yet that worse is they allegge
them more by derysyon and mockery than they do for affection yt they have to
the great substance the which they conteyne. And this they have always in
demynysshynge and reprochynge of ladies / wherefore it is great sin and great
shame to them that so do. For they adnychyll the great noblesse of ladies /
and the great goodness that from them proceeds / for because that the first
woman was made and create in a place high and noble full of clennesse and
fragrant aer / therefore ben all women naturally noble / honest / sweet / fair
/ and curteyse and full of sapyence / light and gentle and so right so tell
that it lacks but little that they know things for to come. For they know
by their propre nature after the comectures and dysposycyons of the weder / of
persons / of arguments / of birds / and of beestes and shortly of all other
creatures / as it appears by this present book. Now it is so that for to
contrary such iniuryes and set their mockynges at naught / and exalte the
ladies and veryfye their gospelles I have studied and ben their humble servant
from my youth / and for the goodness that they have done to me I can not praise
them enough / at the request of some my well-beloved I. H. W. have translated
this treatise yt conteyneth the text of the gospelles of dystaues / with
diverse gloses and postylles added thereto by some wise and dyscrete ladies of
whom I shall speak here after ensewynge in this treatise.

The names of the ladies that made the text of the gospelles of the dystaues.
FOr to begin than this work it is clearly known to all good and true
catholyke christian men to the end that there should be perpetual memory of the
holy words and virtuous operacyons of our redemptoure Ihesu christ / and of his
holy apostles and saints that there were four ryghtwysmen elect among them
that were replete with virtue and verite for to make the holy mysteryes the
which ben named by the scriptures the gospelles / by which the true and holy
faith catholyke is enlumyned and shall be unto the end of the world. Assemble
than for to verefye and put forth the words and auctorytees of the au^cyent
women. To the end also that they should not be lost / nor in such wise
vanysshed but that the memory should remain fresshe among ye women of this
present time / so there has been found six matrones wise and prudent for to
recyte and read the said gospels of the dystaues in the manner the which
hereafter shall be declared / and by cause that in every witness of vice there
must be.iii. women for two men / for to make and accomplisshe than the nombre
of the said.iiii. eua^gelystes / it is of necessyte that there has been six
women besy for to make this work / because of the more approbacyon of troth /
of whom ye names enseweth The first was named dame Isengryne of glay. The
second was called dame Transelyne of ye croke. The third was named dame Abu^de
of the oven / The fourth was called dame Sebylle of ye mareys. The fyfth was
named dame Gamberde the fayee. The syxth was called dame Berthe horned. These
six ladies were so right wise in their time that they might have coniured a
black devil or bound him upon a quysshen they were so expert and nymble.

Who was the first woman that put forth the gospelles. And how the composer of
this book was constrained to make this work.
AFter as I find in ancient regystres these gospels were begone in the second
aege of the world / in the time that the puyssaunt king zoroates did reign
that was the first fynder of the art of nygromancy / of the which art he
showed and taught a little to the queen his wife called Hermofrodita / the
which sith made fair pry^cyples for the beginning of these gospelles / but
they were not ended in her time / but from aege to aege / and from sede to sede
they have been multeplyed / and correct of the prudent women echone in their
time after the arguments and signs that they might apperceyue and se as well
in ye earth as in the air. And sith that time has not ben yet any / ye that I
have known and comen to my memory that would take ye pain upon them to put
them in writing or in order / and this little that has been made has been
tossed about from one to an other. And yet that which has been made was more
made by derysyon and mockerye than otherwise / and for all that they fail not
to be of great mystery / and for to give you to understand how I am come^ to
this obtuous and presumptuous hardynesse and wanhope to will write and put in
order this work / it is troth that upon a night after souper for to take my
disporte and pass the time Ioyously in the long winter nyghtes between
Crystmas and Candelmas last past I transported me in to the house of a well
aeged damoysell my neighbor nere / where as I was accustomed for to resort
and deuyse with her / for diverse of her neighbors came theder for to spynne
and deuyse of diverse small and Joyous purposes / whereat I took great pleasure
and solace. But at that time was there the six ladies assembled yt were
strongly besy for diverse reasons / and often for the great haste that they had
to declare their purpose they argued the one with the other and spoke all at
ones. I which was a little shame fast of that I had entered in among them so
suddenly. would have wtdrawen me abacke in taking my leave of them for to
depart thens / but suddenly I was called of them again / and in effect
retained by my gown by one of them / at whose request and prayer I returned
and sat me down among them and prayed them humbly yt they would pardon me of
that I had entered in among them so famylyerly and so suddenly. One took the
words for them all and said that truly I was welcome unto them euerychone the
which was in that place assembled there and welcomer than any man of the
world / and that them seemed that god had sent me theder for to be in their
aid to understand the matter in which they were so besely occupied at that
time / and that I should do their work well seeing that other times I had
written of ladies unto their laud and praysynge. And yet they prayed me that in
likewise I would do at that their right great work and they in time to come or
their successors should make me such remuneracyon that it should suffyse me
in prayenge me ferthermore that I would undertake to put in scripture a little
volume yt for the name of it should be called ye gospelles of dystaues / in
memory and mind of them perpetually / and the vpholdynge of all them to come I
somewhat ashamed of the praysynge that they gave me wend for to have excused me
/ but anon I was caducke and so oppressed with their words and reasons that
all confused I was constrained to undertake the charge. In the which if there
be any fault or evil endytynge I supply you for to pardon me / and repute the
said fault to them that by so great haste declared it to me that I had no
leyser nor space sometime for to understand them well / nor my hand that was
by aege made heavy / nor mine eyes that were obscure might not comprehend it
so fast as they had well would. This charge than by me undertaken the ladies
thanked me gretely / and set day amongst them and hour for to return upon
the morrow after souper. And charged me that I should bring paper and ynke
enough with me and also pens for they would determyne high and notable
things.

The ordinance of this book put in terms by dame Isengryne.
ON the morrow at the hour assygned I furnysshed of ynke / paper and pens
returned to ye place assigned / in the which was assembled all ready the six
ladies yt after me did abide. And they of my coming were right Joyous as it
seemed by their semblauntes. After that they had prepayred for me my place there
I as might here them best one of them and the most ancient named dame
ysengryn of glay began for to speak after that scylence was mad of her fellows
the words that enseweth. My right der neighbors in this vagacion ye se / and
in likewise know clearly how the men of this present time cease not for to
write and make balades dyffamous and books contagyous in dispraysynge the
honor of our sex. And seeing yt they and we were made of one werkeman
descendynge the one from the other. And yet sith that I must needs say it we
ben descended of a more high and noble place than they be / and made of a matter
more purer and clener than they be. It is mine advise under the correccyon of
you all that it should be good with ye help of this our secretary and friend
that we made a little treatise of chapytres yt we will keep and put by order.
The which of long time has been found by our ancient moders / to the end
that they be not put in forgetynge and that it may come in to the hands of
them yt be^ yet to come. The which chapytres shall conteyne the gospelles of
dystaues with the gloses yt some wise and dyscrete matrones have added and yet
shall in multeplyenge ye text. And for to enter in to the matter and put order
in our begy^nynge ye know that there ben six work days in the weke / and we
be six that have undertaken this work / and that have seen and herd recorded
by our predecessors diverse things of the old testament and the new / and
other things true and of good auctoryte. Wherefore it is mine advise in
co^clusyon that it should be good that on mondaye next we assemble us in the
house of Maroye ployarde where as we have been accustomed to hold our dysporte
at.vii. of the clock at night / And there if ye will one of us shall begin her
lecture / and shall recyte her chapytres in ye presence of all them yt shall
come theder for to keep and put them in perpetual memory. The assistentes
anon and without any other delyberacyon said that dame Isengryne had well
spoken. And in co^clusyon they prayed her that she would take upon her to read
the first monday where as was assigned / and said that withouten fault they
would be there / and prayed some of their neighbors as well young as old yt
they would be there to auctoryse better their chapytres This charge took right
gladly dame Isengryne and said that she would do her best / in saying this she
turned her toward me and required me right louyngly that I would be her
secretary / and in like wise did all the other / and that they would make me
be rewarded by some of them the which were the youngest at my chesynge / for
the which reward I thanked them and held me for content.

The ordinance of the first day / and of the descrypcyon of dame Isengryne of
Glaye and what she was.
Isengryne. dame Abu^de Gamberde


THe mondaye at night between seven and eight of the clock after souper
assembled ye foresaid six ladies together and all the neighbors that were
accustomed to come theder / and diverse other that were somoned theder for to
here the mystery that should be done there. Dame Isengryne of glay came theder
accompanied with diverse of her knowledge the which brought with them their
dystaues and standards / with their spyndels and wherles and all that
apperteyned to their art. And to make it short it seemed a right market where
as is but sold words and reasons and diverse purposes of small effect and
little valor. The syege of dame Isengryne was prepared at one side / a little
hyer than the other / and mine was even beside her / and before me was a lamp
full of oil for to cast light upon my work / and all the assystentes had
turned their vysages toward dame Isengryne / the which after scylence
obtained spoke in this manner. But or that I begin for to write her chapytres
I will rehearse to you the estate and genealogye of her. Dame Isengryne was of
the aege of.lxv. year or there about / she had been a fair wife in her time /
but she was becomen gretely wydred / her eyes were holowe / and her eye lyddes
somewhat reuersed and reed always watrynge she had had five husbands beside her
acquayntaunce aparte. She meddled in her old aege to receive young children /
but in her young aege she received great children / she was much expert in
dyues arts. Her husband was young of whom she was right Ialous / and made
many complayntes of him to her neighbors / nevertheless scylence obtained she
began her gospel and took her substance of her husband and said.

Here begins the first chapter of the gospel of dame Isengryne of Glay for
the mondaye.
MI good neighbors there is none of you but ye know that I took my husband
Iosselyn more for his beauty than for his richesse / for a poor fellow he was
/ and loo I saw him not to day nor yesterdaye / wherefore I have great sorrow
at my heart. And certainly he has great chepe of the goods that my husbands
his predecessors had assembled together with great labor and pain / wherefore
I think it will be my death. Now to this purpose and for the first chapter I
tell you for as true as the gospel that the man that spends the goods
unduly that comes to him by his wife wtouten leave shall give accountes before
god as of things stolen. Gloss. Upon this chapter says an ancient matrone
named Grayll Johan bybebecked wife. Truly that husband that does against this
chapter is put after his death in a caudron in purgatory full of brymstone / if
he have not done his penance in this world upon the hospytalles.

The second chapter.
There is no thing more certain than the husband yt does contrary to ye
which his wife cou^seyleth hy^ to do / and who yt gaynsayeth any thing that
she says he is false and dysloyall forsworn. Gloss. Certainly said Gonbande
of the dytche I have seen diverse miracles of them yt have tra^sgressed this
chapter / for my stepfad broke his leg because he would not believe the
counseyle of my mother.

The third chapter.
He yt beteth his wife shall never have grace of our lady till he have pardon of
his wife. glo. Maroye says it is as great sin as if he would dyspayre
himself / for after that which I houe herd our vycare say it is but one
body man and woman coupled by marriage.

The.iiii. chapter.
The man that does any thing without that he do his wife to understand it.
I say to you as the gospel that he is worse in conscience than a thief / who
durst well say it. Gloss. The ancient matrones has mayntayned for a troth
that the children that come of such marriage shall never be rich in this
world / and yet they shall be lightly great liars

The.v. chapter.
My friends I say to you for a troth that there is no dolor nor anguysshe
like to ye which a woman bears / when her husband bears else where his
substance and in especyall when ye goods comes by her. Gloss. For certain
said a matrone that was named florette the black He that breketh his marriage
by aduoutrye is less to be praised than a Jew or a sarasyn / for he is
forsworn.

The.vi. chapter.
A maiden that will know ye name of her to coming husband / ought to hang
before her door the first threde that she spynneth that day / and the first
man that passes thereby ask his name / and know for certain that the same
name shall her husband have. Gloss. At the same words rose up one of the
assyste^tes named Geffryne Johan blewes wife / and said that she had proved
that thing and that it had happened so to her / wherefore she cursed the hour
that she had met with such a man that had lost all color and beauty / and yet
he was so evil a work man that he did no thing but sleep.

The.vii. chapter.
When a woman bears a child and if they will know if it be a sone or a
daughter ye must lie salt upon her heed so softely that she know not of it
and after in deuysynge with her if that she name a man know that it shall be a
sone / and if that she name a woman it shall be a daughter. Gloss. That same
thing happened unto me when I bare my daughter. Lyle tempremeur said Grelle of
the shoo / and mine aunte did it to me and learned me it the which was right
ancient and gretely renomed in diverse arts.

The.viii. chapter.
Ye should not give to young maidens to ete the heed of a hare to the end that
they should mary / and in especyall to them that be with child / for certainly
their children might have cloven lyppes. Gloss. Then said anon Mar get of the
whete / even so it happened to one of my cosyns for because yt she had eten of
the heed of a hare her daughter that was in her womb brought forth four
lyppes.

The.ix. chapter.
Ye ought not to let young maidens ete no shepes hedes nor cockescomes / nor
eles / to ye end that they have not ye falling of saint lupe behy^de. Gloss.
Certainly said Be let the short nose / it is a right great danger / for
because that my mother ete of them I have three taches the which I think will
never fail me. The one is that oftentimes I let myself fall backewarde / the
second that I can not rise again lightly / and the third is that my husband
says that I cry to hye when he blames me whereof I have great shame.

The.x. chapter.
I swear to you as the gospel that when a young maid eteth customably boiled
milk in ye pan / or in a pot of earth / that it raynes comynly at their
wedding / and also they have comynly husbands melancolyous and grutchers And
also she shall not fail oftentimes to have a dyrtye tail and to be euylly
cladde. Gloss. Said dame Abu^de to this text needs none exposycyon / for the
rule is all common and there is never fault / as it appeared at my weddy^ge where
diverse of you was.

The.xi. chapter.
For certain and for also true as the gospel when a man lies with his wife /
or with his love having his fete foul and stynkynge / and it happen that he
engendre a sone / he shall have an evil and a stynkynge brethe / and if it be
a daughter she shall have it stynkynge behind. Gloss. Marroye ployarde says
upon this chapter that of her cosyn germayne happened even so / for all
about where she went she rendered such a stynkynge odor behy^de that all the
assystentes were feign to stop their noses / but she knew not what was the
cause thereof.

The.xii. chapter.
For also true as the gospel I tell you that when a young man maiden weddeth a
young woman virgyn the first child comynly that they get is a fool. Gloss.
Berte the strayte upon this chapter says that it was not long a gone sith it
happened so to one of her daughters that she had married to the swyneherde of
her house / for the first night she did teache them / and their first sone was a
fool.

The.xiii. chapter.
I say to you as the gospel yt when a child is newly borne if ye give hy^ a
roasted apple to ete or he souke yt he shall be no gloton but serve ladies
demurely. Gloss. Marroye morel says upon this text yt when a child is borne
who that bears the little bowell to his heed he shall have long life / sweet
brethe / good voice / and gracyous eloquence.

The.xiiii. chapter.
I warau^t you for also true as the gospel if that ye will make young
chyldrens heedes curled / also soon as they ben borne wasshe their hedes with
white wine / and put in their bayne the rote of a white vine. Gloss. Dame
Hermofrode says on this passage in corrumpy^ge the text yt who would make to
dry by two children young and fair the aubete of a little child upon the
point of a sharp and a bright sword should make the child all his life fair
hardy / and welcome among the noble men.

The.xv. chapter
Now understand you all the which ben here present I aduertyse you yt ye
never draw sword before a woman with child but if that ye lie your sword
first upon her heed all softely to the end that she abide steadfast / and her
fruit shall be the hardyer all his life. Gloss. Peronne Beuette said yt because
they did not so to her mother when she did bear her she was and is so ferde
that she dare not go to bed without the company of men.

The.xvi. chapter.
I tell you for as true as the gospel that young maidens should never ete
cheryes with their lover who should have the last / for oftentimes it happens
so that they which have the last chery is the last married of all. Gloss Dame
Sebyll of mates says upon this passage that young women should not ete potage
with their lover for by custom it happens often that their husbands have
acquaintance aparte and not the women.

The.xvii. chapter.
Systers and neighbors yet I tell you that god and reason defends every man
and woman that they should not speak before a woman married or able to bear
children / or before a woman great with child of any manner of mete / that for
the present and at a need may not be found / to the end that the fruit that
she bears have not a mark upon his body. Gloss. Dame Abunde of the oven says
that by casting on a woman's vysage that is with child cheryes or read wine
that the child shall bear a mark or some token upon him.

The.xviii. chapter.
Know that the man yt doubleth in marriage is unable to come to any dignyte and
if his wife do to him the same with outen fault he shall be cause of ye one evil
and of the other / and she ought to be Iuged quyte without punycyon. Gloss. Dame
Ysoree the short says upon this pase that the woman that will not have her
husband meddle with other wives that she make to sing mass of saint Auoye
three mondayes together / and I say to you for certain that the women beyond
the sea do so to their husbands.

The.xix. chapter.
When any child is baptized be it a sone or a daughter if the daughter have
two godfaders / she shall have two husbands or moo / and also if the sone have
two godmoders he shall have two wives. Gloss. Certay^ly said Ampelune huket I
ought well to curse ye hour that Wyllymyne my husband had ever so many / for
he has three wives beside his acquaintance that I know not.

The.xx. chapter.
When ye se little children run through the streets riding upon horses of
wood with speres and dysguysed in manner of men of war / it is a true sign of
war nere hand or dyscencyon in ye country. Gloss. Perrine Hulortore says
upon this paas that when little children go in ye streets with baners singing
it is a sign of mortalyte.

The.xxi. chapter.
If a woman will know certainly if her husband do double / let her take heed
if that he touch her not in ye full of the moon / and if he have not ado with
her there is no suspeccyon without a cause. Gloss. This gospel is very true
said maroye ployarde: for it is more than three mones sith Johan ployarde my
husband smote stroke nor half stroke / and yet I am a woman for to endure it
well.

The.xxii^ chapter.
One ought not to give to a woman with child no heedes of fysshe to ete / to
the end that by their ymagynacyo^ their fruit bring not forth their mouths
more greter and more sharper than it is of custom. Gloss. Paret fatoys mydwyf
said that she had received diverse children that had their mouths more greter
out of mesure than other had.

The.xxiii. chapter.
If by adventure a man beat his wife / or defyle her with his fete / she shall
be delivered with great pain / and oftentimes they deye in the pain. Gloss.
Dame Hermofrode says that there is no remedy in this / save that she must
drink in the shoo that did defyle her / and know if she do so she shall be
delivered quyckely.

The.xxiiii. chapter.
If it happen that some body stryde over a little child / know ye for
certain that he shall never grow more but if they stryde backewarde over it
again. Gloss. Certainly said Sebylle of such thing comes dwerfes and little
women.

The.xxv. chapter.
Know ye for as true as the gospel that if the hose of a woman or of a maiden
unbinds in the street and that she lose it / it is sign and fails never
that her husband or her love gothe else where. Gloss. At these words left
spynnynge one named Transye of love young of the aege of.lx and seven year /
and said that there was nothing more truer than yt gospel / for sith
wednesday last paste I saw not my love Iolyet / because that the same day I
lost my garter.

The.xxvi. chapter.
And for conclusyon my friends and neighbors / and for to make an end of my
chapytres I tell you that when there comes to a wife the sekenes in her pappes
/ she nedethe none other thing but that her husband make her with his
instrument natural three sercles about the sore / and without any doubt she
shall be hole. Gloss. Sayntefoute ne tempremure says that it ought to be
understand that those three sercles should be made at the end of the belly / a
little under the gyrdell. All the assystentes began for to laughe a pase of
that Joyous conclusyon / and did praise right strongely the wisdom of dame
Ysengryne that so hyghely had contained her gospel and departed it in.xxvi
artycles that were all of great auctoryte and importance / and promised that
they would take pain for to learn them by rote / for to publysshe them to them
that had not ben at that lecture. Full glad was I when dame Ise^gryne made an
end of her speech / for both paper and candell did fail me / with slombre
that did strongly assail me / for it was almoost mydnyght / wherefore I would
have taken leave of them: but they made me abide till another was elect to read
on the morrow. So they took counsayll and of a common accord did chese
Transelyne of the croke which was an ancient damoysell the which took on her
the charge right gladly / and required me instauntlye before them all that at
her need I would serve her / and I promised her to do it / but of one thing I
required her / yt was that she should come a little sooner than they had done
upon mondaye / to the end to eschew the trauaylle of the night.

Here follows the contynuacyon of the gospelles made and read by dame
Transelin of the croke for the tewesdaye in the house and at the hour
accustomed.
When it came upon the tewesdaye about five of the clock at night there began
for to come wives as well old as young from all sides / for they had already
publysshed yt which had been done upon the mondaye: and that which should be
done upon tewesdaye by dame Transelyn of ye croke a good renommed wife / for
she was a gentylwoma^ of the aege of.lx. and seven year / she was long and
small / in her young days she had dwelled with a lady that could somewhat of
the art of nygromancy and rendered reasons of diverse things to come / with
whom she learned madagury for which afterward she was much reno^med and
honored / but because that she had eten her potage one day with Venus made
in the caudron of love / never sith she cessed not to excersyse her seruyse to
the subgectes of ye same / and in her old aege she was withdrawn and alied
with the curate of the town that night and day herd her confession / wherefore
all her neighbors about her had her in great reverence. Dame Transelyne than
comen amongst them salued all the company. And after that she had demanded
me if I were ready she said thus.

The first chapter.
Now quod she my good neighbors and friends in co^tynewynge our purpose of
the last night I pray you that scylence be made / and I shall tell you for also
true as the gospel that if a woman or a maiden will be well-beloved of her lover
/ let her make him to ete the herb of a catte / and he shall love her so
fervently that he shall never have rest but if he be with her. Gloss. This
thing is true said Burge fauuele / for I did even so to my husband and made
hy^ a salade / but that love endured but six wekes / wherefore I think that it
must be renewed.

The second chapter.
And also I tell you that who may find a true mandrake and ly him between a
pair of white shetes and present him mete and drink twyes a day /
notwithstanding yt he neither eteth nor drynketh / he that does it shall
become rich within short space and shall not know how. Gloss. Certes said
Ione baker it is said but it is in rapmage / yt Alexus of the corner is becomen
rich with the same.

The third chapter.
I say to you as a gospel that when one goothe on his way and if he
encountre a haare it is an evil sign. And for to eschew all dangers he
ought for to return thryes from whens he was departed / and after goo on his
way withouten peril. Gloss. With this word rose up maroye the fa^e and said
all on high that yt chapter was right verytable / for her cosyn had broken
his leg with the fall of a horse after that he had encountered a haare / but
who yt meteth a wulfe or a heart / or a beer is a right good sign and token.

The fourth chapter.
Never wise man mounted upon an axe for the love of our lord that rode upon
one but right well upon a horse / for who that falls of an axe he says bryst
/ and who that falls of a horse he says rise. Gloss. Upon this article may
be made an argument for when Joseph led the virgyn Mary in to Egypt she
mounted upon an ass / and for all that she had no greuaunce. Then answered
Sebylle of the dytche that our lord had not yet mounted upon an ass as he
did afterward. Then answered an ancient woman named Parette of the stynkynge
hole that he had / and that our lady bare him with her mounted upon the
ass. For this argument arose great noise among the assistentes / in such
wise yt the one sustained the text of this gospel / and the other sustained
the gloss / and there arose so great a clamoure and cry among them that one
knew not to which entende. Nevertheless dame Isengryne as presydent for that
night made scylence to the end that she might peasybly make an end of her
lecture / the which thing she obtained with right great pain.

The.v. chapter.
My neighbors for to meue purpose and to abate your strife I say to you for a
gospel that if a woman leave the tryuet / or the gyrdyron upon the fire without
lyenge on a stycke or a fire bronde that she shall wax much old and wryncled
in the face. Gloss. Said one of the spynners named Pyate frelysshe who that
gothe to bed without remeuynge of the sete that they put of their hose on
they be in danger that the mare ride on them that night.

The.vi. chapter.
Who that leueth by night a stole or a treuet the fete upward / also long as
they ben so the devil is on horsbacke upon ye house. Gloss. Certes said Isore
ye white my grandame said that there is as many deuylles sitting upon them as
there be fete upward if they abide so.

The.vii. chapter.
I assure you and say to you for a gospel yt when pyes chatter upon a house
it is sign of right evil tidings / but and swalowes chatter or make their
nestes it is sign of good air and good fortune. Gloss. Gertrude of whete
says that when a storke buyldeth his neste upon a chymney / it is sign that
the lord of the house shall be rich and live long.

The.viii. chapter.
When the eres of one does brenne or ytche / know and it be the right ere it
is a good token / and if it be the left ere it is an evil sign. Gloss.
Isabell of the reed crest says upon this purpose that when the nose of one
does drop it is sign to drink read wine.

The.ix. chapter.
When pesen does boil in a pot after it is taken of ye fire / know for a
truth that in that same house is no wytches. Gloss. Parette sone clothed said
that the cat hatethe and fereth most the pot that boylleth.

The.x. chapter.
Now understand well this chapter / for I tell you yt who that fereth that
the night wytche ride not on him / he must set a stole of wtodde before a
great fire / and when she is comen if she sit down upon it / she may never
rise thens till it be light day / it is a thing proved. Gloss. Iohannet
brownemayre says that she forgate ones to do yt thing / but after that she
had been ryden she tasted what it might be / and found that it was a roughe
thing / and had here soft enough.

The.xi. chapter.
Who that leueth on the saterdaye to make an end of ye flackes on her rock
all that she spynneth on mondaye after shall never do good and if clothe be
made of it / it shall neu^r be white Gloss. Says Maryon the blewe because that
women of hollande ben accustomed to leave it on their rocks upon the saterdaye
they have never white clothe / And it is truth for it appears well by their
shyrtes that they bring over the sea with them.

The.xii. chapter.
Who that absteyneth him from wypynge of his ars with leaves or other grene thing
that has grown upon the earth: he shall not have no evil in his back nor in
his rains Gloss. Pyattyne the grene says to this purpose that who that does
this shall never have the tronchons on his heed but in that place he shall have
his sherte gylte.

The.xiii. chapter.
He that does not cast / or suffers not to cast bones in the fire shall not
have the tothe ache for ye honor of saint Laurens. But Maude the brown
affermeth that in that place dogs fight gladly.

The.xiiii. chapter.
He that has no money in his purse ought to absteyne him from lokynge on the
new moan / or else he shall have but little all alonge that moan. Gloss.
Margot black tache says upon this chapter that he that apperceyueth the
cr^ssant with a full purse he ought to salewe it and enclyne deuoutlye to it /
and for certain it shall multeply all that moan.

The.xv. chapter.
He that fyndeth the trayfle with four leaves / and keep it in reverence know
for also true as the gospel yt he shall be rich all his life. Gloss. Upon
this article says Dame Sebylle the read yt if a man trede barefote upon a
trayfle with four leaves he may not escape without the white axes / and if it
be a woman she shall be cukquene.

The.xvi. chapter.
When a man fyndeth a spyder upon his gown it is a sign to be that day right
happy / and in like wise he yt fyndeth a horse shoo or a piece of one / he
shall have good fortune. Gloss. Then rose up Francyne soft pappes and said
that when one fyndeth silver in the morning it is a right evil sign if there
be no gold among it.

The.xvii. chapter.
Who someuer rubbeth a warte upon saint Iohans eue^ with an eldren lefe / and
after put the lefe deep in the earth where as it may rotte / ye warte shall
dry vpanone. Gloss Isbell of the wodde said that she had assayed it but who yt
would rub them with the milk of the lefe of a thystell that dries sooner /
Lalle had proved it.

The.xviii. chapter.
When a man fyndeth in his garden a vessel of bees fastened in a tree if that
he give them not a pyece of silver to their new years gift it is an evil
sign. Gloss. Baudinon gorgette says that he that appropryeth the bees to hy^
without he give to them as said is in ye text they shall do but pycke him and
shall never love him nor do him profit.

The.xx. chapter.
He that gives a pair of knyues to his lady paramour on new years day know
that their love shall wax cold. Gloss. Then said Colette the holowe to this
article. I assure you yt he that gives his love a pyncell with a great heed to
her new years gift that the love will be more ardaunt and more durable.

The.xxi. chapter.
He that may ride upon a bear freely.ix. paas: he is affrau^chysed from.ix.
pair of sykenesse. Gloss. Then said an old matrone that was behind the other
I think well it is true of the guaryson of the.ix. sekenesses / but not of them
that we fall backewarde of.

The.xxii. chapter.
When ye se a cat sit in a wyndowe in the son / and that she lycke her ars /
and that one of her fete be above her ere ye need not to doubt but yt it shall
rain that day. Gloss. Then rose up dame mehalte and said that it was no
lesynge / for she said her bucke of clothes stood at the river and because that
her cat cessed not to lycke her ars she durst not go to wasshe it.

The.xxiii. chapter.
Who that sytteth by the fire and writes in the ashes with his finger or with
a staff / is sign that he has pysled in bed or shall pysse in bed.
Gloss. Peronne the smokye says in affermynge ye text that he that beholds
his wife covering the fire before him without taking her up know that of
all that night he shall not leave slepynge and routynge / and if it be a maiden
she shall not be wedded of all that year.

The.xxiiii. chapter.
When one fereth that his dog be bytten of a wood dog / make him ete and
drink thrughe a treuet / and he shall be preserved that day from bytynge.
Gloss. To this purpose said Guyllemette the halting that who will have his cat
or his hen to keep the house for lesynge / take ye cat or the hen and torn
him thryes about the croke of the chymney / and then rub their fete against
the wall of the chymney. And without any fault they shall never depart part
from that house.

The conclusyon of this Journey.
FOr this gospel all the assystentes began to laughe myghtely / and in
effect they left their spynnynge and praised right much Dame Transelyne of
the croke for the great actoryte of her gospel / and semblably all the
doctouresses and the wise and prudent wives which had glosed upon the
chapytres so honorably after the postylles that none might not expose them
better. I rose up from my place half weary and already somoned of the messangere
of god Morpleus for to go and take my rest / but before my departing I would
se and behold whom they would chese amongst them for to read the gospel upon
the morrow as the other had done. The wives then having left al their
laughing said that it was time for to chese the lady that should succeed upon
the morrow. So they did chese with a common accord dame Abunde of the oven /
that did accept it benygnely / and promised that she would do all that were
possible. After this eleccyon of dame Abunde of the oven. I departed the most
secretly yt I might for they began to babyll so myghtely that they took no
keep of my departing.

Here follows the contynuacyon of the gospelles of dystaues / made the
wednesday at night by dame Abu^de of the oven.


UPon the wednesday at the hour accustomed came and assembled all the wives
the which were accustomed for to come theder to here ye lecture and redynge /
and there came with the^ diverse other as well young as old that had not ben
there before / by the Instruccyon of their neighbors. And they thus assembled
came dame Abunde of ye oven that for that night had been establysshed for to
read her gospel so as she did. But before that I proceed to the chapytres of
the same I will write of her estate and manner. It is truth that in her young
aege she was a chappe woman of lecherye all by tail / and then afterward
she held a fair shop at bruges among ye merchants she had been a fair
wife in her young aege / but the wine and the good morselles that she had eten
had made her so fat that she was also broad as long / she had studied at
Paris by the space of seven year in the college of Gletygne / from whens she
brought many a perfounde science / She then comen went and sat her down in
the syege determined / and after scylence made she began for to speak in this
manner.

The first chapter.
For the first chapter of my gospel I assure you that he that pysseth
between two houses or against the son / know that he shall have sore eyes.
Gloss. Says Beautrise Bousette I think better that ye sykenes comes of to
much drinking at the fountain of love.

The second chapter.
For to keep them that they fall not in to the palsye / they must absteyne them
from etynge the hedes of cattes or the flesh of beres. Gloss. Says dame
Berte with the short hele I think and believe that for the palsye of the
raynes one must keep hy^ from lyenge on his back / ye the wives and the men
the contrary.

The third chapter.
Who that pysseth against a ch^rche / or there as fire is made it is great
meruayll but that before his death he fall in popelysye / for at the least he
shall have the grauel. Gloss Certainly said Iaquemyne Galoys that had served
the curate long time I assure you that he that pysseth thus / or does his
necessyte against the church that the holywater that he receives on sunday
can not help him against the thondre for that weke.

The fourth chapter.
If a woman apperceyue a wulfe following her / she ought to trayle her gyrdell
after her in saying / keep the wulfe that the mother of god smite the not / and
anon all confused he shall return again. Gloss. Ione the savage says that if
any se a wulfe before that the wulfe se him / he has no power to do him any
hurt / and in like wise ye person of the wulfe.

The.v. chapter.
When the lord or the lady of a house is seek / and that a raven comes and
cries upon the chamber where as the pacyent lies it is sign that he shall
deye of that sykenes Gloss. Mehalte soon ready says to this purpose that wha^
a pie comes and chattreth upon the chamber it is a good sign that the pacyent
shall have his health.

The syxte chapter.
When the chyppynge wind blows / the wise wives and good houswyues ought to
cut the end of the right ere of her young calfe and cast the same piece
against the wind / to the end that he grow and amend as he shall do.
Gloss. Certainly said Maroye the burnt cheke I bylyue that who would promise
to saint Bartylmewe the right horn it should suffyse.

The.vii. chapter.
My good neyghbou^^s I will tell you in this chapter one of the gretest
secret ^^at ever I learned in Sauoye / That is for also true as the gospel
that when some tempest does arise in the air we ought anon to make a fire
of four staves of an asshe tree in cross wise above the wind and then
afterward make a cross upon it / and anon the tempeste shall torn a side and
come not at your goods. Gloss Baudyne camuse says well that in the country
of Sauoye ben diverse wise women / for to make fair or foul weder they ben
maystresses.

The.viii. chapter.
When the semawes feleth the tempest move in the air and that they flee and
cry upon the water all softely / it is sign that it shall be rain withouten
any tempeste / but when they be still withouten any noise they doubt right
strongly the thondre and the tempest. Gloss. To this purpose says Mabylle
Iolyette that when the swannes or ye gese bayneth or plongeth them in the water
/ know for certain and without any doubt that the weder shall change and
rain that day

The.ix. chapter.
When one hereth dogs houle and cry he ought for to stop his eres / for
they bring evil tidings / and to the contrary one ought for to harken and
here a horse nigh and cry. Gloss. Magnon broquette says in approuynge this
article that when one hereth the wulues houle and cry / every body ought put
them in good estate and hold it / for it is sign of great pestylence and
mortalyte to come by famyne and war.

The.x. chapter.
When ye se the wulues come and seek their pray nere the vyllages or within
the vyllages it is sign of a dear seson. Gloss. Isabell basket says upon this
text that wha^ hertes and hyndes or buckes or does comes and pastureth beside
the vyllages and nere the houses it is a right good sign of multitude and
haboundaunce of all goods.

The.xi. chapter.
I say to you for a gospel that none that will win at the dyse or cards
should sytte him down and torn his back toward the moon / in what place
someuer it be at that time / but ought for to torn his vysage / and if he do
the contrary he shall never rise withouten lesynge. Gloss. Michelette hochue
says to this purpose that who will wine at the cards by day he must do the
contrary for he must torn his back to the son.

The.xii. chapter.
I tell to you for a truth my neighbors that when one puts clean shetes
upon a bed the angel of god reposeth him therein till the time that one
have farted / or fysted therein. Gloss. Maryon foul hole says that as soon as
the angel is departed out of the bed the deuylle enters stynkynge and
unhonest whereof oftentimes sourdethe great noise between the man and the wife.

The.xiii. chapter.
He or she that receives holywater on sunday at ye church at the hye mass
the devil cursed and desloyall in all ye weke may not tempe him or her / nor
approach nere them by seven foot length. Gloss. Berte the gentle says that
who that receives not holywater every sunday ye devil may be inuysybly upon
his sholder night and day / and who that receives it not of ye hand of a
priest know for certain that it has no strength nor virtue.

The.xiiii. chapter.
He that does of ten bliss the sone and the moon / ye sterres his goods
shall multeplye double. Gloss. Iossyne sone ready says that who that at his
going to bed salueth ye sterre poucynyere / it shall not be possible for to
lose any of their chekyns or hens / and also they shall multeplye ye (...)

The third chapter.
He that knows carnally his gossep at his request may never enter in to
paradyse if his godsone do not with his good will the penance / first for
his godfader / and after for his mother. Gloss. Crystyne the savage says that
who that weddeth his gossep nevertheless that they be Joined together carnally
yet it thondreth / or makes some orage / either by land or by water.

The fourth chapter.
Who someuer knows a nonne carnally / or a woman vyoled / and deflored by
copulacyon of a man of relygyon / or seculer priest / know for certain that
they shall all dye an evil death / and with gretter pain and doloure than ye
other folk. Gloss. Fyllette ye strayte says that if of such accomplysshynge
come any children they be enclyned unto many euylles and fortunes.

The.v. chapter.
A priests hoore the which perseuereth always in her sin unto the death /
know for also true as the gospel yt she is the deuylles horse / and it
behooves not to pray for her in any manner. Gloss. One amongst them said the
which knew that article that the sin might be forgyuen by ye prayers of the
priest and by the children that they have together / notwithstanding that
comunely they make an evil end.

The.vi. chapter.
If a seculer priest / or another man of relygyon know carnally a wedded woman
/ he shall never have pardon of the sin / till that he have impetred pardon of
her husband against the which he did offend so grievously. Gloss Certainly
answered an old matrone of five score year / (...)

If that a close have plente of sheep that has diverse lambs / after that
the dysme is all paid / there is one presented every year to the wulfe / for
certaynlye he will take one but if they be well watched. Gloss. Emmelote of
glay says to this purpose that who does not present a lamb to the wulfe in
the honor of the lamb of god / know for certain that there shall be many
dyrty arse in the year.

The.xix. chapter.
Who that gadreth herbs for the pot on the saterdaye after none for to sethe
on the sunday to ete / there happens lightly to them that do it the evil
that is called the ioian of our lady. Gloss. Iennet short heles said that it
happened even so to her in her young aege / but a young physycya^ did hele her
softely enough within a short space.

The.xx. chapter.
When a man is all ready for to mount on horsbacke he ought not to take his
sword in no wise of ye hand of his wife / nor no piece of harneys / for at his
need he may not in no wise defend himself. Gloss. Said one of the
assystentes named Angelyne grene gown that it happened even so to her first
husband / for as he rode by night / he saw by the light of the moon beside
him a gobelyn that was on one side of ye way / but he could never draw out
his sword that I had given him for the have that he had to flee.

The.xxi. chapter.
He that pysseth against the son he becomes in his full aege grauellous / and
it engenders the stone. Gloss. I believe said Ienyken that the gravel comes
sooner of drinking of troubled wine / or other troubled drink / and especyally
for to ride without a sadle.

The conclusyon of this Iourneye.
AFter this gospel dame Abunde of the oven held her pease / for it was not
possible to her for to proceed forth in her lecture for the murmr of the
assystentes and spynners together. nevertheless when that scylence was obtained
they thanked right gracyously dame Abunde of the oven for her good and true
gospelles promising that they would not put them in a calves ere / but would
put them in fair rethoryke terms / and publysshe them all about their
progenye / to the end that from generacyon to generacyo^ they were continued
and augmented. Upon this they began for to rise up euerychone and take their
distaues and spyndelles / with whorles aprons and flax and al their
instruments that apperteyned to their art of spynnynge for to return unto
their houses. And then I trussed up al my gobbettes for to go and take my rest
/ for mydnyght approached. They after diverse reasons did chese dame Sebylle of
the marreys for too read upon the morrow at the hour accustomed / whereof they
were right glad / and in the meand while I pycked me to bed.

Here after enseweth the conteynyng of the gospelles read by dame Sebylle of
the marreys the thursday at night.
THe thursday between.vi. and.vii. at night assembled a great sort of matrones
that were accustomed for to be there / with diverse other that had not ben
accustomed for to be there / and all for to here the gospel of dame Sebylle of
the marreys. Dame Sebille the which was of great polle came in the company of
diverse of her knowledge and sat her down for to proceed forth ye night as she
yt was ordained to do the office / but or that I rehearse any thing more I will
tell you of her estate and conuersacyon. This Sebylle was by her grandame comen
out of Sauoye of a country that is named vaulx / where out came first the
vaudoys / of the which science she had retained a great part / she was of
the aege of.lvii. year / small and long / and also she named herself a
gentylwoman because of vaulx / And in what place or assemble that she was in
she had always the last word for to make conclusyon / and so she took always
advantage / for the which cause there came diverse wives which had not ben
there before. Dame Sebylle then set in her syege after scylence obtained she
began her gospel thus.

The first chapter.
Who will that his children be no cowardes / it is expedient that as soon as
the child is baptized that the fader make him to handle his sword or his
glayue with his right hand and he shall be all his life more hardyer. Gloss
Dame Alyx of the marreys her sister said that whoo makes a priest to read upon
the child the gospel of the three kings / or the orayson of saint Charlemayne
/ he shall be hardy and vyctoryous.

The second chapter.
When two young folk sone or daughter be to take up a child / the priest
ought to put him between them / for if it happened that the one took the other
by marriage / there should never be pease between them. Gloss. A matrone yt was
there said that it was true / and more over said and they had any children they
should make a noughty end. (...) ^wyes the double.

The.xv. chapter.
He or she that in the morning at their vprysynge makes the sign of the
cross / and wassheth his hands or he depart out of the house / the devil
shall have no power to grieve him that day / and if he do it not what someuer
labor yt he does it shall not multeplye. Gloss. To this purpose said
Katheryn fendu that who someuer makes not the benedycyte to be said at his
dinner / ye devil inuysybly sytteth at the table and eteth and drynketh.

The.xvi. chapter.
When any woman bears her capons to the good town for to sell or some other
thing / if by adventure she do the on her right sho first in the morning it
is good hap for to sell well. Gloss. This thing has happened me often said
Ione / and more over I have often had my farynge by the way / of which and
my husband had knowledge of it he would not be content.

The.xvii. chapter.
When a woman enters in the morning in to her stable for to milk her kyen or
gotes / if she say not god save you and saint Bryde lyghtely the kyen does
stryke with their hinder fete and casts down the pot / or the pale with
milk. Gloss. At these words rose up an old wife yt which had but one tothe
in her heed / and said on high in the audyence of them all / that when the
calves will not drink at the ponde / nor else where it is sign that the bull
that engendered them had but little love to the mother.

The.xviii. chapter.
(...)

this article I believe well / for god may never upon the right of another /
and after he pardonneth the right of the party safe.

The.vii. chapter
If a man married enhabyte with the wife of his neighbor he closes the gate
of paradyse him self / and shall never enter knock he never so hard. Gloss.
Margot clap^te says that it shall never be opened to him till he have obtained
pardon of him that he did the offense to.

The.viii. chapter.
When the priest has songen mass and that some folk go and kiss the auter
/ they ough^e not of all that weke kiss no woman if they be married. Gloss.
Certainly and for a truth quod an old spynner they that do against this
article shall not fail to have the tothe ache or the head ache.

The.ix. chapter.
When a woman with child bears her child most on the right side / and that
she ete gladly venyson and wild foul / and that she here gladly speak of
torneymentes and Iustynge / know ye that she bears a sone. Gloss. Mabylle
fair face says that when a woman bears upon her left side and that she
appetyteth daunses and sown of Instruments / it is a daughter.

The.x. chapter.
If a woman with child desire to know what she bear the here her speak and by
herself ye shall know it / for when she demands what fruit she bears /
if ye say a fair sone and that she blusshe not read know for a truth that
it is a daughter. Gloss. Says Laurette the serye that if a woman with child
trede sooner upon the right foot than upon the left foot / she bears a sone
withouten fail / and if she do the contrary it is a daughter.

The.vi. chapter.
When a man engenders naturelly a child / if he might think than on the
time to come / and that he thought how after the deed he fyndeth him dysposed
/ other Judge than himself there neded not / for when the man engenders a sone
he changes but a little / because that he engenders his semblable / but for
to engendre a daughter yt is out of his compleccyon he fyndeth himself
strongly altered for two or three days.. Gloss. Parette Galoys says yt
incontinent as a woman has conceived a child male the first three months
she is metely well enough at ese / but the other six months she has much
great doloure more than with a daughter / nevertheless the first three
months the daughter gives her much to suffer.

The.xii. chapter.
When ye se the hens gader under a pentous know that the weder shall change
and torn to rain shortelye Gloss. Sith that we be entered to speak of hens
said emmelyne trumely^re I shall tell you great meruaylles / for when ye will
have your hens copped upon their hedes for also true as we be here ye must
take a copped sack and set the hen therein with her eggs and let her sit on
broad in the sack and her chekyns shall be all copped on their hedes.

The.xiii. chapter.
And when ye se the fire brenne in your chymney make a mow at it and for also
true as the gospel it shall quench and go out.

The.xiiii. chapter.
My friends and neighbors when ye goo to the wedraght beware that ye wype not
your ars with leaves / and for also true as the gospel ye shall never have the
sickness of saint wulfe of feuylloye. Gloss. Callette short hele said that
she did it ones / but she might not endure no where for ytchynge of the ynne
side of her thyes / wherefore I believe that the devil is is the herbs.

The.xv. chapter.
When a child is borne before that he be baptized beware that ye bear him not
upon your left arm / for than shall he be left handed all his life. Gloss.
Martyne soon ready says to this purpose that if ye make your husband torn
his face toward the oryent whiles that he does the deed of love and if there
be any generacyon it is a sone.

The.xvi. chapter.
Who that looks in a glass upon the night for also true as the gospel they
shall se the cursed thief / and yet ye shall not wax more fayrer but more
fouler. Gloss. Belette Camuse says that there ben glasses at Bruges the
which ben natural / and renders the folk that looks therein all brown /
but they have an evil brethe.

The.xvii. chapter.
Who that will be vyctoryous in war and battle / or happy and fortunate in
marchaundyse / let him put on his sherte in the morning the contrary wise /
and for certain and for a truth he shall be right happy and fortunate Gloss.
Quod dame wrynchefyste this rule is true withouten any fault / so that the
war be not against his wife or his love / for there he may no while resyste
/ but lose all incontynente.

The.xviii. chapter.
When a woman has her cock feeble and nyce / she must give him garlyke to
ete / and anoint his crest to the end that he become more stronger and more
vygorous / and also he shall keep the better his ryghtes toward the hens
Gloss. Who that may find said Marote wydred ye herb that awakeneth the nyce
husbands I would give all that I have to my smock / and if I should goo and
beg my bread.

The.xix. chapter.
Who that will nourysshe and bring up little dogs without great growing /
he ought to wasshe his hands in the morning in a great quantyte of water /
and in that same wete the bread that is given to the dogs / and give them the
water to drink / and for a truth they shall never wax more. Gloss. I believe
well that it is so / but ales gracyous did nourysshe them in a pot / and they
might not grow greter than the pot was.

The.xx. chapter.
When a wife does rise on the night for to pysse / and that she stryde over
her husband know that and he have any of his members styffe that it shall
wax soft if she return not theder as she had striden. Gloss. Maroye ployar
de says that and it be after the first cock crow she may return where
someuer it shall please her without any preiudyse.

The.xxi. chapter.
For certain my neighbors and friends when ye here the wind blow strongly
/ know for truth that it is sign of treason / or at the leest of evil
tidings. Gloss. It is a thing that is oftentimes proved / wherefore all the
examples were to long to rehearse.

The.xxii. chapter.
When a man rydeth upon his Journey and if he mete a woman spynnynge it is a
right evil sign / wherefore he ought to return and ride by another way.
Gloss. Iaket Iokesus says that and if the wife will hyde her rock in her
lap or behind her / it can not empesshe him / but if by adventure he fall of
his horse he may hurt some of his members.

The.xxiii. chapter.
I say to you for conclusyon / and for also true as we be here that if any
woman will that her husband / or her paramoure love her well / she ought to
put in his shoo a lefe of brekens that had been gadred on saint Ioha^s even
whiles that they ring none / so that it be in the left shoo / and without
fault he shall love her meruaylously.

The conclusyon of the thursday.
AT that conclusyon began all the old wives and the young that were there
present to deuyse together and make a great murmr as all abashed of the noble
actorytees and true gospelles that dame Sebylle had exposed to them and
promised well among them that they should reteyne them and imprynte them in
their memoryes / for they did hold them for good and holy. It dyspleased me
much that I might not have the company of any man for to laughe and pass the
time / for certainly the countenance and manner of them was right savage and
strange / and to my thinking it seemed them that all the world should be
governed by their constytycyons and words. Now harken to me said one of the
crooked matrones that was named mabylle of ye chyfte / my friends and neighbors
it is thursdaye to day / and the grettest day of roast in the weke: wherefore
it seems me that it should be good that we made among us all together a little
Joyous banquet for to refresshe our understandings with and our spyrytes. And
especyally for to feast and rejoice our wise doctouresses that unto this time
has instructed and admonested us of the noble doctrine the which here after
withouten any doubt shall be perpetually praised and honored / and
parauenture we shall come to have domynacyon over the men / what say ye Certes
said one of her neighbors that was a right good gossep / and knew well for
to flee by night named Mehalte ployarde I shall tell you / there was never
woman that said better to my thinking. I will goo to my house secretly whiles
that my husband ployarde slepeth / and shall bring a dosen eggs with me.
Another said and I shall go and fetch flower and butter for to make pancakes
with / and I take upon my conscience that ye vyllayne Iokesus my husband shall
not ete one morsel. Then answered an old matrone named florette of ye field.
And I shall go and fetch a great quarte of sweet wine / for yet have I spared
four or five pence whereof my husband evil ready knows nothing. Now up let
every body do their dylygence and put pain to do their deuoyre / then there
was one the which said that she would dress the mete. The whiles that they
were thus empesshed and besy / and thought upon none other thing but for to
accomplysshe their desire I departed the most secretly that I might / and with
out any leave I went unto my rest. Of the good chere yt they made for to tell
you truth without any lesynge I can not tell you / save that which was told me
/ but there is no thing worthy to be put in memory / form in that banquet was
so many reasons without effect that it is not possible to write them.

The contynuacyon of the Journey of frydaye made by dame Gonbarde the face.


When it came upon the frydaye at the hour accustomed / and that ye old
matrones and neighbors of all sorts were there arrived and comen / before
that dame Gonbarde ye face was comen for to proceed in her syege / they began
for to deuyse amongst them of the good chere yt they made ye night before
after my departing / whereby I knew somewhat how they had done / then said
Mabylle of the clyfte to florette of the grene / Ihesu neighbor how ye drunk
yester night / I believe that ye did it because yt ye would sleep the better ye
touched well the third pynte I think well said Florette / for it was long ago
sith that I had so good a night for the dremer Iokesus my husband does me no
good but slepeth always / for it is.ix. days sith that he touched me /
wherefore I believe that he has made some vow to some saint / evil might he
thryue for his sparynge of me but sith that we have time for to deuyse how did
Mehaulte ployarde make herself drunk it seemed that all was hers and for to
make it short there was but for her aloone / it were good for to know if yt
she did not waken her husband ployarde when she went to bed. Aha answered
mehaulte for the love of god let him sleep in peace / for he is naught from
hens forth that cold Joy may ye have of him. And how said a young maiden
that was there. Dame mehaulte you that is so old and so au^cyent would ye yet
wynche / and is there any styffe vain in you yet. At those words dame
Mehaulte set her hands in her side and in great anger and felonye answered her
that it was true that she had yet a grene vain / and that she was not so
old but that she might lie upon her back / and that one ought for to take heed to the good will of a body / and yet thanked be god the butter melts in
my mouth / notwithstanding that I may crack no nuttes / for she had but one
tothe. Then came dame Gonbarde the face for to begin her gospel / at whose
coming was made scylence / but that was with great pain / for dame mehaulte
was so evil content because yt she had been called old / and yet she had
but.lxxvii. years that she could not be appesyd in no manner. Nevertheless they
prayed her so much that she held her pease thanked be god. So I took my
pen and paper for to write that which she said / but or that I prosede to
her chapytres I will tell you what was this doctouresse dame Gonbarde. She was
by her mother side of Querne / and by her fader side of Pymont / she was of a
simple countenance before the people / for she named her a gentylwoman / but
and any body had lost any thing she meddled her for to ensygne them to it /
and if some had had any need of a wenche / she would have done him pleasure for
gracyous wine and this was the pratyke that she deled most with. When she was
sytten down and that scylence was made she began her gospel in this manner.

The first chapter.
Now said dame Gonbarde let be all riot and debate / and let us begin for the
honor of the friday that is to day for to speak of the holy sacrament of
marriage / for I have been seven times wedded / but this notwithstanding if ye
eight came to me and that he be to my pay / yet he should be received gladly /
and for to be well-beloved of him I would make him ete a salade of herbs that
should be gadered on saint Iohans even at none / and for truth it shall not be
possible to him for to leave me for another that is more younger than I am.
Gloss. Said Belotte the brown unto this purpose that if a wife put in her
husbands ere the feders of a capon that had brought up young chekyns / and of
the here of the right foot of her dog / and of the here of her cattes tail
/ he may never forgete the love of her.

The second chapter.
If that a woman will be master over her husband / and that he shall not beat
her / she must take all his shertes and when the parysshe priest redeth the
passion on good frydaye put them under the auter / and make him put one on the
sunday ensewynge / know that also long as it is on his back he shall be
gracyous and meke to his wife.

The third chapter.
if a woman will have her husband to love one of her children better than
another / let her make him ete a piece of the eres of her dog: and the child
the other half: and they shall love so fervently together that with pain they
may be one from another.

The fourth chapter.
if a woman will that her husband love all her children out of mesure / let
her take of the bryne of all her children / with fair and clear water / and
make him wasshe his hands and his face therein or ever he issue out of the
house / and withouten fault he shall love them out of mesure.

The.v. chapter.
Who that will preserve his dog from being wo^de. give him to ete every day
in the morning a morsel / or twain of the propre bread that ye take at the
church upon sunday / and if that he refuse it for troth he is evil dysposed.
Gloss. Marotte pylle says that who will not that the dogs bark at him night
nor day / let him have always a good piece of roasted chese with him and give
them to ete of it in saying unto them. In chamo et freno all a long / and for
certaynte they shall let you alone / ye and if they were sterke mad.

The.vi. chapter.
The woman that desires that her kyen may give as much milk as them of her
neighbors / she ought for to rub her vessel well in the which she
receives the milk with good herbs that has been gadered upon saint
Johannes even whiles that they ring none. Gloss. I by leave said Ienettte with
the great lyppes that who would put the foresaid herbs that had been gadered
upon saint Johannes even underneath the door of the stable where as the kyen
does lie / in saying unto them god save you and saint bryde that they should
give always from well unto better.

The.vii. chapter.
Who that will have both winter and somer fresshe butter of their kyen / they
ought when that they be in shalour to lead them before the bulle / and let him
smell at them with out any touching / and then led the cow thryes about the
bulle / and after let him lepe her / and ye shall have fresshe butter all the
year long.

The.viii. chapter.
When that a woman great with child strydeth over a snale / if that it be a
sone he shall have great members and hard / and if it be a daughter she shall
have great lyppes / and read / as well beneth as above.

The.ix. chapter.
The woman that will not lose her good catte ought for to anoint her four fete
with butter by three nyghtes / and she shall never depart from that house for a
truth and a certaynte.

The.x. chapter.
I tell to you for also true as the gospel that if a person ete of the beast
that the wulfe has strangled / and of the which parauenture he has eten /
with great pain may that same person give up the ghoost but if that the wulfe
were first deed. Gloss. At the leest he may not speak of a long time said
Belette the horned if that he make not his offrynge to saint wulfe.

The.xi. chapter.
When one sees a white relygyous goo or ride by the way none ought for to go
that way because of the foul weder that happens often to them. Gloss. Some
wise women says that it is an evil sign for to encountre a white monk in a
morning / but for to encountre a black monk it is a good sign so that he
have no white.

The.xii. chapter.
When that a bryde gothe from her house to the church for to be wedded / the
best prayer that is given to her abides to her profit / so that she thank
incontynente the gyuer thereof / or else the prayer auaylleth nothing. Gloss.
Then said Perrette blewe that when she went to ye church for to be wedded to
Ianot blewe mine aunt salued me and prayed god for to send me good and hard
encountre wherefore I thanked her / but it happened to me all otherwise / for I
found it so soft that one have bound might it at ye right knotte / that
cold Joy have it.

The.xiii. chapter.
One ought never to set the hens on broude upon a friday / for lightly the
chekens that comes of them is devoured by wild beestes and fowls. Gloss.
Certainly said marroye of the clyfte I have often herd say yt one must keep
him that he set not the hen on broude when ye moan changes nor a day after
/ for ye chekyns that comes of them has never good end.

The.xiiii. chapter.
When that a woman's throat does ytche it is sign of good tidings yt she
shall go to some wedding / or some chirchynge to make great che^e but when her
heed does ytche it is all the contrary / for she may happen to be bette of
her husband. Gloss. Perrette long head says yt when a man's throat does
ytche that he has asore times be ten his wife it is sign to hang.

The.xv. chapter.
When one sees plente of backs flee about a house it is good for to dyslodge
be times. for it is a great sign that fire shall be put in it shortly.

The.xvi. chapter.
Who that leueth their table clothe spredde all the night on the table / and
that the myse come and ete the crommes of bread by night / who someuer eteth on
that on ye morrow his tethe shall become black and soon after rotte. Gloss.
Marroye with the gylted mouth says to this purpose yt who someuereteth hot
potage and especyally fourmente shall have their tethe black.

The.xvii. chapter.
When a child is newely borne if it be a sone / he must be borne in to the
field / and put his fete against his breast and for a truth he shall never
make an evil end. Gloss. Then Emenye fauuele said to this purpose that when a
woman is delivered of a daughter / she must be set upon her moders breast in
saying / god make the a good woman and she shall never have shame of her body.

The.xviii. chapter.
When a woman lies with her husband and that she would sooner have a sone
than a daughter / it behooves her for to hold her hands close while yt her
husband does the work of nature / and for a truth she shall have a sone
Gloss. Some ancient matrones maynteyneth that who that will make a sone it
behooves to make him in the morning by day / and a daughter at even by night.

The.xix. chapter.
A woman that will have small children / whiles yt she bears him she ought to
break her fast in the morning with a tossed of white bread in wine / and without
any fault the child that she bears shall be little. Gloss. Said a matrone
that was there I believe better that the little children ben sooner engendered in
the defaute of ye moan than other wise / for customably the men ben than in
defante.

The.xx. chapter.
My good friends and neighbors if that ye will know if a woman be with child
/ cause her to make water in a basyn / and then let her put a lock or a keye
in to it / but a lock is better / and let the lock abide therein three or four
hours / and then empte ye basyn and take out the lock / and if that ye se
that the prynte of the lock abide in the basyn know for a certaynte that the
said woman is with child right great.

The conclusyon of the Iourneye of Frydaye.
FOr this last gloss sourded great tumulte among the wives that were there
assembled / also well of laughing as of speaking all together and it seemed none
other thing but a market where as is but he ha without any ordenaunce / and
without any herkenynge the one of the other / nor abiding the end of their
reasons. Wherefore when I saw that murmuracyon I rolled up my paper / and
stopped mine ynkehorne and put up my pen / and arose up thyn king for to
stele away secretly from them / but anon I was apperceyued of some of them
the which retained me and made me abide by force / for the which cause they
made a little scylence / that endured but a while. In the which they prayed me
all together that I would return upon the morrow with them at the hour
accustomed / to the end for to encheue and make an end of their entencyon /
and the thing the which was so well begone / and for to put in writing the
resydue of their gospelles ye dame Berthe the horned that was the last
assembled should make / where as they ought for to conclude and make an end of
their artycles. I considering the common proverb that says / Who serves and
makes not an end leseth his mede / did vttre unto them their request
lyberally. And after that I had taken my leave gracyously of them I went unto my
chamber for to take my rest. For my heed was gretely emty because of the
folysshe reasons that they babeled unto me in such wise that mine understanding
could not comprehend them. So I left them there trussynge their bagages and
went me to my bed.

The contynuacyon of the Iourneye of Saterdaye.
THe Saterdaye at night about six of the clock after the salve of our lady /
and that I had taken a little short refeccyon / as well for the honor of
the day as for ye affection that I had to se and here to what end they would
take conclusyon of their gospelles / and after when I had taken my gobettes /
both paper / pe^ne / and ynke I transported me to the place accustomed. And I
comen theder sat me down in my syege accustomed. Diverse of ye scolers was
comen theder already that began for to void their dystaues. For they might not
spynne for the honor of the saterdaye and of the vyrgyn Mary. I had not
soiourned there but a while when dame Berthe ye horned came accompanied with
diverse of her friends and neighbors / for to read her gospel and continue as
to do that which she was chosen to do. But or that I proceed to her
chapytres. I will write somewhat of her genealogy and issue. Dame Berthe the
horned was of the country of Leage / and was about the aege of four score
year or more / she was daughter unto Reynarde the horned a meruayllous wise man
/ In his time he had studied at tollette in the art of grammar and geomatrye /
and after that he had been at monpellyer where as he had studied in physyke /
and of that art he lived all his life / and did enduse dame Berthe therein in
the which she profyted much / and lived therewith afterward in Tapynage
dyshonestly enough / she then set down in her syege and scylence obtained
began her gospel in this manner. My good friends and neighbors sithe that my
torn is comen that I must make an end and conclusyon of the work that by my
good ladies was begone / I shall treat to my power of the science that I have
learned as touching physyke / and shall acquyte me the best wise that I may.
Wherefore make ye dylygence for to reteyne them / for they ben dygne to be put
in the profoundenes of your memory.

The first chapter.
For the first chapter I tell you that who that has ye axes and he fast the
first sunday after that they have taken him / know for a truth that they
shall leave him.

The second chapter.
He that has the fevers tyerces and he bear about his neck with a little
sylke the hye names bound / without any doubt he shall guarysshe.

The third chapter.
If ye have a husband rebel the which will give you no money at your need /
take the first knotte of a whete straw / but it must be gadered nere the
earth upon saint Johannes even whiles that they ring none / and put yt in the
keye hole of the coffre / and withouten fault it shall ones open.

The fourth chapter.
He that has the fever quarteyns / let him do so much that he find a
trayfle with four leaves / and break his fast four times with them / and they
shall leave him.

The.v. chapter.
The woman that is syke of the rogereule let her take holy water and make a
candell thereof / and after suppe it of / and for certain she shall be hole.

The.vi. chapter.
Diverse folk speaks of the maladye of the white axes the which knows full
little what it meneth / for they be twyes as ill as ye fever quartayns /
nevertheless they may be heled with ones drinking in saint Georges vessel.

The.vii. chapter.
For to hele fevers contynuelles / one must write ye three first words of the
pater noster upon a sage lefe / and ete it three mornings together / and they
shall guarysshe.

The.viii. chapter.
if a woman do wreste her foot in such wise that it be out of joint. It
behooves that her husband go on pilgrimage to saint Martyn for her health /
and bring with hy^ of the washing of saint Martyns horse foot / and with the
same wasshe her foot and she shall be hole.

The.ix. chapter.
if a woman have the small pockes / it behooves that her husband bye her a
black lamb of the same year / and after bind her in the skin / and then
let him make his pilgrimage and offrynge to saint Arragonde / and for a truth
she shall hele.

The.x. chapter.
if that a horse have wrythen his leg or his foot / it behooves that he ride
him toward the priests house / and call him without / and without speaking to
him return again / and for a truth he shall go as even as ever he did /
and without doloure.

The.xi. chapter.
I would tell you meruaylles of horses and of their medecyns / but because that
the men should not take them to their profit I will hold my pease and speak
of other things. But nevertheless yet I will tell to you that when ye se a
terryble horse that will not suffer that they mount upon him / or will not
enter in to a ship / or pass a bridge say to him in his ere these words.
Horse also true as the lemman of a priest is the deuylles horse suffer me to
mou^te upon the / and incontinent he shall be peasyble and do all yo ir will.

The.xii. chapter.
My good neighbors and friends yet I tell you for a truth that if any man
bear upon him in some battle ye little skin that he brings out of his
moders womb / know that he may not be hurt nor wounded in his body. Gloss.
Then rose up an old matrone among them called Ione soon clothed / and said
herynge them all that if a man bare upon him when he went into batayl the hye
names which ben such. Late thou go / far the hold tho / if they fight /
come away right / and thou shalt never be hurt in battle.

The.xiii. chapter.
I can not witholde me from speaking always of ye things to the advantage of
the men / and yet I know well enough that they set but little by us / for
they hold their parlayment and Jangling of us in the reproach of our sex /
but know that I will well yet tell you / that when a woman has newely the
axes / if that she oynte all her conduytes with honey the first thursdaye after
that she has had them and trembled / know for certaynte that she shall be
quyte of them.

The.xiiii. chapter.
When ye se ye swalowes bylde their nestes in some house / know that it is
sign of pouerte. And if the sparowes build their nestes it is sign of
prosperyte and of al good fortune.

The.xv. chapter.
Also every time and as often as ye make your bucke / and that the caudron is
upon the fire full of lee / and that the fire is under / the which makes it
to boil and sethe / ye ought not for to say a my gossep the lee boylleth /
but ye ought to say that it laugheth / otherwise all the clothes will go in to
smoke. Gloss. Then answered a wife the which was not very old that was all
enlumyned with rubyes / It is truth and certain for I know it well enough
/ For upon a time I made my bucke of threde / and my husband was there / and I
forbade him that he should not say the lee boiled / and told him if he said
it that all our threde would become strawes / for all that my husband could
not keep him from saying of it when he saw that it laughed / and so my threde
became straw. And I the consumer durst not say that it / I had drunk it.

The.xvi. chapter.
My friends for conclusyon fynall of my gospel / and for the sunday yt
approaches I will tell you a thing yt few men knows. I tell to you for a
truth that the storkes yt keeps them in these countrees in somer / and in
winter retorneth again in to their country which is about the mount of
Synay ben creatures there as we be. For it appears that they have great reason
for when they have little ones they pay their dysmes to god. Gloss. For to
conferme that conclusyon rose up dame Abreyge the swolen / the which was so
old that it was great meruayll and said that it was true which dame Berthe
the horned had said for she had often herd it said and told of her uncle /
that when he had been at saint Katheryns mount of Synay / and that in the
deserte when all his felyshyp was deed he saw from far a creature to the
which he spoke / and began for to ask him the way in flemysshe. That
creature anon began for to answer him and showed and taught him his way:
and in deed he went a great while with hy^ and devised with him of his
country and told him that he was a storke here and made his nest in Flaundres
upon the house of his neighbor. Clays which would not believe that thing
prayed him that he would give him a certain token to the end that if he
returned in to the country that he might thank him of his curteysye. Then the
storke drew out a ring of gold that he had taken up in a place beside his
house and showed it to him / and also sone as Clays saw it he knew it well /
for it was the proprery^ge wherewith he had wedded his wife. Then the storke
gave him his ring again upon a condycyon that he defended ye swyncherde and
ye cowherde of his house that they should do him no more outrage as they had been accustomed for to do. And after these promesses mine uncle took his leave of
him and return again to Bruges where ever sith he lived so well and so long
that he was great ye well fourtene palms about when he deyed.

Great was the laughing among the assystentes that had already washed and
combed their hedes: and wound up their yarne / and was already for to trusse up
their get whereof I was right Joyous / for certainly I began for to be much
weary of them / because that to my semynge all the words that they had spoken
was without reason / and with out any good sentente as I thought well it should
be at ye first beginning. But for to show myself not percyall nor also a
dyspreyser of their wylles I with half a joyous chere abode among them to se
what end they would make of their gospelles and actorytees / and how that I
might take my leave honestly of them for to save mine honor. It was yet nothing
apperceyued that there was any ^^ylence amongst them / wherefore I put me in
their sight to ye end that by my beholdynge of them they might have some shame
of their affayre the which was withouten rule or ordenaunce like a bataylle
that had been fynysshed. At the last the six ladies that had been the begynners
and presedentes all the weke came toward me / and thanked me gracyously for
the great pain that I had taken for them / and for my hyre and reward they
promised me if I required them for to auaunce me toward some damoysell / for
the which I thanked them in excusing me by mine aege the which was sore run
on / for I abode nothing but the messanger of god for to call me unto the Joy
eternell / unto the which he bring you and me. Amen.

The conclusyon and excusing of the auctour.
YOu my lords and also my ladies that this little treatise does read / or
hereth read / take it in pass time / prayng you yt ye take no regard unto
the chapytres / as to the apparaunce of any truth / or of any good
introduccyon / But take it all for to be said and written for to show and
declare the fragylyte of them that so deuyse right often when they be
together. And yet I have herd more of the^ diverse times / but it ought to
suffyse at this present time for my part. for another may come ye which may
augmente them.

Thus ends the gospelles of dystaues.
Enprynted at London in Fleet street at the sign of the son by Wynkynde
Word.

wynkyn.de. word.



