THE WISE-VIEILLARD, OR OLD MAN. TRANSLATED OVT OF French into English by an
obscure Englishman, a friend and favorer of all wise Old-Men.

ECCLVS. 25. 4. 5. O how pleasant a thing is it when gray headed men minister
judgment, and when the Elders can give good counsel, O how comely a thing is
Wisdom unto aged men, etc. PRO. 16. 31. Age is a crown of glory, when it is
found in the way of righteousness. depiction of enthroned woman with young
children.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, VVORTHIE, REVEREND, AND LEARNED DIVINE Mr JOSEPH
HALL, Doctor of Divinity and Deane of Worcester, the Author does Dedicate this
Translation as the first fruit and essay of his FRENCH Studies.
WORTHY SIR,
This translation of the sage Vieillard, being the fruit of certain vacant,
and divorced hours, I purposed to dedicate in a singular respect to a
worshipful Gentleman your good friend and neighbor, Mr Henry Archer, late of
Thaydon Garnon in Essex, who was well versed in the French language But his
death disappoynted me of my purpose, made my pen fall out of my hand, lie still
and stir no further, having then more then half finished the Book. The
second year after whose death, well weighing with my self, that it was a
Work might yield some profit to my Country men of England, I took up my Pen
again, and at starts and times finished it. And then withal considering with
my self that a good Book in these days had need of a good man to Patronize
it, I called to mind that your worthy self having been in France and other
foreign parts, might be a fit Maecenas to support my weak labors therein,
and so boldly adventured to Dedicate the Patronage thereof to your good
Worship. And I was the rather imboldened thereunto, upon hope that for your
deceased good friend and neighbors sake, to whom it should have been
Dedicated, you would not refuse it, at least for the works sake, being a mixed
Subject of moral and divine documents and instructions. And further, I hope
that it will not be accounted presumption to dedicate a good Book to the
learned and virtuous. Howsoever, it is my duty to crave pardon for presuming
to dedicate it to your worship; my self being a man of an obscure and humble
condition. And therefore I do further crave your pardon, that I may not make
my self otherwise known unto your worship, then by the two Alphabeticall
letters of my name here-vnder printed. Yet have I always been since I first
knew you, and still do rest a man which does unfeignedly reverence you.

T. VV.

To the Reader.
I AM loath to woce thee, by styling thee courteous, kind, gentle Reader, but
rather desire, that the subject matter of the Book might allure thee to read
it. The French Author thereof, has entitled it, TheWise Old Man: by which
title, he seems to implie, that all are not wise that are old, which if it be
so, he then seems to glance at our English Proverb: No fool to the old
fool. Howsoever he lessons both young and old what they should be. As for my
part, I think it not fitting to preface the wholesome documents and
instructions contained in it, which as good Viandes are offered to thy taste,
least I should take away thine appetite to read it, and make thee to surfeit
before thou have fed. All that I have to do, and less I cannot do, is to
crave thy favorable construction of that I have done. For I modestly confess,
I have been too ouerweening and bold, to take upon me to translate so worthy a
Work, of the worthy French Author thereof, Monsieur Simon Goulart, my self
being no higher a graduate in learning, then a common Grammarian, and no better
skilled in the French language, then what mine own practice and study has
enhabled me to be. But upon the first reading of him, I was so delighted, that
my fingers did even itch to set pen to paper, and to unclasp so good a Work,
which was shut up from thy use and benefit under a strange tongue. Make much I
pray thee of him now, because he speaks to thee in English, and if he speak
it not well, I crave thy pardon, for I am in fault, that have taken upon me,
to make him speak our language, before I well understand his. Yet I hope I
have hit of his meaning, though I vary from his words, as all Translators must
do. And now I am a suitor for pardon, I do woo thee by these Epithites of
courteous, kind, gentle Reader, charitably to censure me, for taking upon me,
to put into English so worthy a Work, with so weak a hand: which favor I
hope I shall the rather obtain at thy hands, for that I have done it, out of a
good will to thee, and not out of any skill in me, which I do disclaim, and
therefore I desire to hide me from thee, and not otherwise to be known unto
thee, then I am to the worthy Gentleman, to whom I have been hold to commend
the patronage of this Work. And so I leave thee (courteous Reader) to God, and
wish thee to be with God, when thy time is to go to him, and will still be
thy well wisher in all good things.

T. W.

THE CONTENTS OF THE twenty Chapters of this Book.
Chapter. 1. OF long life, and the desire men have to live long in the world.
Page. 1. Chapter. 2. Of such persons as have lived long, namely the Patriarchs
before the Flood. Page. 11. Chapter. 3. Of the Tree of Life, and of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil. Page. 16. Chapter. 4. What old age is, and how
many Species and kinds of old age there be. Page. 22. Chapter. 5. The
Springhead of old age, and the causes and occasions of it. Page. 28. Chapter.
6. Of the Climactericall Years. Page. 41. Chapter. 7. The complaints of the
miseries of old age advisedly discussed. Page. 44 Chapter. 8. Four causes
propounded by Cicero, of the miseries of old age, reduced to two, to wit, the
miseries of the body and of the mind. Page. 48. Chapter. 9. A more special
Catalogue, or numbering up, of some miseries in old men in regard of their
bodies. Page. 53. Chapter. 10. The miseries of old men in regard of their
minds. Page. 63. Chapter. 11. Of the causes that old age is burdensome and
tedious to old men. Page. 82. Chapter. 12. Of the benefit or good of old age.
Page. 86. Chapter. 13. Of the profit which wise old men may reap, from the
doctrine contained in the Writings of Philosophers and Heathen Authors. Page.
96. Chapter. 14. Assured consolations, against all infirmities of body and
mind. Page. 107. Chapter. 15. An advise to wise old men, containing the
summarie and substance of their duty until their last gasp. Page. 126.
Chapter. 16. Worthy meditations for all persons, especially the wise Vieillard,
of what quality or condition soever he be. Page. 136 Chapter. 17. Consolations
against death, and how it ought to be feared or not feared. Page. 145. Chapter.
18. The sequel of the points propounded in the former Section, concerning the
resolutions and consolations against death. Page. 160. Chapter. 19. Of the
resurrection of the bodies, and of the immortality of men's souls. Page. 180.
Chapter. 20. The conclusion of the Work, with a serious exhortation to old and
young: Also two Prayers for wise old men. Page. 196.
Ay me! I lack but life to make my will.
If thou had life it would be unmade still.
Il y a esperance on un bien faict,
Le plustost est le meilleur.
depiction of old man writing at a desk.

He that to do, nor good, nor harm, has no devotion,
Differs not from a Picture but in motion.
Dum Scribo, Morior.
THE WISE VIEILLARD OR OLD MAN.
CHAP. 1. Of long life, and the desire men have to live long in the world.
WE labor and essay in this Discourse, that the aged person may have his
thoughts and affections somewhat more stayed and settled, then those of younger
years, to the end to make him truly wise, by expecting and longing until he
may be perfectly and everlastingly wise in heaven. By the wisdom which we
wish unto him, no other thing is meant, then that he should meditate and
exercise himself in piety, justice or upright dealing, charity or brotherly
love, duties beseeming and requirable in the ancienter sort of persons in every
thing they do, so long as they soiourne and make their abode here on earth. It
is a thing very usual and common unto us all our life long, which is but
short, to cast and imagine continually with our selves, the many difficulties
and dangers are in it, and it is a wonder to see, how ingenious and witty we
are to vex and afflict our selves for triffles and things of no value.

There is nothing so much does trouble us, and makes old age terrible unto us,
as the fear to depart hence, and to leave this withering and transitory life,
whereof old age is the Catastrophe and last concluding act, making an end of us
speedily, and may be called the sun set of our days. Consider the ancienter
sort of persons, and you shall observe almost no one humor so much predominant
and reigning in them, as a fervent desire to avoid all surfeitings and
excess, and to keep a good diet, to the end to maintain a little strength,
and to hold our life, be it but for an hour, and to persuade themselves they
may live one year longer at the lest. Would you gladly please or flatter them;
do but make them younger in years then they are, by telling them they are not
so old as they reckon and take themselves to be, and that there is no cause or
likelihood but they may live many a year longer then others, and forget not in
words to extol their experience, sufficiency, prudence, and wisdom to
contriue and wade thorough great matters; you are by and by their only man,
who but you, none more made on.

It is a point of undoubted truth that God created Adam and Eve, not only to
enjoy a life for some hundred of years, but to live for ever; whereupon there
was fixed and imprinted in their heartt a fervent desire to live; and not to
see death. For although that mass and lump of dust, whereof the first man's
body was formed and made, did inuest him with mortality, yet in regard of the
likeness and similitude which he had with God, death had never seized on him,
but Adam and all his posterity had subsisted and continued long upon earth, in
a large and pleasant plot of ground, purposely ordained for them to dwell in
(the whole world, before sin entered, being wonderfully beautiful) until such
time as he and all his posterity, without feeling grief of mind or pain of
body, had been by God translated into heaven, if they had remained in the
first estate wherein they were created. But Adam and Eve having wilfully
suffered Satan to efface and deface the image of God in them, they both, and
all their natural offspring long of them, were made subject unto death,
became strangers to the life of God, and were called Flesh; an appellation and
name very fit for them. Howsoever this be so, yet by the special blessing of
the Father of heaven, through the means and favor of his beloved Son, who
was ordained to be the Savior of all mankind, this present life (how
miserable soever it be by reason of sin) is no small Donation or petty
Legacy, but a most excellent gift of God unto his children. I speak of long
life promised to them which shall bear and behave themselves, as they ought to
do, toward God and toward their neighbors, as is recorded in the second and
fifth commandment of the moral law, where the promises are set down,
whereunto that which is further added in the end of the 91. Psalm, is referred
and has relation; That he which unfeignedly loves the Lord shall be satisfied
with long life. But this longitude and length of life must not cause us to
forget, especial in all our troubles and trialls, The benefit of death.
that by death we have rest and case from our toylings and labors, and that
this life of ours is a paineful pilgrimage, a Sea-voyage full of danger and
peril, The miserable condition of life.
a merciless war, sparing none, making havoc of all, deserving (by reason of
the evils that we suffer and endure in it) to be termed rather a death then
a life. Upon the consideration whereof, a certain grave ancient Father cried
out; O death, how welcome and pleasing is thy doom and sentence to him that is
in want, to the man whose strength fails him, to him that is waxen very old,
and is afflicted on all sides, having no part of him free from pain, to the
man that is at defiance and out of love with himself, and to him that has
cast off patience and is grown desperate! What thing is there that may be
more desired, then speedily to shake off, and rid us of these chains, to get
out of the prison, and dark and fearful dungeons and deserts, wherein we
are confined, fast tied and bound; that so we may recover the precious
liberty to go to our home, to dwell in the house of the Lord, and in his
Palace of glory to triumph and rejoice? What does long life bring with it, but
a Chaos and infinite number of evils? It has been said many years ago,
This grievous penalty upon old men is set,
All the day long at home to grieve and to fret.
With sorrows and woes they are compast about,
Still one pain or other they are never without.
They consume and wear old, as they go mourning in black,
And so at last with griefs heavy load, away hence do pack.


But he that has lived well, although he die when he is but twenty years
old, ought to have his tomb erected and placed with the oldest and wisest, and
with great joy and applause to have this for his Epitaph.

I have lived long enough, and am content here to lie,
Because nature is pleased I should so soon dye.
But that man knows well what it is to live, whose care is not altogether for
himself, but how he may live to please God, and to benefit and do good to his
neighbors, in whom Jesus Christ lives, who has not so great a care of any
one part of his life, as he has for his whole man, and for every part thereof.
Verity it is a strange thing, and not much to be approved or commended, that
we are so many ways careful for this present life, and to pranke up and
mainetaine our selves in this world, and make so small account of our better
part, which so much concerns us, to wit, our soul, the welfare and good
health thereof. Whereof David seems to make high account, as is evident in
the 34. Psalm, when he asks this question, Who is he that desires long
life, and loves long days to see good? Keep (says he) thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips from lying talk and equivocation; turn aside from that
which is evil, and do the thing that is good, seek peace and pursue it. And
when he speaks of life, he uses a word, which according to the Idiom and
propriety of the language wherein he spoke, may be translated lives; to put us
in mind, that we should not rest upon, and content our selves, with that life,
which is common with us and the Plants and beasts of the field, but that our
thoughts should be elevated higher to that other life, which is guided by
reason, and is indeed worthy to be called life, without which we should be
more wretched and miserable then the beasts. Verily the sensual servile and
brutish life is nothing worth, and not greatly to be regarded. What glory can
it be to us, or how should we place our felicity in such a life, wherein the
beasts and every Idiot and Lourdaut may brave it as well as we, and have as
great privilege and commodity and much more. Let us carefully look to, and
set our affections upon that life, by which our better part, the soul, having
as it were sequestered and estranged herself from all transsitory things is
lifted up unto God, cleaves fast unto him, and by his Spirit is nourished,
comforted, and fed unto the hope of eternal life. This is the life that the
Prophet wills us to be in love withal, and enamoured of, to the possession
and fruition whereof, we are regenerated by the incorruptible seed of his
word, who has abolished death, and by the Gospel brought into the world life
and immortality. For the case being thus decreed, that all men must once die,
and every one of us having daily before our eyes four assured witnesses, that
bear record of our mortality, and that die we must; our own natural frailty,
diverse accidents and mischances that may happen to us, many surfeitings and
distemperatures, and old age at last; how can we sufficiently aggrauate and
display the misery and vanity of man, who does not raise himself higher then
these earthly things, and minds, and thinks upon nothing so much as upon
this dying life, or rather a living death. That which me heathen Philosophers
and Naturalists write of long life, and the means to prolong it, will help us
little or nothing at all, and at no time can assure and comfort the conscience.

Some of them think that men may live longer in hot countries then in cold;
others are of opinion, that the Northern and colder climates are best to
mainetaine health and long life, and Galen is persuaded that the air of Asia
Minor in the East parts is a more temperate country to live in then any other.
But these wise men do further observe, that besides a good air, many other
things are requisite, as to keep a good diet, to use rest and exercise at due
hours, to purge sometimes and to cuacuate the excrements and gross humors of
the body, and sometimes to forbear it, to have the mind merrily disposed and
free from pertubations and passions. But admit all these helps should
concur, which seldom happens, what man is so simple and unadvised, be he
never so young, to assure himself in the morning when he rises, to live to
go to his bed at night? What man is there by keeping a good diet, and living
temperately, and by following the rules and prescriptions of Physicians, is
able to make himself continue and last so long as a Date or Cypress tree, or
to live so long as a Raven, a Stagg, or a base creeping worm?

Many have composed and set forth books, wherein they treat how a man may
preserve health, and Galen reports of one Antiochus a Physician, who
contenting himself to eat sparingly three times a day, a piece of bread
spread with honey, lived in wonderful health and strength of body many years.
Pliny in his 22. Book. Chap. 24. makes mention of one Pollio, who lived more
then a hundred years, and being demanded by the Emperor Augustus, how and by
what means he preserved so long the good health of his body and vigor of
mind, made him this answer, That he used to supple his joints with oil, and
to drink the best wine he could get. In his 7. Book and 50. Chap. he
propounds for an example (thinking the like not to be found) of one
Xenophilus a Musician, who lived a hundred and five years, and was never in
all that time sick, nor felt any ach or pain in his body. Cicero also in his
Dialogue of old age, makes mention of Arganthonius King of Gades, who reigned
fourscore years, and lived a hundred and twenty. But seeing all the time of
our life, which is not employed in well doing and virtuous actions, is to be
accounted lost, and that the greatest part of this present life, vanishes away
in miseries, which we are forced to see and suffer. Good God, how are they to
be lamented, and pitied, that have nothing where of they can boast, nor
whereon to rest and place their assurance, but upon a number of years, and who
commonly die, when as yet they have not beto take order to live, or when they
have no sooner begun to be wise, but they are as soon dead?

I pray you do we call that long, which has an end, yea such an end as every
minute we expect and look for? Every man is desirous and willing to live
long, and strives with might and maine, using his uttermost power study and
care to live long, although the time he runs and moylingly trots up and
down, be it never so long, compared to eternity, is but as a drop of water to
the maine sea. To be brief, long life in this world is nothing else, but a
painful progress, which makes it shorter and shorter, and at last makes an
end of it. Let every man then (as Cicero counsels) hold himself contented
with the time is appointed unto him, by him, who has the hour glass of our
life in his hand, who has stinted our days how long they shall run, and
has set down this for his will, that they should be short and miseerable,
which he has done to this end, that we should with good Abraham having our
fill, full load and back burden of days, pack away and remove from this
life, not as from a house of ease and delight, but as from a base beggarly
Inn, making all the speed we can to go hence, to enjoy that life which is
free from all fear of death, from sorrow, error, and false dealing, and is
everlasting. O how blessed are they to whom God has vouchsafed to reveal the
way of life, who by and through Jesus Christ have obtained the fullness of joy,
and those everlasting pleasures which are in Gods right hand. For although it
be elsewhere promised, that such persons being planted in the household and
family of the Lord, shall bring forth fruit abundantly in their white old age,
shall be in good case, always flourishing, that their youth shall be renewed
as the Eagles, yet is to be understood rather of their spiritual vigor and
strength, then of the strength of the body, in which respect Lions, Elephants,
and Eagles do far surpass us. Whereupon the saying of the Prophet does
consent and agree, that those which are the Lords followers, and do attend and
wait upon him, do renew their strength, their wings do spread and enlarge as
the wings of an Eagle, they run and shall not be wearied, they travel and
walk up and down, and shall not be tired nor faint, Isaiah 40. 31. The might
and power of God does so support and uphold them, that they overcome
difficulties and hard usage, they can pass over and undergo all troubles
whatsoever by the means of Jesus Christ, who does assist and strengthen them,
and do at last happily end their days. Nevertheless, we grant and
acknowledge, that God does sometimes set forth unto us notable examples of
hardy old men; who for their strength of body, and courage of mind may be
wondered at. Such a one was Moses, of whom it is said, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. that dying
when he was a hundred and twenty years old, his sight was not dim, neither
was his strength of body decayed. Caleb also, that valient chanpion and
faithful servant of God, who being fourscore and five years old, said to
Joshua Chap. 14. I am as strong of body as I was, when Moses sent me for a
Commander (being more then forty years since) and I am as able to do service
in the wars, and to march and trauerse my ground as I was then. Saint Jerome
writes thus to Paul of Concorda; Behold this is the hundred year complete of
thy life, and yet thy sight is good thou marchest stoutly, thou art quick of
hearing, thy teeth are sound, thou have a shrill and eloquent voice, thy body
is strong and lustly, thy face ruddy and well colored, whereat thy white hairs
seem to envy, and thy strength is such that thou art taken to be younger then
thou art, thy blood which freezeth and is cooled, does not he betate and dull
thy ready and quick wit, nor the wrinkles of thy forehead make thee look
strene and ghastly. We have seen in our time many venerable old men, and there
are to be found many worthy Divines, that are threescore and ten, and
fourscore years old, whose age has no whit diminished their strength of
mind or sharpness of wit, but that they are still to this day, by their
grave counsels, godly communications, and learned writings, very helpefull to
their Friends, and do good service to the Church, to their Prince and Common
weal, and like Appius surnamed the blind, see more apparently what is good
and behoouefull for their country, then those that sit near the helm and
government of the State. I affirm confidently of them, that they are trees
surely rooted and well grounded: And that those verses of Virgill the Poet are
wisely invented, where he says; The life of man at the best, is as a vanishing
dream,
Old age does furrow his forehead with sorrows extreme;
And after many diseases, and sore travel without rest,
Death comes at last, and locks him up in a chest.


Those that curiously search into the nature of things, have from time to time
observed, that we are no sooner borne but a certain heat does preserve our
natural and radical moisture, which at last, especially in old age, by
extreme cold his contrary is cooled and quenched, so as man has not a jot of
time left him to cherish his vital powers, or to maintain the good
temperature of his body, wherein those of Pythagoras sect did hold life to
consist. But to conclude with experience, and the saying of a wise man;
Although the Physician use as much art as he can to keep us alive, by purging
our bodies of peccant humors and diseases, yet at last he that is to day a
King shall die to morrow. Plato does judge, That Commonweal miserable and not
the best,
Where Physicians are sought to, and are in request.


By whose account there is little regard to be made of the chiefest towns and
cities in Europe. Physicians masters of their strength and wealth.
But let it be our duty in all good manner to honor and adore the sovereign
Physician, who pardons all our iniquities, the fountains and causes of all
our miseries and evils, who heals all our diseases, who by the hope of a
blessed resurrection does secure our life from death, who does compass us with
loving mercies and compassions. Let us pray unto him to give us the true Aqua
coelectis. All those that have their hope in him, need not to complain of the
shortness or miseries of this present life, seeing that such is the will of
our Father in heaven, that whosoever believes in this sovereign Physician
has everlasting life, does rise again at the last day, and as well in body as
in soul lives and enjoys eternal happiness in the paradise of God.

CHAP. II. Of such persons as have lived long, namely the Patriarchs before
the flood.
IT is the saying of an ancient man, that it is a thing indifferent and not
against reason, for a right good man to wish death, or to desire to enjoy the
life present in this world, which to some is prolonged for their condemnation,
and to others as a special favor of God: so as we be always ready
according as it shall please God to yield up our life, or to keep it still.
Life is to be desired not so much for it self, as for that we do thereby
attain to the wisdom and knowledge of many and sundry things, especially of
things Divine, for the attainement whereof, God, who is Almighty and good,
bestowed upon the first Patriarchs the gift of long life. The times before the
universal flood had herein a great privilege in regard of the offsprings and
progeny of Seth. For though they were entangled and cumbred with many miseries
(as from the name Henoch is collected, which signifies a man of misery, and
from the name of Noah, whose father Lamech gave him that name, upon the hope he
had of some comfort, after many sorrows and afflictions) yet may it be said,
that the world was then in his prime and best days: At which time these good
Patriarchs were not book learned, but all the knowledge they had in natural
Philosophy, or in the course of the Stars they got it by long observation and
experience, which from the grandfathers and fathers were delivered over and
taught to their children, and to their childrens children, as Josephus
witnesses in his first book of Antiquities, and third Chapter. Many wondering
heereat, have moved this question, whether it be likely or probable, that the
Patriarched lived so long as nine hundred years and upwards, as our first
father Adam, Methusula, and Noah did? Some curious wits, whose manner is to
measure every thing by the meat-wand, and rule of their own ouerweening pride,
who because they could not persuade themselves that the years of the
Patriarchs were composed of twelve months, or of three hundred threescore and
five days, every day having four and twenty hours, and every hour his
ordinary minutes, have imagined (as Saint Augustine reports in his 15. Book De
ciuitate Dei, chap 10. and 12.) that the years of the first world were not
reckoned according to our present computation and style, but that one of our
years now, is as much in the balance of account, as ten year then, and
they held their opinion for current and to be approved, for that the people
of the old world do still to this day differ about the calculation of the
year. For the Egyptians, had their year of four months, the Acarnans of
six, and the Lauinians of thirteen months. Pliny the second, having written
that the Histories make mention of two, whereof one lived one hundred fifty
and two years, and the other lived two hundred years, and of many that lived
till they were eight hundred years old, adds, that the ignorance of the
times gave credit to such tales and reports, because there were of the
antienter men of those times, that did shut up and enclose the year within the
seaesons thereof, some of them reckoning the year by the summer season, others
did put the summer and winter season together, and made two years of them
both, and some of them did reckon the interuall and space from the change of
the Moon, to the last day of the wayne for a whole year. But besides that the
history of the Deluge, being heedfully looked into and examined, according to
his months and days, does confute this error: Saint Augustine declares,
that such conjectures can have no force or authority in this dispute, and
drives these curious disputers into a manifest absurdity. For if seventy
yeare's then, were but seven of our years now, Kenan when he was seven years
old begot his son Mahalaleel, and Mahalaleel, being only five years old and
a half, should have had Iered, as Henoch also at the same age, should have
begot his son Methusula. But not to stand and rely upon the vain disputes
of profane people, who being ignorant in the Art of Astronomy, and Celestial
motions, have invented years after their own fancy, and have intricated
themselves in infinite errors, which time by the help and skill of learned
Astronomers has reformed and corrected. Most sure and certain it is, that
after the Deluge, the whole earth, by that fearful punishment of the
inundation of waters, failed to yield his foison and strength as before, and
men being more luxurious and dissolute of life, lived not so long as they did
before, as appears by the Genealogy of the sons of Sem, in the 11. Chapter
of Genesis. Presently the years of the holy Patriarchs did ebb and abate of
their number, and in process of time, men in their manners grew worse and
worse, so that at last in the time of Jacob, the age of man did shrink away
and decay very much, and afterward much more in the time of Moses, whereof we
may have an instance and proof in the nintie Psalm, although the years there
mentioned seem to be abriged, and cut off for an extraordinary rod of
correction to them in the Desert. Caius the lawyer gives his judgment, that
the houreglasse of man's life (even of those that are of the ablest bodies and
minds) cannot run much longer then a hundred years. In the books of
Heathen Authors, there are found notable and rare examples, and perhaps
fabulous, of men that have lived very old. The years of Nestor are become a
proueeb, by reason that Homer gave it out that he lived thee hundred years.
The Tragedian Poets broach it for a truth that one Tiresias lived six hundred
years, and Pliny in his 7. Book Chap. 48. has set down a Catalogue of old
men that lived to a very great age. Sabellicus in his AEneades reports that
in Arabia, men live till they be four hundred years full out. Our French
Historiographers do celebrate the memory of one John des temps, who had an
Esquires place under Charlemagne, about the year 800. and lived until the
year 1124. under the Emperor Conrad the third. In our days there have been
found in the East and West Indies old men, that have out lived two hundred
years, and in diverse parts of Europe chiefly in the temperate Clymates, but
especially in the mountain countries, there be found men above a hundred
years old, that are very voluble and fluent in talk and discourse. But
whether this be so or no, all wise men agree in this, that although God, by
his special blessing, for certain great reasons, has drawn out the days of
some of his children to a very great length, and that oftentimes it falls out
that the wicked suddenly perish, and have their life taken away for their
rebellion against him, as the whole race of Cain was swallowed up of the flood,
and not a man of them left alive: Yet this earth that bears us up, and
whereupon we tread, is not the Land of the living, as Basil declares in his
exposition upon the 44. Psalm. For here before the soul goes out of the body,
we are often and long a dying, feel many assaults of death, who gives us many
a sore blow, and deadly wound before he kill us outright: first our infancy
dies in us, next our childhood, afterward our youth or age of twenty or one
and twenty years growth, consequently our manly and middle age which is
followed with old age, which changes both us, and our affections, making us to
live after another manner. We shall then be in the land of the living, when we
shall be the same men we seem to be, unchangeable, without grief of mind,
or sickness of body, not subject to any corruptions, or defilements, nor
frowardly living in strife and debate. While we live in this tabernacle of the
body (as Saint Paul says, 2. Cor. 5. 4.) We sigh and mourn, being heavily
burdened, not that we desire to be stripped or unclothed, but to be clothed
again, that that which is mortal in us may be swallowed up of life. In
heaven, which indeed is the land of the living, we shall be stripped of all
that is vile, contemptible, mortal, frail, and corruptible in us and shall
be clothed with a robe of glory and blessed immortality. In which country, as
Saint Augustine in some place says, we shall find true and faithful dealing,
and from whence all impostures, error, and falsehood is banished; as there our
joy shall be a true joy, so there our life also shall be a true life. Now
although the damned doerise again, yet to speak properly they shall not live,
for their life shall be in perpetual torments, and therefore are they still
kept alive, that their tortures should never have end, that their gnawing worm
die not, and that their fire of torment go not out. That life only is to be
accounted a life, which is both everlasting and happy. God having no purpose
therefore, that his elect children should mewe up, or confine their felicity
within the little narrow compass of a brittle and perishing life, but should
seek out and look for another country, where they may live at more liberty
and for ever, has been contented to give them a most assured testimony
thereof, before the law, and before the flood, in the person of the Patriarch
Henoch, then under the law in the middle age of the world, in the person of his
Prophet Eliah, and in the last age of the world in the person of Jesus Christ.
Which three persons are now gone into heaven: The first two as young scholars
and disciples, purposely trained up and chosen to be heirs of eternal life,
that they might be to all others worthy witnesses of everlasting happiness,
and that the men of their times might evidently see and be assured, by that
which fell out in the lives of these two great persons, (whom Tertullian in his
Book of the resurrection of the flesh surnameth, The white robed Saints of
eternity) that there is another land of the living, where we shall one day
meet together as well in body as in soul. And as for Christ Jesus our
Savior, he as head of the Church, and as a tryumphing conqueror of death and
hell, is ascended into heaven to prepare a place in his kingdom, for those
that be his and to draw unto him at the appointed time, all the members of his
mystical body. Then shall be fulfilled all the words of the Prophet, mentioned
in the end of the hundred and second Psalm. Thou have before all times laid the
foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands, they shall
perish, but thou shall endure; they shall wax old as a garment: thou shall
alter and change them as a garment, and they shall be altered and changed. But
thou art always the same, thy years shall be at a stay and never fail: the
children of thy servants shall dwell in thy presence, and their seed shall
remain, and be established in thy sight.

CHAP. III. Of the tree of Life, and of the tree of Knowledge of good and evil.
MOst happy was the state and condition of our father Adam before his fall in
that excellent Garden, where his Creator had placed him. Where so long as he
would do that which God commanded him, he lived at pleasure and hearts ease,
was in favor with God, who created him good, he wanted neither meat nor drink
convenient, nor any good thing. The tree of Life was a strong guard to his
person, to defend him against the assaults of old age, that it durst not come
near to approach or seize on him, he needed not to fear sickness, or any
outward thing to hurt or annoy him, he had there perfect health of body and
tranquillity of mind. This Saint Augustine affirms of him in his 14. Book,
De Ciuitate Des, chap. 16. Let us add that which Damascene writes of him in
the eleventh Chapter of Orthodoxall faith, in these words; That Gods will and
purpose, being to create man after his own image, and to make him the prime
Monarch over all the world, he prepared and built him a most stately and
sumptuous Palace, where he might lead his life in all happiness. And this was
the Garden of Eden, a store house of all sorts of spices, and of all things
else which might give him content and delight, a place very temperate, radiant
and shining, with a most clear, wholesome, pure and fresh air, strewed all
over with green herbs, and with most fragrant and sweet smelling flowers; In
the midst was planted the tree of Life, and the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, to no other end but to prove and exercise his obedience, and that he
might see that Gods will was not, that he should be distracted with diverse and
wandering imaginations, and that his chiefest business should be to praise and
bless his Creator, and to make it his solace and delight, to six his thoughts
and affections on him. These testimonies of Saint Augustine, and Damascene, do
explain the words of Moses, who said that the earthly Paradise (for so is
the Garden of Eden commonly called) was not an allegorical and imaginary
Garden, or some Orchard hanging in the air, and not really in nature, but it
was the sight of a goodly country, surueyed by measure, had his bounds and
abuttments upon a certain angle of the world toward the East, where Eve was
framed and carved out of the side of Adam, and where trees and fruits did
naturally grow, and was the food by which they did live: And this Garden of
Eden was not the whole continent of the earth, for Adam and Eve after their
fall were banished and driven out of it, to go to seek there dwelling
elsewhere. All Divines do affirm, that in the History of Adams creation, as
things are penned and set down by Moses, in the three first Chapters of
Genesis, there were many mysteries contained. But it follows not, as Saint
Augustine in his eight Book upon Genesis, according to the litterall text,
learnedly cleares the point, that in the said History of Adams first estate,
there was nothing contained but Allegories, Idenes, and things mystical: As it
must not be inferred under the color and pretext, that the pillar which
followed the people in the Desert, was Christ; that there was not a material
and natural rock, out of which gushed out waters, which did naturally quench
the peoples thirst in the Desert. If then a mystical and typical sense be
the matter in question, Saint Ambrose in his fourth Volume and Tractat, Saint
Augustine in his second Book upon Genesis, urging the words of the text
literally against the Manichees, and Damascene in the place before alleged,
do also say that the Garden of Eden was a figure of the Paradise and felicity
of the Church, in the midst whereof was planted Christ, the true tree and
bread of life, out of which follows rivers of heavenly and everlasting life:
As also that it signified and made a representation of the Kingdom of heaven,
and to this latter signification our Lord seems to refer, when to the Thief
upon the Cross, who repented, acknowledged his Savior, and made so excellent
a confession of his faith, as no Christian can make a better, he said, This day
shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23. 43.

Concerning the tree of Life, Saint Augustine in his 26. Chapter of the fourth
Book, De ciuitate Dei, and other ancient an modern Divines, do think that
the tree of Life, was so called, not because the fruit of it sustained man in
life, as other fruits do, but that (by a special blessing) the fruit of it
did maintain Adam and Eve in life and strength of body, that they were not
troubled with any disease. They gather their exposition on from this, that Adam
after his fall was by the commandment of God banished with his wife out of the
garden of Eden, and to this end that he should not stretch forth his hand to
gather and eat of the fruit of this tree, whereby he might live for ever. And
from the Cherubins, which with a wauing and flourishing sharp edged sword,
were placed toward the East part of the garden, to keep him from coming that
way to the tree of life, Genesis 3. 22. 24. Some Divines said that after Adams
revolt, the passage way to the tree of life was barrocadoed and shut up, not
that God feared that Adam after he had received his doom and judgment to
return to the dust of the earth, from whence he was taken, could by eating of
the fruit of the tree of life recover immortality, but that he having made
himself a mortal creature, and lost his dignity, should have his scutchion of
honor taken from him and trampled under feet, and all the ornaments, badges,
and marks of the favor of God and immortality. For otherwise, to speak
properly, God alone is the head spring of life, Psalm. 36. 10. Nay he is our
life and the length of days, Deuteronomy. 30. 20. And not any tree, nor the fruit of
a tree. And wittily does Aristotle scoff at Hesiodus, and his other fellow
Poets, who took upon them to make a material bread and drink for the living
gods, which they called Nectar and Ambrosia. S. Augustine in his eight book
upon Genesis, seems out of the words of the text very fitly to resolve this
point of doctrine, when he says, that all the fruits of other trees were
given to man for the nourishment and food of his body, but the tree of life,
and the tree of knowledge of good and evil, were given him in the nature and
quality of a Sacrament. Other Divines, whose opion I reject not, do hold that
the tree of life was a figure of the Gospel, and the tree of knowledge of good
and evil, was a figure of the Law; that Adam and Eve by eating of the fruit of
this latter tree might now come to know good and bad, virtue and vice, right
and wrong, justice or injustice, or by their disobedience to God in doing that
which he had forbidden them, might learn to their own confusion, from what an
excellent state they were fallen, and into what an abisse and bottomless gulf
of confusion they had plunged themselves. Many ancient learned men do write,
that the tree of life did signify wisdom planted in the midst of the
garden, that is ingraffed or infused into the heart of man, which is in the
midst of his body; And for proof hereof, they allege the place in the third
chapter of the Proverbs, where it is said, That wisdom is a tree of life to
those that lay hold of it. We think no less, but that Solomon in that
sentence does allude to the tree of life in the garden of Eden, which was to
our first Parents a Sacrament of the life which they had received of God, and
which had been perpetuated to them, if they had not rebelled against him; And
that he does also admonish us, that the means to recover that happy life, and
to enjoy Gods favor again, is to apply our selves to that study of wisdom,
which is taught us chiefly in the Gospel, of which S. Paul says, We speak not
the wisdom of the world, but the wisdom of God in a mystery, which is a hid
wisdom. 1. Cor. 2. 6, 7. And the same Jesus Christ, which by God was made
wisdom for us, is our resurrection and life.

Concerning the tree of knowledge of good and evil, many do wonder that it
was planted in the terrestrial and earthly Paradise, seeing it was the
occasion and material cause of the death of Adam and Eve. But Divines, and
namely S. Basil and S. Augustine, do wisely make answer; That God planted no
tree that was evil, neither made he death, neither did he set or plant any
such tree in the garden, to be the occasion of man's ruin and destruction; but
to prove his obedience, and to beget in him an habit of abstinence, and to
weane him to sobriety; so that although this tree was pleasant to behold, yet
was it not meet that Adam and Eve should climb it to satisfy their greedy
appetites, but should abstain and forbear so to do, because God had for
bidden them to gather and eat of the fruit thereof. To conclude with S.
Augustine, The Lords will was that the reasonable creature should see, that he
was not to be at his own caruing and appointment, but as a creature to yield
all obedience to his Creator; and in yielding obedience, should find it to be
best for his health and welfare. Thus, then Adams estate was excellent, and
above all things to be desired, wherein he abounded in all joy, integrity,
justice, and holiness, if he had continued in this happy estate wherein God
created him. But after he had eaten of the forbidden fruit, of a man just,
happy, and immortal, he became a sinner, miserable and mortal. These things
being so, we the miserable posterity of Adam, who have tasted of the forbidden
fruit, transgressed in the thing forbidden, and by our disobedience brought
upon us the first and second death, separated and estranged our selves from God
the author of our life, and of our good being and welfare, are exhorted and put
in mind to have our recourse in true faith unto that Mediator, who by his
death and resurrection has opened unto us the celestial Paradise, who gives
us to eat of the tree of life planted in the Paradise of God, Apocal. 2. 7.
not of a figurative and typical tree, but that we might have a right and
interest in Jesus Christ the true tree of life, and in the heavenly Jerusalem,
which is everlasting life, Apocal. 22. 14. For in our Savior is the truth, and
the accomplishment of all types and figures, and whosoever believes in him,
shall not come to condemnation, but shall go from death to life. Upon this
sentence S. Paul in the first Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans 17. Verse,
does ground this principle: The just shall live by faith.

CHAP. IIII. What old age is, and how many species and kinds of old age there
be.
THE disloyalty and fearfulness of Adam and Eve, was the violent downfall
of themselves and their posterity unto death, and unto all the forerunners of
death, as consumption, diseases, and wanne, and pale old age, which is the
respectacle, center, and sink of all man's miseries. To speak properly, God
only is incorruptible, immortal, immutable, always the same, and whose
years alter not. And although it be said that the soul of man is immortal
(as Saint Augustine affirms in his first book, De Trinitate) yet the true
immortality is a perfect immutability and unchangeableness which no creature
has. In God only there is no variableness nor shadow of change, as says
Saint James, Chap. 1. 17. Verse. Contrariwise, our lives are variable and
subject to sudden reuolutions, changes, and chances, and our fair outside
and feature of body turns to be as a moth eaten garment: Our days (as the
Patriarch Jacob said to the king of Egypt) are few and evil or wearisome upon
earth. Galen knowing well that old age a natural infirmity, which could not be
avoided, did justly reprove a certain Philosopher who braggingly gave it out,
that he had a receipt would preserve a man from growing old; Although, says
he old age be natural and inevitable, and withal further adds, that this
Philosopher being grown to the age of fourscore years dyed of a hectique
fever. At that time when Saint Cyprian lived, the whole world was judged to be
very much weatherbeaten, to be grown old, and that all her former good days
were gone and past. Behold, what this courageous Martyr of Jesus Christ says
of the world in his tractate of death. If the old walls of your house should
stand totteringly, if the battlement and roof should shake, if the maine
building should lean awry, and the rafters, posts, groundsells, and
principal timbers should be weak and rotten, all of them giving you warning
of the peril ye are in, if ye tarry in it, would ye stand to delay and
pawse on the matter, and not get ye gone in all have? The whole frame of the
world does totter and reele, and being old and near her end, she cries out
that she stands upon her last legs, and is quite down, and you defer to
serve God, to seek your own safety and good, by preventing those evils which
with her crimes are ready to fall upon you, and may be escaped if you timely
give over the world.

Many learned Astronomers have proved by firm and sure demonstrations, that
the celestial Planets have altered their course and motions, and that the Sun
is come nearer to the earth, that by his warm neighborhood (such is the
special providence and will of God) the Elements, which are become weak in
their influences might be the better relieved. Most certain it is that the
world is grown old, that Kingdoms, Commonweals, and Cities, have their
flourishing times, and times of decaie; kindreds also and whole families are
rooted out, and not a man of them to be seen above ground, and all the
creatures which serve to our use, and are subject to vanity, do after their
manner groaningly desire and look for an end, as the Apostle says, Romans 8. 20.

But to return to our Vieillard or old man, who is the subject of this
discourse, what other thing is old age then the road way to death? For seeing
that death is a suffocating and quenching of the natural heat of the body,
old age makes way to him to enter and seize upon the body the sooner. The older
men are, the more weak and feeble they are in every thing they do and take in
hand, and this weakness of old age can in no sort be helped and redressed,
though we strive to do it, by keeping the hear from faintings and failings,
and in continual motion. For life and action end both at once; it being
impossible that the living creature should die, so long as the heart receives
motion by the bodies action. Moreover, old men, who are of a dry and cold
constitution, are less fit to undertake many actions, exploites, or
imploiments. They are not quick enough of apprehension, their senses failing
them by little and little, the synewes, lineaments, and all the members of
their body do shrink, languish and decay, their sight and hearing fails
them, they are chap-fallen, and their teeth deny to champ and grind the bread
they must eat. And as God has appointed every man's race of life how long it
shall be, and the stages he must pass before he come to the end of it,
whereof old age is the last stage of all; it is not every man's desteny to go
so far; some wax old sooner then others, some bear their age very well,
some look old and are not: So that old age must not be judged by the wrinkles
in the forehead, by the white hairs, by the vnweldinesse or witherednesse of
the body; there being on the contrary some very old, that have a ruddy face and
well colored, a sleeked and smooth skin, and their hair of a cole-blacke or
nutt-browne color: But it is fit rather to refer our selves to the words of
the Psalmist in the nineteenth Psalm, where mention is made of the years of
man's life, and of those things which often happen therein, and of the many and
manifold troubles and discommodities, wherewith old men are besieged and
compassed about.

Moreover, the Naturalists and Philosophers, have used to divide old age as it
were into certain spaces, paces, or progresses. The first pace and progress,
is from fifty to threescore years, at which age a man is yet lusty, strong,
and youthful, especially those men who have been wise to live abstinently and
continently, flying gluttony, drunkenness, whooredome, effeminacies, excessive
pains taking, and labors more hurtful then necessary for the welfare and
strength of the body, overmuch carking and caring, and over violent passions of
the mind, which ouerwhelme the soul, not suffering it to rest in quiet, or
making it to go gadding and madding here and there to and fro, as it
happens to the licentious, ambitious, covetous, reuengefull, irefull,
froward, fearful, and such like persons, who being tempested with disordered
thoughts, and unruly passions, are carried with the rage and fury of them, so
far out of the way of reason and besides themselves, that they can hardly hit
the right way again to the house and city of God. And though that after fifty
years the strength of nature does wane, and by little and little does abate
and grow weak, yet we see that men at that age and after, vntilll they be
threescore and five years old and vpwardes, are fit persons to be employed in
public places of charge and command, as well for their counsel and wisdom
to direct, as for their ability and valor to execute and perform, whereof we
have infinite examples in our own Chronicles and modern Histories. At
threescore and five years, until fourscore, or much about that age old men
may be fit to be counselors of estate, and directours and governors of
families. After this age until their dying day old men are fit for nothing but
to sit in a chair in their chamber, to have their friends, servants, and those
of their house to visit them with reverent and courteous salutations, to have
their children and grandchildren leaping about them, making them pastime and
sport, to be entertained with talk and discourse fitting to their weak
capacities; And their part and duty is to return them their blessing and well
wishing, and to offer up daily prayers for them and all others, wherein they
must be brief and short, expecting and looking every minute, when death will
be so kind as to take them out of the world.

There is a kind of old age ouerhastened, overmuch worn and broken with sore
labor, overmuch pains taking, watchings and surfettings in times past. Those
that by this means are become old, shall yet at times for the most part, have
perfect senses and understanding, and shall have their blood moderately hot,
the lukewarm heat whereof they shall know by skill and cunning to cherish and
maintain: But yet their surfeited bodies shall be tormented with sharp
diseases, and aches in their bones, which by fits at times, shall put them to
such griping pains and panges in their body, that they shall be able no whit
at all to help themselves, and their neighbors, for whose good and comfort
they ought the more carefully to preserve, and the better to see to, and to
order their life, that so they may in peace of conscience yield the better
account to God. Briefly, our life may be compared to the light of a Lamp,
which by little and little goes out, as the oil that maintains it does waste
and consume; or to the Moon, which as it oftentimes shines forth and shows it
self, so is it as often ecclipsed and under a cloud. But we commonly see the
most part of men sweated to death with hot burning feauers: pestilences,
famines, wars, common diseases, and diverse mischances sweep them out of the
world, before they come near by many a days journey to the door of old age.
What man would desire to see the fortith part of his age, if when he is come
to be able to speak, and to be of some capacity and understanding, he should
be showed in a book all the accidents and mischances, which from and after his
infancy is, or may happen unto him, whereof (as Cicero recounteth in his second
book De diuinatione) Dicaearchus in times past wrote a large Volume; But I
suppose he had great leisure, and that all the world could not contain all
that might be imagined to fall out in some men's lives in fifty years space.
If a man fearing God will seriously examine, what things have passed in his
own life, and make a Iournall or day book of them, whereby he may be
brought to repent him of his follies and faults, to amend his life, to lay hold
on the benefits of Jesus Christ, to renounce the world, and unfeignedly to
meditate and think upon a better life, he shall do a worthy work; And I
would gladly counsel all wise old men to stay themselves upon such
meditations, while some young foppish, and old doting persons spend their time
in ridiculous and shameful sports and delights, or which do by foul crimes
and misdeedes deadly wound their woeful consciences. It is recorded by
Lactantius in his second book of Christian Institutions, that the old Poets
did circle and enclose the life of man within three terminations or periodes,
over which they appointed three fatal Ladies, Atropos, Lachesis, Clocho, the
daughter of Jupiter and Themis, to spin at the thread of man's life; under which
feigned names, was covertly vayled and shadowed diverse considerations of our
condition in this world, in the first, middle, and last age of our life,
whereof we purpose not here to moralize or declare the meaning. Aristotle in
his book of the world makes mention, that by these three daughters of
Jupiter, the ancient people of those times would represent time past, time
present, and to come; All things by them being tied to a fatal necessity,
which God has decreed to be; against which the oldest, strongest, and
youngest cannot resist or gainsay.

The name of Senators is derived from the Latin word senes, which signifies
old men, who are so styled in honor of their experience, prudence, and
wisdom, inseparable companions of such old men, who are appointed to have the
superintendency and government over others. In the government of all Churches,
there is an Ecclesiastical Senate, or convocation of Elders, who being
assisted with the ministers of the word, have their eyes still prying into the
manners of men, to reform and reclaim them from evil to good, and if they be
good, to make them better. These old men above all others, ought to take heed
that they do not incur the ancient reproach and scandal of, bis pueri
senes, which is verified in those who are old in years, and in their manners
and actions show themselves children. But as it is a rare thing to see a young
man so well stayed, as an old, or to do things so well and wisely as an
antienter body, so is it a lamentable thing to see old men to mock and make
moes one at an other, and to make a laughing stock of those who are as old as
themselves, or to do the uttermost they can to disgrace them, only to please
and curry-fauour with young men: Common faults in these days, which the
Ancient of days, will redress when it pleases him. Let us close up this
Section with a sentence of a Roman Stoicke, who says, That as he makes not a
long voyage, who is tossed to and fro at sea, with stormy and tempestuous
winds, and does not proceed; so ought we not to account that man to have lived
long, who has not ordered his life to make a happy end.

CHAP. V. The springhead of old age, and the cause or occasions of it.
MAny of the Heathen people have showed themselves rash, unadvised, and
arrogantly minded, who have taken upon them boldly to accuse nature, calling
her an envious and spiteful stepmother, which has been willing and given her
consent, that man who is worthy of very long life, should remain so short a
time in the world, and which is more, that he should be compassed about and
pressed to death with millions of evils. Others have imagined that man was
purposely placed in the world to be punished for his sins. There were many
of them that maintained that life was a scourge and plague to man, and made
great complaints against nature, that she had cast him into the midst of a
raging and stormy sea, ouerslowing with miseries. These, and the like
discoursers have resembled those, who think the worse of good wines, because
of the lees in the bottom of the caske, or those who beholding the eclipse
would mainetaine the Sun to be always dark. But the holy Scripture speaks
otherwise of these things, as also the wiser heathen people to wit, that
instead of taxing and finding fault with our life, because of some
discommodities and troubles are in it; we are on the contrary to acknowledge
the excellent benefits, which by it are bountifully communicated and bestowed
upon us, by our Creator and heavenly Father; who thereby puts us in mind
that the glory of man does not consist so much in the strength, fair outside,
and feature of the body; as in the endowments and gifts of the mind; As also
that nature is not to be blamed, nor found fault with, nor under her name the
true God, who created her, and is the author of her essence and being: seeing
that (as Chrysostom declares in an excellent Homily of his) No man takes
harm, but by and long of himself; And it is agreeable to nature, that as the
Ivy by winding it self about trees does drink up their sap, and makes them
to die so old age killes all those whom she does lovingly embrace in her
arms. So Ovid says; Old age eats the iron, and makes it decay,
And Marble pillars to moulder away.
And Horace upon the same theme adds;
Of the dismal day, that does threaten with death,
Things vital feel the smart, and things without breath.


It is a wonder, says Cicero also, if old men be troubled with infirmities,
seeing young men cannot privilege themselves from them, but are often enough
feeble and weak. The Sun that rises in the morning does set at night; there
is not any thing that does increase and flourish, but it does decrease, wither,
and wax old. But to come nearer to our purpose, let us first discover and lay
open the remote causes of old age, then those that are nearer and more inherent
and natural, and let us show that they are not all of a piece, and of one sort.

Those we call the remote causes of old age, which are supernatural, and
which proceed from the disobedience of Adam and Eve, and from the sentence
pronounced against them by the Lord God. For, so long as God was man's friend,
the sky, air, and earth, were so beautiful to behold, that a fairer prospect
could not be desired, and man himself knew and perceived how proportionably
his bones and joints were set together, and how exquisitely and perfectly he
was fashioned, framed, and made as well in body, as in soul. But man taking
upon him boldly to transgress Gods commandment, and to revolt from his
obedience, had this punishment for his boldness and rebellion inflicted upon
him, that within doors, or touching his inward man, he was not so well
fortified with the spirit of God, as he was before, and abroad without doors,
or touching his outward man, all his former blessings became curses, as
appears by that which is contained, in the sentence pronounced against him
presently after his fall. For where before he had liberty, he was made a
bondslaue, all the pains he was put to in that pleasant garden of Eden,
whereof he was owner, was only to trim it and keep it handsome, which was an
easy work to the hard labor he was put to afterward; his sleep and rest
was disquieted with wearisomnesse, and discontentments, the Elements, and all
other creatures, and things ordained for the necessity of this life, and which
before willingly offered and did their service unto him, were after his fall
subject to vanity and corruption, and began to be enemies, and to proclaim
open wars against this wretched Apostata man; For the sky was troubled with
tempests and storms, the air was infected with noisome vapors, the earth
brought forth thorns, thistles, hurtful and venomous herbs, and the tame
and wild beasts stood with their several weapons ready drawn, to encounter
and make head against him. Man being then environed with the dreadful wrath of
God, combred with so many evils and miseries, and having so many ambushes and
trains laid for him, which he was to pass and make a lane thorough, it was
impossible, but that he should by little and little waste his vital spirits,
and consume his strength, grow old, and speedily come to his death, if God, of
his mere good will to him, had not eased his sorrows and troubles, and
mitigated his afflictions, prolonging the date of his years, and letting some
live so long as it seems good unto him. David lamenting this miserable
condition of his, says in the extreme anguish of all his heaviness and
troubles; There is no health in my flesh, because of thine indignation; My
bones never leave asking, because I have offended thee, O Lord, Psalm. 38. 4.
And in another place he says, My days are as a shadow which vanishes away,
and I am as a withered leaf, ashes have been my bread, and I have mingled my
drink with tears, because of thine anger and heavy displeasure, and because
having advanced me to great honor, thou have cast me down as low as the
dust: Psalm. 102. 10. 11. 12. Many years before David, Job complains, That his
days were like the days of a hireling, months of vanity were given him for
his portion, painful nights were appointed unto him, his flesh was clothed
with worms, his skin was chapt, and shrunk away, and his days passed away as
swiftly as a We^vers shittle, Job 7. 1. etc. Briefly, as Saint Cyprian says,
in his Treatise of the virtue of patience, this obligatory decree, Thou art
dust, and to dust thou shall return, does bind us under hatches, and keeps
us chained in hold until death be abolished, and we made partakers of a better
life. Thus much touching the remote causes of old age.

Now follows the natural and inherent causes of old age. As young men die
unwillingly, so on the contrary, old men fall of themselves into their graves,
like fruits that are ripe, and according to the course of nature, all things
that are old, do by little and little decline and give way to death. Which
caused some Divines to be of opinion, that our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
among other reasons, would not die of any disease, or of old age, that he
might not seem to be driven, and turned out of the world perforce, by this
natural infirmity, which does threaten all the children of Adam. As for that
which is extraordinary, peculiar, and not so much according to nature, we may
read examples thereof in Isaiah 40. Chap. 30. 31. The young men are weary and
faint, yea the lustiest young men do stumble, and fall flat to the ground; but
those that wait and depend upon the Lord, do renew their strength, their
wings do spread, as the wings of an Eagle; they shall run, and not be weary,
they shall walk, and not be feeble and faint. And the same Prophet foretells
in the 65. Chapter, concerning the restoration of the Church, which is
spiritually to be understood; That hereafter there shall be in Jerusalem no
more a child of years, nor an old man, which shall not accomplish and fill up
his years, for he that shall be a hundred years old, shall be a young man.
By which manner of speech, the Prophet would give us to understand, that all
the children of God, shall come to that age and stature, where of Saint Paul
makes mention, in the fourth Chapter of his Epistle to the Ephesians, in such
sort, that they shall be exempt from all infirmities, wherewith children and
old men are cumbred, that is, they shall not be children in understanding, nor
poor silly dotardes and sots, as those are that know not Jesus Christ, but
live in perpetual ignorance, Idolatry, and beastly impiety. On the contrary,
life prolonged unto the profane, shall be but a presage and forerunner of
their everlasting accursed condition.

But to proceed, the inherent and natural causes of old age, are not all of
one sort and kind. For some of them are merely natural, and sleep in our
bosoms, and some of them be accidental and foreign, and further of from us.
Those we call merely natural, and which sleep with us, which the Naturalists
and Physicians speak of, to wit, our coldness and dryness of body; because
the more our radical moisture dryes up, and our blood cooles, the nearer is
our sensitive and natural life to an end; which has been the cause to move
some men to think, that old men were called Senes, which is as much to say as
Semineces, men half dead, because old men, especially those that are decrepit,
and very much worn with age, have cold and dry bodies. For although, they
abound with excrements, and by this accident seem to have moist bodies, for
that their natural heat, being too much cooled, and not able to cherish and
warm them within, the humor purges it self at the nose or mouth: Yet this
age is found indeed and in truth, to be cold and dry. And as death is a total
suffocation of the natural heat, so old age does by little and little cool
and abate it; whereupon it also follows, that all cold and dry bodies are
quickly worn out and grow old. On the contrary, young men are of hoate and
moist constitutions. But even as it is to be found in wines, that some keep
color long, and drink brisk and neat, and some by and by loose color, and
drink eagre and flat: So we see some men wax old, and were out sooner then
others. And notwithstanding, that man wheel about from this place to that,
shifting airs, and using all the ways and means he can, to cherish nature for
a while, yet his natural heat and strength does by little and little leave
him; whereupon does ensue to aged persons white hairs, looseness of teeth,
deafness of hearing, weakness and decay of sight, the shaking palsy in
their hands and legs, and the chilling and shrinking up of all the whole body.

This natural weaknenesse and dryness, which by succession of time does
invade all bodies made of earth, or other matter; besides, is seconded in many
men with diverse diseases, and with old age coming on, which with greater pain
does hasten it forward, and further it the more. All these evils may be reduced
to two heads, which we call the labors and toils of the body distinctly, or
both together; and intemperance. Concerning labor, it is expressly set down in
that sentence, immediately after the sin of Adam and Eve, which Moses does
propound in these words: The earth shall be accursed because of thee, in
sorrow shall thou eat of the fruits thereof all the days of thy life, in the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, etc. Genesis 2. 17, 19. And in the
ninetith Psalm it is said, That we flourish and wither away all at once;
Because, as the Prophet says, there is no part of our life, how strong and
lusty soever it be, which is privileged and free from sorrow and labor.
These two are the parents of old age, as every man knows, and there has been
in our time young men, which being oppressed with extreme grief, have become
old in a night; the toils of the wars have made some gray headed, in the
prime and flower of their years, and it comes by kind to the men and women of
some kindreds and families, to be soon gray and old. Plime in his seventh
book, and seventh chapter writes, That in Albania, some have all the hair of
their heads white from their infancy. I my self have seen in diverse places
where I have traveled, five or six young men, whereof the last I saw was in
Dauphine, who had all the hair of their heads, as white as a man of threescore
and ten years old.

Touching intemperance, whereof there be diverse kinds, a vice to common in
young men destitute of the fear of God, and very unseemly in old men, being
the harbinger of death, and the Phisicians best friend. It has been an old
complaint, seeing this present life is so short, frail, and transitory, that
men do so naturally desire to live, and to be so careful to recover and
preserve their health, and to that end spare for no cost, nor make any bones or
difficulties, to turn their tender stomachs into an Apothecaries shop of
bitter and unsavory druges: how almost all men by their outrageous riots, and
surfettings, do bring upon themselves an irksome old age, do before hand as
much as in them lies, with sharp and violent diseases hasten their death, are
not wise till it be too late, and never condemn, or find fault with their
shameful luxuries and riots, till the gout is in their knees, or the dropsy
does painefully shingle them round, or the stone does torment them, and till
the excesses and disorders by them committed, to the fearful abuse of Gods
patience, have delivered up their rotten and crazed bodies, into the hands of a
miserable old age. They should before hand remember, and bethink themselves,
of the old excellent Proverb, If thou will be a very old man, be old betime.
Which does warn us to be careful of our health in our youth, flying all
shameful and unruly passions, and seeking by the wise government of our
selves, to obtain such an old age, as may be long, strong, and healthful.
Verily, it is a licentiousness not to be borne withal, or tolerated, that a
man should give his youth, as a present to the unclean spirit, by abandoning
it to impudent dissoluteness, pollutions, and ribauld impurities, promising to
himself, that all shall go well with him at last, and conceiting to himself
rude and wild peccauies, which deceive and misleade him. It is a further
evil, and utterly abominable in old men, to see them so far to have
abandoned God, their honor, their respect of others, all remembrance of their
wretched condition, and of death which hangs over their heads; that they would
still weaue a webb of new years for Couerlets, to hide the foul deeds they
commit in horrible hypocrisy, which at last does transform them into profane
persons, and desperate Atheistes. If the exhortation was necessary, which the
wise man has given to every young man, in the twelfth Chapter and third Verse
of Ecclesiastes, To remember his Creator in the days of his youth, before the
evil days do approach; what is to be said to old men, upon whom those days
and painful to pass and undergo, because of the miseries that do accompany
them, are already come, more then half gone and past, and almost at an end?
What a shame were it to old men to be reproached, and justly, that they play at
leap frog, use fond courtings, and make foolish toys and brauadoes, and gadde
up and down, whethersoeuer their affections lead them, and the lusts of their
eyes? It were well done to proclaim, and cry out with a loud voice, Know that
for all thy evil ways God will bring thee to judgment. O hypocrite, where
art thou? can thou hide thee from others, from thy self, from God thy
Sovereign? thou have one foot in the grave, and thou will fetch gambols and
friskes, and caper aloft, that the world may see thou art still one of her
minions, and a favorite of her vanities.

But, let us consider the disorder and licentiousness of youth, which soon
enough procure a miserable old age, which besmeare and rudely handle the sinner
and lewd liver. The first disorder and licentiousness, as Philosophers,
Physicians, and Divines say, is found in whooredome, adultery, and such like
abominable sins of the flesh. Aristotle, in his Tractate of the length and
shortness of life, says, That the males of all creatures, which bill often
with the females, are quickly old, and do waste and consume their bodily
strength. Galen said, that Venus which does cool the blood too much, and
weaken the body, is the capital enemy of old men, and of hot complections.
Long before him the holy Ghost has given a good and wholesome caueate, and
precept thereof, by the instruction of Bethsaba to King Solomon her son, for
whom she made so many vows, Give not thy strength to women, following the way
which is the destruction of Kings. If such infamous disorders and
licentiousness be insupportable and perilous in young men, how much more in
old men, who are obliged and bound to remember the holy statutes, and
ordinances of their Sovereign? who in his inviolable law ratified, under great
pains and penalties, cries out; Thou shall not be a fornicatour; Thou shall
not commit adultery; God will judge whooremongers and adulterers, and such
persons shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. Wise old men tremble at the
words of their great Prince, who tells them in plain terms, That whosoever
looks upon a woman to lust after her, has already committed adultery with her
in his heart. Matthew. 5. 28. They mourn and lament, when this interrogatory is
ministered unto them by the Apostle; Know ye not that our bodies are the
members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, to make them the
members of an harlot? God forbid. Also he says, Fly fornication, for every
sin which a man commits is without the body; but he that commits
fornication sins against his own body: Know ye not, that your body is the
temple of the holy Ghost, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own men?
1. Cor. 6. 15. etc. The reason which he gives does overthrow and cut off all
pretexts, that young and old men which despise the truth, can allege or take
hold of, to excuse themselves, in accusing themselves. You have, says he,
been bought with a price, glorify then God in your body and in your soul.
Let us without producing further allegations and proofs in this case, end it
with the words of the same Advocate of holiness and truth. This is, says he,
the will of God, and your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication, and that every one of you should know, how to possess his vessel
in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as the Gentiles
do which know not God. 1. Thessal. 4. 3. etc.

The Proverb is, That when the belly is full, the bones desire rest, or we are
apt for wanton delights. Delicious fare, gluttony, drunkenness, cause young
men and old to live so dissolutely and licenciously, as before is mentioned.
And, whereas the heathen people sought to find verity in wine, the Apostle
says to the Ephesians. That in wine there is found vanity, dissoluteness,
disorder, and all misgouernment and misrule. Bacchus, and Ceres, as a heathen
man said, are the fewellers and fier-makers to Venus. Wine and belly cheer
dull the understanding, and bereave a man of his senses; And it is the only
time for old men, to remember the notable sayings of Solomon to this purpose,
when they are at their great feasts and iunketting bankets. I will content my
self with repetition of those sentences, which are contained in the end of the
three and twentieth Chapter of the Proverbs; where both the vices are set down
together close one by another. My son (says the wise man) give me thine
heart, and let thine eyes be watchful, and look to my ways. For a whore is
a deep ditch, and the strange woman is a narrow pit; Also, she lies in wait
as for a prey, and will make the treacherous, rebellious, and transgressors
among men to be many in number. To whom is woe is me? to whom is sorrow and
alas? to whom are vproares? to whom are murmurings? to whom are strifes and
quarrels without cause? to whom are red eyes? To those that sit long at the
wine, and which go to seek mixed wine: Look not upon the wine when it is
read, when it shows his color in the cup, and goes down plesantly; It
biteth in the end like a serpent, and stingeth like a cockatrice. Then thine
eyes will look upon strange women, and thine heart will speak lewd things:
Thou shall be as one that sleeps in the midst of the sea, and as he that
sleeps in the top mast of a ship. They have buffetted me, thou will say, and
have given me many cruel blows, but I was so past sense, I felt not when I
did awake: I will yet go seek after new wine.

To these elegant sayings here described, I will add the precept of our
Savior, who says, Take heed to your selves, least your hearts be oppressed
with gluttony, drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and the last day come
upon you unawares, Luke 21. 34. Saint Peter says, Be sober and watch, because
your adversary the devil goes about you like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he
may devour. 1. Peter 5. 8. And lastly Saint Paul has this sentence, That
fornicators, adulterers, effeminate wantons, drunkardes, and other wicked
persons, who are dead asleep, and hardened in their sins, shall not inherit
the kingdom of God, 1. Cor. 6. 10. I forbear to speak of the diseases, which
proceed of the disorders, and licenciousnesse formerly specified, or of the
extraordinary plagues, wherewith the judge of the world can danton, and keep
under the mighty and mean persons, who never have care of their consciences:
It suffices me that they themselves are sensible witness of them, or if they
remain for a time stupide and senseless, that the Almighty has sharp rods
of fearful vengeance in store, wherewith he does whip them at last, though he
spares them a while.

Let us speak a word of choler, or anger, which like a thunderbolt killes
millions of young and old men with the sword, or with suddained seases.
Histories declare, that in former times Valentiaian the Emperor, and of late
in our time, Mathias King of Hungary, giving way, and suffering themselves to
be overcome with choler and anger, dyed both of an Apoplexy. It has been
seen that many old men, furiously transported with choler and anger, have
fallen into soundings, convulsions of the synewes, and other incurable
diseases. Women of ripe age, who are too much given to anger and fretting, are
commonly seen (as a reward of their indiscretion) punished with the
suffocation of the mother, the falling sickness, and other such fearful
scourges. Covetousness, ambition, and the love of the world, make many men so
hide bound with anguish and grief, that it is impossible to cure or comfort
them, when they have most need of help. Soft handed sloth, and idleness,
contrariwise, excessive labors, and violent exercises, and countries that are
too cold, marish and moist, do all give an helping hand to make up an
unseasonable old age. But I have not taken upon me to score up all the
accidents and occasions to further old age. Happy is he, that in his youth
gives not the bridle, to the furious bounding, and rising of his unlawful
desires, and in his general and particular calling amuseth and applies
himself to all laudable exercises, and sincere holy duties, doing all good
offices and service with a frank and free heart to God, and to his neighbors,
and having a care to keep himself temperate and unspotted, from the impure
and rude manners of the world.

CHAP. VI. Of the Climactericall years.
SOmetimes, as men meet together, they fall in talk of the Climactericall
years, especially when occasion is offered to speak of men's ages, and the
days of their death. Pliny, in the seventh book of his History of Nature,
49. Chap. And Censorinus, in his book of Natiuities, do treat of them at
large. These two (namely Censorinus) do observe, that every seventh year,
notable changes have fallen out in some men's lives; and Physicians do hold the
seventh year to be Climactericall and fatal. Those that do calculate men's
Natiuities, do hold that year forty nine, which is compounded of seven times
seven; and the year sixty three, compounded of nine times seven, is more
perilous then any other, and they have showed, that at the periodes and ends
of these years, many worthy and great persons have dyed. Plato, judged the
year eighty one, which is compounded of nine times nine, to be the
Climactericall year, which was most to be feared, which he calls the
square number. Censorinus, does not think the year sixty three so dangerous,
and makes mention of some men, who have dyed at the year of their age eighty
one, as also of others who have lived longer, whereof we have many examples in
our days. The iudiciarie Astrologers, are full of uncertainty and vanity in
their Art and profession; besides, considering the great and infinite deuersity
of humane chances and casualties, of men's constitutions, of the judgments of
God, they are to presumptuous to limit the life of man, to certain periodes
and numbers of days, which they call Climactericall. The members of the body,
have not efficacy or ability of themselves: there is necessarily required a
symmetry and proportion between the agent and the patient, as between the
body and the disease, between the disease and the cure. The number of seven,
is otherwise judged of in the holy Scriptures; then in the College of the
Physicians, who have their critical or judiciary days: And yet there are
learned Physicians who differ in opinion about them, by reason of the diverse
costitutions of men's bodies, of diseases, whereof some are more, some less
violent; of the different airs of countries, according to which men that live
in them are to govern themselves; of the skill of Physicians, wherein some
have better judgment, and better success then others, and other reasons
whereby, at this day is discovered, that there are other days beside the
seventh day, which appear to be critical. The observations of Divines upon
the seventh day, being grounded upon the textes of Moses, are mystical, and
not natural, nor Astrologicall. For according to the observation of Basil, and
S. Augustine, the number of seven, which is very often found in the books of
the holy Prophets and Apostles, sometimes indefinitely, sometimes definitely,
does in his definite sense, whether we take the number of seven days, or
seven years simply, or multiplied, signify compleatnes or perfection, liberty
or rest. The Lord rested the seventh day. The Jews had their feasts which
lasted seven days. In the seventh year the ground was lay and vnploughed, and
bond slaves were set at liberty. The Climactericall years of Iubile,
compounded of seven times seven, were a figure of the perfect rest, which the
Church shall enjoy in heaven, after her so many reuolutions and alterations
upon earth. But that which we have hitherto treated of old age, does teach wise
old men to call to mind their days past, and to think upon the loving mercy
of their Creator, who has so many ways vpholden them; to pray unto him that
the shortness of their days, may cause them to conceive and consider so much
the more his loving patience toward them, and to take occasion thereby to walk
with greater reverence, and fear before his face, and leaning upon the staff
of repentance, done in true faith, to say unto him in all humility: O Lord my
God, let my mouth be filled every day with thy praise and glory; cast me not
off in the time of mine old age, forsake me not when my strength falls me,
for mine enemies have spoken of me, and those that lay wait for my soul, take
counsel together against me, saying, God has forsaken him, pursue and take
him, for their is none to deliver him: O God, go not far from me, O my God,
have thee to help me: Let them be confounded and consumed, that are against
my soul, let them be covered with reproach and shame that seek my hurt. But I
will wait continually, and will praise thee more and more: My mouth does
rehearse daily thy righteousness, and the deliverance thou give to those that
are thine, although I know not the number of them: I will march forward in the
strength of the Lord, who is everlasting; I will make mention of thy
righteousness only. O God, thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto I
have declared thy wondrous works, and yet, O God, even to mine old age, and
gray head forsake me not, until I have declared thine arm unto this
generation, and thy power to all those which shall come hereafter. These are
the words of David, contained in the seventy one Psalm. Moreover, when the
wise old man casts the eye of his thought, upon the long life of the
Patriarchs, he thinks not his condition the worse, though he live not
threescore years, or threescore and ten years; but thanketh the Ancient of
days, who in good time will crown him with the gifts of a better life in his
celestial Palace. He beholds, standing in the middle Court of the heavenly
City; and on both sides of the pleasant river which there runs, the tree of
life, bearing and yielding his fruit every month in the year, whereof he
gathers with the hands of a constant and charitable faith for his souls
health, and marches in the strength of the nourishment thereof, until he
have obtained to the full and perfect fruition of it. As for old age, and the
causes and degrees thereof, he knows well that God holds the Sun-dyall of his
life in his hand, that he is his strength and the length of his days, that all
the years, weeks, and hours of his life are Climacterical: he co^tenteth
himself and rejoices, to march forward under the safe conduct, favor, and
blessing of his Savior: And being near to death, he lifts up his voice,
saying aloud, I know in whom I have believed, and put my trust, and I am
persuaded, that he is able to keep even to the last day, whatsoever I have
given him to lay up for me, and committed to his trust; That he will deliver
me from every evil work, and will be my salvation in his heavenly Kingdom.
To him be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

CHAP. VII. The complaints of the miseries of old age advisedly discussed.
WE are now to speak of the inconveniences and miseries, wherewith old age is
reproched, and of the privileges and advantages old men have and enjoy. Cicero
says. That many men wondered to see Cato so strong and lusty in his old age,
and that he could so easily bear the burden of it, which is esteemed more
heavy then huge high mountains. Not to meddle with the complaints made by
profane Authors, against the miseries of our life, all men agree in this
point, that old age is miserable, being as it were the very sink of all
extreme miseries, where they settle. Horace writes, That old men are
unwilling to touch or handle things, for fear to break them or let them fall.
Aristotle notes in his second book of Politques, Chap. 2. That the people of
Sparta, with whom old age was honorably esteemed, and in great account; held
opinion, that old men were not to continue long in any public office and
charge, because their strength of mind and judgment did decay; Besides, their
sight did fail, which sense of all other is requisite in men that have the
administration of estates, which requires a nimble quick eye, to see into all
occurrences and persons. There is alleged to this purpose, the example of T.
Manlius Torquatus, out of Titus Likins, in the second book of the wars of
Afric. This man being chosen Consul, refused the charge because of his
weakness of sight, saying, It was a shame and dishonor to the General, or
Captain of an Army, to desire to have infinite men's lives and estates committed
to his trust, and not be able to see how to manage them, but by the spectacles
of other men's directions: And although the first Band of Soldiers, which had
given their voices, would not alter what they had done, yet Manlius procuring
another cohort of ancienter Soldiers to sit in counsel about it, was
discharged of his Consulship. The saying of that wise Cynicke Diogenes is
notable, who being demanded what was most miserable in the world, stood still,
and before he stirred his foot, made this answer: And old man that is in great
need and penury. The ancient Romans had a very rude Proverb, to this effect,
That men of threescore years old, were to be cast down headlong, from the top
of a bridge to the bottom, because they were dotardes, and men past labor and
use, and fit for nothing; or because in times past, the young men of Rome (as
Ovid thinks, in scorn) would iustle old men as they met them upon narrow
bridges, that so by drowning them, they might not stand in their way, to cross
and oppose them, or give their advice in their doings and counsels. Some men
think, that if old age be to be borne withal, and had in regard, it is of
such persons as are rich, in great place of honor, and have plenty of all
things in the world, and in great abundance. But if we reckon right, as we
ought, we shall find old age to be charged with many inconveniences and
faults, which are rather to be imputed to our corrupt manners and nature.
Foolish persons, accuse old age of crimes they are guilty of themselves, and
where they should condemn and repress their own peevishness, distrust,
impatience, folly, and avarice, vices wherewith young men, and men of middle
age are tainted and besmeared; they blame old men, saying, Old men look
scowling, and are sullen, suspicious, froward, childish, covetous, and have
forgotten that there is no part of our life, but is blemished with some bad
humor, and with one ill quality or other; as we see roses are not without
thorns, that there is nothing good, but has evil for a checkemate; and the
rich man's revenues are served in with bitter sops and sobs to. But a man that
knows in great patience, to use the traffiques and commodities of this life,
sees great gains to grow by it, and excellent ornaments of virtue; when he
considers that the miseries of this present life, unto the children of God, are
but exercises of patience, humility, charity, temperance, faith, hope.

Commonly diseases in young men, are more painful and dangerous then in old,
and we see by daily experience, that for an old man, there dies ten children
and young men. All the histories of former times do point out unto us, that
ambition, envy, despair, do disquiet and spurgall young men as well as old.
Young men (for the most part) spend their time badly, and it is a rare sight to
see wisdom and youth married together. Young counsels have battered down
the walls of great Monarchies and estates, and laid them level with the
ground, witness that of Rehoboam, and very many great kingdoms and estates
since. It is evident in the history of the Gospel, that Jesus Christ healed
more young then old persons, whereof many instances might be alleged; but the
Centurions servant, the widows son of Naim, the child possessed with the
devil, the daughter of Iairus, and the Canaanitish woman are sufficient
testimonies. Who will dare to deny, but that more young and lusty men do die,
and are slain in the wars then old. The plague interres and lays in the
grave more children, and men of five and twenty, and thirty years old, then
those that be older, and young men are commonly sooner infected then old. Let
us then give over unwisely to object unto old men, and to vpbraide them with
their calamities and miseries, seeing that the youngest men feel more, which
do put them to more pain and torment. Whereas, old men are reproched, that
they have given over Tennys-play, reuellings, dancing, dallying, courting,
leaping, vaulting, and hoyting and gallopping up and down, as the wise
Barzillay says, when he requested King David to give him leave to leave the
court, and to live quietly at home by himself. 2. Sam. 19. So it is, that old
men are distasted and weary of such sports and delights; and on the contrary
are glad, and greatly rejoice, that they are free from the desires and lusts of
young men, which do tyrannize over them, and it is a great joy of heart unto
them, that being altogether unapt to exercise the vanities, and sensual
delights and pleasures of the world, they have the more leisure and vacant time
to employ themselves, to mortify their carnal lusts and affections, and to
meditate upon the life to come. Good God, what a wrong do we do to our
selves, to insert and put into the catalogue and bedroll of our evils and
afflictions, things which do bring health unto us, and are very necessary
documents and instructions unto us? There are no people more miserable, then
those, who foolishly boast, They know not what sorrow and misery means, nor
never had any. The evils of the world are evils, because men think them so,
but indeed and in truth they are not evils. As for example, our bodily
infirmity; men that are truly wise and religious, make a good and profitable
use of it. We will take for our second example, the approach and coming of
death, which the nearer it comes to us, the nearer we shall be to our Port, and
the sooner we shall be within the kennyng and discovery of our true country.
Thirdly, death it self is the end of our life, and the beginning of our
happiness, which all good men wish for. Let us then abandon the company of
those idiots, who when old age is far off from them, wish and desire it, and
when it is come near, and almost at them, revile and condemn it.

CHAP. VIII. Four causes propounded by Cicero of the miseries of old age,
reduced to two; to wit, the miseries of the body, and of the mind.
THere is no day, hour, minute, or moment of our life, which does not put us
in mind that we are mortal, and it is a brutish stupiditie and sencelessenes,
both in young and old men, to promise to themselves to morrow. But why do we
refuse to live according to the conditions agreed upon, when we came into the
world, to wit, to leave life in youth, or in age, when death calls us, and bids
us to take our leave of it? And whence is it, that we bear so impatiently,
that which cannot be shunned, or avoided? What moves us to look for knotts in
Bull-rushes, and to make doubts and difficulties in so plain a case? We do
but peruersly blame and accuse the judge of the world, when we speak of old
age, saying, it is miserable, in regard it makes us unserviceable men, and
unfit to manage and meddle with worldly affairs, enfeebles our bodies, putts
us beside, and bars us almost of all pleasures, being moreover the next
neighbor to death. Cicero in his Dialogue of Old Age puts such like cases,
and answering them, denies that wise old men are idle bodies, and as for those
which make it their recreation and take pleasure to be ignorant, and to sit
still, and do nothing, they are unworthy the worthy name of Old men, and
deserve rather to be called Idolles, and Statues, which artificially are moved
by vises and gynnes. Great and important affairs are not effected by the
strength, nimblenesse, and agilitie of the body, but by counsel, authority,
judgment, and example: And as Salust says in Iugurth, the mind is the guide,
chief Captain, and conductor of men's actions and lives. But seeing that Old
men have always been esteemed to be endued with sound counsel and wisdom,
grounded upon long experience, by reason whereof all those that have eminent
places of charge in the Church, and Commonweal are wont to be called
Senators and Elders. Why shall we think them lither idle persons, who direct
and prescribe unto others, what is to be done, and how, and in what order and
manner things are to be done, and though they sit still themselves, yet the
whole burden of the business lies upon them? Even as we see Pilots of Ships,
who without much troubling themselves, or stirring from their places, sit
quietly at the stern, and holding the Rudder, in despite of boystrous winds
and waves, do cond and carry their Ships laden with men and merchandise safely
to their vnlading port.

And this is the cause why in every well governed Common weal, old men are had
in great reverence and honor, which they justly deserve, and young men
frequent their company, and are conversant with them, to benefit themselves by
their counsels and instructions. On the contrary, wise old men are no gybing
and jesting Buffones, who with their arms a cross take pleasure to trifle out
the time, and to idle it at home in their houses; but they meditate, imagine,
and contriue, and are always doing one good deed or other, teaching good
lessons as they grow old, and growing old as fast as they teach them, not that
they would seem men of knowledge themselves, but that others by reaping the
fruits of their labors, might feelingly perceive that true piety and virtue
are the guides of their actions. Concerning the weakness of their bodies; as
young men content themselves, with a proportiall and competent strength, and
affect not to be so strong as Bulls, Cammells, or Elephants; so old men for
their part are content with that condition, which it pleases God to lay upon
them, and fancy not to be so strong as they were in their youth. It is very
decent and fit, that a man observe and give way to his own nature, attempting
nothing above his own strength, but to do as much as he can and no more.
Therefore Milo of Cretona made himself a ridiculous spectacle, who being
grown old, and beholding his withered arms, wept dolefully, complaining that
they were stark dead. Whereupon Cicero uses these words; Does the virtue and
honor of a man lie in his arms? It is not rather a mature wisdom which
makes him renowned to his dying day? Old age does not by and by so weaken a
man, but that by diverse exercises, wherewith he may invre his body and mind,
and by ordering himself well in his drinking, eating, sleeping, by giving
himself ease, vacancie and rest, and not tyring himself, and spending his
spirits with much labor and study, he may keep himself from bending in the
hammes, and stooping in the showlders, and be still an able and practiced man.
And that this is true, Cicero gives us some examples: Neither the Kings
counsel Table (says he) nor his Court of Common Pleas, nor my Clients for
whom I plead at the bar, nor my friends nor strangers can complain that
they lack me or my help. Zenophon reports, that Cyrus in a Discourse which
he made a little before his death, maintained, that he never felt himself to
have a less able body in his age, then he had when he was young. Cicero
says further, that when he was a child he saw L. Metellus a very aged man so
strong of body, that he cared not to be young. Masinissa king of Numidia could
not be persuaded to go covered with a Hatt on his head, when he was fourscore
and ten years old, but in rain, hayle, frost, and snow, went bare headed.
Appius when he was very old and blind governed a great family; had a spirit,
like a bow, always bent, prepared, and resolved to dare, defye, and wrestle
with old age, in such sort, that he bore all the sway of Command in his house,
and kept all his family in so good awe and order, that he was reverenced of his
children, and beloved of his neighbors. Some do accuse old age in men that it
makes them heavy headed and dull, to have no mirth nor music in them, and to
abandon and cast of all pleasures. But if they account the follies, fond
iollities and gambolles of youth for true pleasures, their accusation is false,
and they speak injuriously of Old age, which procures great good unto us,
blotting out quite, whatsoever is most vicious and bad in young men, to wit,
carnal pleasure, a capital enemies to us all, which headlong plungeth all
those that are vassalls and slaves unto her, into gulfes of eternal perdition,
is the mother of gluttony, drunkenness, whoredom, adultery, of all
dissoluteness, and debauched villainies, and in fine is the cause of the ruins
of Commonweals and families. Old men which are free from the coulp and guilt
of these and the like vices and abominations, have less torture and torment of
mind, and have the more reverence and authority given them, which is the
Crown of their age. The approches of death seem to strike a terror and
astonishment into many old men. But wretched is the man, who all the time of
his life has not learned to make light account of death, which he ought before
hand to envre and frame himself to wish for and expect, seeing death is his
guide and conuoy to heaven, and brings with him a dedimus potestatem to put
him in possession of his everlasting inheritance, which the Son of God has
adjudged unto him, which judgment is entered in despite of Satan, who
continually in this world brings cauelling suites and actions against us to
molest and interrupt us in our just claim thereunto. More occasions and causes
therebe of diseases in young men, by reason they are put to all hard labors,
and iourneyes, whereby for the most part they do untimely end their lives, so
that death does as ordinarily seize upon them, as upon old men. Some do reply
that such young men have a hope to live long, but it is a foolish persuasion, by
reason that they take that which is doubtful for sure and certain, and that
which is false for true. As the time of Autumn succeedes the spring time and
Summer, so there is nothing more natural to old men then to die. The death of
young men resembles a great flaming fire, which is not quenched but with much
water; but old men are like a dry chipp of wood, or a small gloing fire, which
dies and goes out of it self. Why should we mourn and lament for him, who
when he dies finds immortality, and whose practice and study has been from
his tender youth to contemn death, that his soul might be at rest in a place
convenient. This is briefly the substance of that which Cicero in his Dialogue
of old age does handle more at large. Christians have more excellent remedies,
helps, and refuges against the miseries of old age, and the assaults of death,
which hereafter in their order we will declare. That old age has his
particular miseries in regard of the body and mind we are not now to dispute:
It is that which we are next to speak of.

CHAP. IX. A more special Catalogue, or numbering up of some miseries in old
men, in regard of their bodies.
VErily, that man which should take upon him to maintain, that old age is
exempt and privileged from all discommodities and miseries, should reason
against sense, experience, and nature it self, which bears witness against
him. For although the life of man, from the beginning to the end, has no part
of it free from diverse calamities, which it is to resist and conflict, and that
man from his birth seems to be made to live in pain and sorrow: Yet we must
know and acknowledge, that feeble and decrepit old age is incident to many
particular miseries, which are the causes that weak old men are commonly
testie, froward, sad, melancholy; especially those, who are cholerique,
fretfull, and impatient by nature, or are not armed and prepared before hand to
undergo such assaults, and to stoop to the miseries, which the last age of
their life shall lay upon them. It is a well worn saying, That as lees and
dregs do sink down, and lie at the bottom of vessels: so the excrements,
noisome humors, and all the miseries of our life, do settle in old age their
last lodging place. One compares very fitly, the condition of old men to a
little City, half ruinous and decayed, whose walls moulder away, are almost
all broken down, and is altogether unprovided of munition, and victuals, to
fortify and succor it self if need require. For we see in all old men,
their eye sight by little and little to fail them; that they are duller and
deaffer of hearing, their teeth to fall out, their hands and feet to have the
palsy; briefly, this building of clay and spittle, to have many defects and
decays, and daily to waste and impair more and more, expecting a total
ruin. But the more these evils do press and molest us, the more we think
upon, desire, and expect to make an end of our painful pilgrimage, to hit the
mark we aim at, and to be quietly seated in our true dwelling place, and
eternal habitation. Those persons, who from their youth have learned to submit
themselves to the divine providence, and to meditate and reuolue with
themselves a better life, do with greater case sustain and bear all the
miseries of their long age; And the weakness of body in old men, does not
hinder them from doing that which is meet and behoouefull for them to do. But
it is a great reproach and obliquie to old men, if in the eye of good men,
without shame or fear of their great and sovereign Judge, who is to be
feared, they imitate and act the foul enormities and scandalous manners of
some wilful impudent young men. But if, according to the opinion of Seneca,
there is nothing more wretched in the world, then the man who has never had
any misfortune, cross, or affliction: Let us deem him happy, which bears
his afflictions in such sort, that he is confident and assured quickly to
have a release and end of them, to his credit and true contentment. But to
proceed, old men are not without laudable exercises, employments, and
delightful studies and meditations. If their feet be slow of pace; their
minds are quick enough and ready to conceive, and apprehend, as Euripides
says. If young men do know how to use the Stoccado, the Punto reuerso, and
are expert and cunning in their weapon; it is old men do direct them how to
manage a quarrel, and when to fight for their advantage and honor; if
herein we will give credit to Plutarch, wh writes, that it belongs to young
men to bear Arms, and for old men to consult and determine, what is best and
profitable for the good and welfare of the State. Old men then, are the heads
of the politic body, and young men are the arms. As for holy meditations,
wherewith the soul is ravished, and transported above the clouds, they require
not great strength of body; but on the contrary, when the wise Vicillard, or
Old man, cannot without great pain stir hand and foot, and lies bedred, he
comfort and cheeres up himself, with divine meditations sitting to his age;
and while fools and dissolute persons, confound themselves in base shameful
pleasures, he is privately conversant and talking with God, hearkens unto him
inwardly speaking to him, not daring once to look up with his eyes, does
question and expostulate with him; humbly prays and sues to him, preuailes,
and obtaines favor of him, to grant him his humble request and desires. Young
men, that are so forward and bold to provoke old men to anger and displeasure,
feel now and then that old men have strong and forcible resistances, sharp
swords and words to, to daune and dismay the stoutest of them: As in our time
it has chanced to many great and mean persons; who in regard of their age,
weakness of body, being esteemed as dead men, have made young men to tremble
and quake, who erst purposed to pluck their skin over their ears, before
they had been laid in their beds asleep. S. Jerome glanceth at these things,
and touches them by the way, in his letters to S. Augustine. I pray you (says
he) do not challenge and dare one that has been an old beaten Soldier both
by sea and land, to single combat and to hand blows with you, who are but a
young nouice, and fresh water Soldier: remember Dares, and Entellus in Virgil,
etc. Cicero writes that Agamemnon, the chief General of the Grecian Army,
was wont to wish for ten Nestors, that is, eloquent and wise counselors,
and not for ten Aiaxes, or stout Captains, and bold daring warriors. Valerius
Maximus, in his eight book, chap. 1. makes mention of certain old men, who
being deeply strooken in years, would not give over to do service for their
Country, and to the State, and had good success in their enterprises: Among
others, he names Marcus Valerius Coruinus, who lived a hundred years, and
was six times Consul: Also Metellus, who being a very aged man, was
notwithstanding chosen chief Pontifex, and worthily discharged the place:
Lastly, Appius, surnamed the blind; who in his decrepit old age, caused his
Litter to be made ready, wherein he was carried to the Senate house, where he
gave his negative voice, and crossed the treaty of a dishonorable peace with
Pyrrhus, that it went not forward.

Some do object, that old age is to be feared, because it bleares men's eyes,
or puts them out quite. But will you reproach Appius, that he was blind, who
gave eyes to his weak sighted country, to see what was honorable and
behoouefull for it? I solemnly affirm, that loss of sight is a discommodity,
which does diversely sometimes blast and smite young men from their cradle,
either thorough some defect in nature, or by accident. Some see best a far
off, others nearer hand: some cannot endure to look upon the Sun, others are
so weak sighted, that the light of the day does offend their eyes, some are
borne stark blind, and some purblinde. Howsoever this may be, yet old men
are not without the comfort, which blind Asclepiades had; who pleasantly said,
That he had this benefit by his blindness, that before he went all alone by
himself; but since he was blind, he went not abroad any whether, but he
had the company of him that did lead him. The solace and comfort of a wise old
man, who is become stark blind or sees but very little, is that he has no
more the ill hap to see so many dissolute, lascivious, arrogant, impudent,
mad-braine-sicke, and lewd persons, with whom the earth is ouerspread. He can
make the same answer, which a good Father made to Julian the Apostata, who to
mock and scoff so much the more at Christians, reproched and hit him in the
teeth with his imperfection of sight; I praise God, said the good Father, that
he has given me the grace not to see so wicked a man as thou art. Let us add
that which the good Anthony, heretofore living a Hermites life, not far from
Egypt, said to Didymus the blind man of Alexandria, a very pious and
religious person, and of singular learning, as Sozomene reports in his third
book, chap. 14. Thou ought not, friend Didymus, to hold it grievous or
molestfull to have lost thy sight, which myce, lynxes, and other brute beasts
have very piercing and quick, but rather to be glad, and to judge thy
condition happy, that thou have eyes like the eyes of the holy Angels, by
whose help thou beholdest the Lord, and do perfectly see and discern the
causes of his works. But what auayles it to have eyes in our head, if our
understanding be sensual and brutish, if it be clouded with the darkness
of ignorance: Briefly, if in question and discourse of good things, we be
beetle-blinde, and see no more then a mole? How great cause have we then to
beg of the Lord with David, 119. Psalm, To open our eyes that we may be
able to behold, the wonderful mysteries of heavenly knowledge? The soul (as
Basil said in his first book against Eunomius) is glad, and rejoices, which
inquiring into things that be divine, has so good eye sight, that she can
penetrate and pry into things that are not to be perceived by sense, and can
contemplatiuely behold the Lord, with whom she shall dwell for ever.

Some find fault with and complain of their memory, the infirmity whereof
Seneca the Orator, in the first book of his controversies, does number among
the principal hazards of old age, and says, it does first fail and decay:
that in times past he had a very pregnant, ready, and great memory, but long
age had brought him to this pass, that he durst not rely or presume upon his
memory, in any thing he should engage himself to do, or to promise. Pliny in
his seventh book, 14. chapter, says, That the memory is one of the principal
house employments, and vtensiles of our life; and that Simonides did profess
to know the art thereof, but withal, that nothing is more frail and brittle
in man, then memory; which by sundry diseases and mischeeuous accidents, is
impaired and made weak, so that by a small accident, some have forgotten the
names of their nearest allies, some the names of their servants, and some their
own names, as Messala Coruinus did.

But Cicero maintains, that forgetfulness is not a vice of old age; but rather
of a dull, sluggish, heavy age, which had need to be stirred and spurred to
imitate the scholars of Pythagoras, whose manner was every night to repeat all
they had learned, said, and done the whole day. We do not readily forget that
which runs most in our mind, and which we do most effect: As old men do
precisely remember all their several debtors, and their manner of dealing, and
all the coffers, cabinets, odd holes and corners, where they have laid up and
hid their jewels and gold: They carry an exact inuentory of them in their heads.

It is good oftentimes to put many things out of our mind, and to forget them,
that so we may remember our Creator and Redeemer, and whosoever remembers
him, may say; He has forgotten nothing: Who, because we are of our own
nature subject to tread under our feet the memory of good things, has
instituted that in memory of him, we should often communicate in the holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Me thinks, that it were expedient here, by all ways and means, to remember
the providence of our all good and merciful Father in heaven; who foreseeing,
that the last age of our life should be obnoxious, and subject to many evils
and infirmities, has given us many remedies for our ease and comfort, which
are to be found in the books of learned Physicians; whereof it is not
convenient for us to make a scrowle or catalogue in this Section; because we
present not a book of receites for the body, but of instructions necessary and
fit for every wise old man. Only we will say, that the Creator has been
bountiful in giving infinite means to those, who delight not in shameful and
exorbitant luxuries and riots, to maintain themselves in a competent strength
of body, until they be threescore and ten years old: Yea their old age, even
as a tree,
With goodly fruits shall loaded be:
Whose branches steept in summers dew,
Shall goelie be, and green of hew.
Which being seen to every eye,
Aloud to all does testify,
Gods goodness and integrity.
Who is my strength and my defense,
And keeps me by his providence:
That I do live without offense.


It is impossible in mine own opinion, that so great ingratitude should enter
into the mind, or soul of a wise old man, to forget the innumerable
blessings, which God in favor has enlarged unto him, and to complain more of
the evils which he does justly suffer. Justly then did Cicero tax and blame
Cecilius, who maintained that among other the miseries of old age, this was
one, that living long, we see many things which do discontent and displease
us. For we see also other things, which do give us all contentation,
pleasure, and delight, whereof we are altogether unworthy, if God would
strictly examine our life. But Cecilius adds further, that it is a misery and
a death to be contemned, and to be a burden to others, as it happens to
those old men, who for many years lie bedred of the gout, and are a trouble to
themselves, and to all their servants and family, by reason their weak
decrepit old age has made them unable to help themselves, or to do any
thing, but lie still expecting to be laid in their grave. I say, that these are
offenses and discommodities, which proceed from the frowardness or ingratitude
of our servants, and those of our house, or we our selves are the cause of
them, having lived so wretchedly and untowardly that we have not gained the
love of any: or our own follies have made us to be had in contempt of every
one, or we do receive the reward of our own arrogant and insolent behavior,
toward our ancestors, fathers, mothers, masters, schoolmasters, and tutors,
whereby it comes to pass, thorough the just judgment of the Almighty, that
our children, servants, or those of our family do render the like unto us. Not
to harp upon this string: if old men be odious, despised, and scorned, it is
of graceless villains, for whom the gallows groans, who never thinking on
the frailty of man, and that they themselves are as subject to the vncough and
strange accidents, which in this life do blast great and mean persons, do as
proudly disdain and vilify the honor of old age, as they do the maistie of
God, which they blaspheme, revile, and rend and tear it asunder. How should
such desperate wretched persons regard old men, when they show themselves so
refractary and intractable, at the good admonitions and reproves of every man
that gravely tells them of their follies and faults to have them abhor and
detest them? Reverend old men are worthy of commiseration, and to be supported
in their infirmities, to be honored in their age, and the wiser sort of
persons do so esteem and regard them; yea, even those old men, against whom
information is given, and complaint is made that they are Dotardes, whose
number for the most part is but small. Howsoever their case be, these Dotardes,
these twice children, these that are become childish again, do leave among
good men an honorable memory of themselves, and have no less at their
service their holy Angels, beholding the face of their Father, and watching
over them, then heretofore those little children had of whom Jesus Christ
speaks in the 18. Chapter of S. Matthew. This is spoken of wise old men; as
for those men who having not enough glutted themselves with the slipps and
peccadills of their youth, with the sins of their middle and manly age, do
fill up the measure of their iniquities with the vices of a shameless old age,
killing their bodies by foul excesses and surfeits of gluttony, drunkenness,
whoredoms, adultries, by madd bickerings and sudden quarrels, rising of
choler and anger, by unlawful practiques, and unjust dealings, proceeding of
covetousness, and by niggard-shipp, and extreme parsimony on the one side; by
prodigalities, profuse and inordinate expenses, to satiate their accursed
lusts and appetites on the other side: These men build themselves most noisome
and nastie prisons, where they are to be seen now and then to languish long,
and pyne under the uneasy yoke, and in the stocks of sharp diseases, which
do torment and torture them in the sight of all the world, without any pity
or ease, until the first death deliver them over to the second death, to be
for ever tormented in hell fire, if in time they do not reform and reclaim
themselves, and forsake their wicked ways, to dedicate their souls, their
bodies, and goods to glorify God according to his holy will. The best and
choycest antidote, which we can prescribe to old men against the miseries which
suddenly seize on them in their old age, is that before hand they subdue
themselves, get the vpper-hand and master those passions, which do tyrannize
and cruelly Lord it over Atheists and profane persons, that they cheerfully
undergo and endure the miseries which do assail their bodies, that they
live with an upright and pure conscience before God and men; that they always
have their soul lifted up, and ravished at the saying of the Apostle, that
their habitation, or right and privilege of Citizens is not in this world
(for here we are strangers, and wayfaring men) but it is in heaven; that they
may be strong in the Lord, in whom we are able to over come all things,
according as it pleases him to fortify and strengthen us, even to overcome
Satan, the world, our own concupiscence, and sensuality; finally, as the
Prophet speaks in an excellent Allegory, in the nintie-one Psalm; On Lions
fell, and Lions whelps, and Vipers full of gall,
And on fierce Dragons they do tread, and have no harm at all.


They always remember that worthy saying of Solomon (which he himself forgot
in his distress, and when it behooued him more carefully to think on it) to
wit, that he that is slow to anger, is better then a mighty man, and he which
maistereth his own affections is to be preferred before him that wins a
City. Pro. 16. 32. But it behooves us, to treat a little more at large of
the chiefest passions of the mind in old men, to the end that the wiser sort
may bend all their forces so much the more against them, and may earnestly
endeavor to consecrate the rest of their days to the glory of their
sovereign, who is called the ancient of days. ()

CHAP. X. The miseries of old men in regard of their minds.
A Poet in times past, called Old age the seasoning, and as it were, the sauce
of wisdom. And some have thought that the word Seigneur is derived from
Senior, which signifies, an Elder, or Ancient: As if authority, honor,
respect, or reverence did appertain to none but those that were ancient,
being indeed unfit attributes for young men, whom if we reverence, or regard,
it is for their ripeness of wit, and capacities, and in regard they do wisely
discharge and perform the service, business, and matters committed unto them.
In the laws of Pepin, in the fifth Book of the Laws made concerning free men,
and the ninth title, there is read to this purpose of our Senior, which
signifies Seigneur, this constitution under these terms: Nullus comparet
caballum, bouem, iumentum, vel aliam rem, nisi illum hominem cognoscat qui eum
vendiderit, aut de quo pago est, vel vbi manet, et quis est eius senior, that
is, that no man buy a horse, ox, nor laboring, or sacrificing beast, nor any
other thing, unless he know the seller, or of what village he is, or in what
place he dwells, and who is his Lord and master. But this is spoken by the
way. To proceed, It is very apparent that the heat of passions in youth
beginning to cool and smoother out in old men, many vices are extinguished and
mortified in them, by the help and assistance of long experience, which makes
them wise and advised. Notwithstanding which, we yet do confess, that they
have great imperfections, and that their own folly does often enough beat
them, and make them to smart; the corrupt nature of Adam in his posterity
being not to be quite abolished but by death, is abolished in some less, and
in others more during this pilgrimage, according as it has pleased God to
permit some sooner then others to be better taught, trained up and invred to
bow, and more willingly to stoop under the yoke of the Lord, as Jeremy
speaks in his third Chapter, and 27. Verse. There are found very worthy old
men, who in their very old age, by the direction of the holy spirit, and a
right trayning up, do muster in troops, and show like victorious Captains
and Leaders of armies: For having discomfitted and broken the ranks, and
squadrons of diverse corrupt affections, which were their pernicious enemies,
they advance and carry them as excellent Trophies of victory, and with hearts
lifted up behold the heavens, and the reward of their calling above, being able
truly to say with the Apostle 2. Cor. 12. 10. when I am weak then am I strong.

To come again to our point in hand, old age has his imperfections, and there
be old men, who are cumbred and tortured with particular passions, and diverse
diseases, and pestes of the mind, commonly called the evils of guilt of sin,
and the evils of punishment of sin. The punishments of sin are torments and
vexations of mind, griefs, passions, fears, and other miseries, which at
first, being inflicted for the punishment of sin, do also sometimes afflict
the children of God, according as it has pleased the Lord to exercise them,
and often according as the humor of choler or melancholy does abound, and is
predominant in some more then in others. Physicians long since confirmed by
long experience grounded upon the rules of science, and a right knowledge of
causes, have discovered these evils, and diverse remedies for them, in such
sort, that it cannot be denied, but that the study of true Philosophy, the
continual combat and conflict of a good mind against the defects and
frailties of his own inordinate, and ouer-boyling passions, a settled form and
order of life, fervent prayers to God to repress these evils, and to weed out
this evil nature, are of great use unto those men, who do make use of such
helps and remedies.

We call the evils of guilt of sin, the vices of the mind, which solicit us
to lust after, and to do things repugnant to the law and will of God, and to
the office and duty of a good man. It must be confessed that old men, who have
not been well instructed and trained up from their infancy, or be of a harsh,
stubborn, crafty, slie-subtile nature, and disposition, are not without
diverse gross and enormous sins: Yea, so it is (but to the utter confusion
and ouer-throw of themselves, and their families) that they growing still older
and older, such sins are not mortified in them, but on the contrary, the
older they grow, the more do malice, brasen-faced impudency, wickedness and
villainy take deep root in them. Whence do proceed these nipping Proverbs,
and by-words, old fornicator, old gyber, old babbler, thankelesse old man, old
drunkard, and more old drunkards then old Physicians: Forms and parts of
speech, by which the imperfections of mad, doting old men are bewrayed and
discovered, and wise old men are so much the more put in mind, how they ought
to bear, and behave themselves in the sight of God, of his Church, of their
own servants and families, of their friends which wish them well, and of their
enemies which wish them ill, seeking to discredit, disgrace, and defame them.
It is lamentable to see some old men to idle out the time in potting, tippling,
and swilling in drink; others to seek after meats and provocatiue drugs, to
inflame and stir up their beastly lusts, not regarding the commandment of
the Apostle, in the second Chapter of his Epistle to Titus, second verse, where
he wills ancient men to be sober, grave, discreet, and advised. Such
persons do yet less remember that which the Author of Ecclesiasticus says
Chapter 25. verse. 3. 4. There are three sorts of men whom my heart hates, and
whose life I abhor: A poor man that is proud a rich man that is a liar, and
an old adulterer, which doteth, or is without understanding. A wise man said,
that is an imputation to an old man to speak of unchaste courting, and
dalliance, much more to be devoted to it: yea, when it were fit to make him a
comely withdrawing room far from the canopies of the world, and the unclean
spirit, then to wallow and bemyre himself in the perilous pleasures of the
world, is to neglect and despise the wise admonitions of Salomons mother, and
little to consider the evils which happened to that wise Prince, for not having
considered it well, when she left him this worthy instruction, Give not thy
strength to women. Pro. 31. 3. Our wise Vieillard will remember, that if true
wisdom lodge in his heart, and the knowledge of truth delights his soul,
she will deliver him from the strange woman, which smootheth her words, which
forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her God. For
her house leans unto death, and her paths lead unto the dead. Not one of
them which go unto her do return again, neither take they hold of the ways
of life, Pro. 2. v. 10. 16. 17. etc. Keep thy way far from her, and come not
near the door of her house, least thou give thine honor unto others, and thy
years to the cruel: least the stranger be filled with thy strength, and thy
labors be in the house of a stranger, Pro. 5. v. 8. etc. Solomon having in the
same place propounded notable things to this purpose, even as a wise Father,
who with tears trickling a pace down his cheeks, would admonish his lewd
stubborn son, adds, why should thou my son be transported with the
love of a strange woman, or embrace the bosom of a stranger? seeing the ways
of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his paths. The
same wise Solomon further says, in the sixth Chapter; The woman which lusts,
hunteth after the precious life of a man. Can a man put fire into his bosom,
and his clothes not be burnt? shall a man go upon hot coals, and his feet
not be burnt? so he that goes into his neighbors wife, shall not be innocent
whosoever touches her: Also he that commits adultery with a woman is
destitute of understanding, he that does it destroys his own soul. In the
chapter following, he describes a shameless and impudent woman, who by her
crafts, and subtle devices brings those to destruction, who for want of
understanding suffer themselves to be seduced by her enticing words, comparing
such idiots to Beasts that are led to the slaughter house, to fools that are
laid and chayned up in Prison to be corrected; to Birds which willingly fall
into pit-falles, and snares. Let our wise Vieillard remember that the author of
all holiness has expressly condemned whoredom and adultery, not only in
the act, but also in the affection. In stead of beholding with an evil eye
those women, whose company he ought to shun and avoid, let him read, or cause
to be read unto him the places of holy Scripture, which we go about to quoate
unto him, and which are the parts and points of the indictment according to
which God will judge whore-mongers, and adulterers, Heb. 13. 4. The places are
these, Genesis 26. 3. Behold thou art dead because of the Woman which thou have
taken; she was only taken, and not defiled. Genesis 26. 10. Abimelech said to
Isaac, who somewhat unadvisedly behaved himself in the behalf of his wife
Rebecca; it was a narrow hazard that none of the people lay not with thy wife,
and that thou have not been the cause to have the sin laid unto us. Exodus 20.
14. Thou shall not commit adultery. Leuit. 18. 20. Thou shall not lie with thy
neighbors wife, defiling thy self with her. Leuit. 20. 10. Adulterers are
condemned to death. Deuteronomy. 22. 24. He that polluteth, and defyleth a betrothed
virgin is condemned to death with her if she has consented to it. Deuteronomy. 23.
17. There shall not be a whore among the daughters of Israel, not a
whore-keeper among the sons of Israel. Our Lord Jesus condemns him of
adultery in the heart, which looks upon a woman to lust after her. Saint
Paul propounds diverse arguments against whore-mongers and adulterers, Romans
13. 13. and 1 Cor. 6. 15. 16. 18. and the 10. 8. and the 2 Cor. 12. 22. Galat.
5. 19. Ephesians. 5. 3. Coloss. 3. 5. and the 2 These. 4. 3. etc. Heb. 13. 4. Which
our wise Vieillard will examine, then he will join thereunto the
considerations of the terrible punishments of families defiled with such
sins, the fearful judgments pronounced against senseless and obdurate
consciences, the lamentable changes and alterations in the family of David and
Solomon, and of many others since, the strong and invincible arguments of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. Chapter, to this effect briefly, that whore-mongers and
adulterers are shutt out of the kingdom of God. Therefore that we may have a
part in the inheritance of the Saints, who are sanctified and justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of God, we must remember first, that
our bodies are not for whoredom, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.
Secondly, that seeing our bodies shall rise again, not to ignominy and
pollution, but to glory and holiness, it is reason we should keep them pure and
unpolluted, for so are they members of Christ, and consequently, it should be
horrible sacrilege to make them members of a Harlot. Thirdly, that being
members united unto the Lord, and made one spirit with him, it is not meet in
no sort, to join them to a Harlot, with whom we are made one body. Fourthly,
that whoredom ought to be detested above all other sins: for whatsoever
sin a man commits, it is without the body, but he which commits
adultery sins against his own body. Fifthly, that our bodies are temples
of the holy Ghost, which is in us, which we have of God. Sixthly, that we are
not our own men to live as we list, for we have bin bought and redeemed by a
price, to wit, by the precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb without spot, and
without blemish, as S. Peter speaks of him. Of these strong and forcible
reasons, S. Paul frames a holy exhortation to all men, especially to old wise
men, whom it most concerns, who before all others are bound to think and be
mindful of it: Glorify then God in your body, and in your soul, which belong
unto God. Let us conclude this short discourse, with the definitue sentence of
Christ, propounded by S. John, in the last Chapter to the Revelation, in these
words; Blessed are those which do his commandments, that they may have their
right in the true tree of life, and may enter in thorough the gates into the
city: But dogs, enchanters, whoormongers, etc. shall be without. Here we do
put wise old men in mind of the holy exercise of prayer, and particularly we
recommend unto them the serious and continual meditation of the one and
fiftieth Psalm.

All that has been spoken against the above mentioned sins, is
extraordinary and unusual, and it is a thing monstrous to see old men addicted
unto them, or if such old men are to be found, at last diseases, and old
decrepit age, or some particular vengeances of God do come to quench and put
out such fires of hell. But there are sins, which do not grow old, nor dye
in old age, but commonly grow young, and revive again. These sins among
others, are covetousness, anger, or choler, distrust, or impatience. Cicero
thinks, that such sins proceed rather from men's manners, then of old age;
because other ages of man's life have their part in them, as Jeremy said of the
people of his times; That from the inferior to the superior, from the lowest
to the highest, every man was given to fordid and dishonest lucre and gain.
That old men appear to be more subject to such evils, then young men, it
seems to proceed of their weakness, and of diseases which do incessantly
harrie and molest them, so that feeling their strength to fail, fear inuades
them, and pynions the^ up in such sort that (as one says) they are more afraid
then ever they were before, that the earth slides from under their feet, are
suspicious, distrustful, and do mutter at, and find fault with every thing
that is spoken or done. Cicero excuses these frailties and imperfections, with
this; That they imagine they are despised, not regarded, mocked and scoft at;
And that they do fitly resemble sick persons, who are quite out of taste with
every thing, and nothing can be made or done to please or like them: But all
these froward humors, are calmed and tempered by the knowledge of learning and
exercises of virtue. Moreover, Cicero wondereth very much to see an old man
covetous, for that it is a strange folly to load himself with much luggage,
and to massacre and torture his mind with making provision of victuals, when
he is near his iourneyes end, and almost at home. Do you not see (said Saint
Augustine, in his 246. Sermon, De Tempore) that covetousness is so much the
more furiously kindled, and flames out in frozen old men, when it is time for
them to leave and resign up all, and when they cannot keep any longer that
which they have gotten and scraped together? O strange folly! the nearer she
is to her home, the more hasty and instant she is to lay on heavier loades then
she is able to bear. All this is well spoken by these worthy persons. In all
other things, except in covetousness, time does discover unto us more plainly
what is to be done, and how we may handle and feel the pulse beat. But if we
question old men of the cause of this boiling desire, and Cupid of theirs, they
answer in excuse, That it proceeds not of covetousness, but of parsimony and
thrift, and allege four special reasons or motives. First, that their
strength failing them, they are past getting and gathering, and it behooues to
seek and forecast for help and stays, and to provide pillowes and propps,
whereupon to lay their old bones, and to rest their weak crazie age. Secondly,
that their aim, scope, and drift is, by the luster of their wealthy
possessions and riches, to keep themselves in honor, estimation, and credit
with those, who disdain old age that is spurr-gald with poverty. Thirdly, that
being not able to recreate themselves, and to walk and ride abroad from this
place to that, their pleasure and delight is to be cashiers at home, to look
upon their money bags, and to reckon what store of crowns they have in
Bank. Fourthly, that so they may in better sort provide for their children,
and be bountiful and do good to the poor. These excuses are but pretenses,
and the Apostle does in few words answer them, in the thirteenth Chapter of
his Epistle to the Hebrews, saying; Let your conversation be far from
covetousness, and be content with that which you have, for God has said; I
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, The Lord is
my helper, wherefore I will not fear what man can do unto me. Saint Basil in
his Homilies, or Sermons against covetous persons, does confute their several
allegations, whereof we will here draw out a few lines unto you. If, says he,
old age does put you to pain, why do you make it more painful and tedious
to you, by treading mortar, and tempering clay to make brickes, as heretofore
the children of Israel did in the time of their bondage in Egypt? If your
strength fail you, ought your charity therefore to fail? If you so much love
and affect life, will you therefore prefer the goods of the world before the
Author of life? will you therefore despise and not regard the true life? Do
you desire to be had in honor and estimation? Do you fear to be contemned
and despised? practice that which the Prophet speaks in the 112. Psalm; and
that which the Apostle rehearses in the second Epistle to the Corinthians,
Chap. 9. A good man is charitable and lends: The just shall be had in
everlasting remembrance: He distributeth and gives to the poor and needy:
His righteousness remains for ever: His might, or horn shall be exalted in
glory. Do you desire gain or profit: Hark what the Apostle says to the
Galathians, Chap. 6. 9. 10. Let us not be weary of well doing, for in due
season we shall reap if we faint not: The time to do good is in this world,
but men cannot find it.
Wherefore, while we have time let us do good to all men, but especially to
the household of faith. What myching covetousness is it, not to be willing to
part with somewhat of that which we have, and to let others have a feeling
thereof, until we be dead, to wit, when we have nothing to do with it our
selves? Will you then have men to wish your death, or as they kill fat hogs
to practice and procure it, that every one afterward may have a piece and a
part? Though you have the gout in your feet, it may not be in your hands, as it
is, when after the example of the accursed rich man, you will give nothing to
poor begging Lazarus. What a shame is it to young men, and much more to old
men, to waste, and so badly spend and lay out so much money in banquets,
reuellings, maskes; yea, in many lusts and shameful pleasures, and to show
themselves so pinching and niggardly in necessary beneuolences, tending so many
ways to their honor, credit, and profit? What wrong does a rich old man to
himself, to love rather to have his table charged withsuperflous dishes of
meat, to have a great retinue and number of lewd servants, to take pleasure to
be cloyed with buffones, impostors, scorners of all religion, then to show
himself religious indeed? What a woeful case is it, to give less in a whole
year to a great number of poor Christians, then to some one detestable
rake-hell, who has ten times deserved to have justice executed upon him, to
be nailed to the pillory, or to be put in a sack and castinto the sea?
Undoubtedly covetousness, especially in old men, knows no mean in sparing or
spending. Sometimes she is all for belly cheer and banquettings, and as we
say, throws the house out at the windows, then she is niggardly and pinching
again, and like unto Rhodomache, a wild beast in Polonia, which forrages up
and down seeking pasture to fill her self, and afterward seeks to disgorge
and empty her panch, to cramme it quickly again fuller then before. It is a
pleasing and favored excuse among men (says Basil) to allege that they spare
for their children. But have you begged children of God, that having them, you
might forget God himself, and your neighbors. How many persons by their
riches have wasted themselves in pleasures, to the wrack and ruin of their
bodies and souls, to whom it had been much better to have still been poor?
What auayles it a man to gain the whole world, and to lose his soul? to
abound in perishing riches, and not to have one myte of faith, charity,
repentance, humility, truth, and steadfast hope? And what of all this? you
deserve then a double punishment; both because you have doated, and been
enamoured of this yellow and white oar and earth; as also because your
rauennous niggardship, and base pinching on the one side, and your monstrous
and beastly prodigality and lauishing out on the other side have bin the
isntrumental cause of the dissolution, perdition, and ruin of your
successors, and children. You think sometimes, if you give order that they be
well instructed in the fear of the Lord, your Sovereign, and theirs, that
they shall lack nothing: If they be wicked, the more you shall leave them, the
worse they will do. O sot! thou flyest poverty, which indeed has want of some
things, and forgettest that the covetous person wants all things: O mad fool
(said Jesus Christ, speaking of the rich worldling, Luke 12. 20.) this night
they will take thy soul from thee, and whose shall these things be, which thou
have provided, etc. And I ask of you rich old men, and not very wise, who have
devoured so many families to increase wicked riches for your children, whose
shall you be, and what will become of you, when you must be dislodged and
turned out of the world? redeem your sins by just dealing, and your
iniquities by your beneficence and good deeds to the poor: this shall prolong
the prosperity and welfare of your successors and posterity, which you so much
desire. And this counsel heretofore wise Daniel gave to the King of Babylon,
Dan. 4. 27. Let us say further with a worldly wise man, That he is rich, who is
content with his poverty; on the contrary, he is poor, which coueteth more to
that which he has, not he which has little. For what auailes it, how much
money a rich man has in his Coffer, or mowes of corn in his barn, or heardes
and flocks of cattle in his pastures, or crowns at interest, if he cast an
envious eye upon that which another man possesses, if he reckon not upon the
goods he has, but upon those he would have? Will you know what is the measure
of riches? The first is, to have that which is needful; the second is, to have
as much as is enough or to suffice. There is nothing then better or safer, nor
whereof our wise Vieillard ought more to take heed, then not to suffer himself
to be bewitched and intoxicated with the poison of covetousness, which it
behooves betimes to root out of our hearts, for if it take root there, every
eye shall see it bring forth leaves and fruits of all sorts of sin;
according as the Apostle teaches in the last Chapter, of his first Epistle to
Timothy. For conclusion of this point, we exhort the wise Vieillard to remember
to imitate the prayers of David, in the 119 Psalm, and to say with that great
Prophet; Incline mine heart to thy testimonies, not to covetousness. O Lord, I
have thirsted after thy salvation, and thy word is my delight, I love the
doctrine of thy mouth, better then thousands of gold and silver. We further
present unto him the prayer which follows, to the end he may want nothing
which appertains to his duty, or which he might require of us. O Lord God
Almighty, which have given me the use, and lent me the commodities of this
present life; I am greatly displeased with the too greedy affection which I
bear to transitory riches. Behold, this is the worst evil of my over thirsty
and over greedy mind, which no reason can allay, no measure limit; for the more
I possess, the less I cease to covet, the more I lose the possession of my
self. The greater my heaps be, the lesser I find them. My carking and caring
is beyond measure, to increase my revenues, and to heap up goods and
possessions, and still my covetousness makes the heap small. Gaping after
that which I hope, I let that which I hold in my hand fall to the ground. All
that I do, is a very dropsy of the mind. In hunting after plenty, I have
found scarcity and want, and imagining transitory things to be very profitable,
I find my self entangled in the toil of miseries, out of which I cannot get.
They are precious chains and manacles I confess, but they bind me as fast,
as if they were of iron. They are chains which make me forget thy holy
majesty, to neglect my salvation, for which I ought diligently to watch and
labor: O my God, tame and suppress this unruly, wild, and over greedy
affection, making abstinence and continence to spring up in stead thereof. Ease
the heart in my breast, which pants and gapeth for breath. Change this den
of rapine and robbery, into a quiet lodge and harbor of holiness. Wash, and
wash again these gross corruptions, and give me the bright shining beams of
charity. Fill and damme up the bottomless pit of my heart, with the love of
thy grace, that the transitory goods of this world may not be able to fill it
up again. Inflame my thought with the sole desire to behold the beauty of thy
face, and turn it away far from the greedy desire of having and possessing
much earth. Grant unto me, I beseech thee, that I may frame my self to a
voluntary poverty; which being accompanied, with a mild, right, lowly, and
true contentation, may continually rule and bear sway in me in such sort,
that resting my self content with a little, I may employ all the hours of my
life in thy service: that without ceasing I may meditate and think upon thy
blessings, and the benefits, whereof thou have given me so large a portion. Be
it far from me to wish to lay up heaps of silver and gold and transitory
goods, and if I be frugall and sparing to lay up any, that I may do it with
this mind, not to lay them out wickedly in vanities and dissolute riotings,
but to relieve the need of my brethren thy children. Can I find any of my
goods, wherewith I may do good unto all men, especially to the household of
faith, let these be my vacancies and exercises. From thence let flow the
contempt and refusal of all things which do not guide me to thee, and to
hate those things which lead me out of the way from thee. Grant unto my soul,
so much tossed up and down in the haven of thy mercy, to land at her Port,
that floting no longer upon the perilous waves of so many foolish and noisome
lusts, she may rest in the love which thou have testified unto me in my
Savior, Amen.

I come now to speak of anger and choler, which commonly keep possession in
old men, by reason that they still feel sharp goades in their minds, and
grievous wounds in their bodies, either for that their children misgouerne
themselves, or their wives behave themselves usurpingly, or considering the
common state of things, the ordinary burden of their song is, that all the
world is naught, because their manner is always highly to commend the times
past, and ever to bode and presage that the times to come will be worse and
worse. Besides, old men are suspicious, distrustful, and hard of belief,
because (as Aristotle says) having lived long, many men have deceived or dealt
craftily with them, or they have deceived and dealt craftily with others. They
are not easily reconciled, for they cannot endure to be advised or directed,
although (as St Ambrose says) there is no age too old to learn, and that
those old men, which are incorrigible, and will not be reformed, have more
cause to be ashamed, and to lament, then to smooth up themselves that they do
well, and laugh in their sleeves at those which would gravely put them in mind
of their duty. But the principal endeavor of our wise Vieillard shall be to
overcome himself, especially in respect of anger, or choler, a cruel and
outrageous passion, which Horace the Poet fitly surnameth a short madness. He
shall easily get the victory of it, if presently upon the first motions and
assaults he repress and repulse it, before he be invaded, transported,
wounded, poisoned with it. To alter nature is a very hard thing:
notwithstanding many things in nature may be corrected and tempered by taking a
little heed thereunto; Especially choler may be repressed by abstaining to
drink too much strong wine, and to feed upon meats and sauces too much
spiced, by refraining the company of scoffers, quarrell-some, mutinous, and
mad-braine-sicke persons, by frequenting the company of good men, by framing
the mind to meditate upon the sufferings, patience, humility, sovereign
charity of Jesus Christ, by the reading also in good books, the many worthy
examples of the meekness and patience of infinite persons set forth unto us.
Now as green things do help the sight, and as there be some coullors which
do less offend the eyes then others: so there be pleasant studies and
delightful exercises and employments, which drive away dullness of spirit,
and melancholy of mind. And because choler is stirred up in us upon an
opinion of wrong done unto us, let us weed out of our hearts all suspicions,
let us stop our ears against rumors and tales, and let us consider in our
selves, that oftentimes it has been better to wink at, and pass by an
injury then to revenge it, seeing that it is a woeful and impious act to be
cruel to our selves, which falls out, when choler does disturb, and put the
mind and body out of all good tune, frame, and temper: so that (to speak
truly) there is none to whom we do so great injury as we do to our selves.
Undoubtedly, the wrath or anger of man does not accomplish the righteousness
of God, that is, can do nothing that is pleasing and acceptable to God, as
says S. James in his first Chapter.

The proper effect of magnanimity and greatness of courage, is to bridle and
suppress choler and anger, and there is nothing so commendable in an
honorable Peer and great person, nor worthy his fame and reputation, as
clemency and mercy. For although severity must be used in punishing
offenses, yet is it meet to curb and suppress anger, which always leapes
beyond the bounds of mediocritie, and drives us into the toil of odious and
idle fuminges and chaffings. If we be provoked to anger, let us according to
the precept of the Apostle, be angry and sin not, which we shall do, if we
be angry with our selves, and detest our own frailties and vices. But so long
as we are conversant with men, let us carry our selves friendly and lovingly,
and courageously overcome the miseries, which are of a short continuance, by
reason that while we are taking a suruay of our selves, stirring to and fro,
here and there, turning us about, and looking how feate and handsome we be,
death following with everlasting life will seize and lay hold on us. But if
malice and privy hatred do creep into our hearts, it is expedient to seek a
speedy reconciliation, for when we see the mind of man (if in this point we
believe Valerius Maximus) to abandon hatred, and to be of a peaceable and
reconcilable inclination, it is a sign that it is in an excellent state of
rest and tranquillity. And as calm weather at Sea after a raging gust of
wind, and as a fair Sunshine day after a cloudie storm, is wonderfully
pleasing, so war turned to peace causes unspeakable contentments. Moreover,
touching the things which seem to excite and provoke us to anger, as the
disobedience of our children, the ingratitude of our servants, or friends, the
perfidious and false dealing of some others, sickness, and diseases: they are
the visitations of the Lord God, to prove our patience, and also to repress
the pride of our flesh. Let it be our part not to thrust our nails into our
own wounds, nor to add (as we say) fuel to the fire, but rather let us daily
pray to our heaunly Father, who being our sole Creator, is likewise soly he,
who can reform and regenerate us, that by the virtue and efficacy of his
spirit, he may repress all our corrupt and inordinate affections in such
sort, that as children of God, nor of Satan, or of Cain, we may be clothed
with the new man created according to God, may be couteous one toward
another, merciful, mutually forgiving one another all offenses, as our Lord
has graciously pardoned all our sins in Jesus Christ. But it is not
requisite to proceed further in the discourse of anger or choler, the
turpitude and deformity whereof is sufficiently known to wise old men, who
have read the excellent Treatises, which have been aunciently written of it,
especially, in the Books of Seneca and Plutarch: Afterward in our time by John
de L'Espine in his grave Discourses of the contentment of the mind. Whosoever
will add to these that which Turtullian and Cyprian, Doctors of the Church
have written of patience, can require to know nothing further of this subject,
unless he may be pleased to add that which S. Basile and S. Chrysostom have
written in diverse Homilies against anger, and the great desire of revenge,
which is to be lamented in all men, and beyond all measure to be abhorred of a
wise old man. As for many late writers, which in Latin, Italian, Almaigne, or
any other Language besides the French, have written of choler, or anger, and
of the helps and remedies against it, which they have called out of Books of
Divinity, natural Philosophy, and Physic; We need not now to make a
Catalogue of them, they making nothing to our principal intention in this
Discourse.

There remains to speak something of diffidence and distrust, the mother of
impatience and almost of all other vices. Our Lord corrects this evil in
those that are his, whom he calls sometimes men of little faith, showing the
remedies for it, to be contained in the consideration of the gracious power of
our God. If any men be bound to such contemplation, wise old men are, who
seeing themselves at their iourneies end, and feeling their strength to fail,
ought to profit in faith, and in the meditation of the providence and mercy of
God. It is that whereunto S. Paul seems to have regard, when he wills old
men, to sober, discreet, advised, sound in the faith, in charity, and
patience, Tit. 2. 2. What is the cause of the frowardness and impatience in
old men? Even this, that they forget so many great favors and benefits, which
God has bestowed upon them, having mercifully drawn them from their mothers
belly, tenderly brought them up, protected them from infinite dangers, so that
they have great cause to praise God at all times, as David exhorts them by
his example in diverse Psalms, especially in the 34. 71. and 118. Psalms,
which all young and old men ought to know by rote, and by heart; As also we
recommend unto them the seven and thirtith Psalm, which may be called the
shield against impatience, because we may find therein, that which is able to
settle, and assure a conscience wavering and perplexed with the scandalls and
offense, to see the eminent prosperity of Atheists, and profane persons. Put
the case that the sky fall, that the earth melt into the deepes, and that the
elements of fire and water be mingled together; shall we suffer therefore
melancholy, fretting, and impatience to devour us, when on the contrary our
Savior exhorts us at that very time to lift up our heads to heaven, because
our deliverance draws near, and is at hand? Luke 21. 28. Is there any
heaviness or anguish which the promised comforter, who is more mighty then
all the world may not abolish and take away? Provided we leave the matter to
him, and banish and cast of all distrust and impatience. Then to what use
should so many promises of the son of God serve? and what should that
charitable and ardent prayer avail, which he made a little before his death,
described in the 17. Chapter of S. John? But if we will conserve and keep our
souls in peace, and in true joy, let us carefully keep faith, and a good
conscience, and let us endeavor with S. Paul, and after his example, to hope
that the resurrection of the dead, as well of the just as of the unjust shall
come, and to have our conscience unblameable toward men, Act. 26. 15. 16.
Thus doing we shall always have joy in God, Phillip. 4. 4. The heart which is
glad and rejoices in the Lord, is a perpetual banquet, Pro. 15. 15. So the
unclean and froward spirit, the horror of sin, the sense and feeling of the
wrath of God shall vanish and depart from us, and we shall sing in triumph
with the Apostle, these excellent sayings, If God be on our side, who shall be
against us? He which has not spared his son, but gave him for us all to
death, shall not he bountifully give unto us also all things with him? I am
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature is able to separate us from the love, which he has manifested
unto us in Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 8. 30, etc: If sometimes we feel our
faith to languish and droope, and our souls to be heavy and pensive, let us
spur and rouse up our selves with the goad that David uses in the two and
fortith Psalm. 12. v. My soul why art thou cast down, and why art thou
disquieted within me? wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks, he is my
present help, and my God. Let us then discard and cast from us, the execrable
suggestions of the flesh and of Satan, and hearken to the counsel of the
Son of God, who does dehort and diswade us from the perplexed, unprofitable,
vain, and profane cares of the world in the sixth chapter of Saint Matthew,
and does encourage us to all confidence and affiance, and to an invincible hope
in him, when he says, You shall have affliction in the world and peace with
me; but be of good courage I have over come the world. John 16.

CHAP. XI. Of the causes that old age is burdensome, and tedious to many old
man.
A Well framed mind rejoices in prosperity, and is sensible of afflictions.
But the evil and mischief is, that many men casting their eye awry upon
evils, give good things a shrewed unhappy, and wrong name, speak sinisterly
and ill of them, or do not judge of them as they ought: Whereupon it follows
that old age is tedious, and unpleasing unto them, because they have not
learned whereof to rejoice, and to complain, nor know not the felicities of old
age, what they are, nor have not saluted or congratulated them a far off, nor
near hand. The common felicities of old age.
I do not reckon nor rest upon those common felicities, to have the Hatt put
off to them, to be men of countenance and respect, to have servants to attend
them, to be sought unto for their counsel and advise, felicities which do not
happen to all old men: But I have a regard to the true felicities, whereof our
next Chapter shall treat: In so much, that it was wisely spoken, that old age
does resemble the Images called Silenes, which a far off, and without
appeared to be grossly carved, and very ill fauouredly made, but near hand
were of excellent workmanship, and seemed to have in them, I know not what,
that was more then human. Such is properly old age, if the life past has
been wisely ordered, and if old men do truly know their state and condition.
But in mine opinion there are four Reasons wherefore many old men do
impatiently bear the burden of old age. The first is, that by their fretfull
impatience, they do aggrauate their inevitable miseries a great deal more
then is fitting, or there is cause, and give out in speech, that they are worse
then they be, and being too sensible of them, regarding altogether the present
pains and evils, which they feel and suffer, do not comfort themselves with
the remembrance of their felicities past, nor with the hope of the felicities
of come. The second, is an evil education, which is so prevailing, potent, and
powerful, that custom is almost a nature, and habit does utterly deprave men's
manners, and wholly corrupt them. Therefore the saying of a wise ancient man
is of a authority; that it is fit betimes to train up young men to take
delight or pains in such things wherein it is meet for them to recreate
themselves, Delightful good recreations are as fit for young persons as labor.
or to be busied, or take pains: Even as it is good to make them fit for
honest trades, or occupations, and to envre them to good employments, services,
and to well-doing, which no age ought to refuse. For if we should draw the
shoulder from under the yoke, and shun all study and industry, we should
make no reckoning of virtue, whereunto we do not attain, but by the way that
is narrow, uneasy, and painful to clyme; whereunto having attained, our care
is, that we be not carried beyond our bounds, and misled by the vices which we
hate and avoyde. It is said that good housekeepers make use of any thing, be
it never so small a rag; and why shall not wise old men have the wisdom and
skill to draw and distill good out of the evils which they suffer. Physicians
find infinite remedies, and wonderful medicinal properties in plants,
herbs, and fruits, which we would never think to have such excellent
virtues, if daily experience did not make it manifest and probat unto us. Shall
it then be forbidden to those whom so many years have enabled to be wise, to
extract from the time, and from the sundry accidents and occurrences of their
life past, some remedy and refuge against the miseries which do assail and
besiege them? All things are mutually helpful and ayding to the good of those
that love God; And what ought then wise old men to hope for and expect, if
betimes they have learned some documents and lessons touching their true office
and duty? The third cause of impatience is, that we who make profession of
Jesus Christ, and speak highly of the Church, of Religion, of the service of
God, of faith, of good works, and say there is nothing so true as the Gospel,
have but a weak faith and belief in the Gospel, or in the assured promises
of him, who cannot deceive nor be deceived. From this source and fountain do
issue and flow all those evils which our forefathers, and we have seen. What
evils does incredulity and hardness of belief in gender and beget? How often
does our Lord find fault with his Disciples for it, whom he saw so dull and
slow to comprehend and understand what he taught them? Old men do torment and
vex themselves when they feel their sensitive and carnal life to shorten and
melt away, but as for the life eternal, Angelical, blessed, the nearer it
approaches to them, the less they apprehend and perceive it. If a man of
honor or credit, did promise you this or that, this promise should pass for
ready pay, and for money told on the nail; and a hard matter it should be to
make you in the least manner to think, that his purpose should be to falsify
or break his word with you. Behold, God does tell you, and when you are ready
to depart out of the world, promises that you shall live for ever; and your
mind wauers and floates upon the waves of doubt and hardness of belief. This
is, not to know that there is a God, nor who he is; this is, by the sin of
incredulity grievously to offend Jesus Christ, the Lord and master of all them
which believe; this is, to imagine a Christian dwelling in the house of faith,
a man without faith, and without hope. The fourth cause of our impatience is,
that old men know not what the oil of salvation is, the oil of joy, the oil,
whose flaming light never goes out; or if they do in some small measure know
it, they care not for it, nor have any mind or fancy to seek it and beg it
of the Lord. This oil, is the unction of the holy Ghost, wherewith Christians
being inwardly anointed are made strong, not only to resist death, but the
gates of hell also. The ancient manner was to annoint wrastlers with oil, and
old men which are to combat and fight against the terrors of death, have very
great need of this oil and spiritual unction. Let them take heed then that
they quench not the spirit. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. But (to use another comparison)
let them be careful to kindle the gift of God in them, by a daily supply of
this oil, craving with a zealous affection the increase thereof, as King David
did with a loud voice in the one and fiftith Psalm; O God, cast me not off
from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me; Restore to me the joy
of thy salvation, and let thy free Spirit sustain and establish me. This
Spirit does renew us, to the end we like Eagles, which soar directly aloft in
the air to the Sun, might fly up to heaven, there to see our selves plucked,
and stripped of the vain light feathers of corruption, covetousness, anger,
impatience, distrust, and of many wordly lusts and desires, which like
lymetwigges do stay and detain foolish old men, even, as it were, pyles of
wood rammed into the earth, where their hearts are buried, having their souls
more untowardly crooked, then their heads and shoulders; so that they consume
their days in sighs, waylings, and torments; being wholly unprovided of fit
remedies to temper and sweeten the woes and sorrows of this life, nor having
the power of themselves to leave and forsake this world; but as they must
perforce be driven out of it, although misery does assail and afflict them on
every side.

CHAP. XII. Of the benefit or good of old age.
WE do now speak of some commodities of old age, and do parcel out the
benefits and good thereof. We speak here of a well framed and well ordered
old age, and of that age, which is from fifty five years, or there abouts,
until threescores and ten, or fourscore years. Touching those casual
miseries, as childish humors and doting manners, paulsies, faintness,
feebleness, and the like infirmities either of mind or body, these art not
here to be considered, for all old men do not bring forth commendable fruits
and effects of their lives; being become sots, lewd, and men altogether rude
and ill nurtured. And who would think to go to gather grapes of thorns,
figs of thistles, and to find honey in a gall? Ancient men had a Proverb (as
David reports, 1. Sam. 24. 14.) That wickedness does proceed from the wicked.
But we do maintain, that there are virtues not common, which are to be found
in old men, who are virtuous, wise, and fearing God, who only are worthy and
none else, (as Basil says) of the worthy name of old men, although they have
faint and languishing bodies and lie bedred. Speaking then of good, we do
consider diverse sorts of good. There is a natural good, a politic, a
supernatural, and a good which is opposed to that which is vicious and bad,
unpleasing, painful, unprofitable, hurtful.

We do take upon us to make it appear, that these diverse species and sorts
of good, do all meet in old men. And first, to speak of the natural good;
What thing is there so agreeable to nature, as ripeness of judgment? Now this
is found properly and altogether in old men. For pregnant and forward wits,
are of an extraordinary last, and do seldom last long. Men of ripe age, do
undoubtedly perceive the ouerboyling blood and passions of youth, to wax
lukewarm and to freeze in them, they feel ordinarily many salt rheumes, and
Catarrhes to consume and dry up in them, they are macerated and lean, and they
know their judgment decays. It is a natural good to dye old, for a man to
be careful of himself and his health, which is sounder in old men, then in
young; who, for the most part, regard not the good government of their bodies
and lives.

Concerning the civil or politic good, it chiefly consists in honor,
which being the Magnificent and Maiesticall reward of virtue, has been the
cause that wise old men have always judged, that there was no good so
commodious as this. The Spartanes, and many other people, did honor very much
the ancients and elders; who in the commonweal of Israel were
superintendents, and had the charge of public and State affairs committed to
them. And Saint Paul, 1. Timoth. 5. 17. wills, That the elders that rule well
be esteemed worthy of double honor. All constitutions and ordinances do
decree, that old men command, and young men obey. The Athenians observing an
ancient decree of Solon, did honor old age in such sort, that the ancientest
men of the city had the prime voice, and spoke first in all their common
counsels and assemblies, and they esteemed it very expedient for the good of
their state, to respect the counsel of old men. Young Pliny in the eight
book of his Epistles writes, that there was an ancient constitution to this
effect; That young men should learn of old men, not only how to behave
themselves in their speeches and words, but also in their carriage and gesture
of body: The father was tutor to the son, and if the father dyed, the
ancientest man of the place where he dyed, or of some other place, was to have
the tuition and wardship of his son. The Apostle sath to Timothy his
scholar; Rebuke not an elder, but exhort him as a father, and the elder women
as mothers.

Concerning the goods of the mind, which are moral; as prudence, temperance,
continency, and those which are supernatural and infused; as the true
wisdom, the sincere knowledge of God, the zealous invocation of his name, the
discussion of Theological controversies, the dexterity, and skill of managing,
and ordering Church discipline; there was never no doubt made, but it is agreed
upon of all men, that old men have a larger measure of knowledge herein, and
without comparison more understanding to direct, then young men. Certainly
young men, who are of sober and discreet conversation and manners, and
plentiously furnished and qualified with grave counsels, as Timothy the
Evangelist was, do deserve very great commendation and applause. 1. Timoth. 4.
12. But Saint Paul does not mynce and dissemble the matter, but that such
green heads are often time in travel, and whurried about with intemperate
lusts and desires; and further, will not admit that the Pastor and Minister of
the Church, should be a young scholar, or fresh-man; least being puffed up
with pride, he fall into the condemnation of the Arch Calumniator the Devil.
1. Tim. 3. 6. He forbids the young widows to meddle in things set a part
for the service of the Church. 1. Timoth. 5. 12. It is evident what opinion old
men in times past had of young men. Homer in his Ulysses declares, that young
men usually are inconsiderate and heedlesse. Aristotle writes, That they are
not very capable of moral knowledge, for lack of judgment and experience,
which they could not attain unto, but by succession of time. Cicero
propounds this sentence; That young men are rash and heady, and old men are
advised and stayed. Besides, many others have shot forth the like bolts and
censures, whereof this is the total sum and substance.

I never saw wisedoms and youth, both together dwell,
Nor him a good commander, that did never obey well.
I will heereunto add further this Stanza of verses of the same quill.

Suddenly to resolve, and rashly to believe all,
Not to discern and friends voice, from a flatterers call:
Young headed counsel, and new servants put in trust,
Have oftentimes laid high estates in the dust.
It is recorded in Histories, that many Commonweales having been disturbed
turned topsie turuie, and brought to ruin, by the bold forwardness and
rashness of young Counselors, have been reestablished, and at length
reduced to a good form of government by the counsel of old men. The kingdom
in the house of David, in the time of Rehoboam, the Commonweal of Athens many
times, and of Rome in the conspiracy of Catiline, are a proof hereof. So
then the fruits, which old age does yield and bring forth, are manifold,
whereof some redound to the glory of God, as old men have more devotion and
religion then other men, their prayers are more powerful and frequent, they
do more usually, and daily extol and magnify the grace, favor, and
providence of God, whereof they have many testimonies and experiences in their
own persons. There are other fruits, which old age does yield, which do serve
to the benefit and good of their neighbor; for that wise old men by their good
counsels, do maintain and support public estates, and their own private
estates, be they great or small. For he that is a prudent governor of a small
family, deserves great commendation; As on the contrary, if the followers and
servants of the mightiest, and most eminent persons that may be imagined, do
live dissolutely, it is a woeful shame: And hereof we must appeal to the
judgment of Solomon, in the fourth Chapter of his Ecclesiastes, 13. v. where
he says, Better is a poor and wise child, then an old and foolish King,
that will no more be admonished. And what is a wise old man in a counsel of
State? It is an incomparable treasure. And what is a King, Prince, Lord, that
is old and wise? It is a true and lively image of God among men. There are
other fruits, which old men themselves enjoy, who living discreetly, rest in
peace, health, and welfare, reducing their course of life within the lists of
piety, temperance, where they spend their days in holy meditations, and with
joy of heart pass their time, in seeing Their virtuous children in comely
show,
About their table all on a row,
Like Olive plants to stand and grow.


Then they reap the sweet and precious fruit of their labors past. But to
proceed, who would dare to term wise old men idle persons, who do employ
themselves to the true and proper exercises of a man, to wit, to the actions of
the mind. Magnanimity, true fortitude, is not enclosed in the muscles, nor in
the synewes, but in the bearing and sustaining of grieuances; in leuying all
our powers and forces to fight against impatience, carnal lusts, against
Satan and the world. The famous deeds of old men are wise counsels,
instructions, good examples, Old men's actions.
zealous prayers, services to the Commonweal and State, succors and helps
to friends, protection and maintenance to orphans and children. Plato,
Sophocles, Isocrates, and a number of Heathens more, who in their old age began
and perfected works, which are yet extant and useful, were they doting old
persons? Basil, Nazienzen, Saint Augustine, so many ancient and modern
Divines, who during the profound darkness of Atheistes and profane persons,
wallowing like swine in all confusions, dyed very old men, and their tongues
and pens never lay still, but were busy and moving to edify and instruct
the Christian Churches: are these old men which have spent their time badly? So
many white beardes, which yet to this day serve their sovereign Lord, of whom
they expect a glorious reward, are they to be cast behind the door as
unprofitable vessels? Is it wisely done of young men to revile them in words,
and shamefully to spurn and tread on them? But as Zenophon said, Those men
live wisely, who are careful more and more to reform themselves; and they
live cheerfully, who every day feel themselves to profit in virtue, which may
be truly said of wise old men, whose hearts are lifted up to the Lord, and who
already have a foot in Paradise. Wherefore then, do we accuse nature and her
impediments, as we call them, I mean old age, and the infirmities thereof?
Seeing that the mild, and meek conversation of old men is of better esteem,
and more gracious in them; a pregnancie and dexterity to counsel well, is
more eminent in them; their constancy to suffer death, more assured and
steadfast; and the temperance to bridle and restrain fond foolish lusts and
desires, is more potent and forcible in them. Though their body be weak, their
mind is strong. A wise old man is no more daunted at the approach of death,
then a laboring man, who having undergone the rain, heat, and cold of the
day, is not grieved to see the sun set, because it is a sign of his surcease
and rest from his labor, and of receiving his promised wages. And old man
fearing God, does already feel the pleasures of Paradise, and being ascended
to the top and pynacle of true knowledge, dispiseth the base, deceiving,
perishing, to wit, the woeful and corrupt riches of the world. According as
old men have been better or worser trained up, and instructed; according also
to the diversity of gifts, which they have received of God, we see they yield
diverse fruits and effects. It is the incredulity, impatience, vitiousnesse,
and lewdness of life, not old age, which is the cause that many, in stead of
referring themselves, and their actions and affairs to the providence of God,
of learning that whatsoever distasters and discommodities do happen unto us
abroad and at home, in our bodies, in our goods, from our servants and those of
our family, from our friends, from our enemies, is a gracious chastisement
unto us of our heavenly Father, and an exercise and trial of our faith, we
still perceiuering in the sincere knowledge of him in our calling, joined with
a good conscience; Do woefully torment themselves, childishly bewail their
condition, if their proiectes and plors, devices and wishes, have not that
speedy success which they desire: As that great Orator Cicero, who forgetting
what he had written in his book of Offices, That no man can be just which
fears exile, pain, or death, being forlorn and in a desperate taking a few
days before he was slain, cowardly exclaimes in a letter of his to Octauius;
Beast that I am! In vain have I been taken and held for the man I am not! My
old age is most unfortunate and disastrous! My white hairs after a miserable
life stand up fearfully staring, and out of order!

There remains for conclusion of this Chapter, to add unto the felicities of
old age, certain excellent privileges, which those that are learned in the
civil law do attribute unto it. I will give you the cullings and choice of
fifty, or threescore and more, quoated by sundry collectors. Men that were
ancient themselves, did bear no less honor to very aged persons, then they
did to Magistrates. The older a man is the more is his judgment esteemed. In
consultations, and in matters ambiguous and doubtful to be decided, the advice
of old men is preferred before the advice of young men. Old men enjoyed the
privileges of noble men. Old men are not sued, nor scited to appear in any
Courts of justice, without the Pretors express permission, and license, and
particular information of the cause. The auncientest men have their names
always enrolled and set down first. Old men ought to have the first places
and seats, and to sit at the upper end of the Table. The auncientest
Counselors in the absence of the President may appoint and call a counsel. If
there be question touching the observing and keeping of common contractes and
rates, the auncientest men of a fraternity, or company, have the first voice.
It is granted and permitted to old men to censure and reform their
neighbors. Many willing to accuse and bear witness against any one, the
testimony of the oldest man is of most credit. Old men are Magnificoes and
noble men. The counsels of old men are more regarded, then the strength of
young men. In the common weal of Israel there was an express ordinance of
God, touching the honor due to old men, which Moses recites in these words;
Rise up before the hoare-head, honor the person of the aged man, and fear thy
God, Leuit. 19. 32. Elihu in the two and thirtieth Chapter of Job. 6. verse,
does declare what reverence was given in those days to aged persons. And
Solomon in his 16. Chapter of the Proverbs, ver. 31. says, Old age is a
crown of glory when it is found in the way of righteousness. The
commonweal of Israel had a long time the auncientest of the people to the
number of threescore and ten to govern it, men of great age and experience,
who were very much respected, men of great authority, and represented the
whole body of the people, as all the holy history does verefie. It is
apparent, that Rehoboam the son of Solomon, for not giving credit to the
counsel of old men, lost almost his whole kingdom, 1 King. 12. Young
counselors were authors of this confusion, by which it appears how wise
David and Solomon had been, in their just government, to have still gray
headed men about them, and attending on their persons, and what misery does
ensue to Princes, to despise and not regard wise old men. The ancient Jews
had this saying, that it is bonum omen, a good sign to see an old man in a
house. This saying seems to be taken from the first of Samuel and second
Chapter, where the Lord threatening the high Priest Eli, says, There shall
never be an old man of thine house, all that descend of thine house, shall dye
in the flower of their age, and when they be men grown. The same Jews had a
saying also, That those countries wherein there are no old men to be seen, do
deserve to be ouerrunne, wasted, and spoiled by enemies. They have an eye of
regard, to the sentence pronounced in the third Chapter of Isaiah, where the
Lord threatens Jerusalem and Judah, to give them young men for their
governors, and children should rule over them, and further says, That women
are Lords over them. In the book of Ecclesiasticus there are many worthy wise
sentences and sayings, in the honor of old age. It shall suffice to note two
or three of them. Dishonor not a man in his old age, for they were as we
which are not old; they have been taught of their fathers, and of them thou
shall learn wisdom, and to make an answer in time of need. Chap. 8. And in
the 25. Chapter he says, That it is a pleasant thing to behold gray headed
men minister judgment, and for a man to have his cause referred to the elders,
who can give good counsel; Also that experience is the crown of old men, and
the fear of the Lord is their glory.

Cyrus in Zenophon reports, that the Persians had a law enioyning all men to be
silent, when an Elder should speak, to give him the wall when they met him in
the streets, and to set open and clear the passage ways when he should go
any journey, or voyage. Yea, the ancient Grecians, as Hesichius observes,
gave titles of Majesty to old men, naming them Excellencies, Kings, Princes.
In the ancient Roman Common weal great reverence was done to old men, as
Callistratus the Lawyer witnesses. And the Poet Ovid in his third Book,
treating of pride and haughtiness of mind, remembers that the ancient
Romans did greatly reverence old age. It is wonderful what Plutarch in
diverse places does relate of the privileges of old age in the Common weal of
Sparta, which flourished many hundred years, so long as the young men gave
care and credit to the counsel of old men. And Zenophon in a Discourse of the
Grecian state worthily says, that Pharnabazus stood up to speak, because he
was the auncientest common counsel man. Moreover, in the ancient Roman or
Latin tongue, that is called Antique, which is honest, of credit, and
authority; And Cicero says in one place, Ne dubites quin quod honestius, id
mihi futurum sit antiquius. And in another place, At salus antiquior, id est
potior, militum, quam impedimentorum: A manner of speech and phrase usual also
among the Grecians, as Plato mentions in his Sympose, and Pollux in his
second Book of Synonimaes. Let us conclude this whole Discourse of the
privileges of old age, with that which the Apostle propounds in the 1
Timoth. 5. Where he forbids Timothy his scholar, and all others rudely to
rebuke Elders: Unless (as S. Gregory says) they be scandalous, and an evil
example to others. For Chrysostom says, that an old man of a youthful and
light behavior, is more ridiculous, then lascivious, fond toying young men.

CHAP. XIII. Of the profit, which wise old men may reap from the Doctrine
contained in the writings of Philosophers, and Heathen Authors.
SAint Augustine teaches in the fourth Chapter of his second Book of
Christian doctrine, that if heathen Philosophers have had the happ to pen
Documents and Instructions agreeable to the truth, which we profess; so far
beside the mark, and uncouth is it, that we should estrange and withdraw our
selves from the use of them, that on the contrary, we must take out of their
hands, as from unjust possessors, and convert to our use, whatsoever they have
wisely written. For if in the composition of Antidotes, and counterpoysons,
Vipers flesh be mixed and incorporated in treacle; Who shall let us not to draw
and extract from the doctrine of Gentiles and heathens many worthy remedies
against vices: we learning in other books the right knowledge of the true God?
Undoubtedly, we do find in Plato, Aristotle, Zenophon, Isocrates, Cicero,
Seneca, Plutarch, yea, in the Greek, and ancient Latin Poets infinite
lessons and instructions touching vices and virtues. We do read in the
Histories penned by many learned heathens, of wonderful things, which may be
called the rack, and bills of fearful inditements against Christians,
before the judgment seat of God. We see in the Gospel, that Jesus Christ does
propound the examples of the Queen of Saba, of the Ninevites, of the men of
Tire and Sidon, to the end to strike a terror in the Jews. Wherefore then
should we make any scruple to allege some testimonies of Heathens touching the
happy estate and condition of old age? It shall suffice to give the wise
Vieillard some taste of them, leaving him to remember the rest, or to learn
them in the forenamed Authors, and in others which he shall remember. I
commend unto him the laws of Plutarch, especially of the ancient Greek and
Roman Captains; Also the Apophthegmes and wise sentences, and particularly
the whole Treatise of the same Author in his opuscula, entitled, Whether an
old man ought to meddle with public affairs and negotiations. The Dialogue
of old age in Cicero is excellent. And in the Discourses of Socrates, in Plato,
and Zenophon there are found to this purpose in question many worthy sayings.
Valerius Maximus in the eight book of his Collection of ancient memorable
acts and sayings, does set forth many notable examples of famous old men,
whereof some have hitherto been propounded by us. It shall then be enough to
add yet some testimonies drawn and culled out of the hoard and treasury of
Stobeus in his hundred and sixteenth Discourse in favor of old age. The
experience of old men can reveal and discover more wisdom, then the
travails, sweating endeavors, tugging and striving of young men. It is true
that the hands of young men are strong to execute, but the brains of old men
do better service, and prevail, and perform more: For time is the father
that begets variety of wisdom and prudence. Love to commune and advise with
old men, and abandon the foolish devices, and fond imaginations of young men,
wherein there is nothing appears but vainenesse and fopperie. So it is that
the pleasure of a vicious and sinful contentment does not last long.

Old age is not so near the end of life, as it is near the threshold of the
door which opens to an assured happy life. He that will take upon him the
wardship and tuition of some young man, and to have him well brought up, does
commit him to a wise old man; even as to qualify strong fuming wines, we do
brewe them with water. Old men who are free and ridd of the so many evil
lusts, wherein young men do furiously plunge themselves, become like unto
God. Also old men live and die as if they were rather asleep: whereas the life
and death of young men resembles boystrous tempests and violent ship-wrackes.

It will be objected against whatsoever I can all edge in favor of old age,
that the heathens also have spoken very disgracefully and reprochfully of it;
witness the hundred and seventeenth discourse of Stobeus, the scoffing taunts
and quipps both of the Greek and Latin comicall, and Satyricall Poets in
their Tractates. And he he may go for a witness to, who compares old age to
Wine that is low and almost nothing but lees; to a warehouse full of refuse
and brayded wares, whereof there is no reckoning to be made; to a sanctuary
or place of refuge, whereunto all sorts of euilles seem to retire as to their
garrison and hold; to an echo, to a shadow, to a vanishing dream, and to the
dead time of Winter. Horace in his art of Poetry does pensill and picture out
an old man in this manner.

Many are the miseries of wretched man that is old,
Either because he hazards himself to get money and gold;
And when he has got it, his wretchedness is such,
He dares not lay out a penny, he loves it so much:
Or because in all things he takes in hand, and goes about,
He is fearful, unwieldy, full of suspicion and doubt;
He puts off the day of death, still his mind does him give,
And he verily hopes many a day longer to live.
He lies lusking at home, and loves to hear men relate,
All news whatsoever, yea, the secrets of State.
He complains of the times present, is pensive and sad,
And says his forefathers days, were nothing so bad.
Iuuenal in his tenth Satyr, describes the infirmities of such old age. But
if we heedfully consider the scoffing speeches of these Authors, it will soon
appear, that they speak either of the diseases of the body, or of old age
that is decrepit, worn out, quite spent and done, not regarding the commodious
helps and uses of wise old men. For otherwise, to what dangers and disasters
are young men exposed unto? And when should we make an end, if we should take
upon us to make a Catalogue of them? The Heathens have confessed, that a young
man was happy, not in regard of his age, but his virtue: They have affirmed as
much of an old man, adding further, That an old man is already possessed of
that which a young man expects and hopes for. And what do young men aim at,
and hope after, but to live to a great age and to be old men? They have
compared young men, unto men tossed up and down to and fro with the winds and
waves in the midst of the Sea, and old men to passengers which are near
their port and ready to cast Anchor. Ought we to marvel (says Cicero) if
old men be sometimes feeble and decayed in strength, seeing that young men
cannot be exempt and priuilledged from consumptions, or pynings away of the
body? There is no infirmity whatsoever in old age, which the wiser old men
are not prepared and armed for, and with greatness of courage and patience do
easily sustain and endure. Whereunto the verses of Horace do fitly sort and
agree, who says; If God to thee a time do give,
Wherein thou may full happy live,
Most joyfully this time embrace;
Do not neglect too long a space,
The happy hour of thy Fate,
To enjoy a life more fortunate:
But to the world proclaim throughout,
Thou art a voluntary Soldier and stout;
And wilt not from thy coullors fly,
But stand thy ground courageously.


And in another place he says; Irksome it is to be annoyde,
With evil a man cannot avoid;
But that which is past remedy,
Man bears at last contentedly.
When patience has him under awe,
Yielding obedience to her law.


Put case then that old age has his opponents, assaults, and be exposed to
diverse disasters, and miseries, so has it also strong and fit weapons,
stratagemes, directories, and practiced virtues to help at need. Old men's
minds are still entire and sound, so long as they are invred to study, and
exercised. Though their legs fail them, their wits do not, as Homer
says, bringing in Nestor speaking in this manner; I will with my Counsel and
Orations excite and prick forward the youths and young men: This is the trade
and practice of old men, who have more wisdom and judgment then others, and
as Ovid affirms, It is time that ripens experience: The counsel and saw of
old men has in it somewhat, I know not what, that is pleasing to hear,
graceful, and of venerable regard and well liking.

Even as we see the Sun at his decline,
With golden rays more pleasingly to shine.
If Seneca the Tragedian be herein to be believed. And it there be to be
found, foolish, impertinent, and unprofitable old men, they are no other then
fountains without water, forests grubd up and gladed, trees without fruit,
stars without light, and all their imperfections and defects proceed from ill
education. Remember (says Cicero) that I commend that old age, which has had
early good beginnings, and been well taught and trained up from childhood and
youth. For that old age is miserable, that can plead nothing else for
Atiquitie, but the wrinckles of the face and the white hairs. Moreover, the
more old age sees the time to approach of appearing before the tribunal of the
Sovereign Judge, the less it apprehends and reckons of death, the threatenings
and rage of Tyrants: As Solon, who being demanded, By what virtue, he did so
brave the Tyrant Pisistratus, answered, His old age. Touching the contempt of
death, and a resolution courageously to apprehend and embrace it; who will not
marvel to hear the words, which the great Cyrus King of Persia uttered to
his sons a little before his death? My dearly beloved sons, said he, when
you shall see me no more; think not therefore I am quite annihilated and no
where: for when I was in your company you could not perceive my soul, but
only discusled it in your mind to be in my body, by the deeds and actions
you saw me to do. Believe then, that the soul is still alive, and in being,
although you see my body no more. Never could any man persuade me, that the
souls of mortal men perish with their bodies, nor that being departed out of
our bodies past feeling and sense, that they are without feeling and sense: on
the contrary, seeing that the soul being at liberty, and having nothing to do
with the body, begins to become pure and wholly to see and behold it self, I
hold and maintain, that then it is in full perfection of knowledge and
understanding. Furthermore, the case standing thus, that death is the
dissolution of nature, we see whither all things tend, to wit, to their first
matter whereof they were made, the soul excepted, which we see not how it
comes into the body, remains there, nor goes out. You see that there is
nothing so much resembles death, as sleep. But the souls of those which
sleep, show their divine nature in this point, that being free from
disturbance and at rest, see and behold things a far off, and to come, which
plainly declares what they must be, after they are delivered from the prison
of the body. This being so, reverence me, my sons, as a thing divine; but if
the soul be to perish with the body, yet give not you over to fear the gods,
which maintain, uphold, and govern this Principal, and master piece, called
Man: And in this doing, as good children, you shall inuiolably preserve my
name. To this Oration, which is bettered by Cicero in his Dialogue of old age,
reciting Socrates, who in prison wisely and stoutly discourses of the
immortality of the soul: Old Cato also adds, that seeing the souls of men
are so prompt and apprehensiue to remember things past, and of so wise
foresight in things future and to come, have invented so many trades, arts,
sciences, so many rare and notable things; It is impossible that such natures,
capable of so great excellencies should be mortal. And seeing the soul is in
continual agitation and motion, which she originally has not (to wit, from
any extrinsecall cause, and from other then her Creator, which Cicero
forgets) seeing she mooues and stirs of her self; it follows that she
shall ever have such agitation and motion, for she will never leave or abandon
to be her self. Further, that the soul in it own nature, being a substance
simple, pure, unmixed, having no disagreeing qualities, cannot be divided, and
being individual, it follows it is immortal; which serves to prove that men
are capable and of understanding before they be borne; seeing that children in
learning the baser, and more servile and meaner trades, arts, and sciences, do
on a sudden comprehend and conceive infinite things, ere on would say, they
begin to apprehend and understand what this or that is, but only their
memories serve them to retain and bear them away. Cato afterward affirms
further, That if the souls of men were not immortal, good men would not
desire or aspire to a glory, which is durable and ay-lasting. What means this
saying, That every wise man dies most willingly, and the wicked depart hence
full fore against their will, and with much grief and vexation of mind?
Seems it not, unto you, that the soul which sees more clearly and father off
knows she goes to a better place? On the contrary, hebere, dull, and
senseless man is incapable and ignorant hereof. Verily, I desire nothing more
then to see your forefathers, whom I have made much on, respected and honored;
and besides, I desire to be with those of whom I have heard men to speak and
discourse, whose books I have seen and perused, and whose names I have
quoated and mentioned in mine own writings. Now that I am onward in my way,
and making have to go to them, It would be a troublesome and hard matter to
hale me or make me roll, or go back, as men would a ball or a bowl. And
if God had made me a grant to become a child again, and to cry in a cradle, I
should stiffly and with might and maine refuse such an offer; for seeing, I have
almost finished my course, I will not be recalled from my last end, to my
first state and condition. Is there any commodity in this life? Is not this
life painful in all her reuolutions, terminations, periods and ends? But put
the case this life has many commodities: so it is that we may be full gorged
satiated, and glutted with them, and see and end of them too. I will not for
all that way wardly and testily fret, fume, storm, and chafe at this life, as
many learned men have oftentimes done, and I repent me not that I have lived,
for I have so spent my days, that I account of my self, as one that has
served for some use, and for something in the world. I go out of this life, as
out of an Inn, and not as one out of a house; seeing that nature leaves us
here in this world, a time to pass and walk up and down, but not here to
settle, abide, and continue. O happy the day, when I shall go to the holy
company of blessed souls, and shall leave the base rabble, and rascally route
of the world.

See here for certain the worthy Treatises, of men ignorant of the
immortality of man's soul, but as they did gropingly and blindely imagine.
Notwithstanding, they were grounded upon this imagination, that nothing being
so common, nor of more price and account with man, then the love and
preservation of himself, a care and regard ought especially to be had of that
part, which properly may be called Man, to wit, the soul, and that the way and
means to live well and happily, consists in the knowledge and comtemplation
of things divine, inciting and provoking us to good works: so as the
tranquillity of our minds consists, not properly in being freed from pain
and grief, but rather in being delivered from those raging and unruly
passions, which hurry the wicked up and down. For as Seneca says in his
book, De Prouidentia, those casual miseries, which our own hands bring not
upon us, are sent for our good, that our many virtues may the more gloriously
show and appear, and that as we cut Vines to make them yield the more fruit;
so by the smart and wound of afflictions, we are made the more fit for
laudable actions. And as Cicero says in his book of Tusculane questions, If
at the exercise of wrestling, the champions contemn bruises and hurts, and
their pains and tuggings in the presence of noble personages are easily borne,
set light by, and not a whit blencht at, why should we make any difficulty,
stoutly to thwarte and resist the dangers which in the ways of virtue offer
themselves? What magnanimity can be of more fame and note, then that which is
seen in the hazard of dangers, and in bearing those evils, which must be
undergone, and cannot be avoided; for so long as the heart keeps his hold,
unmoved, undaunted, not fainting, not quayling, all is well. And this
resolution is much more excellent then the possession of the treasures and
goods of the world, which a great mind commonly contemnes, as things flitting,
transitory, and vain. Again, by the testimony of Seneca, vnintermitted and
daily adversity and evil (at least as we call it) has this good and
commodity, that those that are tempested, vexed, and exercised therewith, are
the more hardy to bear and endure. But why should he which knows, and takes
himself to be a man, and triumphs and glories to be called a man, refuse to
put under his shoulder and stoop to those ieopardies, burdens, and crosses,
which are incident and casual to a man.

Moreover, the Heathens do tell us of other stays and helps to old age,
whereby to prolong it, and make it more easefull as well in regard of the body,
as of the mind. Cicero says, We must make head, and strive against old age,
carefully correct, help, and redress her defaults and defects, and neither
more nor less resist it, then we would do some disease. Let us have then a
care of our health, let our bodily exercises be moderate, let us eat and drink
to restore, and not to oppress and overthrow that bodily strength which
remains. He that is old cannot be young again, and death is inevitable: but
it is possible to corroborate and strengthen old age by good government and
order of diet, and to keep the heart from fainting and dying on a sudden.
Wise old men are taught and prescribed of learned, and Christian Physicians,
reamedies outward and inward of good and sound health, which they are careful
to observe, that so they might hold out and continue the longer, to do good in
the sight of God, to themselves, and their neighbors: For which cause, as
Cicero said, besides the tendering and cherishing of their weak bodies, which
daily do languish and pine away, they are much more thoughtfull of their
mind, and intellectual and memoratiue parts, which by little and little
decay, if we do not, even as a Lamp is with oil, maintain and keep them
exercised. Long travel, tyrings, and toylefull labors make our bodies
unwieldy, sluggish, and lither: on the contrary, continual exercise and study
do recreate, revive, and cherish our minds. If old men be scoffed and mocked
at in the Theaters and common assemblies, as dolts mad fools, and dotardes, it
is only meant of such as be credulous, obliuious, voluptuous, and dissolute
persons. These are vices of young and old, but not of all persons alike. For
the wise Vieillard has always his mind bent, and intent unto virtue: All his
desire is to keep himself immaculate and pure before God, well affectioned to
his country, careful for the building of that spiritual temple which is
called the Church, governing and bringing up his family in the love of piety,
righteousness, holiness, verity: shining by his grave counsels and sayings,
and by his worthy actions and deeds, as a sun among men, to the joy of his
friends and well willers, and to the astonishment at home and abroad, of the
enemies and enuiers of the splendor, and eminency of those excellent gifts,
which the holy Ghost has liberally communicated and conferred unto him. The
wise Vieillard desirous to live long in this estate, for the good of many, has
most noble and worthy thoughts, and agreeing to his age: though he be far
spent with years, his heart is strong to do wonderful matters ere he depart
hence, and yet the best of his life is in his inwardest part, the soul. But I
know not what false opinion, or wretched ignorance of the truth does possess
us, that in stead of taking pleasure in our own happinesses, we cease not to
torment and vex our selves about evils, which we make much greater then they
are, so that almost ordinarily, and without much thinking thereon, we
voluntarily run our selves headlong into voluntary carkings and fits, and
into continual anxieties, disquiets, and troubles of mind, making that part
of our life extremely miserable, which should with glory crown all that is
past: No whit remembering, what wise Plato said, That what things soever the
outward senses desire or fear, they are almost no other but stadowes and
dreams.

CHAP. XIIII. Assured consolations against all the infirmities of body and
mind.
ALthough the Heathen, Greek, and Latin Philosophers (among others, Plutarch
and Seneca) seem to have gloriously discoursed, of all whatsoever concerns
the tranquillity and contentment of the mind, thereby to make the troubles and
discommodities of this present life more easily borne: Yet must it be
confessed, as we have else where observed, upon the foresaid Philosophers,
that their discourses are weak and insufficient, yea altogether impertinent,
being compared to the doctrines of heavenly wisdom. Notwithstanding, let us
speak this word by the way touching the reading of such Authors, who
endeavor, according to their poor skill, to reclaim us from vice (wherein
worldlings wallow, and dabble ehemselues to their confusion) to the end to
settle and habituate us in laudable thoughts, and in noble exercises of virtue:
They are men guided by a dark light, by which some glympses and glymmerings of
truth are seen and appear, which do not sufficiently direct and point out
the way, yet setue they to make known well enough to them that are wide, and
strangers to the true light, that they are every way miserable: And such by
schools do teach, sober, young, and old men, to redeem the time, and to make
all have to be admitted betimes into the holy Academie, there to be fully
resolved of the doubts and hard questions, which humane wisdom cannot assoyle
and discuss. Ploto in his Philche is of the mind, that the ancient Authors
are to be read, which, in his opinion are the nearer streams to the fountain
of truth, and consequently the purer. If this be so, what shall we say of
Moses, David, Solomon, the Prophets, whose writing were before those of the
Heathen? with what eye of regard, and how heedfully, and accurately ought we
to read the holy Evangelists and Apostles, replenished, and full of so many
necessary and important doctrines for all sorts of persons? Who dares
contradict them but an Atheist, and horrible monster condemned by the testimony
of his conscience, wherein he bears the written doom, and sentence of his
own damnation? Such holy books are the true springs and fountains of living
water, which the Author of life and everlasting consolation, causes to flow
into our souls, by the efficacy and virtue of his Spirit, which for the
salvation of those that in humility come and draw near unto them, purges and
cleanses those filthy frothie waters and puddles, making them quick running
streams to eternal life. We read in the second Book of the Tusculane
questions, a frank and open confession of Cicero the Author, touching the
imbicilitie and weakness of humane reason. There are, says he, certain
seeds of virtue springing in our hearts, which if we would suffer them to
grow and sprout out, nature by their means would guide us to a happy life.

But we are no sooner borne, but behold, we are plunged into all corruption,
and into a gulf of errors, and aberrations, which we seem to suck with the
milk of our Nurses. Then are we afterward put forth to masters and tutors,
which stain and corrupt us with so many false and monstrous opinions, that
verity gives way and place to vanity, and nature being preoccupied and
forestalled with strange imaginations, suffers it self by them to be out of
measure transported and lead awry. As then we draw out of the fountains of
Israel, that is, out of the word of God, contained in the holy Books of the
Prophets and Apostles, most certain and assured documents and doctrines of the
nature and essence of God, of his providence, of his love toward us, of the
sovereign good, and of a happy and everlasting life: So wise old men, and all
good Christians, nurtured and instructed in the words of truth, of faith,
charity, hope, temperance, piety, are not daunted and terrified with human
brittlenesse and frailty, neither think their maladies incurable, nor their
pains, and sorrows unsupportable, but by the help of the Doctrine recorded
in this holy School do enjoy a steadfast and assured consolation, and do say
with David in the Psalm 94. O how happy is the man O Lord, whom thou
reprouest, and instructest by thy law, to set him in a sure habitation and
refuge in the days of adversities, that while and as often as sharp, heavy,
and grievous thoughts and perplexities of mind do wound and pierce their
souls, they may ever be cured, holped and cheared with heavenly consolations.

But when we see many old men which call themselves Christians, more
faint-hearted, more effeminate, more impatient and froward, then many poor
silly, miscreants, and infidells have been: And Christians likewise which make
so great a sound of their name, and have high swelling words in their mouths,
and base and evil manners, who think one thing, and say and do another, are
far indeed from the stayednesse and constancy of the ancient Stoickes: We
can do no other then blame these vau^neantes, vain and vicious persons, who
like bad stubborn soldiers, when trial and need is, throw down their
weapons, scoff and mock at the exhortations and encouragements given them to
learn to handle and weild their spiritual weapons in the hall of Fence, which
stands open for them in the Mansion house of truth: briefly, please
themselves in abiuring and renouncing all parts and points of any good and
laudable duty and service in the army of the living God. Verily, the life of a
Christian, so long as he soiourneth here in earth, is affronted with carkings
and carings, annoyances, and tedious disquiets: It is a continual war,
wherein we are daily to cope, grapse, and strive against the enemy, as well
within as without, to wit, Satan, the world, and our own corrupt nature:
There, is much work marked and cut out. But as the sufferings of Christ abound
in us, so our consolation abounds thorough Christ. Undoubtedly, a Christian
has an Arsenall or Armory repleate with whatsoever is necessary for him,
wherein he finds all manner of weapons, wherewith God himself from heaven
does array and furnish him, so long as he will lift up his eyes toward the
promise and assistance of his Lord, and turn away his sight from whatsoever
may hinder, let, inwrapp, and entangle him.

That these weapons are strong, sure, and of proof, not fained, and vain, we
learn of two most brave Warriors, who long ago, and a long time to,
encountered perils and dangers, were in many skirmishes, and battles, wherein
they fought valiantly: Men who for their magnanimity, valor, and long
experience, hold the prime and chief places of honor and rank in the Army
of the supreme and sovereign chiefetaine, commander, and head of the militant
Church, which is Jesus Christ. One of them is called David the Bethlemite, the
other Paul of Tarsus. David singes in the Psalm 39. Every man at his best is
vanity; doubtless man walks in a shadow: and now Lord what have I waited
for? my hope is even in thee: harken unto my request bow down thine ear unto
my cry, be not deaf at my tears; for I am a stranger with thee, and a
soiourner as all my Fathers were. In the Psalm 40. Blessed is the man that
makes the Lord his trust, and regards not the proud, nor such as turn a
side to lies. O Lord my God, thou have made thy wonderful works, and none can
count in order to thee thy thoughts toward us they are so many; will I take
upon me to declare and speak of them? they are more, then I can recount and
express. Then at the end he adds, Let all them which seek thee rejoice and
be glad in thee, and let all them that love the salvation thou give to those
that are thine, say always, the Lord be praised and magnified. Verily I am
poor and needy, but the Lord thinks and has care on me: my God thou art my
help and deliverer. The same great warrior singes in the Psalm 46. in the
name of all the Church; God is my fortress, strength, and succor in troubles
and distress, very ready to be found, therefore we will not fear, though
the Earth tremble, and be moved, and the Mountains fall, and be over whelmed
in the midst of the Sea. Let us hear the Apostle of the Gentiles. Although,
says he, we be daily delivered over to death for Jesus sake, yet we have the
spirit of faith, which preserues us that we perish not. But although our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is daily quickened and renewed. For our
light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far more
excellent and eternal weight of glory, while we look not on the things which
are seen, for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which
are not seen are eternal. In another place, to wit, in the sixth Chapter of
the Epistle to the Ephesians, he leads his soldiers into the spiritual
Arsenall and Armourie, and says unto them; Finally, my brethren be valiant,
and strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might: Put on the whole Armor
of God, that ye may be able to overcome, and stand against the slights, and
assaults of the Devil, and having overcome all things stand fast. Stand fast
then having your loins girded about with verity, having on the breast plate of
righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of peace: Above all
laying hold on the shield of faith, wherewith you may quench all the fiery
darts of the wicked one: Take also the helmet of salvation, and the sword of
the spirit, which is the Word of God: Praying always with all manner of prayer
and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance.
These are the words of the Apostle.

But because it is not enough to name and show weapons to a man, if he know not
how rightly to use and to handle them: We are more particularly to enquire
after, and to discourse and set forth the practice of this military Art, as
much as the consolation which we purpose to propose to wise old men does
require. Saint Ambrose in his commentary upon the sixth Chapter to the Ephesians
speaks well to the purpose; that although the Apostle names many specialties
and parts of Armor, yet faith it is that makes us keep to our tackling and
to stand fast, and whereof principally we have need in this spiritual combat.
In deed what auailes it to read much, to hear many Sermons of the providence,
grace and mercy of God, if faith be not added to his Word? And what auailes it
to believe this word to be true, if you tremble not when it soundes louder in
your ears then usually it has done, if you steadfastly settle not your joy and
assurance in the promises of salvation which it propounds unto you, if you
do not in humility revere and honor your heavenly Father, if you dread not
his wrath and indignation more then ten thousand deaths, if you be not wholly
resolved that God speaks to condemn you, if you persevere and go on to
provoke him, and to offer you grace if you amend your lives and believe in the
Gospel. To what purpose serve so many Sermons touching Jesus Christ, his
obedience, his merit, his miracles, his love to save his elect? And what are so
many exhortations good for, if this Savior dwell not in your hearts by faith,
if he do not rule, amend, and reform them, if by his spirit of sanctification
and adoption, he seal them not up in them, if he do not stamp and engraue
his love and truth in them? The Apostle S. John speaking of the special graces
of God, who is Almighty, and good to his children, wisely and necessarily
ioynes these two together: To wit, that he has given us eternal life, that
this life is in his Son, so that whosoever has the Son consequently has
an assured guard of defense against death, and all the temptations, which go
before and precede it. Afterward that God has given us knowledge and
understanding, to the end we may know him, and be certainly assured, that he
herein is true, in this Author of all good, which is Christ. The same Apostle
does upon good right call this assurance our victory, that is our warlike
furniture and armor, wherewith we overcome the world, and throw down to the
ground all her strong holds.

For this cause, according to the example of the Apostles, we ought devoutly
to pray to God to give us faith, and daily to increase it in our hearts. What
dastardes and cowardes were the Disciples of our Lord? What a hard, harsh,
diffused noise was it, and not to be endured, to hear of their Masters death,
before the virtue and efficacy of a lively faith did actuate and enlarge it
self in them? We may see what the Evangelists said of them. Saint Matthewe
Chapter 16. verse 23. Saint Luke 18. 34. Saint John 16. 6.

The eleauenth Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews contaynes a great number
of worthy examples, by which we may learn how great the efficacy and power
of a true and lively faith is in all manner of afflictions. We read the same
in the ancient and modern History of the Church, where we see a great
number of men, and women of diverse and differing Ages, of young boys and
girls, that made proof of an invincible Faith, as well in the fiery Furnace
of persecutions, as in the deep dungeon and prison of all sorts of troubles
and calamities, and had the victory, and now are crowned with praise and
immortal glory in the Palace of GOD in his triumphant Church. So we must
conclude with the Prophet in the Psalm 73. that God is good to Israel, yea,
to all those, which serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of
their life, although on the contrary, the flesh, the world, and Satan, do
grumble, gnash their teeth, and snarle at it. And in another place (Psalm 66.)
the Prophet says, O inhabitants of the earth, bless our God, and sound aloud
his praise: It is he that has reestablished our soul in life, and has not
suffered our feet to slip. For thou O God have proved us, thou have tried and
purified us, as silver is tried and purified. As if he did say, justly thou
might consume us, and thou art content to try us, cleansing us from the
filth of so many scand^lls and imputations wherewith we have been disgraced
and diffamed. We are fallen into the fire of afflictions, which should burn
and waste us to nothing, and are up to the ears in the water of extreme
anguish, and agony of body and mind, where if we had our deserts we should
be stifled, and strangled, but thou have enlarged and set us at ease: The peace
and holy liberty which we enjoy by thy free gift, is as a Mansion or dwelling
in a large pleasant country to all those that desire to live and without
ceasing to praise thee. Behold how faith does accommodate it self, is willing
and ready, sweening and mitigating all the pains. griefs, and discommodities
of this present life, quenching also all the fiery darts of Satan,
especially, despair and distrust. It is she which has the custody and
charge of all the Armor of God, which shrowdes us under the helmet of
salvation, with the strong shield of affiance, has the sword of the word of
truth in her hand, is well shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace,
does cross and resist all impediments and letts, and bestirres her self on
every side in the enemies camp. If then (as S. Cyprian says, writing to those
of Thibara) men practice and learn to fence, and to fight pell mell, not
sparing life nor lymme, making great reckoning of a corruptible Crown, which
is set upon their heads in the presence of the Emperor, how much more
excellent and glorious is the combat, whereof God is the Emperor and
sovereign, and his Angels are not only spectators, but moderators and Judges,
and propound to us a Crown of glory? Let us then arm our selves, says he,
with a simple and pure understanding, a sound and sincere faith, and with a
devout zeal and courage.

But let us yet come nearer, and according to our project and purpose, let us
see what help and comfort Philosophy, and faith do yield and afford us
against our natural frailty. While we are in this world we cannot have
freedom and ease from all our affections, perturbations, and passions, nor
from all sense of our misery. Then seeing it is so, let us at least take a
course to moderate them, and with patience to bear our condition: which we
shall easily do, if we call to mind, what our sins do deserve; and how
great the wisdom and goodness of God is, in turning our adversities and
troubles to be profitable and wholesome medicines and helps unto us. Let us
then first acknowledge in our original and natural frailty, that which is
remarkable, and to be observed in all the children of Adam. S. Bernard says in
one of his Sermons upon the Canticles; Man being advanced and raised to honor,
is become as a brute Beast: he dwelt in a garden, and had a pleasant dwelling,
and very delightful, was not pressed with any care or annoyances, wanted
nothing, was surrounded with sweet smelling flowers, with fruits pleasing to
the taste, was crowned with glory and honor, was supervisor and Lord over all
the works, which his Creator had made. But his chiefest excellency consisted
in this, that he was created after the Image of God, was a companion with the
Angels, and with all the companies of the host of Heaven; But he has
changed this glory, and is become like to the Beasts. O lamentable and
woeful change! That man a trimmer of a garden of pleasure, Lord of the earth,
a citizen of Heaven, a domestique of the Lord God of hosts, an heir of
heavenly happiness, by a sudden change is become naked, miserable, poor,
like to the beasts, which with a bridle we awe and keep under! Now, as man is
come naked out of his mothers belly, so shall he return to the earth,
carrying nothing with him of all his labor and travail. For to draw some
comfort from that which has been spoken, let us now and then ponder and weigh
with our selves, that it is our fault and misdoinges has brought these evils
and miseries, and others much more grievous and heavy upon us, that we must
not blame God, but our own disobedience. Then let us consider in God such a
mercy, as does easily swallow up all the miseries of this present life, in as
much as he turns and changes them to medicines profitable to us. To which
purpose S. Augustine said upon the exposition of the Psalm 22. Man knows that
God is a Physician, that affliction is a remedy procuring his salvation, and
not a punishment effectuating his damnation. When a remedy is sought for, the
Physician brings a searing iron and fire; thou cryest, thy Physician hears
well enough thy roarings and clamours, but he hears not to do as thou
would have him to do, but to heal thee. Behold, according to S. Paul in
the fifth Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, how the Physic works;
Tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope. Let us then have before our eyes this molehill of earth, whereof the
body is kneaded and made, and the grace of the holy Ghost proceeding out of
the most hidden treasures of Gods love, whose will it has bin that this vile
mass of earth should be a vessel of his glory: Let us make reckoning of it,
in as much as our bodies (so says the Apostle 1 Cor.) have been made members
of Jesus Christ, and temples of the holy Ghost. Let us not be less considerate
and ingrate then the incredulous and profane Gentiles, who have so deeply
considered the frailty, viletie, misery of our original, as Lactantius in
the second book of his Institutions, Chap. 12. collects out of the first book
of Ciceroes laws, that they have acknowledged that this wretched poor living
creature, in whom is seen such wisdom, prudence, wit, memory, a large and
deep understanding and reason, was created of the high God, to be elevated and
advanced to an excellent state and condition.

Although then other living creatures, devoid of reason, seem better provided
and armed touching the body, then man: Some being very swift of foot, as
Hares, Does, and Stagges: others armed with sharp claws and horns, as Lions
and Bulls: others dight, trimmed and sheltered with feathers and wings, as
Birds and Fowls: yet notwithstanding, this is done by the exquisite providence
of God, as Chrysostom notes well, That all the power and strength of man,
should be in the soul, and that man should be so much the more strong in God,
as he is more weak and naked without. This mystery and secret long ago was
acknowledged by David, and all wise old men to teach the younger, ought to
remember it. Thou have, says he (speaking to God) put thy strength in the
mouth of little children, and sucking babes. Surely in this first age,
sustained, governed, guarded, and protected by a special wisdom, and
admirable power of the Creator, he seems to lay, as the first foundations of
his power and might, to make them manifest to them that have any understanding,
thereby to quell and confound with shame the enemies of his name, Atheists, and
profane persons, which dare contest and contend against him. In the Psalm 22.
the Prophet strengthened by his own experience, says assuredly, O God, thou
art he which drewest me out of my mothers belly, thou gave me assurance and
safety at my nurses breast; I have been in thy custody, tuition, and charge
from the womb, thou art my strong God from my conception. And in the Psalm
139. Thou have possessed my reins from the time that I was lapped up, and
covered in my mothers womb, I will celebrate and praise thee, for that I was
made in so strange and wonderful a manner: Thy works are wonderful, and my
soul knows it right well: The good proportion and setting in order of my
bones, was not hid from thee, when I was made in a secret place, and curiously
fashioned beneath in the earth. Thine eyes did see me when I was as a
formelesse embryon, and all these things were written in thy book before they
were. O mighty God, how precious then unto me are the considerations of thy
works, and how great is the number of them: will I take upon me to count
them? they are more in number then the smallest sands. These are the holy
meditations of David. So then, casting our eyes to the ground, upon this little
heap of earth, whereof our bodies are formed, we learn to hang down the
head, and bow down the crest, and to abate more then three parts of our pride
and self conceit: On the contrary, lifting up our eyes to heaven, from whence
our souls took their beginning, and where the great Father of spirits
dwelles, we have cause given us to rejoice, and occasion, with all alacrity
and readiness, to trample under our feet all those earthly and transitory
things, which nature it self teaches us to despise: And an instruction also
to lodge and harbor our meditations and thoughts in that Palace of infinite
glory, wherein we are assured, that all those that are righteous and
sanctified to God, by Jesus Christ, shall be assembled to bless and praise
him for ever. If on our birth day, we are extruded and come forth into the
world crying and weeping; Let us also remember, that presently we receive the
visible sign in Baptism of our admittance into the Church, and habitation of
the living God, that we put on Jesus Christ, that we are consecrated to God,
that we receive the Hostage, and pledge of that happy life, to which the Son
of God has regenerated and begotten us by his precious blood: That it is he
that wipes away our tears, which gives us good hope and eternal consolation,
which he sufficiently ratified then, when he so lovingly caused the little
children to be brought unto him, laid his hands on them, saying to his
Disciples, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for to
such is the kingdom of heaven. So much touching the first beginnings of our
life.

I come now to other afflictions and crosses, which seem to assail, and to
lay near siege to aged persons. These opponents are so mighty and many in
number, which Solomon considering, has oftentimes said in his Ecclesiastes,
That all that is wrought under the sun is very vanity; That man reapes no
profit of his labor and travel, and that all his days he feels affliction
and vexation of spirit. Having showed that all the sovereign good, dreamed on
in outward and transitory things, is a mere imagination, he wisely
concludes, That this good consists in the fear of God, and keeping his
Commandments, declaring that all man's good consists herein: We cannot more
briefly and certainly clear this point. For whosoever knows not God, to
reverence and stand in awe of him with a pure heart, and to subscribe and
submit himself to all his Statutes and Laws, walks, not in verity, but
vanity: Wherefore, it behooues us ever to come to this point; That there is
nothing more miserable, then the man which understands not, loves not, nor
seeks after, nor knows any thing, but the things under the sun, and which
happen many times without travel or pains taking, to the wicked, and succeed
quite cross and contrary to the godly and good. But happy is the man, which
earnestly looks up to God, walking in his presence, and believes that all
things shall further the help together for his good. Light shines to him in
darkness, he stands fast and is never moved, he fears no evil tidings,
trusting assuredly in the Lord. If he want the necessary things of this life;
his riches are in Gods hand and keeping, who gives him contentation and
contentment. Has he a costly lewd wife, and bad dissolute children? It is the
proof of his patience, and the exercise of his faith, as it was in Job, and
David, of whom, one had a very spiteful shrewd wife, and the other children,
wholly given to lewdness and mischief; wit. Ammon and Absolon. Is he seized
with maladies, he calls to mind what Basil writes upon the Psalm 45.
Oftentimes, says he, sickness and maladies serve to tame and reclaim us: On
the contrary, sanitie and health often hurts enough, in that it helps and
furnishes many with occasions and instruments to do evil and mischief.
Again in the 124. Epistle, he says, Make account that a malady or
sickness serves for a schoolmaster, wherewith to attain to this good, that
making no reckoning of the body, you also despise whatsoever is frail or
transitory, troublesome, and past hope or recovery, to be placed in the
heavenly company, and to live in this world, as if already you were in
Paradise. Pondering these things in your mind, all your life will be a day of
feasting and joy, and it will be joyful unto you to impart your joy to many
others.

But why should we find it evil or strange, to see our body hardly handled
and kept under, which feeling it self fat, and well fed, pampred, and at too
much ease, will work the wrack and ruin of the soul; and as a hot furious
horse, boundeth, and reares up aloft, and seeks how to cast his rider, and to
lay him on the ground? Undoubtedly, man's proper strength, is an inward vigor
of mind, held up by and depending upon God, whose power and strength is
principally seen and discovered in our weakness. For which cause S. Paul
writes; Being weak, I am strong, 2. Cor. 12. 10. David was of the same mind
in his greatest agonies and sorrows. I am (says he, in the Psalm 38.)
weakened, and sore broken; I roared for the great grief and terror of my
heart. O Lord, my desire is before thee, and my sighing is not hid from thee;
my heart is tossed to and fro; my strength fails me, and the light of mine
eyes; yea they are no more unto me. But, seeing I wait on thee, O Lord, thou will answer, O my God. Forsake me not, be not thou far from me, my God.
Have thee to help me, O Lord, which art my salvation. So many excellent
promises dispersed throughout the whole Bible, shall they not have the efficacy
to reclayme and encourage us? Let us have a heed full eye (I pray you) to the
reiterated protestations of Gods love toward his, of that fire of love, which
all the waters of the world cannot quench. To which purpose Solomon spoke in
his last Chapter of the Canticles. Set me as a seal on thy heart, and as a
signet upon thine arm, for love is strong as death, and jealousy is cruel as
the grave; the coals thereof are fiery coals, and a very vehement flame: Many
waters cannot quench this love, and the floodes cannot drown it: If a man
would give for it all the substance of his house, it would be contemned. The
Prophet Isaiah also says, in the Chapter 44. Thus has the Lord said, that
made thee, and formed thee from the womb, and which helps thee. Fear not, O
Jacob, my servant, the righteous whom I have chosen, for I will power water
upon him which is thirstly, and floodes upon the dry land, I will power my
Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon those which proceed out of thy
loins. And in the Chapter 46. O house of Jacob, and all that remain of the
house of Israel, whom I have borne from the womb, and brought up from the
birth. I will do the the same to your old age, yea I will bear you until
your hoare white age: I have made you, I will bear you, and I will carry you,
I will rescue and deliver you.

As touching old men (I speak to those that are wise) they shall find in the
Scriptures, forcible and fitting arguments of comfort. For first, although the
life of God be blissful and unchangeable, yet for the honor and majesty of
his eternity, Daniel calls him, The Ancient of days: not that therefore it is
lawful to represent God in the shape of an old man, with a great long white
beard, as many ignorant folk do, which never read Moses nor the Prophets, and
which are ignorant of the nature and essence of the true God: But that we
should conceive this incomprehensible Majesty, to be nothing else, but
wisdom, a venerable supremacy and greatness of estate, and a perfect
sanctity. Secondly, we are taught to reverence old men, to honor their
persons, to rise up with great respect to these white heads and beards, and to
show thereby, that we acknowledge in this their old age, the stampes and prints
of God, as Moses exhorts us in the 19. Chap. Leuit. v. 32. which we recite to
the same end and purpose, as we have done other sayings and sentences before,
whereunto we add this of a wise Elder, who writ Ecclesiasticus, in the third
Chapter of which book, he says; My son help thy father in his age, and
grieve him not so long as he lives; when his understanding fails him, have
patience and bear with him, and despise him not, but honor him as much as
thou can. For the good entreaty of thy father shall not be forgotten, but
shall be a fortress for thee against thy sins. The women of Bethlehem are
friendly and kind to the good old Naomi, for that her daughter in law Ruth, had
borne a son to Boaz. This (say they) may bring life again to thee, and
lenghthen thy days, and cherish and comfort thine old age. Ruth. 4. 15. God by
his Prophet Isaiah reprochet the Babilonians, that they were cruel and
unmerciful to the Jews, and laid a very heavy yoke upon them, Chap. 47. 6.
Also these wicked people were as hammers, which the just Judge of the world
used to break in pieces the old and the young, as Jeremy speaks in the 52.
Chapter, Verse. 22. whence proceeded those woes, and alasses of the Prophet in
his Lamentations 4. Chap Verse. 16. They reverenced not the face of the Priests,
nor had compassion of the Elders. And in the fifth Chapter following, Verse. 12.
The Princes are hanged up by the hands, and they reverence not the face of the
Elders. That which Ezechiel proposes in the 9. chap. v. 6. is most fearful,
and it suffices us to mark and observe it, that our wise Vicillard do
thereby take heed. On the contrary, in Zachariahs days, there being a question
and demurre concerning the reestablishment of the people, and of the favors
that God was minded to bestow upon them, Zachariah declares in the 8. Chapter
Verse. 4. That the God of hosts, said thus, There shall old men and women dwell
in the streets of Ierufalem, and every man have his staff in his hand for
very age. But Isaiah in the third Chapter, Verse. 2. and 5. puts for signs
of the terrible judgment of God to Jerusalem, That the old men shall be taken
away and destroyed, that the child shall exalt himself and presume against
the ancient, and the abject and vile, against the honorable. If in these
times there be any presage of the decay and ruin of Churches and
Commonweals, it is that the number of wise old men is very small, that the age
of the worthies and renowned men is vanished and past: That those that are
children in years and understanding, are percht up and set up in the places of
the experienced valiant, and learned. An extreme misery which we cannot
sufficiently describe and lament.

But as good fruit when it is ripest and mellow, is most delicate and pleasant
to the taste, and as the last draught contenteth the thirsty person: In like
sort, pleasure seems to reserve her dainties to the last, and for the last
service and mess. So likewise we say, that old age has in it, I know not
what, that is notable and more excellent then other ages, and the sayings of
the ancients, as the singing of swannes, are daily excellent monitors and
admonitions to us. If we listen to the last words of the Patriarchs, Moses,
Joshua, David, and give them the hearing, we shall in them find an ample
proof hereof. Such Histories are familiar to wise old men, and it is much
better to read them in themselves, then here to recite them. What illumination
of Gods spirit is revealed and manifest in the sayings of infinite Martyrs,
especially of such as were old, even from the Apostles time till now? It is
matter for a greater book then this small Tractat, or Manuel. In the second
book of the Maccabees, Chap. 6. It is spoken of Eleazar, one of the chief
Scribes, an aged man, who being pressed, and instantly solicited, to feign and
make semblance, to adhere and obey to the superstitions of the Heathens, upon
an honest and upright mind worthy his age, the excellency of his years, the
honor of his gray hayres, his good conversation from his childhood, and
chiefly Gods holy law, suddenly required that he might be led to the place of
execution, adding these words worthy of memory. It becomes not our age to
dissemble, least many young persons diffident and wavering, that Eleazar being
fourscore and ten years old, was gone and yielded to profane ceremonies,
thorough mine hypocrisy and dissimulation (for a small moment of a caduque and
transitory life) might be seduced, and I bring a malediction and curse and a
stain and reproach to mine old age: for though I should be delivered from the
torments of men, yet could I not escape the hand of the Almighty, neither
alive nor dead. Wherefore, manfully changing and giving up this life, I shall
show my self such as mine age requires and meriteth: And I shall leave a
notable example for such as be young, to die willingly and courageously for the
venerable and holy laws. To this worthy old man, let us join the constant
Martyr Polycarpus, a Disciple of S. John the Apostle, and of the Church of
Smyrna in Asia. As he was brought to the torturing fire, the Proconsul having
most earnestly solicited him to recant and renounce his faith, with promise of
liberty: I have, said this wise old man and constant Martyr, these fourscore
and six years served Jesus Christ, and all this time he did me no outrage nor
hurt; how should it then be possible to bring me to be of the mind to
blaspheme my Savior and King? I will never do it. If you feign and pretend
you know not my quality, I would have you to know that I am a Christian. Many
other words of admirable constancy were then uttered by this reverend old man,
who being armed with invincible courage, presently suffered death for the name
of the Lord.

These two examples shall suffice to show, that the nearer wise old men are
unto death, be it easy or violent, the greater is their courage, the nearer
are they to the kingdom of Heaven: And still as their bodies grow weak, the
holy Ghost does fortify and strengthen them in such sort, that no torments
nor tortures can quell, or dismay their stout mind; nor no Bug-beare, or
terror is ghastly or horrid enough to fray and affright them.

The Lord having made a covenant with his Church, which here on earth is
compounded of all sorts of people, has given unto it two strong propps of
hope, to wit, his spirit, and his true word. This spirit is called the spirit
of wisdom, understanding, counsel, power, knowledge, of sanctification,
verity, consolation, life, faith, grace.

The word is called, the word of life, of salvation, of the grace of God, of
our reconciliation with the father of Heaven: A word testifying that all
things were given us necessary to life, and piety, by the knowledge of him,
who has called us by his own power and glory, by which are given unto us
great and precious promises, that by them we (which are regenerated by the
holy Ghost, and the word) should be made partakers of the divine nature, being
delivered and freed from the concupiscences and corruptions of the world.
Whosoever has not this spirit of Jesus Christ, and trusts not in the
promises of God, a midd all his babble and prattle of the contempt of death,
and the benefit of old age, is still in doubt, has feeble hands, trembling and
staggering knees, haltes, feeds himself with the wind, and not with any
assured consolation. But the just do live by faith, are strengthened and
vpheld by it, which makes them rejoice all ways in the Lord, who sanctifies
them, preserues whole and entire their mind, soul, and body unblameable,
until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XV. An advise to wise old men, containing the summarie and substance of
their duty until their last gasp.
IT should remain now to treat of death, and the certain remedies against it.
But before we enter therein, we will propound to our wise Vieillard an advise
drawn and taken out of the volumes of sacred Philosophy, to lead him more
easily on to that whereunto he aspires. But it behooves those who are almost
at their ways end, more heedfully to consider both the way they have gone, and
are to go, for their further encouragement to their duty. Behold then what I
pretend to remember to whomsoever being in old age will vouchsafe to hearken to
him who is drawing near unto it. It is reason that the grace of God, witnessed
in so many sorts so many years, and sealed in our Baptism at our first
entrance into the world, and into the Church, when we have rightly apprehended
in whom we are dead and in whom quickened; do cause us to wish a continual
sense and feeling of our adoption by his spirit, speaking to us by his word,
and witnessing with our spirit that we are the sons of God. This sense and
feeling does engender or beget an excellent desire, an earnest devotion, a
firm resolution, to yield him obedience all our life long, but more at the
dissolution, and end of our life, then at the beginning, which is devoide of
knowledge, conscience, experience, wisdom, plunged and drowned the greater
part of time in ignorance, self opinion, insolency, and ribauld and
lascivious impudency. Now then it behooues so soon as we feel the motions of
this grace, that our hearts be replenished with a sincere and lively affection
to obey God, not according to our worldly sense, but following the rule which
he himself does propose and set down unto us. Touching this affection it is
commended unto us by general and special reasons. The general reasons are;
that our God is holy, and that we his people cannot cleave unto him, except we
be holy likewise: then as members belonging to Jesus Christ our head and
redeemer, we ought to be made conformable to him, imitating his life, which is
called the obedience to God his Father, even to the death of the cross. The
special reasons are; First, that God is our Father. Secondly, that Christ has
washed us by his precious blood, and incorporated us into him. Thirdly, that
this our head is ascended up into heaven. Fourthly, that we are the temples of
the holy Ghost. Fifthly, that our bodies be predestined to the last
resurrection, and our souls to immortality, both of them to everlasting
glory. Whereupon it follows, that it is horrible ingratitude not to be
willing to obey the will of our heavenly Father; that it is madness to return
to the filthiness from which we have been so dearly and preciously cleansed
and purged; that it is detestable iniquity to wish and to will the members of
Jesus Christ to be joined to Satan, and to the world; that is but reason for
ever to bury all earthly affection; to aspire to a better life; to be by a
lively faith set in the heavenly places, and to feel and taste of life and
everlasting glory; that we must not grieve him which dwells in us, our
counselor, guide, and comforter: That it is good reason, to preserve our
selves immaculate, and pure, even until the day of our Lord.

Having treated of our affection, let us speak of the rule thereof declared in
such wise, and so expressly in the law of God, to make us yet to see, as the
soul and main of all, that his good pleasure has been, to form and fashion
our manners, by a most exact manner and order, and which serves as a
commentary of all that is contained in the said Law: That is, that we should
renounce our selves, to the end to be fit to apply and frame our selves
sincerely and wholly to serve God, because we are not our own but Gods.
Whereupon it follows, that a Christian (be he young or old, and the old is
more bound to this duty, then the young, because God has vpheld and supported
him long, has bestowed many blessings and benefits on him, and a blessed
life, whereinto he is now entering) ought to search and learn out, what God
wills and approves, briefly, whatsoever serves to the advancement of his
glory. Those which are of an other mind, are styled and termed by the voice
of truth, ungracious, hypocrites, ungrateful, reprobates. All these licentious
and inordinate humors S. Paul in his Epistle to Titus comprehends under the
word, Impiety: To which, he opposes the duties of Christians, marshalled and
ranged under the three excellent gifts of the holy Ghost in the regenerate, to
wit, sobriety, justice, and piety. And in this sacred triangle is included
the renouncing of our selves. And the Apostle not without cause has begun with
temperance, which especially concerns us, which moderates our lusts, and
desires, banishing and driving away sensual, carnal, worldly, and unclean,
and filthy affections, much more their detestable effortes and effects. It is
she which does fashion and frame us to a true square, rulle, and order, as
well in the moderation of our wishes, and dreams of worldly houour and
greatness, as of our inordinate beastly concupiscences, suggested by the
unclean spirit; In the violent pursuit, seeking, and hunting after, proud
usurping, sacrilegious detayning, and miserable possessing of goods, not goods,
but perishing and transitory, and which do not enlarge the straight bounds
of this present life, where we are confined (and this is our happiness,
comfort, tranquillity) to deliver up and resign our persons, goods, our
affairs, briefly, all that we love, into the hands of our heavenly Father,
humbly beseeching him every hour to subdue, guide, and govern our hearts by
his grace and power. Whereupon it follows, that it ill becomes all Christians,
much more wise old men, to be voluptuous, ambitious, or covetous: Also that in
all the accidents and chances of our life, we ought quietly to submit and yield
to the will of God.

Touching the word Justice, which respects our duty toward our neighbors,
it requires two things: The one is, that we rightly examining and
considering, what we our selves are, we should prefer others before us; the
other, that our study and endeavor tend to this end, faithfully to procure
their benefit and good. In this behalf, it is wholly requisite that we be
furnished with humility, patience, a frank and liberal mind, least we fall
into the neglect and contempt as well of those that are of the household of
faith, as of those which seem not to be, not shrowding our selves under this
vain subterfuge, shift, and coullor, that our neighbor is a stranger, one we
know not, contemptuous, base, vile, ungrateful, an enemy unto us. For to all
this the law of humanity, charity, the image of God, his honor, mercy, and
goodness makes a suyply.

Moreover, every good doing and deed ought to proceed from a well informed
conscience, and a sincere affection of heart, without which our works are
soyled, and tainted with damnable hypocrisy, with perverse confidence, vain
arrogancy, infamous reproach, fond opinions; As that God is our debtor to repay
and requite us, that our neighbors are exceedingly bounden and obliged unto
us; yea, that having performed some small duty in this, or in that, we are
freed and discharged (even in the sight of him of whom we hold all that we
have, to whom we owe all that we have, without whom we are nothing of our
selves, without whom we can do nothing of our selves, of whom only we ought
to glory, in whom alone it behooues us to put our affiance and trust) from all
other duties of charity, whereof we willingly make our selves ignorant, or
basely refuse, neither loving God, nor our neighbors, nor ourselves, and
living one with another as brute beasts before the eyes of our just Judge.

But it is requisite that our wise Vieillard mount up yet higher, though the
way be narrow, rugged, uneven, steep, and headlong, to wit, that he be
continually ready and prepared to bear the cross, which God lays upon him,
that is, to be exercised within and without by diverse temptations, and
afflictions all the remainder and rest of his days. If from his youth he has
borne the yoke, has not bin brought up in the shade, but has endured storms,
cold, and extreme parching heat, his travail toward the evening of his life
will be less tedious, seeing the hour of his rest is near and at hand.
Hereupon he will call to mind that his heavenly Father, who from the cratch
did handle in like manner his own, and only beloved son, will also that his
members be made conformable to their head, and has predestined them
thereunto: whereof this most excellent comfort does follow, that being under
the cross, we partake of the afflictions and sufferings of our Lord.
Furthermore, for diverse reasons, afflictions are necessary for Christians, more
particularly to old men. First, the vain assurance of their flesh, the opinion
of their sufficiency, their obstinate selfe-willd conceit, their arrogancy,
require such a correctiue. Secondly, they have need to be kept in humility,
and in a reverend awe of God, to the end so much the more heartily to seek and
sue for his grace, without which it would be impossible for them to stand under
the burden, much less to savor and relish well how sweet, and wonderful
the Lord is in their bodily and spiritual deliverances. Thirdly, It is
necessary also that their patience and obedience, may more evidently appear,
it being impossible for them to stop unto God, if he do not awe and
reclaim them by afflictions. Fourthly, Their life past is had in remembrance,
to the end, that being chastised in this world by the rod of a Father, they may
be kept in order in their masters service, who scourging their bodies,
comfort and saves their souls in the hope of the last resurrection;
briefly, he chastises those that are his in this world, that they may not
perish with the world.

Now among the sundry sorts of crosses and afflictions, one among others
carries with it singular contentment, as when we shall suffer for
righteousness, for Christ's name sake, for the maintenance and defense of Gods
word and truth. Christians willingly lay down their necks under the light
yoke of the Lord, and rejoice at it, not with a stupid, or hasty mad
braine-sicke, or fond toying joy; their rejoicing is spiritual, accompanied
with that magnanimous resolution, which appeared in the Apostles, after they
had received the holy Ghost, and in all their true Disciples. This does not
vanquish nor abolish true patience, consisting in this, that Christians do not
faint altogether under the burden that presses them: But in the anguish and
bitterness of their hearts feel the sweetness of the consolations of the
holy Ghost, which comfort and strengthens them unto the end, so as the
love of God vanquisheth the vanity which cumbers them in the world. In this
appears wherein the Philosophers patience differs from the Christians. One
says, that it is an irresistable necessity, or doing of that which must be
done, and counsels to bear what is unavoidable: But the other tells us,
that we ought so to depend upon the consideration of the just, wise, and good
will of God, that we acknowledge that our sufferings in the world are equal,
agreeable, honorable, profitable: that therefore we ought to be courageous
and resolute in them, glorying in the constancy that our God gives us, and
will always give us at need.

The principal fruit, which the wise Vieillard may gather from the tree of
affliction, is, that by the taste thereof he should be enured to contemn this
present life, which would beguile and bewitch him, if all things succeeded
according to his sensual appetite and lust. Afterward, this fruit makes him by
faith, to relish and taste the sweetness and pleasure of the happy life, which
is reserved for us in heaven. For if in youth and old age, We see nothing but
troubles, and dangers in our course here on earth, if our delights be mingled
with griefs, our honey with gall, our pleasures be steeped and drenched in
distastes and discontentments, our mirth end in tears, to what purpose should
we start back and retire? And why should we be sorry to go out of prison,
to go into the Palace of liberty; out of the company of sinners, to be with
the just, and in the heavenly Jerusalem to rest from our labors? But as it is
commended to old and young to have their hearts, where there treasure is, which
ought to be in heaven, consequently not to be affectionated, and inamoured of
this present life, which is indeed no life, and is forbidden them to love the
world and the things in the world: So must they not hate and abhor this
earthly life, nor take occasion by the cumbers thereof, to be ingrate toward
God, much less to mutter and murmr against his justice, or to censure his
providence: Seeing that our life here, though short, painful, and miserable,
is an excellent gift, yea, an assured testimony of Gods love and favor to us.
Let us then so use it, that whatsoever we shall abate (if we be wise) of the
disordinate love thereof, may be added to a fervent and holy desire to be with
the soonest received into heaven. For we should do ill, to wish death, but to
be with the Lord, to glorify him in the triumphant Church, more compleately
and fully, then in the Church militant. Let us only desire for this cause to
live on earth, to praise our Father which is in heaven, and let us stand and
keep sentinel, to wit, our vocation, wherein our chiefetaine and sovereign
head has placed us, till he call us away, which is by the call and hand of
death. True it is, that old men are no less frighted and skared, sometimes
more, then young men, when we tell them of death. But the desire to be with our
Savior in heaven, ought so to overcome this frailty, that faith may persuade
us devoutly to wish that which nature is afraid of. By what badges and
colors should we be known to be Christians, and believers, if we should so
much fear the day of death, which brings us to the true land of the living?
Should we not be more wretched then the beasts, if we should not leap and skip
for joy, pronouncing these comfortable words, I believe the remission of
sins, the resurrection of the flesh, the life everlasting. Are not these the
privileges of the holy universal, or Catholic Church, and of the communion
of Saints? Then shall our miseries and infinite temptations be abolished: Then
shall we enjoy unspeakable glory in heaven, above all them, when after this
happy resurrection, all our enemies shall be vanquished, and God shall be all
in all to his elect.

But forasmuch, as the way to heaven lies open unto us in earth, it is
requisite that Christians old and young, know to use well this present life,
and the means to support it; because without this knowledge and skill, there
is nothing but perils, mischances, and distasters in our terrene and earthly
pilgrimage, which it is reason to aid, comfort, and further (not to hinder and
let) by using our means well, as well by a supply to our necessities, as by
honest lawful recreations, and fitting to our ages and callings. In both these
respects, two extreamities are to be shunned; Too great austeritie on the one
side; dissolution, and intemperance on the other. Those which boast and glory
before God and men, of a certain hypocritical, and dissembled abstinence and
continence, and molded in their own fancies, or others like themselves, are
way wardly wise and Timons, enemies of honest society; persons which have but
a vain, ridiculous show and appearance, who for the the most part commit in
secret, things reserved to the just punishment of the Lord: persons
unreasonable, vnindifferent to themselves and others, ignorant of the doctrine
of holiness, true Christian liberty, enemies to Jesus Christ, his offices and
benefits. All the life of Gods children, who in the Common weal, Church, and
their own families, are profitable servants and ministers, condemns these
frantike wizards, who have made their vaunt and boast of a Moonkish lazy life,
who under player-like habits, have hatched the greatest pride and counterfeite
confidence that may be imagined, who have insolently defied, and spit at the
lawful recreations of good men, and converted the graces of the Lord into
uncouth and strange dissolutions. But to stir this filth no longer: As those
that are young and old endued with the fear of the Lord, know that it is
permitted them to use the goods and things of thig life, not only for
necessity, but also for honest delight, so it be to the glory of God, the
relief of their neighbor, and the common edification of all, and to be for
their own particular, so much the more adapted and fitted to converse and
keep company: So do they not cease to condemn, as much as their calling
requires all dissolutions, enormous, and licentious living, in fine, all abuse
of the things of this life. Hereupon it is good to remember: First, that all
the goods we possess, were ordained, that we should duly acknowledge the
Author and giver of them, magnifying with thanksgiving his liberality to us,
which intemperate and dissolute persons cannot do. Secondly, that all these
goods ought to be abandoned, yea accounted as nothing, even despised as dung,
in comparison of the excellent knowledge of our salvation in Jesus Christ, and
of that glory which is reserved for us in heaven, which is quenched and dies,
when we are too much addicted and wedded to goods transitory and perishing: For
as much as we excessiuely abuse them in prosperity, making them instruments
of our ruin and hurt, which are to procure help, and further our good: For
that also we being deprived of them, cease not to think and to say, that all
is lost and gone, that we are miserable. Indeed so we are in carrying our
selves thus; but we have a good Lord, who does infinitely help and support
us; but it is to bind and oblige us so much the more to our duty. Thirdly,
that the holy Scripture for the ordering of our goods, does teach us, that they
are given to us upon condition to yield account of them sooner or later, yea,
by him that has expressly forbidden the abuse of them, whom also we cannot
deceive or abuse. Fourthly, that to discern the right use from the abuse o^
^orldly goods, God has ordained that every man in all the actions of this
life, cast his eyes, and look to his vocation and calling, that he rashly
undertake nothing, nor with a doubting and unresolved conscience. Whereupon it
follows, that infidels, superstitious, unjust, dissolute, profane persons and
Atheists, are infinitely culpable and guilty before God, because they
outragiously and above measure abuse this present life, and the good they
possess in it; all things being polluted to them, they themselves being
polluted both in body and mind. For conclusion of our counsel and advice, the
wise Vieillard shall remember, that the life of every Christian young and old,
consists in these six Articles. First, That we have a sincere affection to
obey God. Secondly, That the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, contained
in the Canonical Books of the old and new Testament, is the rule of his
obedience. Thirdly, That he renounce himself, to the end to yield and submit
himself unto God. Fourthly, That he patiently and cheerfully bear the cross,
that is, all kind of affliction, that it shall please God to inflict upon him.
Fifthly, That in all his course of life, he meditate upon that better life
which is prepared in heaven. Sixthly, That the use of transitory goods do
provoke, and incite him to go forward more courageously to the end of his high
calling.

CHAP. XVI. Worthy Meditations for all persons, especially the wise Vieillard,
of what quality and condition soever he be.
WE propound further to the wise Vieillard, that which follows, to the end
that in his own particular, for the dignity and honor of his age in the sight
of God and good men, he meditate thereon. I say then, tha^ ^^ery man,
especially he that is far gone in years, ought continually to have Jesus
Christ in his meditation and thought, which he shall stay and settle upon the
considerations following. As Jesus Christ after he was baptized, was solemnly,
and with a loud voice from heaven, declared to be the beloved Son, in whom
the Father delighted: So a Christian inwardly may know, by the efficacy of the
holy Spirit, witnessing in and with his, that he is the child of God. And when
after his initiation and entry into the house of God, sealed by the sacred
sign of Baptism, it happens unto him at many years end, to be led into
the desert, as his head was, there to be brought to extreme hunger, to be
pressed with sundry necessities and wants, environed with the dangers,
persecutions, miseries and adversities of this world, by means whereof Satan
assayeth to make him think (as he assailed on the same side at first our Lord
Jesus) that he is out of the number of Gods children, being destitute of all
helps and comforts, and many ways perplexed; Thou ought not, O wise
Vieillard, of what quality or condition soever thou be, to resign and yield up
the buckler of faith, but opposing it against the fiery darts of that wicked
one, firmly believe, that God is thy Father, has care of thee, that all his
visitations are full of love, do proceed from his wisdom, for his glory, and
thy salvation and welfare. I know that this outrageous one will persevere and
go on in his calumny, will say that thou should make request unto God, if
thou be one of his children, that these stones be turned into bread, that is,
that these hard, sharp, and violent adversities, which do batter and split in
pieces thy heart be changed into prosperity: But do thou answer as thy
Savior, that the children of God are not sustained and maintained by goods,
and things transitory, and perishing, but by God himself, and by his rich,
and blessed promises. If he charge and set upon thee another way, exclamining,
that if thou think thy self so privileged, that thou should cast thy
self down headlong from the top of the pinnacle of the temple, that is, from
the high degree of the spiritual, political, oeconomicall dignity and
jurisdiction, wherein thou art promoted and advanced far higher and above many
others, to tumble thy self into some stinking sink of impiety, injustice,
defamatorie lewdness, and villainy, and he do add withal that nothing shall
follow of it, which thou ought to fear, that no body shall know ought of
it, that thou shall have a foul wide mouth, and a brazen impudent face, to
deny all; yea even that God is much obliged to thee, that his Angels have a
care of thee, that thou always have at a pynch of need ready in thy sleeue a
good peccaui, that whatsoever happen, if thou go the way leading to hell, it
is notwithstanding the way to Paradise: Make him this answer, It is written,
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God; but on the contrary, seeing that of his
so great benignity, goodness, and grace he has made me his, I am so much the
more obliged and bound to honor him, thank him, and to study and endeavor to
assure my calling. Again, if the tempter set before thine eyes all the world,
and thereupon demand of thee to do him homage and worship, thou feeling thy
self by faith to be the son of God, and heir of heaven, disdain, and
despise these shadows, dreams, smoakie vapors, falling down prostrate
before the only true God, thy hope, life, and salvation. Who, where-as thou
were by nature a child of wrath, a member of the first Adam, a brance of a
thorny, bitter, venomous, corrupt, and wild plant, has cut and taken thee
from it, and graffed thee into Jesus Christ, the stock of life, and the
fruitful, pure olive branch, so that thou have been made a living member of
him: which requires that thou have neither strength or vigor, nor motion or
progress whatsoever; but as thou art moved and directed by the Spirit of
Jesus Christ dwelling in thee: that thou ought not to think, to will,
desire, or do any thing, but by divine inspiration, and as much as is
behoouefull for a living and spiritual member of the Lord. Upon this thou art
bound often to meditate, especially when the case is so, that thou art put to
thy trial, and to stand to thy tackling; And when thou do any thing
unbeseeming, and not agreeing to the dignity of a Christian, of one adopted of
God, and of a brother and member of Christ, be ashamed of thy self, and
defer not to repent and amend.

But forasmuch as our Savior was crucified, it follows that all his members
ought to be nailed to the cross with him. Which is first done by a fervent
charity, as it falls out to all those, who being enflamed, and changed by an
entire love to their Redeemer, feel all his sufferings, and are mortified with
him in his cross. Secondly, thou must yet in another manner be crucfied with
Jesus Christ; to wit, if thy feet will trample and trot up and down, to and
fro in the world to do some evil, nail them to the cross of the Lord, with
strong nails of charity. Does as much to thy hands, if they enterprise and
take upon them to do and commit some mischeeuous act and design, and with thy
wanton lustful eyes, including and shutting up in Christ thy intellect and
understanding, with his cogitations, the will with her desires and lusts, and
the soul with all her faculties and powers, so that all the old Adam being
crucified, the saying of the Apostle may be verified in thee, That those that
are of Christ, have crucified their flesh with the lusts thereof; Thirdly,
thou ought further to be fastened in another manner to the cross of Christ,
that as when he hanged on the cross, he was beheld naked, forlorn, emptied
and destitute of all the favor, friendship, respect, and wisdom of men, of
all worldly riches, pompes dignities, and pleasures, by reason whereof himself
said, That the Prince of the world found nothing of his in him: So likewise is
it requisite, that thou being emptied, and stripped of the world, and the
concupiscences and lusts thereof, should be wholly changed and devoted to
further and advance the glory of God. Whereupon the Apostle said; That our old
man is crucified, that the body of sin may be destroyed.

Our Lord having been nailed to his cross is there-dead, and we his members
ought to die to the world and to our selves, in such sort that as those which
are dead, we should make no more reckoning of the things of the world, should
be without sense or feeling of them, and should have neither synewe, nor vein
stretching or tending that way. To this purpose S. Paul said to the Colossians,
you are dead, and your life is hidd in Christ. Furthermore, we must also be
buried with the same Savior. He that is dead has no more care of the world,
yet before he be buried, the world has care to wind him up in a sheet, to
Coffyn him, then to carry him to his grave, where being interred, all society
and dealing one with another is at an end. In this sort, many who think
themselves to be dead to the world, pretending and making semblance to have
renounced it, are not yet buried, because the world makes great account of
them, does reverence and worship them. But it behooves us to be dead and
buried to the world, in such sort as we have as small account and esteem of
it, as of a stinking carrion, and that it esteem so of us. For it is an ill
sign, when the children of this world speak well of us. It is then a thing
requisite and necessary, that we be buried with Jesus Christ by Baptism into
his death. And it is fit also that we descend as our head into hell, that is,
that we have a right knowledge, and a lively feeling of our sins, which is
done, when we feel in our hearts the love of God our Father, in Jesus Christ
crucified. For being convicted to have offended him, we must descend to
confess, and earnestly to decest, and abhor our pride, ignorance,
infidelity, malice, obstinacy, and other vices. Seeing then that these
pollutions, and defilements have so much and so greatly displeased God, that to
purge them out of the world, he has delivered his own son to death, we are
brought to this point, in some sort to know our misery, and how much we our
selves do displease God. Moreover, as the Savior is risen again, so his
members ought to rise again in newness of life, in such sort that afterward
they have no motion, or inclination whatsoever, but to glorify God, walking as
persons whose conversation is already in heaven. Christ is risen again,
therefore his members ought to rise again, not only at the last day, but
hourly and continually in newness of life, so that thence forward they have
no motion, or disposition whatsoever, but to glorify God. Christ is risen
immortal, for that having triumphed over death, death has no more dominion
over him. Thereupon S. Peter says to Christians, seeing our Savior has
suffered for us in the flesh, it is reason that we be armed and resolved in
mind, that he which has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin; willing
and ready to say, that Christ the head, pledge, and surety for all Gods
children, coming to die, consequently to satisfy fully and wholly the Justice
of God for them, has clearly discharged the debt for all his members, who are
obliged to him, (unless they would crucify him again, and hold the precious
blood of the everlasting covenant for a profane thing) to cease and give over
to sin. For being dead to sin, buried to the world, risen again to God,
they ought to sin no more, nor to die in sin, much less to remain dead
therein: Sin ought no more to reign, nor have dominion in them, they ought
no longer to obey their evil lusts, but to curb and restrain them by the
spirit, which does quicken, guide, and govern them. Our Lord is ascended up
into heaven; In like sort, if we be living members of his mystical body, we
ought zealously, and with all our affections to be elevated and raised up unto
God, truly to say with S. Paul, that our conversation is in heaven. The same
S. Paul said to the Colossians, Chapter 3. 1. If you be risen again with
Christ, seek the things which are above, that is, heavenly and divine not
earthly and sensual.

Now as this good Savior soon after his ascension into heaven, for a
testimony of his infinite glory, in that he is set at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty, sent his holy spirit in a visible form upon his twelve
disciples; So we likewise after we are raised up to God, shall feel our selves
filled with this spirit, and with fervent charity, which will then appear,
when we shall illuminate, kindle, and inflame our neighbors in the love of
God, not only with our words, but especially with our doings and deeds, by
the good examples of a blameless life. Jesus Christ ought to come to judge the
quick and the dead; And if we be his members, a lively faith will make us to
feel the sweetness of these words of our Savior: Come ye blessed of my
Father possess the inheritance prepared for you before the foundation of the
world. Let us add, that as the judge of all, shall be judged of none, so shall
it be with all his true members in the great and last day. And who should judge
them? seeing the Father justifies them in his son, and by the mouth of his
son pronounces them just, blessed, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven.
Wherefore Christ Jesus denounces, that he which hears his word, and
believes in him, has eternal life, and shall not come to condemnation, that
is, shall not be judged but is passed from death to life, Ioh. 5. 24.

This needs no further exposition; And it were to blaspheme, whosoever would
call into question the certainty of our salvation by Jesus Christ alone, who
is dead for our sins, risen again for our justification, that we might be
the righteousness of God in him. Let us say further with S. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. 2.
3. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world? Know ye not that we
shall judge the Angels? But as after the last judgment, Christ Jesus shall
remain in heaven in incomprehensible glory; so true Christians, already risen
again by faith, and sitting together in the heavenly habitations with their
head, having their conversation in heaven, shall there appear, and be found
all perfect and entire in their bodies and souls with their Savior, who in
raising them up again, shall change their vile and contemptible bodies, so as
they shall be made conformable to his glorious body, according to the power,
and efficacy, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

If wise old men do in a quiet and sober mood meditate and consider these
things, every one of them hanging down the head, will cry within himself, O
wretch that I am, God has made me, by the gift of knowledge, capable of
infinite wonderful secrets and mysteries, and I seek contentment in vanity!
He has created me Lord and commander of all things, and I am the slave of the
Creatures! I ought to serve God alone, and I am in subjection to mine own
inordinate passions! He has created me upright, the more easily to behold and
look up to the place of my felicity; but I am more brutish then a beast,
which looks still down to the ground! Christ has made me a King, and a
Priest to God his Father, and sensuality does tyrannize and domineer over me,
and I sacrifice to mine own insolences, and lewdness! O what misery! Ought I
not to be fruitful, and abound in all good works, being a tree of
righteousness, and a heavenly plant? What do I? I draw no breath of life but
from the world, I bring forth nothing but iniquity, nothing but poison for my
self and others. Am I created after the Image of God, to be changed into a
Beast? What rests more for me but to be like the image of God! Should I I
then be a liar, a villain, a slanderer, an enemy of godliness,
righteousness, holiness? I am a little world, a world of wounders! shall I
then become a bottomless gulf of wickedness? I am the end and measure of
things, but I am like the mad man which kills himself with his own knife,
like the wicked rich man that damneth himself, and by the winding stayres of
his riches goes down to hell. I ought to be the benefit, and welfare of my
house and family, of my neighborhood, of a whole country, to procure true
peace and quietness to rule there, and I trouble mine own peace and rest, and
other men's too. I that am the measure and rule of all things, am my self out
of all measure and order, as much as can be spoken and more. The vessel
appointed to honor, which will fill it self with stinking mire and filth. The
temple of the holy Ghost, a most holy place, wherein Christ only ought to
enter and lodge, but so profaned that I am ashamed to think on it. Thou
say thou art a Christian, and thou make no conscience to wallow in
impurities, and hypocrisies, joining thy self with Satan, Antichrist, and the
world, so little thou regardest God, Jesus Christ, and his Church. Thou that
art light, art nothing but darkness. Thou that art a sheepherd, art become a
wolf. Thou that art the salt of the earth, art unsavory and tastelesse. Thou
that art the glory and peace of the world, thou sowest disgrace, reproach, and
trouble therein. Thou that art the brother, friend, and Tableguest of Christ,
do thou betray him with a kiss? Thou that art a member of Christ, where are
the motions that thou have of the spirit? Thou that art Christ's Lieutenant in
earth, or in thy house, or family, or over many houses, or families, will thou
daily war against thy Lord? Christ is thy garment, and thou put it off,
to cloth thee with shame, riot, dissoluteness, disorder. Thou art within
three stepps, within three fingers breadth of death, and thou think not on
the true life, and think only on the transitory and perishing life. But
think on the blessings and honors which God has bestowed on thee, on the
dangers, which he has guarded and protected thee from, of the true pleasures
which he offers unto thee, and thou will be ashamed of the false pleasures
which undo thee, thou will blush and be apalled to live and die as thou do
by a poor sorry fire: Thou will repent and fly to the throne of grace, to the
end, that having obtained it, thou render him thanks for the same, who in
special regard of his patience shows himself wonderful toward us, and
submitting thy self to obey his truth, thou will go on in silence to glorify
him to the end. Lo here a little coppie and pattern of some sighinges and
groanings for every wise old man, remembering himself, and calling to mind
Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XVII. Consolations against death, and how it ought to be feared, or not
feared.
WE present now some consolations to the wise Vieillard, to strengthen him
against death, and do show him how he ought to fear or contemn it: For in
this point it is, that wise men at last show what they are. He that has not
learned to die betimes, can hardly die well, and for one that does it,
thousands lagg behind where they perish. Many according to the saying of
Cicero, think old age is miserable, because it is so near approaching to
death, which among the most terrible things, being terrible to the children of
this world, for that it destroys the structure and frame of this mortal
body, and ends the life, which we keep and maintain with so much carking
and caring: We are not able to relate how great and many the terrors be, which
the apprehension of death causes in most persons, which live in the world,
yea, even in those men and women, which under the weight and burden of
extreme anguishes and griefs desire nothing more then to be gone hence. This
terror flows from the sense and feeling of the wrath of God, and a bad
conscience, with which when wicked ones come to feel themselves tormented,
they have no rest, nor can conceive nothing else but evil for them in death.
Therefore we cannot too much allaude and commend the saying of Sineca in the
Epistle 62. where he says; before I grew old I endeavored and studied to live
well: In my old age I frame and dispose my self to die well. It is well
spoken: For according to the counsel of Saint Augustine in his second book of
Christian doctrine; he cannot die ill, who has lived well, and hardly shall
any man whosoever make a good end which has lead a wicked life. But they are
grossly deceived, who think that old men and none else, are lodged in deaths
quarter, and that they only are pressed and obliged resolutely to awaite and
look for him: Seeing that in all places, and at all times he lies in wait
for persons of all ages and sexes, and says unto them, Stand, I take thee
prisoner by the great Kings commandment: pack hence away, come before thy
Judge. Death respects neither babe, young nor old, man nor woman, rich nor
poor, high nor low, strong nor weak.

The poor man's cottage built very low,
Death does demolish, and quite overthrow;
The rich man's Palace high towering and strong,
He shiuers in pieces, and lays it along.
Who knows not that war and the pestilence does sweep away out of the
world, many more little children, or strong able men, then aged persons? verily
all the life of man is nothing else but a road way to death We came into the
world upon this condition, to go out of it. In this we greatly err and
beguile our selves, as many most learned Philosophers and Divines have long
ago spoken, that we look upon death afar off, and still think him to be a
poor feeble impotent, which marches with a slow pace, and is yet five or six
thousand days journey behind the weakest of our troop: not considering that
death is on the threshold of our doors, yea, is our chamber-fellow, a guest at
our tables, and our bedfellow too. Death has already trussed up the fairest
and best part of our life, like a Sergeant, which taking us by the throat
carries away under his arm our money-bagges, our precious jewels, and upon his
yeomens shoulders our curious household moueables. Not to wonder hereat,
consider (said S. Basile) the changes and revolutions of ages. Do we not
observe how in three weeks of years three are dead? Childhood is passed away,
and all his fond and vain wishes have left us: As much may be said of other
parts of our life. The case being so then that the meditation of death
belongs to all persons, and that nothing is so miserable as not to know to
die, and that to fear death is an evil more dreadful then death it self,
seeing also that the proper force of faith, consists in this, not to be
afraid of death: It is meet now, somewhat the more at large to treat of this
point, and to show what other holy, and profane Authors do say therein to our
purpose, to wit, to remove out of the heart, especially, of every wise old man,
the too violent and raging apprehension of death, and to strengthen and
fortify so well the mind, that it be never dismounted, or thrown out of the
seat of assurance, wherein it is settled by the knowledge of the truth.

First, We will show that every one, especially, our Vieillard, ought
continually to meditate upon death, and betimes to provide and furnish himself
with remedies, against the affrightments and terros thereof. Secondly, what
death is: how many sorts there are: what death it is ought to be feared.
Thirdly, for what reasons the Heathens have so manfully contemned death.
Fourthly, of the extreamities which must be avoided, and of the mean, that it
is meet to keep in all. Fifthly, the defenses and comfortes against death, the
commodities of it, and the great benefits which they reap by it, who in young
and old age make their recourse to Jesus Christ, the food and drink of
eternal life. The two first points shall be handled in this seventeenth
Chapter, the other three in the Chapter following.

First, It is reason that we should betimes think upon death, and meditating
thereon, we should castour eye upon the freedom, life, immortality, and other
benefits which ensue it. For he gives death a joyful welcome, who before
hand is prepared for it, and who seeing him to come as at the beginning, is no
more moved and troubled thereat, then the passenger which with a favorable
wind should in shorter time make an end of his sailing. A certain Ancient
compared our life to him which is set in a sailing Ship: be he sitting or
standing he forwards his way. So we every moment make toward death, in our
waking, sleeping, standing still, or going. But it is meet to settle and invre
our minds not to be too much affected, and to doat upon this present life,
not therein to lazy and house them, as if it were their Country, but rather
to think that we are way faring persons from the Mansion and royal Palace of
our heavenly Father. Let our minds then sigh and groan in this Tabernacle; let
them meditate upon, and wish for that happy life, wherein all corruption shall
be swallowed up, least it happen to them as to those inconsiderate persons,
who being a long time grown lazy and idle in some incommodious, rude, and
base Inn, cannot be haled out thence, whatsoever remonstrance and counsel is
given them. But on the contrary, let us call to mind our original, and that
we are the sons of the everlasting King, that heaven is our country, that
for a while we trot up and down in the earth, as little children which are
carried out of cities into country villages there to be nurssed up, till
there fathers and mothers send to fetch them home. Let us remember that we are
poor passengers, and that after much running up and down, we must return
home to our dwelling, and settle our selves in some certain place: least our
hearts make a stay and demurre at the things we behold with our eyes, and
which have some appearance to deceive and detain them.

Let us take great heed of being desirous to dwell, and to rott and stincke in
the close and dark den of our body, and this present life, which is nothing
else but a horrid prison of infinite temptations, cares, carckings and dangers,
where pleasure is unpleasing, where our joy is unsure, where we are tortured
with fear, scroched with lust and concupiscence, wasted with sorrow and
grief. Let our soul be daily couersant in heaven, let our heart be where our
treasure is: By this means we shall easily contemn all things that be
earthly, transitory and perishing. Whosoever does daily think that he is
mortal, (and the Vieillard ought to think on it more then any other)
dispiseth that which he sees present, and makes have to those happinesses,
which are future and to come. I know no better means for our serious
conversion to God, and to enjoy perfect comfort, then the remembrance of the
end of our race in the world, and the meditation of death. This is a powerful
doctrine to draw us out of the swallows and gulfes of intemperance,
impatience, and all riots and excess.

Let us remember our Creator in the days of our youth, before old age and
death intrappe and seize on us: Let the end of our actions and affairs be
before our eyes, to contain us in our obedience to God. When death is between
our teeth, it is too late to provide remedies against the terrors thereof. He
is unadvised who thinks to cast out his lading, when his ship is all leakie,
and takes in water on all sides. It is no time to make provision for a voyage,
when men are put forth and forward at Sea. He deceiues himself who seeks
preservatives, when the pestilence is spread all over the body, and has seized
the heart; The foolish Virgins bethought themselves unseasonably to seek oil
for their Lamps, when the spouse was entered and the gate shut. But our Lord
has willed that the day of our death should be unknown unto us; so much the
more to dispose us to wait for it, following the example of those faithful
servants, who not knowing the hour of their masters return, stand upon their
guard carefully watching. Such servants are wise. But the slothful, dissolute,
riotous, who make spoil and havoc of all in the house without care of their
master, are mischeeuous and unlucky. Plato writes in his first book of his
Commonweal, That when any one is come to this point, to think that he ought
to die out of hand, and yet is so heedlesse that death does surprise him, he
suddenly falls into griefs, frightes, dispaires, horrors, for not having in
his life kept reckoning of those things, which he ought maturely and betimes
to consider of. We add, that this is wholly necessary, by so much the more as
we are to render our account, before the in euitable throne of the eternal
Father of that great family, which must appear before him. Verily the
meditation of death is not irksome, anxious, perplexing, nor ought we to
defer it from one year or age to another, according to the sottish opinion
of the vulgar: But clean contrary to think, that nothing does safeguard or
assure us so much in the midst of adversities and dangers, as such
meditation. It is that which makes us sober in prosperity; pressed, ready, and
prepared in all events. Also as (Saint Cyprian said to the people of Thibara)
we wear not enrolled by Baptism among Christian Soldiers, to think that we
ought to do nothing else in the world, then there to seek and hunt after our
pleasures and ease, turning our backs to conflictes, wounds, death. Saint
Augustine writes in the fifth Chapter of his thirteenth Book, De Ciuitate
Dei, That faith would utterly be weakened; if presently after our Baptism, we
should become immortal, and should be crowned before we had fought.

2. Let us see in the second place, what death is, how many kinds there are,
and how it ought to be feared and contemned. Life and death (according to
Aristotle) are common accidents to all living creatures, for that the reason of
original and corruptible matter does so bear, mainetaine, and require it.
Touching the condition of the first man, and how he had ever lived, continuing
in his obedience to God, we have formerly spoken of it in the discourse of the
tree of life. Furthermore, as the condition of man, created after Gods image,
who kindly received him into his alliance, was excellent: By so much the more
miserable, dreadful, and terrible, is the death into which he fell after his
revolt, then the death of other living creatures, whose soul dies with the
body, and who after this annihilation fear no torment whatsoever. But we
speak here of the death of man, which God caused not, for he also takes no
pleasure in the death of any, but rather in the conversion, good, and salvation
of us all. This does not impugn, but that God is a just Judge, punishing
sins, and suffering no misdeedes and transgressions unpunished, but bringing
all things to their ends by miraculous means, wherein his wisdom does
manifestly appear, although very often the instruments, which he uses to
execute his just judgments, may have foul crimes and gross faults. In this
sense it is said; That God wounds, kills, whetteth his sword, that he
brings to ruin, that he casts the body and soul into hell, and that he
sends the wicked into everlasting fire. So then, God has not made death, but
death is crept, and entered into the world thorough the devils envy, and
malice, and man's disobedience. Saint Augustine in a certain place says, That
if God had made death, he would not with tears have bewailed dead Lazarus,
whom therefore he raised and restored to life, that the devil might see, that
it is but lost labor with such rage and fury, to pursue the children of God to
take them out of the world, forasmuch as those whom we deem utterly lost and
destroyed, do live unto God.

Touching their error, who held that Adam should have dyed, though he had not
sinned: Saint Augustine answers, That all Christians are to hold this point
for firm and undoubted, that Adam and Eve were created such, that if they had
rejected the counsel of the seducer, who spoke by the Serpent, continuing in
the free liberty wherein they were, they had enjoyed eternal life and not
dyed: But making no reckoning of obeying God their Lord, and abusing their free
will, prone and ready to yield to the suggestions of Satan, and their own
lusts and concupiscences, so, as they very soon felt the effect of the
threatening denounced to them both: In that day that thou shall cate of the
forbidden fruit, thou shall die the death. Before his fall the first man was
mortal, as touching the condition of his body: immortal by the good pleasure
of his Creator: before sin he could not dye. But by the redemption of Christ
Jesus, the elect of God shall obtain in the life eternal, even the same
privilege that the holy Angels, not to be able to fall from the state of
grace, nor to dye. And as touching this point, that our father Adam dyed not so
soon as he had obeyed the voice of Eve, it does derogate nothing from the
truth of the sentence pronounced against him, nor from the haynousnesse of his
sin: For the sense and meaning of the threatening, Thou shall dye the death,
is as if God said, certainly thou shall be subject to the first death, which
is a separation of the soul from the body, and to the second death, a
fearful punishment, forasmuch as it is an everlasting separation from God,
from the light of heaven, from joy unspeakable, from the life which is blessed
for ever. If then it be demanded, how can it be, that Adam lived after his
revolt and falling away; Gregory the great, does sufficiently to the purpose
make answer, in his 145. Epistle of his fifth Book: that death in two kinds
steps in and seizes upon us; either by the privation and defection of life, or
by the quality of life. In regard of the first kind of death, Adam dyed not so
soon, but rather as touching the second: For presently after his disobedience,
being deprived of happiness, of the state of innocence, of contentment of
mind, of a strong sound constitution of body, he felt himself covered with
shame, horrors, sorrow, with sundry miseries, knew himself to be alive in
pain under the curse of his Sovereign, who was created by Gods favor to live
in an excellent estate, and perpetual quiet, and tranquillity of mind.

Some think that we meddle and go too far, to say, that man transgressing
in time, was pronounced guilty of temporal and eternal death. The Jews
bewitched with the like error do dream, that they have no need of a Messiah
to abolish and take away sin, and to deliver from eternal death. This error
did grow from the ignorance of the definition of sin, as also of the
sovereign and infinite Majesty of God, whom man had offended by his
transgression. For, sin being a revolt and falling away from God to join and
cleave to the devil, and a transgression of the holy law in dispite of God,
man sinning could not escape eternal perdition and punishment, but by the
grace of his Redeemer, as by obedience he had kept his Creators favor for
ever. Even so then, as it is not injustice (as Saint Augustine says, in the
11. Book, De Ciuitate Dei, Chap 11.) If Magistrates capitally punishing many
heinous crimes and offenses, do banish for ever the malefactors from humane
society: Who shall dare to say, that it is iniquity in God, the Lord of the
permanent and durable City, if he eternally banish out of his kingdom of
glory, his sworn enemies the wicked, who continually offend him; And the
polluted, profane, unjust, reprobates, who plot and conspire against God, and
their neighbors, remain for ever under the wrath and curse of the Lord? For
justification of all, consider only the corruption of humane nature, and what
the sons of Adam are in themselves. For howsoever the belief, touching the
immortality of man's soul, be orthodox and most true, yet may it fitly be
said, that the soul is subject to a certain kind of death. We call it
immortal, because it cease not to live, and in some sort to have sense and
feeling. The body is mortal, because it may be deprived of life, which
consistes in the residence of the soul in it, from whence flows that which
does maintain it, not living of it self, but by the soul which does govern
and move it. But the death of the soul is, when God does abandon it, and
deprive it of his grace: And we say, that man is utterly dead, when the soul
is quite gone out of the body, and that God does abandon the soul finally
adjudged to everlasting torments. S. Augustine will, that the name of death be
derived from the venomous morsure, or sting of the infernal serpent the devil,
then by him brought into the world, when he first bit and stung out first
mother Eve, leaving fast sticking in us the sting of sin, which the Apostle
calls the sting of death. This sting being blunted and taken away, death
cease mortally to sting us. When S. Ambrose writes (in his Treatise of the
benefit of death, Chap. 1. and 2.) that death hurts not the soul,
consequently is not evil; seeing that nothing but sin hurts the soul, it
is to be understood of the bodily death in respect of Gods children. Therefore
he makes a ^hreefold distinction of death, the one good, the other evil, the
third good or evil. The good is the mystical death, when a man dies to sin
and lives to God, whereof the Apostle speaks, That we are buried with Christ
Jesus into his death by Baptism. The evil is the death of sin, whereof it
is written, Then soul that sins shall dye. And the third is the end of our
race and calling in this world, that is, the separation of the soul from the
body; of good men accounted good, of wicked men evil. Although death does
vnshackle and set all persons at liberty; very few yet are to be found, which
take pleasure therein: But this proceeds not from any offense that is in
death, that is, in the separatiof the soul from the body, but from the
infirmity of mortal men, who suffering themselves to go on in their carnal
pleasures and delights of this life, do tremble and fear to see themselves at
the end of their race in the earth, loving long life, there to live euilly,
that is, there to dye hourly. O how sweet is the good death to wise old men,
to men and women who are the servants of God, who watch, who pray, who cry to
their Lord in repentance, in faith, and charity, who manfully fight against all
temptations. And how bitter is the evil death to those evil souls,
unbelievers, stiff necked ones, hypocrites, who wrap themselves in their
sins, who have no pleasure, hope, nor comfort, but in this world.

These things being so, it is easy to show how death is to be feared or not.
Certainly, the death of sinners is evil, who not content to be borne in
sin, live still in all manner of iniquities. But the death of the Saints is
precious, being the end of their labors and toils, the conservation and
custos of their victory; the door of life, and the entrance into an assured,
perfect, glorious rest. Those are to be bewailed in their death, who have hell
for their prison: But it beseemes us to rejoice and be glad at their
departure, whom God does bid welcome into his heavenly Palace, where they
magnify him for ever. If any one ask us (says Lactantius, in the third Book
of his Christian Institutions) whether death be good or evil? we will
answer, that the quality thereof does consist in the consideration of life in
it self. Death in it self cannot be said to be good, pleasing and to be
desired, on the contrary, it is the destruction of nature, and the reward of
sin. But we must esteem it a thing worthy great praise, pleasing, and full
of grace and delight, when we dye joyfully in the true knowledge of Christ
Jesus, to go out of the prison of this mortal body, out of this valley of
miseries, out of this desert where we are exiled persons, to return to our
Father, our country and heavenly city. He dies well, who with the Apostle
says in sincerity of conscience, all my desire is to depart hence, and to be
with Christ Jesus: Particularly, as touching my self, I have fought the good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, also the crown of
righteousness is laid up and reserved for me, which the Lord, the just Judge
shall in that day give unto me; not to me only, but to those who love his
appearing. Again, death and the remembrance and apprehension of it, is
wonderful irksome, and bitter to a man which trusts in his riches, living
in all ease, in full strength of body and prosperity.

Here we demand, what we are to judge of the death of those, who are cruelly
quartered and dismembered by hangmen, or by fierce and wild beasts, are
swallowed up in the belly of fishes, are stifled with a sudden apoplexy, are
bereaved of wit, sense, and reason, by some hot burning fever, or who die
frantic, and madd? As for those who are put to cruel death for the name of
Christ Jesus, the answer is that their death cannot be termed and accounted
but dear and precious in the sight of the Lord, and of all his Church. For if
the heathen Philosophers have had some reason to say, that a virtuous man,
leaves not to be happy, though he be put to a violent death; why should we
not say the same of the true virtuous, to wit, the holy Martyrs, seeing we have
so certain testimonies, and so many famous examples of their faith, charity,
patience, and constancy in death? The Epistle to the Hebrews is herein
express: for it conteyneth the heroical trophies of faith, also the
opprobries, disgraceful reuilings, and cruel torments of the invincicible
Champions of Christ Jesus. But I pray you what torments can dismay, and
terrify him which glories in the cross of Christ Jesus, among all others a
shameful and terrible torment and death. Turtullian observes in his
Apologetico, that in his time Christians were called Sarmentitij and Semissij
bavinistes, and poor snakes, because they were bound to a stake, which cost
but six Liards, three half pence, or thereabouts, and there were burned with
faggotts of reeds, or brush wood, which were set round about them. Behold
says he our equipage, our munition, and armor of victory; this is out
triumphall Chariot. Eusebius writes in the fifty book of his History, of a
holy martyr burned alive with certain plates of iron made red hot, and set to
his naked body; notwithstanding which torments he made a constant profession
of the Christian faith, even to the last gasp. Eusebius adds, that this
shows that nothing is terrible to him, which feels that God loves him, and
that whosoever seeks the glory of Christ Jesus is guarded, and saved
harmless from every painful, and terrible accident and casual event. As
for the uncouth and strange diseases, and kinds of hideous death, whereunto to
man's life is exposed, as they are to be seen in the horrible convulsions of
Epilepsies and falling sicknesses, in the violent fittes of Apoplexies, in
cruel, and hot burning fevers; these are pitiful cases to behold, and
incident to our frail and sinful nature: But they are also certain
monitors of a better life, seeing that our health, and happiness consists
not in a sound temperature of humors, but in this that our names are written
in heaven, and that we have bin dedicated to Jesus Christ. For the Lord God
who knows our hearts, who in his secret judgment exercises some more then
others, regardes and considers what he has done for us, and what the holy
Ghost, who comfort us in such accidents and cases, does for us by
unspeakable groanings; not the intemperature of our bodies, nor the effects
of it. For this is an assured thing, that there is no condemnation to those
that are in Christ Jesus, and that nothing is able to separate us from the
love, which the father of heaven bears us for his sons sake: yea, that all
things do help together for the good of those, whom according to his
determinate counsel he has called to the participation of his grace.
Therefore all Christians ought to remain undoubted and resolved in this point,
that there is no kind of malady, torment, or death, which does hurt Gods
elect: that there is no death, happy, joyful, peaceable to the wicked,
unbelievers, and miscreants, whom God often times for a while does uphold in
this world, to the end, more heavily to punish them, after he has dragged and
haled them out of the earth.

Hereupon it will be demanded, wherefore then so many great personages, members
of the Church of God, and Christ Jesus himself the head thereof, did fear
death, and prayed to be guarded and secured from it?

I answer, that there was something of singular note in our Lord, and which
must be differenced and distinguished from others; In that he not only bore
and felt a common death, or separation of the soul from the body, but also
underwent and sustained the wrath of God, and all the torments and agonies,
that may be imagined, without sin notwithstanding, because he was an hostage
and pledge for us: Nevertheless, in such sort, that he did not yield nor
shrink under the burden, nor murmured a whit against God, but voluntarily
offered himself in sacrifice, stood not demurring, and shifting of death with
natures delays, wholly submitted himself to the will of God his Father, as it
was foretold and figured by David in the fortieth Psalm, Here am I O God, that
I may do thy will. Behold, as touching the head of the Church, who had had no
subject of combat and victory, if he had not felt the torments, and terrors
of death, without sin, or any offense and fault on his part. In respect then
we are his members, let us keep and observe this rule: That we cannot commend
every refusal, or every desire of death, nor discommend all contempt of death.
Some wish death not so much for any desire they have of a better life, as for
the despite and dislike they conceive against their abode and stay in the
world, where they see miseries, which their weak minds cannot brook and
endure, and which give terrible shockes and assaults to the most resolved and
stoutest hearts. The Israelites wanting bread in the wilderness, wished death;
as also when news was brought them, that the Cananites were men of a very tall
stature. Job in the depth of his panges and griefs desired to die; as also the
Prophet Eliah did, during his escape in the Desert. On the contrary David,
Ezechias, and other great personages very much feared death, and instantly
besought the Lord to guard and save them from it. But this was for a special
consideration, to wit, in as much as they being afraid of the threatninges and
judgments of God, the approach of death appeared more terrible unto them; or,
because they wished to continue longer to advance Gods glory, and to yield
their help and service to the edification of the Church.

Again, the same personages banished all fear from them, looking upon death,
according as now it is made unto us (by the grace of God) the rest from our
labors, and the passage to a better life. In this sense the Patriarch Job
spoke in the 19. Chapter, I know that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise
again at the last day, that I shall be again clothed with my skin, and shall
see the Lord in my flesh. So David did sing in the 16. Psalm. For this cause
my heart is glad, my tongue rejoices; Moreover, my flesh rests in assurance,
for thou will not leave my soul in the grave. And in the 23. Psalm, Though I
should walk in the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, because thou art
with me.

CHAP. XVIII. The sequel of the points propounded in the former Section,
concerning the resolutions and consolations against Death.
IF there be any men bound to meditate ordinarily upon death, to be armed with
remedies against the alarumes of it, to procure that their children, friends,
and families do live as pressed and ready to die, wise old men are especially
they, whose true Philosophy is called the Meditation of death. To draw them so
much the more easily unto it, we will remember to every one of them some
sayings of wise Pagans and Heathens, which will cause us to say to all persons,
who vaunt themselves of the name of Christians; At least do not afflict and
torment your selves more with the death of the your selves and yours then the
silly Heathens, who had no hope, who so manfully contemned the approches of
death, who with so great constancy have embraced it, and striuen against it. I
speak thus considering the cowardice of some Christians, who have nothing so
much in their mouths, and take so little to heart, as death. S. Jerome in the
Epistle to Heliodorus showing, how we ought to be more resolute against the
assaults of death, and all accidents and casualties of human life, then
Infidells were, makes mention of Xerxes that mighty Monarch, who overthrew
mountains, and paved the Sea with Ships. This Monarch considering from the
top of a hill many millions of men at his service in wars, fell a weeping,
that at the end of a hundred years, not one of them should be alive. And if we
love (added he) this advantage to be mounted upon so high a watch Tower, that
from thence we may behold all the earth under our feet, and so many kingdoms
fallen to ruin; also many living men, some tortured, others strangled, and
drowned; on the one side festiualles, on the other side funeralles; some to be
borne, others to die: To what straight and exigent should we be brought, if we
were not assured that all these things are ordered by the just appointment of
the All-mightie. S. Ambrose in his exposition of the creation of the world,
says, that all men are borne and die naked, that there is no difference
between the bodies of poor men and rich, but that the bodies of rich-men
being very pursie, well fed and fat while they live, are more puant and
stinking then the bodies of poor men.

Besides these helps and supports against death, which the Heathens have
collected from our condition to be borne and to die they have from thence
collected other causes, which we are now to discuss and examine, and whereof
Ciceco speaks in his Dialogue of old age, as follows. We know how
chearefully and manfully soldiers contemn death; why then should wise old men
fear it? To have our fill of all things causes that we have our fill and
satietie of life. Those who die well, live a life which alone deserves the
name: but so long as we are locked up in the prison of the body, we are as it
were plunged deep in the earth, and exiled very far from, and beneath our
heavenly Mansion. Wherefore all wise men die willingly, fools on the contrary
leave this world against their will, mauger their teeth, or in brutish
ignorance. Socrates the last day of his death discoursed of the immortality of
the soul. Cyrus a little before his death said to his sons, Do not think
that after I shall be dead, I am annihilated and brought to nothing. If some
god (said Cato in the same Dialogue) would permit me to return from old age to
childhood, and to cry in a Cradle, I should forbear to accept such a
condition, nor would I for any thing return to the beginning of my race,
having almost finished it. For what commodity is found in a life tossed to and
fro with turmoyles and toils, as this present life is? Notwithstanding, I will
not bewail it, nor do I repent me to have lived, I which go out of this
world as out of an Inn, not as out of a house, seeing nature has given us a
cabin here of ingresse and egresse, but not to stay and continue. O how
glorious will that day be, wherein I shall be found in the holy assembly of
souls, and shall go to heaven.

Certainly, Old age is the end and Epilogue of our life, even as of some
Comedy or Interlude. Lo here some sayings of Cicero in the forementioned
dialogue. In the first Book of his Tusculane questions, wherein he expressly
treats of the contempt of death, among other his sayings and discourses, we
read that among the old Latins, whom the Poet Ennius calls Cascj, that it
was a doctrine held from Father to Son, that death did not abolish man, so as
it might be said he was utterly perished. The sages would not have set out and
adorned their funerals, sepulchers, and tombs with such ceremonies, nor
hallowed them with so many devotions, if they had certainly held that death is
an utter destruction of the whole man: on the contrary they were in this point
persuaded, that it was a departure and change of life, which brought worthy
men and women to heaven. Plato also brings in Socrates condemned to death,
saying to his judges, I hope that good shall befall me to die; For if all sense
and feeling be abolished in death, it brings a quiet and perpetual rest, but
if that which is said of it be found true, that it is a departure out of this
world to go into places where those that be dead are assembled together, what
contentment shall it be to me, to talk and discourse with them? It is further
(adds Cicero) a sound and solid Argument, that nature it self proclaims the
souls of men to be immortal, in this, that all men have a wondrous care, what
shall become of them and all things else after their death, and die very
willingly, when life beginning to fail and to leave them, may stay and settle
it self upon a good conscience, and a worthy evidence to it self. In the
second Book of the Laws these words following are read; Our ancestors have
ordained that the dead should be canonized, and placed in the number of gods,
by certain ceremonies which they did institute. Ennius as of opinion that we
were not to weep for the dead, because their souls were immortal. Plato said
in the first Book of his Common weal, that a man which has this good
testimony in himself, to have done no man wrong, is always vpheld with a
greacious and steadfast hope, the good nursse and supportresse of his old age.

And again, Cicero in his first Book of Tusculane questions, writes these
words; You have in sleep the image of death, wherein you are sheeted and
wrapped up every night. Are you in doubt then that there is no more sense in
death, seeing you know that in sleep the soul of man is never at rest?
Moreover, banish far from you those old wives fables and comptes, that it is
a great misery to die before the time. And of what time? Of Nature? But nature
has lent us life as silver or coin, without setting us a day of restitution,
but to restore it back again at her will and pleasure. Why then do you
complain, if she call for and demand her own again, when it pleases her,
seeing you hold and have it upon this condition? With what alacrity and
cheerfulness ought we to go that way, at which ways end we shall be
released and discharged of all careful carkinges, fascheries, and anxieties of
mind.

A woman of Sparta having sent her son to the war, and tydinges being
brought her that he was slain in the battle, with great courage answered,
that she did bear him, to the end he should die for his Country.

Seneca an excellent Stoicke Philosopher has very worthy precepts, in his
moral Books, touching death. We could compile a great Book of them, but not
to be too long and too large, it shall suffice us to cull out some sentences of
them, which shall be able to give the reader a taste, and desire to see the
rest. I will begin at the end of the thirteenth Epistle, which speaks to
old men. Among other evils folly has yet this one, that she still begins to
live. This point shows how bad and scurrilous the levitie and giddie humor
of men is, who every day lay new foundations of their life, and begin to
build and raise hopes, when it behooues them to go out of the world. You shall
see old men, who run themselves out of breath after honors, profittes, and
transitory goods. But can there be a more unsightly, and unseemly thing
seen, then an old man to become a child again? In the two and twentieth
Epistle: Is it not a great shame to be afraid, when we are to enter into a
Palace of assurance and safety? The reason is, that we are dispossessed and
turned out of all the goods after which we do sigh, and painefully toil at
the end of our life, whereof not any portion or part remains unto us, all
being gone and lost. There is no man which takes care to live well, but to live
long, and yet all men may be able to attain to this good, to live virtuously,
but no man can or ought to promise himself long life. We do add: And the old
man, which now has no more to do with the things of this life, that are common
to all, is so ill advised, that he thinks not of the amendment of his life,
nor of the box and blow which death shall suddenly give him on the ear. At
the very end of the three and twentieth Epistle; There are some, who begin to
live, when they must dye, and there are some, who are dead, before they have
begun to live. In the thirtith Epistle, As little wise is he who fears
death, as the young man who fears to be old. For as old age does kick and
spur young age, in like sort does death old age. He which will not dye, has
no will to live, because life was given with this exception, That we must die.
We are in the way of death, and who fears it is out of his wits, seeing we
expect that which is certain, and fear that which is uncertain. At the end
of the two and thirtith Epistle. He is free and his own man, who lives as if
he had no longer to live. And at the end of the six and thirtith Epistle,
Neither little infants, nor young boys, nor mad men fear death; it is then
a great shame, if reason do not as much confirm and assure us, as stupiditie
and sottishness does them. At the end of the threescore and seventeenth
Epistle: It is with our life, as with a Comedy, it skils not how long it be,
so it be well acted. Take no care where the end of your race shall be, make a
stop and a stay, where necessity enforces you, provided you make a good end.
In the nintith three Epistle. Let us take order, that as gold and other things
of excellent price and worth; so our life be not of a great length,
nevertheless that it weigh much: Let us not measure it by our time, but by our
work. Will you know a very good respite of years, it is to live till we be
wise. He that is come so far, though he have not attained to a great number
of years, has seen the greater and better part of them. The nintith nine
Epistle contains sundry consolations in death, which I will briefly set
down. It is a fond and childish part to give the reins to sorrow, and to make
account of an uncertain thing as our life is. He does ill who weeps upon
custom, and seeing that sorrow does make us forget the blessings and benefits
received of God, we must betimes shake off, and rid our selves of it, to the
end to call to mind the virtue of our departed friends, and to make our use of
it, and of them, as if they were present. We ought to follow the example of
those, who have showed themselves unmoved at the death of their friends, to
think we shall follow the dead, whom we have not lost, but given up unto God,
who are gone but a little before us: It is the way of the world, our life does
so manifest it: we have assurance of nothing under heaven, but of death, and
our life is short though it contain many ages: It is crossed and wounded with
infinite miseries, which end in death freeing it of malice, and of error and
ignorance. Consequently, he which is accustomed to grieve much, depriueth
himself of comfort, to remedy which, and in stead of imitating the fond
customs of the ignorant and vulgar, he must show himself a man of courage,
in the most violent shockes and assaults of adversity, setting before our eyes
the worthy deportments and behauiours of those which go before us, keeping a
measure between sorrow and forgetfulness, of those whom we have made much
on, and been kind and friendly unto in the world, and whom we see no more, and
when they are at peace and rest, we are to give over to grieve and sorrow for
them. I reascend to the nintith one Epistle, from whence I will deduce that
which follows. Do not measure us by our Tombs, and Monuments, which seem to
note some way differing between some and others. The grave wherein our bodies
are dissolved to dust, makes us all equal. We are borne unequal, but death
makes us all equal. The Sovereign Lawgiver has not differenced us by our
nobility, lineage, blood, and greatness, but in this life: but when death
comes, he says to this worldly greatness, Begone; I will that there be the
same law to all living things upon earth. We are all subject to all sorts of
evils. One is no more frail, nor more assured to live till to morrow then
another. In the hundredth and one Epistle: There is no day nor hour, which does
not point out unto us our vanity, and which by some new experiment and trial,
does not remember us of our frailty, which we tread under our feet, and which
does not compel every one of us, who build and devise endless plots and
designs, to have an eye unto death. From the hundred and seventh Epistle, I
will make this deduction; It is good to bear that which we cannot remedy, and
to follow without murmuring or complaining that great God, by whose providence
all things come to pass. A bad Soldier is he, who follows his Captain
unwillingly. Let death find us pressed, forward, and cheerful. The heat which
does resolutely consigne and yield it self into the hands of God, is every way
great. On the contrary, he is a luske, coward, and basely bred fellow, who
spurns, kickes, and winses, who complains of the government of the world, and
who had rather censure God, then himself. In the hundred and twentieth Epistle:
A man is never more heavenly minded, then when he thinks upon his own
frailty, and knows and acknowledges that he is borne to dye: Also that his
body is not a house, but an Inn, and for a while: It is a folly for us to
fear the last days of our life, seeing our first days are tributarries, and
owe as much unto death as our last. The last day of our race makes us to touch
death, all the other do approach it. Death does not violently lay hands upon
us, but gently lays hold on us. Wherefore a virtuous soul, feeling it self
called to the participation of a greater happiness, endeavors to carry and
behave it self, honestly and wisely in this earthly Sentinel and Station,
accounting none of those things to be hers, which do hemme her in on every
side; but serves her turn with them, as with borrowed mooueables, remembering
her self that she does but go a journey, and in post have. There are many
other sentences of Seneca, touching the benefit of death, in his Consolations
to Polybius and Marcia, as also in his other Treatises. But we will make this
extract no longer, least so we trouble and offend with long reading impatient
and froward old men.

4. Fourthly, we speak now of the extreamities that must be avoided, when
there is question of death, to wit, Too great confidence, or rashness, or rather
inhumane, or barbarous stupidity and sencelesnesse; then the too great
apprehension, fear, and pain of death. Of a truth our Creator and Sovereign
Lord, has honored us with this favorable gift and grant, that our hearts
are of flesh, not of stone or iron, to be easily touched with the sense of our
miseries, and the miseries of others. How should we apprehend the mercy of God,
if we had not an apprehension of our miseries? And what fear of God, and of
his judgments would there be in the world, if we should not fear death, and
other punishments which he does mitigate, and usually convert into wholesome
remedies to persons, who mourn under the burden of their sins, and with a
repentant heart, crave and implore the grace of their heavenly Father? We are
not willing to approve the practice of those too austere Thracian Elders, who
wept at the birth day of their children, and made great cheer and merrily
banquetted at the funeral of them that died. Much less do we purpose to
dispute of death, as Hegesias of Cyrena, whom the King of Egypt prohibited to
discourse any more of death, because many who heard him; killed themselves. No
more do we approve those mad men, such as were in times past, certain
surnamed, Circamcellianes, of the Sect of the Donatists, who not rightly
understanding the sayings of the Scripture, touching mortification of the
flesh, cast themselves down headlong from the tops of high mountains, and
without looking or staying for any commandment to do so, resigned and gave up
the place they held in this humane life. It is not lawful for any private
person, without express authority and order of the Magistrate, to kill a
guilty or condemned person; And he which kills himself is not he a
murderer? Who has given him power and authority to do so? We abhor, and
justly, the facinourous fact of Judas, who by despair increased his detestable
impiety. Satan is the author of such counsels, as we see in the fourth
Chapter of S. Matthew, where Christ Jesus being importuned, by that malignant
and mischievous one, to throw himself headlong from the top of the Temple,
answers, That we must not tempt the Lord. S. Augustine said, in his first
Book, De Ciuitate Dei, Chap. 22. That those which kill themselves, make a
hazardous proof of some kind of greatness of courage, but indeed they are mad
men: Further, they are not magnanimous, seeing that being unable to support and
bear adversity, they discover their impotency and pusillanimity, not their
fortitude and valor, in casting themselves so into the gulf and jaws of
death. But he is truly magnanimous, who chooses rather to bear the burden
of a miserable life, then rashly to rid himself, and fly from it, instead of
standing and abiding in the place allotted and appointed unto him. It is said
that Cleombrotus having read the Book which Plato writ of the immortality of
man's soul, cast himself down headlong from a high wall, to pass to the
other life, which he judged to be better. But it was an act of wretched folly,
for Plato taught no such thing, although he discoursed of the immortality of
the soul. Therefore let us turn our backs to the Stoickes, so brutish and
besotted in their pride, that they think it lawful to a man, which cannot
suffer an injury, to kill himself. A man of courage, and fearing God, knowing
indeed that life is not given him, does not violently rid himself of it, but
renders it into the hands of God, not fearing the approaches of death, but
submitting himself to his Sovereign Lord, who has employed him in his
service in the world, to go out of it when he shall command him. It is
alleged, that a speedy death is better then a fastidious and tedious life, and
once to be quiet for altogether, then so long to languish and droope. But to
attempt to leave this life before God give us leave, is to fall into another
death, which never has end. What then, shall not a Soldier dare to go out of
the army, without his Captains license and pass port, but upon hazard of his
head, and shall mortal man go out of this present life, without the auouchy
and warrant of the immortal, who has placed him in it, protected and blessed
him. What crown can the impatient, the furious, the infidel expect, who in
dispite of his Lord, cowardly resignes his charge, his place, his honor, with
the loss of his body, soul, goods, and friends, who forsakes those to whom
he is bound and beholden, breaks all the bands of divine and humane society?
God gives a happy issue to their temptations who fear him, he does in fit
time deliver and help them. It is they which are to hold out to the end in a
full assurance of hope, not to quail and lose courage, but to follow those,
who by a faithful and humble patience have obtained the promised inheritance.
Let us then take heed and beware of the arrogance of the Stoickes, and of the
vain confidence of Epicures, who never think on death, but think they are in
league and friendship with him, persuade themselves that it shall be easy for
them to put by his blows, and to pacify him. Moreover, let us have no part in
their effeminacy and diffidence, who tremble at the mere name of death, not
thinking that in death it self there is not so great evil, as in the
solicitudes, carkings, sorrows, and fears, wherewith a thousand times a day
they kill themslues, without any ease to their unbelieving heart. Their
apprehensions are ill ordered, fond, and unprofitable, seeing (as witnesses
the Prophet in the Psalm 89. 90.) there is no man living can boast himself
not to see death, and to be able to save his life out of the hand of the grave.
Hereupon we will say to young and old, that their duty requires, that they
bear and behave themselves so toward God, that their death may not be a
mortal, but a living death: And that they so gently and wisely lay down their
load in the world, that they may not be found under a heavy and unsupportable
burden, whose weight does suppress them, and cause them to tumble into
everlasting perdition.

5. Fifthly, let us now add some assured consolations against death; and first
we will draw from certain places of the holy Scripture, the fair terms and
names, which it gives to death, to sweeten unto us the apprehension of it. By
whose testimony, to dye, is to be gathered to his people, as it is said of
Abraham, Genesis 25. 8. It is to go the way of all the earth. 1. Kings 2. 2. It
is to be bound up in the bundle of life. 1. Sam. 25. 29. It is to be taken away
from evil, to enter into peace and rest in our beds. Esaiah 57. 1, 2. It is to
be in the shadow, and at rest as the hireling, which has ended his days
work. Job 7. 1. 2. It is to sleep. John 11. 11. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13. To rest from
his labors. Apocalips 14. 13. It is to go out of the world to go to God our
Father. John 13. 1. It is to go to our Fathers house, where there are many
dwelling places. John 14. 1. It is to return to our home and country, after a
long, painful, and perilous voyage. 2. Cor. 5. 6. It is to be vnshackled and
delivered out of a galley or prison, to be with Christ Jesus. Philip. 1. 23.
It is to go hence out of a poor beggarly tabernacle. 2 Peter 1. 14. It is to
be clothed in heaven with glory and immortality. 2. Cor. 5. 1. 2. It is to
finish our course and our fight, to receive a crown. 2. Timoth. 4. 7. 8. It is
to go to the Nuptials of the Lamb, and his Bride in the Celestial
Jerusalem, in the City of God, all garnished with gold and precious stones,
that is, adorned with incomprehensible glory and eternal happiness. Apocalips
21. 1. etc. It is to live with Jesus Christ a thousand years, to wit, for
ever. Apocalips 20. 4. This life and glorious immortality is manifested unto us
in the Gospel by Christ Jesus, who by his appearing has abolished death. 2.
Timothy 1. 10.

Wherefore then should a wise man fear to go to his Fathers, and would have a
way by himself? Is it well done not to will, and desire to be gathered with
the true living, from so many evils, without, within, above, below, behind,
before, and round about us? After so many battles, so many conflicts,
skirmishes, and wounds, especially in the soul, to refuse peace, to rest out
of the short and danger of the weapons, tears, alarmes, vacarmes, gurboyles,
and stirs of the world, of our own heart, of the corruption of the wicked,
and of the powers of Satan our capital adversary? O strange case! We run
after peace and rest, and fly from it when it offers it self. Travails and
labors weigh us down and oppress us, and we are agaste and abashed to be
rid of them! There is no bed in the world so soft, as that where the bodies
do rest, when the souls are separated from them; notwithstanding not to lie
in it, we would be contented to be condemned to go wool ward, in sackcloth,
and hair cloth in totters and rags, and to lie on the hard ground, or upon
thorns; Had we rather dwell with Vipers, then with our Father in his heavenly
Mansion? Those everlasting Mansions, so much to be desired, are in less
account and esteem with us, then the unclean and nastie stables of Beasts.
The earth does more infinitely please us then heaven.

This galley of our life, where we tugg both day and night, at the oar of
ambition, avarice, cruel lusts, debauched pleasures; These dark dens of
innumerable sins are the resting places, that we make much on, and wherein we
bristle up our selves, and outragiously curse whatsoever sacred Philosophy
does propose and set forth unto us, of the blessed estate of the triumphant
Church, with her head in heaven. What old men are we, who grow young in our
vices, who had rather renounce our sweet Country, and trott up and down in
the hideous deserts of the world, full of scorpions and Basilisques, of horrid
ghostes, and hob goblins, and so many kinds of Devils, then to set one step
in the right way of repentant faith, of charitable hope and patient humility!
Men of wit, where is our wit, when our bodies are of more price unto us then
our souls, and we are willing to forgo and loose our arms to save our
sleeves? Who prefer a garment before eternal glory, a handful of crowns
before most durable treasures, a fond, idle, wicked damnable pleasure before
everlasting joys! Who still desire to run on in the way of perdition, who
fight and strive against nothing but piety, righteousness, holiness; to
conclude, who purchase a buryall place for virtue, to cause vice to reign and
triumph. When will it be, that the invitation to the solemn feast of the Son
of God with his Church, will please and be well-come unto us? When will we
provide our costly rich robes to appear in this holy assembly? Will we still
defer to cleanse our selves from the filth of sin, which makes us holds
down the head, to blush, to look pale, and wan, to be half dead, or in a
trance, not to dare once to lift up the eyes of our mind (but in hypocrisy,
and a very strange stupiditie) to him, which calls us to him, to the gates of
the Palace, whereunto we are so near? Wise old men awaken and rouse up your
selves, and more deeply yet consider and meditate upon the consolations
insinuated, and inserted in the terms and names, which divine wisdom gives
and ascribes to death.

It is demanded, seeing Christ Jesus has abolished death, and that by him we
are reconciled to God to obtain eternal life, how comes it to pass that we
are still subject to death? S. Augustine answers, that heretofore death came,
and was by sin haled into the world, but now death takes away our temporal
life, to the end we should cease from sin, and that the remembrance of death
do keep and conteme us in our duty. So by the unspeakable mercy of God,
the punishment of our sins, was changed into an armor, or shield against
sins. And although that the death of the flesh proceeds originally from
sin, so is it that the good aspect and face of death has made many excellent
Martyrs. And although death and all the evils, travails, and turmoyles,
vexations, and sorrows of this present life proceed from the desert of our
sins, and that after having obtained pardon, these evils remain still, it
is to the end we should have adversaries to wrestle against and to exercise us,
to make known and sensible to us how strong the power of the Lord is in our
weakness: And that so the new man may grow up, and be fitted and prepared in
this world for the world to come, looking for the perfect and complete
happiness of all Gods children. Therefore repentant Christians, whose sins are
pardoned, and who accept this pardon by the gift and hand of a lively faith,
do wrestle against the image of death, against a bruised Serpent, a wourried
torn Lion, against a stinglesse Waspe, against a vanquished enemy.
Chrysostom censureth in good manner those wretches, who fear death, and fear
not sin, wherein they are ensnared and wrapped, nor the unquenchable fire of
hell which gapes for them. Thus, says he, as children are wayward and wrangle,
if their mothers come near them with maskes on their faces, but when a lighted
Candle is brought near unto them, they readily thrust their hands in it, and
are burned: So those men fear death, who know not what it is to live. Death
snatcheth away a miserable and short life to make us to enter into an eternal
and perpetual blessed life. Death does separate us from the heaps of Jewels,
the robes, moueables, coffers crammed with gold and silver, the sundry
immoueables which we must leave. But in heaven we have inseparable riches with
the Angels: death extrudes and thrustes us out of the earth, but to bring us
into paradize: death kills the body, but it shall rise again to die no more,
but be conformable to the glorified body of Christ Jesus. If any man fight
with his own shadow, he hurtes no body: so death does but beat the air, in
bickering and jousting against the just. It has been Gods will and pleasure
(so says Chrysostom) that this present life should be painful and
miserable, to the end that being buffetted on all sides with so many and
manifold miseries, we should eagerly aspire to the happinesses to come. But
seeing we are thus far ill advised to wallow and idle it so willingly in this
present life, where so many disasters and miseries do surround and encompasse
us, how would it be with us, if there were nothing but joy, peace, and rest
here? Our most merciful heavenly Father does so mitigate and temper the
afflictions of this life, that as a Lute-player does not wind up too high his
Lute strings, for fear to break them, nor slacken them too much, that so
their sweet harmony and tunablenesse may be more distinctly perceived: So
does the wise master of our life, not leaving us in continual prosperity,
nor too much oppressed. He is faithful who will not suffer us to be tempted
beyond and above our strength, but will give a good issue to our temptations
and trials, to the end we should be able to bear them.

We see men of war, desirous of honor, and to attain to some rank and
degree, manfully to expose themselves to a thousand dangers: The covetous
Merchant to run upon all hazards and risques for a handful of yellow earth:
The voluptuous person to disdain and set light by infinite, reproachful and
woeful dangers, to satisfy his passions and humors: And you wise old men,
will you slumber and sleep in a corner, will you still sit with your arms and
legs a cross, not rouzing and lifting up your selves to the contemplation,
and diligent seeking after so many happinesses, prepared for them which love
God? Do you fear death, you which in the midst of the shadow of death,
have standing at your ell-bow the Prince and Author of life? If you bear in
your hearts that quickening spirit, which raised up Jesus Christ from the dead,
whence is it that you fear death? Have you blotted out of your remembrance
him, who has the words of eternal life, who is the way, the truth, the
resurrection, the life, who dyed for our sin, and is risen again for our
justification? But soil not this gracious remembrance with the mire and mudd
of sordid and obscene pleasures: Let not the persuasions of the unclean and
filthy flesh stop and hinder the motions of the spirit, illuminated by
sacred Philosophy. Let the repetitions of his most sweet, most certain, and
most holy promises be potent and powerful in your hearts, who was willing to
participate of our flesh and blood, that in the same nature foiled by Satan,
our Savior has abolished it by his death, as by a most sufficient ransom, he
which conquered death, to wit, the Devil. Give me leave to reform and
rectify you by recital of the excellent promises following of the Lord.
Verily, I say unto you, that whosoever hears my word, and believes in him
which sent me, has eternal life, and shall not come to condemnation, but is
passed from death to life, John 5. 24. This is the will of him which sent me,
that whosoever beholds the son, and believes in him, has eternal life,
and for this cause I will raise him up again at the last day. Such perspection
and contemplation of faith is not (as profane persons chatter and mutter) a
vain imagination; but is coupled and covnited with his effect, and with the
true apprehension and laying hold of Jesus Christ, and his benefits. This
great Savior has so often times, and again and again recommended it, and
for confirmation of it, has prepared his holy Table, to which we draw near,
there to receive the bread of life, ordained to the nourishment of our souls
to eternal life, not for our bellies, to receive which bread we hold up the
hands of faith to heaven, and believing in him do eat it. That bread I say
which is given to the children of the house, not to reprobates, who sometimes
eat the bread of the Lord, but not the bread of life which is the Lord. He
which is not reconciled to Christ Jesus, eats not his flesh, and drinks not
his blood, although every day he receive (but to his condemnation) the
Sacrament, or the holy signs of so excellent a thing. But he which confirms
and establishes us in Christ, and who has anointed us, is God, who also has
sealed and given unto us the earnest of his spirit in our hearts. It is this
holy spirit of promise, wherewith we have been sealed, yea, for the day of
redemption, without which spirit the visible signs in the Sacraments are
received to condemnation, by which spirit, faith taught by the word and
confirmed by the signs, or seals of the righteousness of the same faith,
takes daily new growthes and growinges, and is manifested by holy works; of
which the sum and total is, that we live and die to the Lord, who is dead
and risen again to have dominion, as well over the living as the dead, to
govern and guide us as the sheep of his pasture; and finally, to draw us out
of the hideous deserts of this worldly life, no life in deed, to gather us to
himself his heavenly sheep fold. If God be on our side, who shall be against
us? Who shall be able to make us afraid and dismay us? Jesus Christ who is
dead, is risen again, it is he who now being set at the right hand of God
makes request for us.

Let us add some worthy sayings of S. Cyprian in his excellent Treatise of
death. Simeon the just, rejoicing to hold in his arms the little babe Jesus,
whom he had so much desired, declares by his words (which breathed nothing
but faith, charity, consolation, a steadfast hope) that the servants of God are
in peace, enjoy a free rest, being drawn out of the foaming and tempestuous
waves of this world, and landing at the port of safety, and eternal
happiness, when after the abolishment of death we come to a glorious
immortality. For this is our peace, our assured rest, our assured and
perpetual safety. In this world we are continually grapling, tugging, and
wrestling with Satan, and all our exercise is, to repulse and repel his
darts. We have on our arms, on our foreheads, sides, and backs, avarice,
incontinencie, anger, ambition: of necessity we must wrestle without ceasing
against the lusts of the flesh, and the baits and allurements of the world.
Toward the end of the same Treatise, he says further, that we must not weep
for our brethren, when it pleases God to call and deliver them out of this
world; for well I know that they are not lost, but gone before, and have the
start of those who tarry behind. We may desire and look after them, as men
do for their friends, who are going some voyage, or who take shipping to sail,
and go to land in a good port. But we must not bewail them, nor here wear
black mourning habitts, seeing they have already received white robes in
heaven. It becomes us not to give occasion to Heathens justly to tax and
reprove us, if they see by an inordinate love our countenance appalled and
aghast thinking them utterly lost, and annihilated, whom we hold and maintain
to be alive with God, and if they perceive it witnessed evidently enough by our
mind, that we condemn the faith we profess with our mouths. In this case
we over throw our faith, and our hope, which we could not say but to proceed of
hypocrisy. It is nothing to show our selves hardy in words, if we evert and
destroy the truth with our doings and deeds.

It is time to conclude this Chapter. We say then that the anxieties of mind,
maladies, perplexities, and apprehensions of so many deaths which do spurn
and kick against us, do silently and tacitly cry unto us, and exhort us with
speed to lift up our eyes to Christ Jesus the fountain of life, to the
communion we have with him, also to the blessings already received of him,
and to those, which the hope which makes us not afraid, does assuredly expect.
And following the counsel of S. Basile in his Treatise, that thanks must
always be given to God; Let us not put our affiance and trust in man, nor let
us say with the ignorant vulgar, death has taken from me all my succor and
help, my father, my husband, my son, the comfort of my old age, the prop and
pillar of my house: Who has commanded you to moore your ancher of hope in
such a little lump of dust as man is? What age is privileged from the hands
of death? What a one is he who by covenant made with us protests that he will
be the God of their fathers, and of their children to a thousand generations,
who love and fear him! Shall we forget him, who makes so kind a proffer of
himself to us, to imagine and forge to our selves succors and helps of straw
and of wind? Let the ancher of our sure and steadfast hope sincke into the veil
of heaven, and let it be sticking fast in the throne of God. It shall there
be a brazen bullwarke for us, a wall of fire. Let Christ be our life in death,
in him let death be our gain. Let us say with Jeremiah in the 17. Chapter,
Blessed be the man, which trusts in the Lord, whose confidence the Lord is.
For he shall be as a tree planted by the water, which spreads out her roots
by a flowing river, which shall not feel when the heat shall approach, her
leaf shall be green, and shall not wither in the year of drought, and shall
not cease to yield her fruit. Let us further amasse and gather some words from
the same Prophet; O Lord thou art the hope of thy Church; those that forsake
thee shall be confounded, for they have forsaken the fountain of living
waters. Heal those that are thine, O Lord, then shall they be in rest: save
them, and none shall be able to hurt them. Leave them not forlorn, and in a
desperate plight, thou which art their hope in the day of affliction. Let their
despayring and hopeless enemies be confounded; and let them rest in safety
under the shadow of thy wings.

CHAP. XIX. Of the resurrection of the bodies, and of the immortality of
humane souls.
THE Apostle speak to very good purpose in the 15. chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, that if our hope should be in Christ Jesus in
regard of this present life only, our condition should be more miserable then
other men's, seeing that true Christians are continually exposed to diverse
afflictions, and from time to time do suffer great tortures and troubles. But
what would it avail to live in the world, and there to subsist and be a
thousand years, if it be in the fire of calamities and sundry oppressions?
There cannot then be proposed unto us, a more certain refuge and help, nor a
more sweet comfort and support against the miseries and infirmities of this
present life, then the assured hope of the resurrection to a better life. When
we shall bear about us no longer the image of the first earthly man, but of
the second, who is the heavenly Adam; and that this corruptible and mortal
body shall put on incorruption and immortality. The sure confidence of
Christians, is the resurrection from the dead, wherein we shall have a glorious
body, which shall be so reunited to the blessed soul, and the soul again to
the body, that we may be for ever with our head, fully replenished with
everlasting joy in the presence of God. The Heathens, enemies of Christian
religion, have especially impugned this Article of the resurrection of the
body. And which is more, many of their Philosophers have spoken doubtfully of
the immortality of the soul. At this time, to the end to confirm our faith,
our hope, and assured consolation, we will consider the grounds of these two
Articles, as well by the nature of things, and by certain conceptions, as by
the sound resolutions rehearsed in the holy Scriptures. Certainly, as Gregory
the great said in his Moralls, That those who have not learned from the
Scripture, the doctrine of the Resurrection, ought to learn it of nature. For
what do men daily observe in the continual medley and blending of the
Elements, whereof all visible things are composed, but proofs of the
resurrection of the dead? We see by the vicissitude and revolution of time,
the Plants and Trees to lose their green leaves, which wither and fall off
when Winter comes, after in the Spring to sprout forth again, and the earth to
become green and gay as before. If the small kernells of so many several
seeds, somewhat before, or at the Spring do grow, shoot up, and become so
great, that they are Plants and young Trees in the Summer, or in the Autumn
following; Shall we say that the same God, who has given this virtue to
seeds, is not able to do as much in the most noble of his creatures, and made
expressly for his glory? Christ Jesus propounds this argument, when he says
in the 12. Chapter of S. John, Verily, verily, I say unto you, if the wheat
corn falling into the earth do not dye, it abides alone, but if it dye, it
brings forth much fruit, And S. Paul in the fifteenth Chapter of the first to
the Corinthians, Verse. 35. etc. But some man will say, How are the dead raised
up, and with what bodies, come they forth? O fool, that which thou sowest is
not quickened except it dye, and as for that which thou sowest, thou sowest not
that which shall come up again, but bare corn as it falls, of wheat, or of
other grain. But God gives it a body as he will, and to every seed his own
body.

The Patriarch Job, in his fourteenth Chapter, describing the frailty of our
life in earth, prays God in these terms; Turn from the man that is
afflicted, let him be at rest till he come to the end of his life, as a
hireling. Then he adds: For if a Tree be cut down, there is hope, and it
will yet sprout, and his branches shall not fail: Although the root thereof
wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof be dead in the ground, yet
feeling water it will bud and bring forth bows, as a Tree newly planted: But
man dies, and all his strength is gone, yea man breaths out his last gasp,
then where is he? These are the complaints of Job, extremely afflicted,
beholding in his condition, the condition of such like himself, not speaking
precisely, nor determinately, much less after the manner and meaning of
Epicures. On the contrary, both his words of the tree cut down, and growing
green again, and that which he adds presently after, makes it plain what
sense and feeling he had in his soul, of the doctrine concerning the
resurrection. The waters (says he) flow from the Sea, and the River decays
and is dried; so man's lies in the earth, and rises not to wake again, till
the heavens be no more, they shall not to wake, and they shall not be awakened
from their sleep. It is well said, for our bodies being cut off, and laid upon
the earth, and in the earth, in the day of death shall take root again, have
bud and fruit, that is, shall live again. They shall indeed rest in the earth,
until the end of the world: And as S. Peter declares in the third Chapter of
his second Epistle, Verse 10. The day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the
night: In that day the heavens shall pass away, with a whizzing tempestuous
noise, (It is that which Job denotes by these words, There shall be no more
heavens) and the Elements shall melt with heat, and the earth and all the
works therein shall be quite burnt up. But moreover, the same Patriarch makes
a plain confession of his faith, upon this Article in the 19. Chap. Verse. 25.
saying; As for me, I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand the
last day on the earth, and although after my skin, worms destroy this body,
I shall see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall
behold him, and none form. So then it may be demonstrated from the first
testimony of the tree cut down, after growing green again, that the
resurrection of the flesh is not above, nor beyond, besides, nor against
nature. Notwithstanding we acknowledge, that the mighty power of God shall
then be seen, as it was when he raised up Christ Jesus shut up in the grave,
as the Apostle witnesses, Romans 1. 4. Ephesians. 1. 19. 20. And in the third
Chapter of the Philippians, at the end; From heaven (says he) we look for
the Savior, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned and made conformable to his glorious body, according to the
working and efficacy, whereby he is even able to subdue all things to himself.

Among the ancient Theologians S. Basil does propose, and set out an image of
the resurrection in those Insects, which we call Silk worms. Wherefore do
you wonder (says he, in his exposition of the six days) at the change which
shall be of our bodies at the day of the resurrection? Seeing you see so many
mutations and changes in the very insectes, especially in the horned Indian
worm. It is first a Caterpiller, which turns to a Silke-worme. Moreover, it
keeps not this form, but is changed into a Butter-flye. You, those women, who
artificially wind up your quilles and bobbins of silk, and so cunningly and
wittily twisted on your fine skaines and clues, to make the most costly and
curious garments that can be worn; Remember you the diversity of this
admirable worm, to gather from it a clear and certain testimony of the
resurrection, and believe that one day our bodies shall be otherwise, then they
be in this present life, and in the grave. Tertullian in the book which he
penned of the resurrection of the flesh, confirms this Article of our faith,
by reasons worthy memory. What difference is there at the first beginning to
give us our life, and after to restore it again? We cannot despise the flesh
of man, except we would also despise the Lord and Creator of the same flesh.
The earth, from whence the body of our flesh was taken, is vile; but that which
is abject and contemptible in his original, may be excellent in regard of his
very subsistence and matter. Gold is but yellow earth, and yet is much more
precious then any other earth. Do we call the flesh vile, wherein God has
infused the breath of his Spirit? which the Son of God has prised, has
willed to be baptized, and commanded to receive the holy signs of the
Sacrament with thanksgiving? True it is, that the works of the flesh, that
is, of man's nature corrupted by sin, are condemned, but not the flesh it
self, which the Son of God has resumed, and taken into the unity of his
person, being God-man everlastingly. Moreover, the accomplishment of the last
judgment should be imperfect, if the whole man should not appear there, to
the end that he who has suffered in his body, for the confession of the
truth, may receive remission and repose, and that he whosoever, has made the
members of his body slaves to execute wickednesses, may be punished. Also, it
is meet that we should take upon us to spanne with our fingers, and measure
with our arm the miracles of God, who alone (as all people who are not
altogether brutish do avouch) does wonderful works, of purpose that there
might be many choice and rare things in the world, and not to be paralleld,
whereof the reason is hid from us, though we see the things themselves. But
there is a great difference between the destruction or annihilation, and the
change of nature. As we believe the resurrection of this our flesh, so is it
certain that the nature of the same flesh, shall subsist and remain in the
life eternal: But the condition shall be changed, in as much as this flesh,
vile and miserable, shall be made glorious and happy. These are some proofs
brought by Tertullian.

Lactantius Firmianus in his Book of the Heavenly Reward, Chap. 23. observes,
That the Pagan Philosophers, who desired to discourse of the last resurrection,
have confounded and soyled this Article of our faith, as all the Poets have
done. Pythagoras maintained, that the soul did transmigrate and pass out of
one man's body into another, and that he himself in the Trojan war was
Euphorbus. Chrysippus the Stoicke has made a better answer, who in his Book,
De Prouidentia, discoursing of the restoration of the world, adds; This
being so, we see that it is not impossible that after our death, at the end of
the reuolutions of some ages, we may be restored again into the state and
condition wherein we are now. But (as Lactantius adds) the faith of
Christians is much otherwise, and their hope much more certain. For they
undoubtedly believe the resurrection of the flesh, confirmed by most sacred and
invincible proofs of the holy Scripture, by the promises of God, and by the
motions of the Spirit, which raised up Christ Jesus from the dead; as the
Apostle declares it in the eight Chapter to the Romans, saying, If the Spirit
of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up
Christ from the dead, shall quicken also your mortal bodies, because of the
Spirit dwelling in you. True it is, that the wicked shall rise again in their
bodies, but this shall not be for any communion they have with the body of
Christ Jesus, nor with his Spirit, but simply by the absolute power of God, who
shall give them again their being, life, and motion to suffer the second
death, being for ever damned in their bodies and souls. So then, such a
resurrection cannot be counted grace, nor called regeneration, nor a
resurrection to life, but a repairing to condemnation, whereof S. John writes
these words in the twentieth Chapter of the Apocalips, Verse eleventh, etc. I
saw a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from whose face fled away
the earth and the heaven, and their place was no more found. I saw the dead
great and small standing before God, and the Books were opened, and another
Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the dead were judged by the
things which were written in the books, according to their works, and the Sea
gave up her dead which were in her, and death and hell delivered up the dead
which were ion them, and they were judged every man according to their works.
And the wicked were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second death. And
whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the lake of
fire.

Blessed then be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who by his great
mercy has regenerated us into a lively hope by the resurrection of Christ
Jesus from the dead, to obtain an incorruptible inheritance, which cannot be
defiled, nor fade away, reserved in the heavens for us, who are kept by the
power of God thorough faith, to have the salvation prepared to be revealed at
the last day: wherein we rejoice, being now made heavy by diverse temptations,
as it is meet, to the end that the trial of our faith, much more precious
then gold, (which perishes and yet is tried in the fire) may turn to our
praise, honor, and glory, when Jesus Christ shall be revealed, who speaks
thus unto us in the person of his Disciples, in the beginning of the 14.
Chapter of S. John. Let not your hearts be troubled; You believe in God,
believe also in me: There are many dwelling places in my Fathers house: I go
to prepare a place for you, and when I shall be gone hence, and shall have
prepared a place for you, I will come again, and will receive you to my self,
that where I am, there may you be also. Then shall be the true regeneration,
and restoration of Gods children, when the soul emptied of all error,
ignorance, and malice, shall be filled with new illumination, perfect
righteousness and holiness, when the body clothed with glory and
immortality, shall see death swallowed up in victory. In him there shall be no
fainting, dec^ying drooping, nor old age. The bodies of the Saints says S.
Augustine, in the 19. chap. of his Manuel) shall rise again without blemish,
without deformity, without corruption, heaviness, or impediment; This shall as
easily be done, as their felicity shall be consummated: for which cause we
call them spiritual, although their bodies ought still to remain, not to be
changed into Ghosts and Spirits. As for the corruption which now presses down
the soul, and the vices by whose means the flesh lusts against the spirit,
such flesh shall cease to be, because it could not be able to possess the
Kingdom of God. In regard of the substance of the same flesh, it shall not be
abolished, but still remain, but everlastingly glorified. For this cause S.
Paul said, That the body being sown a fleshly body shall rise again a
spiritual body; because there shall be so strong an union between the soul
and the body, that the soul making the body to live without any supply of
nourishment, and having no more combat and striving within us between the
spirit and the flesh, all being then spirit, we shall not feel any enemies,
assaults, nor dangers whatsoever, without, nor within, but shall be repleat,
compassed about, saciated, crowned with permanent glory. Behold, as touching
this point of the resurrection of the flesh. The belief of this Article
encourages all Christians, but particularly wise old men, patiently to bear
their infirmities and maladies; remembering the counsel of the Apostle S.
Peter, in the third Chapter of his second Epistle; Seeing that so it is (says
he) that the heavens and the earth must be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought we to be in holy couersation, and holy works? looking for and hasting
unto the coming of the day of the Lord, by whom the heaven being set on fire
shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with heat. But according to
his promise we look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. Wherefore beloved, seeing ye look for such things, be diligent
that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless. Let us
strengthen this Article of the resurrection by the notable sayings of S. Paul
to the Corinthians, Chap. 5. of the 2. Epistle. We must all appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive according to what he has
done in his body, be it good or evil. Knowing then the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men to the faith, and we are made manifest to God. And that which he
says at the end of the fourth Chapter of the first to the Thessalonians. This
we say unto ye by the word of the Lord, that we which shall live and remain
to the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which sleep. For the Lord
himself with a shout, with the voice of the Archangell, and with the Trumpet
of God shall descend from heaven, and those which are dead in Christ shall rise
first, afterward we which shall be alive and remain, shall be caught up
with them also in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we
ever be with the Lord. O how great occasion have young and old, who read these
things, to think upon and consider their consciences!

Let us add some lineaments of the immortality of man's soul; not that we
think that any good man does call in doubt this truth: but because we cannot
too much fortify young nor old against the bloody scoffings, and execrable
blasphemies of Epicures and Atheistes, with whom the earth is covered in these
latter times. Many ancient Philosophers, as Pythagoras, Pherecydes, the
Platonistes, and the Stoickes, have set forth many sayings of the immortality
of the soul, as much as they could learn out of the School of Nature; And
yet (as Lactantius declares it, in his 7. book of Divine Institutions) seeing
they were ignorant, wherein the sovereign good of man does consist, unlearned
in the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, they apprehended not any thing of
the truth of this Article, but by uncertain opinion, and conjecture, rather
then by assured knowledge. Yea, which is worse, some of them, first
Dicaearchus, then Democritus, and after them Epicurus, have disputed against
the immortality of souls. Cicero himself, who otherwise does eloquently
harang and plead this cause in the first book of his Tusculane questions,
having examined diverse opinions, is at a demurr and doubt even to say, that it
belongs to some god, to scan and to see which of all these diverse opinions are
maintained says he, because these diverse opinions are maintained by learned
men, we cannot well conjecture, which of them all is to be received. But as
Lactantius says, we to whom God manifests his truth, need not to conjecture.

But the source and spring of error upon this point is, that those who have
questioned the certainty of the immortality of the soul, have stood too much
upon their own conceiptes and understanding, judging false and
incomprehensible whatsoever was out of the reach of their apprehension. Their
reasons are well set forth and fitly confuted in the second and third Chapter
of the Book of Wisdom, as it follows. The wicked have falsely imagined
with themselves, our life is short, and full of vexation, and in the death of
man there is no recovery, and it was never known that any returned from the
grave. For we are borne at adventure, and shall be as if we had never been,
because the breath of our nostrilles is as smoke, and our words as a spark
rising up out of our heart, which being extinguished, our body is turned into
ashes, and our spirit vanishes as soft air. Come then and let us frolic it
with the pleasures that are present, chearefully using the creatures, and our
youth; let us fill our selves with the best wine, and with parfumes, etc. It is
added also after; The wicked have thus erred, and gone astray, because their
wickedness has blinded them, and they have not understood the mysteries of
God, nor hoped for the reward of holiness, and have not discerned what is the
reward of the souls that are faultlesse. For God created man to be
incorruptible, having made him to be an Image of his own nature and likeness,
but thorough the envy of the Devil, death is come into the world, and those
which hold on his side prove it. But the souls of the righteous are in the
hand of God, and no torment shall touch them. In the sight of the unwise they
seemed to die, and their end was grievous. At their departure from us, they
seemed utterly destroyed, but they are in peace. They suffered pains before
men: their hope was full of immortality: having been lightly, or in few
things punished, they shall be plentifully rewarded, because God has proved
them as gold, and has found them worthy of him. They shall judge the Nations,
and shall have dominion over the people, and their Lord shall reign for ever.
Those which trust in him shall understand the truth, and the faithful shall
remain with him in love; For grace and mercy is to his Saints, and he has
care of his elect. But the ungodly shall be punished for their very
imaginations, who have made no reckoning of the righteous, and have rebelled
against the Lord. For wicked is he, who despises Wisdom and Discipline;
their hope is vain, their labors help them not, and their works are
unprofitable.

From these words we gather, that the abominable opinion of the mortality of
the soul opens the window to error, and lets go the raynes to all
impiety and dissolution. Whereunto does sort and agree the scoffing speeches
of Epicures and profane ones, to elude and shift off the judgments of God
denounced unto them, of which Esaiah in the 22. Chapter, and Saint Paul in the
15. Chapter of the 1. to the Corinthians make mention: Let us eat and drink
for to morrow we shall die: Let us be frolic and merry, we have but one day
more to live; This is the reckoning of these clamourers and brawlers, who deaf
and trouble our ears with their discourses and reasons.

Moreover, this Text of the Book of Wisdom discovers the profaneness of
these sensual, and carnal men, to proceed from this, that they judge of the
soul of man according to their gross imaginations to wit, that it is no other
but a respiration, a breath, and vapor of smoke: not considering there is
great difference between the effect and the cause, that is, between
respiration which proceeds from the lunges, and is conveyed to the nostrills,
or to the mouth, and the soul it self, which is that essential spirit, which
forms man, yea, does many things without the adiument and help of the
body, witness her speculations, deep imaginations, profound meditations,
she being never idle and without motion, when the body is fast a sleep and
stirs not. Although then that respiration cease, the natural faculties of
the heart and lunges being suffocated, and leaving their office, the soul
created to the image of God is not stifled, and abolished; so as there is great
difference between it and the souls of Beasts, which being formed with the
bodies of the same matter that the bodies are, do perish also as the bodies,
and with them: whereof it is, that the Beasts do suour the earth, and desire
nothing but that which is earthie, and of the earth: Man on the contrary (as
the wisest of the Heathens, especially Plato and Cicero in diverse passages of
their writings do observe) has a divine and heavenly soul, which being
enfranchised and delivered out of the prison of the body returns to the
place of his original; And the more generous the mind of man is, the more he
lusts after and desires heavenly things, meditating and looking for a
better state and condition, then he enjoys in this present life. From thence
it comes to pass, that he despises losses and troubles, calamities, wounds,
and death it self, holding it a great honor to yield up his soul in some
valiant and virtuous exployt, and enterprise for the service and safety of his
Country, to the end to go to the other life, where good men have their
reward. Salust says, that the virtuous effects and suffringes of the mind,
are no less immortal then the soul it self, which to us is common with God,
but the body assimilateth and a greeth with the beasts.

Another reason has strongly persuaded the ancient Philosophers to believe
the immortality of man's soul: That God should seem otherwise unjust, if he
should suffer the vau-neantes, treacherous, dissolute to prosper in the world,
after to escape his vengeance: and good men, who are industrious, and employ
themselves to preserve humane society, should utterly perish in death, without
hope of rest at the end of their travails, and of joy after so many disquiets
and griefs of mind, and of a crown at the end of so many thousand fought
battles and combatts.

Undoubtedly, profane persons, who are bold to think and affirm the soul of
man to be mortal, do abolish as much as in them lies, all piety and
religion, they overthrow all virtuous and laudable actions and enterprises, and
as S. Ambrose very well says in his exposition of the work of the six days,
they are maddmen.

Furthermore, what is more avers, preposterous, and ill beseeming, then to have
a straight body, and a crooked soul, always grovelling and stooping to the
earth, never lifting or rouzing up it self toward heaven her true dwelling
place? But as God our creator has plainly instructed us in his word touching
the original, end and sovereign good of man: It is also from the same word,
that we must gather the infallible doctrines which we do handle. Man's soul
was not composed of the elements, nor fabricated, or formed of the dust of the
earth, but the Lord God inspired it, and endowed it with diverse gifts. Little
children do obtain even a soul of God their creator, to wit, a reasonable
soul, not of the seed of their fathers and mothers, but by the singular favor
and benefit of him, whom the Apostle ( Hebr. 12.) calls the Father of
spirits, and not without cause: For although that he be the father of our
bodies, yet notwithstanding he created not our souls by corporal helps; but
has placed them in our bodies as excellent lamps and lights, as Solomon
speaks of them. Prove. 20. 7. We call them immortal for two reasons: first, by
reason of their essence, which is spiritual and originarie, or primarie from
God the giver of it. Secondly, in regard of the grace (peculier to the children
of God) for so much as we have communion with Jesus Christ, the eternal Word
of the Father, the Prince and author of life. This immortal and eternal life
is the true happy life, and so much to be desired, so much recommended in the
Scripture whereof Saint Paul says, The just shall live by faith, Romans 1. 17.
Also, who believes in me has eternal life. John 6. 47. And the Apostle
says, Jesus Christ has abolished death, and brought life and immortalie unto
light thorough the Gospel, 2 Timoth. 1. 10. For although the souls of the
wicked in regard of their essence, sense, and motion, be immortal,
nevertheless they suffer death in as much as they are deprived of the justice,
light, beatitude, and glorious life of God, upon which cause the wicked who
triumph, and brave it for a while in the world are called dead, and after this
present life it is said, that they go into condemnation, and into eternal
death because the state wherein they are then to be and remain in perpetual
torments, deserves rather the name of death, then life.

Profane people talk they know not what, in obiecting unto us, that never any
came from the other world, as they babble and prattle, to tell news of them. O
the greatest fools and idiots among people! O silly sotts! will they be still
mad? miserable, and more brutish them beasts, who believe nothing but what
they see with their eyes and touch with their hands! According to their babble
they ought to give over to believe, that they do participate of reason, seeing
they do not see their soul: Let them give over to believe that our friends
dwelling remote and far from us, do live and are at their ease and content,
desiring to see us again, and that because we see them no more. But to
proceed, it is not simply true, that never any returned from the other life; on
the contrary, the Histories of the Old and New Testament do furnish us with
examples, of men and women, of young striplings and damsells raised again from
death.

The Prince of our faith, the head of all Christians, our Lord Jesus descending
from heaven to assume our human nature in earth, has told us ample and
gladsome news, of the state of heaven and of life eternal. His ascension to
heaven in body and soul is an assured pledge, that we also shall ascend into
heaven in our bodies and souls. S. Paul caught up into the third heaven, where
he was informed of the high and deep mysteries and secrets of God, from thence
came to tell us afterward many particularities of the Church. Christ Jesus is
in heaven, and we shall live there. For although that death dissolve the body
into dust, from whence it was taken; death cannot let the soul to return to
him, that gave it. And when we die, young and old, let us after the example of
Christ Jesus, and of David recommend our souls to God, rendering them into his
hands, as into the hands of a most faithful keeper and guardian of them; And
let us say with S. Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my soul: being well assured
that at the same hour, when it shall be fit for us to go out of this present
life, we have part in that gracious promise of the son of God, made to the
sinner converted, Verily I say unto thee, that this day thou shall be with me
in Paradize. This is the sweet voice, which still ought to be sounding in the
heart of the wise Vieillard, to the end that being at the point to leave this
world, as his age plainly shows him, his conscience do not smite and check
him, to be a profane person and a contemner of God, to be obdurate and
hardened in his sins, and that Satan bawle not in his ears, that seeing
thou have delighted in nothing but to satisfy thy lusts, to follow thy
affections and desires, that thou art an hypocrite, a liar, murderer, an
unclean person; in effect that thou have loved nothing but the world, that
thou have not carried the name of a Christian, but to live in all carnal
licentiousness, renouncing the guide-ship of the spirit of truth, and
holiness, thou shall speedily be with me in hell. Wise old men lift up your
thoughts to the meditation of this doctrine of the Resurrection of our bodies,
and of the immortality of men's souls, joining to it the last Article of our
Faith, to say in fervor and joy of spirit; I believe the life everlasting.

CHAP. XX. The conclusion of the Work, with a serious Exhortation to Old and
Young: Also two prayers for wise old men.
WHat rests more, but to wish, that that which has been spoken upon so
worthy a Subject in the former chapters, may be carefully pondered and thought
upon by old men, who have any sense or feeling of their condition before God,
who are not ungrateful for his benefits, and who aspire to a perfect
renovation. I was willing to abridge my Discourse, knowing that a short speech
suteth to old men, who love to talk, hear, read, and that practiced precepts
do better fit them then much talk and discourse. Seeing then that they have
but a little way to go, it is reason that they speak many things in few
words, remembering what the wise man has said so long ago in his first Chapter
of his Ecclesiastes. That there is no end in making many Books, and that so
much study is but a weariness which we put our selves to. I grant that it is
so, especially when we let go the bridle, and give way and head to such
curious and infinite disquisitions, bawlings, and controversies, unworthy the
age and quality of old men. For otherwise Solomon himself confesses, that
the words of the wise are as goades, and that the masters who make huge
volumes are as nails, and stakes fast driven in up to the head. For the
Church likewise is the park or fold, wherein the flocks of the chief
shepherd of Souls are gathered, to keeps and contain them in their
obedience and duty by the declaration of sound doctrine, uttered with a lively
voice, and set down in print and writing. If this compyled Volume and Library
of many Masters and Doctors may serve to young and old; to my self who am
freed from the errors and aberrations of young age, and who am growing old, if
the year, commonly called Climactericall, ought to be held for the threshold
of old age, I shall have well spent and employed some hours of my leisure.

Whatsoever success it has, I first inuit young men, who betimes ought to lay
foundations of a comely and settled old age, to remember themselue, that men
have occasion to hope well of them, when they see them soberly and constantly
frequent the company and are conversant with wise old men, are advanced to
places of charge in the Commonweal, or are employed in the service of the
Church, or are well seen or experienced in domesticke affairs. Those which
see young men thus careful cannot but greatly rejoice, and assure themselves
that after their times humane society will be mainetained and kept entire, in
good case and state, and that her breaches and decays shall find men, who
indeed will be able to lay their helping hands to it. A young Orator should
have his wit furnished with argument enough, if he would amplyfie and
discuss the evils and miseries, which do compass us about, and would
purpose and set forth the good things and commodities which we want. Whence
do proceed so many miseries? God has taken away from us many wise old men,
many true Fathers, and men always affected and forward to procure whatsoever
was for his glory, and the Commonweal. Let posterity judge more soundly then
we of what we do want. We do not lance this impostume. It is but too much
said, if we say that almost all, young and old, are the slaves of pride, of
dissolutnesse, of avarice, of vanity, in fine borne to the servitude and
slavery of vices, and to the hatred of virtues.

What does this servitude beget and bring forth? Another so lamentable as
nothing more. Young men open your eyes, to the end that your fathers, mothers,
families, may take true comfort in your virtuous proceedinges, that your
country may receive honorable service from you: resemble (as the Prophet
says in the Psalm 127.) Arrows shot out of a strong bow: Speak in the
assemblies and common counsels, for piety, justice, temperance, and stoutly
procure the suppression of vice, and the advancement of virtue.

Let young men be such as the Apostle commands, Titus 2. 6. to wit, sober
minded, to the end (that according to their usual wishes and desires) they may
be strong of body and mind, well respected, well willed, esteemed, and
commended, with all the privileges and immunities, whereof the dissolute and
vicious have no part. And what madness is it, not to be willing to be employed
always in doing that which they ought willingly and cheerfully to do? Let
young men be such able men, that they may overcome the malignant one, as the
most wise and well-beloved Disciple of the Lord requires them to be, in the
second Chapter of his first Epistle. Above all, I pray them that (to crown
their age with true praise) they be sober, that they respect ancient men,
bearing with the lumpishnesse and sowernesse of those, who have done them many
good turns and services, and who are still able to help and further them
much. For hardly can young age decay and wrong it self more, then in appearing,
ungrateful, sullen, churlish, and insolent to aged persons.

I come now toyou venerable and reverend old men, beseeching you in the name of
the Lord our common Father, to think that your undoubted praise, peace,
felicity, assured health consists in this; That you be (according to the
Apostles doctrine) sober, grave, meek, sound in the faith, abounding in
charity, patience, and wisdom. The Emperor Justinian in a certain Edict
addressed to Christians, says, That the first degree of salvation, consists
in an open confession of the true faith. The knowledge of true and comfortable
Antiquity consists, according to Saint John in the second Chapter of his
first Epistle, In this, if the Fathers know him, who is from the beginning. Let
wise old men profit in such knowledge, and let them not be weary to go on, and
be forward scholars therein, even until with unspeakable joy, they behold
the glorious face of the Ancient of days, and be entertained in his heavenly
Palace. Honor is the nutriment of old men, so also is hope, yea that hope
which makes not ashamed, the assured hope of a better state and condition, and
that taste which we have, even of the contemplation of God in this present
life, is the sound food and solid substance of wise old men. But let us grow
old in such sort, that we may make a good end: that it be not reproached unto
us in Gods presence, that the last years of our life, have been the worst of
all; But let us strive to partake of that singular benediction, contained in
the end of the Song of the wise Debora, in the fifth Chapter of the History of
the Judges; That those who love God, shall be as the Sun going forth in his
strength. It is not to decline, but to rise even to midday. Our midday is to
continue such, never to declyne.

Not only old age, but the world also is in a decline. Let us then lift up our
eyes to the East above, let us behold the Son of righteousness, let us turn
our faces that way, least we perish with the world.

When we shall be departed hence (says Saint Cyprian against Demetrius) there
will be no more time to repent, satisfaction shall have no more effect: In this
world we lose or save life. Let no man then be hindered by his sins, or by
the years of his life, to come to the salvation which is offered unto him.
There is no repentance too late to him that remains yet in the world. The gate
to obtain pardon of God is open: those which seek and follow the truth close,
shall without difficulty approach to it. Although you be ready to topple into
your grave, and have not much longer to live, if you pray the only true God to
pardon your sins, confessing them unto him, and calling upon him in faith
unfeignedly, who has manifested himself unto you, your request shall be
granted, his mercy shall give you grace to salvation, and you shall pass from
death to eternal life. Christ affoordeth us part of such grace, he gives us
that excellent present of his mercy, having slain and put death to death for
us by the Trophie of his Cross, redeeming whosoever believes in him by the
price of his blood, reconciling man to God, quickening him that is dead, by a
heavenly regeneration. If it be possible let us follow after this Savior, let
us be taken and recognized for his Soldiers, let us fight under his banner.
It is he which opens unto us the passage to life, which does bring and set
us up again in the possession of Paradise, which does guide us to the Kingdom
of heaven: we shall live altogether with him, who has made us the children of
God, and being restored by his precious blood, we shall enjoy joy for ever in
his presence. We shall be glorified with our head, blessed in God the Father,
have our fill of gladness and everlasting happiness in his presence, whom we
shall thank without ceasing. And truly whosoever acknowledging his miseries
past, has been made assured of immortal life, it cannot be but he will be
always joyful, and render continual thanks to God. These are the sayings of
S. Cyprian; the meditation of which we do recommend to the wise Vieillard, and
for to excite and stir him up yet the more thereunto, we do present unto him
these two Prayers following.

O Lord my God, who have given to man life, upon condition to be a while on
the earth, and then to go thence by death, to the end to admonish me that
there is a better life, heavenly and eternal; Grant me thy grace, I beseech
thee, that as always I ought, to think by all means to live holily, so now I
may endeavor to depart happily out of this world: Let the hope to behold
speedily and out of hand thy glory, remove from me the fear of death, that I
may wait in joy for that day, wherein that approaching and everlasting
liberty shall unloose me from the chains of my sins, which do so mightily
ouerload me. Let this hope uphold me so, that I may make no reckoning of any
transitory thing, and let humane affections be so mortified in my frail
members, that I may not desire to begin again, or to continue my course, but
to be soon at an end. Grant that I may not be careful for this wretched
body, and this decayed building, but so much only as may be fit for this
short life, which remains for me to use. Especially, fortify my mind
against the many impostures, and guiles of Satan, which do compass me about
on every side. I am ashamed that I am become a child again, and worse then a
young man, who does forge years to himself, and does dream of immortalities
in the shadow of death. Suffer not this fond confidence of lingering still in
the earth, insensibly to steal away my life from me, so as without thinking
on it, and too late, I shall find my self at the end of it, surprised, and
suddenly taken, desperate and past hope; whereupon would follow a vain
complaint, to have wretchedly cast away thy graces, to see my self shackled
with an unsupportable chain, and from which I fear to be loosed. My life is
between my lips, why then should I pant, and sigh after transitory things?
What have I any more to do with the profits, and commodities of this life? My
weaknesses do bidd me enough to turn my back to all infamous lendnesse and
licenciousnesse, and, O my God, though I should be stronger then I am, should
it be to offend thee? My sight is dim, and decays, my hearing is dull and
deaffed; should I revive these dead senses, with the remembrance of old
pleasures and new also? O let me not, with new crimes and sins, increase and
add to mine iniquities past! And if thy favor has vpheld me in my young
age, oh let me not abuse it in old age, or vilely sink into the bottomless
gulf of death, notwithstanding so many graces of thine, for which I am bounden
and indebted to thine infinite goodness, and am to make account before thy
judgment seat. Thy holy Angels, shall they mourn ever me? Thy Spirit, shall
it be made heavy in beholding me? My conscience shall it accuse me, to be
hypocritical and malicious? Make this old age (O Lord) free from stupiditie,
and sottishness, from pollution, from weakness, talkatiuenesse, from
arrogancy, bragging, doting, from too much niggardship, and from
unnecessary, vain, odious expenses; make me become charitable, honest, sober,
temperate, always mindful of my near departure, and desirous of that
immortality, which I hope for. In fine, let my old age have nothing that I may
fear, nothing that my friends and enemies may lament or condemn. Let it be
beloved and welcome unto me, in that it will make me shorly to return into
thy heavenly Palace, where thou shall wipe away the tears from mine eyes,
where I shall see my self delivered from all sins, filled with thy grace,
and closed about with blissful glory, in the holy company, who there
continually magnify thee. O my God, deliver me from these so many cares and
miseries, which do presseme down, to the end that at the hour of my
departure I may follow thee with courage. Let this be my meditation
continually: Let me be released from the vain employments, and businesses of
this world, not setting my self to any thing, but that which directly
concerns my calling, and behauing my self in such sort, that both those which
dwell near me, and those which are far and remote from me, may from my
behauiours and carriage, take example of piety, just dealing, and holy
manners. Let me be an enemy to Atheism, and superstition, and sincerely
addicted to thy service, according to the rules of thy word. Grant me I
beseech thee this grace, that I may carefully meditate on whatsoever I have
understood, or perceived of thy wisdom, power, and mercy in the ways of my
life. That I may every day learn that, whereof to be ignorant, it would be
both shameful unto me, and dangerous.

Above all root out of my heart all wicked guile and craft, and grant me the
grace to walk before thee in a sincere and honest heart, hating evil in my
self more then in an other, to be a lover of plain dealing, of peace, of
equity, of meekness, of purity, of innocence of life. Let these be the
ornaments of mine age, and let thy spirit so direct, comfort, and strengthen
me, that I may not be too much dejected, though I become deaf, blind, weak,
and lame. Only let me have strength left and remaining, to praise and call
upon thee to the last gasp, so as the weaknesses and decays of my body may
be borne up by the supply of thy graces in my soul, which desires not to be
and remain in this prison, but to bless and praise thee. Suffer me not to
conceit still on months and years, but that at every step and moment of
time, I may remember my departure out of this present life, that my whole
thought may be, that I must once pay this debt, least being suddenly taken, I
cast away my soul. When then the appointed time shall come, grant I beseech
thee, that I may joyfully depart, and with fervent desire lift up my self to
thee. Let thy goodness, O Lord my God, cause me to employ my last days to the
study and meditation hereof, not fearing to leave and resign this life,
whereby I shall no more offend thee, but shall glorify thee continually. The
apprehension of so happy a day, which shall be the birth day of my eternal
and unspeakable blessed being, let it make me to rejoice before thee my Lord,
my God, my heavenly Father, thorough Jesus Christ thy son my redeemer. Amen.

O Eternal God and almighty, heavenly Father and merciful, which have been
my hope from the first day of my life, and during all the course of the same,
and until this great age have by infinite ways, caused me to feel thy
providence, care, and protection, thou art he to whom I have recourse as to my
God, my glory, my salvation. My legs are feeble, but I lift up my self upon
the wings of my thoughts, even unto thee, who art my strength in infirmity,
my light in so great darkness of my understanding, my life in death which
compasses me about, beseeching thee to be pleased to forget the sins of my
youth, and to have no more remembrance of my transgressions, but remember thy
faithful promises, to look upon the wounds and sufferings of thy son my
pledge and Savior, for whose love be pleased to pardon mine iniquities. Suffer
me not, O my God, for ever to cast thee off and forsake thee. Be pleased to
annoint the eyes of my soul with the salve of thy spirit, that I may
continually behold thee, and that acknowledging my self a poor wayfaring
man, and a stranger in this world, as all my fathers were, I may earnestly
aspire to thee, and to the country where the blessed are, and where thou have
prepared a place for all thine elect. Grant that I may see my self delivered
out of the waves and storms of the dangerous Sea of this world: O Lord teach
me to know mine end, and the number of my days, to the end that seeing that
the flourishing state of this human life has no abiding, but is compassed
with sorrows, and oppressed with labors and pains, and then the more
dangerous when we least feel them, I may give my self to the study and
exercise of that wisdom, which does teach me to renounce the world, and my
self, and to meditate upon the heavenly happiness of thy kingdom, to the end
that my heart may be there where my treasure is, the head and spouse of the
Church, and where thou have prepared for them which love thee incomprehensible
joys, through JESUS CHRIST, etc.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 5. Line 21. for be, read, begun. p. 12. l. 14. for, from current, r. or
current. p. 17. l. 16. for, midst was, r. nuddest whereof was. l. 1. for, and
that, r. but that. l. 29. for, sight, r. site. p. 18. l. 12. for, follows,
r. flows. l. 23. for, made, r was. p. 19 l. 21. for, of days, r. of our
days. p. 22. Chap. 4. l. 1. for, fearfulness, r. fearful fall l. 7. for,
respectacle, r. receptacle. l. 22. for, age a, r. age is a p. 23. l. 13. for,
down, r. done l. 15. for, crimes r. ruins p. 24. l. 12. for lineaments, r.
ligaments. p. 27. l. 20. for, spin at, r spin out. p. 30. l. 3. for a wonder,
r. no wonder. p. 31 l. 5. for, if this life, r. of his life p. 36 l. 27. for,
to be proclaim, r. to proclaim, p. 10. l. 17. for, porportiall, r.
proportional. p. 55. l. 3. for, wh, r. who. p. 58. l. 23. for, effect, r
affect p. 99. l. 20. for, youyg, r. young. p. 107. l. 16. themselves, r.
themselves p. 120. l. 9. for, wit-r. witness.


