ENCOVRAGEMENTS. For such as shall have intention to be Vnder-takers in the
new plantation of CAPE BRITON, now New Galloway in AMERICA, BY ME LOCHINVAR.

Non nobis nati (...) aliquid parents, aliquid Patria, aliquid cognati
postulant. DREAD GOD 1625



EDINBVRGH, Printed by John Wreittoun. Anno Dom. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL. SIR WILLIAM ALEXANDER of Menstrie Knight. Master of
Requests for Scotland, and Lieutenant General to his Majesty in the
Kingdom of NEW SCOTLAND.

AND TO THE REMNANT THE NOBLEMEN, AND KNIGHTS BAROnets in Scotland*
Vnder-takers in the plantations of New Scotland in AMERICA.

TO THE ADVENTVRERS, FAVOVrers, and well-willers of the enterprise for the
inhabiting, and planting in Cape Briton, now New Galloway in America.
GEntle Reader,
It has been the policy universal, from the creation of the World unto this
time, of all civil States, the replenishing of the World with Colonies of
their own subjects. Adam and Eva did first begin this pleasant work to
plant the Earth to succeeding posterity. Noah, and his family began again
the second plantation. And the confusion of tongues at Babel, made division of
States, scattering as many Colonies over the face of the Earth after the
Flood, as there was diversity of Languages: and their seed as it still
increased, has still planted new Countries, one after another; and so the
World to that estate whereinto it is.

That the planting of Countries, and civilizing barbar^^s and inhumane Nations,
has ever been the work of the greatest Princes of the Earth, their
ever-living actions has testified; wherewith are filled both the records of
divine Truth, and the monuments of humane state; and whose heroicke actions
(we must not think) has been undertaken upon trivial motives, when as by
that they did as well enlarge the limits of their Dominions, and enriche the
revenues of their estates; as bridle sedition at home, and settle security
against their enemies abroad.

These preceding praise-worthie Fathers, and their memorable of spring were
diligent to plant, that yet unplanted to their after-livers; wherein shined
those worthy Founders of the great Monarchies and their virtues: the Hebrews,
the Lacedomonians, Goths, Graecians, Romans, and the rest from time to time
in their several ages.

But to leave these remote times, let us take a view within these 60. years of
the discoveries, and plantations in America, by the English, the French, the
Spainard, the Portugale; by whose industrious pains are made known unto us
already their, so hudge tracts, kingdoms, and territories, peopled and
unpeopled, as upon the hither side for the space of ^000. leagues at the least,
and for 3000. more on the back side in the South Sea.

Many discourses of the discoueries which has been there effected within
these few years are made of worthy Personages: such as Columbus, Cortez,
Pitzora, Soto, Magellanes, and many others, who to the wonder of all ages has
successivelie seconded one another in those parts.

Whole Decads are filled with discoveries there, and volumes with their actions
of plantation: There we see the renowned Drake, and memorable Candisch twice
about the round circumference of the whole Earth. Virginia to perpetrat the
memory of her honorable Knight Sr Walter Ralegh, Amadas, Arthur, White,
Grenuile, and Lane her first discoverers, and worthy Governors in her
plantations. Sr John Haukins in his Guinea. John de Verrazano a Florentine,
John Rinault, Rene Landoniere, Dominique Gourgues in their Florida. The noble
Cortez, and the other Spainards, and Portugalls in their golden Mines of the
15. Provinces of new Mexico, Nueua Gallicia, Nueua Hispanna, Nueua Biscaia,
Cibola, Quivira, and to the Gulf of California on the back side of America.
The famous Cabot, Frobisher, Davis, whose memories shall never die in the
North-west parts: and many innumerable (...) Worthies, whom all after-ages
shall eternize for their virtues, whose actions I leave to be searched as they
are registered in the monuments of their praise-worthie proceedings.

The shining brightness of these ( Gentle Reader) and such others, has so
beamed a path way to all posterity for imitation; as that the basest mind
that is, may be induced to follow their footsteppes. And for my self, having
from the source of that ever and overflowing fountain, that was still a
running to all, from our late Sovereign of never-dying memory King JAMES
obtained a Patent of Cape Briton, which now, by his Royal direction is
entitled New Galloway in America: I have resolved to follow the trodden way of
these others, whose happy success are so plainly seen in such honorable
designs.

And since I do propone to my self the same ends, which are first for the
glory of my great and mighty GOD; next the service of his (...) my dread
Sovereign, and my native Country: and last the particular weal, and utility
of my self, and such as shall be generouslie disposed adventurers with me:
Why shall it be lawful for others, and not for me: and not as possible and
as commodious for me, as unto others of my quality?

The chief (then) and the farthest point that my intention shall seek to
arrive at; shall be to remove that unbelief, which is so grounded in the
minds of men, to discredit most noble and profitable endevoures with
distrust: and first, to shake off their colorable pretenses of ignorance, and
then, if they will not be persuaded to make their selfe-willes inexcusable; I
shall make manifest the worthiness of the cause to the minds of such as are
desirous to be settled in a certainty. As for my self, I do give trust to
the relations of such, whose wisdoms (I know) are not so shallow, as easily
be deceived of others; nor consciences so wretched, as by pretenses to deceive
others: and having the personal trial of so honorable and sufficient
reporters, our own Countrie-men, this naked contemplation, and idle knowledge
can not content me: but knowing that the chief commendation of virtue
consists in action, I have resolved a practice, and to trace the footsteppes
of those heroicke forerunners, whose honorable actions shall ever live upon
Earth; whiles their Souls live in glory in the Heavens, and shall increase
here, and multiply; as their bodies in the grave shall putrify.

The inducements which has encouraged me to this enterprise, and to spend my
time, and best abilities in these adventures, I shall here set briefly
down without any inlargment of made words, but in single speech, as best
beseeming a simple meaning; Entreating thee ( Courteous Reader) that thou would
with an affectioned mind consider these my subsequent motives, wherewith I have
been induced my self: ponder aright my ends: and then but weigh my willing
and free Offers, which I do make for the weal and furtherance of so worthy a
Work. We are not borne to our selves; but to help each others, and our
abilities and means are not much unlike at the first hour of our birth, and
the last minute of our death: and it is our deades good or bad that all of us
have to carry us to Heaven or Hell after this life. While we are therefore
here, let us imitate the virtues, and glories of our Predecessors, that
hereafter worthily we may be remembered as their Successors,

FAREWELL.
THE MOTIVES, which has induced me, and may happily encourage such as have
intention to be Vnder-takers with Me in the plantation of New GALLOWAY in
AMERICA.
MOTIVE I.
JESUS CHRIST amongst an Heathen people, where Christianity has not been
known, nor the worship of the true GOD. Where can be selected a more
excellent subject, than to cast down the Altars of Devils, and to raise up
the Altar of CHRIST: to forbid the Sacrifice of men, that they may offer up
the Sacrifices of contrite Spirits.

Is it not a determined Truth, that the Gospel of Jesus Christ should be
preached to all the World ( Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but GODS Word
shall not pass away). And is it not as certain a Conclusion amongst all the
Divines, that these are the latter Days, wherein we live, well known by the
signs that were to come before, set down by God himself in his sacred
Word, and for the most part already manifested? And has not Gods all-seeing
Providence begun as first by discovery, and next by plantation of so hudge
and so waste a tract, more commonly, than properly called the New World;
unknown but within this 60. years, except by a glimpse, to make appear the
progress of his divine Providence, how he will have the seed of his work to
be sown amongst them; Then does it not belong unto us to prosecute his
work; and as by merchandising and trade we buy at them the pearls of the
Earth; we ought to communicate unto them the pearls of Heaven.

The time has never been so apparent as now, under our most gracious and
Sovereign Lord, King CHARLES, whose generous and gracious goodwill by
encouragement to the same, has manifested the same since he received the
Crown, to be the selected instrument to atchieue it.

Then should not that Heroicke, and illustrious disposition in Him, whom we
see so prompt to be still in action, both incite, and invite to so noble
designs all such as would shun the imputation of idleness to imitate His
foot-steppes.

Is it unlawful for us to come to them? No; it is the duty of Christianity
in us, to behold the imprinted footsteppes of GODS glory in every Region
under Heaven; and to them, against the Law of Nations, to violate a peaceable
Stranger, or to deny us harbor.

Is it unlawful for us to trade with them? No, unless Solomon should be
condemned of sending for Gold to Ophir; Abraham for making a league with
Abimelech, and all Christendom for having commerce with Turks, and miscreants.

Nor neither is it unlawful that we possess part of their Lands, and dwell
with them, and defend our selves from them, because there is no other moderate,
and mixed course, to bring them to conversion, but by daily conversation, where
we may see the Life, and learn the Languages each of others: and because
there is town sufficient in the Land, (as Sichem said) for them, and us; the
extent of an 100. miles being scarce peopled with 500 inhabitants: and
chiefly because (as Pharaoh gave Goshen, to Israel, ere Ephron sold his cave
to Abraham) they have sold to our people their Lands for copper (which they
more esteem of, than money) to inherit and inhabit:, as Paspehay and
Powhatan, two our there greatest Kings to these our Colonies in Virginia; and
chiefly (as it is written by Captain John Smith, a worthy actour in the
business) when Captain Newport was desired by Powhatan at Worowacomaco, to
come from James town in Virginia, where he was, as a place unwholesome, and
to take possession of another whole Kingdom, which he gave unto him.

If any scrupulous conscience will impute, that yet we can possess no further
limits, than was alloted by composition, and that fortitude without justice,
is but the firebrand of iniquity. Let him know that Plato defines it to be
no injustice, to take a sword out of the hand of a mad man. And Saint
Augustine has allowed, for a lawful offensive war that revengeth injuries,
and wherein the whole Divines in Europe, although contraverting far in other
things, yet in this they all agree, that it is lawful. That the Church of Rome
allow it. The Spaniard, and Portugalles large and ample territories and
kingdoms in the 15. Provinces of Mexico, Nueua Hispanna, Nueua Gallicia, etc.
bear witness. And for the Church of England, their Bermudes, Virginian, and
New England conquesse and colonies affirm it. And the Church of Geneva in the
year 1555. determined in a Synod (where Calvin was president) to send Peter
Rochier, and William Quadrigarius, under a French Captain to Brasilia, although
they were supplanted by the Cardinal of Loraine, and the treachery of their
false Captain.

When therefore it is so sweet a smelling Sacrifice to propagate the name of
Jesus Christ: if we have any grain of faith or zeal in Religion, let us
seek to convert these poor Savages to know Christ, and humanity. Let
Religion be the first aim of our hopes, and other things shall be cast unto
us. Our Names shall be registered to posterity with a glorious Title; These
are the men whom GOD has raised to augment the state of their Country, and to
propagate the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The same GOD that has ordained three Kingdoms under the Scepter of our
gracious King CHARLES, will not be wanting to add a fourth, if we would
dissolve that frostie ycienesse which chilleth our zeal, and makes us cold in
the action.

MOTIVE II.


What is so truly suitable with honor and honesty, as to gain to our native
Mother-Countrie a Kingdom to attend her? Wherein can the taste of true virtue,
and magnanimity be more sweet and pleasant, than in planting, and building a
foundation for thy posterity; got from the rude earth by Gods blessing, and
thine own industry, without prejudice to any? What more conducing to that
mystical body politic, whereof thou art a member, than for to find
employment for those that are idle, because they know not what to do?
Posterity shall remember thee for it, and remembering, ever honor that
remembrance with praise.

Consider what was the beginninges, and endinges of the Monarchies of the
Chaldeans, the Persians, the Graecians and the Romans, but this one rule: what
was it they would not do for the Commonwealth or there mother City? for
example: Rome, what made her such a Monarchesse, but only the adventures of her
youth, not in ryots at home, but in dangers abroad? and their justice, and
judgment, out of their own experience when they grew aged. What was their
ruin and hurt, but this: their excess of idleness, want of experience,
hypocritical seeming goodness, and growing only formal Temporists; so that
what their Predecessors got in many years, they lost in few days: these by
their pains and labors became Lords of the World, they by their ease and
vices became slaves to their servants.

Then, who would live at home idle (or think in him self any worth to live)
only to eat, drink, and sleep, and so to die? or by consuming that
carelessly, which their predecessors has got worthily? or by using that
miserably, that maintained virtue honestly? or, for being descended nobly,
pyne with the vain vaunt of Kindred in penury? or (to maintain a silly show
of braverie) toil out the heart, soul, and time baselie, by shifts, tricks,
cards, or dyce? or by relating news of others actions, sharke here or there
for a Dinner or Supper? deceiving his friends by fair promises and
dissimulation, in borrowing where he never intends to pay? offending the
Laws, surfeting with excess, burthening his Country, abusing himself,
despairing in want, and then cousening his kindred? although it is seen what
honors the World has yet, and what affluence of all things; for such as will
seek, and worthily deserve them. Here were courses for Gentlemen, (and such
as would be so reputed) more suting their qualities, than begging from their
Princes generous disposition the labors of his other subjects.

It would be a History of a large volume to recite the adventures of the
Spaniards and Portugalles, their constant resolutions, with such incomparable
honor, so far beyond belief in their discoveries, and plantations, as may
well condemn us of too much imbecillitie, floth, and negligence. And yet the
authors of these new inventions were held as ridiculous at that time: as now
are others that do but seek to imitate their vnparalelled virtues.

And though we see daily their mountains of wealth (sprung from the plants
of their generous indevoures) yet is our incredulity, and untowardness such,
and so great, that either ignorantly we believe nothing; or so curiously
contest, to prevent we know not what future events; that so we either
neglect, or oppress, or discourage both our selves, and others, that might
both as easily and would as willingly attempt and embrace the like.

Who sees not, what is the greatest good of the Spaniard, but these new
conclusions, in searching these unknown parts of this unknown World: by
which means he diveth even into the very secreetes of all his Neighbors,
and the most part of the World.

And when the Portugalles and Spaniards had found the East and West Indies, how
many did condemn them-selves that did not accept of that honest offer of
noble Columbus, who upon the neglect of England, to whom it was first offered;
brought them to it: persuading them-selves the World had no such places, as
they had found: and yet ever since we find, they still have found new Lands,
new Nations, new trades, and still daily do find; both in Asia, Africa,
Terra incognita, and America: so that their is neither Soldier, nor
Mechanicke from the Lord, to the beggar, but these parts afford them all
employment, and discharge their native Soil of so many thousands of all
sorts, that else by their sloth, pride and imperfections, would long ere
this have troubled their neighbors, or have eaten the pride of Spain it
self.

And seeing further, for all they have, they cease not still to search for
that, which yet they neither have, nor know not ^ it is strange that we
should be so dull, as not maintain that which we have, and pursue that,
which we know.

I am sure that many would take it in an evil part to be abridged of the
titles and honors of their predecessors: when if but truly they would judge
themselves: look how inferior they are to their noble virtues, so much they
are unworthy of their honors, and livings: which never were ordained for
shows and shadows, to maintain idleness and sloth, but to make them more
able to abound in honor by heroical deeds of action, judgment, piety and
virtue.

What was it they would not do both in purse and person for the good of the
Commonweal? and may not this be a motive for us to set out such as may be
spared of our kindred in such generous designs. Religion above all things
should move (especially the Clergy) if we were religious, to show our
faith by our works, in converting these poor savages to the knowledge of GOD.
Honor might move the Gentry, valiant and industrious; the hope and assurance
of wealth, all: if we were such, as we would seem, and desire to be
accounted.

Or be we so far inferior to other Nations, or our Spirits so far
dejected from our ancient Predecessoures or our minds so upon spoil, pyracie,
or other villanieas to serve the Portugale, Spaniard, Dutch, French, or Turk,
(as to the great hurt of Europe too many do) rather than our GOD, our King,
our Country, and our selves? excusing our idleness, and our base complaints
by want of employment? when here is such choice of all sorts, and for all
degrees in this plantation.

So let these answer such questionless questions, that keep us back from
imitating the worthiness of their brave spirits, that advanced themselves from
poor Soldiers, to great Captains, their posterity to great Lords, their
King to be one of the greatest Potentates on Earth, and the fruits of their
labors, his greatest glory, power, riches and renown.

MOTIVE III.


Ought not every man to regard, as well to enlarge his patrimony, as that he
be not chargeable to others, so far as he may by his virtue and industry,
in a lawful and honest manner attain unto. Is not a lawful search for such
commodities, to be preferred to an idle sloathfulnesse? and an honorable
policy in a lawful plantation abroad, before unlawful monopolies, and
wrangling suites of Law, by neighbor against neighbor at home, impoverishing
thy self, and thy native Country, whereof thou ought to be a more
profitable member?

May not the fortunate success of the plantation of Ireland, so fresh and
recent to all, whence so great commodities are brought both to England, and
Scotland, and whereby the Country it self is enriched, and we so benefited,
be inticements to induce us to the like. The verturous, and generous Spirits
of resolute Gentlemen, vnder-takers of this plantation, have raised their
fortunes worthy of honor; and by his Majesty's favor, their virtues rewarded
with the titles of Earls, Vice-Countes Lords, Barronets, and Knights,
according to their qualities, and his Majesty's pleasure. The meaner sort, such
as artisanes, laborers of the ground, the greater part whereof, were known to
have scarce a competent means to defraye the charges of their passage thither,
now promoted to be Gentlemen, and of great means. And why may not time
produce as great effects to virtue, in others who shall follow her paths with
resolution: where as good occasions are are offered, in a climate more
temperate, a Soil more fertile, and far exceeding in greater commodities?

And last, to shake off the difficulties, and impedimentes that may be
objected: as the dangerousnesse of Sea, the bariennesse of the Soil, and the
vnwholesomenesse of the climate; all which discouragements might astonishe some
with fear, and to think our expensses, and pains unprofitable; when as our
ends shall be impossible. I have therefore here taken a view that you may
generally know and learn, what the Country is, and her commodities: the
temperature of the climate: nature of the natives: and the easiness of the
passage; all which I shall briefly run over; only to remove from before your
feet the stumbling blocks of impossibility that may affright us.

The Country it is called by the name of Cape Briton, now New Galloway: new,
not in respect of the discovery thereof, which to the judgment of men of
knowledge and understanding is not new, but old; for the much has been written
thereof, yet new, not old, because of our new undertaking of that plantation.
It is situated betwixt the degrees of 45. and 57. an Yland within the Sea, but
upon the maine, severed by the distance of four leagues in some parts, of two
or three at other parts: and at others, less.

The Yland is in length some 120. miles, and in breadth 80. miles or thereby:
standing South-east, and North-west to New Scotland; where the great river
Canada ingorgeth her self in the maine Ocean. Harbors there be exceeding
good on all sides, in most part whereof are ancorage for ships of all
burden. Yles there be about over-grovvn with good timber of diverse sorts of
vvood; all as yet not discovered, except the Isle Sablon, which is full of
vvoodes and vvilde beasts, but without any people. The Land is watered by
four maine rivers, full of Salmond, and diverse other sorts of fishes. It
has plenty of springes of svveete waters. Toward the North-east,
Mountanous: and tovvard the South-west Caimpainge: promising as rich entralles
as any other Kingdom to whom the Sun is no nearer neighbor. The ground in
it self so fertile and good as may equalize any of the Kingdoms that lies in
the hight of 45. 46. 47. Only this advantage I find in nature, that they have
above this: they are bewtified by the long labor and diligence of industrious
people and airt: and this is only as God made it, when he created the world,
vncultured, planted and manured by men of industry, judgment and experience.

The commodities which we shall reap from thence shall be great, for the Sea
shall sweeten our labors with her benefits, as the Land, and the Land as well
as the Sea. The Sea shall reach us up her Whale, her turbot, her sturgion, cod,
haddocke, small ling, makkerell, herring, mullet, perch, Ecle, crab, lobster,
muskle, wilk, oyster, and infinite others. Fish is the maine Staple, from
whence is to be extracted, a present commodity to produce the rest: which
howsoever it may seem mean and base, yet it is the Mine, and the Sea is the
source of these silvered streams of all these virtues, which has made the
Hollanders, the miracle of industry, and pattern of perfection for these
affairs: and the benefit of fishing, is that Primum mobile, that turns all
their Sphere to this hight of plenty, strength, honor, and admiration.

The ground it will yield us an admired variety; some we shall have that are
merchantable, which, by the serving for ordinary necessars of the planters and
inhabitants, may yield a superplus sufficient, by way of traffic and exchange
with other nations, to enriche our selves the provyders; such as flax, hemp,
which the Soil does yield of it self not planted. For pitch, tar, rozen and
turpentine, there be these kind of trees there, which yield them abundantly.
Sassafras, called by the natives, winauk, a kind of wood of sweet smell, and of
rare virtues in Physic. The Vine, it grows there wild. Oil there may be
there of two sorts: one of walnuts; and another of berries, like the ackornes,
which the natives use. Furs of many and diverse kinds; such as the matterne,
the otter. the black fox, the luzernes, Dear skins, bevers, wildcat, and
many others. Sweet gummes of diverse kinds, and many other Apothecarie
drugges. Dies of diverse sorts: such as shoemake, for black: the seed of an
herb called vasebur, and a little small root called chappacor, for red: and
for blew, the her be woad, a thing of great vent and use at home for Dyers, and
many other commodities merchantable, which by planting may be raised.

and in our coastings at home we are subject unto.

And now last, it rests I speak a word of the nature of the people, in so
far as you may know, how little they are to be feared, in respect of
troubling our inhabiting and planting.

They are a people so few, so poor, so base, so incivile, and so savage, as
wanting both multitude, power, or ai^^^ to harm us. They are clothed with
loose mantles, made of Dear skins, casten round about their middles, the
rest of their body all naked, of such stature only as we are here, having
no edge tools, nor weapons of iron, nor steel to offend us, neither know
they how to make any, nor how to use them.

These weapons which they have, are only Bows made of Hazell, and arrows of
reeds: flat edged truncheons also of vvood, about a yard long: neither have
they any thing to defend themselves, but targes made of barks, and some
armor made of sticks vvickered together with thread. In number they are
very few, in twenty miles, scarce threescore people. Towns in the country
are very rare, and small: containing few inhabitants: and he is a Viroan, or
great Lord, that has the government of one town. There houses are little, made
of small poles, and fast at the tops in round form, in most part covered
with barks. If there should fall out any Wars betwixt us and them, what
fight could there be, we having advantages against them, so many manner of
ways: it may be easily imagined, by our discipline, our strange weapons,
especially, our Ordinance great, and small. And by the experience that others
has had of them there, in places more populous than this of ours: where the
taking of them-selves to their heels, was their best defense against them.

So seeing you may perceive, what the Country is, and how situated? the air
how temperate, and wholesome? the Soil how fertile, and what affluence it
does yield of commodity? the natives how both so few, and so harmless?
and the passage, how so easy, and so frequentlie experimented? I hope there
remains no cause, whereby the action should be misliked.

Thus referring my relation to your favorable constructions: the success of
the action to Him, who is to be acknowledged the Author and Governor, not
only of this, but of all things else: and these my subsequent Offers, which I
have freely, and willingly granted, as helps, and furtherances for your
encouragement to so good a Work; ye may pervse, and only embrace as you
shall think your selves disposed.

DREAD GOD 1625


THE OFFERS to be granted to the Adventurers in the new plantation of CAPE
BRITON, now called by the name of New Galloway in AMERICA, BY LOCHINVAR.
ARTICLE 1.
For Ministers.
THAT the blessing of GOD may accompany us in our indevoures; without whose
gracious, and merciful assistance, we can not have happy, nor prosperous
success in our affairs. For the Ministers of the Word of God; such as shall
be the factours of CHRIST for the gain of Souls: and to propagate his
Truth: and enlighten those that are captivate in Ethnicke darkness: and for
the use, and exercise of true Religion amongst our selves; I do willingly,
and freely grant and offer as follows, 1. Their passage from Scotland unto
the said Land of New Galloway shall be free unto them, without payment of any
fraught, either for themselves, their wives, and children, if they any have,
and their necessare household stuff: which all shall be transported thither
unto them, into mine own Ships, and upon mine own charges. 2. They shall
have their entertainment of me, their wives, and children as said is, in
their whole passage on the way thither. 3. For their maintenance, and their
foresaids being there: I shall give them entertainment for the space of the
first three years, in during the infancy of our Church there: and how soon
it shall please GOD that our number be increased, that our Companies may be
divided in Paroches, that then a competent means shall be alloted unto each
Minister in his several charge, as shall be found expedient for their places.
4. For their assistance in such things as belongs unto them in their
callings: I shall have a special care to see, that such reverence, and respect
be had unto them, as appertains unto their place and calling: and shall see
such good order, as by them shall be set down for reformation of life, and
manners, duly obeyed and performed, by causing the transgressors, and
contemners of the same be severelie punished.


ARTICLE II.
THAT every one of such as shall be undertakers, shall give his oath of
alledgeance: and shall all conform themselves in Religion, according to his
Majesty's Laws, and manner professed within the Kingdom of Scotland.

ARTICLE III.
For Gentlemen, and others undertakers: what I shall be obliged to perform
unto them.
ITEM, for the helps, and furtherances of so generous, and well-disposed
undertakers as shall willingly undergo the hazard, and embrace the
enterprise: I shall perform the particulars in every point unto them, as
follows, 1. For their passages: every vnder-taker shall be transported,
himself, his wife, children, and servants, his whole household stuff, and
their provision of victualles for their intertainment, such as meal, malt,
beef, etc. and such as they shall please to provide to sustain them for a
whole year: Together with as much corns, as they shall be able to sow upon
their Lands, the first year: and that all, and together passage free, into
mine Ships, from Scotland unto the said country of New Galloway. 2. Being
thither by GODS merciful assistance, and providence transported, to be
established and placed in the Land: each man according to his quality, as
follows: The landed Gentleman undertaker, shall have his Lands granted unto
him in fee, and heritage to himself, and his successors for ever, to be
holden of me, my heirs, and successoures in New Galloway, in manner as they
hold their Lands in Scotland of our Sovereign Lord, the King his Majesty,
either by feaw, wairde, or blansh, and shall grant the same unto them in
quantity, according to every one of their qualities and means. And for
tennants, and farmorers, their lands shall be granted unto them in Lace,
every one of them to have three Life-rents, and a nyneteene year Tacke
thereafter, conform to their power, and means, and performance of the
conditions of the rent after mentioned. 3. And further more that their helps,
and furtherances may have a competent time to establishe them-selves in their
estates, and that their means may the better increase: each undertaker of the
plantation of New Galloway shall be free from the payment of any duty for
his Lands, for all and whole the space of the first three years. 4. For their
assurance of a security, and peaceable quietness in the possession of their
Lands in New Galloway, whereof they be undertakers: I shall find sufficient
caution, and surety unto each one of them within the Shyre where he dwells
in Scotland, that whatsoever his goods or gear thither transported, and placed
upon the ground of the said Lands, shall be taken from him by violence, of
the natives, or foreign Nations, that the double thereof shall be paid and
refounded again unto him in Scotland, or to his heirs, executours, or
assignayes. 5. And for artisanes and craftes-men, such as Tailors, Shoe-makers,
Smyths, Wrights, Websters, Wakers, Millers, etc. their passages shall be made
free unto them without the payment of any fraught; and likewise the rents of
their lands shall be free unto them, enduring their own lifetimes: and for
their successors, they shall be kept in the case, and estate of tenants and
farmorers, and shall have their Laces of their Lands granted unto them, as is
set down in the Article for Tennants.


ARTICLE IIII.
What the Vnder-takers shall perform unto me.
FOR the whole duty of my Lands, charges, and expensses to bestowed by me
in my shipping and other provision: I shall be contented to receive from
every one of the said undertakers, the thirteenth part of that increase, and
commodity, which their Lands shall be made worthy unto them in the said
plantation: And that I shall not require to be paid unto me in moneys, but
only in such commodities, as the Soil shall afford: such as corns, fishes,
furs, etc.

AND last, I desire that all such, as shall embrace the foresaids offers, may
come unto me before the first day of December next, and give up their names,
and a note of such things as they desire to be carried with them, whereby I
may provide for them, conform to my preceding offers, and they received
every one, and placed according to the order as they first come: so that all
things may be duly provided, and had in readiness against the due time and
season of setting out.

sense, and feeling out of mine own experience, how I see the estate of the
Kingdom.

Then (Worthy Countriemen) let us lay these two things in the balance, and
judge upon them: whether it is better for us to go there, where we may have
to live in in a fruitful Soil, and wholesome, in all commodities abounding to
our contentments, being only a little industrious, and painful? than to live
here at home as Runnagates, unanswerable to GOD, the King, the Laws, to all
reason, and conscience: to be captivate as slaves, and cast in loathsome
Prisons, to satisfy with our persons, when our goods has failed us: and
especially, when we have wronged our best and kindest friends, who out of
their loves has engaged themselves, to be distressed, and imprisoned for us,
which should be a greater grief unto us, than our own imprisonments.

And then shall we disdain plantation: which to enterprise is so honorable;
to prosecute so possible: to purchase so lawful, and when attained, so
profitable? No, whosoever shall reason against the same, especially such as are
in distress, may well be reputed, either the Bastard of generositie, or the
nursling of simplicity, or the abject of frugalitie: and shall either become
for ever, the prostitute of infamy, or consecrated to perpetual oblivion: and
when he is dead, his actions, his means, his name and all, shall die with
himself; and if he shall ever happen to be remembered, that remembrance shall
only be in ignominy, as the Wretch of his Country, the Curse of his
Kindred: and an vnthrist for himself.

But I speak not to such a crew, whose baseness I know cannot climb to
surmount the meanest imagined difficulty, that may arise. I speak to such
noble Spirits and generous minds, in whom does shine the light of knowledge
to discern the differences between a base security and honorable actions,
vice and virtue, stupiditie, and true worth: and who in end shall not miss to
rejoice in the enjoying the fruits of their labors in themselves, and their
names to be honored with a perpetual remembrance.

And if we would study to be remembered in our posterities, here is offered
the occasion to insert us in the books of memory: for if we would portion
our second children in a plantation, and such as in nature we are bound to
help, and advance: both shall we be remembered in their ever-living
successions, throughout all ensueing ages: and they provided in a competent
being and means for them-selves, and theirs, and to be thereafter
proffitable for their King and Country: which is better, than either to be
kept at home baselie, and short of that which is beseeming their birth, and
quality: or to be sent to the service of the Wars of foreign Princes, and
to be cutted away by the sword, and then never more again remembered: and for
so small means, as thereby ye can furnish themselves both in raiment, and
food.

Embrace then the honors of plantation. Do we dream of difficulties? then
know; that it is out of the greatest difficulties, that spring the greatest
honors: and it is that Knighthood, which is gotten under the banner of a
King, and in the Fields which is most honorable; and not that, which we
acquire by our moneys; as the most part is now a-dayes. And that our actions
may both renown us, and beget us moneys, we may see in the examples that I
have set before your eyes, both of foreign nations, and of our own
Countriemen, in their late plantations of Ireland, their estates now, their
dignities, their honors, their credit, and their riches: and what they were
known to have been before.

But these I leave to your judgments: only now, to make an end, I must
entreat thee (Noble and courteous Reader) to excuse my freeness in this my
homely discourse, which I persuade my self the generous mind will allow of:
and for the base, the simple and the vicious; I do not care for their censure,
only I wish it were a spur to draw them to more virtue. As for the
rudeness of my speech, I hope none will except, wherein I profess no airt, if
simply I publish my good meaning and earnest affection to so good a Work*
And wherein their is defect in me; I hope the purpose shall be better
enlarged by him, whose Pen is more than known to be famous, the principal
Actor in the business, and to whom I principally dedicate this my treatise:
and to be seconded by the virtues of these the Noblemen, and these worthily
honored Gentlemen, the Knights Baronets, Vnder-takers often o fair designs:
so that now I cease with my pen, but never with my Sword to do them service
for the advancement of so good a Work.

FINIS.

