THE MARQUESS OF HUNTLEY HIS REPLY TO CERTAIN NOBLEMEN, GENTLEMEN, AND
MINISTERS, COVENANTERS OF SCOTLAND: Sent from their Associates, to signify
unto him, that it behoved him either to assist their Designs, or be carried to
prison in the Castle of Edinburgh: The 20. of April, 1639.

Now published, because of a false Copy thereof lately printed without
Authority, or his own Consent.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Young, His MAJESTY'S Printer for Scotland. 1640.

The Marquess of Huntley's Reply to certain Noblemen, etc.
TO be your Prisoner, is by much the less displeasing to me, that my
accusation is for nothing else but Loyalty; and that I have been brought into
this estate by such unfaire means, as can never be made to appear honorable
in those who used them.

Whereas you offer Liberty, upon condition of my entering into your Covenant, I
am not so bad a Merchant as to buy it with the loss of my Conscience, Fidelity
and Honor, which in so doing I should make account to be wholly perished.

I have already given my Faith to my Prince, upon whose Head this Crown by all
Law of Nature and Nations is justly fallen, and will not falsify that Faith by
joining with any in a pretense of Religion, which my own Judgment cannot
excuse from Rebellion: for it is well known, that in the Primitive Church no
Arms were held lawful, being lifted by Subjects against their Lawful Prince,
though the whole frame of Christianity was then in question.

Whereas you would encourage me to be a partaker with you by your hopes of
supply from France, and other foreign Nations, together with your so good
intelligence in England, as that no danger will come from thence; Let me tell
you, That in my opinion the reasons are but vain, the French being now more
strictly tied then before to uphold the Authority of our Sacred Sovereign, by a
new cimented League of Marriage, whereby their interest in his Majesty's
Progeny will overballance you, though your Cause were better. Other Forrainers
are merely unable by their own distractions, and the English have been ever
strong enough for us, when only their own King, and not ours too, did lead
them.

For my own part, I am in your power, and resolved not to leave that foul
Title of Traitor as an Inheritance upon my posterity. You may take my Head
from my shoulders, but not my Heart from my Sovereign.

FINIS.

