PYRGOMACHIA; Vel potius, PYGOMACHIA. OR, In clean English, THE CASTLE-COMBAT.
Performed; by JAMES FENCER, and WILLIAM WRASTLER. At nine of the clock of the
night of the ninth day of the ninth month of the ninth year of the reign of
our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES. Recorded By the ninth of the mine Muses, in
the ninth part of nine Weeks: and divided into nine Files.

LONDON, Printed for ROBERT MILBOVRNE. 1635.

The Combat is thus ranged into Files, or Orders.
File 1. The Place, and Climate.

2. The Quarrel, and Vapor.

3. The Challenge, and Resolution.

4. The Field, and March.

5. The Search, and Sadness.

6. The Encounter, and Weapon.

7. The Parley, and Parting.

8. The Retreat, and Triumph.

9. The Reward, and Honor.

THE CASTLE-COMBAT.
PROLOGVS.
MY Muse the fights of puling Gnats,
The strifes of leather-winged Batts,
The Duells twixt the Weazells and the Rats
Rejects:
She mounts on Pegasaean wings,
And, streining up her vocal strings,
To sing of Worthies, not of Chitter lings,
Affects.
With any slight Pygmaean Elfe,
Or such poor base aejected pelf
She scorns below to creep, and crawles, her self
Bemudding;
But chaunts of Champions Grandiside,
As tall, as bigg, as long, as wide,
Whose stomachs are as piping hot, being tried,
As Pudding.
Assist ye Heliconian Train,
Power out your liquors on my brain:
That I may utter from a flowing vein
Sad dangers.
Help Phoebus. One's a friend of thine.
For he sells His wine for the most part is thunder-stricken.
Aganippine Wine,
And hangs a soaring The Falcon still flying hard by the Castle, and preying
upon many a peasant.
Bird out for a Sign
To strangers.
FILE I.
The Place, and Climate.
IT much behooves (as Sages tell)
To know where great, or wise men dwell,
And where their Virtues, and exployts befell.
Renowned.
Among the Essex, id est, East Saxons.
Saxons of the East,
There has been many a Nobles nest,
And Roman Garrisons of yore did rest
Entowned:
Who there did fix their foot so long,
They left some spawne of courage strong:
Which, being spread the Natives all among,
Is fruitful.
Hence is it, that so many are
Or fighters in the Forts of war,
Or with their Neighbors strive in Courts of jarr,
Still suitfull.
Within this Climate, on that ground,
Where Hop-crop hopes are (mostly) sound,
A village stands, which fresh-spru^g A river risi^ not above for miles from
the town, on the North side.
Coln does bound,
And border.
It Was bravely governed, while by it
Great The Earl of Oxford.
Oxford in his tower did sit.
Alas! now A strong compound of two easy simples.
Constable-Church warden wit
Keeps order.
It had of old a Market day,
Until the Charter crept away:
Yet love by tale is daily sold (they say)
By many.
They follow busy legal strife:
And yet Profession is their life,
And in good works (for sooth) they are as rife,
As any.
For who, but they, could plot so well
Four superstitious These Bells do roar to the day at St. Edmunds Bury, i^
lamentation of their exile from their native soil.
Bells to sell?
One left does ring a solitary knell.
In The Steeple.
The Chancell has a School-house bin,
Where boys have shown their penal skin,
The sniv'ling Clark does line (...) singing the (...)
by line begin
To The people.
The greater part are deft precise
In The nose, and lips, and ears, and eyes,
And in conceit, and language wondrous wise:
Yea truly.
Some others, on the other hand,
Are of the rash-swash-fellowes band,
And may be well proclaimed, if duly scanned,
Unruly.
Not that it is wild wanton wast
Of wine, to take a short repast.
A modest Muse sometime may sipp a taste
Of Claret.
But helter skelter drawing deep
Till reason wink, and play bo peep,
Till roaring rage rude revel-rout do keep:
O bar it.
On both hands here (and where, where not?)
Are seen some faults. It Is humane lot.
My pens black soap in scouring the^ may blot
A little.
The Town is viewed. You ask the name
I call it only Heningam.
For now what needs prefixing to the same
The title?
FILE II.
The Quarrel and Vapor.
Here valiant James with Billy met:
At juice of Bacchus both were set,
Till Jocky's pot-sows't brain was soking wet
With liquor.
With more good fellows in that throng,
They quafft, and troul'd the wine bowls strong,
When Ioviall Jockey grew in wit and tongue
The quicker.
He began to vaunt, and trumpet out,
And blaze his Martial acts so stout,
And famous Combats, he had bravely fought
With Mighties;
And said, his manifold renownes
Were witnest by all hills and downs,
And all the faires, and greatest market towns,
And cities.
As big, as he, did Billy look,
(As good a man) and could not brook
His mountain-termes, but him to task betook,
And girded;
Thou Braggadocio; thou (quoth he)
Dare thou do any thing with me?
Thou Art nothing but tongue-courage, now I see,
To word it:
You brag, and boast, and make such cracks
To us, of your exployts, and acts,
As if we did not know of your great facts
At weapon.
It Is but thy trick thus in a house
All-man; to let thy tongue run loose:
But in the field, thou dare not face a Goose,
Or Capon.
At these terms Elephantine James,
With his two arms (like Polyphemes)
Pot-fashion by his side, (fro^'s nostrill streams
A vapor)
Sets his Official A black lea^r generous (...) which he ^ares, because ^e
will march ^^der the color an Officer.
Cap upright;
Stands like a Steeple tip-toe-height;
At Billy puffs, as he had been as light,
As paper.
Thou fight with me? thou Campingball?
By this He gives the surname to his Beard, when h^ strokes it with an oath
most gravely.
Cathedral beard, I shall
Slice thee to shreds, and chippifie thee small,
As Chaff old:
I tell you, Sauce, I scorn to flout,
But thou shal't find me true, and stout;
Before K. James, I James his namesake fought
Oth' Scaffold;
For when the great Mogul came over,
And challenged all on England's shore,
My Country's Credit had for evermore
Bin undone;
Had I not entertayn'd him there,
At sharp, before both Prince, and Peer,
And sent him home-ward with a flea in's ear
From London.
When I did serve great Buckingham,
A lozell rascal at me came,
With his long forke, and laid on with the same
Devoutly;
But I, that never knew dismay,
Drew my short blade, and spoiled his play,
Struck up his heels, and took his tools away
Most stoutly;
The Dukes acquaintance then I grew,
Who ever since that time me knew.
You cannot choose but know this to be true:
It Is voyc't so
A great reward to me he gave,
For this exploit performed so brave:
But from his office turned away the knave
Deboyc't so.
When thou art challenged to a place,
Thou dare not look a foe in the face,
But hang'st an erse; and like a Coward base
Do linger:
But see the wounds, the scars, and blows,
This Corpse has had, by devilish foes;
See one, for many; and with that he shows
In a cowardly ^uffle the mid^e finger of his ^^ght hand (vul^^rly called the
^les finger) was (...) off; which often shew^^h for an ho^^urable Cha^^cter of
va^^r, and vows (...) this trick he ^^ll never keep ^ares again; (...) they
(as he ^^es) bit off (...) fatal fin^^.
No-finger;
When half a score at least, I ween,
Fell on me, with their Falchions keen,
With Roman resolution I have been
The first on it;
And laid about me strokes so smart,
That galled the Rascals to the heart,
And gave them all e're they and I did part
The worst on it:
Know Sr; that for my courage bold,
I did the place of Martial hold;
To a worthy Knight, my name stands there enrolled,
No Peasant;
And when to Scotland Charles our King,
On progress went, but for one thing,
I Would gone the voyage with that roy all ring
Most pleasant;
St Edmond's Bury never fails,
To give James honor, since with Hailes,
I played that prize (it is known these are no tales
I tell ye)
For while the Varlet made much chat,
That he could do, I know not what,
I made his heels to mount; and laid him flat
On's Belly;
Yet fairly then I let him rise,
To feast Spectators, with a prize
Of Iames-es playing. At me hot he flies,
But shuffel'd
Then I, for all his pelting rage,
Did quickly turn him off the Stage;
James has the day, cried all the equipage
Oth' Scaffold;
Hundreds came in me to embrace:
And happy he could have the grace
To get a look from conquering Jame-es face,
To talk on:
And as I went along the street,
The boys were ready me to meet,
And strew green rushes underneath my feet
To walk on.
Gaites, One of the Guard; as James reports.
at New Market Court did dare
To strike brave James a box o'th ear:
But I soon put him in a Panick fear
For's error;
Like Hercules that Giant fell,
When he drew Cerb'rus out of Hell,
I dragged him roaring from his lurking cell,
In terror;
For down the stayres I straight did pull,
Spite of his nose, the saucy Gull,
The while he cried, and bellowed like a Bull,
For pardon.
Toth' Presence Chamber then the slave
I brought: There pity he to crave
Fell down on's knees; while I stood like a grave
Churchwarden;
And whilst my breast with wrath was filled;
For half an how'r, and more he kneeled
To me; beseeching I would please to yield
Some mercy:
My Lords, for him did interceed;
That I would pardon his bold deed;
(Sure his long kneeling on his joints did breed
The farcy)
Yet I a Challenge him did write,
If he with me could dare to fight,
To meet me at the A long dry trench on New Market heath.
Devill's ditch; but try't
He would not.
For known it was, the Court about,
I had fou'r mighty Duels fought;
That with a whole skin come off safe; he thought
He could not.
This Wife I have, and the other too,
When they my valor once did know,
Were taken with me, cause I slash't it so
Profoundly;
And should Iugg dye; before the Spring,
I yet could have a dainty thing;
That me a hundred pound a year would bring;
And roundly.
Let James but ride through any town,
In all this Kingdom; James is known,
By all good Fellows, living up and down
The County.
To welcome me, This welcome ^as bestowed ^n James in ^^dleigh in ^uffolke by
one ^escended from be line of Mars.
one pawnes his Mare;
Another does a Goose prepare;
Another his best Sack does pierce, and share,
With bounty.
When thou in London walk'st, forlorn,
The Car-men thee to greet do scorn;
Uncouth thou go to evening from the morn
With sorrow;
The great Lord Mayor, if he see
My noted person, speaks to me;
Come James, and welcome, dine with us he says
To morrow;
There Is never a Lord about the Court,
But I to him have free resort,
And boldly speak in earnest, or in sport
My pleasure;
Let any Lawyer see but me,
Though he be taking of a fee;
My sight will make him instantly to be
At leisure:
Most of the Gentry in the Land,
Whom I with feats of Arms have manned,
Still call me Master, lead me by the hand
To dinner.
I tell thee (Boy) my conquering sword,
Has made me generally adored,
More then befits (now I speak this proud word
A sinner.
This man does talk, as he were wild,
(Quoth Will) we know you are no child;
Were not you he, that once This was Granger Sewster of Ashwel in
Herford-shire, accounted a notable Duellist, whom James in a combat so fiercely
pursued, that he ran into a Hogs-coat.
a royster foild
In Pigscote?
In my conceit (nor do I feign)
Had you but met him, you had slain,
In Duel that victorious Knight of Spain
Don Quixot.
Were I a Fencer though, like thee,
To let one baste, and cudgel me,
And then arrest him for a Battery,
Would shame me:
He cried you mercy for the harm,
But who was it his hands did charm?
The arm of Justice, not the vengefull arm
Of Iamy.
The fame, and fume of you is blown,
(I know it) all over Bury town,
That dainty trick of tayle-strong James is known
To all men:
An hasty pudding once you laid
In your Friend's shirt; and then affray'd
Took to your heels; in that you cleanly played
The tall man;
Beside you played the man, and ha'fe,
When Harry Smith
Harry with a walking staff
Did bast your buff-skin; then did you come off
With credit:
Or then, when John Sewell of Halsted.
John (you well know where)
Struck up your heels, and laid you there
Disarmed; then you did the deed, if e're
You did it.
FILE III.
The Challenge; and Resolution.
James to the bottom stirred, a score
Of teeth does grate at him, and more;
And with a Demi-cannon oath does roar
Like thunder;
Flies at him like a Tyget fierce,
His very visage, sharp, did pierce
Like vinegar; the rest could keep them scarce
Asunder;
Tell thou me (Dogs-nose) in this wise,
That I was baffel'd once, or twice
By Hal, and Jack? Thou whoreson Cockatrice,
Thou Camel;
This foot of vengeance here shall kick
Thy guts out; send thy soul down quick
To hell; or make thee fawn upon me, like
A Spanniell.
Will, not so wordy was; but needs
He would with James have bin at deeds;
Strike slave (quoth. he) I Will beat thee small, as weeds
To porridge.
Meet me (quoth Jocky) if thou dare;
(Quoth Billy) I will, any where,
To morrow morning: I do scorn to fear
Thy courage.
To morrow? If thou dare to night:
For thou shall never see daylight;
Besides, in day time, my swords glittering sight
Will fright thee:
Had I a weapon here, (...) James ^rovided, ^^rell be^ his house.
as thou,
Since thou art so hot on it; I would go,
(Quoth Will) to night, and make thee darely know
I slight thee.
Is that thy way to shift? (quoth he)
I Will lend thee ^^mes, who ^^nd is still, ^^ockt with ^ons in his ^^e.
one, to fight with me:
Thou, and such friends shall have that courtesy
And favor;
With that he fetched two Bilbo blades
Hand-broad; they would have dug like spades,
And served Pioners in their earthen trades
To labor.
Was it your fortune e're to eye,
The tools of Bevis, or Sr. Guy?
Such were these blades, with which stern James would try
The Duel.
Nor could the company persuade,
With all entreats; and reasons aid,
James, fierce, and furious, resolute, unstayd,
And cruel;
Sirrah (he roares) mark what James says,
Ask me forgiveness while thou have breath;
Or else I Will make thee with a doleful death
To rue it.
First, I will Cullendrize with holes,
Thy Bull-thick hide, so good for soles;
Then slice thee thin, as rashers on the coals,
Or sewet:
Thy head I Will from thy shoulders take,
And of thy Scull a piss-pot make:
And that same tongue, that now so much does crake,
I Will smoke it;
Which I for start-up heels will wear:
Thy brains, I Will pickle in dead beer,
Or sowrest hog-wash; Mark my words, and fear,
I Have spoke it;
Then will I souse thy cheeks and ears,
Provant for hungry Customers,
When they come here, to wash away their When t^^ are Maudi^ drunk.
tears
With Flagons:
Thy Flesh I Will slice in serverall parts,
And have it tried by Kitchen arts
For greazing-stuffe, to liquor wheels of carts,
And wagons.
Thy thread, poor Billy, now is spun:
For e're that I with thee have done,
I Will hew thee small, as Atoms in the Sun,
Or powder;
Or make thee run away most base,
Or yield thy weapon in the place,
And say thou have bin before thy betters face
Too proud here.
Do thou so well provide for me?
Mark how I have disposed of thee,
(Quoth Will) and tremble: for of certainty
I Will do it;
When I have hack't, and hewed thy
Tun-carkass, and thy Ghost let fly
Out of that Carrion-dungeon, thus will I
Bestow it;
I Will cut thy head off by the neck,
And make thy scull a Standard peck;
(For it is a large one;) and a chain shall deck
The vessel.
Those black locks from that pate I Will tear,
And have them woven for a hair
To dry my Which are (...) plentiful that town; (...) William a ^^pmaster.
Hops; thy arms and legs shall rear
A tressell.
That Nose of thine I Will give some Smith,
To serve him for a horn, where with
To give Iades medicines, through their halter'd teeth,
And drenches;
That Face I on a Crotch will raise
A ghastly Vizard; Pyes and Iayes
To scare from plumtrees; or to fright young boys
And wenches:
Then from thy flesh I Will draw thy hide,
And have it thoroughly tanned, and dried
Whit-lether-like; thy trunck will I devide
To parcells;
And with thy flesh I Will cram my Of which Cattle William keeps many.
dogs,
Thy panch, and guts I Will give my Which are appurteinances to William's house,
being a Farmer;
hogs,
Which they shall draw, about the moors and Of which, many border upon that Town.
bogs
In morsells;
Thy bones at scales the Boys shall tear,
Or (cause they full of For Iames-es terrestrial body by this time was in Motu
trepidationis.
shaking are)
I Will have them cut out, into dice six-square,
To play with;
That tongue of thine will I confer,
Upon some Alminack-maker;
Some bragging Soldier, or some Traveller,
In which trade James is a great dealer.
To lie with.
Thus blustering in confronting terms,
Sworn to each other's deadly harms,
To hack, and hew, hands, legs, heads, sides, and arms,
And hanches;
With just as much of wit, as sight,
They through the darkness of the night,
Went out, with their high stomachs filled up quite,
And panches.
FILE IV.
The Field; and March.
A Field there is; wherein does stand
A Castle, now lack-daw'd; not manned;
And soothly never by a humane hand
Erected;
For old King Coel (tales do tell)
When first he built that Warlike Cell,
Consulted with the smoaky Powers of Hell
Collected:
This King was tall; At Colchester in the High street he is set forth in a
small volume, or Epitome, to save excessive expense of timber; or because dwarf
Coe^l is strong enough to guard a Pump.
Gygantick vast,
His foot was of the largest last;
It Is everlasting; I have summed, and cast
The measure;
A Yard in Longitude, no more,
Twelve Inches broad: Upon the Tower,
O'th'Leads you still may see the shape at your
Own pleasure;
His Leg was correspondent. Some
Affirm, his Boots did hold a Coome:
This King in such a deal of Leathern room
Did trample.
It Is said, some broken Cobbling wretch,
To set up's trade, them home did fetch,
Nor did the Leather to his Conscience stretch
So ample;
A many rumors old, and new,
And, I think, more believed, than true,
Are blazed abroad of this great King. Did you
Never hear it?
Like Hawk, or Buzzard at his game,
This King could fly in the air (says fame)
James will not only justify the same,
Furthermore he will tell you of a man in this Town of 105 years old, who
heard King Coel cry Dad Dad in his mothers belly.
But swear it;
Whither he flew in the air, or no,
I Am sure he dived very low
Into the earth, how deep no man does know;
T's'admired;
Yet this may be concluded, by
His fabrigs deep groundwork; if fly
He could not; yet at least he very high
Aspired:
Besides by Black-art, like a Mole,
He under ground did work a Rumor runs, that this vault runs under ground
from thence to Colchester.
hole:
Wherese're his corpse is, I think yet his soul
Does haunt it;
By which he had a ready way
To play the Cater; and convey
For all his Soldiers food enough, e're they
Did want it;
For when the Danes had overrun
The Land, this Fort they set upon,
Resolved to slay, or ever they had done,
Or sterve them;
But through this vault there was such store
Of Which they brought underground from Colchester.
victuals brought, that they threw ore
Food to the Foe; and, if they needed more,
They Would serve them:
Long long has stood this strong built Tower,
And (as the Fates have told John Gower)
Vn-undone shall it stand yet many an hour,
Though tattered;
The Walls, with open mouths, do speak
Against the mattocks, that still seek
The ruin of it, and long since did break
And batter't;
So that in stead of Majesty,
Now only Seniority
It justly claims, yet still it looks as Two of t^^ Turrets still r^maine in
the first top-galla^ height, thou^ other parts b^ defaced.
high
As ever;
Whiles all the hammer's spiteful strokes,
And fierce malicious fangs of hooks,
Do what they can, pull down these stately looks
Shall never;
The Tower is girded with a Wall;
In fashion of a Varthingale
Upon a hill, begotten of a vale
Below it;
This Hill by Which Circular.
figure does declare,
The Tower has stood long out of square;
The pye' ball'd prospect of the walls so bare
Can show it.
Here, what the Danes could never do,
The Dawes have done, and wrought into
The walls and chambers of it; And now who
But they there?
The house fee-simple is their own,
For them; their heirs; there they alone
Can build, can gossip, strut it up, and down,
And play there.
Here many tall Ghost's walk: it is thought
King Coel wanders still about,
Sometimes within the vault, sometimes without,
At's pleasures;
And here, in dull Night's sullen shade,
(Because the Circle's ready made)
The light-foot Fayries, dance the rounds, and tread
The measures;
And in the Moonlight nights have been
Hobgoblins Robin goodfellowes seen,
With lights: and noyses have bin heard of the green
Of talking;
And other visions strike with fear
Folk going by: yea sure there were
That night, Goodfellowes, when those two were there
Awalking:
These Champions hither marched forthright,
To scare the Devil in the night,
And Fayries from their round-abouts affright
With horror.
Now may you by this time suppose
These two are at it very close,
With dashing, clashing, banging, bumming, blows
Of terror;
For having stripped themselves, their skin
Each the other showed, so far as seen
By night they could be, and at distance, then,
Fell to it;
And laid on load with might, and maine,
Let who is would take it off again,
What there was don, would ask no little pain
T'undo it.
FILE V.
The Search, and Sadness.
BUt (oh) conceive what griefs, what kind
Of woes, possessed us all behind;
For these two whetted spirits. Words, and wind
Expressed it;
We sigh't, we groaned, as heart would burst,
Care in our cups made us a thirst:
That season, and their tameless fury, worst
Molested;
For (note ye) when such stomachs grew,
At variance, and to weapons flew,
There must perforce of consequence ensue
A slaughter.
O dismal night, like that of Troy:
O lamentable-following day,
That must the fate of both, or one bewray
Hereafter.
Brave Caesar's, and great Pompeyes might;
Fierce Hector, and Achilles fight,
Must come behind this, that befalls this night
Thus sadly;
For by transparent beams of Day,
Those could observe each others play;
But these run desperate, to a blindfold fray
Most madly:
Thus forth we wander, where we guess
Them hurried by their furiousness,
To stop, or spy them, as eyewitnesses,
Thus falling;
But (oh) the fate of Darkness! Night
Our Optic sense had sealed up quite;
That now, more sad we walk along, the fight
Bewayling.
Our eyes can do no good (we say)
If all our senses in the way
Do fail us too, then must the light of day
Discover:
Still rambled we the fields a round
In grievous plight, and nothing found;
No hope was offered, but in vain much ground
Past over.
FILE VI.
The Encounter, and Weapon.
AT last behold here how one sense
Supplies his friend's deficience,
(Were it by any happy providence,
Or fortune)
As to the Castle near we grew,
Where these two forth their tackling drew,
Vnhop't for objects did our sense anew
Importune.
For presently a fresh we met
A fume, that did our noses fret,
And piercing to our hearts did them beset
With dull fear.
Oh! foh! (says one) my nostrils find
We have Gunpowder in the wind:
Thus fumes Salt-peeter when it is calcined
With sulpher.
Another cries: O heavy lot!
Sure they have guns, or Pistols got,
And mutually let fly their deadly shot,
Which vapors.
But straight we found it, that the smell,
Though but ill-favored, favored well
For them. With the^ worse had by guns befell,
Or Rapiers;
For we (concluding to have seen
Or both, or one upon the green
Ly dead, or maimed by Gun, or Falchion keen
With fighting)
So far as eye a sight could gain,
See them with backsides might and main,
Like darting Porcupines, (to tell you plain)
Ash --
Lo in this wise, these Champions twain
Together did their utmost strain.
Much there was shed: but neither of them slain,
No truly.
Sure much was shed all over the grass.
For all, which by next day did pass,
By signs did see what dreery fight there was
But newly:
We puffed and snuft, and peer'd about:
Still, still these Fencers flash't it out,
And buckling to it like strong-tayl'd Lions fought,
Hard striking.
In each was op't a postern wound:
Of bouncing Echo did rebound,
The strokes they dung against the suffering ground,
All reaking.
FILE VII.
The Parley, and Parting.
AT this discovery, joy'd; This Council was not Cowardly, but Cleanly.
Sirs; yet
Lets not, while they are in the heat,
Come in the dint; lest some sour mark we get
Not pleasing.
At length we closed with them, and felt,
(Yet warily) these whom we smelt.
Come worthy Champions you have bravely dealt:
Be ceasing:
This is a newfound Martial trick,
To fight at tail, whiles others strike
At head, at throat, at breast, at belly, like
Mad wretches.
With night, and rage, they are o'regone,
And so they be mistook (says Johannes de Atocha, a Scholar then in the
company.
John)
And for their doublets, thus have they undone
Their 'Twas (doubtless) lest they should wrong them through the approaching
fight.
breeches.
Who ere comes here, to judge the close,
Without th'imployment of a Nose,
Must pass no verdit of the strongest blows
In The Duel:
Well, Sirs I think you will be content,
Now you have given your Stomachs vent;
The fire of ire will vanish, now you have spent
The Fuel;
Put up, then; let us have no foul play:
Let all this geere be wiped away;
I hope there is no hurt done in the fray
To neither.
Or if you be so fierce and fell,
That with your Blades, you yet will deal,
Then cut this vapour-thickned air, and smell
Together.
FILE VIII.
The Retreat, and Triumph.
James shuffling up his pipes (quoth he)
Will, at this game's too hard for me;
I Will be for this, till I make even with thee,
Thy debtor.
But Will with James would yet have fought;
Not now (quoth James) my anger's out;
And heat quite over: let us go drink about;
That Is better.
Give me thy hand (if it be clean:)
Both are by this the better men;
I Will never fall out with thee (Brave boy) again
Hereafter.
But whensoe're thou do desire,
I Will stand by thee a friend entire,
And venture this same head, through sword, and fire,
And water.
Why should we two, we two old friends
Bring one another to our ends?
Death soon enough without a sword will send's
To ashes.
Say we are hurt, say we are killed:
Had we not better thus to yield,
Than lie here dead, or wounded in the field
With slashes?
Say fighting Credit to us gave:
Can Credit cure a cut? cannot save
A leg? shall we (if lamed) by Credit have
Our keeping?
I Have thirty years a Fencer been,
A thousand fights have fought, or seen,
I never could find but in a whole sound skin
Best sleeping:
Since I discretion had, 't has stood
My resolution, it is not good,
To be thus prodigal of guiltless blood
With fooling:
And they that have such spirits high flowne,
And are so hot, and bloody grown,
One day may come unto their cutting down,
And cooling:
Will, Will, consider; we have souls,
We have not lives like Cats, or Owls:
We sans remorse have ba^gd the burning bowls
A long space;
O woe! It Is dangerous fighting now;
For if we should be slain, I trow,
Our ghosts in the dark may miss their mark, and go
To th'wrong place.
Thus James agreed it: and ('it is said)
Though most enraged, and unstaid,
He first the other wholesome motion made
Of stinking.
Well, friends they were, and came down right
All to the Tavern, where they quite
Washed all away with wine, and soakt the night
With drinking:
For rending open the Sellar For Iug in (...) fussian fume, o^ fustie fear ha^^
locked up door, and conver'd her se^ and her keys t^ their nights rest
door,
A good Sack By James hi^ own epotativ^ words, half a Hogshead
Tierce they turned over,
For joy so sweetly they had escaped so Potius sowr^
sore
A battle:
Healths thick and three fold to the wounds,
That never were made, they drunk in rou^ds;
The old banged quart pots (never past their Of measure.
bounds
Did rattle.
FILE IX.
The Reward, and Honor.
IVdge Reader, how this place became
So stout a Blade, as brave Sir Jame.
Ought not this fight to be enrold by Fame,
To last here?
He is a man of mighty heart,
And practiced well, to play his part
With greatest skill, Professor in his art,
And Master.
Sure when old Coel there did reign,
His Tower never did maintain
So brave a Lad, in all his martial Train
For valor;
Nor was so hot a fight by Danes,
Whiles they encamped on those plains;
Nor so deep charge with such te^pestuous strains
Of cholor:
What man soever with Jockie fights,
When he into that humor lights,
Had need be watchful, expert, quick in slights,
Not slothful:
For, if he looks not better to it,
And keep his chaps most surely shut,
He may not only have his hands full, but
His mouth full.
O were the Castle in repair,
My Jockie should some Office bear,
Of Master-Gunner, or at leastwise there
Of Porter:
Then if a Cannon's bellowing blast
The wall had bored through, or rac't,
He soon might daub the breach up with a cast
Of mortar.
And then all foes I would advise,
To keep away (if they be wise)
From Jockie's Bum-shot, lest with loss of eyes
They rue it.
All The neighboring Inhabitants of Castle-Heningham.
you that spy there in your way
The Monument of that sad fray,
By adding Viz. dissolving your ligaments; and imitating these Combetants.
stuff, to keep it from decay,
Renew it.
No charge, great ease will you befall,
The pains of portage is but small.
Unload your native dung-cart: that is all,
In sadness.
This field may prove (manured so well)
An Hop-yard: big those Hops will swell,
And bear away at Surely then will sell for ^igher price under the name of The
gilded Hops of He^ingham.
Sturbridge fair the Bell
For fatness.
If any reading this my News,
Shall think that I with lies abuse
My Champion Jockie, and my jocund Muse
To faigne them;
Out of your way ride but a mile,
And call, and talk with James awhile;
And he himself, will in an ample style
Maintain them.
What if you lose a mile, or twain?
As wise, to see a sight as plain,
Have stepped aside, nor of their pains, as vain,
Repented.
Here you not only shall behold
Sights, signs, but hear strange wonders told,
And many a score of more Adventures bold
Out-vented;
And Wine, and Welcome still your fill;
And jests, and news too, what you will:
For he is more full, than is my dropping quill,
Of Story:
You Will never repent of any cost,
Or time, to see so brave an Host,
Of sight of whom you may for ever boast,
And glory.
Epilogus.
HOld Muse: the Combat finished is;
The Foes are Friends again, I wis:
It may be I shall dearly pay for this
Thy laughter.
And Reader, list awhile and hear:
John Gower is William ^^ke a Wrastler, took him by the Collar with a Process
in April last past.
su'd, and must appear:
If this suit hold, the Progress he will declare
Hereafter.
His Proctour entertained in May,
To answer what the foe shall say,
A prosperous Gale (I hope) will find fair way
In sailing.
What Defamation here can lie
Against a Poet's industry,
Who faineth not, but writes true History
Sans railing?
Yet Jockie does at him so vex,
That he in rage cries, Currat Lex;
Resolved by cunning of his Lawish tricks
To shrieve him:
But sure this Case (so all men think)
The more it stirs, the worse 'twill stink:
Astraea, Phoebus, lest your Gower shrink,
Relieve him.
Johannes Gower.

To the High-spirited, heroick-hearted, Stout-stomackt, bold-brested,
cruel-couraged: Hypseloglotticall, Rhetorologicall, Archinoeticall; Invincible,
Victorious, worthy, noble, generous, Sr James, Grand-possessor, and Professor,
as well Oenopoliall of the rarest, fairest, dearest, Pomperkin, Hullock,
Mellogodoone, Frantiniack, Canary, Musquedine Wines, as Gymnasiarchicall, of
the Martial Science of Defense; Monomachounticall, and Polymachounticall
Greeting, not Grating.
THe mighty Acts of your Olympic arm,
Whose power Pancratiastick all does charm,
Put down great Hercules, and stride before
All his vast Labors, had they been twelve score.
What you enroll in lines both high and strong.
O'th Velom of your own Stentorian tongue.
I do omit, nor make my Muse's Theme,
To add more water to a swelling stream;
But this fierce fight, devoyd of sight, and light,
Encourtainiz'd in Stygian shade of Night,
I have displayed to the rays of Fame:
For that desires, and you deserve the same;
For which my Muse here prostrite, you does woo
To be, as Subject, so Protector too;
Erave Pentathletick Royster; daigne to take
This into favor for your honor's sake;
It is your Art, and part now to desend
This Case, your fighting self, your writing friend.
It is a Nosegay therefore sweet enough;
Called from your Garden; take it not in snuff.
A Dish first dressed by you, now sawc't and graced
To please your Palate: do not it distaste.
A Stage erected by our Mose to show
Your Masterpiece to all Beholders view:
More Amphitheatrall then piles of wood;
O do not fire it in your angry mood.
Behold the verse, though numbered odd, and rough,
Yet, measured even, smoothly apt for you:
The feet your fingers fit, and may be scanned
With Bidexteritie of either hand.
Two Tetradactyles mournful numbers fit
That hand, whose finger by the Bears was bit.
The Pentaedactyle for your left, more high
To sing your deeds, does mount Heroickly.
The short dwrafe-verse to scan if it be thy pleasure,
Then thump upon thy Stump, and there is the measure.
Sir, if that favor shall with you be found,
To you our Muse shall with her Book be bound.
Yours at a cast, unto his last: Idem quidem, qui pridem, IO: GOVVER.

WOrthy Poetical Client, I have viewed the Information you sent me: which will
sufficiently direct me in framing your answer. By reading it I am suddenly
trans-formed, and become a Rythmicall Proctor. Whereof I give you a Proof:
which, when I plead your Apology, shall serve for a Preface; in manner and
form following,

John Gower's Proctor's Allegation
To Iockie's plea of Defamation:
Advised, devised, revised with consultation.

What raised Achilles acts of might?
Not that he did with Hector fight:
But that he did on Homer's trumpet light
To tell them.
Nor had these fuming feats of Fame,
Blown up so high stout Iockie's name,
Had Gower's Lime-hound nose not been in frame
To smell them.
The fivefold fights, which chanted came
Through Pindar's quill, to this are lame:
All Greece of such a brave Olympic game
Never craked.
Here Mars and Bacchus so combine: An Apostrophe to James.

No Bush shall need to vent thy wine:
Two Parthians shooting backward be thy sign
Half naked.
Then Travelers through thick, and thin,
Will flock to this new-named Inn:
Where all in rich Canary will begin
To Iocky.
And Will must not be wrastled out,
Who did so well maintain the Bout.
This Combat's fume made all our Hops (I doubt)
So crocky. Ever since this ^ight the Hops ^hereabout have ^in blasted and ^ooty

Colonus Felis. Expound this Latin into Greek: My name you need not further
seek.

A Congratulatory verse, to the bravely resolved JAMES, the horrid Babby of
bloody-handed Bellona Archduke of Canary, and great Commander of the
omnipotent forces of Bacchus, in the infernal Region of his well-bung'd, and
wellbang'd Barrells.
MArs-daunting Martialist, a silent tongue
Of thy great acts does thy great self great wrong;
Too little stages thy Pancratick rage
Have graced, thou art now brought on the world's great stage;
Lo, here the trumpet of thy wandering fame,
The Herauld-blazer of thy dreadful name:
Thou have an Atlas whose unshrinking shoulders
Of thee, against sharp Censure, are upholders.
Illustrious James, thou hence forth shall inherit
Achilles Achilles, (...), a solvendo dolorem, for he makes his guests merry
with tales and jeasts.
name, as thou do his brave spirit;
What Is said of him is but a pleasant fiction,
And seems of thee to be a true prediction:
Thy mother did thee (young) by the Finger take,
And drench't thy body in the Stygian Lake,
Made it impenetrable; for no wound
Was yet in all thy Broils e're made, or found,
Save in that fatal Finger. (Poets tript
In saying 'twas the Heel, their finger slipped.)
Canary is thy Achyllaean Spear,
That hurts, and heales, and strikes, more joy, than fear:
Thy valiant Busy pott^ of Wine, a^ pots of Beer.
Myrmidons with thee (brave Boy)
Are able to subdue another Troy.
E. A.

To my good Schoolmasters, Mr. John Gower, and to my good acquaintance, his
Book.
THe Printer writes, our Masters Book will sell:
And I must write our Master writes well.
Yet means he not to make a Schoole-booke of it:
For that would turn to our, and his small profit.
Our Dames of Heningham would chide, and say
That boys are sent to study not to play.
And so we do. For daily all the week
He teaches us true Latin, trusty Greek;
But yet on Holidays, and playing hours,
He gives us leave to read of English Towers,
Which have of old in siedge the Danes withstood;
Or been besmeer'd with English cloder'd blood:
And of stout Champions who at every stroke,
Have made the walls of warlike Castles smoke.
Alumnus tuus JOSEPHUS HARRINGTON.

Our Master John Gower
Has writ of a Tower,
Which looks much battered and broken.
Not far from those walls,
I have often played at Scales.
And is not that a good token?
Of James he has written
A story no fitten,
(I know well that Giant of valor)
A deadly sore fight
In The dead of the night,
O! he is more stout then a Taylour.
I had rather run hence,
Then meet him at Fence,
Unless I might give him Schoole-butter:
What though he be bare?
Yet strike I scarce dare,
Lest he begin first to utter.
WILL: BRAMSTON, Discipulus.

Upon the Castle-Combat.
THy Work is sweet, but comes from matter sower:
So rankest dung brings forth the fairest flower.
Thus I salute my gentle Master Gower.
DRVOO TINDALE,
Qui tibi Discipulus nunc sum, cupioque doceri.
THe Printer dreams this Book will sell the better;
If Castle-Schoole do send to him a letter.
I am therein a Scholar, young and tender:
And yet am bold to be a poor commender.
Thus I my hearty Commendations send,
Print well; Farewell, my unknown London Friend.
EDMUND BRAMSTON.
Discipulus Gowerianus.
A Quaere with a Quare concerning John Quis.
What John? What Gower? John Gower, Chaucers friend?
He lived; and See his Monnument in Sai^^ Mary Overie Church near London.
wrote renow'd in times of yore:
And now belike, according to the lore
Of great Pythagoras, himself does lend.
Thus, by Soule-shifting, Virgil's ghost did wend
To Spencer's lodge. Who Ovid was before;
Is Drayton since. Thus Lucan Fates restore
In May. Thus Orpheus soul does Quarl's attend.
Let Heralds thee engower when thou will brave it:
Thy Muse for name; and fame makes Affidavit.
EDM: JOHNSON.

For the Castle Combat.
I Speak it boldly (for I need not shuffle)
This fight encounters with the Counter-Scuffle.
Those Eggs, the Loaves, the Lobstars, Plase; and Ling,
The Pippin-pyes; and all, that they did fling,
Concocted were but artificially
In Culinary fires by Cookery:
But here the weapons are of nobler temper,
Refined in Natures Kitchen. Constat semper,
That Nature added unto Art does make
A better work, than Art can undertake.
A custard backed is not so strong a bullet,
As when for after batch it past the gullet.
The Oven, Caldron, Spits, are all but Sluts
Compared with humane stomach; Liver, Guts.
And therefore it is more honor to be beaten
With tools of meat already chewed and eaten.
O brave heroic shot! O field well wun!
Where cumbatants have made their Corpse their Gun.
I say again, Mars did more richly ruffle
In Castle-Combat, than in Counter-Scuffle.
JOHANNES de ATOCHA.

FINIS.

