THE STATE-MYSTERIES OF THE IESVITES, By way of Questions and Answers.
Faithfully extracted out of their own Writings by themselves published. AND A
Catalogue prefixed of the Authors names which are cited in this Book. Written
for a Premonition in these times both to the Public and Particular.

Translated out of French.

REVEL. 3. 24. 25. Unto you I say, who have not known the depth of Satan's,
that which you have already hold fast till I come. LONDON, Printed by G. E. for
Nicholas Bourne. 1623.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY, AND every way most accomplished, Sr. Thomas Penystone
Knight and Baronett, my euer-honored Master.
SIR:
ALthough we have seen in these our later days, and may every day more and
more perceive in the affliction of Joseph, and in the pitiful and lamentable
estate of a great many of the Reformed Churches of the world, the fearful
effects of the cruel and bloody doctrine of those, who under the sweet name of
Jesus, preach and teach little else then fire, murder, and sedition: Yet
because there are many, which either have never heard of the damnable points
these dangerous men do teach and maintain, or having heard of them, will not
at any hand believe, that such holy-seeming Fathers have in such manner
sharpened their tongues like Serpents, and that the venom of Aspes is hidden
under their lips; Therefore this Treatise (by the providence of God) fallen
into my hands, discovering at large those secret and abominable positions of
theirs, which no Rack, nor greatest torments could ever yet extort out of any
of them, I thought good to learn it to speak the English Tongue, both to
instruct them, which are not yet acquainted with their inaccessible mysteries;
as also to inform them better, which are so carried away by the blind love of
these persons, as they will not be persuaded that ever they have been the
Authors of those woeful and miserable Tragedies, newly acted upon the Theaters
of France and Germany: To the end that the truth being known, it may appear
in the face of all the world, what they are, who in stead of the wholesome milk
and meat of the word of God, do feed them, which are committed to their
charge, with the poison of their detestable blasphemies, applying to their
Institutor many passages of the holy Scriptures, which are only proper and
appertaining to the Divinity: with their impious and abhorred doctrine of
deposing and killing Kings, whereof there is in no other book extant
whatsoever, so much found briefly together; with their perfidous and pestilent
distinctions, for Princes to violate their faiths given unto others, upon that
wicked Maxim of theirs, That faith is not to be kept with heretics; with
their pernicious Equivocations, and most lewd mental Reseruations. In all
which, and the rest, the Author has not belyed the Society, for he has cited
all his affirmations out of their own writings (judging them like wicked
servants out of their own mouths) the quotations whereof, appearing in the
margin, have been most punctually examined with the originals themselves, by
three learned Doctors of Oxford, who have both reported them for faithful, and
the book in general most useful, and to that purpose for which the Author
wrote it, which was, not so much for a Discovery, as for a Caveat to all such,
who being not able to weigh their reasons, are the easier to be abused by their
dissembling allurements: to which end also having now diuulged it, I present it
in all humility unto your noble Patronage, as a testimony of my duty and
thankfulness for so many f^uours and benefits received, since it pleased you
to take me into your protection and service, after the miserable dissipation of
the most part of the Reformed Churches of Normandy. So wishing you heaven upon
earth in this world, and eternal bliss in the life to come, I rest ever in
all submission,

Your humble and truly-deuoted Servant, PETER GOSSELIN.

TO THE READER.
THE Books which are cited in this Discourse, are for the most part common,
and have been diverse times printed in sundry places: there is one cited in the
beginning, which was first published in Spanish, and since translated into
Latin and French, wherein are contained three very excellent Sermons preached
on the feast day of the Beatification of the glorious Patriarch blessed
Ignatius, founder of the Society of Jesus.

By the Reverent Doctor, Petrus de Valderama, an Augustine Friar.

The Reverent Doctor Petrus Deza of the order of the Dominicans.

The Reverent Father Iacobus Rebuttosa, of the same Oder.

In this Discourse I have followed the edition of the French translation made
by Father Francis Solier a Jesuit, imprinted at Poitiers by Anthony Mesnier,
Printer to the King and the University, the year 1611.

Now although the said Sermons were composed by such as were no Jesuits; yet
by translating, publishing, and recommending them, they have made them theirs;
and engaged their credits for all that is said in them concerning the founder
and Society of the Jesuits. For the other Books that are cited, here is a
List of them.

Arturi de Ecclesia libri.
Becanisumma Theol.
Bellarmini Controuersiae.
Idem contra Barclayum.
Caniloci Theologici.
Delrij disquisitiones Magica.
Discipuli de tempore sermones.
Eudaem^^-Iohannes Apol. pro Garneto.
Eiusdem Resp. ad Anticot.
Ignatij Epist. de virtute Obed.
Maphau^ de vitae Ignatij Loyolae.
Marian. de Rege and Regis Iustitutione.
Possevini Bibliotheca selecta.
Ribadeneira de vita Ignatij Loyolae.
Suare^ii defensio ^id. Cathol. contrasectam Anglicanam.
Eiusdem disp. in Thomam.
Sa Aphorismi confessariorum.
Scribanij Amphitheatrum honoris.
Sanctius in Isayam.
Toleti instructio Sacerdotum.
Valentia in summam Thoma.
Vasquez in tertiam partem Thoma.

Page 49. Line 17. for some any, read so many.

THE MYSTERIES OF THE IESVITES, by Questions and Answers.
Where the Nouice demands, and the professed Jesuit answers.
NOVICE. FATHER, being resolved to vow my self to a religious life in your
Society, I entreat you would be pleased to give me leave, for my instruction,
to ask you some Questions, to the end, that by your Answers I may not only be
confirmed in my resolution my self, but also prepared to inform others,
whereby they likewise may be drawn to the same devotion.


IESVITE. Speak on boldly, my Son, for no part of our mysteries shall be
concealed from thee, provided thou promise to receive them at my hands under
the seal of Confession, and not to reveal any more thereof, then what we are
contented to have public, reserving in secret the Theory of many things, whose
practice cannot be hid, and yet it may not easily be perceived from whence they
procced.


NOVIE. I will carefully observe the silence, which I am ready to vow, and will
never speak word of any thing, but when you shall please to open my mouth,
unless it be now, that for to learn of you, I make some demands. And first of
all I beseech you let me understand the original of our Society: for some
there be, and those too among other religious Orders, that hold it to be but
new.


IESVITE. It is true indeed that it has been renewed in our time, wherein it
was necessary to institute some new Orders, Bellarm. de Monach. l. 2. cap. 6.
Because that feruor which is found in the beginning of a new Order, exciteth
many men to piety, which by little and little waxing cold, it is needful that
new should be raised, whereby that feruor may be entertained: But if we regard
the first original of this Society, it will appear to be very ancient.


NOVICE. I pray you show me how; for I should be glad to be furnished with
means to stop their mouths which terms us New-men.


IESVITE. So far is our Society from being to be accounted new, that there is
not any one so ancient; for it was before the Apostles time: and to prove it,
The Society of Sermon. de Valderama page 10.
Jesus was founded even at the very point of his admirable Conception, uniting
in his divine person his humanity with his eternal nature: And that was the
first society which God had with men, and the first College thereof was the
virginal womb of the Virgin.


NOVICE. I should never have dreamed of this College, nor of so authentical
an original of our Society without your direction: But is it not spoken of in
the Gospel, or in the writings of the Apostles?


IESVITE. Yes. For S. 1 Cor. 1. 9.
Paul speaks of it in these words, in the first to the Corinthians, God is
faithful, by whom ye have been called to the society of his Son Jesus.
And S. 1 Ioh. 1. 3.
John, To the end our society may be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. By which words it follows, says Father Arturus, Lib. 1. de Ecclesia.
that the Society of Jesus has been ever since the time of the Apostles, and
is not new, as Sadeel does maliciously slander it. Neither is any credit to be
given to Locor. Theol. lib. 4. cap. 2.
Melchior Canus Bishop of Canary, saying, That that society being the Church of
Christ, they which do attribute that title unto themselves, are to consider
whether like unto the Heretics they do not vainly boast, that the Church is
no where abiding but with them. For you must observe my Friend, that this Canus
was of the Order of the preaching Friars, of whom Father Praefat. ad lib.
disquis. Magic.
Delrio writes truly, That openly they carry themselves as enemies and
opposites to our Society, and in secret by their devices they traduce it,
laboring all they can, both in Italy, Spain, and throughout the whole world,
to make it to be envied, and seek not only by themselves, but by certain
lying Historians their instruments, to blemish it in what they may; and strive
with all their might, either to cause their books to be prohibited, or the
reading of them to be suspended, or at leastwise they charge them with some
note of infamy: Whereupon it may be reasonably concluded, that these men are
not to be held either for competent Judges, or witnesses against them of our
Society, nor against any of their writings whatsoever, but are to be ranked in
the number of our accusers and adversaries.


NOVICE. It is no marvel then if this Spanish Bishop has snarled so at our
Society: and without doubt from the same spirit proceeds that which he
says in another Locor. Theol. lib. 11. cap. 16.
place speaking of fabulous Legends, wherewith he compares certain Histories,
which he calls fables, published not long since by some that came from far,
unto whom he applies the Spanish proverb, De luengas vias, luengas mentiras,
Great travelers, great liars. For I suspected that thereby he meant that which
is read in the Epistles of the Fathers of the Society, sent from the
East Indies.


IESVITE. Thine opinion was not improbable. But to leave these envious
fellows, I will return to the original of our Society, which though it be as
ancient as I have delivered, yet that must be understood only of the first and
farthest foundations thereof; for else it cannot be denied, but that in many
things it is of a new institution; and also it does acknowledge for Institutor
an holy personage, that began his Order not above fourscore years since;
for Father Bellarmine in his Chronology does attribute the confirmation
thereof to Paul the third, in the year 1540.


NOVICE. Who was the Institutor of it?


IESVITE. St. Ignatius Loyola borne in Biscay, and a subject of the Kings of
Spain.


NOVICE. What life had he lead before?


IESVITE. Why he had been a debauched Soldier, and borne arms at Pampelune
against the French, where he was maimed, with an hurt that he received on both
his knees, whereof he halted ever after, but in such manner that it was hardly
perceived, as Father Maphaeus well observes in his life.


NOVICE. I fear that the Heretics will draw some bad consequence from
thence, and say that he is the father of a Society, which halteth on both
sides, as sometimes the 1 Kings 18. 21*
Prophet Elias objected to the Idolaters amongst the Israelites.


IESVITE. I make no question but they will, but we must not regard what they
say; howsoever, though we halt on both sides, I am sure we run fast enough to
cut them out as much work, as they can turn their hands unto. But to return
to Saint Ignatius our Institutor, it was he that enflamed with zeal, first
thought upon the enrolling of so holy a Society.


NOVICE. It seems also that his name takes its signification from fire.


IESVITE. Thou art in the right, and thereupon I will discover great mysteries
unto thee. First of all: Sermon. de Valderama page 10.
As the Psalmist says, According to thy name O Lord, so is thy praise
throughout all the earth, thy right hand is full of justice: As much think I
may I say of Father Ignatius, which signifies a Saint composed of fire, and
that is one of the names proper to God, Our God is a consuming fire: and on the
other side I perceived, that in his right hand he carries the name of Jesus,
who was our Savior and sanctification.


NOVICE. Now I learn of you, that one may say as much of a man as of God
without sinning, which is a deep point.


IESVITE. Thou say true, my Son, and this I will add further, Sermon. de
^e^a page 112.
That in these last times God has spoken unto us by his Son Ignatius, whom he
has constituted heir of all things, and in whom nothing is wanting, but only
that word whereby he made all ages.


NOVICE. Verily, though he did not make all ages by him, he has renewed the
world by him, and has made another age of it: And as Genesis 1. v. 2.
the Spirit of the Lord moved upon the waters, before the world was formed, as
it were sitting upon that confused mass, for to hatch it such as it was at
last: even so is it true, as Father Page 74.
Valderama preached, That when Saint Ignatius plunged himself in the water up
to the very chin in the heart of winter, for to divert a young man from
certain filthy desires, one might say, that Spiritus Domini ferebatur super
aquas, the Spirit of the Lord was carried upon the waters.


IESVITE. This indeed is a pretty observation, and there is no doubt, but that
the coldness of the waters was well warmed by the touching of his body: for as
the same Page 10.
Preacher says, When he resolved to quit the Soldiers life, the very house
wherein he then was, moved, the walls shaked, the posts and beams trembled, and
all that were in it betook themselves to flight, and ran out of doors as
fast as their legs could carry them: even as when some strange eruption of
fire does suddenly burst out with furious flames in some high mountain; so
when this interior fire began to be discovered in him, who before (young
Soldier) was cold and frozen in the things of God, it lightened forth in such
sort, that it caused a thousand fears, a thousand amazements, a thousand
firings of houses etc. there was never any Montgibel, or flaming mountain that
did the like.


NOVICE. I heard an Heretic not long since make strange Glosses upon this.
Heesaid upon occasion of Father Bellarmins reason that it was needful to have
new Orders, because the feruor of the old by little and little grew cold, how
we held a good course that the like should not arrive unto ours: for besides
the care we prouidently take, that the great pot may be always boiling, which
is a perpetual mean to preserve the feruor of our mercinary Religion, we
exercise the trade of incendaries in all places; and not contented with a
thousand firings of houses, made by our Institutor, we have set all
Christendom on fire: neither is there any Kingdom, Commonwealth, City, or
Province, which we have not enflamed with wars and seditions; and therefore
said he, was our Father Ignatius most properly compared to a Montgibel, the
very tunnell of Hell.


IESVITE. For hearing these things, and repeating them again, thou deseruest
to be imprisoned in the chamber of meditations, there to fast with bread and
water, and be disciplined twice a day, and after all that, be forced to have
recourse unto his Holiness for an Absolution, as of a case reserved. But
because I find thee docible, I will proceed in instructing thee, and seek to
clear thee of all such doubts, as these blasphemies may happily have left in
thee: And first of all, for answer unto those which accuse us for the care we
take of our pot, I must remember unto thee the worthy discourse which Father
Deza made thereupon. The design 1 Sermon. de Deza page 152.
says he, of these good Fathers, when as they seek the commodity of their
Colleges, is like the advice which Joseph gave to Pharaoh for the storing up
of corn into his Garners against the time of necessity and famine. The marvel
is how these Fathers in such hard and perverse times can possibly find the
means to furnish themselves with all that they want. It is a miracle that men
being so miserable and pinching, yet should not have the power to deny these
Fathers; a miracle like unto that which God wrought upon the Egyptians, in
favor of his people, when they lent unto the Israelites whatsoever they asked,
and God would have them to carry it all away: such is even right the case of
these good Fathers, for it is a sign that God has a care of them, that they
are his people, and that he tenderly loves them, when they that are so near
and covetous take a pleasure to furnish them with all that they stand in need
of.


NOVICE. I should fear that many good Catholics would be much offended with
this speech, when in recompense of their liberality they shall see themselves
compared to the Egyptians, which may endanger their affection to our Society.


IESVITE. Never fear it: for good Catholics will not be offended if any
thing be derogated from them to magnify so holy a Society. Now touching the
other objection of Montgibell, and incendiaries, whereof they accuse us, for
answer I say, that those Sophisters take that literally, which we mean
spiritually.


NOVICE. I submit my self in all humility to your exposition. But I entreat
you to tell me why our Father Ignatius gave the name of Jesus to his Society.


IESVITE. There be many reasons for it. And the first is, Valderama page 10.
That as our Lord Jesus, who being the Savior of our souls, from the time of
his nativity into the world, unto his death, never dealt in other business
then that which concerned our salvation; so the life of our Ignatius was wholly
bestowed about the saving of souls. The life of Jesus was manifested in his
works, and Ignatius was transformed into him, whose name the Society bears.


NOVICE. I thought there had been none but Saint Francis, that had been
transformed in such manner into Christ, that the one could not be known from
the other, but by their difference of habit, as father Horat. Turcel. in
Jesuit. apud Poss.
Horace Turcelin has daintily expressed it in these four verses.

Exue Franciscum tunica laceroque cucullo,
Qui Franciscus erat iam tibi Christus erit:
Francisci exuvijs, si qua licet, indue Christum,
Iam Franciscus erit qui modo Christus erat.
That is to say, take the frocke and the gown from Saint Francis, and he shall
be Christ: and put on the frocke and gown on Christ, and he shall be Saint
Francis: but now I learn that the same also may be said of father Ignatius;
take from him his cloak and his buckle, and he shall be Jesus: or attire Jesus
like a Jesuit, and he shall be Ignatius, seeing Ignatius is transformed into
him.


IESVITE. No question but it may be said with as much reason, as that which
father Gaspar Sanctius, dedicating a Book to St* Ignatius assures, namely,
that the judgment of father Ignatius, Nihil omnino discrepat a Divine, is in
nothing different from the judgment of God.


NOVICE. Is there no other reason why the name of Jesus was given to our
Society?


IESVITE. Yes; and this it is, Father Ignatius going to Rome for to obtain the
approbation of his Order, and finding himself much perplexed about that which
might befall him there, Jesus appeared unto him carrying a Cross, and in the
same vision also God the Father was seen recommending our Society unto his
Son, who promised him in good Spanish terms, that he would be propitious and
favorable unto him at Rome, as father Maphae. in vit. Loyala lib. 2. Et Rib
lib. 2. cap. 20.
Maphaeus and Ribadeneira relate. These speeches fortified him, and gave him
occasion to name his Company the Society of Jesus.


NOVICE. The same Heretic of whom I spoke before, objected unto me, that that
Jesus which spoke to our father Ignatius, was but an imaginary Jesus, and that
whereas the true Jesus makes intercession to his Father for the faithful, the
imaginary father of our Ignatius makes intercession to his son for us; and
whereas the true Jesus promises to be propitious unto his in heaven, the
imaginary promised to be propitious to his at Rome. But to leave these
scoffers with their blasphemies, did not Jesus that appeared to father Ignatius
perform his promise?


IESVITE. Do thou doubt of that? certainly the Apostles have not more credit
in heaven, then we have upon earth, especially at Rome, where after this
apparition, Sermon. de Valderama. page 48.
The Pope having well considered Ignatius hands, he found them all printed over
with the name of Jesus, whereupon he said, Digitus Dei hic est, In these hands
is the finger of God.


NOVICE. Indeed I have been told that this good Saint wrought great miracles
as well as Moses, of whom the Magicians of Egypt said that which the Pope said
of Ignatius.


IESVITE. What say thou, as well as Moses? Sermon. de Valderama page 11.
It was no marvel if Moses wrought such great miracles, for he did them by
virtue of the ineffable name of God engraued in his rod: it was no marvel if
the Apostles wrought such miracles, seeing they also did them in the name of
God: But that Ignatius, with his name written in paper, should do more
miracles then Moses, and as many as the Apostles, etc. is that which shows
so wonderful unto us.


NOVICE. What particular office has father Ignatius? or what part is there
commonly assigned unto him for the succor of men? for I make no doubt, but as
God has assigned to every orher Saint the cure of some one disease or other,
as to St. Roch the plague, to St. Petronel the fever, to St. Main the itch, so
St. Ignatius has some certain one unto which he is maruellously assisting.


IESVITE. Thou art in the right: Valderama. page 51.
Father Ignatius does assuredly and most readily assist all women that are in
labor: for this vigilant Pastor does always accompany the sheep that are
great with young, for to help them to be delivered, as it is written in Esaias,
Foetas ipse portabit, that is to say, he will look to the Ewes, for to have
their wool and their lambs.


NOVICE. Now here is a passage of Esaias most subtilely interpreted, and sure
none of the Ancients ever discerned that it was spoken of Ignatius, and of the
care which he has of women with child. But it is not strange that Ignatius
should have such a care of good women, for the holy Virgin her self,
accompanied with two Angels, made it not squeamish to go and visit a gentle
Abbess, that had suffered her self to be gotten with child, and for the
preservation of her honor, commanded those two Angels to deliver her of her
burden, and to carry it to an Hermit to bring it up, which in time became a
Bishop, as it is at large related in the Book of the miracles of the Virgin
Mary, printed certain years since at Cum sec. part Sermon. discip. de tempore.
Apud Ioh. Albinum* 1612.
Mentz.


IESVITE. Father Ignatius takes not that course, nor has any need of Angels
for the matter: Valderama. ib.
For do but only lay the blessed Fathers signet unto the patient, and she will
soon be rid of her pain. The only sight of his name has given eyes to the
blind, hands to the maimed, legs to the lame, has consumed the stone in the
kidneyes, and very easily brought women to bed.


NOVICE. Why this indeed is the very finger of God. But does he not cast out
devils?


IESVITE. Valderama page 55.
It happened one night, that the devil had almost strangled him, and twice or
thrice he beat him cruelly: but since he had a full revenge of him: For it has
been often seen by experience, that after many prayers have been made, many
Saints inuoked, many and sundry relickes applied, the last remedy has been
the image of blessed Ignatius, laying it on the patient, or one of his signets,
showing it unto him, and saying, Permerita B. Ignatii abi hinc Spiritus
malign, and presently he departed.


NOVICE. Is not this good Saint dead?


IESVITE. Yes, that he is, and his body was laid in the earth, whence he is not
yet risen again: Idem page 89.
But in his Sepulcher was heard most melodious singing: his Sepulcher seemed a
new heaven, the Angels made such music there, and for that effect they
descended down in squadrons from heaven. Now though no Angel ever appeared
unto him in his life time, yet the blessed Virgin, Saint Peter, the eternal
Father, and his Son carrying his cross, appeared unto him.


NOVICE. Why did no Angels appear to him during his life?


IESVITE. Fol. id. ibid.
It arrived unto him at his death, as it arriueth unto great Potentates of the
earth: As long as Kings are in their Palaces and houses of pleasure, the Guard
suffer none to enter but men of note, unless it be some necessary attendants:
but when the King is dead, and that he is laid on an hearse in the great Hall
of the Court, then every one is admitted to come in. As long as Ignatius lived,
there was none but Popes, as St. Peter; Empresses, as the Mother of God; or
some Sovereign Monarch, as God the Father, and his Son, which had the favor
to behold him: but as soon as he was dead, every Courtier belonging to the
eternal King was admitted, all the celestial people ran to see him, Angels,
Archangels, Thrones, etc.


NOVICE. This indeed was admirable, and verily I do not think that the like
can be said of any other Institutor of an Order. But tell me, I pray you, was
he author of any rule more austere then others that went before him?


IESVITE. He desired, Ignat. Ep. de virtute obedien. Sect. 3.
That we should suffer our selves to be surmounted by other religious Orders, in
watching, fasting, and other austerities both in diet and habit, and has
exempted us from singing day and night in the Quire as others do: And that for
great reasons: He would not have us subject to singing day and night, Valderama
page 30. and 31.
Because as the Angel wrestling with Jacob, said unto him, Let me go, for
behold the day appears; to make him consider that he had many droues of
sundry kinds of cattle, that he had children in his train, and was to provide
meat for some, and drink for others; so that to a man which had such a charge
upon him, it was fit the night should be allowed free for contemplation: so it
is not possible for us to bestow the day in the Quire, that are to furnish the
flock with pasture and clear water.


NOVICE. Here is a reason as clear as water, and therefore I see that that was
the cause, why he did not think it fit to charge us with such austerity of
watching, fasting, and diet, lest by too much weakness of body, we should be
made incapable of the guiding and government of so many Beasts, as are
committed unto us.


IESVITE. It is right. But in one thing he would have us not to suffer our
selves to be surmounted, but rather that we should surmount all others, And
that the true and lawful posterity of our Society should thereby be
distinguished, as by their mark.


NOVICE. What mark is that I pray you? for I very much desire to carry it,
though the heretics should hold it for a mark of the Beast.


IESVITE. Thou do wisely not to regard their prattle, nor that neither of
some Politicians as bad as they, who hold that for sottishness, which we
account the greatest virtue of all, and that is, Ignat. de obed. virtute, Sect.
3
the renunciation of all will, and all judgment, for to depend wholly upon the
judgment and will of another.


NOVICE. If by that other you mean God, it is a great impiety to gainsay that
we should not altogether subject our will to his will, and our judgment to his
judgment; and I hold him for a manifest Heretic that denies it.


IESVITE. Nay, now thou show that thou art but a Nouice; it is not that
which we blame in the Heretics and Politicians, for they confess as much as
thou say: but by another, we mean our Superiors, whose will our Father
Ibid. Sect. 1.
Ignatius would have us hold to be Divine. And we are not to regard, Ibid. Sect.
3.
Whether this Superior has wisdom, or goodness, or other gifts of God, that
our obedience may not in any thing be diminished: or whether he be not capable
of great counsel, or whether he be not prudent: because we are to regard,
that he holds the place of him which cannot be deceived, who will supply any
defect he may have of prudence and probitie. And it is to be noted, Ibid. Sect.
5.
That your obedience shall be imperfect, if it mount not to that degree, not
only to execute the action, which he commands you exteriourly, but also
that you transform your will into the will of your superior, otherwise it
will not merit the name of virtue. And therefore it is, that we read how
obedience is better then sacrifice: the reason whereof is delivered by S.
Gregory, because in sacrifices the flesh of a thing was offered, and by
obedience one offers his own will, which is an excellent part of the soul.


NOVICE. I had thought till now that sacrifice was not to be offered to any but
only unto God, which was the cause why I believed that when you spoke of
renouncing all a man's will for to obey another, which is, as you teach me now,
to sacrifice ones own will, it was not to be done to any but unto God alone.


IESVITE. Therein thou were mistaken, not to regard in the person of thy
Superior, Jesus Christ himself, who is supreme wisdom, immense goodness,
infinite charity, that cannot be deceived, neither will deceive thee. And this
we must do according to the instruction of S. Ibid. Sect. 16.
Ignatius, who would not have us question Sect. 12.
whether he that commands us, does it well or ill, Rectene, an secus: for then
Sect. 7.
by obedience we render our freewill unto him, from whom we received it. Now,
Tollet. instruc. sacerd. l. 4. cap. 3. Sect. 4.
if (as Cardinal Tollet teaches) a simple Countriman, that believes his
Bishop, propounding some Heretical doctrine unto him in the articles of faith,
meriteth in believing it, although it be an error, because he is bound to
believe until he knows that it is repugnant to the Church. Why should not we
yield as much to our Superiors; and why should not we hope to merit, if we do
that which they command us, without farther inquiry, even when they command
evil? It is they that shall answer for it.


NOVICE. I wholly submit my self to believe you, that I may not lose the fruit
of obedience; and renounce mine own understanding to approve this doctrine,
which I would entreat you to declare me somewhat more particularly, in regard
that therein consists our Proprium quarto modo, our principal mark.


IESVITE. I will do it in our Father Ignatius own terms, who has prescribed
unto us, for an article of faith, Ibid. Sect. 18.
How we are to hold for most infallible, that whatsoever our Superior
commands, is the commandment and will of God, and by consequent, that with
all our heart, and with all our consent, we labor to do all that the Superior
bids, out of a certain blind impetuositie of the will, desirous to obey,
without any enquiry at all; as we employ all our consent to believe The
Articles of our Faith, and as Abraham did, when God commanded him to offer his
son Isaac.


NOVICE. This being once granted, as needs it must, seeing the judgment of our
Father Ignatius is divine, nothing shall be impossible to our Society: and as
long as there are those which have vowed this obedience, so long shall we have
men capable to execute the most difficult and hazardous enterprises. But be
pleased, I pray, to tell me whom we are to take for our superiors, which
have this power over us.


IESVITE. Blessed Ignatius shall answer thee himself; Ibid. Sect. 20.
That which I have said of obedience, equally appertains to private persons
toward their nearest superiors: as to Rectors of Colleges, and such as are
ordained for Presidents in each place toward their Prouincials; to
Prouincials, toward their General: to the General, toward him, whom God
has established over him, namely his Vicar upon earth.


NOVICE. What are we to believe of this Vicar, which is our holy Father the
Pope?


IESVITE. That he is the universal Monarch of the whole Church; her head, her
spouse, and consequently above her. That he is the fundamental stone, of
which Esaias speaks, saying; Esaias 28. 16.
I will send into Sion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure
foundation, he that believes shall not make haste. For although the Apostles
1 Pet. 2. 6.
S. Peter, and Romans 9 33.
S. Paul have applied it to Christ, yet so it is, that it is spoken there of a
foundation after a foundation, of the second foundation, not of the first, as
Cardinal Praesat in lib. de sum. Pontif. Item in eod. lib. per totum. and de
council. lib. 2. ^. 17
Bellarmine learnedly observes.


NOVICE. Must it be understood that the holy Father is above the whole Church,
both in spiritual and temporal things?


IESVITE. It must: howbeit with this moderation, whereof we make use to content
the scrupulous; that temporal things depend on him, so far forth as they
serve to spiritual, and that for the good of them the Pope Bellar. de pontif.
lib. 5. cap. 6.. Explicanda.
has sovereign power to dispose of the temporal estates of all Christians:
Because Ibid. cap. 7.. Prima ratio.
the Civil power is subject to the Spiritual, and every superior may command
his inferior.


NOVICE. Do you apply this to Kings and Kingdoms?


IESVITE. It is to that use for which this doctrine chiefly serves, and it
needs no further explication, seeing that so many effects have sufficiently
declared the application thereof.


NOVICE. I, but yet I would desire you to furnish me with some Maxims for the
ease of my memory, according as they have been registered by the most approved
Authors of our Society.


IESVITE. With all mine heart: And in the first place Cardinal Desum. Pont.
lib. 5. cap. 7. Sect. Item potest
Bellarmine shall teach thee, That the spiritual power may depose Princes, and
place others in their steads, when as it cannot otherwise conserve its
spiritual estate. And Father Suarez, Defen. ^id. Cath lib. 3. cap. 23.. 10.
That the power of the Pope extends to the repression of Kings by temper all
pains, and by privation of their Kingdoms when necessity requires. Also,
Ibid.. 18.
That the Pope has as much power over temporal Princes, yea over such as are
absolute and sovereign, as over the other faithful or baptized Christians,
not only to repress them by censuring their faults, but also to punish them
with temporal and corporal pains. Further, That this power is much more
necessary for the repression of Princes, then of subjects.


NOVICE. This it may be is meant of heretical Princes.


IESVITE. Indeed it is first meant of them. And if our Catholics in England,
and other places, had as much power as they have right, they would not endure
heretical Princes, as they are constrained to do, till such time as
opportunity shall serve to free themselves from them: for otherwise they are
taught by us, that Bellar. de sum* Pont. lib. 5. cap. 7 Sect. Praeterea.
to suffer an heretical or infidel Prince, who labors to draw men unto his
Sect, is to expose Religion unto evident peril, which Christians ought not to
do. And Father Vbisupr.. 21
Suarez worthily proves, That it appertains unto the Pope to defend the
subjects of an heretical Prince, and that by his power he may deprive such a
Prince of his Kingdom, chase him out of it, and absolve his subjects from
their oath of allegiance. And herewith agrees Father Gregory of Valentia,
writing Tom. 3. Disp. in Thom. disp. 1. ^. 12. punct. 2.
That temporal domination and superiority over subjects, by the sentence of
the Pope may be taken away from Heretics: And the reason of it is, That if
they may be deprived of their lives, much more of their estates, and
consequently of all superiority over others; and that they which are
excommunicated for Heresy, incur de facto the deprivation of politic
power, and that their subjects are not only absolved from their oath of
allegiance, but are also forbidden to keep it: And that if the Judge has not
yet pronounced the sentence of Excommunication, this pain is nevertheless
incurred, if the crime of Heresy be so notorious that it cannot be hid; and
then it is lawful for the subject to deny obedience to his heretical Lord,
much less is he bound thereunto.


NOVICE. Truly these are notable Maxims, insomuch that although the Pope has
not pronounced express sentence of Excommunication against the Kings of Great
Britain, of Denmark, and others such like, and though their subjects are not
expressly forbidden to obey them, yet now I learn of you, for to teach them
upon occasion, that it is in their liberty, either to do, or not to do it,
without scruple of conscience.


IESVITE. I have given thee for it the very words of our Masters.


NOVICE. But do they extend this power also against Catholic Kings and
Princes.


IESVITE. They do: for Father Suarez conioyneth him that is perverse in his
manners, with the heretical Prince. And Cardinal Bellarmine clears thee of
all doubt, Vbisup. Sect. Alterum.
The Prince (says he) when he is Catholic in faith and belief, but of such
evil manners, that he is hurtful unto Religion, or to the Church, may be
removed, and reduced to the rank of other sheep, by the Pastor of the Church.


NOVICE. May this be done in any other case?


IESVITE. The Bellar. lib. 5 cap. 7. Sect. Tertium.
Pope may also command Kings to punish Heretics and Schismatickes; and if they
do it not, he may constrain them by Excommunication. Now I taught thee before
the consequences of Excommunication, which we have sufficiently demonstrated
in the proceedings against Henry the third King of France, concerning whom
Charles Scribanius one of our principal Fathers at Antwerp, in his Amphith.
honoris, cap. 12.
Amphitheater of Honor, thus refuted those which found fault with the Popes
euill-entreating him. If (says he) a Denis, a Machanidas, an Aristotimus,
monsters of ages, should oppress France, shall there be no high Bishop found
so hardy as to animate a Dion, a Timolcon, a Philopoemon, an Helematus? If more
monsters held the Commonwealth in captivity, shall no Thrasibulus set to an
helping hand? The violence of Tarquin in the bed of Collatine gave a just
cause, and shall there none be met withal to depose and abolish out of France,
a tyrant King, that oppresses the liberty, etc? Shall there not some sword-man
at least rise up against this beast? No Pope that will deliver so noble a
Kingdom?


NOVICE. It seems to me, that they of our Society which answered Anti-Coton,
deny Charles Scribanius to be the Author of that Book: and albeit Father Resp.
ad Antic. cap. 3. page 48.
Eudaemono-Iohannes confesses that our Society is much indebted to the Author,
for defending it with so learned a volume, yet he maintains, how Anti-Coton
cannot prove his conjecture, that Scribanius was the Author of it, by any
evidence.


IESVITE. Therein he was deceived: for by the Index of the Books of our
Society, composed by Father Ribadeneira, he shall find that Charles
Scribanius has showed what knowledge he had in humane learning, by his books
of the Amphitheater of Honor, against the accusations of the Caluinists.


NOVICE. Are we the subjects of Princes where we were borne, or where we live?


IESVITE. Of neither: for we are Clerks.


NOVICE. Does it necessarily follow, that if we be Clerks, then we are not
their subjects?


IESVITE. Yes, very clearly: For it cannot be proved (says our De Clericis.
lib. 5. cap 30. Sect. Quarto obijciunt.
Bellarmine) that the Kings of this age are lawful superiors and Judges of
Clerks, if by the same mean it be not proved, that children are above their
fathers, sheep above their pastor, things temporal above spiritual.


NOVICE. But is it not to be understood of spiritual things only, that Clerks
are not subject to secular Princes?


NOVICE. Not only (says the same De Clericis lib. 2. cap. 17. Sect. Ad primam
Author,) in spiritual things, but also in temporal, is the Priest to be
governed by his Ecclesiastical superior: and it cannot be, that in temporal
things he should acknowledge the secular Prince, because no man can serve two
Masters. And as Father Defens. contra Ang. lib. 4. cap. 17. Sect. 16. and 18.
Suarez writes, The civil Laws of Princes and Magistrates do not oblige
Clerks, neither as touching the power of constraint, nor as touching the power
of direction, by force of the laicall jurisdiction, only they oblige them by
force of reason: nor can Kings oblige Clerks to those laws particularly
imposed. Now we understand obligation by force of reason, when the authority
of the Canons or daineth, that such laws are to be observed by Clerks: but
they are free from the virtue and proper obligation of such laws. The same man
Ibid. lib. 4. cap. 9. Sect. 17. and 18.
after he has proved that Clerks were committed to Peter, draws this
necessary consequence from those words of our Savior, No man can serve two
Masters, Mat. 6. that Clerks are exempted from the temporal jurisdiction of
Princes, iure diuino: because the same moral impotence noted in those words,
He shall hate the one, and love the other; he shall cleave to the one, and
despise the other, would be found, if Clerks were subjects according to the
body, both to the pope and to the King. Whence he evidently concludes, that
Clerks are absolutely exempted from the temporal Jurisdiction of princes, by
reason that that Jurisdiction is exercised toward subjects in regard of the
body, and consequently in regard of all things which are ordained for a
convenient conservation of the body: if Clerks then be exempted from the
jurisdiction of Princes as touching their bodies, certainly they are exempted
from their temporal Jurisdiction.


NOVICE. Does it not follow now of this, that so many Ecclesiastics as are
made in a Kingdom or Commonwealth, so many subjects is the Prince deprived of?


IESVITE. Cardinal De Clericis lib. 1. cap. 38. Sect. Quarto obijciunt.
Bellarmine teaches, that as he which transferreth his dwelling into another
town, or province, cease to be the subject of that prince under whose
domination he was before, without doing him wrong: So Princes have no reason to
complain, if they be deprived spite of their teeth, of the right which they
had upon Clerks, before they were Clerks, because he uses but his own
right, that chooses an estate, which he thinks most convenient for him,
although by accident it follows thereupon, that the Prince be deprived of his
subject.


NOVICE. I would be loath that all Princes should know this secret: for from
thence I learn, that they have a State within their State, no more depending
on them, then that of France does on that of England. And that their subjects
without stirring out of their Countries, there enjoying their estates, may
exempt themselves from their subjection: and by other Maxims, that they may
also make themselves their superiors, even in temporal things, though
indirectly.


IESVITE. Thou say right, and understand the case well. For iure
ordinario, as Father Defens fid. contra Ang. lib. 3. cap. 17.
Suarez will teach thee, not only the Pope, but the Bishop likewise is the
Kings superior, and every King is subject to his Bishop in spiritual things,
if he be not exempted from it by the pope, and immediately received under his
protection and jurisdiction. Now temporal subjection necessarily follows
spiritual, as we have declared before. For as the same man teaches, Eiusdem
lib. cap. 23. Sect. 18. and 20.
If the Church could not punish those that are spiritually subject, with
temporal pains, they would soon contemn the spiritual: and that would fall
out which is spoken of in the Proverbs, chap. 29. verse. 15. The child which is
left to his own will confounds his mother. Whence would ensue, that the
state of Christendom would not be well ordered, nor had been sufficiently
provided for, if the Church had not power to constrain such rebels, as will
not obey her censures. And it must not be said, that the vengeance of crimes
appertains to secular Princes, and that it is enough that they have this
power, because they themselnes may offend, and have need of correction. And
further, because this vengeance does not of it self appertain to the civil
Magistrate, but so far forth as the faults are contrary to civil ends, the
peace of the Commonwealth, and humane justice: but to punish them as contrary
to Religion, and the salvation of souls, that of it self appertains to the
Ecclesiastical power, unto which Principally appertains the faculty of using
temporal pains for such corrections: which power is much more necessary for
the repression of Princes, then of their Subjects.


NOVICE. You teach me great mysteries, which I should not easily have
apprehended without your direction, and have made me to see, that they which
will betake themselves to our Order must subject their understanding by the vow
of blind obedience. But declare unto me, I pray you, the ground of the
exemption of Clerks from the subjection of Princes in the States where they
were borne.


IESVITE. Why it is grounded upon the very law of Nature it self, Bellarm. de
Clericis lib. 1. cap. 29. Sect. Alterum.
For the Ecclesiastical power, which is spiritual, is in consequence by nature
above the secular, and therefore when need requires, can direct, judge, and
correct it: but there is no reason that permits the secular to direct,
judge, or correct the spiritual.


NOVICE. I but if the election, which one may make of an Ecclesiastical
estate, does not exempt the servant from the subjection of his Lord, why should
the same estate deprive the King, Prince, or Commonwealth of their subjects?


IESVITE. The Bellarm. de Cleric. lib. 1. cap. 30. Sect. quarto obijciunt.
tie which is between the Lord and the servant is all in all far greater then
that which is between the Prince and the Subject: And that is the reason why
clericature exempteth the Subject from the subjection of the Prince, or from
the civil power, yea though the superior opposes it, but not the servant from
the power of his Lord. Cardinal Bellarmin says as much of the obligation
between the debtor and the creditor.


NOVICE. If it be so, may a Clerk, whatsoever he does or undertakes, even
against the very persons of Princes themselves, be guilty of humane treason?


IESVITE. Father Aphoris Confess. Tit. Clericus.
Emanuel Sa has satisfied this question in few words: The rebellion, says he,
of a Clerk against his Prince is not treason, because he is not his subject.


NOVICE. I think those words were left out in the edition of Paris.


IESVITE. They were indeed, because at that time this matter was much stirred
in by certain Politicians, who a great coile about it; howbeit they continue
still in the editions of Antwerp and Cullen. But say he had not written it, it
follows well enough from this Maxim, whereof we are agreed, that Clerks are
not the subjects of Princes, nor Princes, in regard of them, superior powers.
And then Suarez. Defens. fid. ^^b 4. cap. 15. Sect. 1. 9. and 10.
It is a general rule, that Ecclesiastical persons are exempted from the
secular jurisdiction, not only in Ecclesiastical crimes, but also in civil,
which cannot be denied, says Father Suarez, without denying a principle of
faith. And so general, that it suffers not, according to him, any exception
of crime whatsoever. Now if it be objected, That in some Kingdoms, certain
crimes of Clerks are excepted, which the civil Magistrate may take knowledge
of, as the crime of high treason, of coining false money, etc. That is not by
common right, but by a particular privilege, which Kings have received from
the Pope; for there is no King nor secular Prince that can give it.


NOVICE. But the Apostles, and the first Ministers of the Christian Church,
subjected themselves to Kings and Princes, paid them tribute, and never went
about to depose them.


IESVITE. The times are to be distinguished: Bellarm. de Pont lib. ^. cap. 7.
Sect. Quod si.
For if the Christians did not in times past depose Nero, Dioclesian, Julian the
Apostata, Valens the Arrian, and such like, it was because they wanted
temporal forces; for otherwise by right they might, seeing that the Apostle in
the 1. to the Cor. chap. 6. commands that new Judges be established amongst
the Christian, to the end that the Christians might not be constrained to
plead before a Judge that was a persecutor of Christ, so would he have
commanded new Kings and Princes to have been made for the same reason, if they
had had power enough in their hands.


NOVICE. But why did not they use cunning where power wanted?


IESVITE. It Mariana de Reg. lib. 1. cap. 6.
was expedient then, that the foundations of the Church should be laid in
patience, and suffering of death; with so much the more miracle, that it grew
the greater being oppressed, and diminishing in number, yet every day
increased. Moreover in those times it was not expedient to do all, that law
and right permitted.


NOVICE. What do law and right permit according to the doctrine of our Society?


IESVITE. In all memory of men, such as have undertaken the killing of Tyrants,
have ever been held in high estimation.


NOVICE. Whom mean you by tyrants that may be killed?


IESVITE. The Theologians, says Father Def* fid. lib. 6. cap. 3. Sect. 1.
Suarez, thus distinguish Tyrants; the first sort is of those, which by force
and iniustly, without all title, occupy a Kingdom, which truly are neither
Kings nor Lords, but only hold the place, and are as it were the shadows of
them. The other sort is of those, which though they be true Lords, and possess
the Kingdom with a just title, yet as touching their carriage, and manner of
government, reign tyrannically, namely, because that either neglecting the
public good, they convert all to their own particular commodity, or iniustly
afflict their subjects with spoiling, killing, and perverting, or injuriously
commit such things, or the like, publikly and frequently.


NOVICE. May one with a good conscience kill both the one and other of these
Tyrants?


IESVITE. Of the first sort no man doubts: Marian. de Reg lib. 1. cap. 6.
For all Theologians and Philosophers agree that they may be killed, deprived of
their lives, and Principalities, by any one whosoever. For seeing that such a
one rightly carries the name of a Tyrant, and has put on the humor of one,
let him at any rate be taken away, and dispoiled of the power which he has
usurped by violence. So by good right Ahud having insinuated himself by
presents into the favor of Eglon King of the Moabites, he killed him with the
stab of a poniard in his belly, and delivered his Countrymen from a cruel
servitude. Father Suarez defends this opinion as the most common and
received, Defens cathol* lib 6. cap. 4. Sect. 7.
That such a Tyrant may be killed by any private person whatsoever, that is a
member of the State, which suffers under the tyranny, if otherwise it cannot
be delivered from it. And to that which Saint Augustine says in the first Book
of The City of God, how it is not lawful to kill any person without public
administration, he answers learnedly; That a private man, which kills such
a Tyrant, does it not without public administration, because he does it either
by the authority of the Commonwealth, tacitly consenting thereto; or he does
it by the authority of God, who by the law of nature has given unto every one
power to defend himself and his Commonwealth from the violence which is done
them by such a tyrant.


NOVICE. But what say you of Kings and Princes that are lawful, but yet
administer tyrannically as touching their carriage?


IESVITE. The Vbi* sup. Sect. 2
present question regards chiefly such a Prince, and the King of England (as
Suarez says) spoke also of such Princes, because we hold them in the rank of
lawful Princes. Father Mariana, having used all the ordinary precautions,
wherewithal I will hereafter instruct thee, came at length to this, not to
leave that power of killing such a Prince in the pleasure of any private man
whatsoever, Unless the common voice of the people be such, and that grave and
understanding men have been consulted with upon it. For in that case he
judged, that it would be good for humane affairs, if valiant and courageous
men were found, that despising their own proper safety and lives, would for
the liberty of their Country, and sauouring the public wishes, deliver it from
the Tyrant.


NOVICE. Is this opinion approved?


IESVITE. The stir which our Adversaries made about it, especially in France,
where they insisted upon those words. as the causes of attempts upon their
Kings, and affirmed, that Mariana by grave and understanding men consulted with
upon it* meant Confessors, and especially those of our Society, giving them all
power over the lives of Kings, has been the cause that we were constrained
to qualify that saying a little: and although Marianaes book had passed for
current, and had been published according to order by permission of the
superiors, yet at the instance of the Fathers of our Society, which in France
found themselves in trouble about it, the General Apud Eudaem. in Res. ad
Antic. cap. 1.
Aquauiua made a De^ree, whereby he forbad, but without naming Mariana, to
teach either by word of mouth, or writing, that it was lawful for any person
whatsoever, under any praetext of tyranny that might be, to kill Kings, or to
plot their death. Father Eudaemono-Iohannes writing against the Ibid. page 32.
Wolf (as he calls him) of Chichester, has refuted this opinion of Mariana,
howbeit with this excuse of him, that he wrote it not as an Oracle, but as a
man that delivered his opinion with doubt; nevertheless he says, that all
the rest of the Jesuits disallowed it.


NOVICE. Teach me then, I pray you, what others say that speak best of it.


IESVITE. I cannot do it better then by the doctrine of Father Suarez, who
answering the King of England upon this matter, spoke the most correctedly he
could. He Defens. fid. lib. 6. cap. 4. Sect. 2.
holds then this Maxim for resolved, that the lawful Prince ruling
tyrannically, or for any crime whatsoever, cannot be killed by any private
authority.


NOVICE. Does he mean this in any case whatsoever?


IESVITE. There are but three cases, which may be considered in it. Either
Ibid. Sect. 5.
the little of just vengeance and punishment, or the title of just defense of
himself, or the title of just defense of the Commonwealth. The first title
appertains to no private man. As touching the title of a just public or
particular defense, distinction must be used, and consideration had, whether a
man defends himself or the Commonwealth: if himself, whether it be his
life, his members, some grievous mutilation of his body, or his goods. For it
is not lawful to kill his King doing violence for his goods. But if there be
question of the defense of his own life, which the King would take away from
him by violence, then, ordinarily it is lawful for the subject to defend
himself, although the death of the Prince does thereof ensue: because the
right of the conservation of a man's own life is the greatest of all others;
and then the Prince is not in any necessity that obliges the subject to lose
his life for him, who voluntarily and iniustly thrusts himself into that
peril.


NOVICE. But may not one from thence draw that consequence, which Mariana
makes? If thou see (says he) De Reg. lib. 1. cap. 6. page 51.
thy Mother, or thy-dearest Wife vexed in thy presence, and do not succor
them being able, shall thou not be cruel, and incur the reproach of
cowardice and impiety? and will thou let thy Country be vexed and tormented by
a Tyrant at his pleasure, unto which we owe more then to our parents?


IESVITE. The consequence is good in the like case. For (says Father Ibid. vbi
supra lib. 6. cap. 4. Sect. 6.
Suarez) grant that the King does actually set upon the City for to ruin it
iniustly, or to kill the Citizens, or some such like thing, then it shall be
lawful to resist the Prince, even in killing him, if the defense cannot
otherways be made. For if it be lawful to do it for a man's own life, much
more for the public good, because a City or Commonwealth does then make a
just defensive war against an iniust oppressor, though its own proper King,
and so every Citizen as a member of the Commonwealth, and moved by it either
expressly or tacitly, may defend the Commonwealth in that conflict, in any
manner that he can. But it is otherwise of a King that reigns in peace, and
that vexes the Commonwealth, and is hurtful unto it by other means, for
then there is no place for defense by force, or for plots against the life of
the King; because the Commonwealth does not then suffer any actual violence,
which it were lawful to repel with violence.


NOVICE. What must be done then in this case, where the Prince otherwise
lawful, comes to such a pass, That he ruineth the Commonwealth, spoyleth
men of their goods, despises Religion, and the public Laws, makes a virtue
of pride, and holds impiety against God to be the greatest valor?


IESVITE. Thou know what Father De Reg. and Re. Inst. lib. 1. cap. 6. page
59. and 6.
Mariana, from whom thou had this question, brings for answer thereunto,
namely, That it is not to be dissembled, but the surest mean to remedy it, is
the public way of Assemblies, wherein by a common consent may be deliberated
what shall be done. The Prince shall first be admonished, and if he reject the
medicine, and that there rests no farther hope of amendment, the sentence
being pronounced, it shall be lawful for the Commonwealth to deny him
obedience: and because that war will necessarily ensue thereupon, arms must
be taken up, money raised, and if otherwise it cannot be done, by the right of
defense the Commonwealth, by its own proper authority, or by a greater, may
kill the Prince declared a public enemy.


NOVICE. But is not this a private opinion of that Father, which is not to be
followed.


IESVITE. No: for if he had not proceeded farther, none of ours would ever
have contradicted him. Father Def. fid. lib. 6. cap. 4. Sect. 15.
Suarez teaches the same doctrine very amply, whereof behold here the first
ground, which is, That if a lawful King does govern tyrannically, and that
the King dome has no other mean of defense, but by deposing and expelling the
King, the whole Commonwealth, by a common consent of the Towns and principal
persons of the Kingdom, may depose the King, as well by virtue of the law of
Nature, whereby it is permitted to repel force with force, as because that
necessary case of the proper conservation of the commonwealth, is always held
to be excepted in that first accord, by which the Commonwealth transferred its
power to the King.


NOVICE. Does it follow hereupon that the Commonwealth has power to put this
King to death?


IESVITE. That Ibid. Sect. 18.
ground being laid, we must say, that after the sentence of condemnation,
touching the deprivation of the Kingdom, given by a lawful power: or (that
which is all one) after a declaratory sentence of the crime, which of right
has imposed such a pain, he which has pronounced the sentence, or he unto
whom he has given commission to execute it, may deprive the King of the
Kingdom, even by putting him to death, if otherwise he cannot, or if the just
sentence does also extend to that pain. Howbeit the deposed King cannot be
killed by any private person whatsoever, no nor be expelled by force, till he
be commanded unto it, or that the general commission be declared by sentence,
or of right. The first part evidently follows upon that precedent principle:
for he that may justly condemn any one, may likewise execute the sentence
either by himself, or by helps necessary thereunto: otherwise that power would
be frustratory, in being able to decide the right, without the ability of an
efficacious constraint. And as the minister of a King does well to kill a man
by the Kings commandment, because that then he executes the Kings power
rather then his own: so when the Commonwealth may justly depose the King, the
ministers thereof do well to constrain the King, or to kill him, if it be
necessary, because then they do it no longer by private, but by public
authority. And therefore Soto said well, That although it be not lawful for
any private man whatsoever to kill him that is a Tyrant in his government, yet
when the sentence is given, one may establish for the minister of the execution
thereof whomsoever one will.


NOVICE. But what means Mariana by that speech, where he says, By the
authority of the Commonwealth, or of a greater: what is that greater?


IESVITE. He means that which we all hold for most certain, namely, that
that Ibid. Sect. 17.
power appertains to the Pope, as to the superior, having jurisdiction to
correct Kings: yea such as are sovereign as well as their subjects. Now though
the Commonwealth or Kingdom considered in its own nature, and as it was
amongst the Gentiles, or as it is at this present amongst them, has the power,
as we have said, to defend it self from a tyrant King, and for that effect to
depose him, if it be necessary: yet Christian Kingdoms, as touching that
point, have some dependence on the sovereign Bishop. First, because the Pope
may forbid a Kingdom to depose the King without his knowledge and advice, and
unless he has first been informed of the cause, etc. Whereupon we read in
Histories, that always in such cases Kingdoms have consulted with the Pope,
or have even implored him to depose unworthy or tyrant kings, as we have
declared of Childeric King of France in the time of Pope Zachary, etc.
Secondly, the Christian kingdom depends also on the Pope in this, That the
Pope may not only counsel, or consent, that the kingdom may depose the King,
which is pernicious to it, but may also command and constrain it to do it,
when he judges it necessary for the spiritual safety of the kingdom, but
especially to avoid heresies and schisms.


NOVICE. If the holy Father* having consented to the deposition of a King, or
having ordained it, yet does not declare himself for the execution thereof,
shall it be lawful for the first Prince, that will, to make war upon him,
and invade his kingdom?


IESVITE. No. Ibid. Sect. 19.
But then his lawful successor, if he be a Catholic, has that power; or if he
neglect it, or that there be none; the Cominalty of the kingdom shall succeed
him, provided they be Catholics, and if they crave assistance of other
Princes, they may assist them: howbeit if the Pope give other Kings power to
invade the kingdom, they may justly do it, because then they shall neither
want just cause nor power.


NOVICE. What shall I answer unto those, which allege David that would not kill
Saul, but caused the Amalekite to be put to death for vaunting that he had
slain him: which object the mischiefs arriving unto the Common-weath by such
facts: which say that the reverence of subjects toward their Princes is in
danger, if once they be persuaded that they may punish their faults; and that
under such pretexts the public peace shall often be disturbed by seditions and
commotions, one part of the people arming themselves against the other, etc.


IESVITE. So they dispute which take the tyrants part, says our De Rege lib.
1. page 57.
Mariana, but the advocates for the people produce as many, and as great reasons
for them. For the Commonwealth, from whom the Royal power took its
original, may according to the necessity of the case call their King in
question, and if he reject the remedy, they may despoile him of his kingdom:
for they have not transferred their right in such manner to the Prince, but
that they have reserved a greater power unto themselves. Cardinal De Council.
lib 2 cap. 16. and 19.
Bellarmine teaches the same, That in the kingdoms of men the power of the
King comes from the people, because the people made the King, which otherwise
had been a private man like another. And that if he degenerate into a tyrant,
albeit he be the head of the kingdom, he may notwithstanding be deposed by the
people, who may elect another. He commends Recog. lib de La^cis. Addo.
also that which Nauarrus says, How the people never make such a transport of
their power to the King, that they do not reserve it in habitude, to reassume
it in certain cases.


NOVICE. What shall I answer unto those, which allege the decree of the
Council of Constance, condemning this proposition; That the tyrant may and
ought to be killed by any one of his subjects whatsoever, not only by open
force, but by secret practices and fraud.


IESVITE. There be answers enough, for as Vbi supra. page 62.
Mariana says, I do not find that Pope Martin the fifth approved that Decree,
nor Eugenius or his successors. But Father Suarez, without wronging the
Council, speaks thus to the King of England, Where do you find in the acts
of the Council of Constance, Princes excommunicated by the Pope, or degraded,
or this other particle, By his subjects, or any other whatsoever? Seeing then
that the addition of such particles to the proposition gives it a diverse
sense, it is an illusory inference to attribute such a proposition unto that
Council.


NOVICE. And what shall I answer if that be objected unto me, which Saint Paul
says, Let every person be subject to the higher powers?


IESVITE. That Saint Paul Suarez. vbi supra Sect. 20.
never added, That every one should be subject to powers excommunicated, or
deposed by the Pope; And that the one cannot be inferred from the other, seeing
they are diverse things, nay mere contraries; for a deposed King is no longer
an higher power. And as Cardinal Bellarmine Contra Barclayum cap. 3.
introduces the Pope answering the people, which would continue in the
obedience of the deposed King; I do not free thee either from the natural, or
divine commandment, when I absolve thee from the tie of obedience: for I do
not permit that thou should* not obey thy King, which were against the
divine Law, but I make him that was thy King not to be so any longer: as he
that sets a servant at liberty, does not agree that the servant should not
be tied to obey his Lord, which would be against the divine Law, but he deals
so, that he has no Lord any longer to obey.


NOVICE. It follows then, that Jacques Clement, which killed Henry the third
King of France, did not kill his King, but only a private man, seeing the Pope
had excommunicated him, and exposed his Kingdom as a prey.


IESVITE. The consequence is necessary. Also De Reg. lib. 1. cap. 6. page 53.
and 54.
Mariana says, That that young man of a simple spirit, and weak body, but in
whom a greater virtue, Vis mayor, had confirmed strength and courage, got
himself no small renown by killing that King. That it was a memorable act:
and he accuses them of barbarousnesse and cruelty, feritatis and seuitiae,
that thronging in gave so many blows to a man that was dead before: and he
assures, that in his face it might have been read, how joyful and glad he
was, amidst his blows and wounds, that with his blood he had bought the
liberty of his Country. For he had learned of Divines, with whom he had
consulted, that the: Tyrant might justly be killed.


NOVICE. Is it lawful to kill the Tyrant with poison, or mortiferous herbs?


IESVITE. We Mariana de Reg lib. 1. cap. 7. per totum.
know that it has been often done, nor are we to think, that any man, which
is assured to kill him, neglecting a mean so fairly offered to dispatch him,
will stay the advice of Divines, and rather make use of steel, considering the
danger that way is less, the hope of impunity more, and the public joy much
increased, the enemy being killed, and the author and architect of the public
liberty preserved.


NOVICE. The question is not of that which men would do, but of that which may
be justly done.


IESVITE. There be arguments on either side: For what difference is there,
whether thou killest him with poison or with steel? There be many examples
both ancient and modern of enemies killed this way. Indeed it is a difficult
thing to poison a Prince, but if a fit occasion present it self, who is there,
so sharp-witted, or clear-sighted, that can show any difference between the
one and the other death? I do not deny but that these arguments are of great
force, howbeit I deny that one may justly kill him with poison, whom, we have
said, may be killed by fraud.


NOVICE. Why so?


IESVITE. Because Christians have thought it to be an inhumane thing in
presenting men with poison, either in meat or drink, to make them the
instruments of their own death, as if one should constrain them to stab
themselves with their own hands.


NOVICE. Is there no way to remedy this, and in the mean time to make use of
poison without scruple of conscience?


IESVITE. There is. And this is the moderation which I would bring unto it.
That he, whom we would have killed, be not constrained to be the instrument
himself of sending down the poison into his own bowels, but that it be
applied outwardly by another, without the help of him that is to be killed.
Which may be done when the force of the poison is so great, that the robe, or
seat whereupon one sits being infected with it, has the power to kill him;
which I have read has been used by some Moore Kings toward other Princes.


NOVICE. I find my self sufficiently instructed herein. But calling to mind
that which you decided heretofore, How the Pope may constrain Kings by
excommunication to punish Heretics and Schismatics, I would pray you to tell
me, whether it be lawful for a King to permit diversity of religions in a
Kingdom, and if he has permitted or tolerated it, whether he ought to
continue it?


IESVITE. The Commonwealth cannot subsist, where the Citizens do not agree in
religion. In one house the Wife does never agree with a concubine, and in a
City or Province it is not well done to tolerate a false religion with the
true. For to what end serves this profane liberty whereby the people are
brought to shake off all fear? unless it be, that religion being violated,
the order of Priesthood abased, and Churches spoiled, this fire gaining farther
and farther, comes at length to consume even the very Nobility it self.


NOVICE. What must be done then?


IESVITE. Princes Mariana lib. 1. cap. 2. de Reg. in^^it.
are to be admonished and exhorted, That if they desire to have their affairs
prosper, they must repress heresy at the beginning, and stifle the growing
Fury in the cradle, to the end they may not too late repent their passed
negligence: Let the Prince fear, lest after the course of this life he be not
condemned as culpable of for saking his charge, and so consequently of a most
grievous crime, and infinite mischiefs; and that he be not very justly
punished for neglecting the public and particular good.


NOVICE. This being well urged to Catholic Princes, they whom we hold for
Heretics, cannot think themselves safe in a kingdom, whose Prince makes
account of such admonitions.


IESVITE. I will tell thee in few words what father Theol Schol. part. 2. Tom.
2. Tract. 1. cap. 16* q. 4.
Becan teaches hereupon. First, that liberty of Religion is altogether
unlawful and repugnant to the Law of God. Secondly, that it is pernicious to
the Commonwealth. Thirdly, that the Prince ought not to command, approve, or
introduce it, but rather by all means, if commodiously it may be done, impeach
and extirpe it. Fourthly, if commodiously it cannot be done, but with great
prejudice to the Commonwealth, he may tolerate it for a time. Lastly, that if
it be so tolerated, and that thereupon an accord be made, he must observe it.


NOVICE. Does not this last clause make well for those, who have their Kings
perpetual and irreuocable Edicts for it?


IESVITE. First of all we say that this toleration ought not to be but for a
time. Secondly, that though in words we give the lie to such as charge us for
saying, that faith is not to be kept with heretics: yet in effect we have
always reserved two means for Catholic Princes and Commonwealths to break
with them: because whatsoever they do, or promise, we say, that Becanus vbi
supra. q. 6.
they do not grant* security unto Heretics, but only against unjust violence,
always excepting justice, and the execution of right: and by this mean was
John Hus and his companion caught: for whatsoever safe conduct was given him
against unjust violence, that made nothing to save him from the fire, which he
had justly merited. The other mean is, that we let Princes know, Becan Ibid.
How when there are two Princes, whose judgments and tribunals are different,
and that the one is inferior to the other; the inferior, whatsoever he
promises, cannot hinder the superior from the execution of his jurisdiction,
and therefore he is quit of his promise, because he has done all that he can.
Now the Pope being the superior of all Christian Princes principally, he may,
notwithstanding any promise of theirs, exercise his jurisdiction in their
Kingdoms. And forasmuch Suarez Desen. fid. lib 4* cap. 22.
as Christian kings not only as touching their persons, but also as touching
their Royal power; not only as men, but also as Kings, are under his power.
It is then in him to direct them in the use of their power, and to command,
forbid, or hinder them in any thing which he shall see convenient for the
spiritual good of the Church. And so, he may amend and correct the civil
laws, when they are not agreeable to good manners, make others, or command
Princes to revoke and reform them. This being, there is no Edict can hold
good, when opportunity serves, and that Kings will obey the Pope, as they ought.


NOVICE. It were an hard thing to draw this obedience from some any Kings, that
have such several and diverse interests, whereby they are governed in these
matters; wherefore me thinks it were good for that purpose, there were one
only King, which might be the Superior of all the rest of the whole world, as
there is one Pope above all Bishops. For those two agreeing, we should have a
dainty harmony, though not very pleasing to the ears of the Heretics.


IESVITE. Cardinal Bellarmine has thus spoken of it, Bellar. de Pont. lib. 1.
cap. 9.
Me thinks it were very expedient, if it could be effected without injustice
and wars, that all Provinces of the world were governed by one sovereign
King in politic matters: especially if this sovereign Monarch had under him,
not Deputies and Viceroys, but* true princes, as the Pope has under him* true
Bishops. We travel with all our power to attain hereunto.


NOVICE. If this could once be brought about, to whom should we give our voices
for that universal Monarchy?


IESVITE. Nay, now thou touchest a shrewd point I tell thee, and which is not
fit to be diuulged, for fear lest they, which shall see themselves excluded,
do mainly oppose it; and therefore it must be kept secret, as a most reserved
article. Howbeit for thine own particular content, read the Preface of our
good friend Henry Doerhangk professor of the Spanish, Italian, and French
Tongues at Cullen, upon his Spanish Grammar, which will teach thee what hope
thou art to have in the matter: Look here is the Book printed by Peter
Brachel, 1614. Read this clause.


NOVICE. All the people of the earth do see that the Name of God is called
upon by the Spaniards, that is to say, that God is in the midst of them, and
is their protector, which is the reason why all men fear and tremble under
them. And I doubt not, if they continue so constant and zealous to amplify and
defend true Religion and piety, to observe both divine and humane Laws so
strictly, and to abstain from the most enormous sins, but that by the
blessing of God they shall possess the Monarchy of the whole world, and
subject all countries, people and nations under the most sweet and glorious
yoke of Christ, and then shall they accomplish that which our Lord and Savior
said, And there shall be but one shepherd, and but one fold.


IESVITE. This is a mystery not to be published till the event appear, for
which we labor so much. I have many others besides to impart unto thee; but
that shall be at another time: for now thou have enough to employ thy
meditation upon yet a good while, that so thou may be made capable of the
practice of these good instructions.


NOVICE. I thank you, good Father: now I find indeed that Father Deza did
not mock, when in his Sermon he said, that our Father Ignatius was that Angel,
of whom S. John speaks in the Apocalypse, chap. 10. verse. 1. And I saw a
mighty Angel come down from heaven, clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow upon
his head, and his face was as the Sun, and his feet as pillars of fire, etc.
For, by that which is said, how he was clothed with a cloud, is meant, that he
covered his high and generous enterprises and designs: which also represents
the government of our Society, that manifest their effects by concealing the
rules and manner thereof. And as in times past, a cloud covered the tabernacle
of the Congregation, and the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle, Exodus 40.
34. So God, who has built this Tabernacle of ours here upon earth, to the end
so holy a thing might be respected as it deserves, has ordained that its
manner of government should be so secret, as no man should be able to pierce
into it. Lo, that which is meant by, amictum nube. I shall never forget this
dainty Allegory, which will teach me to observe secrecy, especially in
Confessions, though it should concern the lives of Kings, whatsoever the
Heretics say of that same sentence of Father Binet. How it were better all
kings should perish, then that the seal of Confession should be violated. And
that which our father Apol. pro Garneto cap. 13.
Eudaemono-Iohannes teaches, How there can be no mischief so great, for the
avoiding whereof a Confession is to be disclosed. In some case, says De
paenit. disp. 33. Sect. 1.
Suarez, it is not lawful, no not for any end, were it even to preserve a whole
State from a great temporal or spiritual mischief. In like manner Cardinal
Tolet, The obligation of the seal is so great, that for no cause, no not for
to save his own life, nor for the safety of the whole State, may the Confessor
reveal the confession of the penitent. lib. 3. cap. 16. Inst. Sacer.


IESVITE. This I assure thee is a very good instruction, my Son, and of great
importance: But because it may happen sometimes that thou may be called
before a Judge, or a Tyrant, who may demand of thee, whether thou know any
thing of that which thou have heard in Confession, in which case thou may
boldly answer without lying, that thou know nothing, because his demand is
unjust, and that to such a demand answer must be made, not to that which is
demanded, but to that which ought to be demanded. And then again, thou
know it as God, not as man. But if he should press thee further, and demand
of thee formally if thou have heard it in confession, then thou can not say
thou have not heard it, for so thou should lie: neither art thou likewise to
answer that thou will not tell, nor to reprehend him that makes thee that
demand, for thereby the Confession may come to be suspected. What shall thou
do then? Thou must deny that thou have heard it in confession, but meaning in
thy mind, for to tell you, or ever to speak of it: By which means thou may
escape. This is the doctrine of Equivocations and Reseruations, whereof another
day I will make thee a more ample discourse. Only I will advertise thee,
according to father Vasq. in 3. part. Thom. Tom. 4. Quaest. 93. art. 4.
Vasquez, from whom I have drawn most of that aforesaid, how thou art not to
be abashed if thou art told, that which indeed is true, namely that none of the
ancient Doctors ever thought of this answer, upon occasion of such
difficulties, and that they all believed, that if the matter be denied, either
before a Judge, or any other body, it is a lie: and they never found out any
other mean but not to answer at all: which is no marvel, because in those
times this doctrine was not known, but is come to light since by continual
disputations.


NOVICE. I will not fail to make use of this instruction for the concealment
of Consessions.


IESVITE. Thou may also make use of it in other things* and teach it unto
others, according as father Lib 4. de inst. Sa^er. cap. 21.
Tolet decideth it. It is lawful sometimes to use Equivocations, and deceive him
that hears you; not always, but when the Judge calls you to swear
contrary to justice, then it is lawful for you to swear according to your
own meaning, against that of the Judge: As if he should ask you, did you that?
you may answer* I did it not, meaning to your self, for to tell you, or at that
time, or some such thing. And if the husband asks his wife whether she have
committed adultery, she may answer, that she has not, although she has,
meaning to reveal it unto him. If any one be constrained to swear that he
will take such a woman to wife, he may swear he will, meaning to himself, if
afterward he thinks good so to do. In like manner he that is in the hands
of thieves, or he that is unjustly detained, may promise money, but meaning to
himself, that he will pay it, if it pleases him; or promise to return again
if he be let go, and yet not perform though he have sworn it, if first he
have used equivocation.


NOVICE. I will endeavor to make a commodious use of these good precepts, and as
a precious treasure will keep what you have taught me, attending till you
think me capable of the rest, at such time as you shall see how I have
profited in this, wherein you have instructed me already, upon which I will go
and meditate very diligently.


IESVITE. Do so, and giving up thy self wholly to Father Ignatius, devoutly
pray him, Gaspar Sanc. Epist. dedic* ad Ignat. Loyol. Comment. in Esayam.
That being the least of his, and the most unworthy of those which are the
companions of Jesus in this religious warfare, he will be pleased to embrace,
entertain, and assist thee, and that also he will often commend thee to Jesus
thy head, and standardbearer, under whose Colors thou fightest, and with who^
he has continual familiarity and communication.


NOVICE. I humbly thank you for this advertisement, good Father, and so God be
with you.


FINIS.

