CERTAIN SERMONS PREACHED upon several occasions.

viz. The Way to Prosper. The Way to be Content. The Way to Well-doing. A
Summer Sermon. A Winter Sermon. Unknown Kindness. The Poor man's Hope.


By John Gore Rector of Wenden-lofts in ESSEX.

Printed at London by T. Cotes, for Thomas Alchorne, (...) the Green Dragon in
Paul's Church yard.

1636.

The way to prosper.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St. PAVLS CROSS ON Sunday the 27. day of May, being
Trinity SUNDAY.

By JOHN GORE Rector of VVenden-lofts in ESSEX.

The third Edition.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign of the Greene-Dragon Anno Dom. 1636.

REcensui hunc Librum, cui Titulus est [A Sermon preached at S. Paul's Cross on
Trinity Sunday,] und cum Epistola nuncupatoria ad dignissimum virum Iohannem
Mede, Militem, etc. qui quidem liber continet septem folia, in quibus nihil
reperio bonis moribus, aut sanae doctrinae contrarium, quo minus cum utilitate
imprimatur, modo intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Guilielmus Bray, Episcopo Londinensi Capellanus domesticus.
Ex aedibus Fulhamiensibus, Iunii 6. 1632.
To the Right Worshipful Sr JOHN MEDE KNIGHT, High-Sheriffe for the County of
ESSEX; My bountiful and uncorrupted Patron.
Right Worshipful,
MY Talent is little, but my love is great; were J able to express it in a
greater measure, or in an higher nature, you should be sure to find it; but J
must say with that Father, (...), etc. All that poor Ministers have to requite
their friends withal is Books and Prayers; Accept therefore I beseech you,
this weak Sermon (not worth the name of a Book) as a pledge of my humble
thankfulness: and for my prayers to God on the behalf of your self, your
good Lady, and your loving Children and Family, they shall be never wanting from

Your poor devoted Chaplain, JOHN GORE.

A SERMON Preached at S. Pauls-Crosse on Trinity Sunday. 1632.
2 CHRONICLES. 26. 5. So long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper.
THese words contain the prosperous and succesfull eestate of King Vzziah,
during all the time that he served and sought the Lord; but as soon as ever
he fell foul with his God, he fell down from his happiness, and his
prosperity went away with his piety: just as you see your comets and Meteors
that hang in the air, so long as they keep aloft in the firmament of heaven
they glister and shin, and make a glorious celestial luster in the eyes of all
beholders, but if once they decline from that pitch and fall down to the earth
(as many times they do) they vanish, and dis-appeare, and come to nothing.
Such is the case betwixt a man and his God; as long as a man holds in good
terms with God, and has his conversation in heaven, and sets his affections
upon things above, so long God will cast his favor upon him, and he shall
shine as a light in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation; but if once
he decline from that pitch, and fall down from a godly conversation, into any
earthly, base, ungodly disposition, it is a venture but his prosperity will
vanish away, and his latter end prove worse than his beginning. Here then is a
worthy president for all that do desire to prosper; as I suppose it is every
man's desire so to do, as one said, Beatus vult homo esse, etiam non sic
vivendo ut possit esse; Every man would be blessed, though he take a course to
be cursed, every man would go to heaven, though he run the way that leads
directly to hell; so every man would prosper, though he take a course to
perish; but if a man does desire true prosperity, that God indeed should
prosper him, and give a blessing to all that belongs unto him, let him take the
course that Vzziah sometime did, let him seek the Lord, and God will make him
to prosper. So long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper.

In which words are two general things to be observed;

1. The ground and foundation of true prosperity.

2. The bounds and limitation of it.

First, the ground and foundation of true prosperity, and that is this; It must
be built and raised upon Religion and Piety, God must be sought unto, ere true
prosperity can be attained to (He sought the Lord, and God made him to prosper.)

Secondly, the bounds and limitation of prosperity, how far it reaches, and
how long it lasts, and that is, only during the time that he serves and
seeks the Lord, [So long as he sought the Lord, so long (and no longer) God
made him to prosper.]

In the first observe two particulars, Man's duty, and Gods mercy; First, man's
duty to seek God; Secondly, Gods mercy to prosper them that seek him. Now
because the whole hope of our prosperity, and Gods success, depends only
upon our piety in seeking of God, I will therefore branch it out into four
circumstances, which like the four Rivers of Eden, shall (I trust) water this
Garden-plot of God, and make your souls prosper the better.

1. What it is to seek God.

2. How, and in what manner we must seek him.

3. When, or what time.

4. Where, or in what place we must seek him; I mean so, as that we may
prosper by seeking him, for that is the basis, the groundwork of my whole
Sermon, and shall (by Gods assistance) be intermingled, and interwoven into
every point.

First, what it is to seek God, so as a man may prosper by seeking him. To
seek God is nothing else but to seek to please God, to seek to get into
favor with God, to seek to get Gods good will; as the Sidonians did with
Herod, Act. 12. 20. when they heard that Herod was displeased with them, and
intended to make war upon them, they made friendship with Blastus the Kings
Chamberlain, and sought by all means possible to get into favor with him
again; and why? Because (said they) our lands are nourished by the lands of
the King. This is our case, our lands, our lives, and all that we have are
nourished and sustained by the King of heaven; and therefore when we know that
he is displeased with us, as justly he may (for as David says) We provoke
him every day, then let us do as they did, as they made friendship with
Blastus, so let us make friendship with Jesus Christ, and desire him to help
us into Gods favor: And this is that we call the seeking of God. Now this
phraise of seeking God, implies that we are at a loss in this behalf; and
indeed so we are; we have all of us lost the favor of God by our sins, and
except we seek to regaine and recover it by our prayers and repentance, we
must never look to prosper. Not prosper, may some say? Why, who prosper more
many times than they that have least care, and make least conscience to serve
and seek the Lord, they that live altogether by usury and oppression, by
bribery and extortion, by fraud and ill dealing, that have not God in all their
thoughts, who prosper more than they? I answer to that, and I hope I shall make
it appear, that a man that seeks not God may thrive in the world, grow rich,
and gather goods, and yet not prosper neither. Wealth is one thing, prosperity
another. A man never truly prospers till he come to have Gaius his
prosperity, whereof you shall read in the third Epistle of S. John, verse. 2. I
wish above all things that thou may prosper, even as thy soul prospers.

When a man's soul does prosper in grace and goodness inwardly, together as
his estate does prosper in wealth and substance outwardly, that, and none but
that is true prosperity. Again, many times it falls out so, and a man in
himself shall find it so, that his soul prospers best, when his estate
prospers worst. Many a man is like the Pine tree, of which they write, that if
the bark be peeled off, it will last a long time, else it rots: so God sees,
that many a man if he had his bark upon him, if he had the wealth of the
world about him, it would rot him, and make him worse, therefore God is feign
to bark him, and peele him, to keep him naked and bare, and poor, that his
soul may prosper the better.

Saint Augustine gives two reasons why it pleases God to withhold outward
prosperity from them that inwardly prosper, and to deny outward blessings to
them whom he has inwardly blessed with grace; first, lest wicked people should
think, ob has colendum Deum, that Gods servants did serve him only for these
things: as the Devil accused Job chap. 1. 10. Have thou not considered my
servant Job (says God) how upright he walks, and how carefully he serves me?
I cannot blame him (quoth Satan) that he serves thee, he does it (...), for
his own need, to serve his own turn, for thou make such an hedge about
him, and so fencest him in with thine invincible protection, that none of all
his enemies can make the least gap to break in upon him; do but put forth thy
hand (says the Devil) manum laesivam, (he means) thy punishing, thy
vindictive revenging hand, and touch him with that (as the Spider touches the
Be) touch him to torment him, and thou shall see Job will turn another leaf,
and in stead of blessing thee, will curse thee to thy face. Yea, do thou
think so (says God) do thou take him to do, I Will give thee leave, punish
him, afflict him, do any thing to him, spare but his life, and thou shall see
Job will serve me no less than he did before; and so it fell out. And the
same mind do all Gods faithful servants bear, prosper or not prosper, thrive
or not thrive, rewarded or not rewarded, all is one to them, they will and are
resolved to serve and seek the Lord. Secondly, Lest Gods servants should bear
a mercinary mind, and serve him only to make a gain of his service, and so
always be looking and lingering after temporal favors; this would turn
patientiam in avaritiam, Christian patience into carnal covetousness, and
make men carnally minded in their spiritual affairs: that were (...), (as the
Apostle speaks) an affection of dishonor, and would discover a kind of
baseness in Gods servants to seek him only for their own ends; therefore
God sees it best in some cases, to restrain prosperity from them that seek
him, and that, alto consilio, upon deep advice, and great reason, as you see;
First, to convince the world of their misopinion of Gods servants. Secondly, to
rectify the affection of them that serve him, that they may learn not to
linger after that which God in his wisdom sees good to hold them short of.

But for the prosperity of wicked and ungodly men (to return to that) of such
as seek not the Lord, but rather mingle their wealth with wickedness, and
mix their prosperity with blasphemy, that set their mouth against heaven and
say, as it is in Job, chap. 21. 15. Who is the Almighty that we should serve
him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto him? Such men as these,
the more outwardly happy they are; the more undoubtedly miserable; that which
we count the felicity and the happiness of such men, is indeed their ruin
and their bane, to thrive well by evil courses. You know what God did to
Hophni and Phineas, that were as wicked wretches as the earth could bear; God
let them alone, let them go on and prosper and domineere over the poor
people, sent them no Cross, nor disease, nor judgment to interrupt them, but
let them take their swinge in the very height of their rebellions; Why would
God suffer such flagitious villains to have their will without control? God
himself is pleased to give an account of it, 1 Samuel 2. 25. Because (says the
text) he would destroy them: this is the event and issue of a wicked man's
prosperity. I have seen the wicked in great prosperity (says David, Psalm. 37.
35.) flourishing like a green bay tree. Why like a green bay tree rather than
like a green oke-tree, or green apple tree? I will tell you what I think the
reason is; The bay tree (you know) is green all the winter* long, when
oke-trees, and apple trees, and all other far more profitable and fruitful
trees, do wither, decay, and shed their leaves, stand naked and bare, and look
as if they were rotten and dead; then does the bay tree flourish and looks as
fresh and as green as it were in the midst of the spring; when other trees
decay, that flourishes. So fares it with wicked men in such Winter-times of
the world as we had the last year, times of dearth and scarcity, times of want
and penury; when many a poor Christian is feign to fast and fare hard, and go
with many hungry meal to bed, then do you usurers, oppressors, corn*mongers,
and such others, those mercatores humanarum calamitatum (as Nazianzen calls
them) those that make merchandise of poor men's miseries, then do they
prosper, then do they thrive, then do they flourish like green bay-trees;
when others decay, then do they flourish, then is their spring, their
flourishing time. [They flourish like green bay trees.]

Well, but what follows in the next verse? After a while (says David) I
sought him, but he could not be found; as if he had said, I sought on earth in
his mansion, in his dewlling place, thence he was gone, there he was not to be
found* afterward I sought him in heaven, to see if I could find him there
among the Saints and blessed souls above, there he was not to be found: Where
was he then? Verily he was gone down, as is said of Judas, Act. 1. 25. (...),
gone down to his own place, gone down to hell, there David might have found
him, but there he sought him not. And this is the miserable end of a wicked
man's prosperity.

The consideration whereof may be a stay unto us against that great temptation
that troubled David and Jeremy, and still troubles them that are weak in
faith, to see the prosperity of wicked men, to see it go well with them that
be evil, and ill with them that do well. Do thou see an ungodly man laden
with wealth, honor and ease? do thou see an hypocrite and an evil liver
blessed as Esau was with the dew of heaven and the fatness of the earth; do
thou see a graceless ruffin, one that feasts without fear, drinks without
measure, swears without feeling, and lives without God; and yet his body
vigorous, his coffers plenteous, and his estate prosperous? in a word, do
thou see them prosper that seek not the Lord, but lie wallowing in that which
God abhors, and stand chargeable in their souls with that which separates and
divides betwixt man and his God? why, be not discomforted at it, be not
disquieted with it, do not fret thy self because of the ungodly, neither be
thou envious at evil doers; but consider the end of those men, that is the
Apostles expression, James 5. 11. You know the patience of Job and what end the
Lord made with him, though he cursed him at first, yet he doubled his blessing
upon him at last; so stay till you see what end God will make with these men:
surely O God (says David, Psalm. 73. 18.) Thou have set these men in slippery
places, thou castest them down into destruction: a man that stands in lubrico
in a slippery place, as on ice or glass, shall have much a-doe to keep
himself upright though no body touch him, but if one should come upon him
unawares and give him a sudden justle, or a sudden rush, he has no power in
the world to uphold himself, but must fall and that dangerously: and this is
the case of wicked wealthy men, they think they are (...), unmovable and
fastened on a rock that never shall be moved; but they are deceived; God that
knows their standing, tells us he has set themon slippery places, and it will
not be long ere God send some death, some judgment, some evil angel or other
to give them such a sudden justle, such a sudden rush, that without great mercy
on Gods part, and great repentance on their own part, they must fall
inevitably into the pit of hell. And this is the first point I desire to have
handled, namely, that the right way for a man to prosper indeed is to serve and
seek the Lord, whosoever prospers without seeking of God, his prosperity in
this world, shall be his ruin and perdition in the world to come.

Secondly, the manner how one that desires to prosper must seek the Lord, and
that is to be done two days: 1. Humiliter, 2. Veraciter;


Humbly and unfainedly, sorrowfully and sincerely.

First, Humiliter, as the blessed Virgin Mary told our Savior, Luke 2. 48. Thy
father and I have sought thee sorrowing. They that would find the Lord must
seek him sorrowing, with sad and heavy hearts, bewailing and bemoaning their
own miserable estate through sin before God, as it is said of the
Israelites, 1 Samuel 7. ^. When the Ark of God was departed from them, they
lamented after the Lord: the best and truest lamentation in the world is to
lament after the Lord, and a man has never so just a cause to lament as when
the Lord for sin is departed from him. We read in the story of Micha, Judge.
18. 24. that when the Soldiers had taken away Micha's gods, he ran crying
and weeping after them, as a man distracted and deprived of all his comfort;
the Soldiers hearing him, turned back and asked him, what he ailed: says
Micha, Ye have taken away my gods, and do ye ask me what I aile? can ye
blame a man that has lost his gods to be out of quiet? If Micha could find in
his heart to lament for the loss of a false god, a god of his own making, as
good gods as that lying at the back of the fire, warming a man or roasting of
meat, (as Esaias speaks) shall a Christian find in his heart to lose the true
God, the God of all comfort and consolation, and that by sin which is the
worst loss of all, and that not by any others taking away (as in Michas case)
but by his own act and wilful default, and not be grieved, nay not moved
a-whit; break none of his sleep, none of his wonted sports for it, as if he
reckoned God as good lost as found? God forbid. Certainly, he that can lament
for the loss of his goods, and cannot lament for the loss of his God, is
worthy to lose both his goods and his God for ever. God was angry with the
carnal Jews, Hos. 7. 14. because they howled upon him for corn and wine, but
did not cry unto him with their hearts; they howled because God had scanted
them in his mercy, but they never howled because they had scanted God in their
duty; they howled for want of means not for want of grace, which is the
greatest want of all: observe therefore what a despicable, contemptible term
God gives their prayers, he calls them ululatus, howlings, like the howlings of
a Dog, or a Wolf, which is a most harsh unpleasing note in the ear of a
man; such are the prayers of obstinate sinners in their extremity to God.

They howled unto me upon their beds, but they did not cry unto me with their
hearts: it is not the howling of the mouth that God regards, but it is the cry of
the heart that pierces heaven and enters into the ears of Almighty God: you
may see it in Moses, Exodus 14. 10. When the Israelites were straighted at the
red Sea; having the Sea before them, their enemies behind them, Rocks and Hills
of each side of them; the text says, The people cried, and made a doleful
howling and lamentation to the Lord, Moses held his peace; and see the issue:
Populus clamabat and non audiebatur, tacebat Moses and audiebatur, The people
cried and God heard not them; Moses held his peace and he was heard, Verse. 15.
Why do thou cry unto me (says God) when he uttered never a word, nor made
any noise that we can read of, only his heart cried, and that was it that God
listened unto: and therefore if any man find himself to be (...) of such a
hard and dry and brawny temper that he cannot cry with his eyes let him cry
with his heart, and it is enough. As it is said of our Savior, Heb. 4. 6. That
in the days of his flesh he offered prayers and supplications (...), with
strong cries and tears unto God, he did not only cry but he cried strongly,
he did even strain himself in this prayers with the greatest vehemence that
possibly he could: it is not a faint and feeble cry, but it is a strong and
hearty cry that wakens the Lord to listen to us, as the Disciples awaked our
Savior when he slept in the ship, Mat. 8. If a mother hear her child cry out
right, cry heartily and strongly, whatever she is a doing she will lay it
aside and run to still her child: God is more compassionate and tender over his
children than any earthly mother over hers; if he do but hear us cry
heartily, cry in good earnest, he has not the power to contain himself but
will arise and have mercy on us; that is the reason our prayers want success,
because they want heart, their blessing is according to their vigor. You will
say it were a good comfort for a man thus to cry and lament and make his moan
to God in this sad and sorrowful manner, if a man were but sure to prosper ever
the better: for that I refer you to an instance in Scripture, 1 Samuel 1. 9, 10.
In 1 Chro. 4. 9, 10. It is said of Iabez who was a man of sorrow, that he was
more honorable than all his brethren, God prospered him and blessed him more
than all the rest; how came that to pass? see ver. 10. And Iabez called on the
God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my
coast, and that thy hand might be with me, and that thou would keep me from
evil, that it may not grieve me, and (says the text) God granted him that
which he requested: that is, granted him prosperity, granted him a prosperous
and happy life; there is the fruit of a godly sorrow. A sorrowful man (as
Iabez was) when he prays in good earnest, that God will bless him indeed,
and be with him in all his ways, such an one shall be sure to prosper in his
suite, and shall undoubtedly receive either what he does ask or what he
should ask: he then that desires to prosper let him seek the Lord this way,
dolenter sorrowfully.

2 Veraciter, truly, sincerely, and with all his heart, Deuteronomy. 4. 29. If thou
seek the Lord thy God thou shall find him, if thou seek him with all thy
heart. He that would find God must seek him entirely, unfainedly, and not by
halves but with his whole heart, because God though he love cor contritum, a
broken heart, a heart rent and torn with grief and godly sorrow for sin,
yet he cannot abide cor divisum, a cloven heart, a heart parted and divided
within it self, which makes a man to be (as Saint James calls him) (...), a
double minded man; so we translate it, but the word signifies a man with two
souls, or with two minds; such a man must never look to prosper by his
seeking of God. I will give you an instance in one or two, 1 Chronicles. 10. the two
last verses, it is said, that Saul died for the sin that he sinned against
the Lord: what was that? one was for sparing Agag and the Amalekites cattle,
pretending devotion when he did it for gain; but the maine sin was this,
that he sought to the witch, and sought not to the Lord, therefore the Lord
slew him. Some man may say, did not Saul seek to the Lord? that he did, look
into 1 Samuel 28. 6. You shall see that Saul tried all ways to seek the Lord,
and the Lord would not be found of him nor answer him, neither by Dreams, nor
by Vrim, nor by Prophets: how then can this hold good, that Saul should die for
not seeking of God, when he sought him, and God would not answer him? the
bestanswer that I can give is this, Non videtur fieri quod non legitim^ fit,
that which is not done rightly and sincerely as it ought to be done is counted
as not done in the sight of God; Saul's seeking of God was counted as not
seeking of God, because he sought him not sincerely as he ought to seek him,
you may see the like in another kind, 2 Kin. 17. 32, 33. it is said the
Samaritan-Assyrians that mongrell brood, which were transplanted out of Assyria
into Samaria, that they feared the Lord and served their own gods also, and
the next verse. says, they feared not the Lord at all; how can these things
concur? one verse says, they did fear God, another says, they did not
fear him. Answ. Their fear of God is counted as no fear of God, because it
was no sincere fear of God: had they truly feared God they should never have
need to fear their own Idols, for he that truly fears God has his
blessing, that he shall need fear nothing else but God in this service of
God; as contrarily, he that fears not God has this curse, that God will give
him such a trembling heart that he shall fear every thing but God, idols and
devils and all, as those people did, and therefore was their fear of God
counted as no fear of God, because no sincere fear; as Saul's seeking is
counted as no seeking because it was no sincere seeking of God.

By this you see, that lip-labor is but lost labor, and lame prayers are but
lost prayers in the sight of God: the Apostle gives us a caveat, 2 Ioh. 8. to
take heed that we lose not the things we have wrought; a man were better lose
any thing that he has wrought, than lose his prayers for want of true
devotion: Labia dolosasi in sermonibus sint, saltem in orationibus non sint,
deceitful lips and a double tongue if they be found in our other speeches, let
them not be found in our prayers in any case (says S. Aug.) God forbid that a
Christian should double and dissemble with God and the world in his devotions;
he that does so let him never look to prosper* Solomon speaks it peremptorily,
Prove. 28. 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper: that is, as we may
apply it to our purpose, he that makes Religion a cloak to cover and color
his deceit, he that makes devotion a veil to hide his sins, such an one
shall never prosper; he therefore that desires prosperity, let him seek the
Lord veraciter sincerely.

Thirdly, the time when we must seek God, and that is to be considered in two
Circumstances, Generally, and Particularly.


First, Generally; He that desires to prosper must seek God at all times. As
we say, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi; so no time comes amiss to God, morning or
evening, midday or midnight, all times are alike for that matter, a man can
never come unseasonably with a suite to God, Exodus 18. Moses sat from morning
till night to hear the causes of the people, but he grew weary of it, and was
feign to give it over; but there is one above, Jesus Christ the righteous that
sits continually (...), Heb. 1, on the right hand of Majesty on high to hear
the causes and complaints of his poor people and to receive and present our
petitions to the divine Majesty and is never weary of it, come when we will he
is at leisure to hear us. It is a pretty observation that S. Augustine makes
out of the parable proposed by our Savior, Luke 11. where he that knocked at
midnight to borrow bread of his neighbor, found all the whole family asleep,
only the master of the house was awake, and he answered, and opened, and gave
him that he craved, though it was at an unseasonable time; Nullus de
janitoribus respondit, none of all the porters, none of all the servants, none
of all the children made him any answer, they were all asleep, only the
master was awake, and heard him when he called. Just so it fares with us when
we knock and call at the door of heaven for any mercy, none of all the
Prophets nor Apostles, none of all the blessed Saints departed make us any
answer; alas, they hear us not, they sleep in peace and are at rest from
their labors, only God Almighty, who is the Master and Maker of that blessed
family, he, and only he does hear and answer, at what time soever we cry
unto him; He that keeps Israel neither slumbreth nor sleeps, call when we
will God is always awake to hear and help: No time unseasonable to seek God.

Secondly, but more particularly, for one that desires to prosper, there is a
choice time and season to seek the Lord above all the rest, and that is early
in the morning. It Is a pretty conjecture that the Hebrews make upon that
saying of the Angel to Jacob, Genesis 32. 26. Let me go for the morning
appears. I take it the true reason was, because Jacob should not be too
curious in looking and gazing upon that humane shape, wherein this great Angel
Christ appeared; for he it was that wrastled with Jacob, but their conceit is,
that the Angel which wrastled with Jacob all night, desired to depart when the
morning appeared, because he was now to go to the rest of the blessed company
and quire of Angels, to sing their morning-hymne unto God. It Is but a
conjecture, but we may apply it thus; We all hope to be (...), like the Angels
in heaven, let us be like them on earth too, and how ever we are employed at
other times, when the morning appears let us hasten to God, and ask him
blessing every morning, as our children do us, and no doubt but God will
bless us the better all the day after. Job 8. 5, 6. If thou will seek unto
God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty, surely now he will
awake for thee, and make thy habitation prosperous. I make no doubt but a many
of you are early risers, that are up before the morning watch, I say, before
the morning-watch, (i) before the day star or the Sun appear: and it is
possible for a man to be early up and never the near, but he that rises
early to pray and seek the Lord, shall be sure not to lose his labor, for he
shall prosper the better all the day, If thou will seek the Lord, etc. Yea,
but there is a place of Scripture that seems to cross and contradict it, Prove.
1. 28. They shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. Is the Scripture
contrary to it self? Does God say in one place, If ye seek me early ye shall
find me; and in another place, Though you seek me early you shall not find
me? How shall we know which to believe, which to build upon? I answer,

There Is a twofold early, Gods early, and man's early; Gods early is to seek
him in the first place, Ante omnia adoremus Deum (was the old rule) before we
eat or drink, before we work or play, before we do any thing, do that
first; first seek the kingdom of God, and that is Gods early. Man's early is at
the beginning of trouble, the beginning of sickness, the beginning of sorrow,
and then the wickedst wretch upon earth will seek the Lord, but then perhaps
he shall not find him; he that will not seek him in peace, shall hardly
find him in trouble; he that will not seek him in health, shall not easily
find him in sickness, yea, though he seek him early, at the very first, at
the very beginning of it, as Ioab fled to the Altar in his perplexity, but it
saved not his life because he never came at it in his prosperity to offer upon
it. So that you see, if we take man's early to seek God, we may chance to
miss him; but if we take Gods early, we shall be sure to find him.

You then that desire to prosper, remember Gods early; the first thing you do
in the morning, let it be seek God, never think your selves dressed till that
be done, let thy souls have a morning draught as well as thy body, I mean a
morning prayer to fence it against the infectious air of the world: Solomon
gives the reason, Prove. 27. 1. For who can tell what a day may bring forth?
It Is a Metaphor taken from a womb, when a woman is in travel, who can tell
what she will bring forth till she be delivered, may be a son, may be a
daughter, may be a monster; so when the womb of the morning is in travel, who
can tell what a day may bring forth, may be albus, may be ater dies, may be a
white, a happy, a comfortable day; may be a black, a dismal, a doleful day;
we do not know what a day may bring forth, whether judgment or mercy,
whether good or bad events (therefore to prevent the worst, it is good to make
sure work for our own safety, namely to seek the Lord in the morning and
then come what will come, all shall be for the best, God will turn it all to
good Omnia cooperantur, etc. Romans 8. All things work together for good to them
that love God.

He then that would be prosperous and speed well, let him be religious and pray
well, for he that prays well can never speed amiss: and therefore if you see
one that follows his calling, and is not followed with Gods blessing, it may
justly be suspected, that such a one restrains prayer from Almighty God, as
Eliphaz told Job in another case, Job 15. 4. Now it is just with God to
restrain prosperity from them that restrain their prayers from him, it is just
with God to withhold his blessing from those that have not the care nor the
grace to ask it. So much for the time and order of our seeking of the Lord.

Fourthly, where, or in what place we must seek God. Generally, we are to
seek him every where, for God is omni-present, in all places to be found of
them that seek him faithfully; as David says; Psalm 139. 3. Thou art about
my bed, and about my paths, and spiest out all my ways. We little think when
we lie down in our beds as a dog lies down in a kennell, without any
prayer, any ejaculation, any good motion to Godward, we little think that God
is so near us that he is about our beds, and does observare excubias, watch
our watchings, and observe our lying down, and our rising up.

Again, when we walk in Circuitus, walk the Devils round from one sin to
another, from one vanity to another, from one ill company to another, we little
think that God is about our paths, and spieth out all our ways: but whether
we think it or no, so it is for certain; and therefore to apply it the right
way; In what place soever we seek God, in bed or up, within door or without,
in the field or in the road, we shall be sure to find him to our comfort and
protection. But more especially, there is a proper peculiar place appointed for
Christians to seek the Lord in, and that is the Church of God, the Sanctuary
or house of prayer, there is his dwelling place, and thither must we resort to
seek him. We have an express law for it, Deuteronomy 12. 5. In that place which the
Lord your God shall choose to put his name in, in that his habitation shall ye
seek unto him. Neither was this a law judicial, or ceremonial, that bound
the Jew only for a time, but moral and perpetual, that binds the Christian
for ever, to seek the Lord where he is to be found, (i) in his Sanctuary; they
that refuse to come there, may justly be termed (as Esau was) profane persons,
as being procul ^ fano, far from the Sanctuary, and consequently out of Gods
protection; for they that are thus out of the one, are out of the other also.

As S. Austin notes out of the parable, Luke 10. 30. concerning the man that
fell among thieves, and was wounded and left half dead, it is noted of him that
he was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho; from the Church I warrant you:
Jerusalem was the Church of God, the holy City; Jericho was a cursed place,
branded with an ancient curse since the days of Joshua, and thither lay his
journey: whereupon Saint Austin notes, Si non descendisset, fortasse in
latrones non incidisset, had he not been descending and going downward from
God and from his Church, peradventure he had not fallen into the hands of
thieves. God would have protected him, the Lord would have safe guarded and
defended him, that no such evil should have betided him; but because he was
going from the Church to a cursed place, and like enough about a naughty
business; therefore God gave him over, and he fell into the hands of thieves.
As many therefore as desire Gods protection and blessing, let them resort to
the Church to serve and seek the Lord.

You will say, it were a good comfort for a man so to do, if he were but sure
to prosper ever the better; but we see many that frequent the Church duly and
daily, that yet prosper never the more.

Answ. If it be so, then surely it is to be feared, that such came not to Church
with a true intent to seek God, but either for no^^lty and fashion sake, or
for company to do as others do, or for some other sinister respect, they do
not make it their errand, their aim, and the drift of their souls to seek
God; if they did, God would surely prosper them in one kind or other: you know
the place, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee.
That love what? that love Jerusalem, that love the Church of God, that love the
word of God, that love the Ministers of God, that love the ordinances of God,
they shall prosper (says David, Psalm. 122. 6, 9.) If they do not prosper
outwardly, they shall prosper inwardly, if they do not prosper in goods, they
shall prosper in grace, and that is the better prosperity by far. I say the
better, and I will make it good out of Heb. 8. 6. Jesus Christ is the mediator
of a better covenant, established upon better promises. The words at the first
sight implie, that the covenant of the Gospel is a better covenant than the
covenant of the law: and again, that the promises of the Gospel are better
promises than the promises of the Law: Now if you look into the old Testament,
you shall find that the promises of the Law were most of them, and the maine
of them, temporal promises, promises of outward prosperity, that if they kept
the commandments, and sought the Lord, they should dwell in the good land, the
land that flowed with milk and honey, they should have corn, and wine, and
oil in abundance, they should lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as
the flints of the river, Job 22. 24. these and the like were the promises of
the Law. Now look into the New Testament, and you shall find the promises of
the Gospel are clean of another nature, most of them spiritual promises,
promises of the pardon of sins, the peace of conscience, the joy in the Holy
Ghost, and such like: and these, says the Apostle, are (...), better promises
than the other.

Hence I gather, that he that in these days seeks the face of God* in his
Church, and is of such a conversation as becomes the Gospel, if he have not
temporal prosperity, he shall have that that is better for him, he shall have
the pardon of his sins, the favor of his God, the comfort of his conscience,
and the salvation of his soul, which are things of greater worth than all the
outward happiness under heaven, and will be a secret stay and comfort to the
soul, when all that the earth affords will not yield a man one drop of true
refreshing.

You know that the Prisoners in the Tower, Noblemen, and great men, and such
others, they are in worse estate and condition than the poorest Waterbearer in
the City: for why? though they have good diet, good lodging, good attendance,
fine rooms, soft beds, curious wal^es, etc. yet they are sub ira, they are
under the wrath and displeasure of the King, and look every day when they
shall be called out to arraignment, to have sentence pass against them, and
execution to be done upon them: Such is the case of a wicked wealthy man, whose
sins are unpardoned, and whose conscience is unpurged, and whose soul is
unreconciled to God, he is in worse estate and condition than the poorest of
Gods servants that fare with bread and water: for why? though he have great
friends, great means, and a great estate, yet he is, sub ira under the wrath
and displeasure of God, and wherever he goes, the black clouds of Gods
heavy vengeance hang over his head, ready upon every provocation to drop down
upon him. No marvel then that Solomon says. The righteous man is more
excellent than his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. he does not deny but a righteous
man may be poorer than his neighbor, yet he says, he is more excellent,
because his excellency is intrinsecall, (omnis decor ab intus) the others is
but outward and adventitious. Now he that shall count himself more excellent
than his neighbor, because he excels him in outward things, in wealth and
worldly goods, it is but (as one well compares it) as if a mud-wall that the
Sun shines upon, should boast it self against a wall of marble that stands
in the shadow.

What says a Father, An ideo Angelus pauper, quia non habet jumenta? Shall we
count an Angel to be poor because he has not herds, and flocks, and droves
of cattle, as worldly misers have? No, their riches are in another kind. So
shall we count a Christian poor and base because he wants the wealth of the
world? No, they are rich in another kind, what he wants outwardly, he has it
inwardly, what he wants in means, he has in grace, though he be not rich in
the purse, he is rich in the faith; though he have not silver and gold, he
has that which is better than either, he has the precious Pearl of Gods
grace, which is of more value to enrich the soul, than all the gold and silver
in the world.

The Gospel (you know) compares grace to Pearls; now Pearls are of no value to
dunghill-Cocks; but to them that know the worth of them, they are the only
riches in the world; and the rather because,

First, they are durable riches, no fire can consume them, no moth can eat
them, no rust take hold of them.

Secondly, they are portable riches: a man that has a thousand pound in
Pearls, may carry them all about him, and never clog him, which he could not
do if his wealth lay in other things. So here, to one that has no grace, to a
godless graceless man, the Pearls of Gods grace is of no value; but to one
that knows how to prize it, it exceeds all worldly wealth, as far as gold
exceeds dirt, and Pearls exceed pebbles; and the rather, because, first, it is
durable, it will never decay, nor be utterly lost. Secondly, it is portable, it
will accompany a man, wheresoever he goes, he shall carry it with him, (...),
the friend of his bosom, the companion of his study, and a continual
comforter in all adversity; yea, when death it self comes to divest and strip
him of all other riches, no death can strip him of that, it is a grace that
shall never leave him till it bring him to glory.

Mistake me not (I beseech you) I do not speak this to any man's prejudice, as
if riches and Religion, as if goods and grace were (...), incompatible and
could not consist nor stand together; but as our Savior said to the woman,
Luke 11. 27. when she cried out, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the
paps that gave thee suck: our Savior denied not that, for that was true also
and undeniable, but answered her by a corrective comparison, yea rather blessed
are they that hear the word of God and keep it: so it is a great blessing of
God to have the wealth of the world and to prosper outwardly; but it is as
greater blessing to have the grace of the Spirit and to prosper inwardly. In
regard whereof David having prayed for many temporal blessings in the behalf
of his people, Psalm. 144. 12. 13, 14. that their sons might be tall and
hardy, and their daughters fair, their oxen strong to labor, their sheep
fertile and fruitful, that there might be no commotion nor complaining in
their streets; at length windeth up all with this Epiphonema or Conclusion,
Blessed be the people that are in such a case; but on the neck of it he comes
in with an Epanorthoma or Correction of his former speech, eating in and
revoking his words, as if he had spoken otherwise than well, yea rather (says
he) Blessed are the people that have the Lord for their God; as if he had said;
that indeed is a blessing in some kind, but it is nothing to this blessedness,
for that is but external, this is internal; that is but temporal, this
eternal. He then that desires to prosper, whether in grace, or in goods or in
both, let him thus do; frequent the house of God, seek the face of God,
reverence the ministry of the word, yield thy self to be wrought upon by the
powerful Gospel of Jesus Christ, and this (if any thing) will make thee to
prosper.

2 Thus you have heard the first point handled with the several circumstances
of it, touching man's duty, To seek God: the next is Gods mercy, To prosper
them that seek him.

God made him to prosper. God is the Author of all prosperity; as David
speaks of promotion, it comes neither from the East, nor from the West, from
the North, nor from the South, but it comes from God; so does this. It is
observeable that when Isaac blessed Jacob Genesis 27. 28. thus he said; God give
thee of the dew of heaven and the fatnes of the earth, and plenty of corn and
wine; after when he came to bless Esau, he gives him in a manner the very same
blessing, Verse. 39. Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth and
the dew of heaven from above; but no mention is made of God in Esau's blessing
as was in Jacobs. Doubtless this was a presage that Jacobs posterity, all true
^sraelites, should depend upon God for those temporal blessings, and
acknowledge themselves beholding to God for their outward prosperity; and so
should not Esau's race, I mean the men of this world, of whom David says,
Psalm. 17. 14. They have their bellies filled with hid treasure; for it is
absconditum, it is hid to them, who it is that feeds and fills their bellies,
namely, God; they know him not, neither do they acknowledge his gifts: but we
know him and are bound in duty and conscience to acknowledge that we have
nothing but what we have received; no food to nourish us, nor means to
maintain us, nor hopes nor helps to prefer and prosper us, but what must
come from God: Non nobis Domine, non nobis, not unto us Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy name give the praise: mark the ingemination; the Prophet teaches us
to pray twice against our own praise, we are so apt to praise our selves, so
ready to glory in our own prosperity; but let me advise you, you that find
that the world does favor you, and prosperity begins to come upon you, whom
should you thank for it? not thank your selves, but thank your God; it is he
that makes you to prosper.

Observe again, that it is not barely said, God prospered him, but God made
him to prosper (as it were) in despite of all those that sought and wished his
undoing. As it is said in another case, Mat. 5. 45. God makes the Sun to
shine upon the good and upon the bad; he makes the rain to fall upon the just
and the unjust; it is not said, he suffers it, but he makes it; (...), facit
exoriri; no doubt there is many a one in the world that is such a Lueifuga, a
hater of light and lover of darkness, whose deeds are so evil that the very
Sun in the heavens, is even loath to cast his beams and shine upon him; and
there is many a plot of ground that is purchased, and possessed by so wicked an
owner, that the very clouds of heaven are loath and unwilling to drop their
fatness upon it, but that God as it were makes them do it: Hence we see that
God has the disposing of all these temporal blessings; if the Lord undertake
to make a man, all the world shall not mar him; we may see it in Moses, Exodus
7. 1. Pharaoh did what he could to mar Moses and to expose him to ruin and
obscurity in his very infancy; but God that undertook to make him, never
left him, nor gave him over, till he had made him a god to Pharaoh; not a god
whom Pharaoh should worship, but whom he should fear and stand in awe of; a
god to execute judgments and bring plagues upon him and to remove the same
again. Hannah says in her song, 1 Samuel 2. 7. The Lord makes poor and makes
rich, it were as easy to God to make all rich, as to make any poor; again,
it were all one with God to make all poor as to make any rich (for he has the
making of both) but in his providence and wisdom he has made some of both
sorts, that the one might help themselves to heaven by supplying and relieving
the necessities of the other.

And therefore for our own parts, if we have any making, any promotion or
prosperity above our fellows, we must confess with David: That it is God
that has made us, and not we our selves; it is God that has made us Men, when
he might have made us Beasts, it is God that has made us Christians when he
might have made us Infidels; it is God that has made us rich when he might
have made us poor; in a word, it is God that has made us to prosper when he
might have made us to perish. (He sought the Lord, and God made him to
prosper.)

But that is not all; the maine thing that I observe from hence is, the benefit
that arises to us by seeking of God, namely, that it turns to our own
advantage, our own profit; God has only the glory, but the gain is wholly
ours, for it is a means to make us prosper; as David speaking of the
commandments, Psalm. 19. says, that in keeping of them there is great reward;
no man shall be a loser by keeping of Gods commandments, but a gainer, and a
great gainer too, for in keeeping of them there is great reward; if we be not
rewarded on earth our reward shall be the greater in heaven, In coelis reposita
est major compensatio (says Calvin) the greatest reward is reserved in the
heavens. Thus says the Lord that teaches thee to profit, Esa. 48. 17. Oh that
thou had hearkened to my commandments! then had thy prosperity been as a
flood, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea: thy prosperity should
have been so large and plentiful, that as a flood it should have run over the
banks, and the reward of thy righteousness as the waves of the sea; that is,
one reward should follow upon the neck of another, as one wave follows upon
the neck of another: so Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Oh that there were a heart in this people
to love me, and fear me as they have said, then should it go well with them
and their children after them; not that I might be a gainer and you lose, but
that you and your children might reap the been fit. So that as our Savior
says of the Sabbath, that it was made for man, not only for Gods service, but
for man's profit: so it is true of every Commandment, it was made for man's,
that is, for man's good and benefit: therefore you have it so often repeated in
Deuteronomy, These are the Commandments that I have given thee for thy wealth
and for thy good.

It is a pretty observation of Cajetan, upon that saying of God to Moses, Exo.
34. 1. Hew thee two Tables, Dola tibi, non mihi, ego enim non indigio tua
dolatione: Hew to thy self, not for me, for I need none of thy hewing, nor
yet any of thy tables, it is for thy own and thy peoples good that I bid thee
hew them; so it is for our good that God bids us seek him; God has only the
glory of it, but the benefit is our own, for it is a means to make us prosper.

Therefore if we love our selves and desire to do our selves good, let us
seek the Lord. I know, that naturally we all love our selves too much, but
spiritually we all love our selves too little; for he that lives in sin, he
does not love himself, for he goes the way to undo himself both here and
ever, 2 Chro. 24. 20. Why transgress ye the Commandments of the Lord that ye
cannot prosper. We use to say of one that is of a good nature, but an evil
husband, He is no man's foe but his own; and it is true of every one that lives
in any known sin, not grieving for it, nor striving against it, not making
conscience to reform it, he is his own foe indeed, for he does not only
anger God, but he hinders himself that he cannot prosper, Why transgress ye
the commandments of God that ye cannot prosper?

The like speech you have in Ezekiel. 18. Why will you die, O house of Israel? God
does not say, Why will you sin, O house of Israel? but why will ye die, O house
of Israel? as presupposing they might well know, if they will needs sin, they
must needs die; for death is the wages of sin, and follows it as the shadow
follows the body. The Lord speaks it with indignation, Why will ye die? as
wondering they should love themselves no better, but even to seek their own
death, by rushing into sin, as a horse rusheth into the battle: that is the
expression that God uses (Ier. 8. 7.) They rush into sin, as a horse rusheth
into the battle. And why as a horse rusheth into the battle, and not as a man
rusheth into the battle? I will tell you what I think the reason is; The
horse when he rusheth into the battle, does not know that those whom he
rusheth on be his enemies, that they will hurt, wound and kill him, but he
rusheth on them without fear or wit, and rusheth upon his own death: so
foolish men do not know, at least will not know (This they willingly know not,
as Saint Peter speaks) that sin is such an enemy to them, that it does
hurt, kill, and damn them, thereupon they rush upon sin without fear, and
so run upon their own destruction.

Therefore it is a good meditation of Saint Austin upon that prayer of David,
Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man. Tu noli tibi esse malus, liberet te
Dominus a te, etc. Be not thou an evil man to thy self, pray to God to
deliver thee from thy self being an evil man, and of an evil man to make
thee a good man, that thou may not hurt thy self, and then never fear any
hurt that any other evil man can do thee. We say, Nemo laeditur nisi a
seipso, No man takes any hurt but he may thank himself, his own sin is the
cause of it; were it not for sin, heaven could have no quarrel against us,
hell could have no power over us; our sins are they that hurt us, they are
those that undo us.

The Scripture speaks of sin lying at the door, Genesis 4. 7. If thou do
ill, sin lies at the door. Of all door keepers in the world, sin is the
worst, for if that lie at the door it does a double mischief, it keeps Gods
blessing out, and it lets Gods judgment in: therefore if you desire to dwell
in saferie, and to prosper in your family, let not sin lie at your door; as
long as that lies there, without repentance, you must never look to prosper.

The Scripture speaks of some that are sons of Belial, and daughters of
Belial, (the sons of Eli were sons of Bell al, *Sam. 2. and 1. Hannah says
to Eli, Count not thy handmaid for a daughter of Belial) Now a son of Belial
is taken generally for one exceedingly wicked, the very child of the devil,
that lives absque jugo, without a yoke, without any fear of God before his
eyes; but it seems to be derived of (Beli) which signifies without, and
(jagnal) which is to be profitable, or to prosper; and so Belial notes such a
one as is altogether unprofitable, and which cannot, shall not prosper. If any
such be here, or if any of you that be here find your selves to be such, that
you are unprofitable members of the Commonwealth, that you do, cannot prosper
in your course of life, I will not say ye are sons of Belial (what have I to
do to judge you?) only this let me advise you, that you would consider with
your selves what sin it is that lies at your doors, and keeps Gods blessing
out.

Remove but that, drive but that a way by a sincere repentance and reformation
of life, and then there is hope to prosper. We see it is the nature of a
stream, if it be stopped in his course that he cannot make a way in his wonted
channel, it will turn in upon it self and flow back again toward the
fountain, and to the place it came from; so when you find your selves stopped
in your proceedings, that you cannot make away into the world so prosperously,
so succesfully as you desire, then do as the stream does, remeate, flow
back, reflect, recoyle and turn in upon your selves, to see where the fault
lies, what sin is the cause of it (for that is the (...) the object or bar
that hinders good things from us) and when you have turned back into your
selves, then turn forward unto your God, desire him to pardon and amend you,
and that is the way to prosper.

I have not yet done with this point; I beseech you give me leave, and I
beseech God give me grace, that I may apply it severally and effectually to
your souls and consciences; for application is the life of all instruction; a
thing proved is true to all, but it is good to none but only to them to whom
it is applied. Let me entreat therefore your patient attention yet a little
longer, and you shall hear what I have to say unto you, not in any biting or
galling manner (I never delighted in that strain,) but in gentleness and
mildness to teach you how to prosper.

First, you that are tradesmen, Shopkeepers, Handicrafts-men, that have
nothing to betake to but what your honest labors and endeavors must help you
to; do you desire to prosper in your trades and callings? then seek the Lord
before you set to work, do as they do at Sea, that have oculos ad coelum,
manus ad clavum, their hand upon the helm, and their eye upon the heaven; so
when a man's hand is upon his work, and his heart upon his God, then is his
business like to prosper. Contrariwise, he that sets to his work before he
seeks to his God, takes a preposterous course, and commonly thrives
thereafter. You know what Peter confessed to Christ, Master, we have labored all
night and taken nothing; and no marvel, for Christ was not with him in the
Ship; as soon as ever he had gotten Christ, immediately he had good success.
Believe it, brethren, except Christ be with a man in his Shop, as he was with
Peter in his Ship, there is no good to be done in any trade. What Is the reason
that so many Tradsmen break and hide their heads, and run away, but because
they have not sought the Lord, nor gotten Christ unto them: they first break
with God, then break with men; first lose their credits with God, and then
'its just with God they should lose their credits with men: first leave their
honesty, then lose their prosperity; if you desire therefore that your
dealings should prosper, and your trading hold and thrive, get Christ into your
shops and he will bring you in Customers, he will bless your takings, he
will uphold you that you shall never break: but if ye expel Christ out of
your shops by your wickedness, as Peter out of weakness would have had
Christ been gone out of his Ship (saying, Lord, go from me for I am a sinful
man) then farewell all good fortune, and never look to prosper.

And if you would have Christ to keep with you, to dwell and make his abode
with you, and so to bless and prosper you, then be sure that you use a good
conscience in all your dealings; take heed you do not deal with your
Customers, as the Prophet Amos complains of the dealers in his time, Amos 8.
5. That they made the Ephah small, and the Shekle great; that is, they made the
measure little, and the price great: take heed of that, it is an abomination to
the Lord, and he that uses it shall never prosper. Remember the saying, Job
cap. 8. 5. 6. Seek the Lord and be upright, and he will make the habitation of
thy righteousness prosperous.

3 You that have occasion to travel by land or by water, that have any journey
to go that you desire should prosper, then seek to God before you set out of
doors, take God along with you, request his company, crave his conduct and
guidance: pray as Eleazer did, Genesis 24. 12. O Lord God of my master Abraham, I
beseech thee send me good speed this day; and God heard him, and granted his
desire, he sped as well as his heart could wish. If thou would be prosperous
and speed well, be religious and pray well; for he that prays well; can never
speed ill. In any case go not out of doors without seeking of God: how do
thou know what mischief may befall thee in the way, if God be not with thee to
protect thee? but if thou have sought to him, he will be a sun and a shield
unto thee, Psalm. 84. a Sun to direct and guide thee, a Shield to defend and
save thee from all annoyances that may hurt thee; He will give his Angels
charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways; in viis, non in praecipitiis,
in thy ways wherein thou walk with God as Enoch did; not in thy headlong
courses wherein thou runnest without God: when thou runnest in the Devils way,
in the way of wickedness and vanity, thou art out of Gods protection, and must
never look to prosper: (out of Gods ways, and out of Gods protection.) In all
thy journies therefore do as Elkanah did, 1 Samuel 1. 19. He rose up early in the
morning to return to Ramath, but he durst not set forward a foot, till he had
worshipped before the Lord: Moses would not stir a foot except Gods presence
went with him, Exodus 33. 15. bear thou that mind, hold thou that godly
resolution, and (my life for thine) God will make thy way to prosper.

3 You that are as Soldiers and men of war, if you be commanded to fight the
Lords battles in causa Christi, against his and your enemies, and (as Tertul.
speaks) cruorem cruore reponere, to retaliate blood with blood, to shed your
blood for Christ that has shed his blood for you; do you desire that your
warfare should prosper? then seek to God before you set upon your enemies; it
is God that must cover your heads in the day of battle, it is he that must
defend you from the danger of the enemy. Believe it, a man of war without
God is but a naked man though in the midst of all his harness, Exodus 32. 25.
it is said that Moses saw the people were naked after their great sin, how
naked? Non vest, sed gratia and praesidio Dei, they were naked not so much for
want of clothes, arms, as for want of the grace, favor and protection of God;
and no doubt (as Ferus observes) Si tunc corruissent hosts, if their enemies
had then fallen upon them, they had most shamefully foiled them. Thus it is
still, let a man be never so well clothed, never so well armed, never so well
guarded and weaponed, if he be stripped of Gods protection by sin, he lies
naked and open to all disasters, and therefore if ever any of you come upon
that service, first seek the Lord, and that is the way to prosper.

4 You that are great projectors and plotters for your advancement in the
world, let me only admonish you in a word; that in all your plots you would
begin with the first mover, and seek to God before you set upon the means;
for it is a certain thing, no project can prosper without God: when you have
wrought a business and ripened it, and (as you think) brought it to maturity,
if God be not sought unto, he can dash it and blast it in a moment, that it
shall prove abortive like the untimely fruit of a woman, Esaias 8. 10. Take
counsel together and it shall be brought to naught, pronounce a decree and it
shall not stand, for God is with us. No good to be done without God. Hannah
gives this counsel in her song, 1 Samuel 2. 3. Speak no more presumptuously,
let not arrogance come forth of your mouth, for the Lord is a God of knowledge,
and by him enterprises are established; for any man to think or say that he is
able of himself to bring an enterprise to pass, he speaks presumptuously,
he takes more upon him than he is able to perform; for mortal man has not
the knowledge to look through a business, to see all the circumstances of it,
all the wheels that must concur to accomplish it. The Lord is only a God of
knowledge, and by him enterprises are brought to pass; one thing brought to
pass by him, is better than a thousand brought to pass by our selves without
him, because his mercy is over all his works; that is (as one well expounds it)
as the warmth of a Hen is over al her eggs to cherish and to hatch them, so is
Gods mercy over all his works, to produce them, so as shall be most for our
good; whereas if a man sit brooding over his own projects, and think to hatch
and produce them of himself with out God, they will prove but Cockatrices
eggs, which when they are broken a serpent appears, some mischief or other
to shame and blame themselves. If you desire then that your projects should
prosper, and your enterprises succeed and come to good effect, then seek to
God for council and direction, beg for the secret guidance of his spirit;
and the secret working of his providence, and he shall prosper thy projects and
bring thy enterprises to pass.

5 Last of all, you that are in debt and distress for want of means and
maintenance; I shall endeavor to give you counsel from my Text; you know that
godliness and honesty is not always a defense against debt; grace and
goodness may keep a man from unthriftinesse, but it does not ever keep a man
from poverty; so that even the best, the holiest, the honestest men on earth
may be in debt and deep in arrerages, not through any lavishnesse or riot of
expense (for Religion teaches a good man to moderate his hands, and to spend
within the proportion and compass of his estate,) but other ways by the
inflicting or ordering hand of God upon him to try him. Many ways there be to
bring a man into debt, but there is but one way (that I know) to bring a man
out of debt, and that is this that is chalked out here in my text, To serve and
seek the Lord. If God be truly served, if the Lord be sincerely sought unto,
let a man's estate be never so poor, his debts never so many, his dangers never
so great, God will find a means to work him out: as the Apostle Peter says,
2 Pet. ^. 9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation:
though the godly know not how they should possibly be delivered, yet God in his
secret wisdom knows how to deliver them; so God knows how to deliver a poor
man out of debt though he himself know no evasion, has no means either in
his power or in his view; God is never at a stand, never at a loss; if we know
how to pray, he knows how to help us.

What said the man of God to Amaziah? 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. when he forbad him to
take the Ephramites into the battle against the Edomites because God was not
with them: Amaziah asked him, what then should become of the hundred talents
which he had given them for their help? Cannot God, said the Prophet give
thee more than this? so say I to him that trembles at the inundation of debt
upon him; cannot God if he were sought unto give an issue out of this? cannot
God (I say, if the stumbling-blocke of thy sin were taken out of the way by a
sound and serious humiliation,) cannot God give thee even more than that thou
owe? cannot God do more for thee than thou art aware of? assure thy self he
can, nay assure thy self he will: Take not my word for it, but take the
Apostles word, Phil. 4. 6. (...) be nothing careful (so we translate it) but
the word signifies, be not distracted or troubled in mind: and what is there
in the world, what worldly thing (I mean) that more distracts and troubles an
honest-minded man than the thought and consideration of his debts and dangers:
well, but is there no remedy, is there no relief for one in such a case? yes,
there is one universal remedy for all evils whatsoever, and that is humble
prayer; that is the harbor we must put into in all our ill weather, and that
is it the Apostle directs unto in the place-forecited; be careful for nothing,
but in every thing let your request be made known unto God in supplication and
prayer and giving of thanks, and the God of peace (...) shall keep and guard
your hearts as Kings are kept and guarded from all annoyances. This do then,
thou that art perplexed and entangled in a labyrinth of debt, that thou can
find no outgate, no passage, no way to escape; down upon thy knees to God,
(...) (as Chrysostom speaks) unclaspe thy conscience before God, lay open thy
grievances to him, unloade thy cares and wants and fears into the bosom of
Jesus Christ; and ifany means under heaven will ease and help thee, this will
do it. Believe it brethren, all worldly policies without this are but
Arenasine calce, sand without lime; they will never hold together when we have
most need of them, but like untempered mortar will fall asunder: let earnest
prayer be joined with frugalitie, skill and industry, and then expect with
comfort the end that God will give: and this is the way to make a poor man
prosper.

I have but one thing more to move you in before I leave this point, and that
is this, that you whom God has already prospered and blessed and enabled to do
good, would be pleased and persuaded to give something out of your plenty to
the poor, and pious uses, according as God has prospered you; it is the
Apostles own word, 1 Cor. 16. 2. He would have every one lay up in store by him
to bestow on the poor and needy according as God has prospered him; for the
quantity, God has left it to every man's conscience, only in general he is
directed, 2 Cor. 9. to do as God has prospered him: we should do therefore
in this case, as the Jews do in another case, who because they know not the
precise time when the Sabbath should begin and end, they begin it an hour
the sooner and end it an hour the later: this they call, Additionem de
prophano ad sacrum, an addition from profaneness to holiness. I will not
dispute the lawfulness of that act in particular, but generally in such cases
as this, it is good for every man to do rather with the most than with the
least: Quantiscumque sumptibus constet, lucrum est piet at is nomine facere
sumptus. Whatsoever cost a man is at for pious and charitable uses, it shall be
a gain unto himself. We find 1 Chronicles. 22. 14 when David had bestowed all his
cost in preparation for the Temple (a hundred thousand talents of gold, a
thousand thousand talents of silver) thus he expressed it; Ecce in paupertate
mea, this (says he) I have done according to my poverty; as if he had said, if
I had been able to do more, I would have done more, but this was as much as I
could reach to, and this (I trust) God will accept: say not then in thy heart,
if I were rich, If I were able I would do thus and thus, but do as God has
prospered thee; if thou can not do according to thy mind, do according to
thy means, and that is all that God requires: we read, Mat 21. when our
Savior came riding to Jerusalem, some strewed their garments in the way, and
some cut down bows and branches: If thou be not able to strew thy garments
in the way of Christ (that is) to cloth his poor naked members, then cut
down bows and branches at least, speak comfortable words to them, plead for
them, and what thou want in substance, make up in prayer. You know the poor
widows case in the Gospel, that put her two mites into the poor man's box;
our Savior Christ affirmed that she gave more than all the rest, because she
gave all that she had: which testified (as one says) not only her liberality
to God, but her confidence in God, that she did verily believe though she left
her self nothing, she should not lack: whereupon Saint Augustine says,
Divites largiuntur securi de divitiis, pauper securus de Domino: a rich man
gives and fears no want, because he knows he has enough at home: a poor
man gives and fears as little, because he knows he has enough above, there
is one above will supply his wants.

Believe it brethren, he that gives any thing with a true intent to relieve the
poor and to maintain the distressed, shall do himself more good, than he
does them whom he releeves; and I will prove it out of Deuteronomy. 15. 7. 10. If
there be among you a poor man, one of thy brethren within any of thy gates,
thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand upon thy poor brother: but
thou shall surely give him; and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give
unto him; because that for this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all
thy works, and in all that thou put thy hand unto. Contrariwise, he that
is so gripple, and so base that he will part with nothing to the poor, let him
know that in so doing he makes a forfeiture to God of all his goods, and God
will be a severe exacter of it at his hands when he comes to judgment.

We have a president for it in the Gospel, of the man that had a talent given
him, and did not use it as he ought; there came an extent from God, first upon
the talent [Take away his talent from him] and the^ there came an extent upon
his person too [Take away the unprofitable servant, bind him, and cast him into
utter darkness.] As S. Peter told Simon Magus, Thou and thy money perish
together; it had been happy for him if nothing but his money had perished,
but there comes an extent from God against all, He and his money must perish
together. As the Idolater (as one said of Julian) shall burn in hell with that
same wood and stone that he adored and made a god of on earth: So the Usurer
and moneymonger, that has no goodness nor compassion in him, shall burn in
hell with the same silver and gold that he made an idol of here in this world.
I will say no more but this, Show mercy to the poor for Christ's sake, and
Christ will show mercy to you for the poores sake. Do good as God has
prospered you, and then you fulfill the law of Christ.

I have done with the first general point of my text, namely, the ground and
foundation of true prosperity, that it must be raised and built upon religion
and piety: God must be sought unto, ere any true prosperity can be attained
unto. I will dispatch the other part in a word or two, and so conclude. And
that is the bounds and limitation of true prosperity, how far it reaches,
and how long it lasts, and that is only during the time that a man serves
and seeks the Lord. So long as he sought the Lord (so long, and no longer,)
God made him to prosper.

Secondly, So long. How long that was you may see in the words before my Text
(He sought the Lord in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the
visions of God.) That wise and holy Prophet Zachariah was a happy tutor to the
minority of K. Vzziah, and was always at hand to counsel and advise him, to
advertise and admonish him in things pertaining to his God and his government,
and by his godly doctrine, and his holy life to guide and steer him the right
way to happiness: now as long as Zechariah lived, during all his time he
sought the Lord and prospered: but as soon as Zechariah was gone and gathered
to his fathers, it should seem that Vzziah began to fall away, and his
prosperity sunk as fast as his piety: just like the waters of Noah's flood,
as soon as ever the fountains and springs began to be stopped, presently the
waters began to abate: so when the spring of grace begins to be stopped up in a
man's heart, and damd up with wickedness and sin, it is a venture but his
prosperity will abate and dry away, and his later end shall be worse than his
beginning. Here then (as in a map) we may see and bewail the miserable
downe-fall of many Christian souls, who during their minority and younger
years, while they live under good Parents, good Tutors, and good Governors,
they take good courses and keep themselves in good order, but when ever they
come to their own hand, Sine cortice natare, to swim without a cork, to
sail without a stern, and to live without a guide and without a God; they
run many times headlong into such desperate licentious courses, that a man
that sees them so bad at the last, would hardly believe they had ever been
good at the first. It is a good observation of a late Divine in the days of
Popery and blindness, the Devil it seems walked very familiarly among them:
hence we have so many stories of hagges and fayries, and of children taken out
of cradles and others laid in their rooms, and those they called changelings:
since the ight of the Gospel has shined so clearly, these devils and fayries
have not been seen amongst us; but still there are changelings too too many
in every place. Some the Priests and Jesuits have changed from the true
Religion, to Popery; some the world have changed from good neighborhood and
good hospitality to all manner of baseness and misery; some goodfellowship
and the alehouse has changed from temperance and sobriety to profaneness
and luxury; too many such changelings there be in the world; God of his mercy
change them again, and transform them into a better mind, ut mutati mutatum
inveniant (as S. Bernard speaks) that they being changed in affection to
God-word, may find God changed in affection to them-ward, to speak after the
manner of men; for if you mark the course of the world, observe it where you
will, you shall never find that such kind of persons do prosper; as those other
changelings never prospered in body, so these never prosper in estate, God
gives a secret curse unto them, that nothing that they have shall prosper with
them: But they are like a man in a consumption, howsoever he may bolster up
himself for a time with Physic and Diet-drinkes, it will kill him in the
end: so he that is in a spiritual Atrophy, a spiritual consumption, that is
fallen from God, he may go on and hold out for a time, but it will undo him
in the end. Just according to the saying of the Prophet Jonas, Chap. 2. 8. They
that follow after lying vanities, forsake their own mercy: that is, they
wilfully deprive themselves of that mercy and prosperity, which if they had
cleaved and stuck unto God, they might have been as sure of, as if it had
been their own to bestow upon themselves, and that was King Vzziahs case.

For our selves therefore (to draw to an end) if we desire to go on and
prosper as we have begun, that there may be no decay, no declining, no
abatement, either in our piety or in our prosperity, either in our inward
graces or in our outward fortunes; let us labor for two things which King
Vzziah wanted, sincerity and humility.

First, labor for sincerity, be the same inwardly to Godward, that you seem
to be outwardly to the world-ward, be like the curtains of the Tabernacle,
which they say were so wrought, that they were on both sides alike; so be you
alike on both sides, in heart to the Lord, and in life to the world, else there
is no hope of continuance; for nil fictum est duturnum, nothing that is
counterfeit, will last long; counterfeit Pearls and Diamonds may glister and
sparkle, and make a fair show for a time, but their luster will not last; so
where there is only an outward form of godliness and not the inward power of
it, it cannot last long. If an apple be rotten at the core, though it have a
fai e outside, it will not continue so long, but rottenness will possess the
outside also; for this is the nature of things that are unsound, they st ay not
there where the rottenness began, but they putrify and corrupt more and more:
so those that have rotten hearts to Godward, may carry a fair show for a
time, but in the end the curse of God will come upon them; and their very name
shall rot, that is, their hypocrisy shall be discovered, and their outside
made as rotten as their inside: Beware therefore of hyrocrisie and labor for
sincerity.

Secondly, pray for humility, that was another grace that King Vzziah wanted;
it is said of him, Verse. 16. of this Chap. That God helped him till he was
strong, and when he was strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction,
this was a lamentable thing, that a man in prosperity should be so swollen with
pride that he should even burst again; take heed of that, you whom God has
exalted above your fellows; the Giants in old time were the goodliest men in
the world, yet they are called in hebrew Naphilem of Naphel, to fall, because
as by their pride and presumption they fell from God, so God in his justice
tumbled them down, that they fell without recovery into the pit of hell; thus
(as the saying is) pride will have a fall, but humility shall have a rise, Job
22. 29. When men are cast down, then thou shall say, etc. When a man casts
down himself in a voluntary humiliation, then God exalts and lifts him up, but
when in a proud presumption he exalts and lifts up himself, then God dejects
and casts them down: it is a good meditation of S. Augustine upon the words of
David, Psalm. 138. 6. The Lord is on high and he beholds the lowly, etc. see a
strange wonder (says he) God sits aloft in heaven, and yet the higher a man
lifts up himself, the further he is from God; the lower a man casts down
himself, the nearer he is to God. I will close up all with that divine
Epiphonema of holy Bernard: Dominus deus, qui das gratiam humilibus, da gratiam
ut simus hum^les. O Lord God, thou that give grace to the humble, give us
grace to be humbled. And that for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee and
the holy Spirit be given and ascribed all honor and glory, be done and
performed all service and duty, from this time forth and for evermore,

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.
THE Way to be Content.

A SERMON Appointed for the Cross, but Preached in the Cathedral Church of
St. PAVL in London, on Monday in Whitson-weeke, being the 26. day of May, Anno
Dom. 1634.

BY JOHN GORE, Rector of Wenden-lofts in ESSEX.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London by T. Cotes for Thomas Alchorne, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Greene-Dragon. 1635.

To the right Worshipful* M. JOHN PENRVDDOCK ESQVIRE, One of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of WILTES* My truly honored Friend.
Right Worshipful,
GOD has blessed you many and sundry ways, with a wise and understanding heart,
with a prudent and religious wife, with sweet and hopeful children, with a
plentiful and prosperous estate; Give me leave (as your Chaplain to God) to
pray for one blessing more, as the Coronis and upshot of all the rest, and that
is, that God would bless you also, as I doubt not but he does, with a
contented mind in all these. This is the subject of my Sermon, and shall be
the supplication of my heart, so long as ever I shall live to be

Your poor unworthy friend, JOHN GORE.

THE WAY TO BE CONTENT.
PHILIP. 4. 11. I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be
content.
THE last time I was in this place, I showed you the way to Prosper: My errant
is now to show you the way to be Content if yon prosper not. Which howsoever it
may seem at this time an impertinent and improper Text; yet let me premonish
you what a Father said of Benjamins sack, Sacco soluto reluxit argentum, When
the sack was opened the silver appeared; the silver was in it before, but it
was not seen, nor known, nor taken notice of, till the opening: So give me
but leave to open my sack, to unfold and enlarge and apply my meditations, and
then if there do no silver appear, if there be nothing worthy your
observation and use; be but you content to hear it, and I will be content to
bear it: For it is indeed a text of Contentation, and you shall have (God
willing) a Sermon of Contentment. I pray God of his mercy grant, that I may so
divide it, and so dispense it, that it may profit, and please, and give Content
both to God and you. And so I come to my text, I have learned, etc.

In which words I will observe two general parts, which may be reduced to two
heads, and be thus expressed. 1. Disciplina pacis, the discipline of peace, and
that is to learn to be Content. 2. Pax disciplinae, the peace of the
discipline, or the profit of this learning, and that is, It arms a man and
enables him to comply with all estates whatsoever. I have learned in whatsoever
state I am, therewith to be Content.

1. Disciplina pacis, the discipline of peace, so the Scripture terms it, Esaias
53. 5. The discipline of our peace was upon him. (i) Christ was disciplined and
punished for us, that we might have our peace without punishment. So some
translate that place, Psalm. 2. ult whereas we read, osculamini filium, Kiss
the Son. (i) do honor and homage to the Son of God; some render it
Apprehendite disciplinam (i) apprehend his Discipline^, obey his ordinances,
and submit your selves to his corrections, as he submitted himself to ours,
and this in the end will work for your peace. And to say the truth, A man can
never attain to a well-setled peace, nor grow up to a well-grounded
contentation, till he have been some way disciplined by the hand of heaven,
Heb. 5. 8 it is said of our Savior, Though he were a Son (the only begotten
Son of God, full of grace and truth) yet he learned obedience by the things
which he suffered: not that he was disobedient before he suffered; but the
meaning is, though he had the habit of obedience before, he never learned the
practice of it till then. For this lesson of contentment is just like your
lessons of Music, a man can never be said to have learned them till he be
able to practice them, for you must know that Christians are of two sorts.

Some are silvestres, or onagri, like wild unruly Asses (so the Scripture
terms them) Ioh 11, 12. I mean, unhumbled, untamed, unconverted sinners, that
never yet felt the Yoke of Christ, nor the hand of God, nor the heaviness of a
wounded conscience: these know no other Content, but what their sports, their
Music and merry company affords them; which is just such a kind of Content as
they that have the Itch do take in clawing and scratching their bodies, which
pleases them infinitely for the present, but makes them the sorer and the
rawer, and the worser afterward: For so all sinful pleasure ends in pain,
and if there be not Ingrata recordatio, an unpleasing, a discontenting
remembrance of all such pleasing contenting vanities, the soul will rue for it
in another place. These may fitly be compared to the Lillies (which our Savior
speaks of in the Gospel, saying that Solomon in all his glory came not near
them) now the Lilly as long as it is fair, whole, and untoucht, it looks
beautiful, and smells pleasantly; but let it be never so little nipt, or
bruised, or crushed in a man's hand, it looks ugly, and smells worse: such are
all your joviall Gallants, and lascivious youngsters, as long as they are
healthful and sound and aile nothing, their only care is to give themselves
content, by hunting and hawking, by dicing and carding, by drinking and
drabbing* etc. sico sic juvat vivere, to some men's thinking, no such contenting
life in the world as theirs: till these men fall into the hands of God (as
sooner or later they shall surely fall) and God does begin to nip them and
bruise and crush them in his hands with sickness of body, or sorrows of soul;
alas, all their Content is vanished and gone, and they become like Naomi in
Bethlem, neither pleasing to themselves nor others. These contentments are
worme-eaten like Jonas Gourd, that will fail a man when he stands most in
need of them, and these kind of men are far from that Content which my Text
speaks of.

But there are another sort of Christians, and they are subacti, or Ablactati,
mortified, subdued or weaned Christians, such as David was, Psalm. 131. 2. I
have behaved my self like a child that is weaned, yea my soul is as a weaned
child. A child that sucks, his whole delight is to be nibling at the breast,
nothing quiets, nothing contents him but that; but let him once be thoroughly
weaned, and then though you show him never so goodly a breast, abounding with
never so luscious milk, and flatter him never so much, you shall not get him
to take it, nor to touch it; for then his content lies in another kind, it is
something else must quiet him* and not that: So it is with a mortified and an
unmortified Christian, nothing contents the one but the breast of the world;
nothing less than that contents the other: When the soul of a Christian is
once weaned and taken off from the follies and vanities of this life, that he
begins to savor and set his mind upon the things that concern a better life,
he shall feel his disposition alo^^ within him, and shall find a more sensible
content in enjoying his God, than any worldling upon earth either does or can
find in enjoying his goods* as David affirms, Psa. 4. 8. Dedisti ^^titiam,
etc. Thou have put more gladness in my heart, than in the time that their
corn and wine and oil increased: The meaning is, he took more delight and
more content in the Law and favor of God, in the worship and service of God,
in conversing and walking with God; more, (I say) by far, than the men of
this world could take in their joyfullest times of all, when their corn and
wine and oil increased. And this is the medulla the pith and marrow of that
Christian contentation, which is begun upon earth, and never ends in heaven.
This is such a happiness that none can attain unto, but only they that are
Cribrati Christiani (as Tertullian terms them) sifted Christians, they that
have been winnowed and fanned, and sifted (as it were) by Gods afflictions, by
the devils temptations, and by the worlds unkindnesses; they that have been
tossed and tumbled and beaten in the world, and have found by their own
experience, that there is no content to be had in any estate but only from
God, and that there is no estate but God may be had in, if a man will himself;
these are they that have learned (with S. Paul) in whatsoever state they are,
therewith to be content. And so I come more nearely to the first principal
part of my Text, wherein are three remarkable points to be observed.

1 Sngularitas personae, the singularity and propriety of the person noted in
the word (...), I have learned. 2 Specificatio temporis, the specification or
intimation of the time when he learned it, noted in the word (...); he does
not say I will learn tobe content, but I have learned; I have done it already,
3. Specialitas re^, the specialty or excellency of the thing it self which S.
Paul had learned and attained, and that was to be (...) selfe-sufficient and
what that means you shall hear by and by.

1. Singularitas personae, I have learned. Some may happily conceit that S.
Paul speaks but this of his own particular, that he for his part had learned
to be Content, not that it is the common condition of every private Christian to
be thus qualified, thus contented: Answ. It is true, as S. Paul was an Apostle
(and you know he was a great Apostle, Apostolus per Antonomasian called by the
name of The Apostle in all our quotations of him) I say, as he was an Apostle
he had his (...), his peculiar gifts and graces proper to himself, not
attaineable nor imitable by us: but that he speaks here, he speaks it as a
Christian, as a Convert, as a contented man, and that a grace that's common to
every true believer. The Scripture speaks of a Common faith, Tit. 1. 4.
because it is common to all the faithful; and so likewise of a Common
salvation, Jude 3. because it is common to all that shall be saved; which yet
every Christian must labor to make proper to himself: so may this be called a
Commmon contentment, because it is such as every common Christian must apply to
himself, and is bound in conscience to learn and practice for his own
particular, for the comfort and discharge of his own soul in the sight of
God. It is worth your observation that of David, Psalm. 40. 6. where he says of
himself, In the volume of thy book it is written of me, that I should do thy
will; O my God I am content to do it: now let a man read over the whole volume
of Gods book, he shall not find that it is written of David, that he by name
should do the will of God more than another man. Why then does David affirm
this of himself? I Will tell you what I think the reason may be: David found in
the volume of Gods book that it was thus written of men of his rank and
quality of Kings, Prophets, etc. that they should have a special care to do
the will of God, and to be exemplary in their lives to others, and this does
David appropriate and apply to himself in particular as if it had been thus
written of him and none else but him. In like manner, when you read in the
volume of this book that it is thus written of S. Paul, that he had learned to
be Content, you must know that it is your case as well as his, and that you for
your parts have as good cause, and as great reason (as ever David had) to apply
this writing to your selves, and say for your own particular It is written of
me, that I should be content, O my God J am content to be so. It was good
counsel that Eliphaz gave to Job 5. 27. Hear this, and know it for thy good,
(so we translate it) but in Hebrew it is (dang-lecha) know it for thy self. It
is not enough for a man to know this in general, that such a thing must be,
that every man must be content with his estate, because God will have it so;
but a man must apply this knowledge to himself in particular, and labor to
work himself to such an (...) such an inward tranquillity and contentedness of
mind, that nothing that God sends may come amiss to him. As S. Austin said of
Alms, Qui vult ordinate eleemosynas dare, deb et a seipso incipere; He that
will give Alms in a right and orderly manner must begin with himself. How is
that? Mendicat a te anima tua, esurit justitian, etc. Thy own soul lies
begging of thee, it hungers after righteousness, it thirsts after grace, its
naked and wounded for want of spiritual clothing and comfort; first begin
with thy own soul, cherish that, comfort that, save and succor that, show
mercy first to thy self, then shall thou the better know and understand how to
show mercy and pity to the bodies and souls of others. In like manner, He
that would go the right way to true Contentment, must begin with himself,
first study his own peace, subdue his own passions, quiet his own mind, and
content his own soul; and when he has done so, he may then happily make his
own plaster serve another sores, and comfort others with the same consolation
wherewith himself has formerly been comforted and contented: but that can he
never do, till he be able to say of himself, what S. Paul does in my text:
How ever others be affected, I (for my part) have learned to be content. So
much for the first particular, which is singularitas personae, the propriety of
the person, (...), I have learned, etc. the next is,

2 Specificatio temporis, He does not say, I will learn, but I have learned to
be content. This is one of those praecognita (as we call them) that must be
known and learned aforehand, against the time that God will give occasion to
make use of them. As the Prophet Esaias exhorts, Esaias 42. 23. Hearken to this,
and hear it for the time to come* though it may be for the time present all
things are so well with you, that you have no need, no use of this doctrine,
yet the time may come (God knows how soon) that you may be glad and thank
God that ever you heard it; do not therefore hear it for the present only
(as most men do Sermons) but hear it for afterward, and lay it up for the
time to come. For as Tully said of Poetry that it was a profession for all
times, prosperity and adversity* for all ages, youth and old age; for all
places, at home and abroad: so is this a lesson for all times, all ages, and
all places* and happy are they that have learned it aforehand, that they may
not be to seek when they shall stand most in need of it, but have a salve in
readiness for every sore. Was not that a sad and a lamentable distress, that
the people of Israel were driven to, 1 Samuel 13. 22. That in the day of battle
there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people, save
only in the hand of Saul and Jonathan: how did those unarmed people (inermes
in armis) tremble and quake to meet their enemies in the faces. Even such is
the case of an unprepared Christian, when trouble comes upon him like an armed
man, suddenly and unresistably, what miserable plunges must he needs be driven
to, that has not learned aforehand to be content with any fortunes, and to
repose and roll himself upon his God in the worst events. When the world is
full of fears, and dangers, and calamities are ready to break in upon a
people, what a taking are they in that have not learned to be content; as David
says of those in a storm at sea, Psalm. 107. 27. They are even at their wits
end, ready to run mad, and go besides themselves with astonishment and anguisb
of spirit: whereas they that have learned Saint Paul's lesson in my text, can
say to their souls as David did to his, Psalm. 116. Return unto thy rest, O my
soul: they can readily turn themselves to God, who is Centrum qu^etativum (as
the Schoolmen speak) and there find rest unto their souls (like Noah in his
Arc) when a world of others are overwhelmed with a flood of sorrow. Beloved,
we are not worthy to know for what we are reserved, nor how God will please to
deal with us; let our care be therefore (like Mariners at Sea) in a calm to
provide for a storm, in health provide for sickness, and in peace prepare for
trouble: that if any unexpected trouble should arise, we may be able (with Gods
mercy) to overcome it, and to wade contentedly and quietly through it; labor
aforehand to ballast our souls with grace that we may hold out stedily,
unmoveably in this troublesome world. You know, that which must keep a ship
stiff and steady on the sea, must not be levers and shores without it but
weight and ballast within it: so that, that must keep a man's mind and
conscience steady and upright, that it do not vacillare stagger and reele to
and fro like a drunken man (as David speaks) it is not wealth and means
without a man, but grace and godliness and contentment within him; A man shall
never be quiet in his mind, never settled in his conscience, but always tossed
and turmoiled with doubts and cares and fears, till he has learned this
lesson of the blessed Apostle, In whatsoever state he is, therewith to be
content.

3. Specialit as rei, the excellency of the thing it self, expressed in the word
(...) selfe-sufficient, if we take the word in a strict and proper sense, none
can properly and rightly be said to be (...)* selfe-sufficient but only God.
As our Savior told the young man in the Gospel, Mark 10. 18. when he called
him Good Master: why call thou me good (says Christ) there is none good but
God: the meaning is, none that has his goodness in se, and a se in himself
and from himself, but only God; all the goodness that men have, comes down
from God as light does from the Sun, or water from the Spring (though Christ
were God too) and therefore good, but that was more than the young man knew:)
so there is none truly selfe-sufficient but God only that has this
sufficiency, this fullness of content in, and from himself without being
beholding to any treature: man of himself has no sufficiency, neither
sufficient means to maintain him, nor sufficient strength to defend him, nor
sufficient grace to save him, but all our sufficiency is from God; (...) who is
sufficient for these things? is as true in other cases, as in the case of (...)
Ministry: man of himself without God is not sufficient (...) any thing; as
the Moon is but a dark body, if the Sun does not look upon it, so is a man
but a dead creature if God do not work in him, there is no light nor life in
him. Yet such is the goodness of God (...) the good pleasure of his will (as
the Apostle calls it) that when a man can so far deny himself, so far
master and prevail with himself, as to suffice and content himself with that
dimensum, that portion which God has allotted and assigned him, be it more or
less, to esteem it enough and sufficient for him; such a one does God account
a man like himself, a man after his own heart, a man that is (...)
selfe-sufficient.

And here I may take up Moses wish, and say, I would to God that all the Lords
people were thus affected, and thus minded: Are your minds set upon
righteousness, O ye sons of men? (says David in the Psalm.) No: we may
answer, and experience shows that men's minds are set upon covetousness,
they are set upon the world, they are set clean cross and contrary to the
rule and direction of Almighty God. For thus the case stands, where God would
have men to be covetous, there they are content; and contrarily where God would
have men to be content* there they are extremely covetous. In some things God
would have men to be covetous, 1 Cor. 12. ult. Covet earnestly the best things:
the things of this life are the worst things in Gods account, howsoever we
esteem them; those are the best things which belong and bring a man to a
better life; and of these God would have us be as covetous as we can be for our
lives. (...) is the word, be earnestly, eagarly covetous; never think you have
faith enough, never think you have grace enough, never think ye have wisdom
and patience and godliness enough; but still labor, still hunger after more;
Herein exerce avaritiam tu^n (as Saint Austine speaks) if thou have any
covetousness in thee, exercise it this way, set it a work about those things,
for here a sufficit is deadly, (as the same Father has it.) See now our
crossenesse and perverseness to God, where we should be covetous, here we are
too well contented, if we have never so little grace, never so little faith*
never so little religion, etc. we are ready to say with Esau, we have enough
to serve our own turns, we neither covet nor desire any more like that Monk
in Saint Bernard, that set down this for his resolution, nec pejor fieri volo,
nec melior cupio, I will be no worse, neither do I desire to be better; and so
they stand at a stay like dwarfes, and never seek to increase their talent.
Just of Gallioes temper, Act. 18. 17. Nihil eorum Gallioni curae, Gallio cared
for none of those things; nor do we care for any of these things; where we
should be careful, we are careless, and too well contented, where we should
be covetous. Thus we cross God on the one side, by being content where we
should be covetous.

See now how we cross him on the otherside, by being covetous where we should
be contented. As first in the mattter of sin: A man that has been (...) a
lover of pleasure, more than a lover of God, and has followed the lusts,
devices and desires of his own heart a long time together, God would have such
a one to leave while he is well, to repent himself, and content himself with
what is done and past, and to sin no more, least a worse thing than he is
aware of, fall upon him, (...) etc. (says the Apostle) 1 Pet. 4. 3. Let the
time past of life suffice us, to have walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess
of wine, revellings, banquettings, and abominable Idolatries: mark the word,
let it suffice, or let it content you to have spent so much of your life in
this ungodly and unprofitable manner: as if he should have said: ye have done
enough, you have had pleasure and sin enough, leave while ye are well, be
content now to break off that course, and begin a new one. A man would think
ruch meek, much moving counsel must needs take good effect: yet it is strange
to see how unreasonable, how unsatiable men are in this kind, they can set no
bounds to their appetites, no stint nor measure to their sins: they can never
tell when they have sinned enough, never tell when they have drunk enough,
never tell when they have angered God enough; but as the Apostle says, Ephesians.
4. 19. They commit uncleanness even with greediness, (...) (as the original
word) with covetousness: no griping worldling is more greedy and covetous of
money, than a wicked man is greedy and covetous of sin, that he can never
see when he has enough of it; but still goes on to add sin unto sin,
drunkenness to thirst, and as a covetous man treasures up wealth, so does a
wicked man treasure up wrath for himself against the day of wrath* Romans 2. 5.
Crastinum peccatum hodie dilinquunt (as Greg. Nissen said of the richman in the
Gospel) They sin to day for to morrow.

They study and devise and plot their sin aforehand, as if our Saviors
saying were not so, Mat. 6. ult. Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.
Alas beloved, the best day that a man spends, or that day that a man spends
best, he commits evils and sins enough to repent of that day (I Will warrant
him) he shall need no more to trouble him; yea, and happy too if he can make
even with God at night. He shall not need to be so covetous so greedy of
sin, he shall one day have enough of it; perhaps ere he be aware, he shall
one day find what it is for a man to sin in suo aeterno, when he comes to
rue for his sins, in Dei aeterno. He that would sin everlastingly, if he
might live everlastingly, it is just with God that he should suffer
everlastingly: Thus will God cross sinful men, as bad as ever they crossed him,
and teach them to be covetous where they should be contented.

Thus likewise do men deal with God for the things of this life; God is all
for contentedness, and we are all for covetousness. God says, If you have
but food and raiment (though ye have little or nothing else) yet be content
with it. 1 Timothy 6. for why? it is more than we deserve, more than we are worthy
of, more than God owes us, if he allow us but that. Yea, if we have but our
daily bread (as our Savior terms it) if God should so restrain us in our
diet, and cut us short in our provision, as to allow us no more but bare bread,
we have reason to be content with it, for we have that we prayed for; if God
afford us more, we are bound to be the more thankful, considering (with Jacob)
that we are less than the least of all Gods mercies: there is not the least of
Gods mercies but it is too great and too good for us. And yet it is strange to
see how few there be, that think ill of themselves, and well of their estates;
I mean, that are well contented with Gods allowance; but rather with the
Prophets wife, 2 Reg. 4. 6. who desired one vessel more when all was full
before. Nay some are so unreasonable and unsatiable, that as the Prophet says,
they enlarge their desire as hell: some man's mind is like hell it self, which
though it swallow up a world of souls, yet it is never satisfied, but still
gapeth for more: that is the reason such a one can never be contented, because
though he may have a house full of money, he can never have a heart full of
money, for why? He has a hell in his heart, that never can be filled with
means nor moneys. Why has Satan filled thy heart (says Peter to Ananias,
when he lied to the holy Ghost to save his money, Act. 5. 3. There is the hell
in the heart, that man's heart which is filled with the devil, filled with
covetousness and ungodliness must needs have a hellish heart; yea his heart
is a hell it self, the very habitation and house of devils, and woe be to that
sin that brings a hell into a man's heart in this world, and brings a man's
heart and soul into hell in the world to come. Thus you see what comes of
being covetous where God would have men to be contented. Learn therefore from
henceforth to set bounds to thy appetite to moderate your cares for the things
of this life, and to frame your desires to Gods appointment, and that is the
way to be content.

I have not yet done with this point, for as I searched more narrowly into the
original word, I found that (...) goes before (...), that self goes before
sufficient: which put me in mind of another consideration, and that is this,
namely: That a man must be himself ere he can be sufficient* I mean, a man
can never attain to any true, real sufficiency or contentment of mind, till
first he be himself. Every man is not himself; not only fools and mad men
and drunkards are not themselves (as we say) not their own men; but every
unconverted, unhumbled, unwakened sinner. As it is said of the Prodigal son,
Luke 15. 17. that when he was converted, Then he came to himself; which
implies that before that time when he lived in riot, and excess, and in that
wastfull way of wickedness, when he was glad to feed upon those siliquae
daemoniorum those husks of Devils which the text speaks of: all that while he
was not himself, he never began to come to himself, till he began to come to
his father: so to speak properly, a man never comes to himself, till he come
home to God by true repentance, he is never his own man, til he be the Lords.
Three things there be that make a man not himself, and consequently make him
unsufficient and incapable of true contentment. 1 Nabals drunkenness. 2
Nebuchadnezzars madness. 3 Satan's villenage. That Is the reason that the
Scripture co^pares unregenerate men to drunkards, and mad men, and slaves, who
of all others are truly said to be not themselves. S. Paul says, 2 Timothy 2.
25. that a Minister that has to do with refractory sinners, must wait if at
any time God will give them repentance, (...), that they may awake out of their
drunken sleep and become sober (so the word signifies:) implying that as long
as we muzzle our selves in our ignorance, and go on securely in our sins,
not grieving for them, not striving against them, not making conscience to
reform them, all that while we are like drunken sots void of understanding, we
are not our selves. As there is a wet drunkenness, too common in these days,
God forgive the world that sin; so there is (...), a kind of dry
drunkenness (as the Prophet says in another sense, Esaias 51. 21. Thou art
drunk, but not with wine.) Every sin that a man is bewitched unto, does for
the time so infatuate and besot him, that he is not himself, has not power
over himself, to refrain or repent of it, till God awake a man out of this
same drunken sleep, and give him wisdom to see into his sins, and grace to
forsake them; Then, and not till then does he come to himself. Now as some
are not themselves through drunkenness; so others are not themselves through
madness. The heart of man (says Solomon, Eccles. 9. 3.) is full of evil and
madness is in his heart while he lives. Now mad men are of two sorts. 1. Some
are furentes furious or raging mad: like those Pharisees, Luke 6. 11. that were
filled with madness at the sight of the miracles which Christ wrought; or like
those that stoned Stephen, Act. 7. 54. They gnashed upon him with their teeth*
(...) (is the word) they grated and ground their teeth at him, as if they had
bin cutting with a saw (for so the word signifies) they were so mad and
devilish, that they could have found in their hearts to have sawed him and
torn him with their teeth. Such mad men as these, let them be never so little
stirred, or provoked, or crossed either by God or man, how bitterly do they
curse and swear, and rage and damn themselves to the pit of hell, that it
would make a man's heart ache, and his soul tremble to hear and see it, for
fear least God should take them at their words, Cursed be their anger for it
is fierce, and their rage, for it is cruel, Genesis 49. 7. 2. Others are Amentes,
foolishmad, I have said of laughter, thou art madness, (faith Solomon) is it
not a mad thing for a man to laugh when he should weep, to sing and shoute
when he should sob and sigh, to make himself merry with that which makes God
and his Angels sorry? Though we account this cheerfulness, the holy Ghost
accounts it madness, Lachrimanum causas tripudiantes peragunt, and ridentes
mortis negotium exequuntur, (says a Father) They that make a sport of sin,
do but dance a Galliard about the brinke of hell* and if that be not the
madness of folly, judge ye. Too many such mad men there are in the world of
both these sorts and kinds, I pray God of his mercy convert them, and bring
them into a better mind, that they may*see and bewail their own* miserable
estate through sin before God, and so may come to themselves, for yet they are
not themselves, and consequently can never attain to any true contentment.
Add hereunto, those that are the servants and slaves, the drudges and vassals
of sin and Satan. You know a servant is totius alterius, is not his own
man, is not a man of himself: Even so, and more than so, is he that is a
servant of sin. My brethren (says S. James) he not many masters, Iam. 3. 1.
every man naturally has (...), many masters, in himself, every temptation,
every sin, every lust, is a wicked man's master; pride comes and that masters
him, then comes anger and that masters him; then comes covetousness, or
worldliness, or filthy uncleanness, all these get the mastery of him, and
keep them in subjection that he is not himself. O quam multos dominos habet
qui unum not habet, Oh how many masters and Lords has that man, that has not
thee O God, for his Lord and master! the very devil himself is his master,
yea more than that, he is his God: therefore he is called the god of this
world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And why the god of this world? me thinks that should be
too high, too happy, too honorable a title for so base a fiend: doubtless the
reason is this: because as God at the beginning, did but speak the Word and it
was done, Genesis 1. so if the devil does but speak the word (as it were) but
give the least hint of any sin, that he would have committed and done,
presently they do (...) seek opportunity to bring it to pass: at such a
beck are wicked men to the mortal enemy of their souls.

Can any man say, or does any man think that these men are themselves, or that
they can enjoy true contentment? Alas no* for their case is just as the
Israelites was in Egypt, who when they had wrought hard in the brick-killns
all day were well whipped and beaten for their labors at night: or as Sampson
among the Philistims, who after he had labored and ground like a horse in the
mill all day, was put into the prison house at night* And what content could
either of these take in their work or in their wages? Thus will Satan serve
them that serve him; after they have wrought hard in the works of darkness
the whole day of their lives, when the night of death comes (without great
mercy on Gods part, and great repentance on their own part) they shall be sure
to be cast into the prison of hell, and there whipped and tormented everlastingly
for their pains. And if there be any content in such work, or in such wages,
judge ye. By this you perceive there is more belongs to selfe-sufficiency, than
perhaps you are aware of; there may be self-love, self-will, or self-pleasing,
or self-conceit, where there is no true grace nor fear of God: but there will
be no self-sufficiencie, no solid contentment, till a man be delivered from
Nabals drunkenness, from Nebuchadnezzars madness, and from Satan's villinage,
and so be truly converted, and come to himself; for there must be a
conversion, before there can be any contentation, never look to be contented,
till first thou be converted, and come home to God, and to thy self; for (...)
must be before (...), self, before sufficient.

Hence then I observe four corollaries or singular circumstances touching the
nature and quality of this selfe-sufficiencie; that it is,

1. Res seria, a serious thing; as Seneca said of true joy, (mihi creds, res
severa est verum gaudium) so may I say of true contentment, it is not a light
and frothy, but a grave and weighty thing; he that would be truly contented,
must sit down and consider seriously with himself, in what terms he stands
with God: for such as a man's conscience is to Godward, such is his contentment
to himselfe-ward. There is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Esaias 57. 21. a
wicked man can have no comfort nor content, Why? For he is like the troubled
sea whose waters cast up mire and dirt (says the Prophet in the same place;)
and why like the troubles sea, and not like the troubled air for the same
wind troubles both? The reason is because when the air is troubled, if the
wind do but cease, it is presently calmed; so is the heart of a godly man,
when his troubles are over, his heart is presently at rest; but a wicked man's
heart is like the sea; which when the winds are laid, and there is no outward
thing to trouble it, it still works and foames, and troubles it self with its
own motion; so though a wicked man have nothing outwardly to trouble him, yet
his own unquiet heart troubles it self, and will not suffer him to be at
peace. Take this for a Maxim, that a wicked man can never be a contented man.
Try thy self therefore whether thou be filius pacis a son of peace, or
filius irae a child of wrath; look well into thy self to see how the case
stands betwixt thy soul and thy God: if upon inquiry thou find that God and
thee are friends then go thy way (as Solomon says Eccles. 9. 7.) Eat thy
bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts
thy works: if otherwise thou be one that live at variance with God, then
change thy note and say, Droope O my soul, hang down thy head and heart, be
in bitterness of spirit: Inhaere poenitentiae usque ad finem vitae (Amb.)
repent and mourn to the very death, never suffer one cheerful thought in thy
heart, one cheerful look in thy face, one cheerful word in thy mouth, till
thou have reconciled thy self to God, and make thy peace with heaven; never
seek to give thy self content, till first thou have given thy God content,
for all the sins wherewith thou have grieved and discontented him. Let no man
therefore be mistaken in the matter of contentment, to think that it is a
wanton and a lascivious thing; he that truly learnes it shall find that it is
Res seria, a weighty and a serious thing.

2. It is Res sacra, a holy thing, therefore the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 6. joins
Godliness and contentment together; to show that none can be a contented man,
but he that is a godly man. A stranger (says Solomon) does not intermeddle
with this joy, Prove. 14. 10. he that is a stranger to God, and a stranger to
godliness, has nothing to do with true contentedness. In which respect the
Apostle says, that God gives to the godly (...), all things richly to enjoy,
1 Timothy 6. 17. It is one thing to use a thing, another to enjoy it; a wicked man
may use the creatures, and the ordinances and bessings of God, but he cannot be
said to enjoy them; for that imports a sweet and sanctified use of them, which
is the gift of God only to them that are godly: and it is certain, no man in
the world takes so much content in his meats and drinks, and lawful
recreations, as a godly man does, for he enjoyes God in all these. Contrarily,
The joy of the wicked (says Solomon elsewhere) has a snare in it; (i) a
secret guiltiness of sin that strangles all their mirth, so that even in
laughter their hearts are heavy. It follows then, that as that was the best
wine that was of Christ's making, John 2. when he turned the water into wine; so
that is the best content that is of Gods making, when he turns our carnal joy
into a spiritual joy, and mingleth heavenly content with earthly. Let no man
therefore have a misopinion of contentment, as if it were a sensual or carnal
thing, for he that truly understands it, shall find that it is Res sacra, a
sacred and holy thing.

3. It is Res pretiosa, a precions thing, not only as it is said, 1 Samuel 3. 1.
That the word of God was precious in those days, that is, rare, unusual, and
seldom heard of: for so is contentment too, it is a rare thing to find a
contented man; but it is Rarum and Charum too, not only precious for the
rarity and strangeness of it, but for the worth and excellency of it. as the
blood of Christ is called precious blood, for the worth and excellency of it,
above all other blood, for one drop of it was able to redeeme^ a world in this
sense is true content a precious thing; its indeed the only (...) the only
heaven upon earth that this world affords, without which a man is even dead
while he lives and many times through grief and discontent, is even ready (as
Job speaks) to choose strangling and death, rather than life, Job. 7. 15. Let a
man's house be never so well situated, never so well furnished, and fairly
built, if he have no content in it, it is but (as the City of refuge was said
to be) (...) a prison without fetters, though it be not a place of durance, it is
a place of bondage to him. Let a man's wife be never so virtuous, if he have no
content in her, she is but (...), like a snake in his bosom, a continual
heart-sore and vexation to him; though a man have many children and means
enough to leave them, if he have no content in them, they will be to him (as
Jacoh said of Simeon and Levi) a means to bring down his hoary head with
grief and sorrow to the grave. Let a man's table be never so richly decked, (as
David speaks) if he have no content in it; it is but with him, as it was with
the Israelites, when God gave them Quails to eat, but sent cleanness withal
into their souls. All your Cupboards of plate without contentment, are but (as
Moab was said to be Olla lotionis) no better than washpots, or as the prophet
expresses it, They are vessels wherein there is no pleasure. In a word, there
is no earthly blessing within door or without, that is of any price, or worth,
or value, to a man, except it have contentment joined with it. Therefore judge
ye, whether it be not Res pretiosa, a rare and precious thing. If thou separate
the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth (says God, Ier. 15.
19.) there is a vile, a base contentment that consists in sensuality and
beastly lusts, when men like Swine lie and wallow in the mire of their own
sins; but there is another contentment, when a man like Enoch can walk with
his God; and enjoy the comfort of a good conscience to himself; and this is
that which I term precious.

4. Lastly, it is Res petenda, a thing to be prayed for. For this shall every one
that is godly, make his prayer unto thee, (says David Psalm. 32. 6.) for other
things the prayers of the godly differ, and very exceeding much; one prays for
faith, another for patience, another for wisdom, etc. according as every one
knows the state of his own soul, and the necessities of his own life: but
this is such a (...), such a universal good thing that every one that is godly
will be sure to pray for, though they differ in other things; in this they all
agree, all their prayers jumpe and meet in this center; there is not a godly
man upon earth, but he does heartily desire of God, that if God will not give
him means to live richly, nor health to live soundly, yet that he would give
him grace to live conte^tedly. Super hoc, for this shall every one that is godly
make his prayers unto thee. It is indeed a grace that comes immediately from
God, as the Apostle implies in the next verse to my text; having said here; he
had learned to be content; he uses another expression there* and says (...),
I am Divinely taught, or I am taught of God to be content: it is not man's
teaching then, but Gods teaching, his inward effectual working that must
learn a man the Art of contentation. Non lectio sed unctio (as S. Bernard
speaks) it is not all the reading in the world that can bring a man to it, but
it is that same Anointing (which the Scripture speaks of, 1 John 2. 27.) that
must supple and soften a man's heart, and make him pliable to any condition. A
man must be (...), inwardly taught and wrought of God, before he can come to
the true understanding and application of it to himself. It is true, that all
other blessings besides this, do come from God, but not so immediately as this
grace does: if a man want money, friends may supply him; if he want counsel,
the Lawyers may help him; if he stand in need of physic, there be those that
can do him ease; but if he want a heart to sive comfortably, and grace to live
contentedly, it is God alone that can furnish him therewith. Hes is the God of
all Grace (as S. Peter calls him, 1 Pet. 5.) he has the treasury, the monopoly
of it in his own hands: want you wisdom? want you faith? want you
contentment? etc. to him you must repair: It is He that gives his beloved
sleep (as David speaks*) He that would sleep quietly, and awake
contentedly, must be a suter to God; Contentment will not come alone, it is Res
petenda, a thing to be prayed for, and happy are we, that we may have it for
praying.

And here I cannot but commend unto you the prayer of Agur for this very thing,
Prove. 30. 8. that holy man knew that if the world afforded any perfect
contentment, it was in a middle estate, equally distant from penury and from
excess: he knew it was a hard matter for a man that is either very poor or
very rich, to live contentedly: therefore he desired of God to give him neither
poverty nor riches, but to feed him with food convenient for him. That God
would grant him such an indifferent, such a midling estate, that he might
neither be so poor as to be despised, nor so rich as to be envied, but only
so happy as to be contented: this was the sum and substance of his prayer.
Give me leave, I beseech you, to make a little digression upon it; I hope it
shall be no transgression, neither to your patience, nor to my purpose, because
it is so agreeable and suitable to my text. There you may see the two extremes
of this virtue; poverty on the one side, and riches on the other, (like the two
thieves in the Gospel) and contentment (like our Savior Christ) in the midst
between them both.

The first extreme, or enemy to contentment, is Poverty, though it please God
to lay poverty upon some men (I suppose) for their souls good; that by being
poor in purse they may learn to be poor in spirit, that so being wretched
one way, they may come to be blessed another way: for blessed are the poor in
spirit, Mat. 5. Yet you would not think how hard a thing it is for a man that
lives very poorly, to live very contentedly. But I will give you my reasons
for it, and they are four.

1. Propter inediam, for the famine and hunger that poor people ^ndure in
these times of dearth and scarcity, which rich ones neither feel nor fear. As
it was with Joseph, Genesis 37. 25. His brethren sat down to eat and, drink, and
be merry, while poor Joseph lay pining and starving in the pit: and to that
the Prophet Amos alludes, blaming those that lived at ease in Sion, and were
not sorry for the afflictions of Joseph; super contrituram Iosephi, some render
it for the threshing and s^ayling of Joseph. How many poor Iosephes are there
in this kingdom, that are feign to thresh and slaile; to work and toil from
morn to night, and all they can do, all they can earne, will hardly buy bread
for their poor wives and children. In all the Lamentations of Jeremy there is
nothing more lamentable than this, Lam. 4. 4. Parvuli panem petunt, etc. The
little children cried and died for bread, and there was not one that could
break it to them. Blessed be the Lord, it is not so in this City, your plenty,
your bounty, your mercy has provided better for poor children than so; and I
doubt not but the promise, the grace, the glory of God will reward and crown
you for it; but let me tell you (beloved) in the country abroad, where no such
provisions are, you would bless your selves to hear and see and know, how
hardly the poor do fare, how wretchedly, how miserably they live* having no
more, but as they say of prisoners pittances (...), it will neither keep them
alive nor suffer them to dye; so much as by the mercy of God will hold life and
soul together, and that is all. And if it be an easy matter for such to be
contented, judge ye: When a man's wife shall cry, his children cry, his cattle
(if he be worth any) shall cry and low and bleate for want of food, and a man
has it not to give them; Oh my brethren, this cuts, this wounds, this peirceth
to the very heart and soul. No marvel then that Agur prayed to God, He might
not come to poverty, Propter inediam, for the hunger that the poor do suffer.

2. Propter injuriam, for the injuries and wrongs that poor people suffer from
rich oppressors, and are not able to right themselves. The Prophet David says,
Psalm. 10. 9. They ravish the poor when they get him into their nets. What are
the Nets of rich men? but their bonds, their debts, their morgages; as Saint
Chrysostom says, (...), You bring us into writings that are stronger than any
iron chains. These be the nets of rich oppressors, their writings and
obligations: Now when they get a poor man into these nets, how do they use
them? David says, they do not only rob them, but Ravish them: You know
Ravishing is a dishonesty joined with violence and cruelty: so the meaning is,
when they get a poor man into their debts and dangers, that he is hampered and
entangled in their nets, they use him dishonestly, and they use him cruelly
too; there is* neither equity nor mercy to be had at their hands. Elsewhere
David terms them (...), men-eaters, Christians in name, but Canibals indeed,
Psalm. 14. 14. They eat up my people, as they eat bread* they do not only
nip them and bite them by their usury (as you know usury in English, is biting
in Hebrew, so the word mesheck signifies) I say, they do not only bite them
by their usury, but they devour and eat them up by their extortion: They eat
up my people as bread, (i.) they make no more conscience to undo a poor man,
than they make conscience to eat a meals meat when they are hungry. Believe
it, these men are no better than murderers in Gods account; for a poor man's
substance is termed his life in Scripture: in the Gospel it is said, Mark 12.
ult. that the poor widow cast into the treasury (...), Her whole life, (i)
her whole substance. So Luke 8. 43. it is said of the woman that had an issue
of blood 12. years, that she spent (...), Her whole life, meaning her whole
living, upon the Physicians: They then that take away a poor man's substance,
do in effect, and in Gods account take away his very life, and so are
murderers. For a poor man in his house is like a snaile in his shell, crush
that, and you kill him. In another place it is said, They grind the faces of
the poor: that is, they use them as cruelly and unmercifully, as if they
should take a poor man's face and grind it on a grindstone. Now if this be not
an enemy to a poor men's content, judge ye: therefore Propter injuriam, for the
wrongs that poor people suffer, and cannot right themselves; Lord (says Agur)
let me not come to poverty.

3. Propter infamiam, for the reproach, the scorn and contempt that is
incident to man of poor estate; let a poor man be never so honest, never so
modest, never so virtuous, yet the world regards neither his virtues nor him,
but does (...) look over him, or disdainefully upon him, as the Pharisee did
upon the Publican, Luke 18. when in contempt he called him Iste publicanus,
this Publican, this base inferior fellow, who was a better man to Godward
than himself. Saint James knew the guise of the world and observed it. Chap.
2. 2. that if there come one into your houses (...) with a gold ring, and
gorgeous apparel, such a one is accepted and entertained with all respect;
but let there come in a poor man (...) in vile raiment, or in a poor habit,
he is despised and bid stand behind the door. Look into Luke 15. 30. you shall
see a true image of the rich churles of these times: when the poor Prodigals
wings were clipped, his means was wasted that he was glad to seek relief in
his fathers house, though his good father kindly embraced and entertained him:
(as God does all repenting sinners) yet his elder brother would not own him,
but called him in disdain, This thy son: not this my brother, but this thy
son, as if he had been nothing of kin to him, because he was grown into
poverty, and driven by necessity to make bold with his friends: had he come
home richly attired or bravely attended, or sufficiently monied; then no doubt)
he should have been his brother, as welcome to him as to his father; but
because he was beggarly, bare and poor, he was but (...) this thy son. O
nimis inimica amicitia, (says a father) Oh the too friendlesse friendship of
this world, that want of means should cause want of love, that a man should be
valued, not according to that which he has, but according to that which he
has not. I beseech you take it into your consideration, whether it be not a
hard matter for a man to be well contented, that shall, see himself despised
and undervalued: and then judge whether a man has not reason to pray as Agur
did, Lord let me not come to poverty* propter infamiam, for the contempt and
scorn that poor men are subject to.

4 Lastly, propter imbecillitatem, for the frailty and weakness of our
corrupted nature, which is such that if our mean^s begin to fail us, our faith
in God is ready to faint and fail us too. Though God would have us live by
faith, Heb. 10. 38. yet alas we count that but a poor kind of living; and as
long as we can either live by our means, or live by our friends, or live by
our wits, or live by our shifts, as long as we can live any way, we will hardly
be brought to live that way, to live by our faith in Jesus Christ. It fares
with us for the most part as it did with Hagar, Genesis 21. 15. as long as her
bread and her bottle held out, so long she was reasonably well content* we
hear no complaint, no moan that she made; but as soon as ever these were
wasted and spent and done, presently she falls a crying out, she was undone,
she and her child must die, there was no more hope. Thus it fares with us* as
long as our means and moneys hold, we can be indifferently well content* God
Almighty seldom hears of us, but if these be exhausted and gone, we are
presently out of heart, we think there is no way but one with us: we and our
children must perish, there is no other hope: unless God open our eyes, as he
did the eyes of Hagar, to see the fountain of his goodness that is ever at
hand to supply the poores necessities; and when we are quieted. Beloved, it is
an easy matter for a man to pray for his daily bread, when he has it in his
cupboard; but when our own provisions fail us, then to rely and rest upon the
provisions of God, that is the trial of a Christians faith. It is an easy
matter to swim in a warm bath, every weakling, every impotent body can do
that; but he that can hold up his head in a dangerous sea, when every wave is
ready to absorpe and swallow him up, that is the trial of a man's strength and
life: so it is an easy matter to be content in a plentiful estate, where
there is no want, no lack of any thing, but for a man to be cast as it were into
a sea of troubles, where so many wants like so many waves, come daily beating
and breaking in upon him; then to hold up his head with content and confidence
in God, there is the touchstone of an undissembled faith indeed. You that never
yet felt any want, little do you know what plunges poor men are driven to in
the time of need; therefore since God in mercy does not make you to know their
miseries by experience, I would have you to know it by fellow-feeling; that you
may learn of Agur to desire of God not to bring you to poverty, propter
imbecillitatem, for the weakness of humane nature, that can hardly hold out
in the want of earthly means.

Thus you have heard the inconveniences of poverty, which is one extreme of
this virtue; hear now in few words the inconvenience of Riches, which is the
other extreme; both enemies to a man's contentment. [Give me neither poverty
nor riches.]

By Riches, doubtless Agur means such Riches as our Savior calls (...) the
mammon of unrighteousness, Luke 16. 9. Riches ill gotten, by unjust,
unrighteous means: for otherwise Solomon tells us, Prove* 10. 22. That the
blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it: intimating*
that they which grow rich, and not by Gods blessing, but by such means as God
has accursed; the Lord does add such a deal of sorrow and care and vexation
with it* that they were as good or better be without it. Such riches they were
that Abraham rejected at the King of Sodoms hand, Genesis 14. 23. when he offered
him goods and spoils enough to have enriched him and all his household; no
(says Abraham) I will not take so much as a ^hred or a shooe-latchet, because
it shall never be said, the King of Sodom has made me rich: men shall never
say, that Abraham was made rich not by Gods blessing, but by the King of
Sodomes means: God shall make Abraham rich, or I am content still to be poor.
It is reported of Nevessan (a better Lawyer, than honest man) that he should
say; He that would not venture his body, shall never be valiant, nor he that
will not venture his soul, be rich, Let them that make no reckoning of their
souls, venture them at their peril; but let all that desire contentment here,
or heaven hereafter, make their prayers to God as Agur did, From such kind of
riches, good Lord deliver us. And great reasons may be given for it;

1 Quia onerant, because such kind of riches load and clog the soul, Heb. 2.
6. Woe be to him that increases that which is not his, and to him that ladeth
himself with thick clay: How long? Mark what a base term God gives the
wealth of this world, he calls it densum lutum, thick clay; because it bemires
and clogs us too: He that increases that which is not his, but hooks it out
of other men by evil means, he must needs be bemired, must needs have a
foul conscience* an unclean heart to God ward: and he that ladeth himself
with thick clay, must needs be clog^ in his mind, must needs go heavily and
slowly on to heaven, if ever he come there with such a lading: And mark how
the Prophet adds, Vsque quo? How long? and there makes a stop: to show the
indefatigablenesse of covetous men, though they have enough to load them, they
can never have enough to tire them* though he load his house, his bags, his
wits, his memory, and his conscience, yet is he never weary with all his
lading, but still desires to take in more. As a ship may be over laden with
gold and silver even unto sinking, and yet have compass and sides enough to
hold ten times more; so a covetous man, though he has enough to sink him, he
never has enough to satisfy him. As a dog may have his stomach crammed, usque
ad vomitum* till he cast it up again, and yet his appetite is still
unsatisfied, for he presently returns to his vomit again: so a covetous
miser, though he cramme his chests with gold, his garners with corn, his
deskes with bills and bonds, yet his lust is never satisfied, his mind is never
wearied; which makes the Lord even to wonder at it, and ask, usque quo? How
long? There Is no end of a covetous man's desires; he never leaves clogging and
lading himself, till he and his load perish together. Take heed therefore of
ill gotten riches, Quia onerant, because they load the soul, and hinder it in
its passage to heaven, and in that sense are an enemy to man's contentment.

2 Quia corrumpunt, because ill-gotten riches corrupt a man's conscience, and
make him worse than otherwise he would or could be. 1 Timothy 6. 9. They that will
be rich fall into many temptations snares and lusts which drown men in
perdition and destruction. Mark, that he does not say, they that are rich,
(for a man may be divinitus dives divinely rich, or rich to God; I mean rich
and godly too; as Moses is said to be divinitus venustus, divinely fair, or
fair to God, Act. 7. 20. so the original has it.) Neither is it said, They
that would be rich, if God so pleased to bless them by just and honest ways.
But they (says the Apostle) that will be rich, that set down this for their
resolution, Rich they will be, by right or by wrong; they are those that
corrupt themselves, and run the hazard of their souls. It is the conceit of
Tertullian, that even Judas carried himself honestly and rightly Vsque ad
loculorum officium, till he came to carry the Bag, that same (...), (as the
Evangelists word is) the purse or tongue, as it signifies; For Judas thought,
as all covetous men do, that the purse is the best tongue a man can use to
speak for himself upon any occasion; when once he came to that to be a master
of money; he grew into such a devilish humor of covetousness, that rather
than h^ would be out of takings, he would sell his very Savior: and a fair
match he made, (for as Austin says) Judas sold his salvation, and the Scribes
and Pharisees bought their damnation, and all for a little money. No marvel
the Apostle calls the love of money, the root af all evil: it is not (...), the
matter of money, but (...), the love of money, that is the Root of all evil.
And why the root? I think, for two causes. 1. Because a root is of a
spreading, of a growing nature, specially if planted in a fruitful soil. Such
is the corrupt heart of man, if Satan can but once fasten that wicked root of
covetousness in a man's heart, and water it as he will with suggestions, it is
wonderful how it will spread and grow and increase continually more and more. Or
secondly, some say it is called the Root, because it is with a man as with a
tree in winter, there is sap and life in the root, when there is little or none to
be seen in the branches. So in old and frosty age, when other vices and lusts
decay, then covetousness holds life in the root, and a man will be covetous
when he has not strength to be other ways vicious. But why is it called the
Root of all evil, for it is not the root of prodigality, riot, etc. I take it,
the meaning is, of all gainefull evils; if so be that riot and prodigality were
as gainefull evils as baseness and misery, a covetous man would be as
inclineable to the one as to the other. Labor then to pull up this same (...),
this Root of bitterness, and desire God to plant the sweet and comfortable
grace of true contentedness in your hearts, that you may be so far from
being carried away with the love of money, that you may account it (as the
Apostle speaks) but (...) but dross, but dung, but offall, but filth and
garbage, in respect of Christ, and a good conscience.

3. Quia cruciant, because they vex and greeve, and pain the soul. Our
Savior Christ compares them to thorns, and thorns you know are painful
things; painful in the piercing, but more painful in the pulling out: so
are ill-gotten riches painful in the getting, but most painful in the going
out; when these thorns come to be plucked out by the hand of death, that a man
and his riches must part, then is the pain* then is the woe: for now men's
hearts are hardened, their consciences seared, they have (as the Apostle says)
(...), a kind of hornyhoofe grown over their souls, like the brawny
hardness that grows upon a labourors hands, or a travelers feet, that makes
them insensible of any pain: Oh but when death comes to pare off this
crustinesse, and leaves nothing to stand betwixt a man's soul and his sins,
then is the anguish of ill-gotten goods; when he is searched to the quick, and
his life lies a bleeding, then let him say, whether ungodly riches be not
paineful things. Zophar gives them a worse Epithet than thorns, and likens
them to poisons, Job 20. 12. Sugared poisons go down pleasantly, Oh but when
they are down, they gall, and gnaw, and gripe the very heart strings asunder,
if there be not extraordinary remedy: So do ill-gotten goods go down like
sugared poisons, and so please the palats of covetous men, that they cannot
forbear them, nor will they: Oh but there will come a time of wringing, and
ruing for all this. They say, the Italians will give a man a poison that shall
not kill him till a long time after: such poisons are ill-gotten riches; would
you know the reason why they do not trouble men's consciences now itis because
the poison does not yet work, when God in judgment sets this Poison a working,
which they themselves have taken long ago, then (as the Prophet Esaias says
Chap. 3. 9.) Woe be unto your souls, for they have rewarded evil to
themselves. If a man should have a Diamond curiously cut into sharp angles in
his body, or in his bladder, no man would account him a rich man, but a
miserable and a dead man: even such is the state of him that has swallowed
down the guilt of ill-gotten gain, it will one day torment him more than ever
it enriched him; so that the pleasure of the one, shall never countervaile the
pain of the other. Take heed therefore and beware of ill-gotten riches, Quia
cruciant, though they smart not now, they will one day rend the soul.

4 Quia pereunt, because ill-gotten riches never prosper with a man, but perish
and come to a naughty end, and that partly through the owners wickedness, as
the Prophet speaks of some that earne wages and put it in pertusum sacculum
into a broken bag, or into a bag full of holes and chinkes* every lust, every
sin that a wicked man is given to, makes (as it were) a chinke or a hole in
his estate, whereat his wealth runs out, if it be not stopped by true
repentance: and partly through the just judgment of God, that like as we see,
Mark 11. 20. as soon as Christ had cursed the figtree, it presently withered
and dried up (...) from the roots, to show that it was not the root alone,
but the blessing of Christ that did support the figtree: it is not all a man's
care, nor all his endeavor that can keep his wealth from withering and
perishing* if God from heaven give a curse unto it, as he does to all ill
gotten goods. W^e be to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house,
Hab. 2. 9. there hangs a judgment over that man's house, like rain in the
clouds, which sooner or later will come dashing down upon it and overwhelme
it. Fire shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery, Job 15. 34* a man that
builds his tabernacle, and raises his estate by bribery, and such unlawful
means, the Lord does bear such hatred to that man's house, that if Atonement
be not made, he will even fire it and burn it to the ground: what a world of
sudden and lamentable fires are there every day in some place or other, who can
tell but that God does fire such houses for the bribery and iniquity of the
owners and founders: you know that fire may be given to a train of Gunpowder,
a great way off from the place to which the blow is intended, so may judgment
be breeding a long time ere it break out, it may hover a long time ere it
light: therefore as you tender your own safety, take heed of getting riches by
ill courses, quia pereunt because they perish and come to a naughty end. And
will thou perish (says Austine) for that which perishes? God forbid.

5 Lastly, quia damnant, because with out Gods infinite mercy they damn a
man's soul eternally. The Apostle Paul is direct, Romans 3. 8. They which do
evil that good may come of it, their damnation is just. Now wherefore do men
filch and steal, cozen and deceive, defraud and over reach, and do all mann^r
of evil? is it not that good may come of it, that they get goods by it? if it
be so, then make the inference your selves, whether such men's damnation be not
just. But I dare not dwell upon this uncomfortable point, I know it is beside
my text; let me entreat you in a word, and so I have done with it: that seeing
riches ill gotten are so dangerous to the soul, and so great an enemy to a
man's contentment; that you would remember Agurs prayer, and desire no more of
God but that which is food and means convenient for you; and that is only so
much as you may get justly, use soberly, enjoy thankfully, distribute
cheerfully, and live contentedly.

You have heard the two extremes of this virtue (Poverty and Riches) now the
mean is that where true contentment rests, that is, when God fits a man with
such an estate as is most meet, and most convenient for him (feed me with
food convenient for me, says Agur,) when a man's heart and his estate do
convenire, do meet, and agree and comply in one, there is the contentment that
my text speaks of: when God fashioneth a man's heart to his means, as David
speaks, Psalm. 33. 13, 14, 15. The Lord looks down from his habitation, upon
the men of the earth, and he fashioneth their hearts every one of them; as a
suit of clothes is fitted to a man's body, so does God fashion a good man's
heart to his estate, and makes it suitable, sit and convenient for him, and this
is it that gives him content: for when there is an unsutablenesse, a
disproportion, a disagreement, betwixt a man's mind and his means, he can have
no content, no comfort in it; as we see by Ahab, and by Haman, and diverse
others, who wanted for no means, yet because their hearts did not Convenire
did not comply and agree with their estates, see how discontentedly they lived
and ^yed. If then thy estate be not according to thy mind, desire of God (as
Agur did) to fashion and fit thy mind and heart to thy estate, that they may
convenire, concord and comply one with the other; then shall thou have content
in it, be it more or less. You must know, it were as easy to God, to give a
man plenty as poverty; health as sickness, peace as trouble, all were one to
him to give a man great means as little; but only that he sees the one more
convenient for some men than the other, and accordingly dispenses his favors.
He is (...) the knower and searcher of the heart, and sees that some man if he
had more, it would make him proud, if he had less it would make him repine; he
sees that every man has not wisdom, nor humility, nor heavenly mindedness
enough to concoct a more plentiful estate, and therefore he fits every one
with such an estate as is most suitable, most convenient for him. Do not
therefore think hardely of God because he straytens thee and cuts thee short
in many things which thou desire* but know that God knows thee better than
thy self; Remember what title S. Paul gives to God. 1 Timothy 1. 17. To God only
wise be glory and immortality: If we did but consider that God is (...) only
wise, it would be a great stay to our minds, and a great help to our
contentment: But here is the mischief, we think our selves wise too, nay I may
say it, we think our selves as wise or wiser than God; we are of Alphonsus his
mind, who feared not to say, Si in principio mundi ipse Deo adfuisset, mult^
melius ornatiusque condenda fuisse, if he had been with God in the beginning,
things should have been contrived in an other manner than now they are: so do
we blasphemously think, that if God would but take our counsel, and be ruled
by us, things should be carried in another manner than now they are, that some
should not have so much* others so little, some all, others never a whit: thus
we wretchedly and blasphemously think our selves as wise, or wiser than God,
and that's the reason we are not content with his dealing; whereas if we did
consider that God were only wise, and none were wise but he, this would make
us resign our selves to him, submit our wills to his, and say as Ely did, It
is the Lord, let him do whatsoever seems good unto him* for whatsoever
seems good to him, cannot but be good, howsoever it seems to us. Do but
thus think, thus believe, thus conceive of God, and that is the way to be
content.

I have done with the first general part of my Text, which was disciplina
pacis, the discipline of peace, and therein you may learn what a happiness it
is to be Content, or as the world signifies) to be selfe-sufficient. I come
now to the second, and that is pax disciplinae the peace of this discipline, or
the profit of this learning; and therein you shall see, how I for my part, you
for your parts, and every one for his own part, may do to attain unto this
happiness, and learn for our own particulars to be contented with our own
estates. My Text you see, is general and comprehensive, and does extend and
enlarge it self, not to any one estate or condition of life, but to all
conditions, and to all estates whatsoever: For if contentment consisted or
rested only in nobility and greatness, what should become of the meaner
multitude, how should they be Content? if it consisted in ease and pleasure,
how should they be content that work and labor; if in costly apparel and
dainty fare, what a case were they in that go poorly and fare hardly; In a
word, if contentment were limited and confined to any one condition, if it were
included and shut up in any one estate, what should become of all the rest? But
the comfort is, that God in mercy has so divided, and dispersed and diffused
this grace into all estates of men, that in whatsoever state a man is in,
through Gods blessing and his own endeavor, he may be contented with; the
poor man as content as the rich man, the husbandman as the Gentleman* and the
subject as content as the King. I have learned (says S. Paul, like a
t^tragonismus or a Die that falls square which way soever it lights) In
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be Content.

Thus far in general; I come now to particulars. As God charged his Prophet,
Ezekiel. 14. 4. to answer them according to their Idols; go no further than their
own case, and speak home to that; so give me leave to lay before you certain
particular cases of discontent, which are or may be your own cases in
particular, and when I have answered you according to them* when I have
satisfied and showed you how they may be borne with a contented mind, (...) I
have done. The cases are fix.

1. Moses case, to be crossed in ones wife, as he was by Zipporah. 2. Elies case,
to be crossed in ones children, as he was by ^^ophni and Phin^has* 3. Joseph's
case, to be crossed in ons reputation, as he was by his mistress. 4.
Mephibosbeths case, to be crossed in ones friends and means, as he was by Ziba.
5. The Cripples case, Job. 5. to be crossed in ones preferment and hopes, as he
was, for he lay at the poole of Bethesda 38. years, yet still one or other
crossed him, and stepped in before him. 6. Hezechias case, to be crossed in ones
departure out of this world, to be called to dye (as he was) at such a time
when a man desires most to live. These six, in my opinion, are the principal
cases, and the chiefest causes that are (as Aristotle speaks) (...) the makers
and breeders, the provokers and procurers of grief, displeasure, and
discontent, I will but strike these several slints with a touch and away, and
I hope in God that each of them will afford you a spark to inlighten my Text;
and to show you the way to be content.

As Jacob when he blessed the sons of Joseph, Gen 48. blessed them with a cross,
crossing his arms (as you may see by the Text:) so the greatest blessing that
ever came into the world, came by a cross (the cross and passion of our
blessed Lord and Savior;) and there is no man living so blessed of God in this
world, but he has some cross or other to keep him humble, and the most
usual are these;

1. Moses case, to be crossed with a Zipporah, with an ill-tongued wife: or
Abigails case, to be crossed with a Naball, with an ill-conditioned husband; we
will put them both together, because this cross is like an Amphisbaena, a
Serpent with two heads, which bites both ways, and stings at both ends; and
there must be a redress on both sides, or there can be no contentment on
either: As the Poets feign of Venus, that she brought forth a son, and
called his name (...) Love, this son of her^ would never thrive nor come to
any growth, till she had brought forth another son, and she called his name
(...), as you would say love for love. Thus stands the case betwixt a man and
his wife they are like (...) and (...), the love of the one will never grow nor
thrive without the love of the other* if there be not a reciprocal affection,
a mutual endeavoring to give each other content, their life will prove
rather Conjurgium than Conjugium (as one said) rather a watfare, then a
welfare, and they shall live in the family as Jacob and Esau did in the womb,
and do nothing but wrestle and struggle for superiority; which is a hateful
life both to God and man. Well, but if it be thus, that a man or woman be thus
crossed; what is to be done in such a case? I answer, there is no way but one,
and that is it my Text speaks of, only to learn to be Content. But yet there
is a course to be taken for that, and it is this. David tells us in the Psalm,
that it is God that makes them that are in one house to be of one heart: if
therefore any discontent arise in a family, the only way is to have recourse
to heaven by humble and earnest prayer, and God will work a peace twixt man
and wife. We see in Genesis, as long as Adam and Eve lived at one with God,
they lived at one among themselves; but so soon as they were divided from God
by sin, they became divided among themselves by discord; Adam falls a blaming
of Eve and accusing her to God, in whom before he rejoiced as bone of his bone,
and flesh of his flesh: So mark it where you will, seldom do man and wife
fall out among themselves, but first they are fallen out with God, and seldom
agree except God has a hand in it. The Hebrews observe that Gods Name
(Ichovah) and man's and woman's name (Ish and Ishah) begin both with one and the
same letter; now if you takeout the first letter of Gods name from a man's and
woman's name, nothing remains but Esh which signifies fire. This is the true
reason why there is so much fire, I mean so much unkind and unnatural flames
of contention betwixt man and wife, only because God is left out, the Lord is
not between them. Therefore the only way to bring peace and unity into a
family, is to bring God into the family; and the only way to bring God into a
house, is to bring him and draw him in by prayer. Draw near to God, and God
will draw near to you (says S. James.) Be not you wanting to God, and God
will never be wanting to you; Always remember the Apostles farewell to the
Corinthians, 2 Cor* 13. 11. Be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of
peace shall be with you. Thus do as God would have you, and that is the way to
be content.

2. Elies case, to be crossed in ones children, Put case thy children be either
taken from thee by untimely death, in their youth; or which is worse, live to
be ungracious and undutifull to thee in their age: these are piercing griefs;
yet learn to be content in both. For the first, say that Almighty God, who
has Ius vitae and necis, the power of life and death in his own hands, and
can draw out, and cut short our lives as it pleases him, do cut off thy child
in the budding, in the blooming of his age, when he is, Aurorae filius (as the
Poet speaks) a son of the morning, so that all thy joy, thy hope, thy
comfort, seems to perish and die* and be extinguished in him: yet learn to be
content, for why? Consider, that if thy child had lived, he must have served an
apprentiship all the while, that he might after have heene free of the heavenly
Jerusalem: now if God in his mercy will grant it the freedom in the beginning
of its years, and make him a citizen among the Saints shortly after he came
into the world is this any cause of discontent? and not rather of thanksgiving?
But who can tell whether such a child be saved or no, if I were but sure of
that (will some say) I should be the better content: though I know a good parent
will abhor such a thought of doubtfulnesse, yet for the better settling of
your minds in that assurance, do but call to mind our Saviors saying, Suffer
little children to come unto me, for unto such belongs the Kingdom of God*
it is not only said that they belong to Gods kingdom, but that Gods kingdom
belongs to them, (as much as to say) if any have a right unto it, or may claim
a part or portion in it, it is such or none: in the Original it is, (...), For
of such is the kingdom of God, (that is) Gods kingdom does consist of little
children, heaven is replenished and stored with such as they. Forasmuch then as
there can be no fear nor danger of thy child's salvation with God, let this
teach thee to be content, if God shall take him from thee in the beginning of
its days.

But the greatest cross of all is, when children live to be ungracious and
undutifull to their parents in their age (as Elies were) when aged parents
shall be forced to complain, as the tree did in the Apologue, that it was rent
and torn and split asunder, with the same wedge that was cut out of its own
bowels; this I am persuaded is the greatest grief that can befall a
tenderhearted parent. This was the cross that subdued Egypt; all the plagues
of God, could not make them yield, till God smote their children, and that
broke their hearts: so 1 Samuel 30. 6. it is said of David's men, that their
souls were bitter for their children: the miscarriage of a child is gall and
worme-wood to a parent, it imbitters their very souls. If thy case be thus, I
bewail and condole it: only let me persuade thee to be content, because the
God that made thy child, can mende him. Do therefore for him as Noah did for
Iaphet, Genesis 9. 27. He had given that son of his a great deal of good
counsel, no doubt, and persuaded him to dwell in Gods Church, and become a
lively member of the same; but knowing well to how little purpose all this
would be, without Gods working upon his heart, he falls to prayer, God persuade
Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Shem: as if he had said, I have advised and
done my utmost, to persuade thee my son; but all this is but lost labor,
unless God put to his helping hand; now therefore, The good Lord persuade
thee, etc. Thus do thou for thy refractary child, desire God to persuade him,
to convince him, to convert and turn his heart, and thou shall see that
nothing shall stand in his way, but the work shall be accomplished. If God
undertake to bring Peter out of prison, no bolts nor bars shall be able to
hold him there; if the Lord ^ake in hand to lead Israel out of Egypt into the
promised ^and, sea shall be no sea, wilderness no wilderness, Giants no
Giants, etc. So though thy child be never so ill minded, never so desperately
bent, if God undertake to mend him and make him good, all his ill conditions
shall not hinder it: therefore let not thy heart sink, nor thy faith fail,
nor thy hopes languish, but still pray, still entreat, still wait upon God,
and chats the way to be content.

3. Joseph's case, to be crossed in ones reputation. Put case thy good name (which
Solomon says, is more precious than riches) be impeached and taken from thee
by slanders, and lies and base imputations of those that wish thee ill: for
such is the vice and villainy of the world, that they will traduce and discredit
a man, whether he deserve it yea or no. David compares such to the Aspe, which
is a beast ill sighted, but quick of hearing, weak but full of poison; so are
all detractours, illsighted to see any thing that is good in another, but quick
of hearing any thing that is bad of him; weak they are in judgment and in
charity both, but full of the poison of malice and envy. The poison of Alps
is under their lips, Psalm. 140. 3. Iunius translates it, venenum p^yados, the
poison of the spitting serpent; they have learned of the old Serpent, the
Devil, to spit their venom in the faces of those that feign would live in
peace, and dwell securely by them: they are indeed a cursed generation, Deuteronomy.
27. 24. Cursed be he that smites his neighbor in secret (that does secretly
and slily underhand traduce him, and seek to work him out of the good opinion
of his neighbors and friends) and mark what follows, let all the people say,
Amen. God does not only curse such a one himself, but he gives all his people
leave to curse him too: and cursed be that offense that brings the curse of
God, and the curse of the people upon such an offender.

Well, if it have been any of your hard haps to be thus secretly smitten, or
openly injured in your reputations, (as some of us, I am sure have been) let
me (as I have begun) entreat you to bear it contentedly whether you deserve
it or deserve it not.

If thou do deserve it, and that by thy scandalous life, thou have thrown
this dirt in thy own face; then be content and be sorry for what thou have
done, and God shall repay and make up thy good name again: we have his own
promise for it, by his own Prophet, Zeph. 3. 11. In that day thou shall not be
ashamed for all thy doings, wherein thou have transgressed against me: the
meaning is, that in the day of thy repentance, God will take from thee, not thy
sin only, but thy shame too. David by his great sins, had in a manner quite
broken his good name, insomuch that his enemies began to insult and make songs
upon him to disgrace him utterly; yet because he was a penitent man, God upon
his repentance repaired his good name, and he dyed (says the text) full of
riches and Honor: first of Chronicles, Chap. ult: not of riches only, but of
honor too: all his dishonor was done away, and he left a reverend and
renowned name behind him: when he had gotten credit with God, he got credit
with men too. In a word, if thou desire that others should speak well of
thee, see thou have a care to do well unto thy self, Psalm. 59. 18. Si
benefeceris tibi, If thou do well unto thy self, men will speak good of
thee. So that it lies in a man's self, it is in his own hand to make himself a
good name or a bad one: So long as a man does well to himself, (i) spends his
time well, serves his God well, leads his life well, and husbands his estate
well; so long he shall be sure to be well thought of, and well spoken of* but
if he do ill to himself, take an ill course, lead an ill life, and follow
ill company, etc. if he be then ill-spoken of, he must thank himself: and he
may say to himself, as the heart of Apollodorus the tyrant seemed to say to
him, who dreamed one night that he was stead by the Scythians, and that his
heart cried unto him out of the Caldron, (...), It is I that have brought thee
to all this. Therefore if thou deservest to be ill-spoken of, amend thou thy
self, and God will amend thy name.

But if thou be ill spoken of, and deservest it not, though the cross be
great, the comfort is the greater; for do but rest contented, and God will
find a time to bring thy innocence to light. Look how God does with secret
sins to bring them to light that are done in darkness; so will he do by
secret innocence* Joseph's uprightness was in secret, none saw it or knew it
but only God and himself; as for his mistress she accused him, belied and
slandered him, and was believed; poor Joseph either pleaded not for himself,
or his plea was not heard nor credited, yet God found a time to clear it and
bring it to light: so let the world raise what slanders they will, look how
he did with Joseph so will he deal with thee, for he is a God that changes
not. In the mean time, do not take too much to heart the reproaches of thy
enemies, but pray as Austin did, plue mihi mitigationes in cor, ut patienter
tales feram, Oh my God, shower down thy gentle appeasings into my heart, that
I may patiently bear with such men as these; Pray (I say) to God, that he
would pacify thy own heart, and mollify thy enemies hearts, and that's the
way to be Content.

4 Mephibosheths case, to be crossed by perfidious friends and servants. I
confess it is a hard case when such as are Viri pacis, and Viri panis (as the
Prophet speaks,) that eat of a man's bread, and profess friendship and love
and service to a man* when they shall go about to undermine him and work him
out of favor, and out of his fortunes too: yet the world is full of such
Zibaes that care not how they collogue, nor whom they slander for their own
private advantage: If they see a man to be a cripple (as it were) that he
cannot go to speak for himself, nor come in place to answer for himself, and
to tell his own tale, he shall be sure to have his tale told for him, by some
that he little dreamt of, that will do him a displeasure, and he shall never
know who hurt him. Thus did Ziba deal with Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 19. 30. yet
see how patiently, how contentedly, that good man put it up; when David spoke
of dividing the land with Ziba, Let him take all (says Mephibosheth) seeing my
Lord the King is come home in peace. Here is the voice of one that is a true
servant to his God, and a true subject to his King; such a man is really
content, that the devils pioners (I mean) undermining flatterers, should take
all they can get, and get all they can take either by Hophnies Fleshhooke, 1 Samuel 2. or by those Nets and Dragges that the Prophet speaks of, Hab. 1. 15.
let them hook, hale and drag together the Devil and all (as some I think
will do:) A contented man had rather with Mephibosheth loose all, part with
all, and be stripped of all he has, so he may but have leave to enjoy the favor
of his God, the safety of his Sovereign and the peace of his own conscience
to himself. Well, if it be thy hard hap to be thus abused and undermined by a
treacherous Ziba, that bears thee fair in hand, and secretly endeavors to
work thee out of all; yet learn of Mephibosheth to be content though thou
go by the worse; and desire of God as David did to stand thy friend in such
a case; sponde pro servo t^o, in bonum, Answer for thy servant in the thing
that is good, Psalm. 119. 122. as if he had said; Lord thou hear and see
how unjustly I am calumniated and evil spoken of in many places, where I am
not, nor may not come to answer for my self, therefore Lord do thou answer
for me, or stir up some good body to plead my cause, and speak in my
behalf. Subarrha servumtuum (so some translate it) be surety for thy servant;
if they will not believe me, nor give credit to my words when I speak in my
own defense; be thou O Lord a surety for me, pass thy word for my truth and
sincerity, for thou know my cause is good. Be surety for thy servant in the
thing that is good: Thus do, see thy cause be good, thy conscience clear, thy
heart unguilty of the great offense, and then commend, thy case to God, let God
alone to answer for thee, And that is the way to be Content.

5 The Cripples case, Ioh. 5. to be crossed in ones preferment, as he was that
lay 38. years at the poole of Bethesda, waiting for a good hour, and still
one or other stepped in before him, and intercepted him of his cure, and put him
by from all his possibilities and hopes. And this is the great Cordolium the
very heart-ake and greevance of many a worthy man, many a worthy Scholar, that
has lain a long time at the poole of the Church and Court, hoping at length to
climb up that same (...) (as the Apostle calls it, 1 Timothy 3. 13.) that good
step or stay to honor and preferment, that others have done, and still one or
other steps in before him, intercepts him of his hopes, and casts him down as
low as ever his expectations raised him up. If this be any of your cases, I
shall give you no other counsel then I desire of God to take my self, and
that's this; to learn of that Cripple to be content for a time, to tarry Gods
leisure, to attend still at the poole (I mean at the ordinances of God) and
you shall see at length, that if Angels cannot help you, Christ him self will
come and do a cure upon you, and rather work a miracle than your faith should
be disappointed, or your hope should make von ashamed. In the mean time you
must know, that there is a special dispensation of God in his dealings with
some of his servants, Number. 12. 7. My servant Moses is not so (says God) he is
faithful in all my house, unto him will I speak mouth to mouth. Here was a
special favor, that God would show to Moses, which he would not show to
every one that was faithful in his house. You see Matthew. 17. when Christ was
tansfigured upon the mount, he took but three of his Disciples with him, and
left the rest hehind, who yet were as near and dear, and as good Disciples as
they. Afterward, Matthew. 27. when Christ arose from death, it is said, that
many of the Saints arose to attend him; Many Saints, not all; others that had
been as holy and as sanctified men as they, stayed still in their graves, and
their bodies lay in the dust expecting glory. Thus does God still deal with
his servants; some he raises up to wealth and honor and preferment; othersome
he depresseth and holds down with poverty, want and need, who yet no doubt
are as true and faithful servants to God as they that are advanced. Solomon
tells us, Eccles. 9. 11. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong, nor riches to men of understanding, nor favor to men of knowledge: his
meaning is, that men of greatest abilities, men of greatest sufficiencies are
often times kept low, when others that are but Gregarij ordinis to our thinking,
are advanced and lifted up. This is to learn us to be content with our
estates, because they are of Gods assignement and designation. Content (I say)
not only by constraint, but willingly (as the Apostle speaks in another
case;) for you know there is a twofold contentment: voluntary, and involuntary.
The Involuntary is when a man is content with his estate, against his will,
because he cannot help it. As Simeon of Cyrene, Matthew. 27. 32. submitted
himself to bear the cross of Christ, because he was Angariatus compelled
and forced to it (as the Text shows:) this is a thankelesse and fruitless
contentment, virtus nolentium nulla est: God takes no pleasure in forced
patience; patience perforce has small thanks with God. But it is the
voluntary contentment which proceeds ab intrinseco from an inward working of
grace, from that same free sperit that David speaks of, Psalm. 51. when a man
does voluntarily, freely and of his own accord endeavor to work himself to
an (...) to an inward selfe-sufficiencie whether his estate please him or no,
as they did, Ier. 42. 6. Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will
obey the voice of the Lord, etc. Not only when Gods Will and ours suit
together, but when there is an utter disagreement betwixt them: then to be
content without constraint, is thank worthy with God. You see by experience, A
man that comes to an Inn, if he can get a better lodging and better
attendance, he will; if he cannot, yet he will be content with it; for why? He
considers it is but for a night and he is gone: thus we come into the world
as it were into an Inn, which is a place of passage, no place of abode; if we
can get a better estate or a better condition, use it in Gods name; if not, yet
learn to be content, for why? it is but for a night, for a short space, and
you are gone. And so I come to the last case of all, and that is,

6. Hezekiahs case, to be crossed in ones departure, to be called to die at such
a time, when a man desires most to live: when God shall shorten a man's days in
his journey (as David speaks) and take a man away in the midst of his age, in
the minority of his children, in the unsetlednesse of his estate; this of all
the rest may seem the heaviest cross* yet learn of Hezechiah to be content
to live as long as God will spare thee, and when God will have thee, be content
to dye. When a loving mother sends forth her child to nurse, and the nurse
has kept it long enough; if the mother think good to take home her own child
again, has the nurse any cause to grudge or complain: how much less cause
have we to show any token of ungodliness and discontent, that God should take
home our departing souls, the work of his own hands, the plant of his own
grafting, who tenders it more than a mother does her child, and will keep it
better and safer for us, than we can keep it for our selves? It is said of
David, Act. 13. 35. When he had served his time, by the will of God, then he
fell asleep and was gathered to his fathers. Every one has his time set him,
to serve God in this world, some a longer, some a shorter time, as it pleases
God to predetermine and set it down: now when a man has served his time (as
David did) and done that he came for into the wotld, I mean when he has
repented of his sins, reformed his ways, provided for his family, and made
heaven and salvation sure to his own soul; if then it shall please God to
send forth that same Ang^lum mortis (as the Hebrews speak) the Angel of
death, to call him home, and fetch him into his fathers kingdom: what just
cause has such a one to take Jobs wives counsel, in the best sense, and even
to bless God and die? It is a lamentable case when a man must die whether he
will or no, when God comes to pull away a man's soul, (as Job speaks Job 27.
10. What hope has the hypocrite, when God comes to pull away his soul. Just
as you see when a great fish is taken with an Angle, the man pulls, and the
fish pulls, and the man pulls again, and by force of Arms twitcheth it out of
the water: thus it fares with an hypocrite (says Job) when he is taken (as it
were with the Angle of God, I mean with some mortal sickness, that God
begins to pull at his soul, and twitch it out of his body whether he will or
no; then quaenam spes? where is the hope of the Hypocrite? alas his hope is
gone. The like expression you have Luke 12. 20. God Almighty says to the rich
man, Thou fool, this night they shall fetch away thy soul; as if he had said,
I know thou art loath to part with thy soul, loath to forgo it, but that
shall not serve thy turn; there will come those that will take it by force,
and fetch it from thee whether thou will or no, (...), they shall never ask
thee leave, but shall wrest and wring it I am thee, into such a place, such a
company, such a condition* as I am afraid to mention. I have not now time (as
the Greeks say) (...) to beat this Oak for any more Acornes, nor to sift my
text for any more observations: only in a word, If you desire to die
contentedly, let your care and endeavor be to live conscionably; then let
death come when it will, it shall be no otherwise than a midwife (a^ Naz.
speaks) to deliver you and help you out of the pains of earth into the joys
of heaven: then when you die you shall live, when you go from men you shall
go to God, when your eyes are closed on earth, they shall be opened again in
heaven.

Thus according to my weak ability I have done with my text, and showed you
the way to be content. God of his mercy give a blessing unto it, for Jesus
Christ his sake, to whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be given and
ascribed all honor and glory; be done and performed all service and duty, this
day and for ever,

Amen.
FINIS.
THE Way to Well-doing.

OR A SERMON OF FAITH AND GOOD WORKS: Preached in the Chapel of Buntingford,
in the County of Hartford, at the beginning of their public Lecture.

By John Gore, Rector of Wendenlofts in Essex.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London by Thomas Cotes, for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Greene-dragon. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Master John Mountford, Doctor of Divinity, and one of
the Residentiaries of Saint Paul's; my most worthy friend and Benefactour.
Right Worshipful,
I Remember a Motto of your own, which was this, Lunae radijs non maturesc^t
Botrus: That the beams of the Moon are too weak and too invalid to ripen a
tender grape, and bring it to maturitie; unless the sun also add his heat,
and cast his vital beams upon it. How well this suits with men of my rank,
that are Inferioris subsellij sacerdotes, J shall not need to tell you. Alas,
what are all a poor man's labors in the ministry, but as the Beams of the
Moon; some light they may give in a dark place; but to ripen any work for
the public good, or to gain any credit or estimation in the world, they are
far too weak and unsufficient, unless some man of worth that is instar
solis in stead of the Suune to so poor a star, will be pleased out of his
own goodness to cast some beams, J mean, some favor and friendly
countenance upon him: Vouchsafe me therefore your gracious aspect upon my weak
endeavors, and the God of Heaven preserve your life, that you may continue
like Eliakim, Esaias 22. 23. As a fastened nail in a sure place; still to do
good works in Gods Church on earth, till you be received up into glory with
his Church in heaven.

Thus prays Your poor unworthy Servant, JOHN GORE.

THE WAY TO Well-doing.
Titus 3. 8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou
affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to
maintain good works; these things are good and profitable unto men.
NOT to trouble you with any preface, it being not Ta^ti not worth the while;
may it please you to observe in the Text three general parts, which may be
reduced to three Heads, and be thus expressed. 1. The Preachers direction. 2.
The peoples duty. 3. Every ones desire. As thus: This is a faithful saying,
and these things I will thou affirm constantly, (there is the preachers
direction.) 2. As many as have believed in God, must be careful to maintain
good works, (there is the peoples duty) 3. These things are good and
profitable unto men. (there is every ones desire) for that which every man
desires, that which every man aims and drives at in his calling and in his
course of life, is to do those things that may redound to their profit and
their good; and therein my text complyes with every man's desire, assuring them
that these things are not only good and pleasing to God, but good and
profitable also unto men; God has only the glory of our well-doing, the
profit and the good is all our own.

In the first general part, observe two particulars. 1. A commendation of the
text, (this is a faithful saying) 2. A command to the Teacher, (these things I
will that thou affirm constantly.)

1. (...), This is a faithful saying. I suppose you believe there is not a
saying in all the book of God, but it is a true and a faithful one; all
proceeding from the mouth of him that is a true and faithful God, a God that
cannot lie, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his lips: yet some sayings
in Gods book are by way of Eminence or of excellence called by the name of
faithful sayings (it pleases the Holy Ghost himself to set that note of
dignity upon them;) either because God would have us in a special manner to
build our faith and our affiance upon them, (as if he should say) whatever
other saiyngs of scripture ye doubt of, never make any doubt of these, for they
are faithful sayings, you may pawn your lives and souls upon the truth and
certainetie of them, or rather (as I take it) they are termed faithful
sayings; because they are such as do more nearly concern the faithful then
any others, being purposely directed and intended, Omnibus Christi fidelibus to
all Christ's faithful people wheresoever; for as Saint Paul said of Timothy,
Phil. 2. 20. I know no man like minded, who will naturally care for such
matters as these. Tell a carnal or a worldly man of faith and good works,
surdo canis, you do but (as it were) tell a tale to a deaf man, he minds not
what you say: if you will talk to such a one, you must tell him of the prizes
of corn, the practice of husbandry, the rising and falling of the markets, or
perhaps some foreign or Domestical news, then he understands you, you speak
to him then in his own Idiome, in his own language: but tell him a discourse
of spiritual matters, that concern the right way of pleasing God, and of
saving his own soul; He is of Gallios temper, Act. 18. 17. he cares for none
of these things, he has other gates matters to trouble his head withal. But
then come to a faithful man, one that is (...) like-minded to God and his
blessed Apostle, one whose mind and whose affection stands that way, and tell
him of these things, you cannot please him better, that is the doctrine he
desires to hear of, he will care for it even naturally without any
irkesomenesse or reluctation. Therefore as a father said of Saint Lukes Gospel
which he dedicated to one Theophilus (which signifies a lover of God) si Deum
diligis ad tescriptum est: If thou be one that love God, this Gospel is
written to thee, Thou art the Patron of it as well as He; In like manner, if
thou be a faithful man, this faithful saying is spoken to thee, this text
is written for thee, and thou must take it to thy self as if it concerned
thee, and none else but thee. We read 2. Reg. 9. 5. when the Prophet came to
anoint John to be King over Israel, and found him fitting among the rest of the
captains, he delivers his message indefinitely to one of the company, not
naming Iehu nor any man else, I have an errand to thee O Captain; Iehu
answered, to which of all us? The Prophet replied, To thee O Captain; when
Iehu perceived that the message concerned himself, he rose up immediately and
obeyed it. In like manner, when a preacher comes into the congregation, and
delivers his message indefinitely to the whole assembly, thou must know that
his errand is to thee, he comes with a message sent from God to thee, and thou
must impropriate it to thy self, as if it pertained to none but thee: for this
is that which frustrates all our sermons, and makes all our preaching void and
uneffectuall, because men take our messages to be errands sent from heaven to
others, and nothing at all concerning or belonging to themselves. Just like
little children when they look in a glass, they think the face they see
there is the babyes face and not their own. But I am persuaded better things
of you (my brethren) that you are not in the number of those that do (...),
Act. 13. 46. put away the word of salvation from your selves to others; and
therefore let me use the words of Lydia, if you desire of God to be counted
faithful, give heed and good regard to what is here set down, for the holy
Ghost commends it to be a faithful saying, as if no other saying were so
faithful as this (...), This is a faithful saying. But that is not all.

I had rather draw it another way, and make another kind of use of it, as thus:
namely, that I, and you, and every one that bears the name of Christian would
be persuaded to imitate this example, to follow this pattern, and to learn of
God and his blessed Apostle, to be faithful in all our sayings; that
whatsoever we speak, whatsoever we affirm, it may be Bonafide (as we say) so
honest and so unfeigned, that we may be able to maintain it without an oath;
This that we have spoken is a faithful saying: For I beseech you (...) what
are all your bonds, all your oaths, all your Affidavits, all your
witnesse-bearing to men's words; but proles humana persidiae, the very issue and
offspring of men's unfaithfulness; if men were but true and faithful in their
sayings, all these things need not be.

It was a sad complaint of David, Psalm. 1 ^. 1. Def^^erunt fideles a filijs
hominum, we render it, faithfulness is minished from the children of men.
Thanks be to Gods mercy we cannot say that faithfulness is quite abolished or
utterly cashered from the sons of men; only this, diminuta it is lessened, it
is abated, it is minished exceeding much for by all report, men are nothing
near so faithful, so honest, so plain dealing in their words and in their
actions, as they were in former times, (faithfulness is ^^nished from the
children of men;) And if it be from the children of (...) there let it rest
and go no further; far be it from the children of God to be defective that
way* if the children of men (I mean carnal unregenerate men* the men of this
world, or the men of the earth, as David terms them) if they be unfaithful
or unconscionable, they do but their kind, their punishment though it be just
it shall be less (you know that blackenes in a Moore is no deformity, as it is
in another man;) but if the children of God that make profession and
protestation of their faith to God, shall make no conscience to deal
treacherously and unfaithfully with men, God cannot choose but take it
hainously, and revenge it sharply. It is indeed an odious and hateful sin,
both to God and man; Psalm. 101. I hate the sins of unfaithfulness, there
shall no such cleave unto me: sin (you know) is of a cleaving nature,
whatever sin a man is given to, he shall find that it will cling like a
burre unto him, he shall have much ado to shake it off; therefore the Apostle
gives it the right term and calls it (...) Heb. 12. 1. the sin that hangath
on so fast; but there is one finne above all the rest, the sin of
unfaithfulness, so harefull in a good man's eye, that David vowed to himself,
that whatever other sin st^^ke by him, he would surely shake off that, that
odious* infamous sin should never cleave unto him, (I hate the sins of
unfaithfulness, there shall no such cleave unto me.) contrarily, it is the
glory and crown of a christian man to be accounted and approved a faithful
man; as God gives this restimonie of (...) Number. 12. He is faithful in all my
house etc* what ever business or employment God set him about, he (...) it,
and did it faithfully: what a deal of accounts, what a deal of back
reckonings might he spared, if such (...) were but known to be like those
overseers of the ^emple (I mean) faithful in th^it dealings, 2. Reg. 12. 15.
there was no reckoning made with the men into whose hands they delivered the
money, for (says the tent) they deals faithfully* neither is it only a commend
abit thing among men, (...) a thing wonderful exceptable to, God; it is that
indeed which is called by the schoolmen* Gratia gratum sacies, it is a grace
of God that makes even God himself in love with a man; A faithful man may
truly be termed V^^r Dei, the very wife and spouse of God, according to that
saying of God himself, Hos. 2. 20. I will even betroth thee unto me in
faithfulness: so that as a good natured husband will bear with any other
weakness, and wink at many just occasions of offense in his wife, so long as
he finds here true and faithful to him in the main, reserving her self to
him only, and to none but him: so will our gracious God deal with us, he will
bear with any weakness and frailties, and pass over many just occasions of
offense that we daily give him, so long as he finds us true and faithful to
him in the maine, in the sincerity and fidelity of our hearts to God ward: what
shall I say? It is the most divine, the most God-like quality in the world,
there is no one thing wherein a man does more nearly resemble God, then in
being faithful: the scripture terms God the Father fidelem creatorem, a
faithful Creator* God the Son, fidelem pontificrm a faithful High Priest;
And God the Holy Ghost, fidelem tostem a faithful witness. So the more
faithful any (...) in his dealings, (...) and the more unfaithful, the more
like unto the devil. If any man therefore that bears the name of Christian,
be found deceitful upon the balance, I mean unfaithful in his dealings, I
will say no more but what S. Paul has said to my hand; Ephesians. 4. 20. Non sic
didicist is Christian, ye have not so learned Christ, your God and your Savior
never taught you any such lesson, but you learned it of your father the Devil
who is the father of lies. Let the consideration of these things persuade us
even to d^tost and abhor all lying and falsehood, e^^iv^cation and deceit, and
to learn of* God and our blessed Apostle to be faithful in all our sayings,
and just and true in all our dealings, that at the great and dreadful day of
judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, we may hear that
comfortable doom from the mouth of our Lord*and Master Christ Jesus, (...)
fidelis serve, well done, (not rich and wealthy servant, nor well* done cunning
and crafty servant, but) well done good, and faithful servant, enter thou into
thy Masters joy. So much for the first particular* the commendation of the
text, This is a faithful saying.

The next point is the Command to the Teacher* (These things I will that thou
affirm constantly.) wherein are two particulars. 1. The will of the Author.
2. The weight of the matter, as it follows.

1. The will of the Author, noted in the word (...) (These things I will) which
word implies not barely voluntatem, sed consilium, and imports not only the
Apostles will or desire that it should be so, but his counsel and his
judgment that it ought to be so, that they which have believed in God, must
and ought to maintain good works, no^ (...) only the Apostles will and
counsel to have it so, you shall find it is Gods will as well as his ^ do
but observe that place, Act. 15. 28. and you shall see, that the Apostles
counsels and constitutions ran ever with this (...) If has seemed good to the
Holy* (...) so that whatsoever seemed good to any of them, seemed first good to
the spirit of God, to God the Holy Christ* first it was Gods will, and then
theirs; their will and judgment was nothing else but a counter ^ane, or a
declaration of the will of God; and if it be Gods will, you will not deny but
his will is a law, at Lest ought to he so accounted by us that are his
vassalls, that live by his favor, and lie continually at his mercy. The
Schoolmen say, that the will of God is, Rationabilissim^ the utmost of all
reasons* (...) were no other reason to be given, why we should* refrain from
evil and do the thing that is good, but (...) his placet, because it is Gods
will and pleasure to have it so, this were reason sufficient. As that Cripple
answered the pharisees John ^. 11 when they questioned him for carrying his bed
on the Saboth, (filth he) How that made me whole, He said unto (...) take
(...) and ^ake* as if he had said, never ask me any further reason, it is
sufficient warrant to me, that he which made me whole, willed me to carry
it, it was his will I should do so, and therefore I do it. In like manner, if
there were no other reason to be rendered, why good works should be
maintained by all that pretend to bear faith to God, but only this in my text
(...), These things I will, it were reason sufficient.

For all the breach betwixt God and man arises from this point, whose will
should be done; God would have us do his will, and we will do our own
wills, and this breeds all the variance betwixt us and our God. We must know
therefore that it is our part and duty to bring our own wills to be conformable
to Gods will, that Gods will and our wills may concur and agree in one, that
God and we may will and desire one and the same thing, and then (...) effect^
qu^^t vol^ere due, these two conjunctive wills can never fail of taking good
effect: if there be f^st a willing mind (says the Apostle) god accepts it,
not according to that whith a (...) not, (...) You (...) a willing mind to
offer up his son by way of sacrifice to God, we know he did not do it
actually, for the Angel stayed his hand; and yet Heb. 11. 17. the Holy Ghost
tells us peremptorily, that he did offer him, how could this ^ee? but that God
accepted the will for the d^^de* for we read in (...) that David had only ^
willing mind to build God a house, we know he did not do it, because God
would not give him leave; yet ye see, that God took it as well at his hands,
as if (...) it (...) So quod (...) for as much as it was in thy heart to build
me a house, (says God) I will do thee as good a turn for I will build thee a
house ^. raise thee such a family that thy coal shall never be quenched, but
thou shall have a light in Israel as long as Israel (...) how much God makes of
a willing mind. In like manner, if we have but a willing mind to do all such
good works as God has given us in charge, thongh we fall short in abilities;
if our wills be not wanting, but what we want in substance, we make up in
prayer, it is as much as God requires: therefore as that poor man prayed in
the Gospel, Lord I believe, help thou my unbeleefe; so let us all lift up our
hearts to God and say, Lord I am willing* help Lord my unwillingnesse. So much
for that particular, The will of the Author. The next is,

2. The weight of the matter employed in the word (...), which we translate to
Affirm constantly, for indeed a good duty cannot be too commonly nor two
constantly pressed and put home to the consciences and souls of men (...)
unstable souls (as the Apostle calls unconstant men) are soon cloyed with
one doctrine, some grow wearle of well-doing, if they have once done a good
work, they think they have a supersedeas for doing good any more. But God
loves constancy in well-doing* (...) see 2. Reg. 13. 18, 19. how the man of God
was wroth with the King of Israel because when he bade him smite upon the
ground, he smote but thrice and stayed: (says he) thou should have smitten
five or six times; then should thou have smitten Syria till thou had
consumed it, whereas now thou shall smite it but thrice. So when a man shall
do two or three good deeds, and then stay his hand, this is not enough to
please God; then is God pleased when we proceed and go on, and keep a
constant settled course of weldoing; when we make it as our meat and drink to
do the will of our heavenly father: so that as a healthful man if he eat or
drink the less one day, he ^ates and drinks the more another day: so should
we, if we serve God the less one day, serve him the more another day; if we
do the less good one day, do the more the next day: as an Archer, if he
shoot amiss one time, he will try to mend it the next time; so if we have
done amiss one day, strive to amend it the next day, and so continually
endeavor to rede^me our times, because our days be few and evil. Doubtless
it is for this cause that God has laid such a charge upon us, to affirm these
things constantly, that they might be always fresh in your remembrance, and
always constant in our practice. You know what is said in the Gospel, Blessed is
that servant whom his master when he comes shall find so doing; that is,
when death or judgment shall come upon a man like a thief in the night,
unexpectedly and unawares, blessed of God is that man that is found at his
prayers, or taken in his calling, or any ways taken in the act of well-doing:
but woe to that man or woman that is taken (as it were) napping in the midst of
his sins, as Balthashar was taken in the midst of his cups; Nebushadnezzar in
the midst of his pride; the old world in the midst of their fleshline* to
speak the best of it that may be, it is much to be feared that God means no
good to that parties soul. I will close up (...) with that sweet and
comfortable Collect, Lord let thy special grace now and ever more prevent and
follow us, and make us continually to be given to all good works, through
Jesus Christ* our Lord, Amen* But that is not all* I take it, (...) (...)
signifies rather, to affirm strongly, ex tote valde (as we say) to press it
home withal the strength and might we have; though you neglect and slight good
works in your practice, we must not slight nor neglect them in our preaching,
but set them on (as the Be does her sting) with the greatest force and
efficacy that possibly we can put to it. I know there is as great difference
between preachers, as betwixt an infant and a Giant drawing the same bow; and
yet if a Giant shoot an arrow against a stone wall it pierces not, but
reboundeth back again with the greater violence: so the most happy, the most
able preacher that lives may shoot as unprofitably, I mean, preach as
unsuccessefully as a weaker teacher, if he meet with people that have stones
in their hearts; I mean, that are untractable and unpliable to any goodness;
unless God do by them as he promised by his prophet Ezech. 11. I will take
away your stony hearts, and give you a heart of flesh: non ^arnale, sed
carn^um, not a fleshly heart, but a fleshy hears* that is, a heart that shall
be as tender as your flesh, that the least blow will be seen upon it, and
the least prick of a pin draw blood of it; when God has made this way, then
shall they feel that the word of God is virga virtutis a rod of strength and
power, even in the hand of the weakest minister: we see by experience, let a
little child take a staff in his hand and strike a man therewith, it never
troubles him, he never complains of the blow, but let a strong man take this
child by the hand and strike with the same staff, he that feels the blow,
though he see not the party that struck him, can easily conjecture that this
was more then a child could do, there was the strength of some man in it. In
like manner when we take the word of God into our hands as Gehazi took the
staff of Elisha, al^^ we lay it on but weakly, we do but Verbera^^ (...)
beat the air, or beat your ears, that is all that we of our selves can do;
but if at any time you feel a blow* that lights upon your hearts, if you feel
a word that touches you to the soul, believe it, that stroke came from the
hand of God. All that we can do, is but (as John Baptist speaks, Mat. 3.) to
lay the Axe to the r^ote of the tree: now if a man take an Axe and only lay it
to the root of a tree, it will be long enough ere the tree be cut down; for
it is the strength of the arm, and the fetching of the blow, it is that that
wounds it, it is that that fells it down: and for that cause I suppose the
preaching of the word is called the Arm of God. Esa. ^3. 1. it is not the hand
of a preacher* but it is the ^rme of God, that wounds a sinners heart, and
makes him fall down at the foot of God* the weakness is from us, but the
strength is all from God; who yet has commanded us not to abate any thing* of
our own pains, nor to preach his word in any negligent manner, but to affirm^
and confirm it with all the strength and might that our wit and learning will
afford (...) (says my text) These things I will that thou affirm strongly.

And so from the skirts (as it were) I come to the body of my text, where you
have an abridgement of the law, and the Gospel; the Gospel is doctrina
credendorum, the law is doctrina agendorum; the one teaches us what we ought
to believe, the other teaches what we ought to do for the comfort and
discharge of our own souls in the sight of God. Here both are knit together,
Believing and doing, Law and Gospel, Faith and good works, do in our text (as
they should do in our lives) even meet and kiss each other. Intimating unto
us, what Gods good pleasure is in this behalf namely. That as many as are of a
right faith, (as many as have believed in God,) should be also of aright
conversation, (should be careful to maintain good works.)

1. For matter of faith, I suppose that of all men living we Protestants are in
the right; the Faith that we profess and hold is doubtless such as is able by
the mercy of God to save the soul of every true believer: if our works were
but answerable to our faith, and our lives correspondent to our Religion, we
might truly (...) to (...) a (...) nation indeed; admired and unparraleld of
all the world, according to that of the Apostle, 2. These. 1. 10. God will be
glorified in his Saints, and Admired in those that believe.

Two sorts of men are to blame amongst us: the first are Nullifidians, men of
no faith, that neither believe in God nor in his word, only pass on their
times more su^, after a fashion, such as it is, but for matter of faith and
Religion they desire to have nothing to do with it: these men the Apostle
terms unreasonable and absurd* it is an absurd thing (you know) for a man to
be without that which he has universal use of; as for a husbandman to be
without a plow, a Carpenter without a rule, a Preacher without a Bible, it is
an absurd thing; and so is it for a Christian to be without faith which he
has universal use of, and without which it is impossible to please God, it is
a thing unreasonable and absurd* How can such a one repeat his Creed (I
believe in God, etc.) but he must multiply lies as fast as he multiplyes
words, every word he speaks is a lie to God to the world, and to his own
soul. I hope there be but few of this sort amongst us, if there be, let them
hear their doom, and read their Neck* verse, John 3. 18. He that believes
not is condemned already* he needs no further trial or conviction, his
sentence is past, and though he live in the world (like a thee^e in a common
^ay^^) ^ee is a condemned man in the sight of God. But what is their no
relief, no remeady, no redemption for such a one, but he that (...) now an
unbeliever must of necessity be damned eternally? God forbid: I would be loath
to interclude the hope of salvation to any man whatsoever; and therefore take
this comfort with you, you know there is always a space of time* some distance
betwixt the condemnation and the execution of any Malefactor* during which time
if he can work means to procure a pardon, his condemnation is disanulled* so
that though a prisoner be cast by the ^ury, and condemned by the Judge, yet no
man can say directly he shall suffer death* because the mercy of the King may
pardon and release him. In like manner, though an unbeleever be condemned by
the verdict of his own conscience, and by the sentence of Gods word (which
shall judge a man at the last day) yet there is a latitude, a space of time (I
mean the term of this life) between the condemnation and the execution, and
this space is spara miser^cordi^, the compass or circuit wherein Gods mercy
and our repentance ^^^ves* if in this Interim a man can make means to Jesus
Christ to procure him a pardon from God (as that he has promises to procure
for any poor sinner that makes means unto him, for it is his office to be
our Advocate, and you know a good Advocate does always help a bad cause.) I
say if he can out (...) out his pardon before (...) of his (...) his some shall
be (...) before the (...) of God, and his (...) shall be as i^ they had never
been. So much by the way o^ ^^e comfort of such (...) are (...) faith.

The second sort are (...) men that have nothing else but faith, that make
profession of faith and a good conscience* but have no other virtue, no manner
of good (...) to commend them to God or to the world* The (...) add to your
(...) virtue. 2. Pet. 1. 7. because though the excellency of a (...) lie
chiefly in his faith, whereby he (...) hold upon jesus (...) for life and
salvation; ye^ this ^aith is not complea^^* (...) perfect and right ^s it ought
to be, unless it have belee^e added to it. As Solomon says, Eccle. 7. 11.
Wis^^ome is good (...) it does well without it, but better with it; so does
^aith with virtue. And the reason is, ^aith has (...) a drawing property, it
draws home grace and mercy to a man's own soul (as a loadstone if it be not
rubbell with Garlike will draw, so will faith if it be not suffyed with
sin:) virtue has (...) and (...) our (...) that virtue was gone out of him,
he did not keep his virtue to himself, but was content it should go out of
him, that others might be bettered and amended by it.

Have but patience a little, and (...) you the (...) that (...) be ^dde^ to
ou^ ^aith* by the (...) of those whose (...) was commended by our Savior
Christ himself tobe a (...) and a saving ^aith.

1. Fides (...) Mat. (...) The faith of the woman with the blood^ (...) ^^ee
came creeping (...) our Savior, and drew virtue ^^cretly from him and went her
way and made no words of it* And our Savior says unto her* Go thy way, thy
faith has (...) th^^ whole* what kind of faith was (...) was a private a
secret faith* a ^aith that can go to ^od and make no (...) of it, that can draw
virtue from (...) make no boast of it, that is one property of a saving faith.

2. Fides (...) the faith of the (...) wo^an, Mat. 15. to whom our Savior
promised such an unlimited Bo^ne, what (...) of ^^ith (...) here it was a
patient and an humble faith; she (...) to be (...) to be despised, to be called
a dog to her own face, any thing whatsoever so that she might but (...)
^avour, and wring some (...) the hands of God. This is ^^other virtue of a
saving faith it makes a man (...) humble in all discourtesies; no man living
can think so basely or speak so (...) and (...) as he thinks and speaks of
himself: his enemies and he are well agreed, they (...) h^^ and he (...)
himself* (...) and ^ee reviles himself; they (...) of him, he thinks and
speaks as ill o^ worse of himself* and so the (...) is quickly ended. This
also is a virtue that mu^^ be (...).

(...) you know how (...) at (...) (that wa^ as one (...) interpr^^s it, that
God through Christ ^ight look upon her and ^he through Christ might look^ upon
God (...) washing his (...) with (...) with the hayres of her (...) well ^aith*
our (...) thy way* the ^aith has saved thee: what kind of faith was he^^* it
was a weeping, a (...) faith without (...) will (...) the repenting ^aith that
is the saying (...).

4. Fides (...) the ^aith of the (...) leaper. Luke 17. Th^^ (...) and gave
(...) God and to ou^ Savior (...) Go^ thy way, thy (...) of ^aith was his? it
was a (...) to (...) without (...) without expression o^ ou^ ^uty to God will
(...) that is the saving (...) be added to our faith.

5. Fides Bartim^i, the faith of Bartim^ius the blind beggar, Luke 18. that
cried so improtunately to our Savior Christ, Jesus thou son of David (...)
upon me; and would take no repulse, but else more they rebuked him for his
clamor, so much the more he cried, Thou son of David have mercy on me. God
thy way (says our Savior) thy faith has saved thee: what kind of faith was
his? it was ^n earnest ^aith, a zealous, a prayerfull faith: faith without
zeal without (...) and importunity to God in prayer will never save (...) man*
it is the zealous faith that is the saving faith. That is another virtue that
must be added to our faith.

6. Lastly* Fides (...) Mat. ^. The faith of the Centurion; (...) Savior
himself admired it, and said, I have not found so great faith (...) in Israel.
What kind of faith was his? it was a merciful, a compassionate faith: the
Centurion ayled nothing himself, only he had a poor servant that lay sick
at home, visited by the hand of God, and his heart could (...) be as rest,
till h^e had wrought a means to our Savior to relieve and restore him. Here
is (...) man (...) to them that are in misery* Faith without compassion and
mercy to the poor and needy will never save a (...) it is the merciful faith
that is the saving Faith.

These be the virtues that (...) be added to our faith* without which
(whatsoever we profess) are cannot (...) in truth and reality to believe (...)
in God. If (...) be away, all the rest of ^osephs brethren might as good stay
at home* so if virtue be wanting, our faith will stand us but in little stead
to (...) and therefore marks what follows* in the (...) God* (...).

I might here (by the way) observe from (...) order of the words, that before a
man can do good works that may be acceptable to God, and availeable to his
own soul, he must first be a believer, and be endued with faith and other
graces from above, for if the water be soul in the well, it must needs be
soul in the bucket; if the heart be unclean within, the works that issue
from it must needs be so much the worse. But I never loved to dishearten any
man from well-doing; to tell men (as some do, because they have alittle
authority for it) that the best works that men can do, if they be
unsanctified (to their thinking) and unregenerate, are but splendida pec^ata,
glorious and glittering sins, that may perhaps slake the fire of Hell, but
not extinguish it, and make a man's damnation (it may be) somewhat more
tolerable, but not a whit the less durable, what miserable comfort is this to
a weak well meaning Christian: it is just for all the world like that which
Bias calls (...) the Backward forwarding of a cause; it is rather terrifying
then enduring, and will sooner drive a man off, then draw (...) God with his
substance, and to help himself to heaven by well-doing: for my own part, I
am of the same mind for matter of good works, that Saint Paul was for matter
of preaching, Phil. 1. 15. some (says the Apostle) preach Christ of ^^vie and
strife, and (...) of good will and love; what then? (says he) why (...) (...)
whether in pretense or in truth, so that Christ be preached; I therein do
rejoice, yea and will rejoice; for I know that somebody shall fare the better
for it, It shall (...) my (...) ver. 18, 19. Thus say I, some men do good
works out of faith and a good conscience* others perhaps out of vaineglory and
ostentation; what (...) Why (...) Any way, so that good works be done
sincerely* (...) sincerely I for my part both do and will commend and (...) for
I (...) that God must needs have some glory, the Church and the poor some
good, and themselves without all doubt shall be ultra condig^um rewarded for
it. In the 9. of Luke, there was one that cast out devils in Christ's name who
followed him not, the Disciple tell our Savior they had forbidden him our
Savior rebuked them and said, noe, I will none of that, Forbid him not, for
^ee that is not against us, is for us. ver. 50. Christ would have no man
hindered or discouraged from well-doing, (whether he follow him or follow him
not) but let them have all the encouragement that may be to forward and further
men in doing good. You know what God said to Caine, Genesis 4. 7. If thou do
well, shall thou not be accepted? and you know what Caine was, to show that God
will accept of any man's well doing. Some men (no doubt) do good works
Obediently, because God commands them so to do; others perhaps do it only
R^tinually, because they think well of it themselves: what then? as long as
God accepts it, what reason have we to speak against it. I say no more but
what was said to Gideon, Up a^^kee doing, and the Lord shall (...) with you for
good.

So I come more nearly to the Apostles in junction touching the maintenance
and continuance of good works among men which are of three sorts.

1. Opera pirtatis, works of piety and devotion to God, as prayer,
thankesgiving, besides other divine expressions and exhibitions of ou^ duty, of
(...) our God for Gods services are of two sorts* some are cheap services that
come gratis and cost us nothing, coming to Church, hearing of Sermons,
receiving the Sacrament, and few there be that make any scruple of these
because they come of free cost: (yet the old world was, (...) other some a^^
chargeable service^* (...) the may^tenance of Gods ministry, the building and
repayring of his sanctuary, and those (...) (which the Apostle speaks of Heb.
7. 4.) paying tithes of the best and principal of allthings in (...) did; when
it comes to these (as (...) said (...)) The Lord pardon his servants in these
things, (...) have not one to an hundred, but will haggle and dodg^ with God
most shamefully and basely when it comes to a matter of cost* what law compels
them, that they do, but it is (...) God knows) against the hair, nay against
the very heart of them to part with any to the Lord from whom they have
received all things: just as one said of his Saint Martyn, Martinus ^onus in
auxilio, churu^ in negotio, he was a good saint for his assistances, but a
chargeable saint for his businesses: so basely do many think of God, they
like his succor well, but hot his service: He is a good God for his comforts,
but for his costlinesse they would willingly have that abated. Time was when
men faulted in excess; the Jews were feign to be restrained by Proclamations,
our Ancestors were feign to be restrained by Statutes of Mortmayne; now there
needs none of all this, men know how to shut their hands alone, and strive
rather to be injurious then any way helpefull to God and his Church. I say no
more, but refer you to our Saviors determination; He oporte^ facere, these
works of piety must not be left undone, if ever we hope to be saved by that
God whom we profess to believe.

2. Opera (...) works of Charity and compassion to the poor. Esaias ^8. 10.
Draw out thy soul to the hungry; if thou be not able to draw out thy purse
or thy possessions, then draw out thy soul in a tender compassion and
commiseration of their miseries, as it is said of our Savior, when he saw the
poor people (...), his bowels yerned upon them, why is it that Christ says,
The poor ye shall have always with you, but that such as are rich and
wealthy might make God some part of amends for their trespasses and sins by
supplying the wants of the poor and needy; that God may have honor from them
both, as from a Physician and a Patient when a bodily cure is wrought, both are
joyful, both thankful to God: you know the place, Dan. 4. 27. Break off thy
sins by righteousness, and thy (...) by showing mercy to the poor: if there
be any way in the world for a rich man to break off the yoke of sin and Satan
from his neck, and to deliver his soul from the hand of hell, it is by deeds
of charity and works of mercy to the poor. I will have mercy (says God) and
no^ sacrifice* Hof. ^. 6. where mercy and sacrifice may stand together, it is
reason God should have both; but it there must be a separation, if there must
be a defalcation, that must be cut off; God had rather lose his own part,
then the poor should lose theirs; God had rather lose a sacrifice or a work
of piety, then the poor should lose an alms or a work of mercy. I will have
mercy and not sacrifice: I say no more but this, show mercy to the poor for
Christ's sake and Christ will show you mercy for the poores sake: and so much
for the second sort of good works, which are Opera charitatis, works of
charity to the poor.

3. Opera H^n^statis, works of honesty and good dealing with neighbors and
strangers, that is, to do as we would be done unto, and to be as loath to do
wrong, as we are to take it. They say that honesty and plain dealing is a
jewel, and he that uses it shall die a beggar: but wot you what one wittingly
replied, That Beggar shall go into Abraham's bo^ome, when all dishonest
worldlings with all their dishonest gains shall be damned (like Dives) to the
pit of hell. And therefore as you desire to escape that direful slaughterhouse
of hell, and those everlasting burnings in that infernal pit, be ru^e^ (...)
and see that you provide things honest in the sight of God and men; that if
ever you shall come to be questioned, as Jacob was by Laban, how you came by
your goods, you may be able to say (as Jacob did) my righteousness shall
answer for me. And so much briefly for the three several sorts of good
works, which every Christian is bound by his belief and faith to God, to do
and to maintain to the utmost of his power and ability. It remaynes how this
must be done, and that you shall see by the sequel.

1. (...), be careful to maintain good works, (so we translate it) the word
signifies somewhat more, i. ut studeant that they study, devise and beat their
brains, how they may do good to those that stand in need of their goodness,
according to that Esaias 32. 8. The liberal man devises liberal things; he
studies upon his bed (as a mother does when her child is sick) what course to
take, what means to use to make the Church and the world the better for him.
Solomon says, Pro. 14. 22. Mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good:
i. Mercy in the promises, and truth in the performances of Gods favor and
goodness to that man's soul. As on the contrary it is the brand-marke of a man
that fears not God, Psalm. 36. 4. He devises evil upon his bed; it is bad
enough to do evil any manner of way, though it be ex non advertentia, for
want of good taking heed, (as Gods best servants do many times, and are
heartily sorry for it when it is done, so that were it to do again they would
not willingly do it for a world) but for a man in cold blood (as we say) to
lie and study and contrive a way to sin, and to project and plot his sins
aforehand, it is damnable and devilish. And mark the place where a graceless
man devises evil, David says, In cubile suo, upon his bed, in the dark and
silent night when a man should do nothing but pray, and sigh, and groan, and
cry to God for mercy and grace, and remission of sins; then does a wicked man
lie and plot and beat his brains how to be revenged on such a neighbor, how
to bring such a wicked enterprise to pass, that the world may take no notice
of it: oh that such men would remember that woe, Mich. 2. 1. We unto them that
devise evil upon their beds, and in the morning rise and practice it: that is
a degree beyond the former evil, if a man has had evil thoughts or evil
purposes in the night (as the best man may have) the first thing he should do
in the morning should be, to down upon his knees to God, and desire the Lord
(as Peter advised Simon Magus to pray, Act. 8.) that the thoughts of his heart
might be forgiven him: but for a man first to devise evil without remorse of
conscience, and then to practice it, what is this? but to add sin to sin,
and even with cartropes to pull down the curse of God upon his own head.

And therefore as you love your souls take heed of devising evil by your
selves; drive away those evil thoughts, (as Abraham did the fowls) with the
staff of earnest prayer; and (as the Apostle says) Phil. 4. 8. If there ^ee
any virtue, if there be any praise in you, think on these things that my text
enjoynes you; and when you have any leisure, any spare time from the world,
devise (in Gods name) and beat your brains how you may compass to do some
good work which may tend to the right way of pleasing God, and of saving your
own souls. So much for that particular (...) men that believe in God must
study and take thought how to maintain good works.

2. To maintain good works, the word in the original is (...), which
properly signifies pr^esse to be before others, to be a President or an
antecedent in good works; not only to take example by others, but to give
example to others of goodness and well-doing: as in giving of honor, so in
doing of good, we must strive to go one before another, not singer and stay
till we see what an other man will do, or what such a man will give to pious
and charitable uses, but strive to be the first in a good action. That that
saved Shimeyes life. 2. Sam. 19. 20. was, that he was the first of all the
house of Joseph that came to meet the King: so was (...) that came to our
Saviors (...) and you know in the poole of Bethesda, John 5. he that stepped in
first was cured of whatsoever disease he had, and none but he that stepped in
first. In worldly matters men are forward enough, they need neither clock nor
bell to awaken them, neither spur nor switch to drive them on; if there be but
a good lease to be taken, a good bargain to be bought, a good preferment to be
gotten, every one strives who shall step in first: but if it be a matter that
concerns the serving of God, or the doing of good, as our Savior said of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 21. 31. they care not though the very Publicanes and
harlots go into Heaven before them: thus backward men are when they should be
forward, and forward when they should be backward. If it be in a matter of
fashion, or a matter of faction, every one desires to be the Antesignanus the
Ring leader, the first and fore-most in it; but if it be a matter of piety or
charity, I pray let who will go before (it may be) at their leisure they will
follow after. It is good I confess to be a follower of good men. Heb. 13. 8.
Whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Daubtlesse there
be some that follow the paths of Christ, and (to use the words of Salvia^us)
patenti^ra faciunt D^mini vestigia, they make the footsteps of our Savior
more plain and easy by the example of their virtue, and by the evidence of
their bounty; it is good for any man to be a follower of such: But where such
are not (for they are rara aves) happy is he that can (...) (as my text
speaks) that can be a president of good works, that can shine as a light in
a dark place, and go before others in well-doing, that others may follow and
be led by him to the kingdom of Christ and of God.

3. This I suppose to be the Genuine signification of the word, but we will
take it also in that sense that our translation renders it, (namely) to
maintain good works; and that offers us this consideration, that he that
believes in God must be careful, not only to do good works for the present,
but so to order his affairs and husband his estate, that he may enable
himself to maintain good works and to continue and hold out in well-doing
for the time to come. Most men when they are pressed to works of mercy, think
it enough to say, I am not able, I have not wherewithal; But why are ye not
able? how comes it that you have not wherwithall? If God has disabled you by
his own immediate hand that you have not water enough to drive your own mill
(as we say) not means enough to maintain your own family; the excuse is
just and good: but if a man have disabled himself by his own improvidence,
unthriftinesse and wa^^fulnes* and have crumbled away his means by drinking
and dicing, etc. and so have made himself unable to do any good work, it is
both a shame and a sin too. But what remedy? how should such a man do to
enable^ himself to maintain good works? Ans. 2. ways.

1. By industry and diligence in his casling, so the Apostle advises, t^tid^m
v^rbi^, Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole steals no more, but let him labor with
his hands the thing that is good, that he may have wherewithal, (not only to
supply himself) but to give to him that needs. He then that would do bona
opera good works, must be bonus operarius a good workman, i. not deal in
dishonest trades, nor use unlawful means to get his maintenance, but labor
with his hands the thing that is good, for then shall he be in a way to receive
a blessing from God, you know the place, Psalm. 128. 1. Blessed art thou that
fear God and walk in his way, for of thy labor thou shall eat, oh well
is thee, and happy shall thou be. Solomon says in one place, the blessing of
God makes rich; in another, The diligent hand makes rich, to show how God
blesses the diligent and industrious, and enableth them to every good work.
Iud. 19. ye read but of one good man in all Gibeah, that had any inclination,
any disposition to do a good work, to harbor a poor Levite, and that man
was a labourer, that came home from his work in the evening, all the rest were
quaffing and reveling* and that one man ended his labor i^ (...) the other
ended their play in a brutish act of villainy, industrious spirits are commonly
best disposed to goodness, whereas those that give themselves to loose and idle
courses are fit for nothing but sin. Solomon describing a virtuous woman Pro.
3^. says* in the first place, she stretches out her hands to the spindl^* i.
to her work, and in the next place, she stretches out her hands to the poor,
i. to charity; the one enabled her to maintain the other: So a father speaking
of Abraham's hospitality in entertaining the Angels Genesis 28. observes, that
there was nullus ^iger in dom^ sapientis, not a slothful body in all his
house, but all busy, and well employed: Here was a family like to maintain
good works and hospitality. This is one way to enable a man for well-doing:
the next is,

2. By Frugality and thriftinesse in his expenses, the proverb is true, Bonus
condus facit bonum promum, etc. a good layer up makes a good layer out, and a
good sparer makes a good spender, we have a famous example in Joseph, who by
his thriftines and frugality saved the lives of his father and all his family.
Our blessed Savior (a quo virtutem possi^ discere virtus) of whom virtue it
self may learn virtue) amongst other divine lessons, has taught us this of
Frugality by his own example; so to dispose that plenty which Gods goodness
has bestowed upon us, that nothing be lost. John 6. 12. Gather up (...)
(says Christ) the very fragments and o^^alls that nothing be lost. Now if he
that could do wonders, and miraculously multiply meat and drink at his
pleasure would be so saving and frugall, how thrifty and sparing ought we to
be, that have nothing of our own, not so much as our daily bread, but what his
mercy affords us out of his hidden treasure. I know there is parsimony enough
in the world, but it is to a wrong end. Some there be that spare and save, they
know not why, nor for whom: like him Eccles. 4. 8. that is alone by himself,
and has wife nor child, yet there is no end of his gathering, neither does he
so much as say or think (says Solomon) quare defraudo animam meam, why do I
defraud my own soul: such a one is a very felon to himself, and a very
thief to his own soul. Ier. 17. 17. as a Partridge ^itteth on eggs and
hatcheth them not, so he that gets riches and not by right means, (nor to
a right end) shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall
be a fool; that is all he gets by his miserablenes, he leaves al his goods
behind him, carries nothing with him but his sins, and so coram domino vacuus
apparet, appears before the Lord empty, I mean, of grace and good works, and
how can such a one hope to be welcome to God. Others spare like him, Luke 12.
that they may say to their souls in future times, Eat, drink, take thy case,
etc. such men God commonly disappoints, when they think to take their
pleasures, God sends some evil Angel to take away their souls; and then
^ujus, etc. whose shall those things be that thou have laid up? Others spare,
pretending to have to keep them when they are sick; that is not amiss, yet
many times God punishes them in that, they shall spend their means upon
Physicians, as the woman with the bloody-issue did, and be never the better.
Others spare to leave enough to their children, that is good; but if that be
all, see Job 20. 10. ^lij ^ius placab^nt ^^ndicos, his children shall flatter
the poor for bread i. an other shall possess his means, and his children
come to poverty. The only true and right end of thrift and frugality should be
to maintain good works and hospitality, when a man spares from himself that
he may have to give to him that needs* according to that of our Savior Luke
11. 41. (...), after our own necessities are served, then give alms of those
things that are within (says Christ,) that is, within our power, or within the
compass of our abilities, so Pro. 5. 15. first drink the water of thy own
ci^^er^e (that is provide for thee and thine) and then let thy fountains flow
forth; first for our own use, then for the use of others. For though Charity
begin at home, it must not end at home, but imp^rt it sel^^ to the good of
others. And these b^ (...) ^^intayne good works.

One thing only remains, and that is the reason why they are to be
maintained, as David answered his brother. 1. Sam. 17. 29. when he questioned
him, why he left the sheep and came into the camp, I^ there not a cause
(says he?) so say I, If you desire to know why good works must be
maintained, Is there not a cause, specified in the text? These things are good
and profitable unto men: I could show you diverse other good causes and
considerations for the maintenance of good works; I will but name them, and
conclude.

1. Propter placentia^ Dei, for the pacifying and pleasing of God. Heb. 13. 16.
To do good and to distribute for get ^o^, for with such sarifices God is well
pleased: if we that so often, and so many ways displease and anger God by doing
ill* will not some times and some wales endeavor to please him again by doing
good; how can God take it well at our hands.

2. Propter (...) fidei, for the evidence and manifestation of our faith; as it
is said Acts* 14. 17. that God left not himself without witness, in that he
did good, etc. his own good works are his own witness to testify and prove the
providence of his goodness to the sons of men: so were our Saviors, Opera
(...) me, my own works testify of me that I came out from God: so must we
have good works to testify the truth and goodness of our faith, though as
Saint John says, 1. Ioh. 5. 10. He that believes in the son of God, has
the witness in himself; that inward testimony is sufficient for a man^ own
satisfaction, but not for the conviction of others* therefore says Saint
James, show me thy faith by thy works; thou may show it to God in another
kind, but to me thou must show it by good works. For ubi opera non apparent
extra, fidem non (...) esse intr^, (says a father) where I see not good works
without, I will never (...) any (...) within.

3. Propter* (...) adversary, our adversaries the Dapists they upbraid us (as
Peninnah did Ha^^ah) with our unfruitfulnesse; they crake that all our
Churches, all our Hospitalls and Colle^ges are theirs* and albeit enough is
said and done to break the teeth of their slanders, yet if it be possible, let
us (as Saint Peter advises, 1. Pet. 2. 15. (...) muzzle them quite, stop their
mouths and put them to silence by doing more good; for so is the will of God
(says he) that with well-doing, ye should put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men.

4. Propter indigentiam mundi, the poor we have always with us; wherefore? but
that as the Israelites in the wilderness did help one another in gathering of
Manna, whence it came to pass, that he that gathered much, had nothing over,
and he that gathered little, had no lack: so (says the Apostle. ^. Cor. ^.)
should it be among Christians: one man's wealth should supply another want,
that God may have glory from both, (as I said before.)

5. Pr^pt^r consequentiam commodi, from the profit and benefit ^^^ing from good
works; which is the reason added in my text, These things are good and
profitable unto men. The heathen man could say, Ad utilitatem omnes rapimur,
neque aliter ullo modo possimus; All men living run hedlong after profit,
neither can they possibly do otherwise: now if ye will believe the Holy Ghost,
there cannot be a more profitable thing then well-doing, both for this life,
and the life to come: not that I care for a gift (says the Apostle, Phil. 4.
17.) but I desire fruit that will further your account. Every good work that a
godly man does is put upon his score, it stands upon his account; so that when
God and he shall come to reckon at the last day, he shall have nothing to
answer for, but all his evil works shall be forgiven him, and for the good
works that he has done, shall he hear that heavenly voice from the mouth of
Jesus Christ, Come thou blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for thee, etc. To which kingdom God of his mercy bring us for Christ Jesus
sake, to whom with the Father and the holy spirit, be given and ascribed all
honor and glory, be done and performed all service and duty from henceforth
for ^ver more.

Amen.
FJNJS.
A SVMMER SERMON UPON ELIAHS PRAYER; Preached in the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul's in LONDON, on the last Sunday of Trinity Term in the after noone being a
time of (...) and drought.

By John Gore, Rector of Wendenlofts in Essex.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London by Thomas Cotes, for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Greene-dragon. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Mr. WILLIAM BIRD, Doctor of the Civil Law, my most
worthy Friend and Benefactor.
RIGHT WORSHIP.
WHen J consider the manifold favors and courtesies that J have found at your
hands, J am ready to say unto my self, as Ruth said once to Boaz, Ruth 2. 10.
Quare inveni gratiam? Why have J found grace in your eyes, that you should take
knowledge of me, seeing J am a stranger? For mine own part J can impute it to
nothing, but unto Gods goodness, and your own worthiness: And my only
ambition is to make you this acknowledgement (...) the world may for, though J
(...) p^^re, (...) N^^ (...) Ioa^ ^is^t to David (...) Sam. 24* 3. so wish J to
you, The (...) God (...) ^^t^ your ^^tate, how much soever it be, an hundred
fold, and that your eyes may see it, and your heart may rejoice in it all the
days of your life.

Thus prays Your poor unworthy (...). JOHN GORE.

A SVMMER SERMON.
JAMES 5. 17, 18. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he
prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the
space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and the heavens
gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.
THe sum and drift of this Text is to set forth the efficacy, or rather
omnipotency of earnest and fervent Prayer* There be two graces of God in man
that may justly be termed Omnipotent or Almighty graces; God himself being
pleased to show his Almighty power and goodness in them, and they are Faith and
Prayer. 1. For the first, Mat. 15. 28. O woman great is thy faith, be it unto
thee even as thou will. What a large unlimited Grant and Patent was this for a
poor sinner to ask what she would, and have promise of acceptance. Mark. 9.
23. to him that believes all things are possible. Look what a believer cannot
do himself, God himself will do it for him, and yet it shall be accounted as
his act and deed. Phil. 4. 1^. I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me: Not meaning that he could do all things in general and at
large, as to walk on the waters, or fly in the air, etc. but all things that
belonged to his calling, all things that concerned his Ministry, and all
things that pertained to the right way of pleasing God and of saving his own
soul: He could pray well, Preach well, live well; he could want and he could
abound, he could conform and apply himself to all estates whatsoever: All
this he could do, not by any power or ability of his own, but by the
strengthening grace, and faith, and virtue of Jesus Christ, (I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me.) As on the contrary, Our Savior
says of himself, Mark 6. 5. that he could do nothing worth speaking of in
his own Country* (...)* or mighty w^rk^, no work of wonder (in respect of what
he could have done) only because of their unbelief: and mark, that it is not
said, He would do no such works there, but (...), He could not do them: not
that Christ was unable for want of power, but he saw it was unavaileable
through their lack of faith. For the power of God, and the faith of men, are
like the spirits and the sinews in the body, the one moves, and stirs, and
works within the other; if there be no faith in us, there can be no
expectation of any power or any help from God.

2 The other omnipotent grace is Pr^y^r; and that you may be assured it is so,
mark but that expression, Exodus ^^ 10. Let me alone (says God to Moses) that
I may conf^^^^ them, and I will make of thee a great Nation. What a word was
this to come from the mouth of Almighty God, to bid a poor weak creature, let
him alone: it shows that Moses by his prayer did even (as it were) ^ver-power
the Lord, that the Lord had not the power to revenge himself on that provoking
people, as long as Moses interceded for them.

Such a powerful man with God was Eliah here in my Text: His mouth (as a
Father says) was Franum Coeli, the very bridle of heaven; he could even rule
the heavens with his prayers, as a man rules a horse with a bridle: Now least
you should think he did thus prevail with God, rather by the privilege of
his person, then by the virtue of his prayers, The Apostle tells us for that,
he was (...), he was a man subject to the s^m^ passions that we are, and yet
his prayer took such good effect. (Eliah* was a man subject, etc.)

In my Text there are two general points to be considered. 1. The condition
and quality of Eliahs person, [He was a man subject ^o like passions as we
are.] 2. The condition and quality of his prayer; that like a two-edged sword,
it cut both ways, and prevailed in both kinds; both to bring a judgment, and
to bring a blessing upon the people. His first prayer like a burning fever
entered into the bowels of the earth* and scorcht and dried up the Rivers and
Lakes, and Springs, and le^^ no moisture in them; and so brought a judgment of
drought and dearth upon the land. His second prayer went up into the clouds
above, and fetched an (...) a heaven-dropping dew, a happy and a heavenly rain
that moystned and fatned, and refreshed the earth again. [He prayed again,
and the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.

1 The co^^ition and quality of Eliahs person, what manner of man Eliah was? My
text says he was (...) A man subject to the same passions, to the same
frailties and infirmities that we are. Hence you may observe, that no
profession of holiness, no practice of piety, no degree of grace and
sanctification in this life, can exempt, or free, or privilege a man from
common passions and infirmities: Eliah was a man of God, a mortified and a
sanctified man, and one of the greatest favorites in the Court of heaven, and
yet a man subject to passions. What shall I need to multiply examples to prove
this point, when we know the Apostle affirms even of our Savior himself,
That he was in all things like unto us sin excepted: set but sin aside
(whereof his blessed person was uncapeable, for as no rust can take hold of
burning and ^^aming iron; no more could any ^^me or corruption take hold of his
pure and precious soul) set but that aside, and our Savior Christ was (as
Eliah is said to be) (...)* a man subject to the very same (...) and passion^,
of anger, and fear, and sorrow, and sadness, that we are: and happy was it
for us that so he was; for by this means he became (as the Apostle says,
Heb. 2. 17. Amercifull High-Preist, one that knew how to tender and succor our
infirmities, because himself had a feeling of them in his own nature. This
made him so tenderly affected toward the hungry multitude, Matt. 15. because
himself knew by his own experience what an unsufferable misery hunger was.
This made him so compassionate toward the sorrows of Mary and M^^sha, Io^.
11. because himself was (...) acquainted with gri^^^ and sorrow: And such was
his compassion toward Peter in that state of desertion wherein he lay, Luk 22.
because himself knew and felt in his own soul, what a woeful thing it was to
be forsaken of God. And this is the assurance which the Apostle gives us that
we shall obtain mercy and grace from Jesus Christ, to help and comfort us in
time of need, Heb. 4. 16. because himself had a feeling of the same
infirmities, and was a man subject to the same passions that we our selves
are, sin only excepted.

In a word then, as there is no Rose since the Creation, but has his prickles,
as well as his sweet leaves; so there is no man living since the fall of Adam
(except our Savior forementioned, who was (...) God and man both) but has his
passions as well as his perfections, his infirmities as well as his graces. As
Cyril observes, there is no Rock of stone so hard, but has some cracks, some
clefts and seames in it, whereat weeds spring out and grow: so there is no
man's heart so sanctified and filled with grace, but has some cracks, some
flawes in it, whereat his sins and corruptions sprout and issue out, to his
no small regret and grief. And as we see by experience, that there is chafe
about every corn in the field, and bitterness in every branch of Wormwood,
and saltness in every drop of water in the Sea; so is there infirmity and
frailty, corruption and passion in every man, woman, and child, of what estate,
of what degree, of what profession soever. Eliah was a holy man, a zealous man,
a man of God, and yet a man subject to passons.

Let no man therefore be too forward or too severe in censuring and condemning
the follies and frailties, the weaknesses and passions of godly men, or of the
men of God, (such as Eliah was) for alas, they are (...) subject to the same
passions that other men are Solomon tells us, Pro. 27. 19. That as in water,
face answers to face, so does the heart of man to man. A man that looks into
the water, or into a glass, shall see a face there in all points answering to
his own, the same spots, the same warts, the same wrinkles and blemishes that
he sees in the face in the water, they are all the very same in his own face,
there is face answering to face: so does the heart of man to man; the same
evils, the same corruptions, lusts and sins, that thou see in another man's
heart, breaking out into his life, the very selfsame are in thy own heart;
his heart to thine is but as a face answering to a face in the water. Observe
the Apostles demand, 1 Cor. 4. 7. and apply it to thy self. (...)? Who makes
thee to differ from an other man? For by nature all are alike, all equally
devoid of spiritual grace and goodness, and all equally prone to sin and
wickedness: how comes it to pass then, that one man differs from another,
that one is holy, blameless, and undefiled in his way; another licentious and
loose, and spotted with the world? Answ. It is not any thing in nature (believe
that for a truth) but merely that same Gratia discriminans (as Divines call
it) that distinguishing Grace of God, it is that which makes the difference
betwixt one man and another. Let no man therefore ascribe any thing to himself
for his freedom from great offenses, but give God the glory of his grace which
had made him to differ from the greatest sinner; and if at any time, thou see
another man break out into passion, or miscary in his way by some ill
temptation; reprove him in Gods name; and pray for him when thou have done, and
withal, reflect upon thy self, and say, as Plato did, Number ego talis uspiam?
Am not I such a one? Have not I been, or may not I be as vile and as vicious
as he? Be not therefore too censorious, nor too supercilious (as the manner of
some is) but incline rather to think every man better, than to think any man
worse than thy self; if thou see thy brother overtaken in a fault, do then
as the Apostle advises thee, Gal. 6. 1. (...) restore him with the spirit of
meekness, or (as the word signifies) bind him up gently and lovingly, as a
Chirurgian does a bone that is out of joint; Considering thy self (says he)
least thou also be tempted; considering (I say) that thou art, as he is, and
all men are, as Eliah was (...), too like one another in that which is naught,
all subject to the same passions; All (as the Apostle says) shut up under sin,
And I pray God of his goodness have mercy on us all. Amen.

Again, the consideration of this, if it be rightly conceived, may serve for a
comfort and a stay unto such tender consciences as have sinned of infirmity,
and like Moses in their haste, have spoken unadvisedly with their lips, not
being able for the time to overruled and bridle their passions. It is some
comfort to consider, that the greatest Saints of God have sometimes been of
the same temper; yea there is not a soul in heaven (the soul of Jesus Christ
only excepted) but has been sometimes subject to the very same passions. And
I said, This is my infirmity (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 77. 10. but I remember
the years of the right hand of the most High. (i) I consider and call to mind
that God in former times, and in the days of old, has had compassion upon the
same infirmities in other men; and why should I misdoubt (he being still the
same compassionate God) but that he will have pity and compassion upon the
same infirmities in me. But some man may say: How shall I know and be assured
that my sins are sins of infirmity, such as God will wink at; and not
rather sins of presumption and iniquity, such as his soul abhorres? Answ. A
sin of infirmity may be known two ways,

1. By the antecedent which goes before it; and that is an honest resolution of
a man's heart against sin and evil; when a man does steadfastly resolve (by
the assistance and grace of God) to separate himself from every known sin,
and to sanctify himself in all holy duty and obedience to God, striving by a
holy desire and an hearty endeavor, in nothing willingly to sin against God,
but in every thing to please him and approve himself unto him: if such a man
chance to fall by occasion into a fault, or be overtaken unawares (as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 6. 1.) besides the purpose of his heart, and against the
intention and desire of his soul; that man's sins, are sins of infirmity,
which by the mercy of God shall never be laid to his charge. Contrarily, when a
man shall hang in ^quilibrio, in an even balance (as it were) betwixt
wickedness and goodness, and shall be equally disposed to sin or not to sin
as occasion shall offer it self: or which is worse, shall do like him, Psalm.
36. 4. shall set, and settle himself in a way that is not good, resolving with
himself, that this sin ^its my turn, and pleases my humor, and I will not
part with it: or which is worst of all, when a man shall draw iniquity with
cords of vanity (as the Prophet spaketh) as if the devil were backward, and
sin would not come fast enough upon him of its own accord; shall fish and
angle for it, and hunt after ill company, and draw himself and others into
sin, as Fish and Fowls are drawn into a net, to their ruin and destruction;
this man's sins are far beyond the sin of infirmity, for they are sins
of iniquity and sins of obstinacy, and such as will cost him many a sigh,
many a groan, many a tear, before ever he shall attain to this comfortable
persuasion, that there is compassion with God, and salvation with Christ for
his soul.

2. A sin of infirmity is known by the consequents of it, or that which
follows after it: it leaves such a sting behind it in the soul, that a man
can never be at quiet in his own conscience, till he has made his peace with
God by a sound and serious humiliation, and reconciled himself again to Jesus
Christ. Yea, it never leaves a man, till it has brought him to that same
(...), that Indignation which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 7. 11. that a man
shall even fret and vex and fall out with himself for offending and provoking
so good, so gracious a God. It will make a man upbraid himself for a very
beast and a fool (as David did, Psalm. 73.) So ignorant was I, and so foolish,
even as a beast before thee. And it is a sure rule, that of Saint* Augustine;
peccata non nocent, si non placent; if a man's sins do not please ^im they
will never hurt him. Whereas on the contrary, when a man can carry away his
sins as lightly as Sampson carried the gates of Azz^, that they are no
burden to his (...)e or if they do begin to trouble him, shall do as Saul
did, betake himself to music and sport, and merry company to drive it away
(as if one sin could drive out another, and not rather drive it farther in:)
believe it, this man's sins are no sins of infirmity, but they are sins
of an higher nature, and such as will cost a man dear ere he can be acquitted
of them in the sight of God. And this I dare confidently affirm, that there is
no man that sins of infirmity but he i^ afterward the better for his sin;
it makes him the more jealous of himself, the more watchful over his ways,
the more careful to serve and please God, than ever he had been in former
times. Whereupon says Saint Austin, upon those words of the Apostle, Romans 8.
Omnia cooperantur, etc. All things work together for good to them that love
God. Etiam peccata Domine, Even our very sins O Lord; for by sin we have
experience of our infirmity, our infirmity brings us down to humility,
humility brings us home to God, and in God every man has his quietus est, a
happy discharge from all his sins. This being done, one thing only remains,
and that is this; A man that has sinned of infirmity, will labor to bring
forth that same (...) which John Baptist speaks of, Mat. 3. 8. the worthy
fruits of repentance: for you most know, that repentance is one thing, and the
fruit of repentance is another; it is not enough to repent and be sorry for
what a man has done (so did Judas, so did Ahab) but he must honestly and
unfainedly endeavor to bring forth the fruit of repentance, and that is the
reformation and alteration of his life, and conversation in the sight of God
and men. If it he thus with thee, take comfort (in Gods name) from this
comfortable Doctrine, that thou art no other then Eliah was, a man subject to
passion.

It follows; Eliah was a man subject to passions, yet he prayed; Hence we
may learn, never to be so dejected at the view of our frailties and
imperfections, as to forbear our resorting to God in prayer. For no man living
has so much need to pray to God, as a man subject to passions. It was one
part of Salomons request to God, 2 Chronicles. 6. 29. When any one shall perceive
and feel his own sore, his own grief, and the plague of his own heart (as
he terms a man's own corruption) what shall he do? Shall he despair, shall
he be driven back from God (as Jordan was driven back at the persence of the
Arc) no, let him this do; let him down upon his knees to God, and spread
forth his hands to heaven, and the Lord which dwells in heaven will hear
him, and when he hears, have mercy. It was an amazed and unadvised prayer,
that of Simon to our Savior, Luke 5. 8. when he cried out, Lord go from me,
for I am a sinful man; as if a Patient should say to the Physician, depart
from me, for I am sick. The sicker a man is, the more need he has of the
Physicians presence; and the sinfuller he is, the more need to draw near to
his Savior; as a man that shivers of an Ague creepes nearer and nearer to the
fire. You know our Saviors gracious call, Come unto me all y^ that are weary
and heavy laden, and I will ease you. Now (as Saint Bernard says) every
Christian is Animal onerif^rum, a burden-bearing creature; not a Christian upon
earth but has some cross or other to clogge him, some corruption or other to
burden him at times, and lies heavy upon his heart; what then is to be done?
Shall he lie down, like Issachar, and couch between his burden? Shall he be
disheartened and discouraged from resorting and approaching to God? God forbid;
let him in Gods name come to Jesus Christ that calls him, with tears in his
eyes, with true grief and Godly sorrow in his heart, with humble confessions
and prayers in his mouth; and he has promised in verbo servatoris, in the word
of a Savior, that he will release and ease him of it. One thing I must tell
thee by the way, when thou prayest to Christ for ease, thou must promise him
obedience and service; as the Israelites did to Rhehoboam, 1 Reg. 12. Ease us
of our burden, and we will be thy servants for ever. Thus do, and then let
thy burden be never so great, thy corruptions never so many, thy passions
never so strong; He that could calm the sea, can calm thy sorrows, and
speak peace unto thy soul in the midst of all thy troubles, and therefore, if
at any time thy passions be stirred, and thy heart disquieted within thee; know
of a surety, that, there is some Jonah that has raised this storm, some sin
or other that has caused this trouble to thy soul; then fall to thy prayers
(as Eliah did) and give God no rest, till God has given rest to thy soul.
Eliah was a man subject to passions, and (...).

It follows, How did he pray? My text (...) he prayed earnestly in the
Original it is, (...), In praying he prayed, or he prayed a prayer; we
translate it, He prayed earnestly; and it is to very good purpose; for it
implies thus much: that no prayer is a prayer indeed, but an earnest prayer.
Cold and careless prayers, counterfeit and superstitious prayers, they be but
res nihili, in Gods account no prayers at all. I will give you an instance.
Act. 9. 11. When Paul was converted and stricken with blindness, Almighty God
sent Ananias to him to lay his hands upon him, and to recover him of his sight;
now least he should mistake the man, and lay his hands upon a wrong party, God
gives him this prive token to know him by, for behold he prays. Now let me
demand; do you think that S. Paul never prayed to God till that time? or do
you imagine that was the first prayer that ever Paul made? It is the first we
read of; but do you think he never prayed before? I believe he did, many a
time and often; and I will give you my reason* Saint Paul (you know) was a
Pharisee, one of the strictest and devoutest of all the Sect (as he testifies
of himself) and the Pharisees, you know, were altogether given to long
praying; it was their glory and their gain to, that they could make long
prayers in every place, in the open streets, in widows houses; and no doubt
but Saint Paul had as excellent a faculty that way, and could pray as long and
as largely as the best of them all: but see the issue: Almighty God, who styles
himself the hearer of prayers, gave no ear, took no notice of all his
formal, Pharisaicall, hypocritical prayers, which he had made in former
times; till he came to this humble, this earnest, this heartbreaking prayer;
And now (says God) Behold he prays* he never prayed indeed, till now: for
as Philo says well; God does not numerare, but ponderare, not number our
prayers, but weigh them; if he find them cordial, if he find them hearty,
that they have some substance and so^e weight in them, then he records and
registers and sets them down in that book of remembranc^ which the Prophet
speaks of, Mal. 3. 16. If otherwise, they be dull and heartlesse lazy and
spiritlesse, God does by them as he does by onr sins of ignorance, Act. 17.
30. (...) wink at them, over-see them* pass by, and take no notice of them;
let no man therefore deceive himself to think that all kind of praying
speeds alike, for no prayer is a prayer in Gods account, but an earnest prayer.
Eliah prayed a prayer, because he prayed earnestly.

Furthermore, it is worth your noting, to see the constant disposition of this
holy man. Eliah was well known to be a hot spirited man in all his actions,
exceeding zealous and earnest in all his reprehensions, both of the King, and
of the people. Now here you may observe the equability the evennesse of Eliahs
zeal; as he was earnest in his reprehensions, so he was as earnest in his
devotions; and as zealous in his prayers, as he was in his anger. There is many
a man hot and fiery in his anger, but cold and lukewarm in prayers; such
zeal is never right. Gal. 4. 18. It is good to be always earnest in a good
thing. (...), Is the word to be hot and fiery, and zealously affected in one
good thing as well as another, in devotion, as well as reprehension, in prayer,
as well as in anger. When a man's zeal is equable (like Eliahs) then it is
right and pleasing to God.

As Physicians judge of the state of a man's body, Vniversalia salutaria,
particularia ex morb^; as thus: if a man be hot in one part and cold in
another; if the palms of his hands burn, and the soles of his feet be
key-cold, then all is not right; but if he be of an indifferent equal heat
all over, that held a good sign of good health in the body. By the like rule,
judge thou of the state of thy soul, if thy zeal be equable and uniforme both
in prayer and in anger, it is a good sign of grace and sanctification in thy
heart; but if it vary and differ, that there is too much heat in the one, too
little in the other; all is not well within. It was the reason which old Father
Latimer gave, why men in these days do not prevail with God in their
prayers, as Eliah and such others had done in former times, Deest ignis (says
he) deest ignis, There lackes fire, there lackes fire; his meaning is, our
prayers want that zeal, that heat, that earnestness, which they put into
theirs. For as Incense without fire yields no smell, no more does prayer
without zeal and earnestness; and as Honey is no Honey, if it have lost its
sweetness; and Vinegar is no Vinegar, if it have lost its sharpness; so
Prayer is no Prayer, if it be void of earnestness. Eliah prayed indeed,
because he prayed earnestly.

Now I come to the subject, and matter of his Prayer which (I told you) was
first for a judgment, and then for a blessing, first for a drought, and then
for rain, as it follows. He prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it
rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months. Here are
two weighty points to be considered. 1. What should move Eliah to pray for a
judgment. 2. Why he made choice to pray for this kind of judgment, of
drought and dearth, rather then for any other. I will tell you my opinion of
both.

1. Upon what ground, or by what warrant did Eliah pray for a judgment. S.
Paul (in my conceit) seems to tax him for it, Romans 11. 2. and he brings it in
with a notandum, wot ye not (i) do ye not mark and observe what the
Scripture says of Eliah, how he made intercession to God against Israel. Good
men in former times were wont to make intercession to God For the people, not
Against them: Abraham prayed for the wicked Sodomites, Jeremy prayed for the
Idolatrous Israelites, till God forbad him, and gave him a countermand, Pray no
more for this people, for I will not hear thee, Ier. 11. 14. The Husbandman in
the Parable entreates his Master for the unfruitful tree, that he would spare
it and not cut it down, and does Eliah differ from all the rest, and bend his
prayers against the people, and pray for the vexation and undoing of his
Country? How could this stand with that good Religion, and that good affection
which so holy a man should bear toward the people of God? Answ. Three things
there are (in my weak judgment) that may seem to warrant and bear out Eliah
in praying for a judgment.

1. Authoritas Prophetic^. Prophets might do more than ordinary persons, and
Eliah had the spirit of Prophecy, and knew by revelation from God, that such a
judgment was a coming, therefore he might the more warrantably and
unoffensively frame his desires to Gods appointments, and fit his prayers to
Gods purposes. Thus must we conceive of those bitter execrations and
imprecations wherewith David did so often in the Psalms curse and banne his
enemies, [Let their Table be their snare, let their children be vagabodes and
beg their bread, etc.] A man would think it could not stand with the piety and
charity of a godly man, to wish such wicked events, such uncharitable wishes
to proceed out of his mouth: but only that we know, he was a Prophet of God,
and did it per aff^atum divinum, by the direction and inspiration of the Holy
Ghost; he knew by the spirit of Prophecy, they were such as were accursed of
God, being Gods enemies as well as his, and therefore might the more
warrantably and safely do it. It is not for us to use David's curses, unless
we had David's spirit. David and Eliah had that gift which the Apostle calls
(...) the discerning spirits; they knew by instinct from heaven, who were blessed
and who were cursed of God. It is not so with us, God has hid those secrets
from our eyes, and therefore it is our part and duty to pray in love and
charity, That God would have mercy upon all men.

But what use then are we to make of those curses in the Psalms that are read
so often to us? Answ. Thus we may do, we may apply them to the enemies of the
Church, that seek the ruin of the true Religion, and profess an open enmity
to the Gospel and Faith of Jesus Christ (Who is God blessed for) ever we may
safely take our Saviors part, and curse all those that are enemies to him* [So
let all thy enemies perish, O Lord, Iud. 5. 3* 1:] But for our own enemies,
that have done us some private wrong, or bare us some secret grudge, to curse
them and banne them in this kind (as the usual manner of some is) it is both
unwarrantable, uncharitable, and ungodly. But the best and safest use, that we
can make of those curses, is to appropriate and apply them to our selves, to
acknowledge and adjudge our selves worthy to undergo all those deadly evils,
and that God may justly do so; and more than so unto us, if he should deal
with us according to our sins; by this means we shall save God a labor, and
our selves a pain. For as on the contrary, to bless our selves is the way to
make God curse us, Deuteronomy. 29. 20. He that blesses himself when he hears the
words of these curses, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the
imaginations of my own heart, adding drunkenness to thirst, (mark what
follows) the Lord will be revenged upon the soul of such a one, his anger and
his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written
in this book shall light upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from
under heaven. This a man gets by blessing of himself: whereas if thou would
be blessed of God, I do not say, that thou should curse thy self (far be it
from any servant of Christ so to do) but this I would advise thee to do, even
with a sorrowful and a sad heart, to say Amen to all the curses in the Book
of God, to acknowledge and confess that thou have justly deserved, and that it
is Gods only mercy that thou have escaped them. So much for the first reason
that may warrant Eliahs prayer; the next may be this.

2. Convenientia temporis, the fitness and order of time when this was done,
it was done in the time of the Law, which was used to such judgments, they
were then* accustomed to more terrible wonders, than are now suitable to the
sweet and saving time of the Gospel; observe the wonders that Moses wrought in
Egypt, what terrible, what hurtful, what mischeivous wonders they were, he
turned all their water into blood, all their dust into Lice, and spoiled all
the fruits of the earth, and undid the whole Land* What a dreadful wonder was
that of Elisha, 2 Reg. 2. when he cursed the children of Bethel that mocked him
for his baldness: One would have thought that a little discipline, a little
correction, or sending to their Parents or Masters, would have sufficed, and
been a sufficient revenge for waggish unhappy boys, that did not know their
duty to a man of God: but he looks upon them with a direful countenance, and
cursed and banned them in the name of the Lord, and immediately two Shee-beares
came out of the Wood, and tear two and fortic of them in pieces; what a
horrible, what a terrible, what a mischeivous wonder was this. Of the same
kind was that of Eliah, 2 Reg. Chap. 1. when the Captain came with authority,
to bid him come down, and come before the King; he might have answered, I
cannot come, or the Lord appointed me some other way to go, etc. but the next
word we hear, is a word of Judgment and Vengeance, If I be a man of God, let
fire come down from heaven, and consume thee, and thy company: and so it did
both them, and the rest that came after on the same message: Such wonders as
these were usual in the time of the Law. But now look to the Miracles and
Wonders of our Savior in the Gospel, and you shall find them to be of another
nature, all of goodness and mercy, all merciful, all beneficial, all healing
Miracles, no way hurtful or destructive of any man's life. We ^ead of many a
man's life that he saved, many that he recalled and restored, none that he
destroyed, no not one; being so reviled as he was, so persecuted, so laid for,
so betrayed, apprehended, condemned and crucified; yet what one man did our
Savior strike dead for all these heinous indignities? Nay, he was so far
from revenge, that he prayed for their lives that sought and wrought his death*

The most terribble wonders that ever our Savior did, were but two, and those
no ways prejudicious to the person or life of any man, woman, or child. The
one was his cursing and blasting of the barren Fig Tree; and this was but
symbolicall, not done in any spleen to the poor tree; but only to show his
indignation against all unfruitful profession; when men make an outward show
of piety to God; but when the poor and hungry come to them (as Christ came to
that Figtree) hoping to pull some fruit of charity and mercy from them, there
is nothing to be found but leaves, good words perhaps, and that is all: believe
it, such men are nigh unto cursing, and it is Gods infinite mercy, if he do
not blast their estate (as Christ did the Figtree) that it shall never prosper
to them nor theirs. The other wonder of Christ that did any hurt, was that,
Mat. Chapter eight. The drowning of the Swine, and yet that was the devils
doing, Christ only gave way to these evil spirits (which seek the
destruction of man and beast) to carry them headlong into the (...) (as they
would carry us too, but that God above, who styles himself The preserver of
men, is pleased in mercy to keep out of their clutches;) and this was
symbolicall too, to let us understand how God hates all those that are of a
swinish disposition; that is, all drunken sots, that like swine, have neither
wit nor grace to moderate themselves in the use of Gods creatures; and all
lazy beasts that mind nothing but their bellies, (as you know) a Swine is one
of the laziest creatures that a man can keep, it does him no work, nor
service at all; or lastly, All hoggish worldlings, and miserable muck-wormes of
the earth, that never do good till they come to die: let all such tremble and
fear, and call to God for mercy, least in his just judgment he deliver their
souls into the hands of those hellish Fiends to carry them headlong (as they
did the swine) into the lake that burns with fire and brimestone for
evermore, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

These are the two severest wonders that ever our Savior did, or suffered to
be done; as for all the rest (look into the Stories of the Gospel, which are
the Acts and Monuments of Jesus Christ) you shall find to be all gracious, all
beneficial, all healing and saving wonders. Never any man came to him for
sight, that went away blind; never any came to him for hearing, that went away
deaf; never any came to him for health, that went away sick. In a word, you
shall never find that ever any man or woman came to our Savior for any help
or mercy, that ever went away confounded or disappointed of their hopes. Now
beloved, Christ is the same Jesus still, that then he was: Coelum non animum
(as we say) though he have changed his place, he has not changed his nature,
but is still as favorable, as indulgent to mankind as ever he was, if we do
but as truly seek unto him for our souls health, as they did for their bodies.

So you see the nature of these wonders is altered from that they were in
Eliahs times: the severity of the Law suites not with the lenity of the Gospel;
and we must now imitate our Savior in works of mercy, and not follow Eliah in
prayers for judgment. We see, Luk 9. 54. When the disciples fingers itched to
be revenged on the Samaritans for their base discourtesie in not entertaining
our Savior; Master, (said they) will thou that we command fire from heaven,
and consume them, as Eliah did? We have a president for it, it is a book case,
Eliah did so, let us do the like, these men deserve it, as bad or worse than
they with whom Eliah had to do: No, (says our Savior, the case is altered)
ye know not of what spirit ye are; the spirit of the Law required severity, the
spirit of the Gospel requires meekness and mercy. Far is it from the good
Spirit of Christ and of God to stir up any man's heart to private revenge; not
an Eagle, but a Dove was the shape wherein that holy and healthful Spirit made
choice to appear. Let us therefore all that are called Christians, follow no
other president, but our Savior Christ's; whose only lesson that ever he set
us to learn of him, was (...) and meek, and so doing we shall find Requi^m
animabus, (...) own souls.

The third and last reason that may warrant Eliah in praying for a judgment,
was,

3. Necessitas rei, the necessity of the thing it self; that holy Prophet had
spent his strength in vain, Sermon upon Sermon, warning upon warning,
threatening upon threatening; and when he saw that nothing would work them to
goodness, then he prays for a judgment; not in a vindictive way to be
revenged upon them, but as a desperate remedy, knowing that, that or nothing
would bring them to good, as it is said, 2 Chronicles. ult. God sent his Prophets,
rising early and sending them, and used all gentle means to reclaim them,
till there was no remedy, then he sent destruction. In this sense, if a man
have a child, or a friend, or any one that he wishes well to his soul; if he
be grown to that pass, so hardened in sin, that no persuasions, no warnings,
no threatenings will work upon him; I am persuaded, it were neither
uncharitable, nor unpleasing to God, if a man should pray; Lord smite him,
correct him, lay some medicinal, some healing punishment upon him, that he may
see the error of his ways, and may return and repent, and so be saved.

Upon these and the like grounds, I suppose Eliah might with a safe conscience
pray for a judgment: but then the next question is, Why he should make choice
to pray for this kind of judgment, of drought and dearth, for want of rain;
rather than any other. I will tell you what I think the reasons may be.

1. Because it was an uncontrouleable, a convincing judgment; if Eliah should
have brought any earthly or visible judgment, as Sword or Pestilence, etc.
they would have imputed it presently to some secondary means and causes; now
this was a heavenly an invisible judgment, the stoppage of the clouds, the
detaining of Rain, and the burning and scorching of the (...) judgment from
heaven and (...) needs confess to be Digitus the (...) God, not Aliqnid
humani, no handy work of any mortal man. For this was the fallacy which the
Scribes and Pharisees put upon our Savior Mat. 16. 1. When they had seen all
the miracles and wonders of Christ, how he cured the sick, etc. they
conceited that these things might be done by slight of hand, by art Magic, by
Beelzebub, or by Conjuration, etc but (say they) Show us asigne from Heaven and
then we will believe. They knew that a Magician or a devil might do much upon
earth, but he could do nothing in heaven; therefore (say they) show us a sign
from Heaven and we will believe. So here to prevent all misconceites Elias
prayed and procures a judgment from heaven; and that a convincing a cutting
judgment; for you must know that the people at that time left off to worship
the true God, and fell to worship Baall, the Sun, the Moon, and all the
Host of Heaven: trusting no doubt that these gods of theirs, would by their
influence so moysten and fatten the earth, that they should not need to be
beholding to God for any rain: now (quoth Eliah) here is a judgment to try
your gods withal, go to the gods that ye have served, let them help now or
never, if they can do any thing, they can send a shower of rain, if not, why
do ye serve them? I say it was a convincing judgment. Eliah did it on
purpose, to let them see the vileness of their Idolatry, what base, what
impotent, what unworthy gods they served, that could not help their clyents to
a drop of rain. In like manner, whatsoever a man makes his god, besides the
true one; I mean, puts his trust in, for help in time of need; shall at
length so deceive him, and so befoole him, that he shall be forced to confess,
as these people did in the end; The Lord he is God, The Lord he is God.

2. Because it was a just and a fitting punishment; this people were guilty of
spiritual barrenness, and God plagued them with temporal barrenness. No
Nation under heaven was so husbanded, and manured of God, so watered with the
dewes of heaven, I mean, with the means of grace and salvation, as they were,
and yet none more unfruitful in every good work: Now therefore Eliah fits them
with a judgment suitable and agreeable to their sin: he prays to God that
it might not rain, that so their lands might be answerable to their lives, and
their soyles become as barren as their souls. Thus it* pleases God many times
to pay men in their own coin, to come home to them in their own kind, and
to fit his punishments according to their sins. That as they that sin in
their goods, by misgetting miskeeping, and mispending them, are many times
punished in their goods, by losses, and crosses, by fire, by water, etc. And as
they that sin in their children, by misloving, or misnurturing them, are often
times punished in their children, as David was in Absalom and Adonijah; so they
that sin in their lands; it is just with God to punish them in their lands:
Solomon tells us, Prove. 21. 4. that the plowing of a wicked man is sin. That
is strange; the husbandry and tillage of the ground is generally held to be one
of the most honest, the most innocent, the most harmless callings in the
world; and so it is of it self; and yet we see, when a wicked man takes the
plow in hand; when a man goes to his plow with an ill mind, and an ill
conscience, his very plowing adds to his sins. And it is just with God, that
that land which is plowed sinfully should thrive accordingly, and become as bad
and as barren as the owner. A fruitful land does God make barren, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein.

3. Because it was a sensible, and a palpable judgment. As God Almighty told
Cain, Genesis 4. 7. that he should be cursed from the earth. The Lord knew that
Caine cared not to be cursed from heaven, and to be banished from the presence
of God, and branded for a Reprobate; but to be cursed from the earth, to be
cursed in earthly things (he being a tiller of the earth) that would go
nearest to his heart of any judgment. Even such is the disposition of every
man of the earth (as David terms earthly-minded men) they do not value nor
care to be cursed from heaven, to be excommunicated out of the favor of God,
and out of the blessed company of all faithful people (which censure of
excomunication if it be rightly carried with a Clave non errante (as the
Schoolmen speak) when there is no error committed in the use of the Keys,
is one of the greatest punishments under heaven.) But carnal men are not
sensible of this, and therefore God will punish them in that wherein they are
sensible, in their wives and children, in their corn and cattle, etc. in such
things as are nearest and dearest to them: as when David slung his stone at
Goliath, if he had struck him upon any part of his harness, he had never felt
the blow, but striking him (as he did) in the forehead, which was naked and
tender, that sunk him presently: so it is with carnal men, for spiritual
judgments, they are harnessed, their hearts are hardened, their consciences are
seared, they have (as the Apostle speaks) (...), a horny hoof (as it were)
grown over their hearts, that makes them insensible of any spiritual blow
that can light upon them. Therefore Almighty God, knowing in what part they lie
naked, in what kind they are tenderly affected, namely, in their affection to
earthly things, strikes them there, plagues them in that, and that ^inkes them
like Nabal, whose heart died within him like a stone. As we see in Exodus, how
Pharaoh and the Egyptians hardened their heart, and out stood all the plagues of
Egypt, till God plagued them in their children, and that broke their hearts. So
believe it, they that care not for spiritual punishments (for the loss of
Gods favor, the loss of heaven, the loss and peril of their own souls)
God will find a time to punish them in that which they do and shall care for,
in their corn, in their substance, in that which is nearest and ^earest ^o
the: As he did these Israelites here, because they were not sensible of the
want of grace. God punished them with that would make them sensible, with the
want of rain; that when they had plowed and sown their land, and bestowed all
their care and cost, all should be in vain, for want of moisture to refresh
the earth. These or the like reasons (I suppose) might move Eliah to pray and
procure this kind of judgment.

By the way, if any man desire to know the reason, why God is not thus
marvelous in the Ministers of the Gospel, as he was in Eliah, and those other
Prophets of the Law; why we that are his Evangelicall Prophets cannot do such
wonders in our days, as they did in theirs? Answ. though that same donum
miraculorum, the gift of Miracles be ceased in the Church, now that the Gospel
has taken root: (as Husbandmen when they transplant a tree, at first, they
set props and stays to shore it up, but after it has taken root, they pluck
away the stays, and let it grow by the ordinary influence of the heavens;) I
say though the gift of working wonders be ceased, yet miracles and wonders in
an another kind never cease, but are wrought daily by the Preachers of the
Gospel. For you must know that the micles under the Gospel are of a differing
nature from the miraracles under the Law: those were ^cularia miracula (as I
may fitly call them) eye-miracles, that were visible and outwardly apparent to
be seen; but these are Auricularia miracula, Eare-miracles, secret and
invisible, wrought in the heart by the Word and Spirit of God, entering in at
the ear, and going down into the soul. Though we cannot command, or forbid
the rain to water the earth, as Eliah did; if we can water and mollify the
earthen hearts of men with the supernatural rain of heavenly Doctrine, and
make a dry and barren soul bear fruit to God; Is not this as great a wonder
as the other? Though we cannot cause nor command the thunder (as Samuel did) to
terrify the people for their sins; yet God has his Boanerges, his sons of
thunder still, that by rattling from heaven the terrible judgments of God
against sin and sinners, are able to make the stoutest and the proudest heart
upon earth, even tremble and quake, and fall down before the presence of God;
and is not this as great a miracle as that of Samuel, to bring an unhumbled
sinner upon his knees, and make glad to cry God mercy for his sins? In a
word, though we cannot cast out devils out of men's bodies, as the disciples of
Christ could do; if we can cast the devil out of men's souls, by the
powerful Gospel of Jesus Christ; is it not as great a wonder? Believe it
brethren, the conversion of a sinner to God, and bringing of a soul to heaven,
is absolutely without comparison the greatest miracle, the greatest wonder in
the world. And these be the miracles wherewith it pleases God to grace the
Ministers of the Gospel; therefore ye observe, that the Collect for Ministers,
runs thus, Almighty God which only workest great marvels, etc. When a soul
is sick to the death, with a surfeit of sin, is recovered and revived again
by that same healthful spirit of grace, which God together with his Word does
breathe into the soul, it is so great a marvel, so rare a wonder, that the
Angels of heaven rejoice to see it.

I have held you overlong in the former part of Eliahs prayer; which brought
the judgment: hear now in a word or two, the Reversing of the judgment, and I
have done. [And he prayed again, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit.] It well becomes the Prophets of God to be merciful;
Good Eliah had not the heart to hold the people too long under a judgment,
when he saw he had done enough to humble them* he desires God to reverse the
judgment. As it is observed of the good Angels in the old and new Testament,
when they appeared to any, either man or woman; their method and manner was
this, Primo terrent, deinde laetisica^t, they first terrified them, and put
them into fear, then presently comforted them and put them out of fear. Thus
did Eliah with this people; thus did Moses with Pharaoh, that good man had not
the heart to hold wicked Pharaoh always under a judgment, but upon the least
entreaty made suit to God to reverse it. So dealt the Prophet with Jeroboam, 1
Reg. 13. 6. when he had smitten him with a judgment, and had him at the
advantage, that his hand was withered, Jeroboam was glad to submit and say,
Entreat now the face of the Lord thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be
restored me: the man of God had not the heart to deny him, but immediately,
besought the Lord, and the Kings hand was restored, and became as it was
before. When a judgment comes, then Prophets are in season. Abraham is better
than a King in this case, Genesis 20. 7. and 17. Restore the man his own, for he
is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee; and ver. 17. Abraham prayed unto God,
and God healed Abimeleeh* etc. Go to my servant Job (says God to his friends,
Job 42. 8.) and my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept. So
Act. 8. 24. When Peter had denounced a curse on Simon Magus, he was glad to
crouch and cry unto him, Oh pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these
things which ye have spoken come upon me. Thus ye see that judgments and
plagues will bring Prophets into request: men commonly deal with their
Ministers, as boys do by Walnut-trees, and other fruit trees, in fair weather
throw cudgels at us, in foul run to us for shelter. In the days of peace
and prosperity we are past over as superfluous creatures of whom there is
little use, and less need: but when the wrath of God falls on the naked
soul, when the conscience is wounded within, and body pained without, then the
Minister is thought on. I say no more, if you desire their prayers, and that
God should hear them praying for you in your extremity, do not slight them,
do not wrong them in prosperity. Remember how Ahab and all Israel were glad to
be beholden to Eliah to reverse their judgment; and you do not know how soon
the case may be your own: therefore as you love your souls, love those that
have charge of them.

And he prayed again, etc. When I look into the Story, 1 Reg. 18. I can find
no direct prayer that Eliah made for rain. But I ^iud there a twofold prayer
that he made. 1. A virtuall. 2. A formal prayer*

1. A virtuall prayer, not for rain, but for their conversion, Oh Lord, (says
Eliah) bring back, or b^ing home the heart of this people unto thee; verse. 73.
and this includes all other prayers that can be made. A prayer for Conversion
is a prayer for every thing. Ier. 31. 18. When Ep^ratm prays for conversion,
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned: (says God) I will surely have mercy upon
him, etc. Such is the goodness of God, that he will withold no good thing,
(be it rain, be it plenty, be it any thing that is good for them) from them
that are converted, and brought home by true repentance to him. Therefore if
thou stand in need of any temporal mercy, pray first for conversion, and
all other good things shall be super-added and thrown in unto thee; or if thou
prayest for any child, or for any friend to do him good indeed, pray for his
conversion, and thou prayest for every thing: that one prayer is instar omnium,
instead of all the rest. If he be in an ill way, desire God to bring him
back, and for future things take no care.

2 A formal prayer, when he saw that the people were truly humbled, and that
their hearts were indeed brought home to God, insomuch that they cried out,
with an ingemmination, The Lord he is God, the Lord he is God; then he buckles
his head between his knees (to show the humble prostration of his soul) and
falls a praying to God for rain. After humiliation any prayer comes in season,
Esaias 1. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings, etc. And
now come (says God) and we will reason together, now let us parle, now let us
confess, now pray, and I will hear you. Iud. 10. 17. When the Israelites put
away their strange gods, and turned themselves to the true God by sincere
repentance and reformation; the text says, His soul was grieved for the
misery of Israel: thus the only way to ease our own souls of grief, or to
be rid of any grievous judgment, is to Grieve the soul of God, that is, to
humble our selves before him, to pray and seek his face, and to turn from our
wicked ways, and God will be even grieved himself that ever punished,
plagued, and put us to grief; and he will return (as he says) and have mercy
on us, and will do us good after he has done us hurt. Here then (in a word)
is the ready way to prevail with God, either for rain* or for fair weather,
or for any temporal blessing whatsoever, to do as Eliah did, buckle our very
heads between our knees, I mean, prostrate our selves before the face of God,
in the humblest, in the lowliest, in the most dejected manner, that we can
device, and if any means under heaven will fetch down mercy from heaven, that
will do it. Eliah prayed again, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit. Now to God the Father, God the Sun, God the Holy
Ghost, be ascribed and given, all honor and glory, be done and performed all
service and duty, from this time forth for evermore.

Amen.
FJNJS.
A VVINTER SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's in LONDON,
upon Shrove Sunday last, 1634. in the afternoon, being a time of extraordinary
snow and floods.

By John Gore, Rector of Wendenlofts in Essex.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London by Thomas Cotes, for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Greene-dragon, 1635.

Perlegi has tres Conciones, in quibus nihil reperio sanae fidei, aut bonis
moribus Contrarium.

Tho: Weeks R. P. Episcopo Land. a Sacris.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL my truly Honored friend Master Alexander
Thistlethwayte Esquyer, to whom I owe even my own self.
Right Worshipful,
I Remember how Noah's Dove (after some longer stay then was expected) returned
at length unto the Arc from whence she was sent with a branch of Olive in her
mouth. Your worthy Family was the Arc out of which J was sent into these
farther parts of Essex; and thus long have J been abroad, ere J could find
out an Olive Branch fit to present you with at my return; such as it is, I
beseech you take it in good part, and let it find (as the Author has done)
favor and acceptance at your hands. And the God of peace lengthen your
tranquillity, and continue to preserve your house and family, that it may ever
remain as an Happy Arc wherein both you and yours may successively be saved,

Thus prays Your poor servant and suppliant JOHN GORE.

A WINTER SERMON.
Psalm. 147. verse. 16, 17, 18. He gives snow like wool; he scatters the
hoary frost like ashes: He casts forth his Ice like morsells; who is able to
abide his cold? He sends out his word and melts them; He blows with his
wind, and the waters flow.
THE last time I was in this place, I preached you a Summer-Sermon (out of
Eliahs prayer, James 5. 17.) it being then a time of extraordinary heat and
drought; I am now come up (through Gods merciful preservation) to preach you a
Winter-Sermon, such as the extremity of the weather, and the misery of the
ways has even enforced me to fall upon, besides my purpose and intention;
that so, by a kind of spiritual Antiperistasis, your souls may receive some
warmth within, whiles your bodies are encompassed with so much cold without,
for this end, I have made choice of such a text, as will teach us to make good
use of all manner of winter weather; whether it be snow, or frost, or Ice, or
floods, or what ever else it be, there is still some good use to be made of it,
if men had but grace to apply their minds and hearts unto it.

Which that you may the better do, be pleased to observe with me four
general points, which may be reduced to four several heads, and be thus
expressed. 1. The providence of God, or the care that God has to cloth and
keep warm the very earth as it were with a Garment of wool* (dat nivem sicut
lanam, He gives snow like wool) 2. The diligence of God (if I may so term
it) that in the cold and bitter evenings, when we are close and warm by the
fire, or when we are at rest and warm in our beds, then is our God abroad at
work, sprinkling and scattering the hoary or the ashy frost for the health and
welfare both of man and beast (spargit pruinam sicut cinerem, he scatters or
sprinkleth the hoary frost like ashes.) 3. The severity of God, whereby he
returns men the same measure which they themselves have mete unto others:
because for the most part men's morsels are like Ice, that is, they come hardly,
and coldly, and cruelly from them, to the poor and hungry; therefore God comes
home to them in their own kind, and pays them (as it were) with their own
coin, and gives them Ice like morsells, to be both a remembrance, and a
revenge of their miserable Inhospitalitie (proijcit glaciem suam sicut
buccellas, He casts forth his Ice like mosells*) 4. Lastly, see the goodness
and the tender mercy of God; that when God sees the weather is grown to that
extremity, that people are not able to abide his cold, then he has compassion
upon men's infirmities, and (as it follows in the text) emittit verbum, and
liquefacit etc. He sends out his word and melts them, he blows with his
wind, and the waters flow. These be the several parts and branches of my
text, of each whereof, I will endeavor to speak, as briefly, and as
effectually as God and his good spirit shall enable me. And first of the
providence of God in clothing the very earth.

Dat nivem sicut lanam, He gives snow like woll.
1. The first thing I observe from hence is this, that the snow does not only
come by the course of the planets, or by the coldness of the Climate, or by
the virtue of any secondary means and causes; but it is Donum Dei, the gift of
God; The same God that gave us these souls, is he that gives us these snowes,
to be a covering and a garment to the naked earth: far be it from us
therefore to murmr or repine, or think our selves agreeved with God for
sending us such snowie weather, to hinder our husbandry, to pinch our cattle,
and to spend our stover, etc. but let us learn of David, to give God the glory
of all his gifts; and sit down and say as Elie did, 1. Sam. 3. 18. It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good, for whatsoever seems good to him,
cannot but be good, how ever it seems to us. Consider (I beseech you)
wherefore is it, that the snow, and hail, and storm and tempest are bidden
and commanded to praise God. Psalm. 148. 8. and think with your selves, how or
which way those senceles inanimate things can perform that honor to their
maker, unles it be by the Ejaculations and expressions of the heart and tongue
of man, which is the only Lyra animata the living harp of God, to sound forth
his praises, and set forth his glory for all his gifts and benefits; Alas
those livelesse creatures cannot do it of themselves, but they must do it by
us, or rather indeed it is we that are commanded to do it for them. Wherefore
else has God given to man the use of the tongue with language and words to
express himself, which he has denied to all other creatures besides, but
only that Man should be (as it were) The mouth of all his other creatures, to
praise and glorify God in their sted, and in their behalf. If any of us shall
think much to do so little for our God, let us take heed that God do not do
by us, as he threatened to do by those Priests, Mal. 2. 2. Even to curse our
very blessings, and to make those things which are blessings in themselves, to
be little better then crosses and curses unto us. For God can give us
blessings with such a tang that the fruition shall differ little from the want,
as he did to the Israelites when he gave them quails; so God gives many a man
children with so little grace, that they would have accounted it even a
blessing to be barren: so God gives many a man wealth with so little comfort,
that it had been better for their souls, if they had begged their bread: so
God can give us snow and rain with so little favor, that neither we, nor the
earth shall receive any comfort or refreshment by it. Therefore as we desire to
do our selves good, and to have and to hold the good will of our heavenly
father, that he should prosper and bless his blessings to us; then let us in
no case withhold from God the Honor due unto his name, but return him some
glory for all his gifts; for what man will go into a cold bed to warm it, but
he looks for warmth from it again: what man will give his friend a ring, but
he hopes that he will wear it for his sake, or give him a book, but he hopes
he will read it for his sake, or give him any token of love, but that he hopes
he will accept it and keep it for his sake: and shall we think that God does
not look for as much as this at our hands, when he give us snow and frosts,
etc. believe it he does; and therefore if thou have been defective this way,
let me be thy monitour, to do as Pharaohs Butler did, Genesis 41. 9. to call to
mind thy fault this day; and to remember that it is thy part and duty to
bless God for all his blessings; as well for those which thou enjoyest in
common with others, (as good air, good weather, etc.) as for those that thou
have in peculiar and proper to thy self; has God given thee health? bless
him for it: has he given thee wealth? bless him for it; has he given thee
children and friends, and peaceable days? bless him for all these: but has
he given thee his good word to instruct thee? Has he given thee his good
Spirit to comfort thee? Has he given thee his good grace to preserve and
keep thy soul? Oh bless him for this above all, for he has given thee with
it, that which I pray God of his mercy to give us all. Health and salvation in
Jesus Christ. So much for my first Observation, that the very Snow amongst
other things, is Donum Dei, the gift of God. [He gives Snow.]

2. Further more, Job tells us that the Snow is Nuntius Dei, the messenger or
the servant of God, Job ^7. 6. He says to the Snow, be thou on the earth; and
immediately upon the least watchword of God, there it falls and lies. Thus you
shall observe, that all the creatures, and all the Works of God, both in
heaven and earth, do in their ways, and in their kinds show themselves
obedient and dutiful to their Maker, except only man, and the devil; if God
speak to the Winds (though unruly creatures) they obey him, if to the Seas,
to the Whales, to the Lions, etc. they obey him; if God do but call for a
dearth (as the Prophet told the Shunammite, 2 Reg. 8. 1.) or a famine, or for
any other judgment, they come at the first call, and fly upon the world to
plague it for sin; you cannot name any creature except man, but is ready at
the least beck of God to fulfill his Word. Ah what wretched creatures are we,
that can find none in all the world to comply with, but the devil; that can
find no other pattern for our disobedience, no other partner in our rebellious
courses, but we must fetch a president from hell, and from the bottomless pit.
Is it not strange? that whereas Divines observe, that God was never called Lord
in Scripture till he had created man, as you may see in the first of Genesis,
where it is said, that God created the heaven and earth; and God said let there
be light, etc. only God without any other attribute; till he had made man, and
then the text calls him the Lord God at every word, to intimate that God has a
special Lordship and Dominion over man, and looks for more special duty and
service from man, than from all his other creatures: I say then, Is it not
strange, that no one creature of Gods making does so much dishonor and disobey
the Lord, as wicked, wretched man; whom the Lord purposely made to honor and
obey, and do him service. Look to all the other creatures, and David tells
you, they no fooner receive the least word of command from God, but presently
they fulfill it, Psalm. 148. 8. Praise the Lord ye Dragons and all deepes, fire
and have, snow and vapor fulfilling his Word. There be a number of us, that
are a^t enough to hear Gods Word; they have Aures bi^ulas, hungry and thirsty
ears for that purpose; or rather (as the Apostle calls it) pruritum aurium,
they have a kind of itch in their ears, which like a Tetter, the more it is
rubbed, the farther it spreads, which makes them unsatiable in ^earing the word
of the Lord; but where shall you find a man or woman, that ^ath any care, or
makes any conscience to fulfill the Word of God (as those creatures do?) There
be those that will go a mile or two to hear a Sermon* but where shall you
find one that will go out of his own door to do a Sermon? I mean, to do
as God would have him; that is, to repent of his sins, to reform his life,
to follow his calling with a good conscience, and to walk with his God with an
honest heart, which is the principal and the maine of Christianity? You know
that Hearing is but a part of that service we owe to God; as our Savior
intimates in the Gospel, where he says, that Mary has chosen the better part:
It is the doing of Gods Will, and the fulfilling of his Word, that makes our
service entire and complete, and such as God would have it. This lesson, if we
will not learn it by the Scriptures, we may learn it of the very senseless
creatures, of the very Snow in my text; for (says Job) God does but speak to
the Snow, and say, Be thou on the earth; and there it rests, till God removes
it. This is my second observation, that the Snow is nuntius dei, the messenger
and servant of God, and may teach man obedience to his Maker. Therefore Christ
expostulateth it as an absurd thing in men to cry Lord, Lord, (i) to profess
and ingominate a verbal subjection; whereas really and indeed they would not
do so much for God as the very senseless and brutish creatures.

3. Moreover, Job tells us, Cha. 38. 22. that God has* Thesaures nivis;
Treasures of Snow, which he reserveth and keeps in store against such time as
the earth shall stand most in need of it; and so you shall observe in
Scripture, that God has treasures in store for all kind of mercies. He has a
treasure of rain (as Job tells us in the same place) that is, in the scorching
heat of Summer, when the earth does even rend, and split, and gasp for want of
moisture, as if it were ready (as it were) to give up the ghost, then does God
go to his Treasury, and fetch) out that same pluviam munificam, Psalm. 68. 9.
gracious, ^^^^ching rain, that refreshes the bowels of the earth, and makes
the very Valleys (as David spakes) even to laugh and sing. The same Prophet
David tells us Psalm. 17. 14. that God has Thesaurum alimonia, a treasure of
food, and provision for the belley [Whose bellies thou fillest with thy hid
treasure.] that is, In time of dearth and famine when the city shall be forced to
cry to the country, as the man did to Paul, Act. 16. 9. Come out of Macedonia,
and help us: and when the country shall think (as that Nobleman did. 2. Reg.
7.) that the scarcity of provision is so great, that if the Lord should make
windows in heaven, it would all be little enough to fill the bellies of the
people: then does God of his goodness provide for the poor, then does he go
to his secret and hidden treasure, and by ways unlikely and unexpected, does
God take order for their relief that put their trust in him. Beyond all these,
God has one Treasure more, more worth than all the rest, and that is Thesaurus
Gratia the treasure of his grace and goodness, which he has hidden, and laid
up in the Breast and Bosom of Jesus Christ, Colos. 2. 3. In him (says the
Apostle) are hid the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Therefore as in
Egypt, they that wanted any corn went all to Joseph, who had the Treasures and
Storehouses in his own keeping; so let all that want grace, repare to Jesus
Christ, who is the Lord high Treasurer of the graces of God.

Now these treasures of grace are said to be hid in Christ, not as Moses body
was hidden by the Angel, to the intent that it should not be found; but as the
woman in the Gospel, Mat. 13. is said to hide her leaven in the meal, that the
virtue of it may be diffused and dispersed into every bit of her bread. In this
sense, does God hide his graces in the heart of Jesus Christ, that all we that
are his sinful members may have a taste and a relish of the same graces that
are in him: according to that, Ioh. 1. 16. Of his fullness we all receive grace
for grace: that is, (as one sweetly expounds it) as a child in generation
receives (...) his parents member for member; or as the paper from the Press
receives letter for letter; or as the glass from the face receives Image for
Image; so do we from Jesus Christ receive grace for grace; that is, for every
grace that is in Christ, (appertaining to a general sanctification, as
humility, zeal, devotion, etc.) there is a grace in us (if we belong to him)
in some measure and proportion answerable and agreeable to the same in him.
Thus ^re we (through Gods mercy) partakers of the same treasure with our
blessed Savior, and we carry it about (as the Apostle speak) (...) in earthen
vessel; therefore it stands us in hand to take heed of knocks and falls, I
mean, into sin whereby the treasure of Gods grace may be endangered in us.
Thus you see, that God has treasures for all mercies, and indeed his
treasures are all, and only for mercy; as for that same treasure of wrath,
Romans 2. 5. that is ours, and none of Gods; God treasures up nothing but mercy;
it is we that store and fill his treasure with wrath, as the Apostle says,
Thou, (O wicked man) after the hardness of thy heart treasurest up wrath for
thy self against the day of wrath; God does not treasure up wrath for thee,
nor for any man else, but thou treasurest and storest it up for thy self; and
therefore if God pay (...) home in thy own coin, and (...) thy treasure upon
thy own head, thou must thank thy self* In a word, though God keeps the
treasures of mer^ie yet we keep the key (at least we may if we will our selves)
for God has given us a key that will open any treasure that God has, and that
is humble prayer, it is Clavis (...) the key of heaven gates* only take heed
that we do not suffer the wards of this key to grow rusty for want of use,
least in the day of extremity, when we come to the door of mercy, our key will
not open it. These things have I noted upon occasion of Jobs expression
touching the Treasures of the Snow, which God lays up in store for the earth
against the time of need that is, in sharp and bitter weather, when the
fruits of the earth lie naked and bare, and have nothing to defend them from
the cold and killing blasts of the wind and frost* then does God bring forth
the snowes out of his treasury* or out of his wardrobe* as a vesture of Wool
to keep warm the corn that it take no hurt, as it follows in my text, Dat
ni^em sicut lanam, He gives Snow like Wool.

And why like Wool? I suppose for two principal reasons.

1 Propter albedi^^m, for the witness of it. That Metaphor it pleases the
holy Ghost to use elsewhere; Psalm. 51* 7. Punge me with Hysope, and I shall be
clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter than Snow, to show what a blessed change
and alteration Gods mercy and our repentance makes in the soul of a poor
sinner; who can tell where the spot was, when the skin is rinsed; now the
only washing-lye for the heart and for the inward (...) is that which is made
with the ashes of our sinne^* to (...) and sco^^^ our fowls, That soul which
before w^^ (...) or hell with wickedness, and (...) of darkness, being
rinsed by repentance, and renewed by the Spirit of Jesus Christ, becomes as
clean and white* a^ pure and unspotted in the eyes of God, as the driven Snow
is in ou^s. Take away (...) iniquity (says David) and th^^ (...) find (...):
when God has taken away a man^ iniquity* his sins are no more to be found
than if they had never been. (...) Esaias ^. 16. Wa^^ ye, make ye clean, put
away the evil of your doings from before my eyes, etc. What then? Why then
(says God, ver. 18.) Though your sins be (...) scarlet, they shall be as white
as Snow, though they be red like crimson they shall be as Wool. You know that
crimson and scarlet i^ so deep a dye, that all the Art under heaven cannot
alter it or take it out: yet the Lord can make of a Slarlet-sinner, a
milke-white-Saint: God can take out the deepest dies of sin, though they be
sins in grain, and the soul shall become as the Snow or Wool that was
never dipped o^ stained. Therefore when thou go^^^ or look abroad in the
Winter time, and see the Snow lie white as Wool upon the ground; then
reflect upon thy self and say, O that my soul were of this color; Oh that
all the blackness and darkness, the deformity and ugliness of my sins
were done away, and that my soul were restored to that Candor and whiteness,
and bright sincerity that this Snow does represent. Beloved, It is not the
outward brightness and beauty of the countenance and complexion that God
regards, where there is cor nigrum, a black base heart within; but it is that
same decor ab intus that inward intrinsecall comeliness that David speaks of,
Psalm. 45. 14. that makes the King of heaven take pleasure in our beauty. Let
neither man nor woman therefore boast or be proud of their white Outside, but
rather labor and pray for a white Inside, that they may be as Moses was said
to be (...), Acts 7. 20. fair to God, (for so the Original has it) we
translate it, He was exceeding fair, but the Greek signifies, He was fair
to God, and when all is done that is the true beauty that commends us to God,
when the other beauty is withered and wrinkled, and clean gone, then does this
I^ve^escere grow younger and better with age. Whenever therefore God sends a
Snow, do not thou (like a brute beast) only trample upon it, and tread it
under foot; but make some benefit of it to thy soul, and say within thy
self, This is the color o^ my Savior, Revela* Chapter 1. verse 14. The
Saints in heaven are all of this color, as white as this very Snow in grace
and glory, Revela^. Chapter 7. verse 14. Lord make my soul of the same color
too, that I may no longer resemble the devil, in being black with sin and
iniquity, but may resemble the Saints and Angels in being white with innocence
and integrity. Consider (I beseech you) why is it said, 1 Corinthians 15. That
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: The meaning cannot be, that
the substance of flesh and blood cannot inherit Gods Kingdom, for then what
should become of all the Saints and servants of God, whose souls are gone
beforehand into heaven, while their bodies li^ in the must expecting glory* but
the meaning truly is, that the corruption of flesh and blood cannot come
within that Kingdom; that is, flesh and blood as it is corrupted and defiled,
as it is blacked and besmeared, and stained with sin and Satan, so it shall
never come within the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and of God our heavenly Father:
but when flesh and blood shall be washed, and cleansed, and sanctified, by the
grace, and by the Spirit, and by the blood of Jesus Christ, and become as white
as Snow, then is it come to the right color, then, and not till then, is flesh
and blood fit for Gods Kingdom^, and for the blessed society of the Saints in
light. So much for the first reason why God is said to give Snow like Wool,
for the purity and whiteness of it*

2 Propter (...) for the (...) and (...) of it; for though the Snow ^e ^^ld and
^^illing to (...) it is warm and comfortable to the earth* like a garment of
Wool upon the back of it, to preserve and cherish the kindly fruits of the
earth, that in due time (through Gods mercy) (...) ^ay enjoy (...) Reason
therefore with thy self, if God so cloth the (...) which is but scabellum Dei,
the (...) God* the lowest and basest part of his creation; Will ^e not much
(...) cloth thee* O man, that art Image D^i, the Image of God, that carriest
the stamp of God upon thy soul, as the coin bears the stamp of the King
upon the side: surely he that takes care for Oxen, will much more take care
for Christians: He that feeds the young Ravens that call upon him, will
surely feed young Infants that call upon him: He that Cloatheth the grass of
the field, which does him no service, will certainly provide clothing for us
if we do him any service as we ought to do. Remember how God provided for the
Israelites when they were in the wilderness where there was no new apparel to
be bought, God so provided that the old apparel which they had, did neither
wear out, nor wax too little for them; but their clothes grew as their
bodies grew, and their shoes grew as their fee^e grew, and the one w^^ as
lasting and as durable as the other.

Take no care therefore (says our Savior) (meaning no distrustful care) what
ye shall eat or drink, or what clothes ye shall have to cover you; Why? for
your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of these things: Alas, may some
say, this is but small comfort, to tell a poor man, be of good comfort, for
God knows thy wants; or to tell a sick man, be of good comfort, for God
knows thy diseases: or to tell a man that is undone, be of good comfort, for
God knows thy losses, etc. I say, this that God knows all things were but a
feeble Cordial, if so be, that the knowledge of God were not (as it is)
accompanied and attended with the helpefulnesse and the goodness of God, that
wheresoever God knows there is a want, he takes a speedy course to relieve
and supply it; according to that, 2 Chronicles. 16. 6. Oculi domini discurrunt, etc.
the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth (not harely to
see and take notice of what i^ wanting or amiss, but) to show himself strong
in the behalf of them, whose hearts are perfect toward him. Doubt not
therefore but steadfastly believe, he that is so careful to cloathe the earth,
will have a greater care to cloth thee, if thou belongest to heaven.

Lastly, from hence, they that are rich in this world, may learn (in a
contrary sense to that of Lucifer) to be similes altissimo like to the most
high God, I mean in goodness and tender-mercie; we use to say dives quasi
divus, to intimate that a rich man should be to the poor, as Moses was to
Aaron, in some fence a God, Exodus 4. to succor and defend them in the time of
need: so then, look how God above does in the Summer time refresh the bowels of
the earth with rain, and in the Winter time keep warm the back of it with
Snow: so should they Philemon-like, refresh the bowels of the poor that are
pinched with hunger; and Dorcas-like provide some clothing for the backs of
the poor, that are not able to cloth themselves. It is recorded of Job to his
eternal happiness and honor, that the loins of the poor did bless him,
being warmed with the fleece of his flock. Oh what a blessed thing it is to
have the blessing of the poor and the blessing of God into the bargain, and
all for the offalls of a man's estate. Such a man shall be blessed in his name,
blessed in his person, blessed in his posterity: God will bless a charitable
minded man, men will bless him, heaven will bless him; earth will bless him,
all that ever have been comforted or clothed by him will bless him too*
their backs will bless him, their bellies will bless him, their souls will
bless him; his house shall be filled with blessings, as a cruel man's house is
filled with curses. Therefore as David said of the men of Iabez, when news was
brought him that they had buried the bones of Saul, 2 Samuel 2. 5. Blessed be ye
of the Lord, the Lord recompense you this mercy: So may I say of a merciful
minded man, blessed be such a man of the Lord, the Lord will surely recompense
him, mercy for mercy, kindness for kindness, and whatsoever cost he has
bestowed upon earth, he shall find it a hundred fold with God in heaven. This
lesson, men of wealth and ability may learn of the very Snow, or rather of the
God that sends it* not to lay all upon their own backs, Sal^^s and sylvas (as
he said) groves and grounds, and all to deck up themselves, but lay something
out upon the backs of Christ's naked members, that they may hear that
comfortable doom at the last day, Come ye blessed of my Father, for I was
naked and ye clothed, etc.

I had a conceit as I come by the way, that the Snow did carry in it a lively
resemblance of the state of this world, in sundry passages, I will but name
them, and leave them to your consideration.

1. As the earth lies warm under the Snow, and feels not the bitter blasts of
wind and frost, which other poor creatures shrink and smart for; so fares it
with the rich men of this world, that lie warm with their wealth about them,
and have no feeling nor compassion of the cold and hunger, the miseries and
necessities of their poorer brethren. So Dives being warm within, had no
feeling of poor Lazarus without: now Dives signifies a rich man, and Lazarus
(in the Original) signifies one qui auxilio destitutus est, One that stands in
need of help; and the intent of the Parable is to show, that the rich are
commonly as destitute of pity, as the poor are destitute of help, the one
has little or no feeling of the other sufferings.

2. You may observe how the Snow goes by drifts, the Wind fetches it off from
one place to fill up another, many a piece of ground is made naked and bare, to
fill up some ditch, or pile up against some hedge, and there it lies to keep
those places warm that were warm before: Even so does the wealth of this
world go by drifts; the wind of adversity fetches it off from one man to
fill up the unsatiable ditch of another man; and many a man's means (like the
Snow) is blown clean away from him and his posterity into the hands of
Usurers and rich Oppressoins, to keep them warm that were warm already, to
increase their wealth that had too much before* just as Nabo^hs Vineyard was
blown away from him and from his children into the territory and demaines of
wicked (...).

3. Look how they boys and other youths toil themselves in the cold to make
a Snow-ball, that shall lick up the other Snow, and la^^ when that is gone; so
does many a covetous man toil himself in the world, and lick up his poor
neighbors with hard bargains, and cruel dealings, and all this, to roll up
himself a private wealth, which when he has done, is but like a Snow-ball, it
may last for a time, but vix gaudet terti^^ here is, it is a venture but some
unthriftie Heir will waste it and melt it away, as fast, and as ill as ever
his father got it.

4. The Snow blindes a man's eyes, that when he comes into a dark room, he can
scarce discern any thing: Thus are many a man's eyes dazzled with the vanities
and vices of the world, that when he should come to look inward into the
dark corners of his heart, to see how the case stands betwixt God and his
soul, like the blinded Sodomites, he gropes at noonday, and cannot find the
door of Gods mercy to enter at. Solomon says, that gifts blind the eyes of
the wise; In the Original it is Pickim: such as have their eyes open; the
meaning is, that corruption and briberie so dazleth many a wise man, that
though his eyes be open to the world-ward, to hell-ward, they are blind to
Godward, and to heavenward, and cannot see into the things that belong to the
right way of pleasing of God, and saving their own souls.

5. As many a dunghill, and many a dirty slough is hid under a drift of Snow,
that a man can neither see it nor suspect it: so is many a base mind, many a
false heart hid under a fair outside, that will make profession and promises
of favor and friendship to a man in prosperity; but let him be cast or driven
upon them in adversity, he shall find them like a rotten quagmire under a
heap of Snow, a means rather to sink him, than to save or succor him at
such a time.

6. Lastly, as Leontius said once to his sons, pointing with his finger to
his gray-haires, (...), etc. when this Snow melts, there will be a flood; so
let all old weather-beaten sinners, pueri centu^ annoru^ (as the Prophet
speaks, Esa. 65. 20. that are aged in time and sin, but children in grace and
knowledge, that have feathered their nests in this world, and have nothing to
take to in the world to come; let them beware (as he said) least a flood of
fire and brimstone in the infernal lake, do follow upon the melting of their
snowyheads, upon the dissolution of their sinful souls and bodies.

These thoughts came in upon the by, and therefore I will not stand to enlarge
them, but hasten to the next general part of my text, as it follows in the
next place, Spargit pruinam sicut cinere^; he scatters or sprinkleth the
hoary frost like ashes.

2. This I termed the Diligence of God: He that keeps Israel neither
slumbereth nor ^leepeth; but when we are a sleep, God is awake, when we are at
rest, God is at work; when we are taking our ease within, then is our God
taking pains abroad, to sprinkle the hoary Frost in the evening for our health
and welfare in the morning. The consideration hereof should move us, not only
to praise God for his Day-mercies, as David did [Seven times a day will I
praise thee (says he) Psalm. 119.] because he knew that so, and more than so
often he was beholding to God every day that came over his head: but also we
have just cause to remember God for his Night-mercies, for his preservation and
protection, for his custody and care that he has of us in the night, as well
as in the day time. Have I not remembered thee on my bed (says David elsewhere)
and thought upon thee when I was waking, Psalm. 63. 7. So, if thou have
forgotten God at thy board, remember him on thy bed* if thou have not thought
upon him in the day, think upon him the more in the night, and when at any
time God holds thy eyes waking (as he did David's often) then consider and
call to mind Gods mercies, and thine own sins, be thankful for the one,
be humbled for the other, and then lie down in the peace of Jesus Christ. And
in the morning when thou walk a broad, and see the hoary frost lie upon
the ground like ashes; then think with thy self, this is the work of Gods
own hands, God has surely been in this place, and I was not aware of it.

Now mark the manner of Gods working, Spargit pr^inam, he sprinkleth the hoary
frost; that is, he does it in such a secret insensible, invisible manner, that
no man living can perceive it, till God have done his work and finished it,
and even so, it pleases God to work and bring to pass the regeneration of a
sinful soul; my Father works (says our Savior) and I work, and yet both
work after such a secret way, that until a man be converted, the work of
Gods grace cannot be imagined nor perceived, as it was with our Savior at his
resurrection, when he was risen, he appeared and showed himself, but the
manner of his rising, or how, or which way he arose and got out of the
Sepulcher, no man living saw or could conceive, as Solomon says, that the way
of a ship in the sea is not to be known or found: a man may stand upon the
shore, and see the ship, and the sea, and the ship going on the sea, but the
way of a ship in the sea is unknown and undiscernable: even so the ways of
God in translating men out of the state of sin and death, into the state of
grace and life, are sine vestigijs, unsearchable and past finding out. Many a
one is troubled that he knows not the very instant of his conversion and
regeneration to God, and therefore makes question of his Christian calling; but
you know there is great difference betwixt a man that is suddenly converted as
Paul was, like a brande snatched out of the fire (as Saint Jude speaks) in the
very heat of their sins; and such as have the grace of God wrought in them
by degrees (as Timothy had) sensim sine sensu, now a little and then a little,
by the secret supplies of the Spirit of grace: now it is an easy matter for
the one to set down the time and manner of their regeneration; not so for the
other. But the effect of all is this; if a man can find in himself the marks
of the Lord Jesus (a^ the Apostle speakeeth) I mean the infallible signs and
symptoms of grace (as a desire to fear God, a ^are to please him, and a
kindly repentance when he has done amiss) let him never make question of his
own conversion, but take it as an undoubted evidence to his soul that God
has received him into the state of mercy, wherein he will reserve him for ever
unto Jesus Christ. No man makes question how the frost is gendred when he sees
it lie upon the earth, because he knows it is the handy work of God. And so
is this.

Again, ^parg^^ pruinam. Look how God does with the hoary frost, how he
scatters it upon the grass, that no one spot of ground has it all, but every
pile of grass has some sprinkling of it: so he does with all his heavenly
gifts and graces; no man ever was so happy to have the fullness of grace, save
only our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: All we have but our sprinklings, a
sprinkling of faith, a sprinkling of zeal, a sprinkling of repentance, and
other graces, some more, some less, as God is pleased to distribute it. Hence
the grace of God is compared unto two things in Scripture, which are both
things of sprinkling, namely, Salt, and Seed. Our Savior compares it unto
salt, Mark 9* ult. Have salt in your selves, and be at peace one with another.
Now you know, They that season meat, do not lay their salt all on a heap,
but scatter it and sprinkle it all over, that every part may be made savoury by
it: So does God distribute to every man a measure of grace, that his soul may
be seasoned, and all his services be made savoury to the Lord, that he may
smell in them, as he did in Noah's sacrifice, Od^rem quietis, a Savor of rest.
Saint John compares the grace of God unto Seed* 1 Ioh. 3. ^. He that is borne
of God cannot sin, (meaning sin unto death) Why? quia sem^n dei because the
seed of God abides in him. Now you know, no sower lays his seed all on a
heap, but scatters and sprinkles it all over his land, that every furrow may
have some part of the feed, and yield him again some fruit of increase. Thus
does God sow the seed of eternal life in the minds and hearts of all
faithful people* there is no one that has all grace, and there is no one but
has some, some sprinkling of every grace. For this cause (I suppose) the blood
of Christ is called the blo^d of sprinkling, Heb. 12. 24. in allusion to the
Passover where the blood of the Pascall L^m^e was sprinkled on the posts of
the door to save the house from the deadly stroke of the revenging A^gel. So
is the blood of Jesus Christ sprinkled (as it were) by the ^inger of God upon
the souls and consciences of all peni^^nt sinners, to save their souls from
death, and to take out the blots and stains of all our sins. Look how Aqua
fortis takes out the blots of Ink out of a paper, so does this precious blood
take out the blots of sin out of the soul; and blessed of God is that man
that (...) sprinkled with it All those sprinklings of (...) in the Law of
Moses, were all but types and shadows of this blood of sprinkling which
speaks better things than that of Abell, because Abel blood cried for
revenge, but the blood of our Savior cries for mercy, and drownes the cry of
our deadly sins that ^ry and roar for vengeance. And therefore i^ ^^ou have
not had the grace to keep thy (...) spotted of the world, but rather for want
of grace (...) have bestained and bespotted thy self with filthy lusts and
sinne^; then let me advise thee thus to do; as Joseph of Arima^hea went to
pita^^ and begged the body of Jesus, Ioh. 19. ^8. So do thou go to God and
beg the blood of Jesus, and desire the Lord to sprinkle it upon thy soul,
that thy sins may be done away, and thy iniquities may be seen n^ more* for
even this kind of sprinkling is as easy to God, as that whereof my Text here
speaks. He (...) or sprinkleth the ho^r^ frost like ashes.

[Sicut cin^r^m, like Ashes] We read Exodus ^. 8. That Moses by Gods
appointment took ashes from off the furnace, and sprinkled them toward
heaven, and they bred botches and boyles and blames upon man and beast. If God
should sprinkle such ashes among us, or if the hoary frost should bring forth
such effects, what a woeful case were we in: How much cause therefore have we
(as the Prophet speaks, Hos. 3. 5.) to fear the Lord and his goodness; in
that being so unthankefull and so evil as we are, yet God is pleased out of
his own goodness and mercy (not because we please him, but because mercy
pleases him, Micha. 7. 18.) to do us good and no harm all our days, and to
sprinkle such wholesome, healthful frost, as shall do every man good and no
man hurt. It is said, Exodus 16. 14. That Manna, which was called Angels-food,
not because the Angels did eat it, but because the Angels did prepare it, and
bring it and make it ready for the peoples eating: this Manna lay upon the
ground like the hoary frost in the morning. Doubtless it was to intimate, that
Manna is no more to God, than ashes are to us; and that if need were, rather
than his people should famish, God can turn the hoary frost into Angels food,
that we might live upon the one, as the Israelites did upon the other forty
years together. David was driven to a low ebb, when he said, Psalm. 102. 9.
Cinerem tanquam panem manducavi, I have eaten ashes like bread. I take it, it
was not so much out of necessity, as to testify his humility that he did
esteem himself so vile a sinner, that he was not worthy to feed upon any
better food, and that dust and ashes were too good for him. And so in the days
of old they were wont in times of sorrow and sadness to sprinkle dust and
ashes upon their heads; from whence (I take it) our Ashwednesday has its name*
being dies cinerum a day wherein men humbled them before the Lord in dust and
ashes: this they did to express the humiliation and deep abasement of their
souls, that they thought themselves not worthy to be above ground, but to be
under earth in the grave, dead and dissolved into dust and ashes. I will not
here press the imitation of the ceremony, but only the observation of the
substance of that act which concerns us as nearly, as it did them; and that
is, I would have you be* as humble, as sorrowful, as dejected and as pensive
for your sins, as vilely and basely, and meanly conceited of your selves, as
they that strawed ashes upon their heads or as they that eat^ ashes in stead of
bread, and mingled their drink with weeping.

And so I come to the third general point of my Text, (...) it follows in
the third place.

3. Procijcit ejus glaciem sicut buccellas, He casts forth his i^e like
morsels.

Me thinks the Ice has some resemblance of the state of this world, which is
dangerous two ways. 1. For slipping. 2. For breaking.

1. For slipping, so the Fathers call the sins of the godly by the name of
Lapsus, slippings, because (like men on Ice) they slipped and fell ere they were
aware of it. And David says of the men of this world, Psa 73. that God has
set them in slippery places. Now a man that walks in a slippery place, had
need walk very circumspectly and very warily, least he get a slip unawares
that he cannot rciover himself without hurt and danger: So the Apostle
advises all good Christians to see that they walk Circumspectly, Ephe. 5. 15.
not as fools, but as wise. A fool will venture to run headlong on the Ice,
as if he were upon firm ground, but a wise man will be very circumspect and
wary, and take heed to every step he takes, because he knows the danger.
So should a Christian take heed to his ways, and if he find himself going,
that he is ready to slip and fall from God into any sin, or to be carried
headlong by the strength of his own corruption, or other temptation into any
dangerous or wicked action; let him then call unto the Lord as David did Psalm.
119. 117. sustenta me, etc. stay thou me up, and I shall be safe; like a man
ready to fall* he prays God to uphold and stay him up. For it is certain, a
man has not any power of himself to stay himself, but that, as Hanna tells us
in her song. 1. Sam. 2. 9. It is God that keeps the feet of his Saints, and
stays them when they are going into an evil course. And Moses tells us, Deuteronomy.
33. 3. That God has all his Saints in his hands, (as a Nurse has her child)
and will not suffer them to fall into their own mischief: and therefore our
care must be by* daily prayer to put our selves into Gods hands, and desire God
to lead us by his grace and his good Spirit, and not leave us to our selves,
for then we shall surely slip and fall into evil. That child that cares not to
be led, but will go of himself, gets many a knock and many a shrewd fall;
but the child th at is fearful and will cry to be led, that child scapes many
a broken face: Therefore David desires God to lead him, Psalm. 5. 8. Whereupon
says Musculus, Duci cae^orum est, pu^rorum, infirmorum, etc. to be led, is a
thing that properly belongs to such as are blind, and to children, and
impotent persons; now if a blind man, or a child should go upon* the Ice
without some guide to lead them, what a dangerous case were they in; even such
are we without the guidance of God. The Ice is dangerous, and so is the world,
take heed of slipping.

2. For breaking, many a one we have known and heard of, that have ventured
confidently on the Ice upon the Thames till it has broken under them, and they
have perished irrecoverably; so have many made a great show in the world, have
been in great dealings, and* been confident of their fortunes, till the Ice
has broken, their credits have cracked, and they sunk on a sudden. See 2 Reg.
1. How securely Ahaziah walked on his wonted pavement, fearing no danger, nor
distrusting any ill event; and all on a sudden, the floor that he walks upon,
or some grate that was in the floor, brakes under him, and he got such a fall
that he never could recover it till his death. It is not good therefore for any
man to be too confident of his own estate, vainly, saying with Job, Chap. 29.
18. I shall die in my nest* or with David, Psa. 30. 6. I shall never be moved*
but rather as the Apostle advises, Let him that thinks he stands take
heed least he fall. For those that stand fastest upon earth have but slippery
footing* it is but a kind of Ice, take heed of breaking

And yet there is another kind of Ice, which he that can break or have it
(...) is a happy man: and that is the Ice of sin, I mean the hardness of
heart; for look how Ice hardens the water, so does sin harden the heart, and
make it insensible of any danger, and untractable to any goodness. As long as
the frost holds, the Ice and the water are all one, till the thaw comes, and
then it breaks into these buccellas, these morsels that my text speaks of: so
as long as a man is frozen in the dregs of sin, and accustomed to a^ evil
course of life, so long his sins and he are all one, all the persuasions in
the world cannot part them; till God be pleased to send down that same Gratiam
mollificativam (as Divines call it) that same mollifying and melting grace,
that his heart begins to thaw, and his sins and he begin to part, then does
he cast out those buccellas peccati, those morsels of sin by daily confession
and contrition to God, which before lay and wounded his conscience that he
could never be at peace. And this is that which the Scripture calls the
breaking of the heart, it is just like the breaking of Ice, when the heart is
dissolved with grief and Godly sorrow, and his sins begin to break away by
repentance and reformation of life* then does the Spirit of God (which Zachary
calls the Spirit of Grace and supplication) do as in the first creation
I^cubare super aquas, sit and brood (as it were) upon these waters, to hatch
new graces, to create a new heart, and make him a new creature in Christ Jesus.

I might observe further, how reverently, how religiously the Prophet David
speaks of the Ice and cold; that he calls the Ice ejus Glacies, Gods Ice, and
the cold ejus f^igus, his cold, to show that God has a hand in all
ill-weather; and that we ought not to blame the creatures, but to remember
their Creator, who for our sins justly is displeased. But I hasten to the
last part of my Text, and that is.

4. The compassion and tender mercy of God, that God* has not the heart to
hold his people long under a judgment, but as in the tenth of Judges, when the
people were thoroughly humbled, his soul was grived for the misery of Israel,
and he sent a remedy out of (...) and as David's heart after some space of time
began to yearne after Absalan whom for his rebellion he had justly banished,
and he must needs recall him home. So when we relent, God relents, when we
begin to b^e grieved for our sins, then does God begin to be grieved for our
punishments when our hearts are melted within, God melts the earth without, as
it follows in the text Hitt Emi verbum and lique facit etc. He sends out
his word and melts them, He blows with his wind and the waters ston^*

He sends out his word, (that is) his command, for so the ten Commandments
are called December verba the ten words of God. And he blows with his wind,
(in the original it is) flabir spiritus, his spirit shall blow; for the spirit
of God, and wind and breath of God are all one* Now mark from the connection
of these two, How the word of God, and the spirit of God go evermore together
[Hee sends out his word* and blows with his spirit*] Just as in the body of
a man, the veins and the Arteryes go ever together, the veins ^ary the blood
and the Arteryes carry the spirits, for every vein in the body there is an
Artery goes along with it. So wheresoever there is a vein of truth, I mean,
where the word of God is faithfully preached, there is vehiculum spiritus, an
Artery for the spirit of God to accompany and go along with it to mollify and
intenerate that same nervum ferreum (which the Prophet speaks of) that
Ironsin^w of unbelief, and to make the word effectual for the melting and
thawing of the frozon hearts of sinners. Now if you look back upon this
kindly Thaw that God has sent us, after so long and lamentable a time of Snow
and Ice and cold, you shall see in it a lively resemblance of the inward and
spiritual thaw and melting of a hardened heart, that has been frozen a long
time in the dregs of sin, and been utterly incapable of any grade* until
such time as God does send out his Word and melts him, and blows upon his
soul with that same truly so called ventus favonius, that favorable wind of
his holy Spirit that makes the waters of repenting tears fall down from his
eyes. I will but name the particulars and so conclude.

1. The Thaw is always accompanied with a change of weather; the sky which
before was fair and clear and bright, does then grow cloudy and sad and dark
with foggie mists and vapors, that a man has no pleasure to be abroad in it.
And thus it is with a repenting soul, when God sends this Spiritual thaw, a
man shall find a change of weather in his heart, his joy will be changed into
sorrow, his mirth into melancholy, his songs and merry tunes, into sighs and
sobbes, and he shall sensibly perceive the foggy vapors of his sins arise
out of his heart into his head, and come trickling down in tears at his eyes.
It is said in the Psalms, that therefore the wicked fear not God, because
they have no changes, but still continue in one estate of prosperity and pride,
and so think to pass a deliciys ad delicias, from the joys of earth to the
joys of heaven; but that will not be, if ever God intend to save their souls,
he will find a time to send a thaw into their hearts, and then let them tell
me, if they do not find a change of weather in their consciences.

2. If it chance to thaw and then freeze again the next day, this makes the
ways and passages worse than they were before. So when a man's heart shall melt
a little on the Sunday, and freeze again all the week after; as Pharaohs
melted for a time, and then presently hardened again; this relapse is worse than
the former: as water having been once heat, and then cooled again, grows
colder after than before. We see, that even marble in some weather will stand
on drops, and yet retains its wonted hardness: so did Pharaohs heart, and
Saul's, and Ahabs, seem to give, and melt for a time, but they grew hard again
too soon. Take heed of that, if thy heart begin to thaw, desire God to follow
thee with his grace, that it may not freeze again.

3. After a thaw, though the Snow for the most part be vanished and gone, yet
under hedges and ditches, there will lie some leavings of it (as we call them) a
long time after; so when it has pleased God to melt a man's heart for sin,
yet there will be some leavings* of corruption, some remainders of his old
sins, in the blind and secret corners of his heart. So that the continual
care and daily practice of a Christian must be to find out and purge out these
old leavings of sin that lie unmelted in his soul. 1 Cor. 5. 7.

4. The thaw makes the ways exceeding foul and cloggie which before were
fair and clean; so till a man's heart be thawed, he never perceives the
foulness of the ways of sin, how they bemyre his soul, and clogge and
hinder him in his passage to heaven; Saint Peter calls the world (...), a
squalid foul and filthy place (so the word signifies, 2 Pet. 1. 19.) a man
shall have much ado to keep himself unspotted where so much filth and
corruption is. David found this, and desired of God, Psalm. 69 15. Eripe me de
^uto; Lord deliver me out of the mire that I sink not. A wicked man thinks
the broad way to be the best way, but a man whose heart has been thawed,
knows it to be full of mire and sloughes, and it is Gods mercy if they do not
sink irrecoverably.

5. While the frost holds the plowes are locked out of the earth, no seed can
be sown, all husbandry is intermitted, till God send a thaw, and then their
work goes forward. So while men are frozen in sin, Gods Plow can make no
work, the seed of his word can take no root, (...) (as the Apostle calls the
Ministry of the word. 1 Cor. 3.) God husbandry does no good till there come an
inward thaw to prepare and make way for grace, that men's hearts may be wrought
upon by the powerful Gospel of Jesus Christ, then it is no grief for a
Minister to take pains in the Word and Doctrine of the Lord. Therefore John
Baptist was sent before to prepare the way for Christ, and to thaw men's hearts
by the preaching of repentance, that they might be capable of the Doctrine of
Christ, who was to sow the seed of eternal life in the world.

6. Lastly, after a thaw comes a flood, so after repentance follow tears. It
was Peter's case, Luke 22. 60. (...) while he was yet speaking, ere the word was
out of his mouth, his heart began to melt, and he went out and wept bit^erty.
It was one of Gods charges to his people, Exodus 22. 29. that they should not
delay their liquors or drink-offrings: (So we translate it) but in the
Original it is, non tardabis ^a^rymam tuam, thou shall not delay thy tears:
therefore if thou have done any thing that needs Peter's tears, and have not
shed them, let me be thy Cock, do it now: what ever thou delayest, delay not
that; for it is a ruled case in Divinity, that no man can come to heaven with
dry eyes; therefore if thou find thy eyes to be so dry, and thy heart so
hard, that feign thou would, but can not weep for sin; desire God to
smite thy heart, as Moses smote the Rock, that the waters of repentance may
gush forth in abundance: or as the words of my Text are, desire God to blow
upon thy soul with the vital blasts of his holy Spirit, that these waters may
flow, to wa ^ and cleanse and carry away the mudde, and dregs, and filth of all
thy sins.

I have done with my Text. God of his mercy give a blessing to it for Jesus
sake our Lord and only Savior.

Amen.
FJNJS.
UNKNOWN KINDNESS.

A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of St. PAVL in London, Anno Dom
1635.

BY JOHN GORE, Rector of Wenden-lofts in ESSEX.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London by T. Cotes for Thomas Alchorne, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Greene-Dragon. 1635.

Perlegi hanc concionem cui titulus Unknown Kindness, in qua nihil reperio
sanae fidei aut bonis moribus contrarium.

THO. WEEKS. R. P. Epo. Land. Cap. domest.
Ex aedibus Fulhami, Maij 24. 1635.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, M. Doctor DVCK, Chancellor for the Diocese of
LONDON.
RIGHT WORSHIP.
I Remember that David, Psalm. 23. 4. took as much comfort in the Rod wherewith
he was smitten, as in the Staff whereby he was upholden: And J consider that
your Jurisdiction over me, is as well corrective for what is amiss, as
directive in what is aright. Take (J beseech you) this Tender from my hand, as
a testimony from my heart, that J am yours in both, and do as kindly accept of
the one, as J embrace the other. Thus nudus ad ignotum, J prostrate my self,
and pray both for your temporal, and your eternal welfare.

Your poor unworthy Friend. JOHN GORE.

UNKNOWN Kindness.
PSALM. 141. 5. Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness, and let
him reproove me, it shall be an excellent oil that shall not break my head.
AS there are two sorts of sins against God; sins known, and sins
unknown; I know my iniquity (says David of the one;) and, Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do (says our Savior of the other:) so
there are two sorts of kindenesses from man; known kindness, and unknown
kindness: the known kindness is that which consists in charity, in love,
and compassion to the poor; like that which David showed to Mephibosheth. 2 Samuel 9. 3. Is there not any of the house of Saul, that I may show the kindness
of God unto him? (says the King to Ziba,) that is, that I may sustain,
relieve, and do him good, as God in his kindness is wont to sustain,
relieve and do good to those that stand in need of succor: this is the
kindness of God, and that is a known kindness. But then there is another
sort of kindness that is unknown, such as the world does hardly know how to
discern from an unkindnesse, and that consists in smiting, rebuking and
reprehension, and this is the kindness that David does even beg for here in
my Text. Let the Righteous smite, it shall be a kindness, etc.

In which words there are three general parts, to be observed, which may be
reduced to three heads, and be thus expressed.

1. Desiderium sanae conscientiae, the desire of a sound and a good conscience;
that which is most distastefull to a bad conscience, is most desirable to a
good one, viz. To be smitten and to be reproved, (percutiat, et increpet, Let
him smite me, let him reprove me.)

2. Electio sidelis amici, the choice of a faithful friend, of a fitting
person to do this office; A man would be loath that every Jack, or every base
fellow should curb, and snib, and smite him for his errors; but a Righteous
man, or (if you please to take the word so) a right wiseman, one that is able
to give a man counsel, and honest to keep a man's counsel, let such a one
smite in Gods name, let him reprove and spare not, (percutiat me Iustus et
increpet; Let the Righteous smite me, and let him reproove me: though it be (as
the original has it) Malleo percutiat, Let him smite me, (as it were) with a
Mallet; now Malleus incutit et excutit, a Mallet serves both to drive in, and
to drive out; so his meaning is; if it be good counsel, let him drive it in;
if it be a bad custom, let him drive it out; let him not forbear me in
either, but smite home in both.

3. Acceptatio fraternae correptionis, the acceptance or well-taking of
brotherly reprehension; David did profess in the behalf of all penitent and
humble sinners, that he would be so far from taking it as a discourtesy, or
esteeming it as a disreputation to be told of his faults, by such a man, after
such a manner; that (says he) it shall be Misericordia, it shall be a
kindness unto me, yea a mercy, yea more then that, it shall be Oleum Capitis,
(as it is in the Hebrew) a principal, a sovereign, an excellent oil that
shall not break my head; of these in their order, first of the first part,
which is,

1. Desiderium sanae conscientiae, the desire of a good conscience, that is, to
be smitten, and to be reproved. A sound heart is like a sound hand, that can
abide not only rubbing and chafing, but smiting and striking too, if occasion
serve, and yet neither suffer, nor offer any harm; whereas if a man have a
thorn in his hand, or a bille, or an vlcerous sore, the least touch at
unawares provokes him to impatience, and makes him fret at him that meant him
no unkindnesse. So fares it with a man that has a thorn in his heart, or an
ulcer in his Soul, I mean, some secret sin or other that he loves and is
loath to part with; though he be not smitten upon purpose, if he be but touched
upon the by; as David says in another case, Tange montes et fumig abunt; Touch
the Mountains and they shall smoke; so the least touch upon his predominant,
his Mountaine-sinne, makes him fret, and fume, and smoke, like the vapors in
the clouds, that never leave working when once they are enraged till they have
vented themselves into a clap of thunder: malice will find a vent if it be but
stirred with a touch. When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, He is
as a moth, fretting a garment, (says our translation, Psalm. 39. 11.) He that
undertakes a carnal man, with rebukes to chasten him for sin, shall find
him play the Moth presently, he will be fretting secretly, though he make no
show of it openly; as we say of a Moth, Tinea damnum facit, non sonitum. A
moth does mischief, and makes no noise; I say, Rebuke him, and you shall find
him a very moth; if he cannot find a hole in that man's coat that shall offer
to reproove him, it is a venture but he will fret one, that is, he will either
raise some imputation of scandal upon him, or bring some action at law against
him, one way or other, he will be revenged upon him for it. Its death to an
ill-minded man to be smitten for his faults. But then come to a man of an
honest heart and an humble mind, one that is truly conscious to his own
defects, and such a one will be so far from taking it in ill part, or in
indignation to be touched for his transgressions; that he will rather entreat
any good man, or any good Minister, as the man of God entreated his neighbor.
1 Reg. 20. 35. Smite me I pray thee, in the name of the Lord: If thou know
any thing that is amiss in me, or see me do any thing that may be
displeasing to God, or prejudicial to my calling, to my credit, or to my
conscience to Godward; do not favor me, do not forbear me, but deal
truly and effectually with me, and smite me I pray thee, in the name of the
Lord. And such was David's disposition in my Text, though he were a prince, and
a man after Gods own heart, yet was he so far from delighting to hear
himself flattered for his virtues, that he did rather even desire and long to
feel himself smitten for his vices: percutiat et increpet, let him smite me,
and reprove me.

A man would think that David had smiting enough, if that were good, he should
desire no more. Almighty God had smitten him (as he says himself) with such a
sore disease, that there was no rest in his bones, noe breath in his body by
reason of his sin. Besides that his enemies had smitten him on every side,
They came about me like Bees (says he) animasque in vulnere ponunt, they smote
him and stung him, though it were to their own undoing, though they left their
very lives and souls in their stings. Beyond all these, David's own heart had
smitten him more then once; when he numbered the people, His heart smote him
(says the Text. 2 Samuel 24. 10.) To teach us how our hearts should smite us,
when we consider the number of our sins. So when be had but cut Saul's coat, his
heart smote him again, as much perhaps as it would have done some other if he
had cut Saul's throat: I say, if smiting be good, surely David had enough of it;
and yet you see there was an unicum deest, one thing wanting to all those
smitings; He that knew the state and temper of his own soul, did sensibly
find in himself that if he were but smitten again in another kind, if the
Righteous would but smite him too, it might be a means to do him as much,
yea, much more good, than all the rest had done. But stay; and let us reason
the case: why should David desire to be smitten once more, having been so much,
and so often smitten before? I will tell you what I think his reason might be.

1 Vt videat, that he might see his errors. We have a saying, that standers by
see more than Gamesters: so another man may see more by his friend, than
perhaps he sees or perceives by himself. Hence I take it, the Prophet Gad is
called David's Seer, 2 Samuel 24. 11. We know that David was a Prophet himself,
and had Revelations and Visions from God as well as Gad; and yet even he had a
Seer deputed for him; and doubtless Gad had a special inspection into David's
ways and actions, and saw more by him, many a time than he saw by himself,
and brought back many of his sins to his sight and remembrance which had
formerly escaped him unseene, and unrepented: for this cause, I suppose, does
the holy Ghost entitle him David's Seer. So Number. 10. 31. when the Israelites
were traveling in the Wilderness toward the land of Promise, though they had
the Cloud to direct them by day, and the Pillar of Fire to direct them by
night, yet they desired Iethro to be in stead of eyes unto them (as the text
expresses it): Why? What need had they of Iethro to be eyes unto them, seeing
they had the infallible guidance and direction of the Cloud and Fire of God?
Yes, for though these were guides unto them in general, yet for particular
places and passages in the desert, Iethroes direction was instead of eyes unto
them, because he knew the dangers of the wilderness which they knew not. So
though a man for the general course of his life and conversation may have the
heavenly guidance of Gods holy Spirit, and the blessed Guardianship of Gods
holy Angels; yet in particular cases and circumstances of a man's demeanor and
carriage, a Iethro, a loving friend, that will deal truly and plainly with a
man, may be in stead of eyes unto a man, to inform him of what is a right, and
reform him in what is amiss; to show him much good, and save him from much
evil that might befall him. They say, that a Mole is blind all her life, and
never sees till the very point of death, for then the extremity of the pain
breaks open the filme of her eyes, and then she sees, but then her sight does
her no good. Whether it be so or no, I dare not affirm; But so I have heard,
and so I have read: and surely (me thinks) it is a lively resemblance of the
wretched estate of some kind of men, that go blindlings on in an evil course
of life, like the blinded Aramites, 2 Reg. 6. that thought they had been in
the way to Dothan when they were in the midst of Samaria; so these think
themselves in the way to heaven, when they are in the midst of Satan's kingdom
and dominion; till they come to die, then the extremity of their pains may
peradventure break open the filme of their hearts, to see their own miserable
estate through sin before God, but who can tell whether their sight does then
do them any good, and not rather torment them the more. Happy therefore is
that man that can meet with such a friend as Job and Iethro was, that will be
instead of an Oculist unto him; to open his eyes by sober admonitions and
seasonable reprehensions, that he may see his sins in time, and save
himself from this same (...) (as Saint Peter terms it, Acts 2. 40.) this
perverse, untoward generation. We read, 1 Samuel 14. 27. that when Jonathan had
tasted the honey with the top of his rod, the text says, his eyes were opened,
and he saw that he had done amiss. This in my conceit, is a lively resemblance
of loving reprehension; the Rod (you will say) is an emblem of correction, and
castigation; and the honey may well pass for an emblem of a sweet and loving
disposition; put both these together, the Rod and the Honey, Reprehension and
love, or sweet and loving reprehension; if any thing in the world open a man's
eyes, and make him see he has done amiss, that will do it. And this may be
one reason why David desired to be smitten, to be reproved, ut videat, that he
might see his sins.

2 Vt doleat, that he might grieve for his sins. It is with many a man, as it
was with Job, who lost his cattle, lost his children, lost all the goods he
had, yet all these losses never troubled him, till there came a nuntio, a
messenger that told him of it; then Job rent his clothes, and humbled himself
in dust and ashes: thus does many a man run on in a careless course of sin,
till he has lost himself, lost his soul, lost the favor of his God, and
the hope of heaven by Christ; yet all these losses never trouble him, until
some nuntio come, some good Minister, or neighbor, or messenger from God, and
tell him how the case stands betwixt God and his soul; then he grieves, then
he groans, then or never will he humble himself before the Lord; as Saint
Paul told the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7. 8, 9. Though I made you sorry with a
letter, I do not repent me, because your sorrow brought you to repentance. So
he is a happy man that can make his friend sorry for his sins, either by
letter (as Paul did here, and Eliah elsewhere, 2 Chronicles. 21. 12. who would not
go to Iehoram to reprove him to his face, but left a letter, or a writing to
be sent unto him, which was brought him afterward, when Eliah was either absent
or dead, and a bitter one it was, as there you may read;) I say, either by
letter, or by word of mouth, any way he that can make his friend sorry for his
sins, does him an happy kindness; because this sorrow may bring him to
repentance, repentance brings him home to God, and in God every man has his
quietus est, a happy discharge from all his sins. And this may be another
reason why David desired to be smitten yet more, ut doleat, that he might
grieve for his sin.

3 Vt desistat, that he might leave his sins, we read, Number. 22. 34. that when
Balaam for the wages of unrighteousness was riding on to curse the people of
God, and that God had opened his eyes to see the revenging Angel that withstood
him in the way, and saw that the Angel did not smite him with his sword, as he
might have done, but only smote him with his word, and reprehended him; the
text shows how modestly, how meekely he submitted himself, and said, Now
Lord (says he) if my way displease thee, I will get me back again, and go
no further. In like manner when thy conscience shall tell thee, and Gods Angel,
I mean, Gods Minister shall make it appear unto thee, that thy way
displeases God, that thou have led thy life in such a way as God does not
accept; be not thou more obstinate, more headstrong than Balaam, who is
generally holden to be a Sorcerer and a Witch; but if thou have escaped
vengeance, and art but fairly smitten with a rebuke; resolve with thy self,
and say as Balaam did, Lord, I perceive my way is displeasing in thy sight, I
will therefore return, I will repent, I will desist, and sin no more. Thus did
Saint Paul, as you may read, Acts 9. when he had gotten authority from the
higher powers to bind, and carry captive all that called upon the name of
Jesus Christ, he went on (says the text) (...) like a tired Wolf breathing
out threatenings and slaughters against the people of God, and si non aliqua
nocuisset, mortuus esset, if he had not done some mischief, he had been
breathless, he had been a dead man: well our blessed Savior meets him in the
way, smites him down from his horse, and gives him a sweet and yet a searching
rebuke, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, etc. after this that he had been
thus smitten, you never read that ever he showed his letters, that ever he drew
forth his commission, or went about to put his purpose into practice; but
immediately desisted, and turned a new leaf, and became more zealous for the
Gospel, than ever he was against it. Thus God told Abimelech, Genesis 20. 6.
Cohibui te, I restrained thee, I withheld thee, or kept thee back from
sinning against me. How did God withhold him, or by what means? See the last
verse of that Chapter; he smote him with a judgment, and that deterred him
from it: if there be any means under heaven to restrain a man from sin, or
(as S. James his word is, (...), Iam. 3. 2.) to bridle, and curb a man in,
from sinning against God, and against his own soul; it is this preventing
stroke of the hand of God; as Ahaziah told the man or God, 2 Chronicles. 25.
Forbear, why sholdst thou be smitten; It is a happy thing when a man will be
won by fair means, to forbear before he be smitten; but he that will not be
won by foul means, to forbear when he is smitten; if smiting will not make a
man to forbear sinning, it is a shrewd sign that man is Conclamatae spei,
little hope of his amendment. And for this cause I suppose that David (in the
last place) might desire to be smitten yet again, ut desistat* that he might
forbear, that he might leave his sin, and so much shall serve to be spoken
of the first general part of my text, which I termed desiderium sanae
conscientiae, the desire of a sound and a good conscience, that is, to be
smitten and reproved* The next is,

2 Electio fidelis amici, the choife of a faithful friend, of a fitting person
to do this office of kindness for a man that deserves and desires it,
percutiat me justus, Let the Righteous smite me. You may by justus understand
Christus (as some do) or you may by justus understand sanctus (as others) but
my conceit leads me to take it in the plainest and directest sense; so that by
a righteous man, I conceive to be meant, a Right wise man, a sober,
understanding man, a man of good temper, good government, and good discretion;
if any man undertake to smite me (says David) let it be such a man or none;
for why? if a Righteous or a Right-wise man smite me and reprove me, he will
do it,

1 Sine fell, without gall, without bitterness. For as there is a fault in too
much lenity, too much forbearance, and indulgence where there is just cause of
sharper reprehension, which was Elies fault in the case of his sons, 1 Samuel 3.
13. the text says, His sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not,
(So our Translation renders it) but the Original is more expressive, for there
it is, Maledictionem inferebant sibi, they brought a curse upon themselves by
their wicked lives, and non corrugavit frontem in eos; he did not so much as
frown or bend his brows upon them. Whereupon says S. Bernard; quiaira Eli
tepuit in filios, ira dei exarsit in illum, because the anger of Eli waxed cold
against his sons, the anger of God waxed hot against him, I say, as there is a
fault in too much lenity and indulgence, so there is as great a fault in too
much virulency and bitterness. David complains, whether of his friends or of
his enemies, that they gave him Gall to drink: this we know was prophetically
spoken, and literally fulfilled in our blessed Savior at his passion; but
surely David spoke it of himself in a metaphorical sense, meaning, that their
words and rebukes were as bitter, as vile, and as distasteful to him, as if
they had put gall into his very drink. Now observe it when you will, you shall
find, that these harsh, these galling reprehensions do never work kindly a
good disposition, as S. James says, Iam. 1. 18. The wrath of man works not
the righteousness of God, that is, a furious or a railing reprehension does
not persuade or move a man, so as that thereby he is won to God or to
goodness: for one will take that which comes from a hasty man, to proceed
rather out of spightfulnesse and spleen, then of love or good-meaning, and so
it falls to the ground without working that good effect, which wholesome
reprehension should work, that is, it does not frame nor work a man's heart to
the righteousness of God. Now an undiscreet man in his passion, is tanquam leo
in vi sua (as the Prophet speaks) like a Lion in his rage, and has not the
wisdom nor grace to moderate and contain himself from words that are as
bitter as gall, yea, as sharp as swords and arrows, like swords that wound a
man if he be near hand, and like arrows that follow him, and wound him through
if he be a far off* they never smite a man, but they wound him in his
reputation. But then let a righteous man, or a rightwise man undertake to smite
or to reprove, and he will do it, (...) (as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6. 1.
in the spirit of meekness, and will endeavor (as the text says) (...), not
so much to reprehend, as to restore such a man to a better estate than he found
him in; it is a metaphor taken from Chirurgions and Bone-setters, that when
they undertake a dislocated joint to restore it and set it right, they do it
with as much tenderness as possibly they can, and with as little pain as
needs must to the patient; or as he that takes a mote out of ones eye, takes
it out exceeding warily and tenderly, least he put out the eye also: so
tenderly, so feelingly will a man of discretion go to work in the manner of
his reprehension, as if the case were his own, as if himself were in the same
condition. Therefore if any man smite me (says David) let him be a righteous,
a right-wise man, for such a one will do it, sine fell without gall, without
bitterness.

2 Sine publicatione, without publishing, divulging, and telling it to the
world. It was our Saviors rule, Matt. 18. 15. If thy brother offend, corripe
inter te and se, go and rebuke him betwixt thee and him alone, make no words
of it to a multitude: ubi malum contingit ibi moriatur, where an evil arises,
let it receive private admonition, and there let it die. We read in the
Gospel, Mar. 7. 33. that when our Savior went about to cure the man that was
deaf and dumb, the text says, He took him aside from the multitude, (...),
he took him in hand privately and peculiarly to himself; in like manner,
would thou do a spiriturall cure upon a man that is deaf, and will not hear
good counsel, dumb, and will not open his mouth in prayer to God; Take him
aside; Do as a discreet Surgeon with a modest Patient, whose secret
complaint has more shame than pain; I say, take him aside; for to undertake
him before the face of a multitude, is rather to wound him, than to heal him.
Brotherly reprehension must be auricular, no ear must hear it but the own
parties. According to our Saviors after-charge, when he had done many of his
cures, See thou tell no man of it; tell it the party in Gods name, and spare
not, but tell it no man else. As David cried out when he heard of Saul's and
Ionathans untimely and unfortunate end, 2 Samuel 1. 20. Tell it not in Gath,
publish it not in the streets of Askelon, least the daughters of the Philistims
rejoice, least the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph. I can but wonder (by
the way) why David should mention only the daughters of the Philistims, and the
daughters of the uncircumcised; why does he not say as well, Tell it not, least
the sons of the Philistims rejoice, and the sons of the uncircumcised
triumph? surely, it should seem that Daughters, (I mean) Women-kinde are far
more prone to flout and mock, to jeare and frump, to rejoice and triumph, to
tattle and tell tals of the weaknesses and frailties, the casualties and
miscariages of men, far more then men that are of understanding, that know
what humane frailty is: therefore (says David) wheresoever you tell it, tell
it not in Gath, in what streets or towns soever you publish it, publish not it
in the streets of Askelon, amongst the women-kinde, amongst the daughters of
uncircumcised Philistims, for they will be so far from grieving and
relenting, that they will even triumph and rejoice at it. Herein then is the
discretion of a right-wise man seen, that though he tell the party delinquent
of his faults, he will tell no man else of it, he will not blaze it to the
world; such a one will give his admonitions, as he gives his alms, In secret,
that none shall hear it, none know of it, but him only whom it concerns.
Therefore (says David) if I be smitten and reproved, let it be by a righteous,
by a right-wise man, for he will do it sine publicatione, he will make no
noise, make no words of it.

3 Sine contumelia, without disgrace; a right-wise man, though he tell his
friend of his follies to reform him, he will not tell it in that manner as to
disgrace him. In the ceremonial Law, God commanded that the very Snuffers for
Lamps in the Tabernacle should be of pure gold, I suppose, to intimate that
they who are censurers and correctors of others, should be holy and blameless
themselves; now he that shall top a candle, and then throw the snuff about the
room, does offend more, and do more hurt with the stench, than he did good
with his diligence; in like manner, he that shall first rebuke his brother, and
then disgrace him, does him more hurt with the one, than he did him good with
the other. The Apostle tells us, that love covers a multitude of sins;
not only Charitas Dei, the love and kindness of God, and Charitas Christi the
love and compassion of Christ; but Charitas amici too, the kindness and love
of a friend, if he be true and faithful, will be the same that Shems and
Iaphets cloak was, a means under God to cover and to hide the weaknesses and
deformities of his fathers and brethren: See an example of it in our blessed
Savior, Luke 7. 37. when he had occasion to speak of the penitent woman that
washed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head, see
how favorably, how tenderly he makes mention of her, and the worst language
he gives her is, that she was peccatrix a sinner, There was a woman in the
City which was a sinner; Alas, what woman was not, what woman is not a sinner?
We do easily guess what the woman was, and what her sin was; but see the
tenderness and the goodness of our Lord and Savior, that names neither the
woman, nor the sin, but spares her reputation, because he saw her repentance.
Thus did the Father of the Prodigal child, Luke 15. ult. when he was driven by
necessity to seek relief in his Fathers house, and came and submitted
himself; see how his elder brother reviled him, how basely, how
contemptuously, how disgracefully he makes mention of him, ver. 30. This thy
son (says he) that has spent thy living upon harlots, shall have more
kindness from thee, than I that never angered thee. He does not say, This my
brother, but, This thy son, as if he had been nothing a kin to him, seeing
he was grown into poverty, and driven by necessity to make bold with his
friends. Such is the dogged disposition of ill-minded men, if they know any
thing by a man that may any way disgrace him, he shall be sure to have it laid
in his dish when he fares the worst. But then see the good nature of his good
Father, how he seeks to cover and to hide the deformity of his sons offense
under favorable and gentle terms, This my son was dead (says he) and now is
alive, was lost and now is found; and so buries all in oblivion, and makes no
reproachful mention of them. Thus favorably does the Scripture speak of
David's great offense. David's heart was upright in all things (says the text)
save only in the matter of Vriah, 1 Reg. 15. 5. it is not said, save only in
the murder of Vriah, but save only in the matter of Vriah; what that matter
was is too well known, but the holy Ghost seeks to cover it, that there may
be no disgracive mention of it. It is meat and drink to some kind of people,
if they can but find any just accusation against a man, to disgrace him by it:
Saint Austin compares such to Dives dogs that lay licking and sucking of
Lazarus sores; they meddled not with his sound parts, but only with his sores;
so let a man have never so many good parts, they make no mention of them, but
if he have but one sore, (i) an infirmity, you shall have them licking at that
continually; never chance to speak of him, but that is at their tongues end.
Well therefore did David abandon all unrighteous men from having to do with
him; and make choice of one that is right-wise, and honest to smite and to
reprove him, for such a one will do it sine contumelia, without disgrace.

4 Sine adulatione, without flattery; without abetting or justifying a man in
his evil courses. For there is, (as one has well observed) a twofold
Justification; 1 A Justification of a sinner from his sins. 2 A Justification
of a sinner in his sins; the first is an act of Gods mercy, the second is an
act of man's flattery: the former is an happy an blessed thing, when God is
pleased in mercy to justify and acquit, to discharge and free a guilty soul
from the bond and punishment of all his sins, by the merits, and by the
blood, and by the Spirit of Jesus Christ. The latter is a woeful and accursed
thing, when a man shall speak good of evil, and labor to justify another
man's actions though never so vile and foul; it is such a Justification as
without Gods infinite mercy will bring a man to everlasting condemnation; and
yet such servile spirits there be, that for their own advantage, will sooth a
man up (if he be rich or great) in all his ways, and wickedness: Let him
sin what he will, they will not check him; project what he will, they will
not thwart him; say what he will, they are ready to second him; and let him be
what he will, they applaud and admire him. Oh, what amiable friends are these!
these love a man, as the Ravens love his eyes, or as Dalilah loved Sampson,
when she hugged and lulled him in her lap, and then cut off his lock, which
was the only ligament that tied and fastened him to his God, so she did what
lay in her even to cut him off from God. These are they whom the Prophet terms
Caementarios diaboli, the devils dawbers, Ezech. 13. 10. the comparison stands
thus; when a man dwells in an old ruinous house, the Mason comes and plasters
and dawbes it over, making the Indweller believe that all is well, that it is a
sound and a solid wall, and he may dwell safely in it, when the house is indeed
ready to fall, drop down, and smother him. Such are they, that will not stick
to persuade a man that his case is good to Godward, that he has no cause to
be discontented or ill-conceited of himself, when there is an ulcisci in
promptu (as the Apostle speaks) when vengeance is in a readiness to fall
down and seize upon him. Another calls them the devils Vphosters (in relation
to that Ezech. 13 18.) if they see a man lean toward a sin, they will sow a
pillow under his arme-hole, (i) sooth him up in his inclination, that he sleep
securely in it with as little trouble and unrest as possibly may be. These be
woeful friends, God deliver every good man from having such burs hang on his
sleeve, from having his head broken with these precious balmes (as our
Translation reads my text.) For my part (says David) give me a true friend
that will smite me, as for a flatterer that will smooth me, I hate and abhor
him; give me such a friend as is like those sawces which a man commends with
tears in his eyes; whose reprehension is like some wholesome potion, though it
make a man sick for the present, it will purge him and do him good for the time
to come; it be these rough hands (as one said of Jacobs) that bring us savory
meat, and carry away the blessing when they have done: As David blessed
Abigail, when she met him and stayed him from his evil purpose, 1 Samuel 25. 32.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel that has sent thee to meet me this day,
and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me this day from
shedding of blood* A flatterer may please a man at the first, but a
plaine-dealing friend has his blessing at the last; and such a one did David
desire to be smitten by, because he knew that he would do it, sine adulatione
without flatery.

Lastly, if a righteous man smite, though he do it (as I have showed) 1 Sine
fell without gall. 2 Sine publicatione, without notice. 3 Sine contumeliae
without disgrace. 4 Sine adulatione without flattery, yet which is the maine of
all. 5 Non sine Deo, not without God. If David could say of his enemy that
cursed him, Let him alone, for God has bidden to curse; much more safely may
thou say of thy friend that reproves thee, let him alone for God has bidden
him to smite. And as the Apostle says of Ministers, that God does entreat you
by us; so persuade your selves, that God does reprove you by them: Do not
therefore resist, do not reject good counsel, least thou be found to be (...),
an opposer, a fighter against God. For believe it, if thou do not hearken to
God when he reproves thee by thy friend, thou shall one day hear him to thy
cost, when God will reprove thee by himself. Give ear and tremble at that
same tuba terroris (as Saint Austin calls it) that trumpet of terror, or that
terrible trumpet, Psalm. 50. 21. These things have thou done, and I held my
peace, whereupon thou thoughtest wickedly that I was such a one as thy self
(that is, one that sees evil done, and by silence gives consent, and takes
pleasure in them that do it) But I will reprove thee (says God) and set thine
sins in order before thine eyes. Tremble (I say) at the voice of this
Trumpet; Thou that wilt neither reprove thy self when thou have done evil,
nor suffer others by reproof to do thee good; assure thy self, there is one
above that will reprove thee when he comes to judge thee, who will so
marshall, and rank, and set thy sins in order before thee, that thou shall
not be able to answer him to one of a thousand. Therefore as Saint Austin
desired of God in another case, Domine hic ure, hic seca, ut in posterum sanes,
Lord cut me and scorch me here, that thou may heal me, and cure me
hereafter; so let thy prayer to God be to the same effect, Lord smite me and
reprove me here, that I may have nothing to answer for, nothing to be
questioned for, when I go from hence. So much briefly for the second general
part of my Text, why David did make choice of a Righteous man to smite him. The
next is,

3 Acceptatio fraternae correptionis, the well-taking of brotherly
reprehension; the text says, It shall be a kindness. But what will the world
say, if smiting be a kindness, a man shall be sure to have enough of it, if he
will take that so kindly, he shall not want for kindness, as this world goes:
Such kindness as this Ananias could afford Saint Paul, Acts 23. 2. Smite him
on the mouth (says he) when he was speaking how he had lived in all good
conscience before God until that day. This kindness the Officers could afford
our Savior, John 18. when he had thus spoken, one of the Officers which stood
by smote Jesus on the face, with the palm of his hand. This kindness
Zedech^ah could afford Michaiah, 1 Reg. 22 He went near and smote him on the
check. Doubtless if one in anger had smitten Ahabs or the Highpriests dog
in that place, and in that presence, he should have smarted for it, but this
they thought was kindness good enough for them that durst do no other but
take it. So that as Absalom said to Hushai, when to his thinking he had showed
him a plot how to undermine his father David, 2 Samuel 16. 17. Is this thy
kindness to thy friend (says he;) so if this, if smiting, and baffling, and
backbiting be a friendly kindness, a man shall have kindness and friendship
enough as this world goes; he shall never need to beg for it, he shall have
it without asking; but if he look for any other friendship or kindness, he
may chance to go without it, and fall short of his expectation; such friends
as Tacitus speaks of, quibus deerat inimicus, ab amicis sunt oppressi, they
that had no enemy to oppress and abuse them, were abused and oppressed by
their friends; such as these the world is full of; and such kindness as Iul an
showed the poor Christians, that would smite them on the one cheek, to see
whether they would turn the other, shall be offered a man whether he will or
no; I say, he that will take smiting kindly, shall have kindness good store:
But that is not the meaning of my text. The Original is, percutiat me in
misericordia, let him smite me in mercy, or in compassion to my soul, that
would do ill or worse if it were not smitten; and well does deserve to be
accounted a kindness in many respects, I will but touch them, and pass them
over.

1 It is a kindness Reducere errantem, if it be but a sheep that is lost and
gone astray, he that will reduce it and bring it home to the Shepherd and to
the fold, it is a kindness you will say: Now all we like sheep have gone
astray (says the Prophet) and we acknowledge it daily to God in our public
confession, We have erred and straied from thy ways like lost sheep. Now the
sheep (as the Philosopher says) is pecus erraticum, a kind of cattle that is
given more to wandering and straying than any other whatsoever; and besides that
such is the simplicity and the foolishness of a sheep, that being once lost
and gone astray, it has not the wit nor understanding of it self ever to
return and come home again (as a dog, or a spaniell will do) but wanders
further and further, unless some good body or other do chance to seek it up
and find it, and bring it home: even such are we, too apt to go astray from
God, and to lose our selves in a labyrinth of sin, but have not the wit nor
the grace of our selves ever to return to the Shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, except some good body or other be a means under God to reduce, to
reclaim and bring us home to Christ. Now he that shall see his friend thus
gone astray, and shall by wholesome admonitions, and friendly reprehensions,
endeavor to reduce him and bring him back to God, Is not this a kindness?

2 It is a kindness Sanare aegrotum, to recover on that is sick, and make one
sound that is in a consumption; such is a man far gone in sin, as the
Apostle says of the Cretians, Tit. 1. 12. they were (...) evil beasts, slow
bellies, always liers; a man would think it a vain thing to meddle with such
as were so far gone in a spiritual consumption, so sick to the death with a
surfeit of sin; yet (says the Apostle) do not despair of their cure, but
rebuke them sharply (...) Cuttingly, that they may be sound in the faith. A
rotten Cretian by sharp reproof may be made a sound Christian. Thus when a
man is corrupt in his conscience, and rotten in his communication (as the
Apostle calls filthy discourse (...), Rotten communication, Ephesians. 4. 29.) I say,
when a man's soul is almost consumed and dead and rotten to Godward; he that
by wholesome advice, and heavenly physic can recover such a one, and make him
sound in his heart and in his faith to God, Is not this a kindness?

3* It is a kindness Suscitare lethargum, when a man is in a lethargy where
sleep may be his death; or if a man should sleep on the top of a mast where
every nod may endanger his life, he that shall awake such a one* before any
harm befall him, it is a kindness even that. And such is the case of all
impenitent sinners; Awake thou that sleep and stand up from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee life. Believe it, security is as dangerous a sleep to
the soul, as lethargy is to the body; now when a man shall lie in wickedness, as
a carrion lies in rottenness, and shall sleep away his salvation, though his
damnation sleeps not; He that shall awake such a one by stirring
reprehensions, least (if he were let alone) he might sleep as Sisera did
(which God forbid) who slept but never waked again, Is not this a kindness?

4 It is a kindness Ligare insanum to bind a mad man, to chain up one that is
bereft of his senses and wits, who if they were at liberty might endanger
himself and others; now Solomon tells us, Eccles. 7. that the heart of man is
full of evil, and madness is in his heart while he lives: see how Bedlam-like
some men are in their fury and passion, swear and curse, and even worry their
God and Savior, when they are provoked by man, they right their spleen upon
God. Yea, if their words were the same indeed, that they are said to be in
effect, if they were but swords, and arrows, and rasors, indeed that would
pierce and wound the body, as they wound and pierce the soul, nothing should
satisfy them, but the lives and blood and death of those that have offended
them; such mischievous, such murdering words do they spit like venom out of
their hellish mouths; now then, he that can over*awe such a one with grave and
sober reprehensions, that can overcome and overpower and overruled him with
good language and good persuasions, Ne quid loquare durius (as God said to
Laban, Genesis 31. 24.) and smite him so, as that he dares not smite again, but
cry God and his neighbor mercy for what he has spoken and done amiss, Is not
this a kindness?

5 Lastly* it is a kindness Liberare perditum, to save a lost man that is in
imminent danger of drowning and death, if he have not speedy help; it was
Moses case when he was in the river, had it not been for the kindness of
Pharaohs daughter; it was Ieremies case when he was in the dungeon, had it not
bin for the kindness of his special friends; and it is the case of many a man
that is fallen from God into a gulf into a whirle-poole of sin, that winds
and draws and suckes him in, there is no possibility that his soul should
escape drowning and death, if mercy help not out: It is said of the Prodigal
child, Luke 15. 13. that he wasted his substance with riotous living, (so we
read it, but the Original is more significant, (...) which is in proper
terms, He lived unsavingly; as much to say, as in that course that he took,
he was a lost man, and could not have been saved, had he not reverted and
repented as he did. And such an unsaving life does many a man lead, in
gluttony and drunkenness, in riot and profaneness, etc. that God cannot
keep his own truth, and save his soul. Now he that shall see his friend in
such a way of wickedness, that as he said, Ipsa sicupiat salus, etc. if
salvation it self should come down from heaven and offer it self to such a
one, he would not, he were not in case to accept it; He, I say, that by words
of motion can work upon such a man's heart, can bring him to repentance, that
he may become salvabilis within the compass and possibility of being saved*
Is not this a kindness? If you will believe S. James, Chap. 5. ult. it is the
greatest kindness in the world, He that conver^^th a sinner from the error of
his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.
Therefore as Saul said to the Ziphites when they came and told him where David
was 1 Samuel 23. 21. Blessed be ye of the Lord, for ye have had compassion upon
me. So he that has any grace, or but good nature in him, will bless God for
such a Minister, or neighbor, or friend, that will show him the error of his
way, that will tell him of his sins, and take it as a mercy, and a kindness
and a compassion to his soul.

And so I come in the last place, to the exaltation of this kindness above all
that has been spoken, It shall be Oleum capitis (as the Original has it) it
shall be a sovereign, a precious, and an excellent oil that shall not break
my head. When I first took this text in hand, this seemed unto me a very
strange and an uncouth expression; if the Prophet had said, It shall be a stone
that shall not break my head, or a staff, or a club that shall not break my
head, etc. we had easily understood him, but to speak of an oil, or a balm,
which we know to be so soft, so supple, so lith and gentle an ointment, that
he should speak of breaking his head with oil, it is strange: I confess it
troubled me a while, till at length I conceived it might be spoken by
contraries* as when a Physician gives a patient some pectorall, or cordial,
and says, Take this, it will not hurt you, his meaning is, it will help and
do him good. So this oil shall not break my head, that is, it shall heal
it, being broken* by my own corruption, by Satan's temptations, and by the
assention of such as flatter me in my sins.

But why does he mention his head? why does he not say as well, It shall not
break my arm, or it shall not break my legs, etc? Answ. The head you know,
is the principal part of man, that which is nearest, and gives life and
influence to all the lower parts, if that be broken all the body fares the
worse. It is a known place, Matthew. 10. Be wise as Serpents. Now the wisdom
of the Serpent *they say) consists chiefly in this, that he will expose his
body to any danger, take any wound in his body, so he may but save his head,
because he knows that his life lies in his head: so is Christ our head, and
all our spiritual life lies in him, and flows from him; therefore our
principal care should be, what ever bodily danger we expose our selves unto,
to hold life in the head, hold faith and affiance in Jesus Christ. But that is
not all* I take it, when he says, it ^^all not break my head, his meaning
is, It shall break something else about him that shall be better for him; as
thus; It shall not break my head, but it shall break my heart; he that
breaks a man's head, does him an ill office that may endanger his life; but he
that breaks his heart with that same hammer that Jeremy speaks of, Ier. 23.
29. by the powerful subduing Word of God, does him a right good office, that
may be a means though* Gods blessing to prepare his soul for grace, and make
him a vessel capable of mercy, for Deus Oleum misericordiae non infundit, nisi
in vas contritum, God never powers the oil of his mercy, but into broken
vessels, that is, into broken hearts, that are rent and torn (as it were) with
remorse and sorrow for sin. As God threatened, Hos. 13. 8. I will rend the
kall of their hearts; rather than he will suffer sin to dwell where his
throne should be. So this smiting is not to break heads, but to break hearts,
which is better. Or thus, It shall not break my head, but it shall break my
sinnes-head, or the head of my sins; as David says, Psalm. 74. 14. The heads
of Dragons are broken in the waters: what are these Capita Draconum, these
heads of Dragons? but capital crimes, predominant and master-sinnes, that do
(...) and (...) (as the Apostle speaks) that usurp authority and domineere in
the soul, and threaten to devour the conscience if they be not taken down,
and broken in the waters of repentance, in the tears of godly sorrow for
sin. Now he that can be a means to save his friends head, and break his
sins head; to cherish the one and crush the other, Is not this a kindness
worth acceptance?

If a man have an enemy that does him wrong, the Apostle counsels him, to heap
coals of fire upon his head, Romans 12* 20. what are these Carbones ardentes,
these burning coals, or coals of fire, which the Apostle would have a man
heap on his enemies head: Surely (I think) he means no other then those,
Rom* ^. 9. Tribulation and anguish, indignation and wrath, upon the soul of
every one that does evil (upon purpose to vex his neighbor.) Now thus stands
the case, He that revengeth his own quarrel, and recompenseth evil for
evil, he heaps coals of fire on his own head, that is, makes himself
liable to the just revenge of God; but he that by patient forbearance commits
his cause to God, and renders good for evil, he heaps coals of fire on his
enemies head, that is, he saves himself from wrong, and transferreth the
indignation and wrath of God upon him that wronged him, or whom God in flaming
fire will render vengeance when he comes to judgment. And this is the way to
be revenged of an enemy.

But then if a man have a friend that he wishes well unto, and feign would
reclaim him from his evil life; David would have him take another course, and
power drops of oil upon his head, that is, mollify and melt him, and work
gently and kindly upon him, by mild rebukes and reprehensions; for this may
touch his heart, but shall never break his head; it may do him good for his
soul, but shall never do him wrong for his life or reputation. And this I
take to be the meaning of my text. The sum of all is this, Look what virtue,
what excellency there is in the most sovereign, most precious oils or
balsomes for the salubrity and health of the body; the very same are to be
found in kind and gentle admonitions for the health and welfare of the soul.
Fitly therefore does David resemble it to oil in many respects, I will but
name them and conclude.

1 Quia medetur vulneribus, you know that balsom which is nothing else but
oil, is a sovereign remedy specially for a green wound; so is seasonable
reprehension a sovereign cure for one that has newly wounded his conscience,
or his credit by sin: Would thou do a spiritual cure upon thy friend, let
him not run on till he be festered and rankled with a habit of sinning, but
take him while the wound is green: We see in Genesis, that when Adam had
sinned, God came to him in the cool of the evening the same day, and
reprehended him for it; because God would not have him sleep one night in his
sin. A Candle new blown out, is soon blown in again; and a wound newly
taken is sooner healed; if thou would heal thy friend give him this balsome in
time.

2 Quia expellit venenum, there be oils (as sallet oils, etc.) that are of
special virtue to expel poison taken inwardly; sin is of a poysonfull nature,
that envenomes and endangers the very life of the soul (David compares it to
the poison of Aspes, which is the deadliest of all poisons:) has thy friend
taken poison, has he baned himself by presumptuous sins; give him this
oil, rebuke him lovingly, it will either fetch the poison upward by a penitent
confession, or drive it downwards, and make him prostrate himself at the foot
of God; one way or other it will work upon him.

3 Quia exhilarat fa^i^m, Oil makes a man have a^ cheerful countenance
(says David, and it is pity his words should be perverted and strained to
patronize the painting of Icz^bel*) but my meaning is, when a man has been
gently rebuked by a friend, and been wrought thereby to a kindly repentance,
to a holy sadness and de^ection for sin, and therefore has in a sincere
penitential manner even shriven himself to his God; you would not believe
what a cheerfulness this breeds in a sad heart, how light-some he shall be
after his former lumpishnesse; quasi volitare facit (as a Father says) it even
carries a man above ground, and makes him forget the best of natures comforts.

4 Quia penetrat corda, There be oils of that virtue, that they will enter
through the skin and flesh, and bones, and work upon the very marrow that is
within. Such virtue has the word of God, being powerfully applied and chafed
in by the warm and soft hand of a kind and loving friend, it will enter into
the very secrets* of the heart, and work upon the very soul and spirit, and
do a cure there, where no earthly medicine can take place.

5 Quia recuperat moriturum. Saint James tells us that in the Primitive Church,
when a man was sick unto death, the Elders of the Church anointed him with
oil, which by the miraculous virtue that God gave unto it, was a means to
recover the party: from whence the Papists derive their Extreme Unction, which
(God knows) is but an apish uneffectuall mis-imitation of a miracle which now
is ceased in the Church, and even then could not be done by every Elder, for
all had not the gift of healing (as the Apostle tells us:) this is indeed the
only spiritual oil that we are to apply unto men on their death-beads, to
speak comfortably to their hearts, to work kindly upon their consciences, and
to prepare their souls for heaven by wholesome admonitions.

FJNJS.
THE POOR MAN'S HOPE.

A Sermon Preached By JOHN GORE, Rector of VVenden-lofts in EESSEX, 1635.

PSALM. 12. 5. For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy,
now will I arise (says the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that
puffs at him.

printer's or publisher's device HEB DDIEV HEB DDIM



Printed at Lond^ n by Th(...) for Th^mas Alchorne* and ar^ to be sold at his
shop i^ ^ Paule^ Churchyard, at the sign of the Greene-Dragon, 1635.

Perlegi hanc concionem eui titulus, The Poor man's Hope, in qua nihil reperio
sanae fidei aut bonis moribus contrarium.

Tho. Weeks. R. P. P. p. Land. Cap. Domest.

TO MY WORSHIPFUL And most worthy Friend, M. EDMUND VVOODHALL Chief
Register of the Perogative Office in LONDON.
WORTHY SIR,
I Remember how heartily the Apostle prayed for his good friend Onesiphorus,
who had ought refreshed him, and was not ashamed of his chain, 2 Timothy 1. 16,
18. The Lord give mercy to the house of Onesiphorus; and again; The Lord grant
that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day Now whither that good man were
willing to have his name, and his goodness made known to the world, J cannot
say, (very likely his modest hashfulnesse would not seem to desire it;) But
who will blame Saint Paul's good nature, that he did not forget the kindness of
his friend, as Ioash forgot the kindness of Iehojada; nor would smother his
(...) Hazael smothered his Master; but remembered (...) in his prayers, made
mention of him in his writings, and besought the Lord for mercy to that house,
where he had found so often refreshing. In like manner, This is all the poor
amends that J can make you (worthy sir) for all your free and noble
entertainements, to become your Orator to God, your Herald to the world, and
to requite your courtesies with prayers which (...) all never be wanting from

Your poor unworthy Friend. JOHN GORE.

THE POOR Man's Hope.
PSALM. 37. 25. J have been young, and now am old, yet never saw the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.
THese words are an experiment, or an observation of the Prophet David,
touching the certainety and infallibility of Gods Providence and Goodness to
the righteous and their posterity. Wherein we may take notice of three
general Points. 1. The time, how long David had observed Gods dealing and
dispensation in this behalf; namely, from his youth to his age [I have been
young and now am old.] 2. The parties in whom David did observe this
privilege, that they were never forsaken, and they were, the righteous only
[I never saw (...) righteous forsaken.] 3. The continuance and succession of
Gods favor and mercy, that it does not rest only upon the righteous
themselves, but extends and e^la geth it self to their posterity and their
seed, [nor their seed begging their bread.] Of th^se in their order; and first
of the time how long David had observed Gods dealing with the righteous,
namely, from hi youth to his age.

^. [I have been^ young.] Here first you may take into your consideration, the
holy minority of the Prophet David, that in his young time he began to enter
into religious thoughts and meditations touching Gods proceedings with his
servants. That time which other young folks waste and melt away in folly and
vanity, or in the pleasures of sin; that did he dispend and employ in a more
serious* and more sacred manner, in devotions, and divine contemplations of the
manifold wisdom and works of God. To be a pattern and a president to all
young ^olke^ that should come after him, to begin betimes (...) God and follow
goodness. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth (says Solomon,
Eccles. 12. 1.) before evil days come. Old days are evil days in respect
of young days; ^t be the young that be the good days, if young folks had but
grace to make good use of them. It was Gods Ordinance, Levit. ^. 14. that in
their Meate-offerings of first fruits, they should offer green ears of corn,
or corn beaten out of green ears. To intimate unto us, that God loves we
should dedicate and consecrate our green and tender years to his service, and
not put it off (as too many do) to the very Autumn and fall of their lives.
It is witten in the Gospel, that when Christ heard a young man say, He had kept
the Commandments from his youth, the Text faith, He began to (...) to show how
God loves these timely beginnings of grace and goodness: Yea, I dare say it,
that God makes more account of a little goodness in a young body, ^h^n of a
great deal more in one that is of greater age, as you read, 1 Reg. 14. 13.
When (...) child was sick, the Prophet sent him word from God, that he only
of Ieroboams house (...) go to the grave in peace, because in him was found
some good thing toward the Lord. There could not be much goodness in him being
but a child, and bred in Idolatry, yet because there was some goodness; ye see
how God took liking to him, and showed his acceptance by that extraordinary
favor toward him. Let this be an encouragement to all young persons, that are
(as the Poet speaks) Aurorae filij, sons of the morning, that have day and
life before them, to learn of David and Ieroboams son, to begin betimes to set
forward to heaven, and make choice of Christ to be their Guardian in their
youth, so shall they be sure never to come to want nor beggary in their age. It
was the honor and the happiness of Andronicus and Iunia (as we read Romans 16. 7.
that they were in Christ before Paul; and it is the happiest privilege and
priority in the world to be the first in Christ, and in the Covenant of grace;
for he that is the foremost in Christianity upon earth, shall be sure to have
preferment according to his time both in grace and glory in the heavens. Be
ambitious therefore (ye young men) of this high honor and preferment, get into
Christ as soon as possibly you can; for if you linger like Lot in Sodom, and
stay till you have gotten an habit, and an haunt in wickedness, you would no^
believe, how hard a matter you shall find it then, to dispose your minds, and
frame your lives to goodness. Stamp Garlic in a new mortar, and it will
smell of it ever after; let the devil get possession of a child, he will
hardly be removed when he comes to riper years: as we have an example, Mark
9. 20. There was an evil spirit had gotten such hold of a young man's body, that
the Disciples with all their power and prayers could not cast him out;
whereupon our Savior perceiving with what extremity he came forth, with what
wallowing and foaming, and renting of the possessed, He demanded, how long that
had happened unto him? answer was made, of a child; if Satan get but handsell
in childhood, he will plead prescription in age. Therefore let all parents
take heed they do not deal with their children, as those wicked ones did, 2
Reg. 17. who offered their children to Molock: first* they carried them round
about the fire, and that was called (...) wheeling about their death and
destruction: secondly, they caused their children to pass through the fire,
this was called Lustratio a purging by sacrifice: thirdly, they put them into
the belly of Molock (which was an hollow Image of brass) and burnt them
quick; this was Vivi-comburium, burning alive. Too many such graces^sse
parents there are in the world, who first, initiate their children to the
devil, when they correct them (...) this is (as it were) to carry them about
the fire of hell: secondly when by their evil example they teach them villainy,
as the young (...) of the old Lion to catch the prey, ((...) 9) this is (as ^t
were) to make them pass through the ^^^e: they not only teach them evil by
their evil example, but applaud and allow them in their wickedness, and (as
the Apostles word is, Romans 1. 32.) (...)* take delight and pleasure in their
lewdness; that is to put them (as it were) into the arms, into the belly of
the devil. This is a woeful training up of children, God forgive and amend all
them that use it; and God give all such children grace, to do as Solomon
advises the young man, Prove. 2. 16. ^urto se eripere, to steal themselves ^ut
of the hands and bands of sin and Satan, and to bind themselves Apprentices
to God in their youth, so shall they be sure to be potected, and preserved, and
provided for in their age. I bave been young (says David) and now am old, etc.

[Now am old.] You have heard the beginning of David's piety, now mark his
proceeding and continuance in well-doing he was no changeling (you see* neither
in Religion, nor in affection to Godward, but held on in a constant, settled
course of godly-mindednesse, I^a ut cano placer^t, quod Juveni complace^a^ (as
one said) so that, that goodness which pleased him in his youth, pleased him
no less in his elder years; young and old he was still the same, still bent
and set his heart to serve, and to observe the Lord. It was the commendation
given to Mnason, Act. 21. 16. that he was (...), an old disciple, and it is the
greatest honor that can be given to man or woman, to be truly styled (as he
was) An old disciple; that is, to be a ^ollower of Christ from ones youth, and
to continue Christ's faithful servant to ones age. Age is a crown of glory
(says Solomon) Prove. 16 31.) When it is found in the way of righteousness*
that is, when an old man is found to be a just and a righteous man, then he
truly deserves reverence; but when a man has lived to those years, that he
comes to have Caput album, and cor nigrum, a head white with hoary hairs, and
the heart black with wicked deeds; it is the most lamentable incongruity, and
disproportion in the world. It is observed out of Genesis 25. 8. that Abraham was
the first in all the Scripture that is called by the name of an old man, and
yet there were many before him that were much elder in years, and had lived a
longer time in the world than he had done: why then should Abraham be called an
Old man, rather than any of his elder ancestors? Philo gives this to be the
reason, that it was propter canitiem virtutum, not so much for the age of his
body, as for the antiquity of his virtue; though they were elder in years than
he, yet Abraham was elder in grace and virtue than they, and had been a
virtuous, a religious man, and had served and feared the Lord, a longer time
than any of his predecessors: and for this cause was he written the first old
man in the Register of Almighty God. And so at this day; not he that is first
Christened, but he that is the first and best Christian, is the eldest man in
Gods account, and comes nearest unto him who is the Ancient of days. Whereas
he that is full of days and empty of grace, that has attained bonum
se^ectutem (as one says) a good old age, but wants the maine of all which is,
Bonum senectutis the goodness of old age; who when the harvest of his years
is come, does not bring forth that fruit unto God, of devotion and piety, of
wisdom and gravity, of temperance and charity, that is to be found in men of
fewer years: Most wretched and miserable is his condition, for he comes (as it
were) to the borders of Canaan, to the very point of time wherein Gods children
make their happy transmigration into heaven* but by reason of his sins is
thrust back again; so that when he should die and ascend to the place of
eternal blessedness, he dies and descends to the pit of utter darkness,
where is nothing but weeping and gnashing of teeth. Such is the miserable
condition of that man or woman, whose body is declining to the grave, but his
spirit has not learned to ascend to God that gave it. You therefore that are
aged persons, (...)* ready and ripe for the grave, learn to resemble the
Sun, whereof the Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 104. Sol novit occasum suum,
the Sun knows his going down; and therefore before his setting sends forth
the brighter and the clearer, and the sweeter beams: so you cannot but know
that it will not be long, ere the sun of your life go down, therefore
before the night of death come upon you, send forth some beams of light, some
good prayers to God, some good deeds to the poor, show some token for good
before your death that it may appear that your souls are gone the way of
life. And then look how the Rivers when they come near the sea, the tide
comes forth to meet them; so when your souls come near to heaven, your God
and Savior shall meet you in the way, and receive you into those eternal
mansions which himself has prepared for you.

So much for the Time, how long David had been an observer and an eyewitness
of Gods Providence, sc. from his youth to his age. I come now to the
observation it self [Non v^di justum derelictum, I have not scene the
righteous forsaken.] Wherein are two things remarkable, 1. The persons
privileged, and they are the Righteous. 2. The privilege of those persons,
and that is, they are never forsaken.

1. The persons privileged, (to wit) the Righteous. Here the question will be
where any such persons are to be found; for it is certain that a Righteous man
is Rara avis in terris, as this world goes. The Prophet once cried, O ye
heavens, drop down righteousness* When Righteousness (says a learned man)
was taken up into heaven, and the earth was utterly devoid of it. But we trust
in God, the world is not altogether now so bad, but that (by Gods grace) there
are some, though not many righous persons to be found amongst men: but who be
they? that deserve to be so called, and so accounted? Ans. I will show you some
particular instances out of the Book of God, what kind of persons went under
the name of Righteous men in the days of old, and leave the application to
your selves.

^ The first that ever went under the name of a Righteous man, was Abel; of him
you shall read, Heb. 11. 4. That he offered a more excellent sacrifice than
Caine by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God himself
testifying of it. Now wherein did Abels righteousness consist, or what was it
for which Abel was accounted righteous? the text shows, it was for that he
offered, uberius sacrificium, a richer, a fuller, a better sacrifice than Cain;
for Caine also offered a sacrifice to God, such a one as it was, but it was a
pinching sacrifice, and the fruits that he offered were (...), the refuse of
that he had; that which he cared not for himself, that he offered to the Lord;
but Abel made choice of the best, and offered the most; so that his sacrifice
was both more and more excellent than Caines, it was better and bigger too; and
for this he obtained testimony from God that he was a righteous man. Hence I
note, that they which are voluntary and free in their offerings to God, that
are willing God should have (...), the best and principal part of all their
substance; that hold it in scorn (as David did) that it should be said, they
should worship the Lord, and be at no cost: these are they in the first place
that deserve the name of righteous men. Contrariwise, they that are of a base
and niggardly disposition to Godward, that think (as Judas did) every thing
to be perditio, to be waste and lost, that goes to the maintenance of the
worship, and service, and Ministers of God; they are far from Abels
disposition, and consequently, far from being Righteous in Gods account.

2 The next Righteous man, was Abraham, of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 4. 3.
Abraham believed God, and this was counted to him for righteousness. Now
wherein did Abraham's righteousness consist? the text says, in his faith, in
his belief of God. God Almighty called him out of his own Country, and made
him leave all his friends and means behind him, only promising him to be his
exceeding great reward; now if God should have failed Abraham when he was in a
strange place, he had been utterly undone; but Abraham gave credence to his
Word, and wholly cast himself upon the Promise and the Providence of his God,
and this was counted to him for righteousness. Hence I gather, he that bears
a true faith to God, dares repose and cast and roll himself upon the mercy of
his God, and the merits of his Savior, for the pardon of his sins, the
preservation of his life* and the salvation of his soul; he that dares trust
his God in a case of exigence and extremity; when if God should fail him he
were undone by it: I dare say that man is a righteous man in Gods account.

3 The next shall be Let, of whose righteousness you read, ^ Pet. 2. 8. That
righteous man dwelling among the Sodomites vexed his righteous soul from day
to day with seeing and hearing their unlawful deeds. Now wherein did his
righteousness consist? the text says, in vexing and grieving at the
unrighteousness of others. Try thy self by this. Art thou vexed and grieved
at the heart, to see the unlawful deeds, and the ungodly courses of the world?
Do thou mourn in secret (as Samuel did for Saul) so do thou mourn for
those, who in men's understanding are in the high way to hell and destruction;
is it an Hazael to thine eyes, and a grief to thy heart to see that men should
have no more grace nor care to serve and fear the Lord, but to dishonor and
provoke him every day; and do thou wish in sincerity before God, Oh that it
lay in thee to further the cause of God, and to hinder the increase and growth
of Satan's Kindome in the world: art thou thus minded, thus affected (as Lot was
in Sodom?) then take it as an undoubted testimony to thy soul, that God who
counted it to him, will count it so to thee, for righteousness. Whereas he
that can make himself merry with that which makes God and his Angels sorry, is
far from Lots disposition, and consequently far from being righteous in
Gods account.

4 Come next to Job, who says of himself, Job 29. 14, 15* 16. I put on
righteousness and i^ clothed me; meaning, that his soul was clad with
righteousness within, as his body was clad with clothes without: but how did
that appear? I was eyes to the blind, feet to the lams, and a father to the
poor. These be the true (...), the infallible marks and badges of a righteous
man. 1* He must be eyes to the blind, Ignorant em (...) (says Lyra) by giving
counsel, direction, and advice, the (...) can to them that are ignorant and
simple, here signified by the blind, which are not able to guide themselves
without Seer. 2. He must be feet to the lame, Impotent^m adjuvando, by giving
countenance help, and assistance the best he can to them that are impotent and
of mean ability, here signified by the lame, for he that wants his limbs
cannot stir without some helper and supporter. He must be a father to the
poor, Indigentem subl^vando, by giving relief and protection the best he can
to them that are destitute of friends and means, like poor Orphans or
Fatherless children that are not able to provide for themselves, nor to live
without the charity and the mercy of good*minded people. These are the objects
of the care and compassion of the righteous, and these are the touchstones and
trials of undissembled righteousness: He that lends his eyes to the blind to
direct them* his feet to the lame to support them; and his bread to the poor
to sustain them* that is a Iob-like-disposition, and a righteous man without
doubt in the sight of God.

5 Look next to Phineas, of whose righteousness you may read, Psalm. 106. 31.
Phineas stood up and prayed, and the plague ceased, and this (says the text)
was counted to him for Righteousness. Now what was it that made Phineas a
righteous man? It was his praying or his pacifying of God, for so the Greek
word (...), signifies, and in the vulgar Latin it is, St^^^t and placavit, he
stood up and pacified or appeased God, and this was counted to him for
righteousness. Hence I gather, He that labors to pacify God by prayer, when
he is provoked and displeased by sin* he that takes a speedy course to
reconcile himself and others, and to make atonement with God by a sound and
serious humiliation, when he sees that wrath is gone our from the Lord; that
man's name is surely recorded in heaven amongst the number of the righteous in
the Book of God; Whereas he that goes on daily to provoke God, and never goes
to pacify God, is far from Phineas disposition, and far from being
righteous in Gods account.

6 It is said of Zachary and Elizabeth, Luke 1* 6. They were both righteous
before God. How did that appear? the text says, They walked in all the
Commandments of God; though no doubt they had many a rub, many a slip, many a
fall, yet still they kept on their way, and walked in all the Commandments of
God. But how did they walk? the text says (...), unblameably, or
unoffensively* sine querel^, non sine peccato (as a Father says) not without
sin, but without blame; not that God could find no fault with them, but that
men could not charge them with any open crime: and herein consisted their
righteousness before God. Hence I note* they that make a conscience to frame
their lives according to Gods Commandments, to keep themselves unspotted of
the world, and to be innocent from the great offense (as David speaks, Psalm.
19.) so that though they cannot be free from sin, will endeavor to live
unoffensively, and to be free from blame; these are surely righteous in Gods
acceptance, though they fall short of that righteousness which Gods
Commandments do require.

7 Lastly (to come home to my text) if ye would know what kind of qualited man
David meant by a righteous man, He expounds himself in the very next words to
my Text, and says* He is ever merciful and lends: There be lenders enough
in the world, such as they be, but they be unmercifull lenders, that lend upon
usury, whose lending is as unmercifull, and for the most part, as unrighteous
as a Robbery. The mercies of the wicked are cruel (says the Scripture)
Viscera impiorum (as it is in the Original) the very bowels of the wicked,
which are the tenderest parts about them; and if their bowels be so cruel, Oh
how cruel are their Bills and Bonds? if there be cruelty in their mercies, Oh
what cruelty is there in their malice? and if their best dealings be so bad, Oh
how bad, how vile are their worst? This unmercifull kind of lending is far
from making or showing a man to be righteous in Gods account. But then there is
another sort of Lenders (which are the Righteous here spoken of) and they are
merciful lenders, that lend according to our Saviors counsel, looking for
nothing again; that is, for nothing but their own again, no advantage, no
gain, no use or their lending; but they lend in mere compassion and mercy to
relieve their poor brethren in their need and necessity. He is ever merciful
and lends, (and mark what follows) His seed is blessed. That which
worldly-minded men think and imagine to be the only means to make their
children poor and miserable, I mean, liberality and sending to the poor,
that the Holy Ghost says is the only means to make them rich and blessed;
and is so far from empoverishing and impairing their estates upon earth, that
it is the only way to draw down Gods blessing out of heaven upon them. As the
Prophet Jeremy told Iahojakin, Ier. 22. 15. So long as thy father did help the
oppressed, and show kindness to the poor and needy, did he not prosper? was
it not well with him? so that (as Chrysostom says) We may not think that God
made rich men only for the profit of the poor; but God made the poor as well
for the profit of the rich; Make ye friends (says our Savior) of the
unrighteous Mammon: as if rich men should one day find, that the poor were
their best friends, when they come to be received into everlasting habitations.

By these, and the like examples and instances, you may easily conceive who
they be that are counted Righteous in Gods acceptance. Therefore as Elisha
spread himself upon the Shunamites child, 2 Reg. 4. 34. and applied his mouth
to the child's mouth, his hands to the child's hands, and his body to the child's
body, till the child began to neeze and to revive; so you shall do well to
apply your selves to these patterns and presidents, to see what correspondence
and agreement there is betwixt (...) lives and theirs; and if your disposition
be the same with (...) your acceptance shall be the same as theirs was; and if
you be partakers of the same righteousness, you shall also be partakers of the
same happiness, (as it follows in the text) you shall never be deserted nor
forsaken of God; I never saw the righteous forsaken* etc.

As for the unrighteous and ungracious that first forsake God, no marvel if
God in Justice forsake them again; according to that anciently received rule*
Deus nunquam deserit hominem, nisi prius ab homine deseratur, God never
forsakes any man, till that man do first forsake his God. But for the
righteous that cleave close unto the Lord, and hold them fast by God (as David
speaks) and will not, if they can possibly, let go their holdfast; believe
it, God will be a steadfast friend to them, and will never fail them nor
forsake them, neither in life nor in death, but while they live, he will be
with them; and when they day, they shall ^e with him.

1 In life, the righteous are never quite forsaken, nor left utterly destitute
of food and provision, and such other comforts which God in his wisdom sees
to be most expedient for them. Thus says the Lord, Esaias 65. 13. Behold my
servants shall eat, but you, (that is, the wicked Idolaters, for to them he
speaks) you shall be hungry; my servants shall drink, but you shall be
thirsty, my servants shall rejoice, but you shall be ashamed: so that what ever
be tide the wicked, when the days of evil come, God will take order for the
righteous, his servants shall be sure to be provided for. In the days of
famine they shall have enough, Psa. 37. 19. that is, enough to content them,
though not enough to enrich them; and if their own means chance to fail them
at home, God will provide them means and friends abroad, as he told Elias, 1
Reg. 17. when he was in great distress at the river Besor, and had neither
meat nor drink to sustain him, The Word of the Lord came unto him, saying,
Arise, get thee to Sareptah which is in Sidon, and tarry there, for behold I
have commanded a widow woman to sustain thee there. Elias knew not the
widow, neither did the widow know him, but God who knew them both had given
her a secret charge and commandment, that she should* sustain his Prophet,
and so she did. Thus will God ((...) than his own shall want) give secret
charges to those we (...) not aware of to sustain and supply us at our need;
as in Paul's case, Act. 17. when the ship was broken in pieces which they
thought should have carried them to land, the Lord cast them and conveyed
them safe to shore, upon such boards and plankes, as they did not, nor durst
not expect: so when those helps fail us which we most relied upon, God will
so provide, that somewhat else shall come in and bring us help, which we never
thought nor dreamt of. Let the consideration of this teach us to take out that
Lesson of the Apostle Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have, for he has said, I
will never leave thee nor forsake thee: If God have said it, we may swear it,
and pawn our lives and souls upon it, that if we live according to his will,
he will never leave us nor forsake us, while there is breath and life within
us.

2 As they are ever sustained in life, so they are never forsaken in death, but
in their last extremity when their life is in extremis labris, God is always
present with them* either to relieve or to receive their souls. (...) Just man
(says David) and (...) the upright, for (whatsoever (...) beginning be, yet)
the end of that man is peace. And again, Follow after righteousness, and do
the thing (...) for that shall bring a man peace at the last.) It was promised
as a blessing to good Jasiah, 2 Reg. 22. ult. that he should be gathered to the
grave in peace; and yet we find in the story that Josiah died in war. How
then was this promise made good? I answer thus: though he died in war
outwardly, yet he died in peace inwardly; his conscience was at peace with God,
and his soul was pacisied and discharged from the trouble of all his sins;
so that whatsoever his death was, yet he died in peace. And such is the
happiness of all the righteous, some die by fevers, some by the sword, some by
the fire, yet all through Gods mercy die in peace. Therefore (says Balaam) Let
me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like unto his: for
though it be decreed in heaven that the Righteous must die as well as the
unrighteous, yet there is as great a difference betwixt the manner of their
dying, as betwixt the passage of the Egyptians and the Israelites through the
same red sea; which was Alijs s^pul^hrum, alijs vehiculum, a sepulcher and a
grave to the one to drown them in perdition; and a chariot to convey the
other, Sicco pede without wetting their feet, to the land of Promise. This is
that which the Apostle calls (...), Heb. 12. 11. the quiet fruit of
righteousness: for though the bud and blossom of Righteousness, I mean the
first beginning of Grace and Christianity, may be troubled and assaulted with
difficulties, and doubts and fears; yet the fruit is always quiet, and the
end is always peace: so that the Righteous while the live, they live to the
Lord; and when they die, they die in the Lord; so both in life and death, the
Lord is theirs, and they are his; they never forsake the Lord, nor does the
Lord ever forsake them. [I never saw the Righteous forsaken.]

Ob. No, may some say? Did David never see the Righteous forsaken, as when he
himself cried out, Psalm. 22 1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, and
art so far from my help? And does not Sion it self which is the Church of
God, and mother of the faithful complain in like manner, Esaias ^9. 14. The
Lord has forsaken me, and my God has forgotten me. And did not our blessed
Savior, who was Righteousness it self, when he was in that bi^ter passion
upon the Cross, and suffered those (...), those unknown and unexpressible
torments, did not he cry out, to the amazement of men, and horror of Angels,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me: How then can David say, He never saw
the righteous forsaken?

Ans. I answer in the words of a Father, Quosdam deserit Deus, quosdam des^rere
videtur; some, God does indeed forsake, as he did Saul and Judas, and such
others, because they had indeed and in earnest forsaken and cast off the Lord:
other some God does but only seem to forsake, as he did David and Sion, and
his own blessed Son our Savior. As when some tender mother will seem to
forsake her child, and go aside, and hide her self, only to try whether
the child will moan after her or no, and then hearing the child's moaning, she
is wont to make the more of it, than she did before. Thus it pleases God many
times to hide himself (as the Prophet speaks, Esaias 45. 15.) Thou O God
hid^st thy self, O God, the Savior of Israel: but it is only to see whether
we will make any moan after him, and lament after the Lord (as the Israelites
did) and groan and grieve for his departure.

Therefore as our Savior, when he heard them say, He whom thou love is
sick, Job. 11. 3. he answered, This sickness is not unto death; so when it
may be said, He whom God loves is forsaken; it may be answered, This
forsaking is not unto death; but when they seem in the sight of others, and in
their own sense and feeling to be most rejected, and least regarded of God,
then is God nearest to their help and succor.

In a word, there is a twofold desertion, the one in sin, the other in
punishment; God may leave the Righteous to either or both of these, that is,
he may suffer them to fall into some grievous sin; or he may suffer them to
lie long under some grievous punishment, and yet not forsake them neither.

1. Desertion is sin, is when God withdraws the assistance of his grace, and
leaves the righteous to fall into some great offense, as he did David and
diverse others: and of Hezekiah it is said, totidem verbis, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31.
That God left him, to try out all that was in his heart; not but that God knew
all before; but Hezekiah did not know so much by himself, nor would not
believe, that he had so bad, so base an heart, till he tried it and found it by
woeful experience; therefore God left him to himself, to pull down the pride
of his heart, and to make him humble and vile in his own eyes. Thus God left
Saint Peter (as you know) but wherefore did he leave him? Our Savior says,
it was but only (...), Luke 22. to sift, and winnow him as wheat. Look then
what winnowing is unto the wheat, a means to cleanse it and purge it from
dross, and dust, and chafe; the same is temptation and sin to the
righteous, a means through Gods mercy and their own repentance, to make them
more clean, more holy, more humble in the sight of God. And for this cause I
suppose, that God, who if he pleased could easily withhold the righteous from
sin, does yet in his wisdom, leave them to themselves and let them fall,
that by falling they may have experience of their infirmity, their infirmity
may draw them to humility, humility brings them home to God, and in God they
have their quietus est, a free and full discharge from all their sins.

2. Desertion in punishment, is when God casts the righteous into tribulation
and anguish, and then seems to leave them, and neglect them, and take no
notice of the burden that lies upon them, as you read, Judge. 6. 13. the Angel
of the Lord came unto Gideon and said, God is with thee, thou mighty man of
valor; Gideon answered, Alas Lord, if the Lord be with us, how then is all
this evil come upon us; that good man could not per^wade himself but that God
had quite forsaken him, when he saw there was so much evil come upon them; he
thought that Gods goodness, and their evils, his mercies and their miseties
had been incompatible and could not have consisted nor stood together. But
Gideon was mistaken in that, and so are the Righteous many a time and often, when
they measure Gods presence by prosperity, and hi^ absence by adversity. For
God is not absent when he punishes* but only seems to withdraw himself and
his favor, that the Righteous might draw nearer, and creep closer to God, as
one that shivers of an Ague draws nearer and creepes closer to the fire.

Thus you have seen the privilege of the Righteous, that notwithstanding
their sins, and notwithstanding their punishments, yet they are never wholly
deserted nor forsaken of the Lord.

I come now to the last part of my Text, and that is, The continuance and
succession of Gods favor and mercy, that it does not rest only upon the
Righteous themselves, but extends and enlarges it self to their posterity,
and to their seed [Nee semen ejus querens panem, nor their seed begging their
bread.]

This shows the gracious descent and propagation of Gods blessing when it
alights. Like the Oil that was powered on Aarons head, it wet not his head and
his beard alone (as David speaks, Psalm. 1 33. 2.) but went down to the
skirts of his clothing; so the mercy and loving-kindnesse of the Lord, does
not rest and remain only upon the head of the family, upon the righteous
parents, but descends and runs down to the utmost of their posterity, and is
derived from them unto their ^eed. Here then come in two Points worthy to be
resolved. First, who are meant by the seed of the Righteous. Secondly, whether
none of the Righteous seed ever ^ame, o^ ever shall come to beggary.

1 The Scripture speaks of a twofold seed, Genesis 3. the seed of the woman,
and the seed of the Serpent; that is, an holy seed, and an unholy seed; by the
one are meant the Generation of the Righteous, by the other, the Generation of
Vipers, (as John Baptist calls such Reprobates, Matthew, Chapter 3. verse 7.
who like Vipers, eat out the very bowels of their Parents, that is, waste
their substance, grieve and gnaw their hearts, and are a means (as Jacob said,
Gene. Chap. 44. verse 31.) to bring down their hoary head with sorrow to the
grave. Now it seems to me, that this S^m^n in my Text, this seed here spoken
of, is principally, if not solely and only meant, and to be understood of the
Holy seed, of the Righteous generation, that is, of such children as are of the
same Religion, and of the same righteousness that their parents were. For if
you mark the Scripture, you shall find, that wicked and ungracious children,
though they be begotten of righteous and religious parents, yet they are not
esteemed, nor accounted as their seed: As you see, Genesis 16. 12. that Ishmael,
that ungracious younster, whose hands was against every man, and every man's
hand against him, He is called the seed of Hagar, not the seed of Abraham,
though he came out of his loins, as well as out of her womb, only because
the promise of blessing was not made to him but to Isaac; who is therefore
called the child of promise: and Romans Chapter 9. verse 7, 8. We have an
express place for to prove, viz. That the children of the Promise only are
counted for the seed; Others, though they come of righteous parents according
to the flesh, yet in Gods account they are not reckoned for their seed. And
therefore Cajetan has a good conceit upon that promise of God to Abraham,
Gene. Chap. 13. verse 15. The land which thou see, I will give unto thee, and
to thy seed for ever. It is (says he) as if the Lord had said, quandu erit
semen tuum, etc. as long as they shall be thy seed, I will give them this
land; therefore when they began to degenerate from Abraham, both in faith and
in good life, and were not his right children (as our Savior told the Jews,
Ioh. 8.) but rather by their wicked manners, the children of the devil; God
was no longer tied to his promise, but did disinherit them of that good land
which they might still have enjoyed, had they continued to be Abraham's seed,
and followed the stepps of his righteousness. The like place we have, Psalm.
132. 11, 12. The Lord swore unto David, of the fruit of thy body will I set
upon thy Throne (that is) one of thy children shall still succeed thee in thy
kingdom; but mark what kind of children God meant; only such as should
keep his Covenant, and do as their father had done, If thy children will
keep my Covenant (says God) and my Testimony as thou have done* their
children also shall sit upon thy Throne for ever-more: so that the promises of
blessing, though they seem to be made promiseuously to all the children of the
righteous, yet are they peculiarly restrained to such only as tread in the
steps of their parents virtues. Therefore in the Jewish Talmud, an ungracious
son is called (Ben ve lo ben) filius and non filius, a son and no son; as
an Eunuch is said to be a man and no man, and a Batt a bird and no bird, and a
Pumise a stone and no stone; so a disobedient^ child, is a child and no
child; a child according to the flesh, no child according to the Spirit; a
child in man's account, no child in Gods. It is storied of Augustus Caesar that
he had three untoward sons, whom he used to term tres vomicas, and tria
carcinomata, his three impostumes, or his three ulcerous cancers; they were
such an eyesore, and an heart-sore unto him* so may all ungracious children be
truly termed, as being no better than ulcers and cancers to those that breed
and bring them up, as Esau was to Rebeccah, Genesis 26. ult.

So that on the one side, whereas it is said, God will visit the sins of the
fathers upon the children; it is meant only of wicked children, such as do
patrizare, and follow the tracke of their parents wickedness, and so draw upon
themselves their just-deserved punishments; so on the contrary, whereas it is
said in my text, that God will never forsake the righteous nor their ^eed; it
is meant only of good children that follow the copy of their Parents
righteousness, and so bring themselves within the compass of their parents
happiness. It is indeed a great happiness to be borne and bred of righteous
parents* for as many a good child smarts for his fathers wickedness, so many
a bad one fares the better for his fathers goodness, as Cham was saved in the
Arc, not for his own, but for his fathers sake. And I do verily believe,
that the more virtuous predecessors a man has, the greater mercies he shall
receive, as the blessings of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all three together were
more availeable for their posterity, than if there had been but one single of
them: therefore Jacob says to Joseph, Genesis 49. 26. The blessings of thy Father
shall be stronger than the blessings of my elders; for he had his fathers
blessing, and all the rest concurring therewith: as on the contrary, I fear,
that the more evil Ancestors one has, the greater punishment he shall
receive, if his own sins be also added to theirs. Therefore let all children
that have good parents, thank God for them, be obedient unto them, and take
heed they do not degenerate from them; for as it little benefits a river to
come from a clear spring, if it self be muddy; or as it little benefits a
blind man to say that his parents could see, or a feeble man, that his parents
were strong; so its little comfort, and less credit to any young person, that
his parents were worthy and virtuous, if he himself be unworthy and vicious:
for this blessing which is here reported of the seed of the righteous, belongs
(you see) of ^ight, to none but to the righteous seed (that is) to such
children as are righteous and religious as their parents have been; for the
other in Gods account a^e none of their seed.

2 The last question is, whether none of the Righteous seed ever did come, or
ever shall come to beggary, because David says, He never saw their seed
quaerentes panem, seeking or begging their bread. I dare not but say, that this
general Rule may admit of some exceptions; for we know that Lazarus was a
Righteous man, for immediately upon his death his soul was conveied by Angels
in Abraham's bosom, and yet he lay begging at Dives gate. So was Bartimeus (no
doubt) a Righteous man, for our Savior gave testimony of him, that his faith
had made him whole* and yet he begged by the highway. So though it do not
seem to hold in singulis in all particular^, yet ut plurimum for the most
part, it is a rare unusual thing to see a righteous body come to beggary.
David in all his time never saw it, and* I believe the oldest man alive cannot
point out many instances. But (I take it) the Prophets meaning may be this;
that he never saw the righteous nor h^s seed forsaken of God, though they did
beg their bread, that is, though they should be driven to that hard exigent
as for a time to beg their bread, yet even in that extremity God would not
forsake them, but be graciously present with them* to sanctify their poverty
unto them, and to give them a comfortable enjoyment of that very bread and
food, which the exigency of their hard condition had constrained them to beg
for, I say, though they should upon some extremity be enforced to make their
wants known, and seek relief, as beggars do, yet their God whom they serve
will never leave them to that scarcity, as to make a trade and profession of
common beggary. As Saint John says in another case, He that is borne of God
cannot sin, (the word is (...)*) cannot be a workman or an Artificer of
sin, he cannot follow his sins, as a workman follows his trade; but some
time or other he shall break off his sins by repentance, and turn to God by
reformation: So he that belongs to God, cannot, shall not beg his bread, so
as to make a trade and profession of beggary, God will surely raise them up
some friends or means to sustain them for the present, and to put them into a
better course for the time to come. For it was one of the greatest curses that
David could banne the enemies of God withal, Psalm. 106. Let their children be
vagabonds and beg their bread, let them seek it also out of desolate places;
where no bread is to be had; now surely God will provide better for the
children of the righteous, then that this should be their lot. Consider the
Ostrit^h (says Job 39. 13. God has taken understanding from her, and she
leaves her young ones behind her, and provides not for them, but forgets
them as if they were not hers: how comes it then that they grow up, and that
the species is not extinguished, but continues? Surely, because, God takes care
for them, and nurseth them up. So the Hind that is in the wilderness, as she
calveth, she brings her young, and casts forth her sorrows, and there
leaves them; who now should provide for them, but only God? So they say of
the Raven, that when her young ones are newly hatched, she flies away and
leaves them destitute of food, and there they lie in the nest croking and
crying, ready to starve for want of sustenance, but that God takes pity upon
them, and creates a worm out of their excrements, which crawleth into their
mouths, and so feeds them, and keeps them alive; therefore it is said in the
Psalm, God feeds the young Ravens that call upon him. Now if God be so
gracious as to feed young Ostritches, and Hindes, and Ravens, much more will
he feed young children, and babes, and infants, that call upon him. My father
and my mother forsook me (says David, Psa. 27.) and the Lord took me up:
In the Original the word is, (Asuph) I was a foundling, like a lost child
that left by the parents and found by the parish: such was David's case (it
should seem) for a time, and the Lord took care of him, and brought him up:
so will God provide that none of the Righteous seed shall be lost or perish for
want of looking to, but he will find them himself, and set some good body or
other to find them out, as he set Pharaohs daughter to find out Moses, and
to nurse him up at her own cost: one way or other God will take order for
their seed and posterity, that they shall never come to utter want and beggary.

What then is to be thought of our common beggars? are they all ungodly? are
they all unrighteous? are they all the seed of Reprobates? I dare not say so;
there may be some that belong to the election of grace among them, else God
forbid. We read in the Gospel, that some were called in out of the
Highways, and from under Hedges to the wedding Dinner of the Lord, which is
doubtless meant of beggars that lay lurking thereabouts; and mark that the
Lord of the Feast says to his servant^ Coge in^rare, compel them to come in;
they came not in alone but by compulsion; and so may our common beggars by
compulsion perhaps be brought to goodness; as Seneca observes that such
licentious persons have sometimes been amended per disciplinam and metum, by
correction and fear, nunquam sponte, never of their own accord. But generally
as they are suffered and ^et alone, they are the very filth and vermin of the
Common wealth, I mean, such as have health and strength, and limbs, and are
able to do good, work and take pains in an honest calling, yet rather choose
to wander up and down the country, and spend their days in a most base
ungodly course of life; they are indeed the very Sodomites of the land,
children of Beliall, without God, without Magistrate, without Minister;
dissolute, disobedient, and reprobate to every good work. And therefore no
marvel that God in his just judgment does let such runnagates continue in
scarceness: for if they would seek their meat at God (as David says the
young Lions do) God would take such order, that they should not always be to
seek for their meat, as now they are; if they did but beg their daily bread
of God (as our Savior teaches us in his prayer) God would surely provide them
bread, that they should need to beg it of none else but him: but as they
restrain their prayers from God, so God restraines his blessing from them, and
lets them like Runnagates continue in scarceness.

But now for the seed of the Righteous, they have a special relation to God,
and God has a special regard to them, as being the lambs of his own flock,
the members of his own Son, and the children of his own adoption; and in that
respect* heaven shall want power, and earth want means, before any of Gods
own children shall want maintenance: let the world be never so hard, corn
never so dear, and their means never so small, that God that multiplied the
widows oil, will add such a blessing to that little which they have, that
like a Spring it shall continually feed them, and keep off beggary from ever
coming on them. Here then is a comfort to all poor pious parents that have
little or nothing to leave their children but only prayers and blessings; God
who is Rich in mercy to all that call upon him, will be a Father to thy
children, a Guardian to thy orphans, and while thou art above with God in
glory, God will be beneath with them in mercy, that they shall never feel such
want nor fall to beggary. It is a blessing promised to the poor, Psalm. 107.
41. That God will make them families like a flock of sheep; which implies
that they shall thrive with a little maintenance, even as sheep grow fat and
gather flesh and fleeces, though the plains and leas they feed on, be but bare
and short.

I know that generally all parents have a natural desire that their children
should prosper and do well, when they themselves be dead and gone. Oh that
Ishmael might live in thy sight (says Abraham to God) Oh that thou would be
pleased to take him into thy favor and mercy, that he may never cast off thee,
nor waste his means, and so come to want and beggary. Now if thou would be
upon a sure ground for thy childrens welfare, labor to become a righteous man
thy self, and to bring thy children to righteousness too, and then there is
no fear, but all shall be as well as thy heart can wish: for it is not wealth
and money, but it is honesty and piety, that must keep a man's seed from want
and beggary; it is not rents and revenewes without, but it is Righteousness
and Religion within, that entailes Gods blessing to thy child, and keeps the
beggar from the door. This then is the only comfort, that though parents
shall not know how their children ^are when themselves are dead and gone (For
Abraham our father is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not, Isa. 62. 16.
(...) the father of the faithful above knows not his own children, till they
come into his bosom, nor how the world goes with them: and Job 14. 24. His
sons come to honor and he knows it not, and they are brought low, but he
perceives it not of them) I say, though the Righteous shall not know what
becomes of their children after that themselves are gathered to their fathers
in peace; yet here is the comfort and the assurance that they have in God, that
if they have brought them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord, and see them
towardly and well-disposed to goodness, they may comfortably depart without
fear of their miscariage, for as God has bin a Father to them, so he will be
to their children, and though they leave them behind on earth they shall find
them again in heaven. At which blessed center God of his mercy grant we may
all one day meet, where we shall never be divided any more, but shall live
together, and love together in eternal solace, in eternal felicity world
without end.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE ORACLE OF GOD.

A SERMON appointed for the Cross, and preached in the Cathedral Church of
St. Paul in London, on the 20. day of December, being the Sunday before
Christmasse, Anno Dom. 1635.

By John Gore Rector of Wenden-lofts in Essex.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes for Thomas Alchorne, and are to be sold at his
shop in S. Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Greene-Dragon. 1636.

Perlegi hanc concionem, cui titulus (Gods Oracle) in qua nihil reperio sanae
fidei, aut bonis moribus contrarium.

Tho. Weeks R. P. Epi. Land. Cap. Domest.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHRISTOPHER CLETHEROVV, Lord Major of the honorable
City of London; whose dignity and prosperity God long continue.
WHat it pleased your Honor to desire, may it please you also to accept (a
poor man's Sermon.) J have no other plea, nor other hopes nor means to find
Grace in your eyes (seeing J am a stranger,) but only for that Grace's sake,
which is the Theme and subject, the pith and marrow of my text. Jn a word
therefore, As Jacob prayed heartily for his sons, when they went to present
themselves before Joseph. Genesis 43. 14. God Almighty give you mercy in the sight
of the man: such i^ my hearty prayer to Almighty God; God Almighty give me
mercy in your sight, and you in his sight. Oratum est.

Your Honors poor servant and suppliant JOHN GORE.

THE ORACLE OF GOD.
2 COR. 12. 9. My Grace is sufficient for thee.
IT is well known that this Sunday, and some of the rest that are gone before,
are commonly called in our Liturgy by the name of Advent-sundayes, as you
would say in plain English Coming Sundays. And wot you why? because therein
we do thankefully celebrate and solemnize the blessed time and memory, of our
Saviors coming to us in the flesh, and his arrival from heaven in this vale
of misery. If any man desire a reason why we celebrate the coming of our
Savior in so solemn, so sacred, and so settled a manner, being gone and past
1600. years ago? Saint John has given me an answer to my hand, Because
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1. 17. When Jesus Christ came from
the bosom of his Father, he came not empty-handed, nor unprovided: but brought
Truth and Grace into the world with him: Truth to direct us to heaven, and
Grace to deliver us from hell: and that is a Congiary that deserves
commemoration to the worlds end. If any man shall yet further inquire, what is
this Grace to us? or what are we the better for the Grace that he brought?
For that my text will resolve you, and make it evidently appear unto you, that
Christ is no niggard of his Grace, neither does he keep it to himself (as
Nabal did his victuals) but does graciously impart it, and mercifully bestow
it, so much upon every one, as he sees in his wisdom to be enough and
sufficient for him. My Grace is sufficient for thee. And let that suffice for
the occasion and choice of my text, that it is not (...), not altogether
unsuitable and impertinent to the time.

Come we now to the text it self, which is nothing else but The Oracle of God,
or Gods own immediate voice, not disdaining to utter it self from Heaven, for
the comfort and satisfaction of his poor distressed Suppliant here on earth.
For thus stood the case.

Our Apostle at this time was punished with two strange and strong afflictions,
the one internal, the other external; the one he terms the Thorn in the
flesh, the other the Messenger of Satan that buffeted him. By that same (...),
Thorn or splinter in the flesh. I suppose he did mean his own
concupiscence, his own corruption and lust, which is as painful and
vexatious to a tender soul, as a thorn in the hand, or a splinter under the
nail, is irksome and grievous to the tender flesh. By that (...), the
messenger, or the angel of Satan, must needs be understood the Devils
temptation; for before that wicked one come himself, he sends his Messenger or
his Angel before him to make way for his entertainment, and as Elisha said of
the King of Isreal's man which was sent to behead him, 2 Reg. 6. 32. Is not the
sound of his Masters feet behind him? so believe it, whenever an evil
temptation, or a temptation to evil does come before, the devil himself who
is the master and maker of it is not far behind. Now mark how this evil
angel used, or rather abused S. Paul; the text says, He fell foul upon him,
and buffeted him; now you know that buffeting is a malicious act joined with
violence, or a violent act joined with malice, and it signifies unto us, what a
malicious mind the Devil bears to Gods especial servants; if he cannot by
fair means entice, and allure, and inveagle them to sin; if God will give
him leave, he will fall upon them by soul means, even (...) to buffet them,
and enforce them in a manner to sin against God and their own souls. Thus
sorely was our poor Apostle haunted, thus cruelly was he handled, both with
venomous corruptions within, and with violent temptations without, so that
neither inwardly, nor outwardly: he could be free or at liberty to enjoy
himself and his God: Whereupon (says the text) He besought the Lord thrice,
that they might depart from him; all his desire, all his prayer to God was, to
be rid of these annoyances. Now mark the answer, and observe the Oracle of
Almighty God.

Just as some skillful Physician, when his Patient in a feavour calls for
drink, gives him a sirrope, or some conserve, and so quenches his thirst in a
better kind, than drink would do: so dealt the Lord with Paul, who was now
in a spiritual fever, and cries out amain, (as it were for drink) that is,
for some present refreshing, and release of his punishment. God seems to take
no notice of that, but quenches his souls thirst in a better kind, gives him
a spiritual conserve, endues him with his Grace, and let that content thee
(says God)* let that suffice thee; for that, even that alone is entirely
enough and sufficient for thee.

My Grace is sufficient for thee. viz. That if after all our prayers, after all
our entreaties and importunities with God for private and particular favors
and mercies; as for health in time of sickness, for ease in time of pain, for
rest and deliverance in the time of trouble and affliction: Though God should
seem to take no notice of us, but deny or withold all these things from us;
if he do but condescend unto us in this one thing (as he did to Saint Paul) if
he do but vouchsafe us his Grace, Summam votorum attigimus, we have as much
as heart can wish, we have that which is in stead, or in liew of all the rest.
As the Jews write of their Mannah, that it had in it Omne delectamentum, all
manner of delightful tastes, and was in stead of Bread, in stead of meat, in
stead of all kinds of dainty fare; so may it be truly affirmed of the Grace
of God, that it is in stead of health, in stead of wealth, in stead of all
other earthly blessings whatsoever: so that as a man that walks in the Sun,
never looks nor regards whether the Moon or the Stars shine or no, because
he has no need of their light: so he that enjoys the light of Gods
countenance, that has the Grace of God to befriend and bestead him, needs care
the less for these inferior commodities, these Bona scabelli (as the Fathers
call them) these goods of Gods Foote-stoole; because, if he have them not, God
will so provide he shall have no need of them. In a word then, if thou were put
to thy choice, as Solomon once was, to ask any one thing at the hands of God,
and to have promise of acceptance, what should that one thing be? would thou
ask for riches, or pleasure, or long life, etc? Alas, all these things thou
may have, (as many a man has had) an^ be never the holyer, never the
happier, never the higher in Gods account and favor: Leave therefore all these
things to Gods disposal and dispensation; let God do with thee for these
things what seems good in his own eyes; but pitch thou thy heart, and the
desire of thy soul upon that Vnicum necessarium, that one thing necessary
(which our Savior speaks of) in comparison whereof all other things in the
world are needles and superfluous, I mean upon the Grace of God, and nothing
else; and in thy daily prayers to Almighty God, let this evermore be the maine
of thy requests. Whatsoever thou denyest me for other things, Lord, grant me
thy Grace, and it is sufficient.

My Grace is sufficient for thee. Grace here spoken of. 2. The Author* or the
owner of this Grace, whose it is, and to whom it does of right belong, and that
is to God, as the next word implies, (...) My Grace. 3. The efficacy or virtue
of this Grace, what it profits, and whereunto it avails, and that's expressed
in the word (...), it is sufficient; and therein I shall show you, how, and
wherein the sufficiency of Gods grace does consist. 4. The Application of this
Grace, or the bringing of it home to the conscience and soul of each believing
Christian, and that I gather out of the last word, (...); that God does not say
in general (...), My Grace is sufficient for all; nor in special (...), My
Grace is sufficient for many; but in particular, (...), My grace is sufficient
for thee, and so for me, and so for every one upon whom God in mercy is pleased
to bestow it, (...), My Grace (says God) is sufficient for thee.

Of these in their oder as briefly and effectually, as God and his good spirit
has enabled me; and first of the meaning of the word (...), or what is meant
by the grace here spoken of.

By the grace of God (in few words) I conceive to be meant nothing else but the
favor and goodwill of God; that which the schoolmen term Complacentiam dei,
the well pleasednesse of God: the same which the scripture calls Lucem
^aciei, the light of Gods countenance. Psalm. 67. 1. Because, as God is said to
frown and bend his brows upon the wicked train, Psalm. 34. so on the
contrary, he seems to smile (as it were) and to look amiably and lovingly,
and lightsomly upon all them that are in grace and favor with him. It is an
usual expression among us to say, such a one is in great grace with the King,
or in great grace at the Court, we mean, he is in great favor there. And it
is a phrase no less usual in scripture, Genesis 6. 8. Noah found grace in the
sight of God, i. e. he found favor in his sight; and God Almighty says of
Moses Exodus ^3. 12. Invenist^ gratiam coram me, Thou have found grace in my
sight* i. d. favor and good acceptance: And so the Angel greets the blessed
Virgin, Luke 1. 28. fear not Mary, Invenisti gratiam, Thou have found grace*
i. e. thou art highly favored of the Lord. So that the grace of God, and the
favor of God are (as Joseph said of Pharaohs dreams) both one and the same.
Now the thing that I muse upon is this, that the grace and favor of God is
thus often, if not always expressed in the Bible, sub termino inveniendi^, under
the name and term of finding: It is not barely said of Noah, and Moses, and
the Virgin Mary, fuerunt, they were in grace and favor with God, but
Invenerunt, they found it: this phrase does certainly seem to imply (as
Oleaster well observes) that the grace and favor of God is sometimes found, as
a poor man finds a treasure, or a bag of gold, non industria, sed casu; not
by any industry or paines*taking for it, but merely by casualty and Gods
providence in it. As when Joseph's brethren found their money in their sackes
mouths, it enriched them, and it ravished them too, with wonder and
admiration, Genesis 42. 28. in like manner, when a poor disconsolate wretch,
shall without all desert, and beyond all expectation, find a sensible
experiment of Gods favorable goodness toward him; how can he choose, but
even bless himself and say, Lord, what am I that such a favor should be cast
upon me! In a word, as Jacob answered his aged father when he questioned him
about the matter of his venison, Genesis 27. 20. How is it that thou have found it
so quickly my son? (says he) Because the Lord thy God brought it to my hand.
In like sort, if any shall seem to question the matter, how it comes to pass
that some one man finds favor and rises to preferment so easily and so
quickly over that some others do, which to our thinking deserves it better, In
promtu ratio, the Lord their God brings it to their hand: when God brings a
blessing to hand, the labor is not long to find it. But that by the way.

I shall here take occasion to resolve you of two questions, which do offer
themselves to your consideration; the first is this, when a man wants the grace
and favor of God, how shall he do to find it? the second is like unto it,
when a man has found Gods grace and favor at his need, how shall he do to
keep it, that he do not forfeit it, nor loose it again? I will answer you
for both, in a word.

Do thou want the grace of God, and feign would find it? Thou must do
two things for it.

First, thou must depreciari teipsum (it is Tertullians word) thou must
disparage and disgrace, thou must humble and abase thy self before the face of
God: for if that be true which our Savior says, John 10. 35. non potest
solvi scriptura, The scripture cannot be broken: then no man living can find
Grace with God, but he that is truly humble (for God resists the proud and
gives grace to the humble) Let one example serve for all, and it is a
seasonable one for this time: that of the blessed Virgin, of whom we spoke
before: the Angel told her (as you have heard) that she was (...) highly or
extraordinarily in favor with God, for indeed she had such grace, as never
mortal woman had the like with God, to be made (...) the Mother of God, and
to bear him in her body, who in his body bare away the sins of all the
world; to give her own Savior suck; it was a favor beyond expression: well,
but whence came this to pass that the Virgin Mary found this favor with God
rather then any other virgin in Israel? no doubt (as our Savior said in
another case) many widows were in Israel in the days of Elizeus, but to none
was the Prophet sent, save only to the widow of Sareptah: so, many virgins
were in Israel in the days of the virgin Mary, yet to none was the Angel sent,
but to her only: And why to her, and not to them? she that knew it best,
gives the reason herself in her Magnificat which we daily read; My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior; for why?
Respexit humilitatem (says she) He has regarded the lowliness of his hand
maiden. It was not then for her loveliness, but it was for her lowliness; not
for her hansomenesse, but for her humbleness that she found such grace and
favor with God above her fellow virgins: Other Virgins there might be that
were as chaste as she, as beautiful as she, and far more wealthy and gay
then she was; but no Virgin in Israel, nor in all the world, was so humble nor
so lowly as she was; and this was the only materia struendae misericordiae,
(if I may so speak) the matter that Gods mercy had to work upon; that, that
only, was the foundation and ground*worke of all the grace and favor that she
found with God. In like manner if thou do desire to be partaker of the same
mercy, to find favor with God as she did, thou must also be partaker of the
same humility, thou must be humble and lowly as she was: do as Benhadads
servants did to Ahab 1. Reg. 20. 31. We have heard (say they) that the Kings of
Israel are merciful kings, let us go then and put sackcloth upon our loins,
and ropes upon our heads, and so humble our selves before him, peradventure we
shall find favor with him, that we shall not die but live: so thou have heard
that the God of Israel is a merciful God, stand not then upon terms of ease
or state if thou love thy self, but go and humble thy self unto him,
prostrate thy self before him, pray and seek his face in the lowliest, the
dejectedst, the devotest manner that possibly thou can express both with thy
body and with thy soul, and (believe it for a truth) if any thing under heaven
bring thee into favor with the God of Heaven, that will do it, deprectari
teipsum, to disparage thy self.

Secondly, thou must Appropriare Christum, thou must appropriate Christ unto
thy self, thou must shroud thy self under thy Saviors wings, thou must sue
to God under his protection and patronage, and as the Herodians Acts 12. made
friendship with Blastus the Kings Chamberlain to help them into favor with
Herod; so must thou make friendship with Jesus Christ, for it is he and only
he that can help thee into grace and favor with thy God. Gratificavit nos in
dilecto (says the Apostle Ephe. 1. 6) He has brought into grace, or he has
made us accepted in his beloved son. Gratiam pro Gratia (says Saint John
elsewhere, Ioh. 1. 16.) We have received Grace for Grace; that is, for the
grace and favor that Christ has with God, we also are received into grace
and favor with him: For otherwise, as Elisha told the King of Israel. 2. Reg.
3. 14. As the Lord lives were it not that I regard the presence of Iehosaphat,
I would not look toward thee, nor see thee: so stands our case with God, we
are of our selves such vile bodies (as the Apostle rightly terms us (who shall
change our vile bodies) I mean sofoule and so full of corruption and lust and
sin, so odious and abominable in the holy eyes of God; that as the Lord
lives, were it not that God does regard the person, the presence and the
prayers of Jesus Christ our true Iehosaphat he would not look to us nor see
us: but that (as he says himself,) This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well-pleased. (There come we into favor) and mark, that he does not say,
This is my beloved son which pleases me well, but in whom I am
well-pleased; which intimates a further matter unto us; namely, that our
blessed Savior does not only please God his father, for his own part, but
that God in him, and for his sake is well-pleased even with them that are in
themselves (as the Prophet speaks) even vessels wherein there is no pleasure.
Ier. 22. 28. Thou therefore that desire to get into favor with thy God,
flatter not thy self in thy own eyes, think not that God will accept thee
for thy own person, or for any other personal qualities or abilities that are
in thee; but as Jacob shrouded himself under the garments of his elder
brother, and by that means got him the blessing of his father; so do thou
shroud thy self under the garments of thy elder brother in Heaven; I mean, as
the Apostle speaks, Labor to be found of God, not having on thy own
righteousness, but the righteousness of Christ by faith: Say as Tertullian
does, Mihi vendico Christum, mihi defendo Iesum; claim thou thy part, stand
thou for thy right in Jesus Christ; and as thou art a Protestant, so make this
protestation before God and the world, that thou hopest for grace and mercy,
not by any merits or deserts of thy own, but merely by the merits, and by the
spirit, by the death, and by the blood of Jesus Christ. This is another
infallible way for a man to find the grace and favor of God, that wants it,
Appropriare Christum, to get an interest into Gods beloved Son, our dear and
precious Savior.

2. Now for the second question; Have thou found the favor of God, and feign
would keep it? Thou must (...) (it is the Apostles own word, Gal. 2. 14.)
Thou must walk with a right foot to God*ward; or as John Baptist expresses
it in other terms, thou must Rectas facere semitas tuas, Make thy paths
straight; the meaning is, Thou must bind thy self to the good behavior unto
God, thou must resolve against sin and evil, and set thy self constantly,
carefully, sincerely to walk with God, so far forth as frailty shall permit
thee, so that though there fall out many intercurrent infirmities in the course
of thy life, for a man may, etiam in bono itinere pulverem ^olligere, gather
dust and soil even in a good way, yet let it be the general drift and desire
of thy soul, in nothing willingly to sin against God, but in every thing to
please him, and to approve thy self unto him: which if thou do, see what
will follow upon it, Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord will give Grace and Glory, and no
good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly with him. The
Scripture says of Enoch, that he was Raptus a facie malitiae, snatched (as it
were) out of this wicked world, as a brand is snatched out of the fire and saved
from burning; that is, He was translated alive from earth into Heaven, and
never felt, nor tasted of death: This (you will say) was an extraordinary
favor of God, but what might be the reason of it? Moses tells us, Genesis 5. 24.
it was because He walked with God; the Apostle commenting upon it, Heb. 11. 5.
says, it was because He pleased God, (...), (is the word) which signifies, He
gave God content, or kept Gods favor and good will; so then, the way to keep
Gods favor and good will, is to please God, and give him content; and the way
to do that, is to walk with God as (...) did. But what does Moses mean by
(...) God, how may that be done? Ans^^ Generally, A man may then be said to
walk with God, when he leads his life in such a way as God does best accept,
in the way of of godliness and honesty, in the way of temperance and sobriety,
in the way of diligence and industry; when a man has mind on God in all his
ways, and desires Gods protection and conduct to guide his feet into the way
of peace. This is, in a general sense and acceptance to walk with God more
particularly; A man is then said in proper sense to walk with God, when he
walks with none else but God; as Isaac did, when he sequestered himself, and
went out alone into the fields to meditate and to pray, Genesis 40. 69. (The word
(Suach) signifies both, then went he out to walk with God: And indeed there
is no such time for a man to converse with God, and (as the phrase is in Job)
to acquaint himself with the Lord, as when he is solitary, private, and alone:
If any thing grieve a man, or lie heavy upon his conscience, when he is Alone,
he may freely disburden his heart into the bosom of God. If a man have faulted
any way, or done amiss for want of good take-heed, when he is Alone, he may
freely and fully bewail and bemone, and even beshrew and shrive himself unto
the Lord his God. If a man want any good thing that's requisite and necessary
either for the body or the soul, when he is Alone, he has free and full
opportunity to beg and to entreat it, to win and to obtain it at the hand of
God. No such time for a man to reconcile himself, and to make his own
atonement and his peace with God, as when he is Alone. In a word then, if thou
do desire to keep the favor of the Lord, and to abide in his grace and his
good will; do as Isaac did, take one turn with thy God every day thou
risest; steal away from thy earthly occasions (as our Savior stole away from
his earthly Parents) to do the business of thy heavenly Father, or as the
Apostles word, 2 Pet. 3. 9. (...) to retire and repent. Let no day pass thee
without some commerce and conference with thy God; and (believe it) if there
be any means in the world to fasten and rivet the favor of God unto thy
soul, that will do it, (...) to walk aright with God.

I have done with the first general part of my text concerning the meaning of
the word (...), or what is meant by the Grace here spoken of: Come we now to
the second, and that is the Author and Owner of this Grace, expressed in the next
word ((...)) God claims it at his own peculiar, and calls it by a term of
propriety, My Grace, to show that none has to do with the dispensing of that
but himself alone.

Now if you mark the course of Scripture, you shall observe that there is not
any thing which belongs to man, but in one place or other God claims it for
his own. Though he has given the earth to the Children of men, yet has he
not alienated it from himself, but that still, The Earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof: whatsoever fullness the earth affords us, whether it be
Fields full of Corn, Folds full of Sheep, Orchards full of Fruit, Tables full
of Meat, etc. all these fulnesses are the Lords, who opens his hand, and
fills all things living with ple^teousnesse. And not only the earth in
general and the fullness thereof, but the very Cattle and Beasts of the
earth, are all the Lords too: Psalm. 50. 10. All the Beasts of the Forest are
mine (says God) and so are the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. The Beasts of
the Forest (we know) are ferae naturae, of a wild unruly nature, they know no
Master, acknowledge no owner, are in subjection to no keeper; yet because the
Lord takes care of them, gives them their being, and provides them their food,
therefore does he justly claim them for his own, and says, (All the Beasts
of the Forest ar e mine) and so are all the Cattle upon a thousand hills;
whether they be sheep or goats; Neat or Foul; there is no man living has
any right unto them upon earth, but he holds it in capite, and has his right
from the God of Heaven.

Not only so; but the very Corn in our Barnes, the Wine in our Cellers, the
Wool upon our Sheep backs, the Lord claims for his own, as ye may see,
Hos. 2. 8, 9. For God bestows his blessings, as the Sun does his beams, in
such a manner, as that they depend still upon himself after he has bestowed
them. Nay to come nearer yet, the very money that is in our purses or coffers,
whether we keep it close to hatch a purchase; or put it out, as the Lion puts
out his claw to rend and gripe the poor needy borrower; wheresoever God finds
it, he claims it for his own, Hag. 2. 8. The Silver and the Gold is mine; and
as little conscience as men make of their gains, they must one day be
accountable to the Lord, How they got it, how they used it, and how they wasted
it. All this is to let us understand to whom we are beholden for our Lands,
for our goods, and for whatsoever else we inherit or enjoy in this world, even
to the Father of lights, (as James terms him, Iam. 1. 17) from whom both
(...) and (...) both gifts and goods, and all descend unto us; therefore as in
the sacrifices of old, whosoever had the flesh, God had the fat; so whosoever
has the goods of this world, let God have the glory, for his they are, and
from him we have and hold them.

But there is one thing in my text, for which we are more beholding to God,
then for all the rest; and that is for His Grace, other things though they come
originally from God, yet they come mediately by the means of other
instruments, by Parents or friends, or Benefactors; but Grace is a thing that
comes solely, and only, and immediately from God; as there was no corn to be
had in Egypt, but from the hand of Joseph, so no grace to be had on earth, but
from the hand of God: He is the God of all Grace (as Saint Peter truly styles
him) there is no grace whatsoever that is wanting in man, but there is a
gracious supply to be had in God, which made David (as it were) in a rapture to
cry out and say, Oh taste and see how gracious the Lord is, Psalm. 34. 8. First
taste, and then see; because as a man can never truly tell the sweetness of
honey, till he have tasted it first; so can he never truly see nor perceive
nor understand how gracious a God the God of Heaven is, till he have first had
a taste of Gods grace, and an experience of Gods favor in himself and for his
own soul. Taste then and see how gracious the Lord is: Gracious in his Throne,
for it is the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16. gracious in his spirit, for it is
The spirit of Grace. Zach. 12. 10. Gracious in his Word, for it is the Word of
Grace. Acts 20. 30. and above all, gracious in himself, for He is the God of
Grace: yea, (...) The God of all Grace. 1. Pet. 5. 10. And therefore do thou
desire wisdom? He is the God of that Grace; do thou want patience? he is
the God of that too; do thou stand in need of Faith, or Hope, or Charity? he
is the God of all these: Oh what a gracicious God do we serve, and what
graceless beasts we are if we serve him not, seeing he has grace sufficient
for all his servants, My Grace (says God) is sufficient for thee.

In a word then, for as much as all Grace is of God, that He, and none but He,
has the disposal and the dispensation of it to whom he pleases; take (I
beseech you) into your consideration these brief advertisements following.

1. N^ deficias, do not fail of it; It is the Apostles own caveat. Heb. 12.
15. Look diligently least any man fail of the Grace of God. God for his part
is so gracious, that he denies his grace to none but offers it, and (I may say)
gives it to every one that will but ask and accept it, as the Scripture says
of Araunah, 2. Sam. 24. 23. when he offered King David his oxen for a
sacrifice, and his threshing instruments for wood to burn them; the text
says, All these things did Araunah as a King give unto the King: whereas we
know, he did not give them, because David would not accept of them, but his
will was to have given them, and that the holy Ghost accounts as a gift, and so
records it. In like sort, God offers his grace in the Word and Sacraments,
his will is graciously and freely to bestow it, if sinful men were but
like*minded to receive it, and to make themselves capable of so great a mercy
by desiring it. It was Gods own proposition to his own son, Psalm. 2. 8.
postulaa me, etc. desire of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thy
inheritance, etc. If he that was sole heir of Heaven and earth haeres ex toto
ass, as the Romans used to style them) could no otherwise come by his
inheritance but by way of petition to desire it before he had it, much more so
is it with us; where no desire it, look for no gift, no prayer, no grace. We
see in Esaias, God makes a gracious promise to his people that he would put away
all their sins, and take them all into his favor as though they had never
sinned; but mark the condition, for all these things I willbe sought unto
(says God.) So though God offer his grace to men, he will not force it upon
them against their wills, he will have them sue for it, he will have them
desire it, or they may thank themselves if they go to hell without it; and
God may justly complain of them, as David did of Naball. 1. Sam. 25. 21. All
is in vain that I have done for these men. Seeing then there is no
backwardness in God to make denial of his grace, but he is willing to bestow
it upon all that are desirous to embrace it; oh be not wanting to thy own
mercy, ne deficias, do not fail of it.

2. Seeing that grace is the Lords, ne superbias, be not proud of it, do not
(...) (as Saint James his word is, cap. 3. 5.) do not magnifically lift up thy
self above thy brethren whose graces are not so eminent as thine: but rather
as the ears of corn, and the bows of trees, the more they are laden with
fruit, the lower they hang to the earth: so the more God has laden thee with
his graces and favors, be thou so much the more lowly in thy own eyes; and
think not scorn to do as thy God do, who though his Glory be above the
heavens (says David, Psalm. 113. ^.) yet he does Abase himself to behold the
things that are in the earth; and as the more direct the Sun is over us, the
shorter and lesser is the shadow: so the more that Gods grace is over thee, and
in thee, the lesser let the shadow of pride be seen to come from thee: for
consider (says the Apostle) what have thou that thou have uot received? or
what is that thou can properly call thine own, but mendacium and peccatum*
lying and sin? as our Savior said of the devil John 8. when he speaks a
lie, he speaks de suo, of his own, God never put that into him: so for thy
sins thou must thank thy self, or rather indeed beshrewe and blame thy
self, for they are thy own; but if thou have any grace or any virtue in thee,
thank God for that; for it is not thine* it is the Lords: seeing then thou art
but a Tributary to God, and have nothing that good is, but what thou art
beholding, and must be countable to the Lord for it, ne superbias, be not proud
of it.

3. Seeing Grace is the Lord to bestow on whom he pleases, ne invideas, do
not envy it, let not thine eye be evil because God is good, nor think the
worse of another man because God is better to him then unto thee: for Gods
grace is his own, he may give it to whom he will. When God shall take of his
grace, and of his good spirit, (as Samuel said to Saul) shall give it to a
neighbor of thine that is better then thou: what cause have thou to be envious
at this? and not rather to humble thy self, and think that (as Daniel told
the king. cap. 5. 27.) God has weighed thee in a balance, and found thee,
minus habens, wanting to God and to thy self, and therefore has justly with
holden his favor from thee, and given it to one that will use it better, for
his glory, and for the Churches good, far be it from any child of God to
Cherish in his breast the spawne of that old serpent the devil; for envy is no
better; (as the learned have well observed) there is so near a resemblance
betwixt an envious man and the devil, that in the book of God the one is
taken for the other; so the devil is called (...)* an envious man (Mat. 13.
28.)* and an envious man is called (...) a devil (John 6. 70.) How far better
would it become us in this respect to be (...) like the Angels of heaven* who
now at Christmas time, when they saw that our Savior would in no wise take
their nature which was far better then ours; but took our nature upon him,
which was far worse then theirs, and which was most of all, and would have
gone most against our stomachs, commanded them to worship it, Heb. 1. 6. they
were so far from envying, or taking offense at this; (as that elder brother
did in the Gospel, when the younger was received to grace after his riotous
course) that even then they sung an Anthem for the joy of our happiness, and
even to this day; (Saint Peter tells us 1. Pet. 1. 12.) they do (...) stoop
down (as it were) in duty and love, to honor the mystery of Christ's
incarnation, and to admire the grace and favor of God to mankind: In a word
then, seeing that the Honoring of Gods grace wheresoever it lights, is a
quality so Angelical; and the contrary so diabolical, let it be thy practice
evermore to reverence him that has it, to judge thy self unworthy of it,
seek it in Gods name, and get to be partaker in it, but in any case ne
invideas, do not envy it.

4. Seeing that grace proceeds from so holy a fountain as is the Lord, ne
Abutaris, do not abuse it, do not vitiate nor stain it with sin, as Lot
entreated the men of Sodom, Genesis 19. 8. that they would not abuse the Angels
of God, seeing they were come to shelter themselves under the shadow of his
r^ofe; so let me entreat you all in the name of Christ, that you would not
abuse the graces of God, seeing they are come from heaven to take shelter and
harbor in your breasts and bosoms. The Apostle speaks of some (Iud. 4.) that
turn the grace of God into wantonness; and that is a woeful kind of Alchymie
(as one says singularly well) would we not esteem that man prodigally foolish
and mad, that would spend all his time, all his substance, and all his industry
to find out a perverse Philosophers stone, that should turn all the gold it
touched into lead and dross: even such are they that pervert the grace of God,
and turn it into wantonness, into lasciviousnes, into all manner of
scurrility and deboistnesse, and never lin, till they have made a poison of an
Antidote, and baned themselves with that which would have been their bliss,
lucerna dei in spiritu hominis (says Solomon, Pro. 20. 27.) The spirit of a
man is the candle of the Lord; it implies, that a man naturally walks in
darkness, which is full of error, and full ofterrour, till God in mercy set
up a candle in his soul, (I mean) endues him with knowledge and grace from
heaven, that he may show him the path of life, and to avoid the snares of
death.

Now you know, that a candle naturally burns upwards, if you take it and turn
it the wrong way, and hold it downwards, is dies and goes out alone, so fares
it with (...) Graces and gifts of God, as Wit and Wisdom, Knowledge and
Learning, and all these are the candles of the Lord, and are purposely given us
to light us up to heavenward; but if we take Gods candles and hold them
downward, turn them the wrong way, and apply and abuse them to sin; it is
much to be feared, the light of God will go out, and thou shall be left at
the length in a place of utter darkness. Therefore as thou tenderest the
favor and goodwill of God, and the eternal welfare of thy own soul, deal
not with the graces of God, as Iehu dealt with Iehorams messengers 2. Reg. 9.
do not turn them behind thee, and make them serve against their own masters;
but remember that if the sons of Jacob would not endure to have their sister
abused (Genesis 24. vlt.) how do thou think thy God will endure to have his
grace abused, and to be prostituted to every sin: In a word, as Ruben said to
his distressed brethren, (Genesis 42. 22.) did not I speak unto you saying, Sin
against the child, and ye would not hear? Oh be not you like them, monitoribus
asperi, so carlesse and regardlesse of divine admonition; but remember that you
have been spoken unto, that you have been warned of God not to sin against
your own souls in this too common kind, but if the Lord have betrusted you
with his grace, labor to cherish it, and (as the Apostles word is (...) 2.
Tim. 1. 6.) to blow it or stir it up, as we do a dying fire, to kindle and
quicken it by the use of good means, but in any case, ne abutaris, abuse it
not.

5. Lastly, seeing thou have to do with the grace and favor of God, ne
diffides, do not distrust it, do not make any doubt or question of it but it
will bestead thee, and befriend thee, and be firm and sure unto thee at any
time of need. It is the Apostles own advertisement. 1. Pet. 1. 13. (...),
trust perfectly on the grace that is revealed and brought into the world by
Jesus Christ. It is a thing that a man may lean his whole weight upon, and
venture his whole estate upon, and paune his life and soul upon, the
certainety, the truth, and the infallibility of Gods heavenly grace to all that
make their peace, and put their trust in him. Fear not Mary (said the blessed
Angel to the blessed Virgin) for thou have found favor with God: as if he had
said, Let them fear that are out of Gods favor, let them be distrustful that
are wicked and deceitful, that make no conscience of their ways, but live in
the displeasure of an angry God; paveant illi, let them fear; but noli tu,
fear not thou, be thou stead fast and unmovable in thy affiance to God, for
why? Invenisti gratiam, thou have found favor with him, in whose favor is
life, and whose grace will be thy guide unto the day of death. In a word then,
(to close up this point) As I said before, so I say it over again, (...), gird
up the loyues of your minds, and trust perfectly to the Grace of God; do it
not in any wavering, or timorous, or unconfident manner* as if God were like
the Poets ^enedos; Stat^o malesida carinis, a trustles Anchor-hold to the
seabeaten travailer; or like those deceitful Jews, (Ioh. ^. 24.) to whom our
Savior durst not commit himself, though they seemed to believe in his name.
Oh let not thy heart entertain the least suspicion the least jealousy of the
faithfulness and fidelity of thy God; but try him by thy prayers, and trust
him by thy faith, and urge him with this Text that now is preached unto thee,
(as S. Austin says his mother Monica did Chyrographa tua ingerebat tibi, Lord
(says he) she urged thee with thy own handwriting) tell him but how hard
the world goes with thee, and then say ere God have done with thee if thou do
not find his Grace to be sufficient for thee. And so I am come in the third
place to show you the efficacy and virtue of the Grace of God, how and wherein
the sufficiency thereof does consist, (...) (says the Text) My Grace is
sufficient.

The principal things whereunto the Grace of God (and besides Gods Grace,
nothing else under heaven) is available or sufficient, are these that follow.

1. Ad Condonandum, to pardon and forgive us all our sins, which would be
the bane and destruction of all our souls. Grande est barathrum peccatorum
meorum (says a Father) sed mayor est Abyssus misericordiae dei: Great is the
gulf and whirlepoole of my sins, but greater and deeper is the bottomless
sea of Gods Grace and mercy: see that place, Romans 5. 20. where sin abounded,
Grace did much more abound: Have thou abundance of sins, let not that
disharten thee, God has abundance of Grace; if thy sins be great, his Grace
is greater than thy sins, and far more sufficient to justify, than all thy
sins are to condemn thy soul. Only ne desis, be not thou wanting to God in
thy prayers and repentance, and his Grace shall never be wanting to thee in
thy pardon and forgiveness. What a golden sentence is that of S. Chrysostom,
(...); Thou do not, thou can not so much desire to have thy sins forgiven
thee, as God does desire to forgive thy sins unto thee. I forgave thee all
thy debt, because thou desiredst me, (said that gracious Lord to his ungracious
servant, Mat. 18. 32.) intimating unto us, that if God do not forgive us ous
debts, if he do not pardon and remit our sins; we may thank our selves, the
fault is our own, because we do not desire him, for if we desired him, he
would do it. In a word then, As our Savior asked the ^riple, John 5. 6. Will thou be made whole? so, will thou be made holy and clean, and fit for
absolution from God? do thou desire in sincerity and truth to have thy sins
remitted, and thy soul absolved by the blood and death of Jesus Christ? to
have all thy misdeeds expunged and blotted out, that they may be as if they had
nev^^ been? Then take the Prophet Esaies counsel (Esaias 43. 25, 26.) put God
in remembrance of these things: (it is a pregnant place, I pray read it and
remember it) I even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins: (there is a gracious promise; but mark
the condition in the next immediate words) put me in remembrance (says God)
and I will do it, and not otherwise: for though God remember all our sins,
and can tell them better than our own souls; yet he does not remember them to
our comfort, but rather to our confusion, unless we tell him and put him in
remembrance of them: so that the only way to put our sins out of Gods
remembrance, is to put them into his remembrance; the only way to make God
forget them is daily and hourly to declare them and put him in mind of them.
If therefore thou can not be so good as thou would, be not ashamed, be not
afraid to tell God how evil thou art; tell him how ungodly, how unthankefull,
how unprofitable a servant thou have been unto him, and desire God to mend
thee, and make thee such a one as he would have thee: And as Joseph of
Arimathea went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus; so go thou to God and
beg the Spirit of Jesus; even that spirit of Grace and Supplication (which
the Prophet speaks of, Zach. 12. 10.) which will come down from heaven and
bring into thy soul, first Supplications to prepare thee; secondly, Grace to
assure thee of the free and full forgiveness of all thy sins: And then let
thy sins be what they will be, sins of death, sins of blood, sins of
hell; if thou can find in thy heart to pray, God will find in his heart to
pardon, for his Grace is sufficient to do it. That's the first.

2. The second thing whereto the sufficiency of Gods Grace does belong, is
Adconsolandum to comfort those sad and heavy hearts that can no other way be
comforted. I should have fainted (says David, Psalm. 27. 13.) for all my
worldly comforts, but that I steadfastly believed, to see the Lords good grace
in the land of living, (that is) to see it before he dyed; therefore we read
1. Sam. 30. 6. when he was in great distress, had neither house nor home to
shelter him, neither wife, nor child, nor friend be any to comfort to him, but
his own very soldiers began to takle of stoning him; Then (says the text)
David comforted himself in the Lord his God. Hear this thou poor
disconsolate man, that art (as thy Savior was said to be) (...) sad round
about; thou that look into thy purse, and there is no comfort, money is
gone; that look into thy cubbord and there is no comfort, provision is gone;
that look into thy barn and storehouse, and there is no comfort, corn and
wares are gone; that look in thy heart, and there is no comfort,
cheerfulness and joy is gone: Then look up to God, and there is comfort to
be had; if there be any water, it is in the sea; if there be any light, it
is in the sun; if there be any comfort, it is in God. Therefore the Apostle
justly calls him, The God of all consolation, 2. Cor. 1. because when all
other comforts fail, theres's comfort to be found in God. For believe this
for a truth, there is no man's case, no man's estate, no man's soul is desperate
to God; but when they are at the lowest ebb, at the rest stay, at the most
forlorn hope; then does God speak peace unto their souls, then does he draw
out those same vbera consolationes, those breasts or dugges of consolation
(which the Prophet speaks of, Esaias 66. 11.) and drops down that same (...)
that sincere milk of heavenly comfort, to revive the spirit of the humble, and
to give life to them that are of a contrite heart. The Hebrews observe that
one and the same word (nakam) signifies, first to repent, and then to comfort;
and it may be well applied to this purpose: that true comfort belongs to none
but such are truly penitent: So our Savior tells us that the holy Ghost whom
he calls the comforter when he comes, the first thing he will do, is to
convince the world of sin; that is, first put men quite out of comfort in
themselves, then put them into comfort by their Savior. In a word then,
forasmuch as comfort cannot be had without repentance, nor repentance be
endured without comfort, nor either of these be attained without God; it
remains, that as the daughter of Caleb besought her earthly father (Iud. 1.)
so we beseech our heavenly Father, to give us the springs above, as well as the
springs beneath; I mean, that Irriguum superius, the spring of grace and
comfort from above, as well as that Irriguum inserius, the spring of sorrow and
repentance from beneath: and then let our discomforts and discontents be what
they will, we shall have grace sufficient from God to countervaile them al,
and as Philip said to our Savior, John 14. 8. Lord show us the father and it
suffices us; so though our sins confound us, and our consciences condemn
us, Lord show u^ thy favor, as it is sufficient for us.

3. The third is Ad sanandum, His Grace is sufficient to cure and heal us of
all those (...) those bodily ailements and infirmities which God for sin does
inflict upon us, (...) from those scourges and rods (as the holy Ghost
terms sore diseases, Luc. 7. 21.) for indeed they are the very rods which God
uses to chasten and correct us for our follies: I say, there is no rod so
sharp, no disease so sore, but Gods Grace is sufficient to heal it and to
take it off. I am Ropeca (says God Exodus 15. penult.) I am thy Physician, or I
am the Lord that heals thee: and if God be the Physician, his Grace is the
Physic, for whosoever be the instrument of our health, God is the Author,
his Grace is it that does the cure. Therefore in common speech, when any
outward malady does befall us, whereof we know no second cause; we use to say
(and we say well) that it came by the Grace of God: now if thou beleevest that
it came by Gods Grace, believe this also that by the same Grace it shall (in
Gods good time) be remedied, and removed and done away, for (as S. James says
in another case) God gives (...), Cap. 4. 6. He gives more grace, and shows
more favor, to heal those that are sick and broken in heart, than to break
their hearts, with sickness that were well and whole; both are from the same
Grace, but the one more especially the other.

But then the maine point for satisfaction will be this: seeing it is in the
power of Gods Grace to cure all infirmities, and that in a moment, with a
word-speaking, (as the Centurion said, Speak but the word, and my servant
shall be whole.) Why will God suffer so many of his own Patients, that have no
Physician but himself, to lie languishing so long under his own hand, and
seem to take no notice of their miseies? The best answer I can give, is that
of our Savior to his Mother, John 2. 4. Nondum venit hora, My hour is not yet
come; for you must conceive there are two kinds of hours; we have our hour,
and God has his Hour. As soon as we begin to sicken, that we feel but any
pain, or find the want of any ease; then is our hour to be healed, then do
we cry out, as it is fit we should, Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak,
Lord heal me for my bones are vexed, Psalm. 6. 2. But God has another hour,
and that you shall find, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. When my people humble themselves, and
pray and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, (that is, when they
are bettered and amended by my afflictions) Then (says God) will I hear in
Heaven, and have mercy upon them, and heal their Land. God complains of that
people in many places, that their hearts were waxen fat, that they would not
see with their eyes, nor hear with their ears, nor understand with their
hearts, ne convertantur ut sanem, Mat. 13. 15. lest they should be converted,
and I should heal them. So that the time of our conversion is Gods
healingtime; First, labor to be converted, and then look to be healed, and
not before. So Acts 3. 19. Repent and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out, and then (and never till then) look for a Tempus refrigerij, a
time of refreshing from the presence of the Lord. We read, Numb. 12. 14. When
Myriam was stricken with leprosy, Moses was importunate with God to heal
presently out of hand; Heal her now O Lord, I beseech thee; Heal her now. No
(says God) I will not heal her yet, she shall stay the time that I have
determined upon her, for if her Father had but spit in her face, should she not
have been ashamed and kept in for seven days, etc. So persuade your selves of
this, that there is a (...) an appointed time that God has set down with
himself in heaven, when and wherein his mercy shall appear on earth for our
recovery; and till that time we must wait, (as David says, Psalm. 123. 2. As
the eyes of a servant wait on the hand of their masters, and the eyes of a
maiden on the hand of her mistress, so do our eyes wait upon the Lord our
God, until that he have mercy upon us. Mark that same donec misereatur,
until he have mercy: that is, though God show thee not mercy, this day, nor
to morrow, nor the next day, may be, not till a long time after; yet, let not
thy heart be dismayed, but let thy soul truly wait upon God, until he show
thee mercy, let him show it when he will. In the mean time know, thou art
under the hands of a wise and gracious God, who measures every dram ofsorrow
that thou feel, who will not only be about thy bed, but will ever make all
thy bed in thy sickness, and will so establish and under-prop thee with his
Grace; that though thy body lie in pain, thy soul shall lie at ease; though
thy outward man consume and melt away for very heaviness, yet that same
Interior cordis homo, (as Saint Peter speaks) the inner man of thy heart shall
be so strengthened with might, and armed with patience, and guarded with
peace, that neither pains of death, nor the powers of Hell shall ever be able
to prevail against thee. In a word, if ever it shall please God to cast thee
down upon that same Lectum languoris, that bed of languishing, which David
speaks of, Psalm. 41. 4. (for that we all must make account of) though we now
lie and laze upon our beds, the time may come that we shall lie and languish
on our beds, wishing (as they did in Deuteronomy,) when it is morning, would God
it were evening, and when it is evening, would God it were morning. If ever such
a doleful time should happen to thee, I pray God of his mercy look graciously
upon thee, and say unto thy bleeding soul, as he did once to that forlorn
Infant, Ezech. 16. 6. Dixi in sanguinibus, etc. when thou wast in thy blood, I
said unto thee, live; yea, I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood, live;
If God do but say thou shall live, though thou were in thy blood, though thou
were in thy grave, his word shall fetch thee, for his Grace (if it stand with
his glory) is sufficient to heal thee.

4. The last and chiefest thing whereunto the Grace of God, and nothing else
but Gods Grace, is sufficient, is Ad salvandum, to save the soul of every one
that has it. The Apostle calls it, The Grace that brings salvation, ((...),
Tit. 2. 11.) for as the wickedness of man brings destruction, so the Grace
of God brings salvation to every soul that entertaines it. Saint Paul is
direct, Ephesians. 2. 5. By Grace ye are saved; whether it be meant of the Grace
of God within us, which our Savior compares to Salt, Mark 9. 50. (Habete
salem in vobis, etc. have Salt in your selves, and peace with one another)
because as salt preserves the flesh, so does Grace preserve the spirit from
corruption and rottenness in sin: or whether it be meant of the Grace of God
that is over and above us, I mean, his favor and loving kindness which
lightneth upon us from Heaven; (as we pray in our Liturgy, let thy mercy
lighten upon us, as our trust is in thee,) Take it either way, it holds good
and true; for by the one we are prepared for salvation, by the other salvation
is prepared for us; the Grace of God within us prepares us for salvation; the
Grace of God over us prepares salvation for us: so both ways it is our
happiness, By Grace to be saved. It was Gods merciful promise, Deuteronomy. 11. 12.
Mine eyes shall be upon this Land from the beginning of the year, to the end
thereof; such is Gods goodness where he bestows his Grace, such a care has
God of their souls, that his eye is upon them from the beginning of their
conversion, to the end of their salvation: and as his eye is upon them to watch
over them, so his hand is with them to con^uct them in the right way of
pleasing God, and of saving their own souls, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. All his Saints are
in thy hand: as a Father leads his child, so does God lead his Saints by his
Grace, and by his good Spirit, from all things prejudicial, to all things
profitable, to his service and their own salvation. (To conclude this point)
because (as the Schoolmen say well) Ad singulos actus desideratur Gratia, a
man has need of Grace to every action that he takes in hand, and that he can
do nothing well without it; let us all desire of God (as it is in the Collect)
That his special Grace may ever more prevent and follow us, first, that God
would prevent us with his Grace, to put into our hearts good motions, good
thoughts, and good desires; and secondly, that it may follow us too, (as the
water of the Rock followed the Camp of the Israelites to the Land of Promise,
1 Cor. 10. 4.) so that Gods Grace may follow, accompany and go along with us
in this world; and never leave us, never forsake us till it has brought us to
the end of our Faith, which is the salvation of our souls, according to that,
Psalm. 109. ult. Dominus ad dextram, etc. the Lord is at the right hand of the
poor, to save him from all them that would condemn his soul, where note that
he does not say, the Lord is at their left hand (which is as I may term it)
the lazy hand, to save men in their negligent and idle courses. But he is at
their right hand (which is the working hand) to save all them that work for
their salvation, and carefully use the means to save themselves: which thing
if thou make a conscience to do, though thy sins and thy enemies should
conspire to condemn thee. Thy God and his Grace will be sufficient to save
thee.

And so at length, I am come aboard the last and long-desired part of my text,
which contains the application of all in particular, which has been spoken
and delivered in general; drawn out of the word ((...)) My Grace is
sufficient for thee, so that, as it is said of our Savior, Mat. 21. 45. that
his doctrine was so punctual, and clapped so close to the consciences of his
Auditors, that the Pharisees knew he meant them. so by that time I have done
with my text, (neither will I be long in doing it) I trust you shall perceive
that Gods meaning was to you, when he spoke to Saint Paul, and told him that
His Grace is sufficient for him.

Briefly than, see what Paul was, and say what thou art; if your case be the
same, your comfort is the same; for God is no accepter of persons, his Grace is
as sufficient for the one, as for the other.

1. Saint Paul was Homo in Christo, he was a man in Christ, as you may see by
the second verse of this chapter (I knew a man in Christ, that was taken up
into the third heaven:) Art thou such a one? I mean, art thou regenerate and
become a new creature? (for he that is in Christ is a new creature. 2. Cor. 5.
17) do thou daily renew thy repentance, and renew thy obedience, and renew
thy duty and devotion to God? and is it a grief to thy soul, that so much of
the old leaven, thy old corruption remains still in thy heart? Then take this
holy Scripture to thy comfort, and assure thy self, though thy conscience
disquiet thee, Gods Grace will be sufficient for thee: contrarily, if thou
be an old weather beaten sinner, an old rusty drunkard, swearer, and that
stand at a stay, and gatherest sin, like an old tree that stands and
gathers moss; I must say unto thee (as Peter said to Simon Magus, Act. 8.)
thou have neither part nor portion in this privilege; thou art not a man in
Christ and consequently can claim no interest in the grace and favor of God.

2. Saint Paul was Homo in Cruce, a man upon the cross, Gal. 2. 20. I am
crucified with Christ; and elsewhere, Colos. 1. 24. I fill up that which is
behind of the sufferings of Christ in my flesh: whereupon (says a father) quid
deest passioni Christi, nisi u^ nos simil^a patiamur, what is, or what can be
wanting to the sufferings of Christ, but that as he took up his cross, so we
take up ours and follow him: for, vae portantibus crucem, and non sequentibus
Christum, woe to them that are crucified, and not with Christ; that bare the
cross* and follow not Christ, but turn from him clean another way. It is
well known that afflictions go under the name of crosses; now a cross was a
piece of wood for a malefectour to die on, there was no other use of a cross
but that: Affliction therefore is called a cross, because it should have the
nature and power of a Cross, that is, it should be a means to crucify and
mortify all carnal lusts and affections in us; that the more we are
afflicted, the more we should dye to sin, and the less life and power should
our corruptions have in us. Thus it was with Saint Paul, is it so with thee?
do thou wish and desire the death of thy sins? do thou make this use of
thy afflictions, even to die daily? (as the Apostle speaks) do thou every
day drive one nail into the body of sin, I mean one sigh or groan to God
against it? do thou labor to draw blood of thy soul (as they drew blood of
thy Savior) I mean, the tears of true repentance? and is it a death to thy
heart, that thou can not die unto sin, and live unto God* as thou should
and ought to do? Then look no further for Harts-ease, but to the words of
my text, and assure thy self, what ever Crosses be upon thee, Gods Grace (in
Gods good time) shall be sufficient to ease thee. Contrariewise, if thou be
one that do (...) (as Saint Setphen speaks, Acts. 7. ^1.) one that do
fall cross and contrary to all but to thy sins, and art indeed a very
cross to God himself and to his good Spirit by thy perverse, ungodly courses,
I must say unto thee, as the Prophet Esaias says, Esaias. 3. 6. Woe be unto thy
soul, for thou have rewarded evil unto thy self: thou forsakest thy own
mercy, and deprivest thy self of the comfort of Gods grace in the time of
need.

3. Saint Paul was Homo in negotiis, a laborious man, a man full of
employments, 1. Cor. 15. 10. I labored more then all my fellow Apostles (says
he) yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me. (there is an honest
acknowledgement by whom he profited.) and elsewhere he tells the Corinthians,
2. Cor. 11. 9. When I was with you and wanted, non obtorpui, I was not
chargeable nor burdensome to any man. The learned observe, that word has his
weight from Torpedo, which signifies a Crampfish; a fish (they say) that has
such a benumming quality, that the cold of it will strike from the hook to the
line, from the line to the goad, from the goad to the arm, from the arm to
the body of the fisher, and so benum him, and take away al use and feeling of
his limbs: His meaning is, that he was none of those idle drones, that by
their laziness and lewdness do even chill, and benumme, and dead the charity
of well-disposed people; but as he labored in preaching, so he wrought in his
calling too, and put himself to any pains, (...) then be chargeable or
burdensome to any friend or stranger: and by this means it came to pass,
that what he wanted at home, he found it abroad; and Gods grace that was with
him did ever supply him with that which was enough and sufficient for him. Is
it so with thee? Thou that art a poor man, art thou also an industrious and a
painful man? that as Jacob got the blessing in the garment of Esau, which
signifies, Working; so do thou work and take pains to get the blessing of
thy God? do thou labor with thy hands the thing that is good, that thou
may rather be charitable, then chargeable to him that needs? and will not
thy honest labor maintain thee, nor suffice the charge that daily lies upon
thee? Take comfort by this Text that now is taught thee, and let not thy wants
nor thy necessities dismay thee, for there is a God above that has sufficient
for thee; contrarily, if thou be one that live in pleasure (as Saint Paul
says of that widow, (...), she was dead even while she lived) one that
spendest thy time in this world, no otherwise then that Leviathan does in the
sea, only by taking thy pastime therein, or like those lyllies that our
Savior speaks, that neither labor nor spain, but only make a fair show as
long as it will hold: Then as Iehu said to Ioram, What peace? so may I say to
thee, What grace? or what favor can thou look for at the hands of God.

4. Saint Paul was Homo in aerumnis, a man full of cares. I do not mean of
carnal or worldly cares, or such as Martha's were, for the things of this
life; for these he had cast upon God, and had learned in whatsoever estate he
was therewith to be Content; but I mean of spiritual, divine, religious cares
for the health and welfare of the soul, such as he commends in the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 7. 11. as being the first fruits of Grace and godly sorrow
((...), What carfulness it has wrought in you) how much it wrought in them,
I know not; but sure I am, it wrought in him a mavelous and a manifold care,
and that of the better kind: first, an immediate care for himself, and his
own soul, least after he had preached unto others, himself should be a
castaway, 1 Cor. 9. 27. secondly, a charitable and that a Catholic and
universal care for all Churches and Christian souls under the cope of heaven.
2 Cor. 11. 28. Non aliter in ecclesias quantumvis remotas affectus, quam si
illas humeris gestaret (as Beza said of Calvin) he was no less tenderly
affected for those Churches that were remote and far-off than if he had borne
them upon his own shoulders, and carried them (as nurses do their babes) in
his own bosom. But his third and most especial care was for the souls and
saving health of his little children (as he calls them, Gal. 4. 20.) Of whom he
traveiled in birth till Christ was formed in them. His care was greater for
them, than either for himself, or any others; and he gives his reason (...),
for (says he) I stand in doubt of you. Good Parents the more they love their
children, the more they stand in doubt of them, least they should fall to any
defection, or decline to any corruption, or come to any disaster when they
themselves are dead and gone. This made Saint Paul in such perplexity for them;
and yet were they but his spiritual children; what care then (may we think)
would he have taken for them, if they had been his natural children too? then
might he justly have used that word, and said (...) I am in doubt of you: for
(...) in Greek signifies both dubious and pauper, doubtful and poor* for
none have so much reason to be doubtful of their childrens welfare as they
that are poorest and have least to leave them. They may justly fear (as the
woman of Tekoah said to David. 2. Sam. 14. 7.) least their coals should be
quenched: (for so she calls her child her coal; for as coals either warm
or burn, as they are used; so do children either comfort or cross their
parents as they prove) now when a poor man shall dye and leave his coals, I
mean his Orphans behind him: such is the world, that where you shall light of
one good body that will be a means to cherish and maintain and keep them
alive; there be twenty to that one so unchristianly and uncharitably minded,
that they care not how they use them, yea though they quench and crush, and put
them clean out. And hence come those (...) those perplexities and doubtful
cares of tenderhearted parents for their children. Have thou therefore many
little ones, and little to leave them? and does thy heart even yearne with care
and fear to fore-thinke what shall betide them, when thou by death art taken
from them? I will give thee the same counsel that I desire of God to take my
self, and that's this. Cognovisti Gratiam Dei, (says our Apostle, Colos. 1.
6.) Thou know the Grace of God: thou know that to be a sure stay when
all other props and stays are done away: That Anchor will hold when all other
tackling breaks: Make trial of that:

Do by thy Children as Saint Paul did by his brethren, Acts 20. 32. Commend
them to God, and to the word of his Grace; Lay them down at the feet of Jesus
Christ, as they in the Primitive Church, laid down their money at the feet of
the Apostles; desire God to be their Father, Christ to be their Guardian, the
Holy Ghost to be their Guide; and when thou have done so, then as David says,
Psalm. 116. 7. Revertere ad requiem, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, then
settle and assure and resolve thy self, that Heaven shall want mercy, and
earth means, before any of those that are under Gods protection and patronage
shall want maintenance. Never be in doubt what shall become of them, knowing
that His Grace is sufficient for them.

I might add hereunto many particulars; as that Saint Paul was homo in
vinculis, a man in bonds, but the grace of God unloosed them all: that he was
Homo in necessitatibus, a man in wants, but the Grace of God supplied them all:
that he was Homo in periculis, a man in many perils and dangers, but by the
Grace of God he escaped them all: that he was Homo in tentationibus, a man
mightily troubled with temptations, but by the Grace of God he overcame them
al: All these I purposely overslip (which perhaps might comply with many a man's
condition, and conduce to his comfort) but there is one behind that is of
greater value than all the rest, that S. Paul was (as I pray God of his mercy
make me and thee, and every Christian soul to be.

5. Homo in Caelestibus, a man of an Heavenly disposition; though his bodily
abode was upon earth, yet his (...), his souls commerce, and conversation was
in heaven, Phil. 3. 20. no marvel then, that being so much acquainted with
God, as he was; and so conversant in heaven, which is Gremium Gratiae, the lap
and bosom of Grace; if, as it is said of Saint John that leaning in the bosom
of Christ, he thence sucked out his heavenly knowledge; so S. Paul being so
intimate, and so entire with God who is the God of all Grace (whatever else he
wanted) could not possibly want Grace sufficient for him. In a word then: Is it
so with thee though in a far inferior degree? Art thou, as every good
Christian is, and ought to be (...), a Citizen of heaven? do thou account
that thy home, and this but the place of thy pilgrimage for a time? and as our
Savior set his face to go to Jerusalem, Luke 9. 51. do thou set thy face to
go to heaven? does thy heart stand heavenward? art thou bound for that coast?
(as Paul went bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, Acts 20.) I mean, do thou
set thy affections upon things above, upon God and his Grace? and not on things
below, upon the world and her goods which drown men's souls in perdition? Art
thou one of that same Generis Aquilini, of that Eagle kind whereof our Savior
speaks, Mat. 24. (where the body is, thither will the Eagles resort) the body
of thy Savior thou know is in heaven, and does thy soul resort often
thither? do thou wish (as Macarius did) (...), that thy soul might go up
into heaven with thy prayers, and there abide for ever with God? Then, what
Nathan said to David in a case of conviction, I dare apply to thee in a case of
comfort; Thou art the man whom God delights to favor: and therefore as the
Patriachs are said Heb. 11. (...) even to kiss and embrace the promises of
Christ: so do thou even claspe and hug this promise of Grace to thy self;
and let neither thy wants, nor thy weaknesses dismay thee, for both in life and
death thou shall find Gods Grace to be sufficient for thee, which God of his
mercy grant unto us all, etc.

Amen.
FINIS.

