THE STRANGE DISCOVERY: A Tragi-Comedy.

Written By J. G. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in
Chancery Lane, joining to the Roles. 1640.

The Prologue.
How Is this, The strange discovery, may some say,
It Is likely we shall see some glorious Play
Of Christopher Columbus, and his brother,
Whose navigable pains did first discover
America.
That unknown world, thinking the far fetched scene,
To be Peru, and the Indies, but to w^ane
Your expectations from this gold^n dream,
Our Author bad me tell you, that the scope
Of his intend^d travell's Aethiope,
There he begins, there ends, but as he passes
To and again, touches at many places,
As Egypts fertile soil and learned Greece,
Yet as h^roicke Jason sought the fleece
In diverse coasts, but in the stately I Will
Of Colchos gate it by Medeas guile,
So he in Aethiopia s^tteth down
The period of his plot, which but a frown
Of yours will ruinate, your gracious eyes,
Raise to the height of Jasons enterprise.
The History is candid, crowned with praise,
So let the play be too, our Poet prays.
The persons of the Play.
HYdaspes, King of Aethiopia. P^rsina, his Queen. Cariclea, their daughter.
Syfimethres, a Gymnosophist Ambassador for the King, Caricles, Apollos Priest.
Calasiris, Isis Priest. Aristippus, a Citizen of Athens. D^meneta, his wife.
Cnemon, Aristippus son. Thisbe, Demenetas maid. Arsinoe, a Courtezan. Nebulo,
Caricles man. Nebulona, his wife. Theagines, a Thessalian Captain. Arsace,
wife to the Deputy of Egypt. Cibile, her Chamberlain, nurse, and bawd. Aura,
Cibiles maid. 4 Judges, Magistrates of Persia.
Besides messengers and attendance.

THE STRANGE DISCOVERY, A Trage-Comedie.
Actus primi Scena prima.
Enter Caricles, sometimes Apollos Priest at Delphos in the habit of a Pilgrim.
Caric. WHat course shall aged Carcles now take
After his weary travells? shall I here
Resolve to lay my bones, and Egypt make
The final period of my pilgrimage?
No, I must bid Catadupice adieu
So famous for these sluices of fair Nile,
And since the surfeit which I took of sorrow
For my dear daughters sad untimely death,
Is well digested in this breast of mine,
And change of air has wrought a change of mind;
I am resolved to stately Greece to wend
And breath my last breath where I breathed my first,
It Is so determined; -- Enter Nebulo his man.
Honest Nebulo,
My man draw near, I Am in a humor now
To change some words with thee; -- so oftentimes -- aside.
We see wise men for recreations sake,
Consult with Fools, and honest men with Knaves. -- aside
What course does thy fond brain advise me to?

Neb. To no other but to a home course Sir, I must tell you plainly, I like not
these extravagant ones you take of traveling the world thus; I Am sure I have
paid dear for those idle humors of yours, witness my body, brought to a
mere Anatomy by travel and fasting; me thinks, a wise man, as you are,
should not have such wandering thoughts in his mind: well Master, resolve to
leave this place, and return to Delphos our native habitation, or I shall
soon resolve to leave you, and go there without you. O the smoke of mine
own poor chimney at home, and the beloved smoke of my wife, would both smell
to my nose now so comfortable, as a perfume made of Arabia spices; adieu, I can
stay no longer from pretty Nebulona without the lash of her just displeasure; I
come my chickin, I come, be ready to receive me, I know thou languishest all
this while for want of my company.


Caric. Nay prithee stay a little longer and hear me; will thou leave me now
at last, and frustrate the good opinion I have always had of thy simple
plainness and constant service? have patience awhile, and I will accompany
thee in thy journey; as for thy wife Nebulona (if that trouble thee) I shall
rectify her in the truth of al thy actions. Who knockes there? go^ see, and
bring me word before you grant entrance Nebulo.

Exit, and redit Nebulo. Who is it now?


Nebul. A very sweet faced Gentleman, so sooty as the Devil himself, I
believe some Ambassador sent from Pluto and the fiends.


Caric. What ever he be admit him.


Enter Sisimethres, Legate of Aethiopia. Sisimet. God save you reverend Father.


Caric. Welcome Sir,
Although I have not seen your face before
That I can well remember.

Sisimet. May be so.
But I have seen you often in this town
Walking the streets, and read the character^
Of gravity and wisdom ciphered in
Your aged face, wherein I think my judgment
Nothing deceives me; and I do suppose
You are an aliene here as well as I,
No natural Egyptian.

Caric. I confess
I am a stranger borne, and should be glad
To know your name, your country and your business.

Sisimet. I shall obey you, for my country, first
It Is Aethiopia underneath the line,
My name Sisimethres employed now
As Legate from my sovereign King Hydaspes,
Unto the Deputy here, to forbid him
To meddle with the mines, out of whose bowels
The Smaragds dug were, which appertain
To none but to the crown of Aethiopia:
Now Sir you know me, be not scrupulous
To let me understand so much of you,
Something does prompt me strangely, that you have
Some near relation to the gods, or else
My Genius does deceive me.

Caric. Understand then,
You do not err in your imagination,
I am a Grecian borne, and sometimes Priest
Unto Apollo in that sacred City
Of Delphos, which Parnassus lofty tops,
As with a wall, encompasseth about,
And sweet Castalius pleasant springs refresh,
There was I borne and bred, and exercised
The office I was called to by the gods.

Sisimet. Most venerable Priest, and holy Father,
Let me beseech you tell me what mischance
Drove you from thence to these remoter parts?

Caric. The great misfortune that I had at home.


Sisim. I wonder at it, pray relate the manner.


Caric. When you have heard my story to the end,
Your wonder will forsake you.

Sisimet. Then resolve me


Caric. Upon your better knowledge and acquaintance
I shall, till when excuse me.

Sisim. I Will not press you
Beyond good manners; Sir, I saw you buy
Some herbs and roots that grow in India
And Aethiopia for your use last day;
If so you please, I can produce you such
As never were better.

Caric. Pray Sir let me see them,
Sysimethres take from under his arm a little bag, and shows Caricles
precious stones in stead of roots. You must for these, good Sir, seek other
chapmen,
The Margaritas, the Smaragds, Hiacinths,
Are for a Princes use, and not for mine:
Each one alone is ransom for a King,
My whole estate cannot buy one of them.

Sysim. But though you cannot buy them, you can take them (I trow) if freely
given you, can you not?


Caric. It Is true, I can receive them, but I marvel
Why you should mock me thus?

Sysim. I mock you not
By all the Gods, but mean uprightly in it,
I will not only give you these, but if
You will be pleased to take it at my hands
Bestow a richer gift, to which compared,
These are but dross and rubbish.

Caric. Ha ha ha.


Sysim. Why laugh you Sir?


Caric. Is It not a matter which
Deserves laughter, when you promise things
Of such a prise, and yet assure me more;
You cannot mean uprightly.

Sysim. Ttrust me, but swear
That you will use this gift as I shall teach you,
And I Will perform my promise of the other.

Nebul. Accept it Sir, if you be wise; it is not good, nor religious to refuse
any man's courtesy.


Caric. You tempt me shrewdly Sir.


Sysim. Let me prevail,
And bind me still your servant.

Caric. You have won me
To what you would.

Sysim. Then take an oath, and swear
To follow my directions, so confirm it.

Caric. By great Apollo, then whose Minister
I was at Delphos, I shall not digress
From what you shall instruct me touching this.

Sysim. It is sufficient, and I build upon
Your faith, your trust and your religion;
Here fellow, take this bag, and keep it for
Your honored Master.

Nebul. But more honored bag,
Would I might keep thee for my self, I then
Should make an Idol of thee -- aside.

Caric. What Is your pleasure,
That I should do in lieu of this reward?

Sysim. I cannot now acquaint you, for some reasons
Best known unto my self, give me your hand
To meet me without fail tomorow morning
At Isis Temple, thence I shall conduct you
Unto my lodging, and in secret tell
The sum of my request.

Carry. I shall not fail you.


Sysim. Adieu, until we meet -- Exit Sysimethres.


Caric. Apollo keep thee
In his safe custody. I marvel much
Whence this unlooked for kindness should proceed,
I Will see the issue on it, what ever betide me,
It may be that the gods have pre-ordain'd
I shall once more be happy, and in lieu
Of all my passed sorrows, reap the fruit
Of long expected comfort, sure my mind
Is much illuminated with the thought
Of some good fortune, and refreshed as if
The spirit of Pitho were infused into me
By heavenly inspiration; I Will obey
My Genius, for oftentimes the gods by signs
Will have that mortals understand their minds. Exit.

Actus primi Scena secunda.
Enter Demeneta, and young Cnemon her son in Law. Demen. MY pretty boy, how
do thou? where have thou been so long absent from my embraces; come hither,
let me solace my self a little with thee, let me kiss thee my sweet heart,
my heir, my own life.


Cnem: Had ever any one a kinder stepmother -- aside. Mother, you make too much
of me, I am not able to deserve your love in so high a strain, my duty cannot
countervaile it.


Demen. How prettily he speaks, I cannot choose but kiss thee for it.


Cnem. What a close and hot kiss was that? I like not this behavior, would I
were delivered hence, please you give me leave to go about my exercises?


Them. What exercises?


Cnem. My books and studies at the School, I shall be shent else by my Tutor.


Them. Come, thou shall not leave me.


Cnem. Will you have me prove a truant then?


Them. No, but a student in a better art; have thou ever read Ovid de art
amandi, or Ovids amorous Epistles?


Cnem. Never.


Them. O, I would have thee study that book above all other, there are very
good rules, and worth the observation truly, if thou errest in any thing
therein written, I will be thy Mistress to instruct thee, follow my rudiments
good son.


Cnem. But I have heard it is a ribaldrous book, and corrupts youth to all
wantonness.


Them. That is but a fantasy, a mere untruth; it was made by the Poet for
youthful recreation and pastime, none but Stoicall old men will invey against
them, who envy that in others which they cannot enjoy in themselves.


Cnem. I understand not your Philosophy.


Them. Would thou did, and were well entered in my book^ and science; but where
is thy father and my husband Aristippus?

Enter Aristippus. O, my dear husband, where have you lingered so long; you are
too blame indeed to leave me so solitary, I must chide you for it, truly, had
you tarried never so little longer, I should have died for sorrow.


Arist. My sweet wife Demeneta, I have a jewel of thee, thy extreme love to me
is confirmed in thy affection to my son Cnemon, virtuous woman.


Demen. I love him I must confess, as well as if he were mine own son, or
better.


Arist. I know thou do my love; never was a man happier in his choice, I
think.


Demen. Cnemon, sit on my lap pretty boy.


Cnem. No, I know my duty better.


Demen. I will have it so; the very picture of his father.


Cnem. Pray mother excuse me, this is no fit place for me.


Demen. There is not a prettier or wittier boy in Athens, but it is no wonder,
that old men beget always the finest children, it is most commonly seen.


Arist. I know your virtue, and therefore will dispute with you a little upon
this subject, and ask you this question: how could you, a young woman, affect
me an old man?


Demen. How could I not Sir; your wisdom, stayednesse and understanding were
such motives to my affection, as I would not change my old man for the
youthfull'st cavalere of all Greece; I hope for all your age, to have a
hopeful offspring from you, such another as Cnemon, you can do it in faith,
old Aristippus.


Arist. My girl, how thou do revive my decayed spirits to hear thee talk
thus! I will strain hard for this, but I will answer thy expectation.


Demen. Thanks sweet husband, let me hang upon your neck, pretty gravity, how
well it becomes him, who could choose but love such a man entirely; pox upon
smooth faces, and young lusty gallants, there is more trouble with them a bed,
when a gentlewoman would sleep and take her rest; they are always disturbing
of her, when by a man of some years and experience we may lie as quiet as we
will; would all women were of my opinion, we should cut the combs then of
these lusty gamesters.


Arist. Indeed young men are very inconstant in their love, and changing from
one unto another, whereas an old man perseveres to the end in his devotions.


Them. True, true, my love, your words are oracles,
Were I now as I seem, how should I wrong
Youth, beauty, nature, and rebel against them -- aside.

Arist. My dearest love, though loath, I am enforced
To leave you for some hours, the state of Athens
Sent for me, to repair unto the Senate
At ten a clock about affairs of weight,
It Is now about the time; farewell my sweetest.

Them. You shall not go, come, come, you do not love me,
Else could you not be so unkind my dear,
To kill your loving wife with your departure.
I doubt I shall not live till your return.

Arist. Come prithee, leave this off, and be assured
I will not stay two hours.

Them. On that assurance
I do dismiss you, but if you exceed
The time, you're like to find me turned a coarse;
stick to your promise.

Arist. I Will not fail you sweet. -- Exit Aristippus.


Them. Where go you Cnemon?


Cnem. No where, but to wait
Upon my Father to the Senate House,
And instantly return.

Them. See that you do,
And you shall not repent it, Exit Cnemon.
I must gain him
Unto my will by fair and gentle means,
By promises and gifts, by sweet allurements
And strong enticing words, by pleasing him
With what he likes best, this will take his youth
(I make no doubt) and bring me to his bed.
I burn for love of him and must be quenched,
Old Aristippus I have fooled and made
Believe I love him, but it is not so.
I have brought him to my own lure so th^^
He stoops unto my beauty; now if I
Can but enjoy my Cnemon, I am then
Mistress of my design, and a chief Artist
In this sweet trade; let fools burn in their fire
Of modest love, i will on to my desire. Exit.

Actus primi, Scena tertia.
Enter Caricles, Sysimethres and Nebulo. Sysim. Prithee honest friend
Shall I entreat thee to go forth and bid
The pretty girl without in the next room^
To come here to me.

Nebul. Yes sir that I shall,
I love to be employed a messenger
To pretty mayds, is she so beautiful*

Sysim. O wondrous fair and beautiful.


Nebul. I Will then
Usher her safely in, and kiss her too.

Exit Nebulo, enters again with Cariclea. Sysim. See here the second gift I
mean to give you:
More precious then the first, you told me sir
You had a daughter once, but raped by death.
Here is another for you, use her well.

Caric. I am amazed to see so rare a beauty,
Such an Angel-like creature.

Sysim. Cease your wonder;
The mother of this beauteous girl which here
Stands before us for a certain cause
Which you shall learn hereafter, laid her forth
Clad in such weeds as commonly is used
For such a purpose, so committing her
To fortunes doubtful chance, but I by hap
Finding her took her up, for it is not lawful
That we neglect a soul when once it has
Entered a humane body, (being a precept
Amongst the wise men with us, to be whose
Unlearned scholar I was once judged worthy)
Be^ides even in the infants eyes appeared,
Something which bred both wonder and delight.
With her I found this bag of precious stones
Which I gave you of late, and a silk cloth
Wrought full with letters in her mother tongue,
Wherein contained was her whole estate;
Her mother as I guess procured the same,
Which after I had read, I knew from whence
and what she was, and therefore carried her
Into the Land far distant from the City
Delivering her to certain honest shepherds
To bring her up, with charge that they should not
Reveal her unto any; for those things
That were found with her I detained with me,
Least for them she might suffer any danger,
And thus at first this matter was kept close.

Caric. But what befell her after pray go one.
In process then of time this princely maid
Growing and as she grew increasing still
More fair then any women else besides
(For beauty surely cannot ^e conceald
Though under ground but would from thence appear)
I fearing least her fortune should be known
And I brought unto danger, su'd to be
Sent in embassage to the Deputy
Of Egypt and abtained it, therefore come I
And bring her with me, full of zealous care
To set her business right and in good order.

Caric. Leave that to me.


Nebul. But chiefly unto me,
I Will be her guardion too.

Caric. What will you have me do concerning her?
Direct me, and i will punctualle observe it.

Sysim. As touching her, first I commend her to you,
(And to the gods who hitherto have kept her,)
On such conditions as by oath you are bound
To see performed, that is that you will use her
As a free woman ought to be, and give her
In marriage to a free man, as you do
Recevie her at my hand, or rather of
Her mother who has left her to your charge:
I hope you will perform all things according
Unto your oath, and answer the opinion
I have of your good manners, which I find
By some few days experience to be
Greekish indead; this much I had to say
Before I executed my commission
Concerning my embassage, other secrets
Belonging to the maid, i will tell you them
To morrow in more ample manner, if
You please to meet me about Isis temple.

Caric. Expect me there then; but I cannot brook
So long a time to see the Virgin masked
In so obscure a manner.

Sysim. Now I cannot
Stay to discover what I know of her;
The Deputy of Egypt has appointed
This day for hearing of me: farewell both. Exit Sysim.

Caric. Can you speak Greek my pretty sweet heart, can
you? she smiles upon him but says nothing.
No, can you speak Egyptian? neither sweet?

Nebul. I Will undertake to teach her both the tongues
So I may be her tutor. she frowns upon him.

Caric. Nebulo
Thou see I have another daughte^ ^ow,
She shall be called fair Cariclea
Derived from Caricles which is my name.

Nebul. Would I had such a daughter too, she should not
Have then so course a name, all men should call her.
The pretty Nebuletta; Nebulo,
Then Nebulona, then neat Nebuletta,
A sumptuous pedigree, how sweet it runs!

Caric. Thy house would flourish then, were she thy daughter.


Nebul. Above the clouds, the gods would lodge themselves
Beneath my roof, and power down plenty on me
In golden showers to rest in Danaes lap.

Caric. What grown so high conceited Nebulo?


Nebul. Something inspired my brain, I know not what sir,
But now i am come unto my self again,
'Twas but a toy that took me.

Caric. I believe it,
Many such toys do take thee in the head:
Get me a mask, I must convey this damzell
Muffled home to my house.

Nebul. She need not be
Ashamed to show her face, it may procure her
A husband by the way for ought you know;
You shall but wrong her much in doing so.

Caric. Sirrah away, dispute no more, but do it.


Exit and redit with a mask, they muffle her. Nebul. It Is pity faith
methinkes to use her thus,
It Is such a pretty thing.

Caric. Come you must go
With me my daughter dear where you shall be
Used and respected as my native child:
When I have understood (hark Nebulo
Here Is news for thee) by good Sysimethres
My daughters fur^her state, we'll hye forthwith
To Greece and Delphos, and put on again
My first religious habit; to your shrines
Ye gods we'll offer sanctified minds. Exeunt.

Actus primi, Scena quarta.
Enter Demeneta and Thisbe her maid. Demen. When saw thou Cnemon, Thisbe?


This. Know you not
That Pallas high feast called Quinquatria
This day was celebrated here in Athens,
One with a ship by land, (as is the manner)
Was consecrated, Cnemon was imployd,
Clad in his robes, and on his head a crown,
To sing the usual hymn due to her praise
I saw him busy in the ceremonies.

Them. Is this the day? by Jove I knew it not,
Else had I been spectator of the sight,
Chiefly to see my Cnemon in his office,
Could I be angry with him, I should chide him
For not acquainting me.

This. He did it neatly;
I would not for my maidenhead have missed
So rare a sight, not for ten maiden-heads.

Them. Are all the rites and ceremonies done?
I feign would see yet the conclusion.

This. Mistress, it is to late; see Cnemon there returned in all his robes.


Enter Cnemon in his robes crowned, Demeneta runs to him and takes him in her
arms. Them. My young Hippolitus, and my dear Theseus,
Welcome, O welcome to me.

Cnem. Heavens defend me
From this lewd Phaedra -- aside. Mother what dee mean
To burn me thus with kisses?

Them. Burden thee
With blisses too I can, my pretty boy,
If thou will love thy mother.

Cnem. In what nature
Require you that? if as it ought to be,
That children love their Parents, I agree.

Them. As Venus with Anchises sported once
In Ida grove, so let me sport with thee;
Do understand me now?

Cnem. You are too bold,
Too impudent.

Them. Nay, prithee do not frown,
This night I must enjoy thee, and thou me,
Thy fathers absence does invite us to it;
I will maintain thee like a Princes son,
Glittering in gold, and our sweet furtive sports
Keep from the sun and knowledge of the gods,
No one shall know it.

Cnem. Hence incestuous woman,
Think thou to make me wrong my fathers bed,
And to commit an act so foul as incest?
Tempt me no more; by heaven, by earth and all
The Immortal gods, I Will die a thousand deaths
Ere think a thought on it, much less yield unto it,
Your damned wit, nor quaint enticing words
Shall not prevail, my hate exceeds my love.

Exit Cnemon in a rag3. Demen. Am I despised thus, and my hot love
Requited with disdain, as cold as ice,
By such a youngling? he shall know the difference
Between a woman's favors and her frowns,
And curse too late his foolish modesty:
Go Thisbe to the Castle, tell my husband
I am not well, entreat him to come to me
With all the speed he can.

This. I shall sweet Mistress. -- Exit Thisbe.


Demeneta a lies down upon the bed, faining her self sick. Them. What raging
fires still burn me? how I am
Divided in my self tweene love and hate,
two mighty passions combatting together?
Love would prevail, if reason might be judge,
But love is too unreasonably harsh:
Hate therefore execute thy proper function,
Inflame my breast with rage and high disdain
Against this brat that gave me the repulse,
Inspire my study in his Tragedy.

Enter Aristippus and Thisbe. Arist. How fares my sweet heart, that she keeps
her bed?


Them. Dear husband, very sick and in ill case.


Arist. The gods forbid, that sound does strike me dead;
What ailes my dearest wife? tell me the cause
Of this your sudden sickness.

Them. Nothing Sir,
I know no cause at all.

Arist. Come, come, you must not
Conceal your grief, but lay it open unto me,
I do beseech my love.

Them. Since you are so
Importunate to know it, understand
The goodly young man, son unto us both
(To you by nature, but to me by love)
Whom I (the gods know) held as dear unto me
As you, when he perceived by certain tokens
I was with child by you (which thing I kept
Hid from your knowledge till I knew my self
The certainty) and waiting for your absence,
When I in wonted manner counseled him
To leave his whores, and to avoid his cups
(Which things I knew he loved, but would not tell you,
Lest I should run into the ill suspicion
Of stepmother) whilst I in gentle manner
Told him these things, I will not speak the worst,
Nor in what sort he did revile us both,
But last of all, he spurned me on the belly,
Which has procured this my disease and pain.

Arist. O villain, I will scurge him even to death;
Thisbe, go call him hither. Exit Thisbe,

Then presently enters Cnemon, Aristippus falls presently a buffetting of him
without speaking a word, then calls his servants and scurgeth him with rods.
Cnem. Dear father, I beseech you let me know
The cause of this your anger and my stripes
So cruelly laid on me.

Arist. Oh cleanly dissembler,
Thou would indeed know thy own fault from me.

He beats him afresh. Cnem. Yet now at length, Sir, let me understand
What I have done, that thus provokes your wrath,
The gods do know my innocence.

Arist. Base wretch,
Thy innocence; would she belie thee think thou,
That loved thee better than her self? away,
Get out of my sight, I will not hear thee speak. Exit Cnemon.
My dearest Demeneta, cheer your self,
Strive to forget the pain.

Them. I Am in bad plight,
So that I do not only fear the life
Of that I go with, but mine own, besides,
These accidents are dangerous to women;
Yet, Sir, it grieved me that you took so sharp
A punishment of Cnemon, for all this
I cannot choose but love him.

Arist. That Is thy virtue,
But banish him thy thoughts as I will do,
Hence forth as most unworthy of our love;
Come sweet, you shall remove from hence into
A fitter room, I Will send a Doctor to you. Exit Aristippus.

Them. You do mistake my pulse, whose veins do swell
With rage and fury, and shall live in pain,
Until I be revenged.

This. My Mistress knows
How to deceive old Dotards with false shows. Exeunt.

Actus primi Scena quinta.
Enter Nebulo solus, frisking for joy. Nebul. We shall fall down the river
Nile to night, and hoise sail for Greece, brave news, comfortable news, my
heart capers within me for joy, that I shall see my country again; my Master
is sore troubled for black Sysimethres his constrained flight, which has
defeited their appointed meeting and conference touching Caricleas fortunes,
but haste our journey the sooner, there is my comfort. I left him cursing the
Deputy, and invoking the god Apollos wrath to plague him for dismissing the
Ambassador so suddenly, with such deadly threatenings to depart the Kingdom.
Alas, poor maid, I pity thee, that by this means thou shall not be able to
know who begot thee nor who brought thee forth, but all is one, thou will soon
learn to be begotten, and to bring forth by instinct of nature and thy own
experience. Catadupice adieu adieu, adieu gentlemen; when you see us next,
twill be in Delphos; away, away, away, merrylie, merrily.


Exit. Finis actus primi.
Actus secundi, Scena prima.
Enter Calasiris Isis priest at Memphis. Am I the goodesse Isis priest, and
burn
In these unlawful fires? shall Rhodopis
With her Venerious charms subdue my heart,
And make me break that temperance of life
Which I have hitherto preserved unspotted?
What shall I do? I cannot stand the push
Of these strong passions, yet I am resolved
Nere to commit the act, nor so to stain
My priesthood with dishonor; Isis temple
And secret places shall not be defiled
By Calasiris, no i will rather bannish
My self from sight of cursed Rodopis,
Least staying here I should be forced to do
So vile a deed; I am resolved to leave
This stately City Memphis suddenly,
I Will give it out, my journey is for Thebes
To see my eldest son called Thiamis.
With this pretense I shall unquestioned go,
But there is a City sacred to Apollo
In Greece hight Delphos, there i will bend my course
(For it is a College where wise men resort
Free from the concourse of the common people)
To visit my old friend priest Caricles.
When whorish beauty and vain pride display
Their gaudie colors, wise men shun the way. Exit.
Actus secundi, Scena secunda.
Enter Demeneta and Thisbe. Them. Thisbe my wench, thou must be secret unto all
my commands.


This. As your own heart could wish, as your trusty cabinet.


Them. I am confident of thee; thou know how I loved that proud boy Cnemon,
what proffers I made him, what favors I bestowed upon him, and all to win
him to my embraces, yet how scornfully and scurvily he refused me, with what
disdain he left me; I am now resolved no longer to solicit my love but to
execute my revenge; I have devised a dainty plot against him, which will take
according as I would wish, follow thou my directions.


This. I will not digress a hairs breadth mistress.


Them. Then thus I school thee, make a show that thou love Cnemon
exceedingly, entice him to thee with beckes and amorous glances, he will soon be
caught with these baits, especially having heretofore long nibled upon thy
beauty; frequent his bed often, be not ashamed, it shall be for thy great
advancement, and whereas thou art now a bondmaid, thou shall be made free
forever.


This. I am your creature in all things, especially in matters of this nature.


Them. When thou have done this which I command thee, I will instruct thee
farther.


Exit Demeneta. Manet Thisbe a little. This. I wait your pleasure. I must give
Cnemon good countenance, well, I must entice the young man, well, I must lie
with him too, very well; faith these are no harsh commands, it shall never
grieve me to be imployd in such work, would my mistress had no harder labor
for me, this is a task of pleasure; I have a warrant now for what I shall do;
I durst not yield to C^^mon before when he attempted me, now let him come with
his stoutest artillery, I will stand the charge valiantly.

Enter Cnemon.
Cnem. Fair Thisbe are you here? why now I like you,
You smile upon me, and your countenance
Darts amorous glances which before cast frowns,
Now you appear like Venus.

This. Courteous Cnemon,
Although at first I did deny your suit,
Impute it not to want of love, but place
And opportunity, besides the doubt
And danger which the action brings with it
If once discovered, made me to commit
So gross an error.

Cnem. Will you be reformed
Upon mature counsel?

This. You shall see
I will not be refractory to ought
You shall advise me, I do know your mind,

Cnem. Come with me then and learn to kiss and smile,
You know the back way to my chamber sweet.

Cnem. I do, and will attend you, there we will meet. Exeunt.


Actus secundi, Scena tertia.
Enter Caricles and Calasiris. Caric. Welcome to Greece my worthy friend and
brother,
And in the fittest time, because I shall
Need your assistance in the perfecting
A business which concerns me, you are wise
And can persuade, when reason is your theme.

Cala. What I can do, our long acquaintance sir
And brotherhood in travel and vocation,
Wills me to render it unto your service;
Wherein can I be useful to my friend?

Caric. In this, you know last night I did relate
Cariclaes story, how I did receive her
And brought her from your Egypt here to Greece,
where in a short time she has learned our tongu^,
And so far passes she all other beauties
That she attracteth all men's eyes to gaze
With admiration on her, as well strangers
As Greeks, so that where ever she be conversant,
Either at home, or in the Temples, or
At public exercises, all men's eyes
Are fixed upon her with as great devotion
As if she were the image of some goddess
Lately created; that which grieves me, is
She loathes to hear of marriage, and resolves
To live a maiden still, and so becoming
Dianas servant, for the most part does
Apply her self to hunting and to shooting;
I had a great desire to marry her
Unto my sisters son, a fine young man,
Well manner'd, and fair spoken; but I cannot,
Either by prayer or promise, or by force
Of argument persuade her thereunto:
In this I crave your help, dear Calasiris,
Use some point of your wisdom to persuade her
To know her nature, that she is a woman,
And that she would not so degenerate
From all those of her sex; this I beseech you
To do for great Apollos sake, and all
Your country gods.

Calas. In this point, Caricles,
I Will do my best endeavor. Enter Nebulo.

Nebul. Master, come
Away for shame, the captain of the Aenians
Embassage stays for you at the gate
For to begin the sacrifice.

Calas. Pray Sir,
What are those Aenians? what their holy message?
What sacrifice make they?

Caric. They are the noblest
Of all Thessalia, this same sacrifice
They send to Pirrhus, stout Achilles son,
Every fourth year (at such time as the feast
Again is kept unto Apollo here)
For here was Pirrhus massacred before
Apollos altars by enraged Orestes,
This message is more honorably done
Than any of the rest, because they say
The Captain is sprung from Achilles line.
Indeed, such is the beauty of his person
And brave majesticke carriage, as confirms
He is some goddess son.

Calas. I feign would see him.


Caric. You shall, and his brave ordered sacrifice,
Cariclea too, my daughter, must be there
To day by custom, at the funeral pomp
Of Neoptolemus, but you have seen her
Before.

Calas. Yes, and done sacrifice together.


Caricles. Come, you must go unto the Temple with us
To help me in this ceremonious work.

Calas. Lead on, I Will follow, if I Am prompted right,
Strange things will happen after this rare sight Exeunt.

Actus secundi Scena quarta.
Enter Cnemon and Thisbe. Cnem. Thisbe my love, we must act closely, and with
great circumspection, lest we be discovered by the mischievous Demeneta, who
(as thou say) hates me more now than she loved me before.


This. You talk simply Cnemon, if you count it a dangerous matter for me being
a bond-maid, bought with money, to be taken a bed with you; what punishment
think you her worthy, who is a freewoman, and lawfully married to a husband,
yet plays false, and bears a man too many.


Cnem. I judge her worthy of death, but who is the person, prithee?


This. Your virtuous stepmother, my Mistress Demeneta, now you may be revenged
upon her by discovering it to your father Aristippus.


Cnem. I can scarce believe it.


This. To confirm my report (if you please) I will delive^ the adulterer unto
you in the very act.


Cnem. You shall do me a courtesy then.


This. With all my heart, not only for your sake who have been injured by her
before, but for mine own also, who, for that she has me in jealousy, am used
of her very extremely, wherefore if thou be a man apprehend him.


Cnem. Else let me die in scorn and infamy,
I Will kill them both, for never shall it be said,
That Cnemon knew his fathers bed defiled
And durst not be revenged, assist my hand
Infernal furies, Thisbe lead the way
That I may do the deed ere see the day. Exeunt

Actus Secundi, Scena quinta.
Enter Aristippus and Demeneta. Demen. It Is late 'ith night, sweet husband,
let us to bed,
I cannot have too much of your embraces,
The envious day will interrupt our sport,
Me thinks we married were but yesterday.

Aristip. Conceiv'st thou so, that does proceed from love,
But I am old, and thou a sprightly less.

Demen. You wrong your self, you are a lusty man,
For were you old the dull effects of age
Would then appear, but I have had experience
Of your performance, Cnemon, I believe,
Your son is not so active in his trade.

Aristip. If it be so, then sure the youthful heat
Of thy fair body has infused life
Into my withered veins, more powerful then
Medeas charms, when she stirred up fresh blood
In the decayed body of old Aeson.

Enter Cnemon with his sword drawn followed by Thisbe, a candle carried
before, he comes hastily to the bed. Cnem. Where is the villain, the most
worthy lover
Of this chaste dame?

his father leapes out of the bed, and falls on his knees before him. Aristip.
My son, have pity on thy fathers age,
Spaire his white hairs, take not away his life
That gave thee thine, and brought thee up with care,
We do confess we wronged thee, yet the fault
Was not so great that it should merit death;
Assuage thy fury, and put up thy sword,
Imbrue not in thy fathers blood thy hands.

Cnemon in amaze looks round about him for Thisby, who had conveyed her self
away, and being thus astonished, his sword fell out of his hand, which Demeneta
straightwaies took up. Them. Did I not tell you this before, sweet heart,
To look unto this princoks pride and hate
Who would no doubt, if time had served his turn,
Attempt some mischief to destroy us both.

Aristip. You told me so indeed, but I believed not;
Now I do find it true, which to prevent
I Will raise my house and bind him fast, to morrow
I Will carry him before the people to
Be judged for his offense; let nature go
In parents, when sons prove unnatural so. Exeunt.

Actus secundi, Scena sexta.
Enter Nebulo and Nebulona. Nebulo. Nebulona my pretty chickin, how faires thy
body? did thou not think me lost long ago?


Nebulona. I gave you for dead in good faith, and was in the humor once to
marry another man?


Nebulo. Why sure thou were not, thou do but jest I know.


Nebulona. Truly I was, nor could you blame me for it if I had; is it not a
torture, think you, for a woman, to stay seven years without her husbands
company?


Nebulo. Methinkes my brows begin Acteon-like to bud already, they are very
knotty, I pray God thou have not graft something there, I begin to suspect it
shrewdly by diverse signs and tokens, how comes your belly so high wife?


Nebulona. It Is nothing but a timpany I am sometimes troubled with.


Nebulo. I do believe thee, how long is it since you perceived it to grow upon
you?


Nebulona. About two months since, the Doctor tells me I shall be free of it
very speedily.


Nebulo. He is a fool, I am a better Doctor then he, thou shall go with it
this fourteen weeks yet or thereabouts; come you are a whore, and have
abused my honest bed; I Will have you before the Justices to be punished for thy
offense.


Nebulona. Spare me prithee gentle Nebulo, and hearken to my counsel a little,
since thou art a cuckold (as I do not deny it) choose whether thou will wear
the horns in thy forehead, and so all men see them, or put them into thy
pocket, and no man see them, I leave it to thy own discretion.


Nebulo. Why then I am a cuckold it seems?


Nebulona. I cannot say against it truly, and speak the truth, if I should,
this mark of thy fortune here deeply stamped would bewray me, be not so
foolish now as Vulcan was, to make a proclamation of thy forked order.


Nebulo. Did Vulcan do so?


Nebulo. Yes, but afterward he repented it for he forged an artificial net,
with which he caught his wife Venus and Mars a bed together in carnal
copulation, then called all the gods and goddesses to be spectators of his own
shame.


Nebul. But what said they when they saw it?


Nebulona. They commended Mars, but condemned Vulcan for being the publisher of
his own disgrace.


Nebul. But it was a shame for Mars to be caught so.


Nebulona. The gods wished every one of them if that were a shame, to be shamed
in the same manner.


Nebulo. but how did Venus ^ake this?


Nebulona. In scorn of the smith, and in revenge of this trick has made his
head as hard as his anvile.


Nebulo. Thou have devised a pretty story in thy own defense, is it best to
follow thy counsel, and say nothing, or stir this bad thing and make it
stink the more?


Nebulona. You may do what you please, but I have told you the best course.


Nebulo. Let it be so then; I have traveled well I trow, and to good purpose,
at may return home to father a child, of which I did not beget so much as the
least finger or the least toe; if this be the fruits of traveling, God keep
me from it hence forward, and all good folks besides; come Nebulona we are
friends, do so no more, and all is forgotten.


Nebulon. Not, if you stay at home and warm my bed,
But if you leave me, then have at your head. Exeunt.

Actus secundi, Scena septima.
Enter the sacrifice to the tomb of Pirrhus in the manner of a Hecatombe led
in by the Thessalians, who had each of them a white garment knit about them,
these were entertained by so many virgins of Thessalia standing in a ring with
their hair loose about their ears; the maids were divided into two
companies, those who were in the first carried flowers and fruit, the other
carried in backets other fine knackes and perfumes, at the sound of music and
a song made fit and agreeable to the music, they danced, the song was made in
praise of Thetis. The Song.
O Nereus god in surging seas, we praise thy Thetis.
daughter dear,
Whom Peleus at commandment of Jove did make his pheere:
Thou art the goddess we adore in Sea a glimpsing star,
Who stout Achilles did bring forth a very Mars in war,
And Captain good unto the Greeks, thy glory scales the skies;
To thee did thy red-headed wife cause Pirrhus rough to rise,
The Trojans utter overthrow, but stay to Greekish host,
Be thou good Pirrhus unto us a favorable ghost,
Who here in grave intombed lie in Phoebus sacred ground,
Bow down thy ear to the holy hymns that we to thee do sound,
And this our City suffer not in any fear to be,
Of thee and Thetis is our song, Thetis all hail to thee.
The song ended, enters Theagines Captain of the Thessalians, very richly
apparelled, followed by many gallants, who guarding him as he went, at last
encompassed him round about; the maids overcome with the beauty of Theagines
could not moderate their passions but began to cast flowers and fruit upon him,
with that enters Cariclea most sumptuously adorned according to the manner, her
hair was neither all bound up, nor all loo^e, but the most part thereof that
grew behind, hanged over her shoulders; that which grew from the crown of her
head down to her forehead, being of a yellow color, was crowned with a
garland of young Laurel; in her left hand she bare a gilded Bow and a Quiver
of arrows hanged on her right shoulder, and in her other hand she bare a taper
burning: after the young men had gone three times about Neoptolem is sepulture
in their bravery, the women cried out pittiously, and the men made a strange
noise, with that Theagines speaks to Caricles. Theag. Most sacred Priest of
this high Deity
We make request unto you to begin
This sacri^ice to Neoptolemus.

Caric. The sacrifice indeed belongs to me,
But you ^ir, as the Captain o^ this charge,
And sacred mess^ge, ought to take the taper
Of her there, who of all those ceremonies
Is p^esedent, and burn the alter of;
This is the order and our Country f^shion.

Theagnes takes the taper with a great deal of reverence from the hand of
Cariclea, and sets fire to the Alter, b^t first he was in a maze at the
exceeding beauty of Cariclea, and she as much taken with his, then they both
smiled a little and blushed and then became pale again: in conclusion he f^ll
in love with her, and she with him. Theag. So burns my heart as does this
Alter here,
The taper that did set my heart a fire
Was fair Caricleas beauty. aside.

Cariclea. How my soul
Could sacrifice to fair Theagines. aside.

Caricles. Great god of Delphos in whose sacred temple
We celebrate these funeral obsequies
Of great Achilles son, vouchsafe to send
A happy omen which may crown this work
Of our devotion offered at thy Altar.

The Oracle speaks touching Theagines and Cariclea. Ye men of Delphos sing of
her, and her rare beauties praise,
Who now in grace begins to grow, but fame shall end her days,
Who leaving these my temples here, and sailing surging streams
Shall come at length to contries scorched with Phoebus burning beams,
Where they as recompenses due that virtues rare do gain
In time to come ere it be long White miters shall obtain.
After this answer of the god Apollo, the pomp is broken up, and Exeunt. Actus
secundi, Scena octava.
Enter the judges and people of Athens, then Aristippus And Demeneta with
Cnemon bound. 1 Judge. Cnemon stand forth, who does accuse him here?


Aristippus steps forth, and strewing ashes on his head, says: Aristip. I
brought not up my son ye men of Athens
To see him come unto this end, but rather
To be a staff to stay my age upon;
As soon as he was borne his education
Was good and civil, when he did attain
To riper years, I set him to our schools
And Academies there to study arts,
And Mathematicke sciences, besides,
According to the laws of this our City,
Made him free denison, yet notwithstanding
He has not only cast behind his back
These favors of my love, but diversely
Both injured me, and beaten this good woman,
Who by our laws is now my second wife;
And not content herewith, one night he came
Unto us with a drawn sword in his hand
(When we in bed suspected no such thing)
In mind to kill us both, and was no farther
From being a paracide but that by chance
His sword by sudden fear fell out his hand,
Which Demeneta my good wife took up:
Therefore I flee to you most learned Judges,
And though I might by law of this our Senate
Slay him with my own hands, yet I appeal
Unto your justice, and commit my cause
To your grave censures, counting it more fit
To punish this my son by public law
Then private bloodshed.

With that Aristippus weeps, Demeneta faining tears also. Demen. Cnemon, i am
sorry for thee pretty boy,
In an ill hour were thou brought to the world;
Unhappy creature.

Cnem. Grave and learned senate
Vouchsafe to hear me speak.

2 Judge. We will not hear thee,
But answer to this question we propound,
Came you unto your father with a sword
Drawn in your hand, or no?

Cnem. I not deny
But I came with a drawn sword in my hand,
But I will tell you how, please you to hear me.

3 Judge. He has confessed enough, he ought not speak more for himself.


1 Judge. Let us proceed to sentence.


2 Judge. I judge him worthy to be stoned to death.


3 Judge. I to be hanged.


4 Judge. This is my sentence, fathers,
That he be cast headlong into the dungeon.

Cnem. O cruel stepmother, and most unkind,
For thy cursed sake am I so ill entreated
Against all equity and justice too,
Thou kil'st me contrary to course of Law.

1. Judge. Your sentence is too hard and too severe,
Let him not die, but be for ever banished.

2 Judge. Let him be stoned.


3. Judge. Nay hanged.


4. Judge. nay cast into
The dungeon.

1. Judge. since we differ conscript fathers,
In our opinions, I do think it fit
It be referred unto the peoples voices.

2. Judge. I do assent unto it.


3 Judge. So do I.


4. Judge. And I.


1. Judge. Then people give your voices, shall young Cnemon
Die or be banished!

The people. banished, banished, banished.


1. Judge. Then Cnemon, this must be thy punishment,
Perpetual exile from thy native land
Never to be revoked, which if infringed
By thy presumption, then expect to have
No mercy from the senate, but a grave.
Break up the Court. Exeunt,

Actus secundi, Scena nona.
Enter Caricles, and Calasiris. Caric. Saw you my only joy, and the sole honor
Of Delphos, fair Cariclea my daughter?

Calas. This was not sir the first time that I saw her
As often as the people made resort
Unto the temple I was present with her,
And more, we have done sacrifice together,
And when she doubted any point depending,
On divine matters, or on humane learning;
She would have me instruct her in the truth.

C^ric. How did you like her at the sacrifice?
Did she set forth that brave sight any thing?

Calasiris. You ask me a strange question Caricles,
As if you doubted, whether the bright moon
Did pass the lesser stars.

Caric. The people praised
Theagines the young Thessalian captain,
Attributing the second place to him.

Calasires. Yea, and the third too, but they all acknowledge
Your daughter carried it away, and was
The very eye of the solemnity.

Caric. Come will you go with me to visit her
I doubt the concourse of so great a troop
Has preiudic'd her rest.

Calasir. though my affairs
Call me another way, yet i will dispense
With them how great so ever and important
To wait on you and her exeunt

Actus secundi, Scena decima.
Enter Cariclea love sick, she lies upon her bed Cariclea. O cruel power of
love! why do thou triumph
In lovers restles pains? what glory can
Be added to thy deity in seeking
The overthrow of my poor liberty?
Take here this tribute of my tears, these sighs,
Sent from a gentle heart, convaey them hence
That they may meet Theagnies, and flow
With his as from one fountain, from one head.

To her enters Caricles and Calasiris, Caricles embraces her Caric. What ailes
my sweet, my dear Carcilea,
Tell me my daughter.

Cariclea. Nothing but my head
Does ache a little, and I feign would sleep.

Cariclea faines her self asleep. Caric. What should this mean good
Calasiris think you,
What disease has she taken?

Calasir. You need not marvel
At this, for I believe some envious eye
Has over looked her.

Caric. I must laugh at this,
Then you believe as commonly men do,
That there is witch craft

Calasiris. Yes as I believe
That anything is true, and for this cause,
The empty air that is about us round
On every side, entering in by our eyes,
Our mouth, our ears our nostrills, all our pores,
Carrying such outward qualities with it
As it is indew'd with, does ingraffe a like
Infection in the man who has received it;
As when a man has enviously beheld
Something that is excellent forthwith the air
Is filled with that poisonous quality,
Which enters into that is near at hand,
This same air being a slender suble thing
Pierces even to the bones and very marrow,
And by that cause has envy been the means
Or that disease, which by a propper name
We call bewitching.

Caric. Your wise reasons bear
Some probility I must confess.

Cala. Consider Caricles how many have
Gotten the plague, although they never touched
Nor saw, nor eat, nor lay wi^h the deseas'd,
B^t being with them in the selfsame air,
Let love be argument and proof of this,
Who takes its beginning from the object
Or what it sees, and so as if it were
Some privy passage by the eyes has entrance
Into the heart, and this is probable,
For seeing of all other pores and senses
The sight is capable of most mutations,
And so the hottest, it must needs receive
Such like infections as are round about it,
And with a hot spirit entertain loves changes,
As for examples sake, I will produce
Out of the holy books some reasons for it
Gathered from natures sole consideration;
You know the bird Charadrius does heal
Those persons whose disease is the kings evil,
Which bird does fly away as soon as any
Diseased with this grief has spied her,
And turns her tail to him, and shuttes her eyes
Not (as some say) because she would not help them
But that by looking on them she by nature
Draws that disease unto her, therefore wisely
Declineth such a sight as present peril,

Caric. You have discussed this doubt right sagelie Sir,
I would my daughter once might feel and find
What love does mean, I would not then conceive
That she were sick, but in her perfect health,
But nothing less then this is to be thought
Has happened to her, who contemnes all love,
But rather seems to be bewitched indeed;
Dear Calasiris for our friendships sake
Show some point of your wisdom to dissolve
This witchchraft, and if possible to bring her
Into a good opinion of my nephew.

Enter Nebulo with a bastinado in his hand. Nebulo. Sirs what dee mean to make
such tarriance? Theagines has made such a feast, and all the good cheer will
be eaten before you come, for shame come away, there are none of the ghestes
wanting but you who are the principal, if you will be such fools to miss it,
you may, but i will not follow your foolish example.


Calasiris. This fellow calls us rather ^o a battle
Then to a banquet.

Caric. It Is his rustieke manner;
O what a lo^ty fellow Bacchus is
When he is well washed! but come let us go
Least with his cudgel honest Nebulo
Do drive us forward.

Nebulo. Well firs you may jest,
But I mean earnest if I miss the feast.

Exeunt. Finis actus secundi.
Actus tertii, Scena prima.
Enter Aristippus solus in a melancholy humor. Aristip. How have I played the
fool and robbed my self
In hasty passion of my only son;
Repentance when it comes too late does argue
An inconsiderate judgment; O my Cnemon
Would thou had killed me ere I banished thee,
For death is better sure then banishment;
Nere shall I see my boy, well for this fault
I will do penance, penance on my self;
Athens adieu and all the City pleasures
Forsake me quite; my solitary manor
Far in the country where no people comes
Shall be my habitation day and night
Where I will eat my heart out. Exit Aristippus.

Enter Demeneta and Thisbe. Demen. Oh my Cnemon,
My pretty boy, more dear then my own life,
How I lament thy chance and my mishap.

This. Comfort your self dear mistress I beseech you.


Demen. Peace fool, my grief is more then can be cured
By any words of comfort, no man knows
What a sharp corsive it was to my heart,
More fervent is my love now he is absent.

This. Fie, fie, forget him, think upon his pride
And high disdain against you, think he does
Deserve this punishment and greater too.

Demen. How ready thou art Thisbe to do mischief,
Thou art the fire brand that have kindled this
Combustion in my heart, thou have not been
A help unto me, but a hinderance
In the fruition of my love, by thee
And by thy means I h^ve lost my only joy,
And yet for all this thou do still incense me
To run on in this way; most wicked wretch.

This. Well I perceive your mind, she thinks to make me
Support the fury of her frantic fits,
But I shall overreach you sure in wit,
And lay the saddle on the right horse back, aside.
Why do you thus accuse your trusty servant?
You know I did but what I was commanded,
Nor ere did any thing without your warrant,
If this thing happened not as you would have it,
Ascribe it not to any fault in me,
But r^ther, as you justly may, to fortune;
If you will have me yet devise some way
To remedy your present grief and sorrow,
You shall perceive how ready my good will
Shall be at your commands.

Demen. What remedy
Can possibly be found, since he that can
Ease me, and none but he, is separated
At such a distance from me? and besides
Th'unhop'd for lenity of those which gave
Sentence against him has destroyed my hopes.
I would he had suffered death, for then in me
H^d quenched been the flames of burning love.
Hope that is past removes grief from the heart,
And when despair possesses troubled minds
They in^ermit all sorrow building on
Th'impossibility of their enjoying;
But as it is methinkes I see and hear
Cnemon complaining of my cruelty,
And how by unjust guiles I did ensnare him;
Sometimes me thinks he comes to me as if
I should enjoy him, othertimes I bend
My course to him where ere he lives remote;
These things inflame me, these things make me mad,
But O ye gods, I have as I deserve;
Why did I not with good will seek to win him
Rather then by deceit and craft compel him?
Why did I not most humbly sue unto him
Rather then wrong him like an enemy?
It may be at the first he did deny me
For maiden modesty, and fear to foul
His fathers sheets, but had I persever'd
Unto the end, he might have been allured
To condescend by fair means to my will;
But O my Thisbe tell me, tell me quickly
What remedy is that thou would devise
For me and say is easy?

This. Mistress this:
All men suppose that Cnemon is departed
The town of Athens and the territory
As he was judged to do, but I know well
(Who have searched all things merely for your sake)
That he remains here still in secret manner
With one Arsinoe whom I think you know,
She plays well on the Virginals, with her
He lies every night, for this fair maid
Won with his love, and pitying his distress
Received him in, and promises as soon
As all things are provided for her journey,
To go away with him.

Demen. O happy wench,
Happy Arsinoe is thy destiny,
Though banishment or death with such a partner;
But what do these things ought advantage me?

This. Much, i will pretend I am in love with Cnemon,
And will desire for old acquaintance sake,
Arsinoe would be pleased to suffer me
In stead of her to lie with him one night,
Which if I can obtain, it shall be yours,
You shall enjoy him in Arsinoes stead,
And i will provide before he go to bed
He shall have wine sufficient, least our plot
Should be discovered; if you have your wish,
Rest then contented to give over your love,
For in most natures it is easily seen
That such love whose beginning's violent
After the first experiment decays
And waxes cold, but grant it burn a fresh
Within your bosom (which ye gods forbid)
It Is but to make a new voyage, and seek out
A new way to atchieve it.

Demen. I approve,
And praise thy rare invention dearest Thisbe;
Fail not to put this plot in execution,
And I shall well reward thee.

This. Fear it not,
I crave but three days to bring this about.

Demen. It Is granted; if thy wit can work my pleasure,
How I shall love my Thisbe beyond measure! Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena secunda.
Enter the banquet, after Theag. Caric. and Calasi. with attendance. Theag.
Welcome my honored friends, and holy fathers
To my poor Table here, please you to sit
And eat of what the gods have sent us.

Caric. Sir,
Superabundant are your cates and dainties,
Fair Cleopatra that luxurious Queen
Might revell here, and be contented too,
We that are Priests use to such dainty fare
Whose lives are squared by rules of temperance.

Theag. We will not cause you break those rules, nor swerve
From your religious order, but sometimes
A little Wine will much inflame your zeal
To holy duties, reverend Caricles
I must begin to you. drinks to him.

Caric. Theagines, I must return you thanks.
Theagines on a sudden falls into musing, sighs, and changes his countenance
sometimes red, sometimes pale, and gapes withal, as if he were not well. What
means this variety? I think
Some envious eye has looked upon him too,
Methinkes Cariclea and Theagenes
Haave one disease. -- softly to Calasires

Calas. By Isis that they have
One and the same disease, thus it appears:
Since he next to your daughter was the fairest
Of all the show at that brave sacrifice.

Theagenes begins to recollect himself. Theag. Sirs, pardon my stupidity and
dullness,
A little fit of passion did possess me,
But now it is past, here worthy Calasiris,
I drink a health to the fair president
Of our late funeral pomp.

Calas. Excuse me Sir,
I drink no healths, yet thank your courteous proffer.

Theag. Refuse Caricleas health?


Caricles. Sir, be not angry,
This man never drinks wine, nor eats the flesh
Of any living thing.

Theag. That Is strange, how comes it?


Caricles. He Is an Egyptian, borne at holy Memphis,
And Isis Priest, whose custom is t'abstaine
From wine and flesh as things unlawful.

Theag. Then
Bring me some water, wise and reverend man,
Pardon my ignorance which knew it not;
Now Sir to you in your own element,
And let this table make a lasting league
Of amity between us.

Calas. Let it be so,
Worthy Theagenes, for I do much
Desire that combination.

Theag. Ere you go
Please you to see a dance in armor, called
Pyrricha, which we use in Thessalie.

Caricles. What pleases you does please us.


Theag. Sound music then.


The Thessalian youths with Theagenes their Captain, dance Pyrricha in armor,
with a graceful dexterity, which ended, the Priests take their leaves, and bid
Theagenes adieu. Caricles. Thanks for our worthy entertainment Sir.


Theagenes embraces Calasiris very often, and at parting whispereth him
something in the ear. -- Exeunt all. Actus tertii Scena tertia.
Enter Calasiris solus. Calas. 'Twas not a dream or such like fantasy,
As oftentimes invades and creepes into
The minds of men, when Morpheus shuts their eyes,
That took me last night napping in my bed:
No, it was no dream, but a true apparition.
I saw Apollo, and Diana both
Appear before me, and with them they brought
Theagenes and fair Cariclea,
Apollo gave me him, Diana her,
With this command, go take these young folks with thee,
And haste thee home unto thy native country,
It Is time, for so the Destinies command,
Love them as if they were thy natural children,
And when thou comst to Egypt, lead them further,
Where it shall please us gods to give direction;
With that they vanished, and a token gave
That it was not a dream, or a false vision:
Immortal powers, your hests I will obey,
If you vouchsafe to point me out the way. one knockes.
Who Is there?

Theag. It Is I, Theagenes your friend.


Calas. Theagenes, the 'brave Thessalian Captain,
Most welcome Sir, what business was of force
To make you stir so early?

Theag. Reverend Father,
A stirring one which keeps my thoughts awake,
And banisheth sweet slumber from mine eyes,
Has made me break your morning meditations,
And though I suffer beyond thought of man,
Yet blush I to reveal my grief for shame.

Calas. Come, come, I know your grief, although you are
Ashamed to tell it me, I know it well,
For nothing from my wisdom can be hid,
And from the knowledge of the gods my son.
Calasiris casts some account upon his finger, as if he would prophecy.
Young man, thou art in love, nay, start not back,
Thou art in love with fair Cariclea.

Theagines embraces him about the neck. Theag. Thy prophecy is true, I am in
love
With fair Cariclea, save me learned man;
For without help I cannot live a day,
So much this mischief works upon my heart;
I never till now knew the effects of love,
Nor ere saw woman that I thought deserved
To be beloved, before Caricleas beauty
Made me a slave to Cupids cruelty.

Calas. Weep not Theagines, be of good cheer;
For since you have recourse to me for help,
My wisdom shall prevail above her strength,
Although she be perverse, and easily
Will not be drawn to love, I Will try all means
For your sake whom I love, and use all art
I can to break her nature, be but bold,
And do as I shall show you.

Theag. With my soul,
And if you do this, I am yours, and all
I have at your command. -- one knockes.

Calas. Who Is there, be gone
Theagines, to morrow morn I Will meet you
In great Apollos Temple and talk more. -- Exit Theagines.
Enter Nebulo. O, is it you Sir Nebulo, what news
Bringst thou I prithee?

Neb. What dee take me for, a news Carrier? I would you should know it, I am
none such, I have not to do with other men's business nor their wives, I would
they had not to do with mine, but it is no matter for once, there is promised a
reformation, I hope all will be amended, let it pass; but to the point now.


Calas. I, to the point Nebulo by all means.


Neb. And then to the business afterward.


Caricles. Why, did thou not mean the business when thou mention'dst the
point? is it not all one in the sense? I conceive it so, else thou art more
learned than I am.


Neb. No, it is not all one, the point is one thing, and the business another, we
must first handle the point, before we come to the business; for your better
understanding, I will make it plainer.


Calas. Thou art a very learned Doctor sure, in matters of this nature.


Neb. I hope so, yet my wife has gone beyond me I Will besworne, by many degrees.


Calas. But Nebulo, prithee what would thou have with me? how does thy
Master, and my good friend Caricles?


Neb. In health, but doggedly out of tune, he will be with you presently, so
much he bid me tell you, and something else, but I have forgott^n it, so much
business I have to think of.


Enter Caricles. Calas. My dearest friend and brother, welcome to me,
Why do you look with such a sullen cheer?
Methinks you're very s^d and melancholy.

Caricles. I am indeed, and I have reason for it.
I come to crave your counsel what to do,
But first depart and leave us Nebulo.

Neb. Wherefore I pray? well, there will be a sweet counsel now I am excluded,
I should be loath to change heads with either of them for all my horns. -- Exit
Nebulo.


Caricles. My daughter, Sir, since yesterday, the race
Was run in armor tweene Theagenes
And stout Ormenes, has been wondrous sick,
And the last night did never sleep one wink.

Calasiris. Who won the garland Sir?


Caric. Theagines,
Cariclea as the custom is did hold
The prize, and he received it at her hand,
She still grows worse and worse, dear Calasiris,
Employ your skill and wisdom to restore her,
I know it is easy for you if you please
To heal her, who, you say, is but bewitched,
For I believe it is not impossible
For holy Priests to bring to pass strange things.

Calas. Let Us go then if you please unto the maid,
And by recommendation strive to make
Me more familiarlie acquainted with her,
That she the bolder may sustain my cure.

Caric. Content, Apollo grant a good success
Unto thy work, and Aesculapius. Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena quarta.
Enter Aristippus and Thisbe. This. Master I doubt not but my sudden coming
Appears strange as being unexpected,
The cause whereof I will relate unto you
Without more circumstance, or vain preambl^^;
I come here to accuse my self unto you;
And to receive such punishment as your
Discretion shall think fit for my offense;
By me sir you have partly lost your son,
I do confess I was an accessory,
Though much against my will; when I perceived
My mistress lived not well, but wronged your bed,
Not only provident to shun the danger
Might light upon my self for keeping counsel
(If it should come to light by any other)
But chiefly sorrowful for your mis-hap,
Who should in recompense of all your kindness
Unto your wife, reap such disgrace from her,
I came one night to my young master Cnemon,
(My self not daring to acquaint you with it)
And told him there was one who used to play
The lecher with my mistress, he enraged,
Thinking that then they were in bed together,
Took suddenly his sword into his hand,
And notwithstanding that I told them then
They were not at their sport, he would not hear me,
But thinking that I had repented of
Bewraying it, ran like a mad man forth
Unto your bedside with intent to kill
Th'adulterer, what followed sir you know:
Now to confirm that this I say is true,
If so you please, this night i will show your wife
My mistress Demeneta with her friend
A bed together in a neighbors house
Without the City.

Aristip. If thou can do this,
I Will make thee free, and pardon all thy faults,
For I suppose I should revive again
So I revenged were on my enemy;
I had such a suspicion in my head
That she was false, but kept it to my self,
Because I wanted clear proofs to convince her,
But what must I do Thisbe, tell me wench?

This. You know the garden where the monument
Of Epicures does stand, there come a little
Before the night and stay for me; adieu. Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena quinta.
Enter Arsinoe and Thisbe. Ars. My old acquaintance welcome, welcome Thisbe.


This. Thanks good Arsinoe, will you teach me now
A lesson on the Virginals?

Ars. You jeere me,
I feign would learn of you: but prithee tell me
What business brought thee hither?

This. I will tell thee,
You know Feledemus the dauncer

Ars. Yes.


This. We too must dance la volta here to night,
Let Us have a chamber and a bed made ready
Sweet sister, for I Have promised him this night
He shall come first, and I will follow after,
As Soon as I to bed have brought my mistress.

Ars. All things shall be according to thy wish,
My better half.

This. But when he comes I pray you
Be out the way, for he is very shame-fac'd
As being a novice in this art.

Ars. Is he
Not entered yet?

This. Not yet I can assure ye,
His flower is yet to spend and strength of youth.

Ars. That flower thou soon wilt crop, and wast the seed.


This. In time I may, at night expect me sister.


Ars. I Will wait you home.


This. If this my plot do hit
Nere was the like devised by woman's wit. Exeunt.

Enter Demeneta, and Thisbe again with a candle. Thisbe. Come mistress, let me
make you unreadie instantly, all that I promised you is done, I will go fetch
young Cnemon unto you who is making merry here by, and return suddenly, lie
down, take your pleasure and say nothing. Exit Thisbe.


Enter Thisbe followed by Aristippus. This. Bind the adulterer fast master.

With that she ran to the door and made it give so great a crash as she could,
crying out in this manner: O wonderful thing, the villain is fled, take heed
sir that you be not again deceived.


Arist. Peace be of good cheer, I have this wicked and mischievous woman which
I most desired.

O thou much hated of the gods, I have thee
And all thy shame about thee, come thou shall
With me unto the City, to receive
What punishment the laws allot to such
As live unchaste, and wrong their husbands bed,
Which is no less then death.

Aristippus dragges her along, but she pulling herself out of the old man's
hands, fell suddenly of purpose into a pit made in the stage, and so ended her
life. Aristip. See Thisbe, is she dead?


This. Oh yes, her neck
Is broaken sir.

Aristip. Then has thy punishment
Prevented what the law should have inflicted;
I Will to the people and declare this matter,
And with my friends consult what means to use
For to call home my son from banishment,
Whose truth and innocence does open lie
By this unheard of strange discovery. Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena sexta.
Enter Cariclea, she lies down upon the bed indisposed, her kinsfolk^ weeping
about her, then enter Caricles and Calasiris. Caric. My child, my daughter
dear, tell me thy father
The cause of thy disease, have a good heart,
This wise man Calasiris is requested
By me to find some remedy to cure thee,
And he can well perform it as a man
Of heavenly knowledge, and a sacred priest.
My most endeered friend, you shall do well
To suffer him to exercise his art
And holy spells for your recovery,
For I perceive thou art ore-look'd my child.

Caric. Sir it is my duty to obey your will
In all things you command me.

Calas. Then depart
Dear Caricles, and all the rest avoid
The room, we must be private here together,
Fetch me a little Laurel and a stool
Having three feet, some fire and frankincense,
And let no man disturb us till I call.
It shall be done forthwith, heavens crown your work.

Exeunt all but Cariclea, and Calasiris. Calasiris begins to burn
frankincense, to mumble with his lips, to lay laurel upon her from top to toe,
to gape and make strange gestures, while Cariclea, wagged her head often and
smiled. Caric. Father you are deceived in my grief,
You cannot guess at it for all your art.

Calas. Nay daughter say not so, but cheer your self,
For what does vex you is a malady
Common, and easy to be cured by me;
Thou were o're-look'd not only at the pomp
Of Pirrhus funeral rites, but at the race
In armor too when you were overseer,
And gave the prize unto the conqueror;
Theagenes was he that overlooked you,
Whose want on eye was always fixed upon
Your splendant beauty object of his sight.

Caric. Whether he daign'd to look on me or no
Apollo have him in his custody;
But whence is he, and what is his pedigree?

Calas. He Is a Thessalian borne, and as you heard
Descended from Achilles, who although
He have bewitched you with an envious eye,
He suffers more than you by the reflex
Of your Sun-burning eyes upon his heart.

Caric. Why do you wrongfully accuse the man
Of witchcraft, who has done no harm at all,
There Is no such matter, it is some other sickness.

Calas. Then tell me daughter, and conceal it not
If you desire to find a remedy,
I am no stranger to you but your friend,
and old acquaintance of your loving father,
I am of your profession too, a priest,
I Will keep your counsel, and be bound by oath
To help you what I can; all griefs are cured
In the beginning, but if left alone
At length they grow incurable; declare
Your mind at full.

Caric. I love Theagines.


Calasiri^. I knew so much before, he loves you too,
I Will be your faithful friend and true assistant.

Enter Caricles, with Acestinus a skillful physician. Caric. Dear friend what
have you done? what news have
You to tell me that is good?

Calasir. All shall be well
Cariclea shall be healed to morrow morn
Of her infirmity, I now will leave you
To prosecute my business for her health.

Caric. Adieu dear friend, the gods reward thy pain.
Here Acestinus, lies the sickly patient Exit Calasiris.
You are well read in physic, feel her pulse
And give your wise opinion.

Ac^stin. fairest maid
Where does your pain lie most?

She turned her face from him, and repeated with a loud voice this verse of
Homer, Achilles is the bravest man of all the Greekish rout. Ac^st. Her state
of heart I find Priest Caricles,
My labor is in vain, no physic can
Restore her to her health.

Caric. The gods forbid,
Why say you so, must my dear daughter die
Without all hope of her recovery?

Ac^st. Peace make not such ado, but here me speak.
Our art sir, does extend no further then He draws Caricles aside.
To cure distempered bodies, if the mind
Diseased be without the bodies sickness,
We have no help for that, the maids disease
L^es in the mind, her body's in good state,
No humors do abound there, no headache,
No fever burns her, all is free within.

Caric. What then should be the cause of these her fits,
Utter what y^u perceive does trouble her,
I do beseech you, skillful Acestinus.

Acestin. It Is love does trouble her, which who knows not
Is an affection and grief of the heart,
Do you not see her eyes swollen in her head
Rouling one every side, her visage pale,
Her half distraction, how she utters
What ere comes in her mind, and sleeps but little;
In brief I do perceive that she has lost
The moisture of her body, and indeed
Just amplitude thereof, my counsel is
You find her out a man and that with speed. Exit Acestinus.

Caric. A man, heavens grant she be inclined that way,
Then Calasiris has played well his part;
How fares my daughter now, what sickness have thou?
Shall I send for more Doctors yet?

Caric. It Is needless,
Send none to me but Calasiris only,
He has the art to ease me, and none else.

Caric. I Will send him to thee, sleep Cariclea,
Until he come: if Alcamenes love
Possess her heart, thanks to the gods above. Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena septima.
Enter at one door Theagines, at another Calasiris. Theag. My worthy friend
most opportunely met.


Calasi. What, beautiful Theagines!


Theag. How can he
Be beautiful that pleases not Cariclea?

Calasir. No more, you make me angry thus to doubt
My skill by which she is entrap'd in love,
And longs to see you.

Theag. What is that you say?
Does fair Cariclea wish to see me father?
Why do you then detain me here, and not
Conduct me to her? Theagines offers to run forth, Calasiris catches him by
the cloak, and holds him fast.

Calas. Nay sir stay a while,
Though you are very nimble of your feet,
You must not think this matter must be handled
As if it were a prize for every man
That list to get it, take my counsel first;
Know you not that her father Caricles
Is the chief man in Delphos? that the laws
Give present death to such as steal a maid
Without their friends consent? be wise my son.

Theag. The matter were not great although I died
After I had enjoyed Cariclea,
Death for her sake is life, but Calasiris
If you think good, let us demand her of
Old Caricles her father for my wife,
I do suppose my blood is high enough
To be commixt with his.

Calas. We shall not speed,
Not that he thinks you any way unworthy,
But 'cause she is promised to his sisters son
By him in marriage.

Theag. O ye gods above,
It cannot be, nor shall it by your leaves,
Theagenes, and none but he shall wed
Cariclea, who ere presumes to touch
My goddess but my self, shall sure repent it,
This hand is not benumbed, nor this sword blunt
But it can take revenge.

Calas. It shall not need,
Theagines be patient, be but ruled
By me, and we will bring all things to pass
According to your wish; now leave me here
Alone to project on your good, be careful
You be not seen oft-times to talk with me,
But when you come, come private and alone
To shun suspicion.

Theag. Farewell reverend Father. Exit Theagenes.
Enter Caricles. So efficacious is your wisdom sir,
So forceable our friendship, as it has wrought
That effect I wished upon my daughter,
Cariclea is in love and quite subdued
By strong affection, who before was stubborn
Unto so sweet a yoke.

Calas. I knew my charms
Were of sufficient force to do the feate,
But can you tell as well what man she loves
As that she is in love?

Caric. No by Apollo,
Would Alcamenes were the man she loved
My sisters son, I have endeavored it
All that I can to make her fancy him.

Calas. It Is best you bring him to her, and so try
The aim of her affection, mutual sight
Of lovers kindles sparks which else would die
Raked up in ashes of forgetfulness.

Caric. I Will take your counsel.


Calas. And return with news
How you have sped.

Caric. I Will give you a relation. Exit Caricles.


Calas. I must convey them hence, this task is laid
Upon me by the gods, but where I know not.
The Oracle is mystical and dark,
I cannot well interpret what it means,
We must begin our voyage by sea it seems,
As may be gathered by the Oracle
Where it is said, and sailing surging streams
Shall come at length to countries scorched with Phoebus burning beams. If I
could by any means get the Fascia now, which was laid out with Cariclea,
wherein Caricles said he h^ard all the maid estate was notified, I should be
instructed more particularly what I ought to do, and whether the Ladies of
destiny would send us. Enter Caricles.

Now brother what success?

Caric. Oh woeful news,
My daughter seems distracted, such a strange
Infirmity does seize her, when I brought
My nephew Alcamenes to her fight
Freshly apparel'd, as if Gorgons head
Appeared, or some more fearful thing, she cried
With a loud voice, and turned her countenance
From him and me, withal she put her hand
Unto her throat, threatening to kill her self
And bound it with an oath, if we departed
Not suddenly the chamber, which we did
In Less time then she spoke it, least she should
Put that in execution which she said;
Now Calasiris once again I come
Most humbly to beseech you that you will not
Suffer the maid to perish, nor her father
Be fr^strate o^ his purpose.

Calasiris. Caricles,
It Is true your daughter is distract in mind,
For she is moved which the multitude,
Which I have b^rth^^'d her of purpose with,
They are not of the least but such as should
Force he^ to do what she abhorred most
As Well by nature as decree of mind,
But I suppose some god does take in hand
To hin^er this design and strive to cross
My ministers, therefore it is requisite
And time you show me that same Fascia
You said was found with fair Cariclea
Amongst her costly jewels, for I fear
Least that it be enchaunted stuff and wrought
With such things as do now exasperate
Her mind, by reason that some enemy
As Soon as she was borne had this ordained
To keep her from all love and thought of marriage
That she might die, and leave behind noe issue.

Caric. It Is probable; it may be so indeed.
Come go with me, and I will show you all
What in the Fascia is contained and written,
I understand it not, character
Is Ethiopian, and the letters are
Not common, but such as the princes use
Of Egypt in their holy businesses.

Calas. I understand the Ethiopian tongu^,
Which unto thee I must interpret wrong.

Exeunt. Finis Actus tertii.
Actus quarti, Scena prima.
Enter Calasiris, Theagines and Cariclea. Calas. Come let us away my children,
let us away,
Why do we linger here? the gods commands
Must be obeyed, all things are ready for
Our secret flight, a ship for Memphis bound
Waits us without, the wind comes gently from
Th'adjoyning shore, and stays to swell the sails
With pride till you imbarke, see here the Fascia,
Which by a sly devise from Caricles
I have obtained, nothing does hinder us
To meet this long wished opportunity,
If you have got your jewels, dearest jewel,
From your supposed father.

Caric. Calasiris.
I have them all, but how gat you I pray
The Fascia from old Caricles, for when
He had received me from Sysimethres,
Who brought me up, he brought me here to Greece
I know not how, and took the Fascia from me,
Which in a chest he did preserve and keep.

Calas. How I came by it you shall know hereafter,
But can you tell me what it does contain?

Caric. How should I as being never told by any?
Besides although I oftentimes had seen it,
I could not understand the character,
Pray sir, interpret what it does contain.

Cala. It does declare your parents and your Country,
And all your fortunes, thus I read it to you
Verbatim as it stands, give your attentions.

The Fascia.
Persina Queen of the Aethiopians to her daughter, only in sorrow by what
name soever she shall be called, does write in haste this lamentation contained
herein, as her last gift. My daughter, the sun being author of our sto^ke,
is witness that for no mis-deed, I have cast thee forth, and concealed thee
from thy father Hydaspes sight, yet I would have my self excused to thee, if
thou happen to live, and to him that shall find thee if the gods procure any,
and therefore I declare the cause of thy exposition, after king Hydaspes had
been married to me ten years, and we had never a child, we happened one time
to rest us after dinner in a gallerie where hung rare pictures and images,
amongst which were those of Perseus and Andromeda portrayed as when he first
redeemed her from the rock, at this time your father lay with me, swearing
that by a dream he was command^d so to do, and I by and by perceived my self
to be with child: but thou were borne white which color is strange among the
Aethiopians. I knew the reason, because I looked sted fastlie upon the picture
of Andromeda naked, and by that means, conceived a thing like to her, yet I
de^ermined to rid my self of shameful death (counting it certain that thy
color would procure me to be accused of adultery, and that none would believe
me when I told them the cause) and to commit thee to the unstablenes of
fortune, which is a great deal rather to be wished for then present death, or
to be called a bastard: and telling my husband that thou were straight dead, I
have privilie laid thee forth with the greatest riches that I had for a reward
to him that shall find thee and take thee up: above all things remember that
thou seek among thy jewels for a certain ring, which thy father gave me when
we were first made sure, in the hoope whereof is a princely posie, the stone
is a Pantarbe of secret virtue, consecrated in the place where it is set. The
gods preserve thee my dearest daughter, and grant us a happy meeting.


Theag. A strange but blessed discovery have thou made
Of fair Caricleas royal pedigree
(Right reverend father) which before lay buried
Deep in the obscure vault of ignorance.
Now princely virgin raise thy glorious head
Above the clouds, and give thy conquering beauty
Command to pull the thunderer from his seat
To serve thee here on earth or in Olympus
Where thou shall please to dwell, and rest not here,
Let Mars be fettered, Mercury a slave,
And bright Apollo dazzled with the sight
Of beams more splendant then his own, fall down
And worship thy appearance, offering thee
His throne to sit upon.

Calas. Theagenes,
Fie, be not such a vain Idolater
The gods may plague you for it.

Theagines. plague me for
Adoring queen Caricles deity?
They are unjust then, for themselves commit
The same Idolatry as well as I.

Calas. That Is but your superstitious jealousy.
Think you the gods will rival you, or love
A mortal Virgin? fie it is blasphemy.

Theag. They have done so, or else the Poets lie,
Witness Europas bull, and Laedas swans
Fair Danaes shower, and Daphnes transformation;
If their poor beauties had that operation
To work such strange effects in heavenly powers,
How much more force, nay violence think you
Has hers, to whose compard, theirs are like glass
To sparkling diamonds.

Caric. My dearest friend,
Forbear these candid raptures of your wit,
Not my desert, and enter into thought
Of what concerns us most.

Theag. Agreed my goddess.


Calas. No more dispute then, but forthwith to sea.
Delphos adieu, the fates call us away. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena secunda.
Enter Arsace and her old baud Cibile. Arsa. So sweet a man as thy description
makes him?


Cib. Nothing inferior Madame, but beyond it;
His body is a Temple stately built,
Where Venus comes and offers turtle doves
To gain his liking.

Arsa. Such a majesty
Accompanying that sweetness too?

Cib. As if
They wedded were together, hand in hand
Walking in so delectable a mansion.

Arsa. So active and broad shouldered as thou say,
So tall and portly?

Cib. Every way provided
To satisfy your pleasure.

Arsa. Thou have kindled
A fire within me; but what Country ownes
This wonder of a man? when landed he
At Memphis shore? who brought him, can thou tell?

Cib. He came with Calasiris from some parts
Of Greece, as I am given to understand,
And landed here last night.

Arsa. Where does he lodge?


Cib. In Calasiris house without the Temple.


Arsa. Thou must devise some way to bring him to me,
And lodge him in our palace, for I have
An itching humor to enjoy the man.

Cib. Let me alone, I am your Ingineer
To work your pleasure.

Arsa. But who is the maid
Thou say did bear him company, and was
So near his bosom?

Cib. I suppose she is
Hi^ sister or his wife.

Arsa. Is she fair as he?


Cib. I never saw one fairer, such a beauty
As would have made Jove stoop, and shaken off
His Eagles borrowed shape, to force a kiss
From her Nectorious hand.

Arsa. Thou make me jealous
With praises of my rival.

Cib. Let not that
Trouble your thoughts, he cannot be so foolish,
That when so great a happiness shall be
Offered unto him as the love and liking
Of fair Arsace Oromdates wife,
Egypts great Deputy, but reverently
Kneel down, and worship such a change in love.

Arsa. If thou can bring, dear nurse, this thing to pass,
Thou shall at once cure two diseases in me,
Fell love and jealousy.

Cib. I doubt it not;
What mad man but will be content to change
His Brass for Gold, his Copper for rich pearl?
Both which he shall enjoy, enjoying you.

Arsa. O what a sugared time have I to use
My sweet disports now that the Deputy
My husband is employed in the war
Against Hydaspes King of Aethiopia
About the Smaragd mines, pray heaven they end not
Before my pleasures period.

Cib. Never fear it.
You shall have time enough to bathe in bliss.

Arsa. See Cibile who knocks there. one knocks.


Cib. Calasiris
And the fair parties.

Arsa. Heavens! conduct them in.


Enter Calasiris, Theagines and Cariclea. Calas. All hail unto the Palace of
my Prince,
Madame it may seem strange unto your Highness,
That I presume to bring these strangers with me
To kiss you Princely hands; I make no doubt
But when you shall be well informed of
Their birth and breeding, it will plead my pardon.

Arsa. What need this complement? you are welcome sir,
So are your friends, when did you ever know me
Unkind to strangers, or inhospitable
To such as these* whose outward looks declare
Their inward minds, and speak their noble parts?
So elegant a grace and stately beauty,
As shines in their countenances cannot
Proceed but from some Princely pedigree,
Pray ^r speak whence you are?

Theag. Most beauteous Lady,
Please you to understand, we are of Greece,
Descended of a Noble family,
Which never produced yet unworthy branches,
Let it suffice (I do beseech your Grace)
We open it no further; we have been
Robbed on the sea by pirates, but redeemed
By Noble Calasiris, and brought here
To Memphis stately City.

Arsa. Is this Lady
Your sister, or your wife?

Theag. My sister Madame,
Tossed equally with me by fortunes blasts.

Arsa. but now those storms are past, and you are in
A quiet harbor: pleasant calmes appear.
Sir, I must rob you of your ghests.

Calas. I durst not
Deny you Madame, though I must confess
I should to any other.

Arsa. Cibile,
Prepare their lodging near our own, and let
No costly furniture be wanting there,

Cib. It shall be done with speed.


Arsa. My noble ghests,
I know not if you would retire alone
Into your private chambers, travel does
Require repose, please you to follow me,
I Will be your glad conductor.

Caric. O I fear
This kindness is some love plot on my dear. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena tertia.
Enter Thisbe sola. This. What sly evasion to put off thy guilt
Is left thee now poor Thisbe? what device
To shun the severe justice of the Law?
All will be now discovered, and my plots
Return upon my self, the heavens are just
In sending Cnemon home from banishment
To punish me in cheering of himself,
Can thou behold his face, or speak one word
In thy defense, when he stands forth t'accuse thee
Before the people? O what shame, what curses
Breathed from a general mouth will weigh thee down
Even to Avernus gulf; I feel the weight
Of my offenses poised in the scale
Of sad despair; O thou incendiary
Of all this mischief, says my guilty thoughts,
Thou murtheresse of thy mistress, hie thee hence
To the infernal shades, where never light
Appears, but gloomy darkness covers all
Under her sable mantle, there find out
Medea, Clitemnestra, Pasiphe,
Long since condemned for murder to this place,
Companions of thy shame; why lingrest thou
Upon the earth? is not thy sin complete.
And ripe for hell? yes, yes, I know it is,
I know it is, my sad despairing thoughts,
I Will follow your suggestions, gentle violl
Reserved for such a use, this kiss from thee
Shall cross the sentence of the Laws decree. She drinks poison.

Enter Aristippus and Cnemon. Arist. Hold, hold thy hand, drink not the poison
down*
Thou desperate woman.

This. Not to gain a crown,
It Is done, and past prevention.

Arist. Thisbe yet
Make thy confession, and subscribe thy hand,
That innocent Cnemon die not.

This. Write it then. Cnemon writes.
I Thisbe do confess young Cnemon was
Unjustly banished, I and Demeneta
Did forge that plot against him, for the which
We have our condign punishment.

Cnem. It Is done, now put your hand to it she signs it.
Dying Thisbe. she dies.

Arist. Son it is enough to clear thee of all things
Can be objected; i will forthwith declare
This matter to the people, and produce
Thisbes confession, strengthened with her han^,
Come with me Cnemon.

Cnem. See the wretched state
O^ false accusers, and their po^sonous fate. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena quarta.
Enter Theagines and Cariclea, to them presently Cibil^. Cibile. My children
great Arsace recommends
Her love unto you, who has seat me here
To serve you in all things that you command,
I Am proud to be employed in your service
Who am a Gr^cian too, and borne in Lesbos:
Most be^utifull young man cheer up thy self,
I bring thee joyful news, Arsace loves thee,
Arsace she whose favor kings have kneeled for,
Does kneel^ to thee petitioning thy love
With rich oblatio^s both of pearl and gold.

Caric. O heavens, my prophecy is too too true,
My jealousy foresaw this.

Theag. Tell Arsace
My sister and my self both kiss her hands
And do return her humble thanks for all
Her noble favors, but that she does love me
I think it strange, whose husband is a man
So far beyond my rank as put in balance
With worthles me, it would not brook the trial.
We know you are her hands, her eyes, her ears,
Her mind, her all, for countries sake persuade her
(I do beseech you) to remove her thoughts
Upon some worthier person; all that we
Desire is one^y this, that she would please
To send us back again to Calasiris,
And never bring strange banished, restless lives
Unto so high and excellent a fortune.

Cib. My son be ruled by me, be not so foolish
To shun this happiness that courts thee now,
Embrace it, least hereafter thou repent
Thy oversight; thou shall have rule and riches,
Dalliance, and all the fruits of flourishing youth,
If thou but condescend unto her will;
But if thou do deny, know that she has
A high and Princely stomach, which nere brooks,
Affronts of such a nature.

Theag. Tempt me not,
But tell your mistress I despise her lust
As much as prize her love, you shall obligue us
Unto you in a bond of love and kindness
To get us leave from her hence to depart
To seek our fortunes.

Cib. Obstinate young man,
That wilt not see thy good, Lady persuade
Your brother to some reason, you may hap
To work upon his nature, and prevail;
I leave you to your selves. Exit Cibile.

Caric. Theagines,
This is no honest dealing, I perceive;
Was it for this she sent us from her table
Such curious viands, and such costly cates?
Was it for this she did adorn our chambers
With stately hangings wrought with sundry colors,
Which came from Sidon and fair Lidia?
Was this her wicked end? would that we were
A hundred leagues from this accursed place,
Or that we never had beheld her face. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena quinta.
Enter Arsace and Cibile. Ars. But will he not be won?


Cib. Not all the art
I have can work him to it.

Ars. Do my favors
Make no impression in him?

Cib. Yes of thanks,
No otherwise, he craves leave to depart,
A sign he does not like his entertainment.

Arsa. ^hou make my hot blood cold within my veins
As if an ague ceaz'd me; how depart,
Ere he get o^t my power, I am resolved
To Enjoy him, or destroy him.

Cib. A right course
Your wit has found out mistress, my advise
Is this, that once more you solicit him
By fair entreaty and persuasive means
To win him that way, but if he stand out
And stubbornly refuse to grant your suit,
Let him be ti'd unto cold fare hard lodging,
And give him up unto your Eunuchs hands
To be scourged and tormented, for young men
Reg^rd not when they are entreated fair,
But when enforced, then they stoop and yield.

Arsa. It Is well advised, but how can I endure
To see that body bleed?

Cib. Madame you are
Too pityfull, if that an eyesore be
To see him scourged, you may refrain^ the sight,
I know twill mollify his haughty stomach
To your desire.

Arsa. First try all means, before
You put this last devise in execution;
But Cibile what cause or color have we
To hold them prisoners, or detain them here
Against their wills?

Cib. We Will give it out, they came
As spies from King Hyd^sp^s army hither,
To view the strength of Memphis.

Arsa. Excellent.
How shall we handle fair Cariclea
His beauteous sister?

Cib. Sister, I believe
She is his mistress rather, for such dalliance
As I have seen between them argues love
Of a more fervent nature; I have come,
And found them kissing with such ardency,
As if they feign would have their souls to meet,
And at their mouths salute.

Arsa. O strange discovery!
If this be true, hence may proceed the cause
Of my repulse and his unkind denial;
Sift out this business further, and observe
Their looks, their gestures, give an ear unto
Their privatest discourse, for this concerns
My business mainely; if Cariclea prove
A bar to my desires, we must remove her.
Go presently and know the young man's mind,
If he will yield yet, but if he refuse,
Let Euphrates the Eunuch punish him
With yrons to pull down his lofty heart.
So far I Am gone, pursuing my desire,
Hell shall not make me now back to retire. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena sexta.
Enter two Judges, then Aristippus and Cnemon. Arist. Although I do not doubt
most learned Judges,
That your grave judgments would acquit my son
Without more proofs then by the sequel of
This business does appear, yet to the end
To make his innocence the more perspicuous
Which has so long strived to break through this cloud
Of falsehood and deceit, I here have brought you
Thisbes confession, and her hand subscribed
For confirmation of it, please you see
What it contains. the Judges read it.

1 Judge. When did she write this?


Arist. Presently upon
Her poisonous draught, her conscience prompting her
Unto so good an action.

2 Judge. Was It voluntarily done without constraint?


Arist. Yes, for what force has power to work upon
The settled resolution of a person
Whom death is ready for to seize upon?
I^ came free from her, the confession was
Her own invention, and the hand her own.

1 Judge. But will you swear to t^is?


Aristip. I will, and safely.
By all the gods it is true, else let me be
Struck with their thunder for my perjury.

2 Judge. It is enough, we do acquit your son,
Long may he live the comfort of your age;
So now dismiss the people, it is done.

Arist. Thus innocence shines cleerer then the sun. Exeunt.


Actus quarti, Scena septima.
Enter Arsace and Cibil^. Ars. Now will he bend or break, yield or endure
More punishment? how do his fetters please him?
How does he bear his stripes?

Cib. With patience
And manly fortitude beyond belief,
Takes glory in his sufferings, and becomes
More unrelenting now then heretofore.

Ars. What a strange nature has this savage man,
Will nothing work upon it? cannot love
Persuade him, nor the force of punishment
Compel him to humanity? some Tigresse
Or she Wolf in the forest was his nurse.
Is there no hope he will relent in time?

Cib. Our labor's lost in the attempting it,
He has Cariclea still before his eyes,
Lodges her in his heart, his mouth expressed it;
I heard him to exclaim thus, dear Cariclea,
My love, my life, my heart, thy only name
Makes me despise my torments, and in thee
I Am comforted what ever fall to me;
Whereby I Am confident she is his wife,
Or secret mistress, wherefore if you please,
Lets (as the proverb says) cast our last anckor,
And seek some means to rid her of her life,
For when he knows she is dead, it is very likely
He Will change his mind, when hope of love is gone.

Arsace. Thy counsel pleases me, and i will command
This stop to be removed presently.

Cibile. How, will you do it without course of Law
Or orde^lie proceeding, who will do
In this point your commandment? for although
All things are subject to you, yet the laws
Are free, and will not let you kill without
The judgment of the Persian magistrates;
Besides we should be careful how we did
Accuse the maid, least we should not be able
To pro^e what we do lay unto her charge.

Ars. How then shall we contrive it?


Cib. D^intily,
By a more sure and far more safe a way,
By a strong subtle cup of deadly poison,
The plot is laid already, and the potion
P^epar'd, I stay but only for the patient
T'administer it.

Ars. Is any gone to call her?


Cib. Yes, Aura madame.


Ars. Well i will leave you then,
Strong physick's best for stubborn natured men. Exit Arsace.

Enter Cariclea, with Aura weeping, and servants. Cib. Why do you weep, sweet
heart? 'twill mar your be^uty,
Your brother shall not long be kept in prison;
Be not so foolish to consume and pine
Away for sorrow, know Theagines
This night shall be released, and come unto thee,
Therefore be merry; 'twas his foolish fault
And disobedience to my mistress service
Made him to be committed; nicety
Is naught in young folks, but all is forgotten,
(Partly at my request) and liberty
Granted unto him, this was the occasion
I sent for you, that you might be partaker
Of this glad news, therefore rouse up your self,
And now at length eat something; Aura lay
The table, I have made some meat, I hope
Will comfort your weak stomach, sure you are
Too blame to fast so long.

Caric. But is this true
That you have told me? you so often have
Deceived me with untruths as I scarce dare
To credit any thing you say unto me.

Cib. By all the gods it is true, which if it be not,
Let me be poisoned at this table here
And be a sad example; more this day
Your business all shall be dispatched, so that
You shall not need to take more care hereafter,
If by refrayning from your meat you do not
Destroy your health and die, pray eat a little.

Caric. On confidence that this is true I will.


they sit down and eat. Cib. Aura give me some wine, Cariclea health
Remember good Theagines.

Aura mistaks and gives the poisoned cupp to Cibile, she drinks, but powers
half of it on the ground when she tasted what it was, looking cruelly upon
Aura, the poison suddenly works and she begins to fall, Cariclea supportes
her. Cib. I will not have thy help, false wretch, I will not thou have poisoned
me, bear witness all here present
That see me die, I lay my death on none
But her and this queen Aura, so inform
Arsace that she may revenge my death. she dies.

Caric. See here the justice of the heavens displaid
To mortal view in this strange accident;
This cup, this poisonous cup was meant to me
By wicked Cibile, but yet it fell
By some mistake to her own lot to drink it.
Arsaces servants bind Cariclea and Aura. What do you mean to bind me a
weak maid,
I Will go without constraint where you will lead me
If It be before Arsace, though I die
I care not so Theagenes be by. Exeunt.

Actus quinti, Scena prima.
Enter Hydaspes and Sysimethres, with attendance. Hydasp. Thus far have we
marched by the banks of Nile,
And conquered Philae, and the Smaragd mines,
Thus far has fortune favored our attempts,
And stern Bellona set our conquering feet
Deep in the bosom of the Egyptian Land;
Are we not now revenged Sysimethres
For thy uncivil barbarous entertainment,
When we employed thee our Ambassador
To Oroondates Deputy of Egypt?
How think you, do they not repent the wrongs
And disrespect they gave thee, contrary
Unto the laws of Nations? do they not
Wish that they had surrendered to our Crown
Those lands we justly challenged for our own?

Sysim. I think they do, and curse their arrogance
That has brought home the wars unto their doors;
It cannot choose but vex their very souls
To see so fruitful and so fair a soil,
Their native Country, over-runne and spoiled
By the incursions of a hostile army.

Hydasp. It Is fit they suffer for their usurpation;
But where lurkes Oroondates since his flight
In our last battle, no news yet of him?

Sysim. Fame gives it out, he is within this town
Of Syene with the remnant of his army.

Hydasp. Will not the Town yet come to composition?
Will it hold out yet longer notwithstanding
Our water-workes to drown them?

Sysim. Royal sir,
As soon as we had cut the banks of Nile
And let the river in upon the town,
The Inhabitants began to see and feel
Their misery, for suddenly the water
Encompassed fair Syene round about
That it became an Island, and by sinking
Into the earth below the walls foundation,
The weight above began to shake as if
It would have fallen down in every place;
Then suddenly arose a piteous cry
Amongst the people of the town, imploring
The gods assistance, and the Deputy
It seems by this extremity constrained
First caused letters tied to a stone
As messengers to be shot to our camp
Out of a sling, and archers from their bows
Sent their swift winged arrows to speak for them,
But both fell short and perished in the water;
At last when we by signs perceived their minds,
As holding up their hands in token of
Submission, and sometimes behind their backs,
In token they were ready to receive
Bands so they might find mercy, we sent out
Some boots to talk with them, who brought us word
They would surrender to your royal hands
The town of Syene, if you would be pleased
To grant some poor conditions.

Hydasp. What a^e they?


Sysim. First Oroondates makes request that he
And all his soldiers without interruption
May march forth as best suiteth their profession,
With all their martial habiliments
And arms about them, next to be convoyed to
Elyphantina with your royal guard;
Else he would rather die then live to be
Condemned as a traitor to his king,
For yielding up the City and betraying
The army, and besides be put to death
With rackes and tortures.

Hydasp. What a fool is he
To make his own conditions, or to argue
Of such a matter? does he not conceive
He is not in his own power, but in ours,
To live or die, why what a madness is it
For conquered men to argue of conditions?
But it is not noble to destroy a number
For one man's folly, go Sysimethres,
Take here our seal and sign their articles,
F^r pity works upon a noble spirit. Exit Sysimethres.

Hydasp. If I could entertain ambitious sparks
Within my royal breast, or never enter
Into examination with my self
Of right or wrong, (as many politicians
And proud usurpers do not) what should let me
From adding this large kingdom to my own,
Stretching my Empire to the mouth of Nile;
But justice sets down limits to my thoughts,
Bounds my ambition in, so that I dare not
Advance one foot beyond it, sacred goddess,
Divine Astrea, though all kings rebel
And pay no reverence to thy deity,
Hydaspes shall adore thee, and his might
shall never be more potent then his right. Exit.

Actus quinti, Scena secunda.
Enter the Persian magistrates as judges with Arsace, then enters Caricles with
Aura bound, they sit. 1 Magist. Is this fair maid the prisoner?


Arsa. Fair without, but foul within.


2 Magist. It Is pity vice should bear
A semblance of fair virtue, or be masked
Under so sweet a veil,
Sure by her looks

3 Magist. I should not judge her guilty.


Arsa. That Is a rule
Deceives us, for the choicest fruits of all
Ofttimes have rotten cores, and underneath
The fairest Hours lurk most the foulest snakes.
That cannot hold,
Bring forth the prisoners;
You are accused for poisoning Cibile,
How do you answer this?

Caric. Who Is my accuser?


Arsa. My self, and these my servants, who were present
When the old woman died, and heard her name
Thee, and that other guilty of her death;
Can thou deny the fact?

Caric. I Will answer thee
Proud dame, if my Theagines live yet,
I say, I am not guilty of this murder,
But if by thy most damnable attempts
His purer soul has left the earthly prison
Of his fair body, I declare my self
Guilty of this and whatsoever else
Thy malice can invent, I was the woman
That poisoned then thy nurse, who trained thee up
To all those goodly virtues of thy mind;
I do desire to suffer, kill me straight
That I may meet my lover, who so stoutly
Resisted thy foul lust, and lewd enticements,
Choosing to die rather then condescend.

Arsa. Base queen, how durst thou take unto thy self
Such liberty of speech? judicious sirs.
And magistrates of Persia, understand
That this she says is false touching my honor;
I take the gods to witness that when first
This woman and her friend came to the Palace,
I entertained them as became the state
Of greater persons, and so long continued
My favors to them till by open proof
I found they came as spies to Memphis sent
From King Hydaspes army, then indeed
I did begin to draw back my affection,
Many more things inciting me to do it
Which I forbear to speak of, but in brief
Although I loved this maid so as to make her
My bosom-friend, and my most dear companion,
She has repaid me as you see, and poisoned
My trusty woman, is it not to be doubted
Her purpose stretched yet further, even to me?

Caric. I do confess yet once again, I poisoned
Thy nurse, and would have done so much to thee
Had I not been prevented.

Aura. O Cariclea,
Unhappy maid, why do thou wrongfully
Accuse thy self, and draw on death upon thee?
Hear me right grave and most impartial Judges,
There is no fault in her, I only, I
Gave Cibile the poison by mistake,
Which was prepared for this virtuous maid
By that old beldame, this is true, or else
Ye gods hurl down your thunder on my head.

2 Magi. But how came this mistake? make it more plain.


Aura. Old Cibile my mistress did prepare
This cup for fair Cariclea, I was forced
To have a hand in it too; when I should give
The poisoned cup unto Cariclea,
And Cibile the other, I know not
Whither being troubled with so strange a deed
Or hastily called on by Cibil^,
I changed the cups, and poisoned the old woman.

Arsa. This is a forged devise, believe it not,
This woman is a traitor, and conspires
With them in all their plots, as privy to them.

3. If she that calls herself Cariclea.
Be guiltless of this business, what should make her
To cast herself into the jaws of death
By her so free confession of the fact?

Aura. Sir I believe she is weary of her life,
And being in desperation e're to see
Much less to enjoy her husband, without whom
Life seems a burden hastens on her death.

1. Madame you must produce some witnesses,
Or we shall clear the prisoners.

Arsa. Here are five
Will be deposed they heard Cibile charge
These two here with her death.

2. What say you friends.
Dare you swear this?

All 5. We dare and will, by Isis,
And all the gods it is so.

3. Then we must pass
Sentence according to the law, which most
Depends on witnesses, your doom is death,
Carry these two forthwith unto the fire,

Caric. O sun, and earth, and all you blessed creatures
That are above or underneath this round
Terrestrial ball, you that do take revenge
On such as work impiety, bear witness
I die an innocent, and willingly
Submit my self to death, for to avoid
The intolerable griefs that burden me;
Vouchsafe to take me gently to your hands,
And speedily inflict your punishments
Upon this whore Arsace, who has plotted
This mischief to no other end and purpose
But to take from me my Theagines. Exeunt.

Actus quinti, Scena tertia.
Enter Caricles solus, Nebulo listening. Caric. Cariclea raped, O gods how can
it be;
Where is your justice then? where our reward
For serving at your altars, when you suffer
Your sacred temples to be robbed and spoyld
Of its chief jewel, and my life, Cariclea?
O sacrilege unheard of! can you sleep
And wink at this? or is your anger to me
Implacable, and therefore to torment
My heart the more, you seem not to regard it?
Was It not enough, O cruel powers, to kill
My daughter at her Nuptial, and my wife
For grief thereof, but to augment my sorrow
Beyond the bounds of reason, give consent
Unto Caricleas rape, who was my joy,
My only comfort, heart, yea life and all?
Well I will once more put on pilgrims weeds.

Nebu. Ha, what was that? a dreadful sound me thought
More pilgrimages? stay but listen yet.

Caric. And go in quest of thee throughout the world,
First to Thessalia, where that thief was borne
That stole thee hence, then unto Memphis City
Where Calasiris that false priest remains.

Nebu. I am confirmed in horror, it is too true
He Will travel once again, but soft attend.

Caric. And if I find thee not, i will travel further,
Even to the utmost bounds of Aethiopia,
Where I suppose thy parents live and reign.

Nebu. To Aethiopia, what strange land is that
(I marvel) oh, oh now I do remember
Sysimethres was borne there as he said; Nebulo discovers himself.
We shall be black a devils if we go there.

Caric. What Nebulo, my trusty friend and servant,
Prepare thy self to accompany thy master.

Nebu. Where sir, unto the temple of Apollo?


Caric. Beyond the seas I mean.


Nebu. Beyond the seas;
He Is mad I think, or has some worse disease. aside.

Caric. I hear you sir, it seems your grown a Poet
You rhyme so well.

Nebu. I care not who does know it.


Caric. Raptures still flow upon thee more and more,


Nebu. But this bad news of yours does vex me sore,
That you will cross the seas, the bare conceit,
Will keep me seven days without taste of meat.

Caric. Why that is profitable, saves thy purse.


Nebu. But hurts my body sir, and that is worse.


Caric. Why thou art a second Ovid, all he says
Does flow in verse.

Nebu. Then I shall wear the Bays.


Caric. But Nebulo no more of this, you are content to accompany me this
journey, are you not?


Nebu. Good sir, do not ^rge me to it; you know how willing I should be to wait
upon ye, did not one thing cross it.


Caric. What Is that thy wife?


Nebu. You have hit the mark, it is dangerous (I can tell ye) for me to go
abroad and leave her at home* I had woeful experience on it after our last
peregrination.


Caric. What did she make thee a cuckould in thy absence?


Neb. I know not, but she dubbed me knight of the forked order.


Caric. Why that honor is for term of thy Life man; thy staying at home
cannot take it away, nor thy going abroad add unto it.


Nebu. No, do they not rise by degrees? I suppose yes, as in this manner, from
Knight to Lord, from Lord to Earl, from Earl to Duke of the forked order, and
so forward: but my ambition is not to climb so high, therefore i will stay at
home and prevent that promotion.


Caric. fie, prevent thy honor?


Nebu My Nebulona will heap enough such honors on my head, If I follow your
counsel, but I tell you again I am not ambitious so to be promoted, yet
notwithstanding, so well I love you, that rather then you shall go alone, i will
once more adventure my fortune.


Caric. Spoken like a right honest man, come let us away then withal expedition.
Delphos and Greece farewell, your priests hard fate
Denies him still to enjoy a settled state. Exeunt.

Actus quinti, Scena quarta.
Enter Theagines, Cariclea, and Aura. Theag. And have thou escaped the fire my
dearest love?
Miraculous deliverance! let me hear
The manner on it related.

Caric. Thus it was,
After we were condemned to be burnt
By foul Arsaces slanderous report
For poisoning Cibile, a blazing fire
Was made, and we two cast into the same,
And whereas it was thought by every one
The fierceness of the flame would soon consume us,
It proved clean contrary, for we stood in
The middst of it untouched, for every side
It gave us way, and never singed our clothes,
Although Arsace with a threatening voice
Commanded the tormentors to lay on
More wood and reed, yet all prevailed not,
For no hurt would approach us, which the whore
Arsace seeing, presently declared
Before the people with an open voice
That we were witches; though good Calasiris
Did what he could to free us from her hands,
We by her guard were apprehended, and
Brought here again to thee my dear, for which
I Am glad that we may suffer both together.

Theag. I have not heard a stranger miracle,
This does proceed from favor of the god^,
And their unbounded justice.

Caric. It should seem so,
But still to be tossed on the angry seas
Of rigid fortune and never see an end
Of our sad miseries, should rather argue
Their hate and fierce displeasure, if th^^e be not
Some secret and more hidden mystery.
We mortals understand not, which r^store^ u^,
After our sufferings when all hope is fled,
Unto a happier state and peaceful being.

Theag. Oh sweet, let not the sense of misery,
Make you offend the gods thus, but be patient.

Caric. It Was a rashly spoken, and I do repent it,
My dear Theagines; now I remember
A dream I had last night, but had forgotten
Till now to tell it you, thi^ was the verse.
By virtue of Pantarbe let fear of fire removed be:
An easy thing to Persaetis, though else right strange to see.

Theag. The gods are good to us, for I likewise
Am made a Poet by remembering now
An answer which last night some spirit gave m^
Who seemed to say this,
To morrow shall thou with the maid escape Arsaces hand,
And soon be brought with her into the Ethiopian land.

Caric. That Oracle has but a sad constru^tion,
Which thus I dare interpret, Aethiopia
Is meant that land that is beneath the ground,
That with the maid is meant with Proserpine,
And the escaping of Arsaces band
Does signify the soul and bodies parting.

Theag. Still how you err! calamity has made you
Forget your self, and always doubt the worst,
Turning all things to a sinister sense,
The Oracle is plain, you are the maid
The gods do point at, whom I shall convey
Out of Arsaces power into your Land
Of Aethiopia, but how this shall be
Effected, unto us does not appear,
Yet it is credible the gods can do it;
We must leave that unto their secret workings.
Now what your verse should mean I cannot guess,
Which does contain so many contrarieties,
For Pantarbe, in its true signification,
Is taken for all fearful, yet it would not
Have you to fear the fire.

Caric. I do believe
This ring preserved us both from force of fire,
Wherein is set a precious stone called Pantarbe,
And round about some holy letters written;
My Fascia, if you do remember well,
Did mention such a one among my jewels;
And to be brief, I think that stone contains
Some heavenly virtue which withstandeth fire.

Theag. But then, how was it that Aura perished not?
She had no Pantarbe to defend her.

Caric. No
But I still held her always in my hand
Whereon my ring was.

Theag. This is probable;
But now what other Pantarbe have we left
To shun the next days danger, for Arsace
Will not end here, but practice still new mischief.

Aura. Despair not, but rely upon the promise
The gods made you last night.

Caric. Distressed Aura,
What will thou do?

Aur. Run on, in the same fortune
That you do, be it life or be it death.

With that enters an Officer from the Camp of Oroondates, to fetch Theagenes
and Cariclea. Officer. Be not afraid, I come not to destroy you
As you suppose, but to deliver you
From hence; my Lord and General Oroondates
Has sent me hither from the camp, to bring you
Unto him, for the fame of your rare beauty
And virtue in resisting his wifes lewdness,
Has wrought so much upon his disposition
As he desires your presence, come with me,
Delay breeds danger, I have fifty horse
Shall safe convoy us to the camp, the way
Is clear.

Theag. Lead on then, we are bound to obey. Exeunt.


Actus quinti, Scena quinta.
Enter Arsace sola. Arsa. Ye stern Eumenides, and direful powers
Of the infernal kingdoms, muster all
Your troops together by a general summon,
For I do cite you to the court of hell,
My grievances beget this invocation;
Have I so long served you, and bent my thoughts
To your low center? have my actions been
As lewd as you would wish them, and as black
As you your selves, and could you suffer me
To fail in this achievement of my lust?
So much your instigation? is this justice?
Justice that is a word not known in hell;
Is this injustice? no, then are you rebels
To your own laws, I do insist on this:
What other doctrine preach your ministers
But foul inj^stice, rapes, impieties,
Adulteries, murders, slanders, ignominies,
False accusations and the like, all which
My life has practiced? yet ye punish me
With justice never till now heard in your courts:
You thought it just Cariclea should escape
The poisoned cup, and afterward the fire,
You thought it just Theagines and she
Should escape my hands, and Oroondates know
All my proceedings, cursed fates of mine!
Wretched Arsace, will thou live and feel
Thy punishment augmented by thy shame?
Shall the laws triumph over Arsaces will?
Or Oroondates say he was revenged
Upon the high and royal blood of Persia
For wrong I did him? no, since I have failed
In my desire, these fa^es I will withstand,
And die by none but by this Persi^n hand.

She falls upon a sword, and kills her self. Actus quinti, Scena ultima.
Enter Hydaspes, Persina his Queen, Sysimethres with attendance. Hydasp.
Persina welcome to our camp, how durst
Our fairest Queen adventure forth to see
The angry face of Mars? this is no object
For Ladies eyes, dame Venus sport's more proper.

Pers. Where you are sir, there is my object fixed,
Whether at home or here, all is one to me,
Besides, where Mars is, there will Venus be.

Hydasp. This was a favor we expected not;
I must embrace thee; O Sysimethres,
What is there wanting in the curious model
Of this rare Architecture, built by nature,
That mortal or immortal eye can see
To add more beauty to it then it has?
Nothing, I know you will grant it, then what pity
Think you it is, so beautiful a frame
And building should contain within it is womb
No living creature, no inhabitant
That might support it is ruins, but stand rather
For prospect then for benefit?

Pers. this points
At my unfruitful womb. aside.

Sysim. I grant it sir,
But if the gods have ordered that this house
So stately built by them, this temple rather
Shall be reserved for their immortal uses,
And have forbid that any mortal seed
Shall dwell therein: it argues in you
Sin and impiety so to repine
At their decrees and secret operations. Enter a gentleman attendant.

Gent. Sir the fore-riders of your royal army
Have taken two prisoners the most beautifull'st
That ere were seen, a young man and a maid,
They wait without attending what is your pleasure.

Hydasp. Let them be brought forthwith into our presence,
They may be found a fitting sacrifice
And an oblation to be offered
Unto our gods for this our victory,
Being the first fruits of the wars.
Enter Theagines, Cariclea, Aura and Bogoas the officer of Oroondates lead in
prisoners. Ye gods The king raises himself from his throne, And sits down
again in a study.
Be merciful unto me!

Sysim. What does aile
Your royal majesty, that you remain
In such a studious meditation?

Hydasp. I had a dream last night Sysimethres,
That did present unto my fantasy
A beauteous virgin, such as is this maid
Telling me that she was my natural daughter:
But whence are you, and of what country borne?

Theag. Great King, I am her brother, she my sister,
Both borne in Greece.

Hydas. O noble Greece, that still
Producest what is good, and at this time
Have given us such fair offerings to present
Unto our gods; but O thou beauteous maid,
Why do thou hold thy peace, and answerest not
Unto my question?

Caric. At the sacred altars
Of the immortal gods (to whom we are
Reserved for sacrifices) you shall know
Me and my parents.

Pers. O sir, what a maid
Have you appointed to be sacrificed?
Never have mine eyes beheld a fairer creature;
With what a stout and an undaunted courage
Bears she her fortune? I am moved with pity
At her so flowring age, O had my daughter
I bare unto you lived, she would have been
Almost as old as she, I do beseech you
Spare her, and let her serve me at my table,
For I am prompted strangely by my Genius
Unto commiseration.

Hydas. So am I,
Beyond imagination, but you know
The Law requires the first fruits of the war
Should be the gods oblation, to the Sun
Therefore we'll offer him, she to the Moon,
The gods must be obeyed, the laws fulfilled.

They all offer to rise, Cariclea falls at the feet of Sysimethres. Caric. Wise,
grave, and learned sir, be pleased to stay
A little longer, for I have a cause
Of consequence to plead before the King
And Queen Persina, which concerns them too
As Well as me, this matter does require
A speedy judgment, and I hear that you
Give sentence on such noble personager;
Therefore judge you this plea of life and death,
And know it is not just to off^r me
Unto the gods.

Sysim. Vouchsafe to hear, most gracious Sovereign,
This strange appeal, and what this maid requires.

Hydasp. What judgment may this be? or what have I
To do with her? by what means should I come
Into her danger?

Sysim. Please you to attend,
She will declare it.

Hydas. But take heed that this
You do, be no true judgment, but plain wrong,
If I that am a King must stand to plead
My cause with any prisoner whatsoever.

Sysim. Justice and equity never looks into
The person, but the cause, and he speeds best
That brings best reasons.

Hydasp. But the Law permits
You only to determine controversies
Between the King and subjects, not with strangers.

Sysim. Wise and discreet men do not measure things
By the appearance, but by equity.

Hydasp. Well let her speak, since good Sysimethres
Will have it so, but it is manifest,
She will say nothing to the purpose, but
Some forged devise to shun the stroke of death.

Caric. O Sun, thou founder of my ancestros
High pedigree, and all ye other gods.
Ye noble men that here are met together
Assist me in this place, and be a witness^
That what I say is true, and by firm proofs
It shall appear: do you command, O King,
Strangers or your own subjects to be offered?

Hydasp. Strangers.


Caric. Then it is fit and necessary,
You seek out such, I am no stranger borne,
But of this country, and your subject too.

Hydasp. Thou lie.


Caric. You seem to wonder at small things,
But there are greater undiscovered yet,
I am not only of this Country borne,
But of the royal blood.

Hydasp. This woman's mad,
Away I Will hear no more such lunacie.

Hydaspes turns from her in anger. Caric. My royal father, I beseech you know
Your only daughter and despise her not.

Hydasp. Sysimethres and grave Gymnosophists,
How long shall she abuse my patience?
This mayd's distracted, and the fear of death
Makes her speak any thing how false soever,
How bold and impudent; I know I had
Sometimes a daughter, but she died as soon
As she was borne, this is a false impostor,
Wherefore away with her, and let us delay
The sacrifice no longer.

Caric. none shall dare
To take me hence, unless the judges please
So to command, for you are not to judge
In your own cause although a King, but must
Be subject to the law as well as others
Which priviledgeth you perchance to kill
Strangers, but neither this law, nor the law
Of nature does allow you to destroy
Your natural children, for the gods to day
Shall by a strange discovery make you know
I am your daughter, though you now disclaim me.
All controversies in the law depend
One these two points especially, that is
Firm proof by writings, and sure confirmation
By witnesses, both which I can produce
To prove I am your child, my witness shall not
Be common neither, but the judge himself,
And here is a writing shall declare both mine
And your estate.

She gives the Fascia to the Queen, she knows it and is amazed. Hydasp. What
means this Persina, that thy blood
Thus comes and goes, and that thy countenance
Wears such an alteration? is there ought
Contained in this writing troubles thee?

Pers. O King, my Lord and husband, I have nothing
To say unto it; but take heed, and read it
Your self, the same shall teach you well and truly.

Hydaspes reads it to the end, then gives it to Sysimet: and the rest. Hydasp.
Persina do you own this character
As your own hand, and know the birth to be
Legitimate and true?

Pers. By Sun and Moon I swear it.


Hydasp. Although you told me that my daughter died.
I yet believe she was exposed forth
As here is mentioned but who was the man
That took her up and carried her to Egypt,
How shall I know that he was taken with her,
Or this is she, or whether the exposed
Be dead or no, besides whether some man
When he hap'd to find this might his good luck
Abuse, and make her play this famed part,
Mocking the great desire we have of issue
By the suborning of some changelinge and
Coloring the truth with this devised Fascia.
All these doubts must be cleared ere I believe.

Sysim. I can resolve you in the first, for I
Was he that took her up, and carried her
With me to Egypt, when you sent me thither
Ambassador (you know we may not lie
Who are Gymnosophists) I know this Fascia,
Written with Aethiopias royal letters.
Therefore you need not doubt that it is forged.
Besides it is signed with Persinas hand;
But there are other tokens that I gave
To him that did receive you at my hands
Can you produce them?

Caric. Yes, lo here they are She shows Sisimet: and the queen her jewels.


Hydasp. What are they? do you know them?


Pers. Yes with wonder.


Caric. These jewels were my mothers, but this ringe
Was yours, I think you know the Pantarbe well.

Hydasp. I do and all the rest, but whether you
Came by them as my daughter, that I know not,
You might have got them by some other means,
For to omit all other needles questions,
Your colour's strange and the like never seen
In Aethiopia.

Sysim. She was also white
That I brought up, and with this virgins age
Does correspond the term of years when she
Was forth exposed being seventeen years,
So old seems this fair maid.

Hydasp. Sysimethres
In my opinion you have showed your self
An advocate in this cause, not a judge,
Beware least while you strive to clear this doubt,
I may suspect Persina has been false,
For how is it possible that such a thing
Sold be in nature, we two being black
To have an issue white? this is against
All humane sense, and reason natural.

Sysim. The Fascia tells you how this came to pass,


Persina in the act of generation
Contemplatively eying the fair picture
Of beautiful Andromeda, and firing
A strong imagination thereupon,
Conceived in her womb the very figure
Of Perseus Mistress when she was bound fast
Unto the rock, and he redeemed her thence,
For proof let that same picture be presented,
And then compare them, you shall find the substance
And shadow nothing different but in life.

Enter a Gentl^man attendant. Gent. Sir there is a strange priest newly come
from Greece
Desires he may be heard touching this matter,
Who can inform you of the truth of things.

Hydasp. admit him straight. Enter Caricles with the gentleman.
Grave Sir can you declare
Ought of this matter, do you know this maid
And that young man?

Caric. I know them both great King;
That maid which shall be found to be your daughte^
I nourished from a child; one of this country
Gave her to me in Egypt, and with her
Rich costly jewels, and a Fascia,
Wherein was written her high pedigree;
With her I went to Greece my native country,
And being priest unto Apollo there,
When I was busy in the rites and customs
Belonging to my office, This Thessalian,
Who vaunts himself borne of Achilles line,
Stole her from Delphos, and I understand
Passed many dangers with her; I forgive him
And crave you would be pleased to do so too;
For since the gods by diverse signs and tokens
Have unto us reveild their sacred wills,
And made it plain by strange discoveries,
Strive not to cross their workings.

Cariclea falls at Caricles feet. Caric. O my Father,
As dear unto me as those that begat me,
Take what revenge you please, lo here I stand
To Abide your sentence.

Caric. O how largely am I Embraces her and weepe^ for joy.
Rewarded for my travel! it is enough.
I have beheld thy face yet once again.

Sysim. What Caricles, do you not know your friend?
Have you forgot the Ethiopian Legate? salutes him.

Caric. No, no, I have not good Sysimethres,
But do congratulate our happy meeting.

Hydasp. We have heard and seen enough, I Am yet unmoved;
Bring in the picture of Andromeda.

Enter the picture of Andromeda, the King for joy and admiration could not
speak, the people give a great shout. Sysim. One point is wanting yet, strip
up your sleeve
Fair maid, there was a black spot above your elbow.
It is no shame to show a naked arm
Before your parents for to prove your birth.

She shows there a mole, the Queen runs and embraces her. Hydasp. You strive
to wash me white an Ethiopian
In hin^ering this sacrifice, you shall
Do one as well as the other, for although
I now believe she is my natural daughter
Sprung from my loins (as I have seen it proved
By many arguments) yet I so much
Fear justice and the gods, and owe such love
Unto my country, as i will lay aside
All natural respects, and all regard
To the succession of my blood, and offer
My daughter to the gods for your behoof,
(As Agamemnon did his Iphigene)
Regarding more the public benefit
Then my own private profit and respect.

All the people. Save the blood-royall, save her whom the gods
Will have preserved, appease the Sun and Moon
With a more lawful sacrifice.

Hydasp. Well since
You Will have it s^, though loath I am content;
And now I turn to thee my daughter dear
With armefuls of my love; but what is he
That was taken with thee, whom you called your brother?
I trow he shall not too be proved my son.

Caric. In that sir pardon me, I did abuse you,
He Is not my brother, but necessity
Compelled me to dissemble, what he is
Himself can boldly tell you.

Hydasp. Whatsoever
He be, he is destined to be sacrificed,
Some women too must bear him company.
This maid that waits on you shall serve the turn.

Caric. If he be sacrificed, I Will be that woman,
Death must not part us two.

Hyd^sp. The gods forbid,
Why say you so?

Ca^ic. Because it is fore-decreed
I must both live and die with that young man.

Hydas. I praise your courtesy and gentle nature
Unto this Grecian stranger, who has been
Companion of your journey, but we cannot
Break so the custom of our Country, as
To save his life.

Caric. Then I must perish with him,
For know, O king, (perchance I may not dare
To call you father) it is cruelty
To spare my body, and destroy my heart,
He is my heart, my love, my life, and all,
My husband by the destinies appointed,
And it is sin to oppose the gods decrees.

Hydas. What will you counsel me to do herein,
Sysimethres and thou most reverend Priest,
I will be guided by your wisdoms wholly
In this affair,

Sysim. Through the exercise of joy
The wisest men, oft-times we see are blinded.
For at the first, great King you might perceive
The gods liked not this sacrifice which was
Ordained, who have every way declared
Cariclea your daughter, and brought hither
Out of the midst of Greece this reverend man,
Who brought her up, to fortify your faith.
Moreover it is plain by many signs
And secret revelations that the gods
Have fore-decreed this couple man and wife,
And to that end have freed them from so many
And imminent dangers, therefore let us suffer
These divine miracles to sink into
Our understandings, and from this time forward
Do sacrifices more acceptable
Unto the gods, who are not pleased with
Humane oblations, but the blood of beasts.

Hydas. Since things are thus appointed by the will
And pleasure of the gods, since this fair couple
Have been preserved by fate from many dangers
By Land and Sea, and as should seem reserved
For Hymen's instigation, i will no longer
Resist the will of heaven, heavens send you joy, puts their hands together.
And a most plenteous offspring to succeed you,
This is our firm decree, which we'll confirm
By sacrifice, and worshipping the gods.
O Sun and Moon, whose sacred deities
We most adore, since it is fallen out thus
By your decrees, that young Theagines
And fair Cariclea are made man and wife,
Accept their offerings, and vouchsafe to take them
Into the order of your holy Priesthood.
Theagines, I do resign unto thee
My office, be thou Priest unto the Sun,
Wear this white Miter. Tak^s his Miter and puts it on Theagines his head.

Pers. And Cariclea thou
Wear this of mine, which consecrateth thee
Priest of the Moon, adore her Deity.

Caric. Now is the god Apollos Oracle
Of Delphos verified, which said of them
That leaving Greece, and sailing surging streams
They should arrive at Countries scorched with Phoebus burning beams,
Where they as recompenses due that virtues rare do gain,
In time to come ere it be long white Miters should obtain.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.

