THE First book of the famous Historye of PENARDO and LAISSA other ways callid
the watres, of LOVE and AMBITIONE. WHerein is described Penardo his most
admirable deeds of arms, his ambition of glore his contempt of love, with loves
might assalts and ammorus temptations: Laissas fearful enchantment her releif
her trauells and lastly loves admirabel force, In her releiving Penardo from ye
fire, Done in Heroik verse, by Patrik Gordon.



Printed at Dort By George Waters. 1615.

To the most Honorable, and most Accomoplisht Earl GEORGE Earl of ENYIE lord
Gordon, and Badyenoth etc. sone and heir apparent to the most Illustrius Lord
George Marquies of Huntlie.
RIght Honorable, finding my self enclosed in the labourinth of your
al-conquering merits, and dispairing of al relief, necessity encuraged me to
go forward, till the infinite riches of your worth should choke the poverty of
my near famisht Wit with abondance, while thus I thirsted for a fatal period
to my longing desires, I found your Lo. incomparable virtues, so seated on the
throne of al perfection, as your insatiable avarice was only on the
Heauen-infused gifts of the mind. Wheirof since I could produce nothing for
the release of my boundage but this barren Invention, so many be the rare and
excellent Wits which exceed in that kind, as though I was assured that your
wonted courtesy would pardon my rudenes, and accept of my poverty: Yet would not
these only deime it too mean a present, for so worthy a personage: But also
such multitudes of men seiming Babouns swarmeth every wheire now a days being
ignorant of any thing, and yet will needs be Witty in jesting at eurie man's
actions, so that the vprote of my confused thoughts cold not be appeased, but
either by obtianing aid of the first or silence, of the last, and as the
silence is impossible, so is the aid dishonorable; Wherefore I resolved, being
imboldened by affection to offere this small stream of my Wit, to the
boundless Ocean of your virtues, under the shield of whose most honorable
patronage, this my first borne shall adventure to the view of the world armed
with silence against the sensors of the Wise, and with patience against all
the carpinge malice or skoffing jests that these Appish Monkies can vent from
their too curious inuectiue and belabored brains. And because that all my
endeavors are tied already with the two-fould chain of your L. Princely
virtues and more then deserved courtesies, to which the extension of my natural
duty cannot add any suffitient tribut for the interest which your Lo. has in
me: therefore being still in my former d^spaire I am forced (in such a world
of bands) for ever to rest.

Your L. vn-redeemable servant Patrik Gordon.

To every freendly and Courteous Reader.
GENTLE, and courteous Reader, I doubt not but some their are, that will not
gentlye, but rashly censure those my labors, Nether am I ignorant, how hard a
thing it is to please every one, Some their be that are courious, whom as i^ is
impossible to pleas, so have I given over impessibilites, as one, whoes
judgment could never reatch to the meanest of possible things: Some their be
that are invyous, and those as I care little for their feid, so hunt I not much
for their favor: Some also will be rash, in geueing their judgment before they
have duly considdered, to whoes temerarious, opinione, as I give little heed,
so will I suffer them, to be whipped with their own folyes: But you that are
judicieus disereit, and courteous, eune you it is, whom I would please* I confess
I writ not of profound, and deip matters, fitting your judgments, bot according
to the shallownes of my brain, as their is not much good to be reapt, so shall
you not find much evil: Wheirfore, my willingness I hope, will satisfy a great
part of your contents, and supply my defects. Looking always (that although I
can not in the greatest measure satisfy your ex^ectation) yet ye will accept
freindlie, of my goodwil; In respect, that unto your charitable hands only, I
cousmit the censure of these my paepers, as the undoubted touch stone, whereon
my travels must be tried: And how many so ever my e^rors be, which I doubt not,
but the thrie before named will make to many, yet to you I hope it shall suffice
that I acknowledge my own weakness. But fearing to deceive my self, with too
much presuming on your courtesye, I have left of in the mids of my labors,
for that I was loath to pain my self with to much travel, till I were better
certefied, of your favorable acceptance, (which while I heir of, I have
thought good to stand at a point, and breath a while) as the only rewaird, I
crave for all my trauells yet my counsel is, before you give judgment, that ze
enter, and walk throw all my field, look on every shade, search throw every
corner, wheir amongst the pople, and tair, you may find some pure grane, And
amongst the thorns and breirs, some roses, that may perhaps have a pleasant
smell: Upon al adventures, hoping that such will be your censur, as my meaning
is toward you, I bid you fairwel

Yours, as you merit. P. G.

THE AVTHOR to his Patron.
YOur Lordshipe when I call to mind,
And your great favors, which I find,
I plain, I sighe, my tears down fall:
For this my strenth, my wit, my skill.
Not equaleizing my good will,
No not my life, my self my all.
My self, my service, both is due,
Both bond by duty, unto you,
My wealth to mean, for to present you
A present then, I shame to make it,
Not with your honor stands, to tak it,
Thus naught is mine, that could conten^ you.
Often thus I pause, I think, I muse,
And tho us and other things I choose,
Wheirof their's no thing mine to give,
Then give I over my vane contentione,
And s^^yues in naught, but apprehensione,
So rests your dettore while I leiue.
Zit to make known that if I could
Feign would I do all that I should,
And often alone on this I mus' de:
At last presents unto my view,
This Knight, beit, cold and pale of hew,
That seemed no danger hade refus'de.
His armor rousted, rent, and torn
Clift was his sheeld, his sword was worn,
A stranger in this country strainge
Nor adventures might heir be found,
The warr-lyk Knights heir, till the ground,
And rights their wrong, with laws revenge.
Although this Knight was borne a Prince
Zit none would do him reverence,
Which I lamented much, bevaild*
And of his sorrows took a pairt,
But lo his proud ambitious hairt,
Calami^ye hade nere assaild.
This much, his giddy brain forth bred
If he with armor once were cled,
To search aduenturs, hunt for fame:
Zit would he ^a^y heir a while,
And pouse his fortune, throw this isle,
Perhaps to win a famous name.
I pitied much his poor estate,
His mighty mind I could not hate,
No armor, no equippage fine,
Hade I befaitting such a Knight,
Zit to my power, strenth, and might
I used my moyane, my in gyne.
When he was featted to my strength,
On Some he would depend at length,
Then come your honor to my mind
Whoes many favors, I haid found,
Me Nature, life, and duty bound,
My thankfulness some way to find.
Him then to you I first present,
To serve, to please and to content
Beneth your wings let him be seine:
If he be not so rigged furthe
As apperteineth to his worth,
Mine is the fault, whoes wealth was meine,
His name Penardo he me told,
A youth ambitious, hardy, bold,
His travel, life and deads hes beine*
A war, betuixt ambitione strong.
And crafty love, that lested long,
Which be the sequel shall be seine.
P. G.

To the Right noble Lady Lady Margret Countes of Marsheale.
LOng have I wishid my Muse, to sound thy praise
The worth, the fame, the due, to the belong,
But she onlernd un fit, for such a phrayse,
Denyit to do, say, think, so heighe a song:
Since on thy worth, both heaune, and earth still gaize
She should but shame her self, and do the wrong
Better quod she be sobre silent, still,
And spair to speek, then speek, and speek but ill.
O but quod I, to speek her praise, her worth,
Out of my faith, my truth, my zeall my love,
Faith, truth, lone, zeall, and duty, breaths it furthe
As shall my pure, eleir, simple meining prove:
Her nature myld, heighe place, and royal birthe,
Her wit, her worth, her virtue, from above.
Has croun'd with garlants, of immortal glory,
Then none ean writ amiss, that writts her storye
Whill thus my barrene Muse, and I contend
Thy worth, wit, virtue, and thy geighe desairt,
Commands me write, and speek, and praise furthsen^
To eurye country, province, place, and pairt,
But comeing to (what should I say) in end.
O then I stand, I pause, I think, in hairt
Words does my wit, wit does my words eonfuse
Nou this, now that, a thousand things I choose,
So infinite, thy endless graces be
That what I ^ould, I would, Zit can not do
Wit moketh wit, art skorneth art, in me
And wealth, deludeth wealth I know not how
When I should end, I but begine to sie,
A world of worlds rair worthiness, in you,
Then this I say, nor will I write no more,
None is, shall be, nor was lyk the before
To the richt Noble Lady, and full of all verteus Lady ANNE Countess of Enyie.
FE^r Madame, graced from highest heavens above,
With wealth of Fortune, Nature, beautye Love,
Lend not to frowning looks, thy gracious eye,
For this bold pride, and arrogance in me,
That darr's breath furthe, or preis to pen thy praise
Earths ornament, heaun's object, beauties gaize.
Nor Maro great, nor Naso sweit, am I,
Nor have I Homers mighty style, wheirby
I might to after aiges e're reveiue,
Thy fame; thy worth, and make thy glory leiue,
Zit were it but t'awake the braver wits,
Whoes lofty quill's thy sweitter praises fitt's,
This much I say, nor vanely vaunt I nather,
Thy wit, thy beautye, and thy virtue rather
Celestial is, rair, excellent, devyne,
(In whom all woo^the, all grace, al goodness shine)
Then humane, so heaun's croun's, adorn's thy blood
With Naturs wealth, grace full, and fortuns good
Then let the Poets on their Muses call,
To fill their brains, their pen's, their papers all
With ornament of method, wit, and sense,
That flows from thy rair worth, rair excellence.
In goldin showrs, which fame on her fair wings,
To eurye natione, country, kingdom bringes,
And strowes it heir, and their, in eurye pairt,
To beautifye speech, eloquence, and art,
If on poor me, some, drop's she would down pour,
I Will spend my pains, my wits, souls wasting power
To pen thy praise, and thy brave Mates, whoes worth
Thou stryues to match, as thou hes matched his birth
O wondrous strife, blis'd, happy, perfect, pure,
Long may that war myld, pleasant, sweet, endure
P.G.

To the right worth and verteous Lady DAME GRISEEL STVARTE Lady Meldrum.
MAdame, if I should smouther up thy praise
For most ingrate, thou iustlye might me blame
All eyes should sie, all tongues to heau'ne should raise
My stain, my blote, my never deing shame
In me, poor me, if any virtue grows
In the it leius, from the it springs, it flows.
For lo thine was the seid, thine was the tree,
Good reasone were that thine should be the gain,
^hin the ^ncrease, the haru'st, the fruct must be,
Zit reapts thoow to to little for thy pain
But much it is, in such a barten soil
If thou receive the seid, for all thy toil.
And thought unhappy I, could nothing kno,
Noir pairt of thy great graces could have gained
Me by thy sweit example did thou sho,
Of thy thryce happy life, pure, cleir vnstam'd
My ill my own, if good I have in stoir
Thine be the thanks, thine be the prais, the gloir.
Eu'ne as the Eggle learn's her burds tho fly
First low, then mean than, heigher still to ryi^
Till far above al other foulls they be
With lofty soaring wings in asure skyis,
On Phoebus than, their eyes she maks yame set,
Nor his bright birning beam's yair sight mey let.
So Eggle lyk thou taught me as thy child
To mount to virtue, wisdom, grace deuyne
But I thy precept's wise, sweit, easy, myld
Could not conceive, so gross was my ingyne
Whill Phoebus like, vpone my face thou stream'^
Thy virtues rays, and wisdoms goldin beam's.
And thus thou proves my lofty Eggle fair,
But I, poor I, I hade no wings to fly,
My Phoebus als thou shynes with virtues rair,
Zit Eggle like, I daris not look on the,
Then Queen of fowls, and light of sterr's above
My Eggle, and my Phoebus both still prove.
And what I have, eu'ne yat should thou receive,
As propre thine, and only due to the,
Mine be the fault, the wrong, the ill I have
Thine be the good, if onie good their be
If none, as much me fears, their's none but ill
Zit for thy pain's, i will praise, the, serve ye, still.
P.G.

To the Author.
Sonnet.
COme forth Laissa spread thy lo^kes of Gold,
Show thy cheeks roses in their virgin Prime
And though no ge^mes the deck which Indies hold,
Yield not unto the fairest of thy time
No ceruse brought far, far beyond the seas
Noe poisone like Cinabre Paints thy face
Let them hawe that whose native hues displeas
Thou graceth nakedness it does the grace
Thy Sire no pyick purse is of others wit
Thoise Iewellis be his oune which the adorn
And though thou after greaiter ones be borne
Thou may be bold eu'en midst the first to sit
For whilst fair Iuliett or the farie queen
Do live with theirs thy beauty shall be seen,
M. William Drommond.

To the Author.
Although my shallowe wit sound's not thy deep,
And weakling ey's follows not thy flight:
Tho where thou run's, I can not thither creep,
Nor chyldishe weakness imitat thy might
Since in this sacred trade I made a pause.
By inter mitting of my Clio's laws.
Yet since I have most wonderouslie detected
A swane whoes Syren-musique me enchant's
Yet since I find eune wheir I least suspected
A lurking poet in our homebred haunt's
O when I sie him, when I sueetlie hear him.
I can not but commend him and admeir him.
Thy years (dear friend) ar young, thy wit is old,
Thy youth er child time come is brought a bed,
Thy mine in liew of ore, yields purest gold
Thy basest rob's with crimsone ouerclade
How glade am I thoes mythologique flowrs
Argue the reconnings of thine Idle hours.
Mr. Robert Gordone.

To the Author.
LAissa's bathing in the sacred well
With charming beutie wounds the chastest hair^.
Penardos valor into Plutos cell
To basest mynd's dois honor's worth impairt
And moves the Coward to desire the fight:
And chastest recluse search for beuteis sight.
The fei full ourthrow of thy Sigismund
For Vsurpat^oune: pride, and priuatt gain
Show's how the lord the lof^ie will confound,
And in extream's the humb'led soul sustain
For tyrann's proud, lo heir a curbbing bitt^
For humb'led misers, heir-s a confort fit.
Those sacred lights proceiding forth from the
In Natours sueetnes staning straned air^
Maks us the treasure of thy mind to sie
The riches rair wheir with thowe furnished art:
For beu^ie, Valor, right and hellishe vronge*
Ar praised reprou'd* and painted in thy song.
Dear friend with love whill I admeir thy lyn's
Thy brave inuentioune clam's a fresh respect:
Thy graceful method in them both so shyn's
That I am doubtful whither to direct
My freindlie ey's, or well affected heart.
To play the lizards, or the pensive part.
Ihone. Wrrey.

To the Author.
THE Ent^usiasme, or fury of thy spreit,
A grace both great, and dignlie deim'd divyne*
So fluentlie, into thy front does fleit,
Whill all the world admeirs both the and thine
Each word has weght, and full of life ^^ch (...)
Quick thy conceapt Emphaticall thy phraise,
Thy number's just* judicious thy ingyne,
O thou the new adorner of our days.
Whoes pen or pinsell shall depaint thy praise
Since Mare naught, nor the Meonian muse
Be with their learned nor their livery ^^yes
Into this wondrous worthy work to use.
Then tak this task, and tune thy trump unto it:
For only thou art destinatt to do it.
Mr. Allexander Gardyne.

To the Author.
DEmereits Maro from proud Mars his throne
A freindlie look, or yet a thankful sho?
Deserves Naso from young Venus sone
A cheirfull smyll? (if they can have no mo)
Yes faith: I pray then what should be thy hyre?
Who maks all men their monarch gods admyre.
Has not thy Pen proclaimed at lairge to all,
Stern Mars his soldier great Penardo strong?
Has not thy lays learned how Laissa's thrall
To crafty loves allurments too too long?
Then both the warreou^s, and the wanton's theam^
Should spare no pains, to aeterneize thy name,
William. Tod.

THE FIRST BOOK, OF the Famous History, of PENARDO and LAISSA.
Caput. 1.
Argument.
A Visione moves Achaias King,
His daughter to have slain,
The Muses find her, and preserve
Her life with care, and pain,
In whom such woundrous virtue grew,
Such beauty bright, and fair,
That those who saved her life, now soght
Her woe, her wrack, her care.
1.
IN glorius Greece there lies a firtile land,
Of ancient time Achaia called by name
Within whose blessed borders bravely stan*
Parnassus mont, so much renound of fame.
Where Aganippes silver streams do spring
About the which Jove's brain-bred daughters sing.
2.
Sending from thence that which in flamm's the brain
Of brauest Spreitts, and beautifies the mind
With end les rare inventions, which obtain
The name of wondre, to the humane kind
Who in their works of learned witt's divyne
Make Learnings light, in blakest darkness shine.
3.
Eune heir, and in this natione most renoun'd,
The famous Phedro sumtyme ruled, as King,
By just descent, and regal title croun'd
And first in peace enjoyed a happy regne,
At last hi^ stars which bad conjunctions borrow
Did turn his sweets in sowrs, his mirth in sorrow.
4.
For when the winds in hollow caves containd,
Leave off their sharpest cold, and bitter blast,
To slay the tender herbs, when they refraind
The talest Cedars torment then was past
Then was it not, as when they raige at will
Under the horns of the lascivious bull.
5.
Eune when the Farthe spreds forth her mantle grein,
On which the wanton Flora spreds her treasure,
While time that wai^t's one Phoebus goldin eyne
Gives lyuelye colors, for the Goddess pleasure,
The hills, the daills, the plain's, ar passing fair
Through heat, through moist, though sueitnes of the Aer.
6.
The tries bud furthe before their fructe the flourish
The herbs before their seid, the blossomed flower
The corn's, and grane, their, leauie stalks do nourishe
The winding vynes their pregnant graips yet sour
When as the goldin chariot of the Sune
Twixt day, and night, an equal couse does rune.
7.
Wherefore each creture bles'd with equal light.
Sal^ts the princelye spring with pleasant noys
The restles roling heaun, with shyning bright
Smyls on the earth (his love who does reioys
Of such a Mate; and with her mantle grein
Was de^k't, wheir rich embrodries might be sein.
8.
In this delicious pleasant time of yeir
Which bringes to farmers hope of greatineres
When Phoebus began down in the west appeir
In Thetis lap to cool his fyrie face,
And shadows dark of glomie night oppressed
All creatur's, with silence, sleip, and rest.
9.
King Phedro wrapped in heavy sleip, did ly
Free from all travel, care, all pain, and toil,
Yet so opp^esst in his fantassy
That rest from rest, and ease from ease, did spoil
His spreitt's, his senses, faculties, and sent
A visione that his brain did much torment.
10.
And thus it was, he thought him self did stand
On Helicon and vewd a fearful fire
That brightlie burnt ore all Achaia land
Which did undo burn: waest his whole empire
And their withal it seemd a voice did say.
This night has brought thy kingdom her decay.
11.
This fire he thought did from him self proceid,
And to him self again it did return
The diadem from of his princely head
This fearfulll flamme in melting d^ops did burn.
And when brunt, spent, consumed it had bein
No mark no nor no flame was to be sein.
12.
E^ne as a clothe in aquauitae did
Or in sum strong and mighty burning oil
If kendled by sum fire it is espyd
To fl^mme, to shine to blase, to burn, to boil,
^he liquor spent, the cloth retein^ no stain,
Nor ^pot, nor blot, nor burning does remain.
13.
When as the King awakes from drousie sleip
This woundrous visione did torment his mind
And all his senses from there fauctio^s keip.
His thoughts in uproar now no rest do find
But when he rangd them hade a thousand ways,
One path he finds in which them all he stays.
14.
For lo eu'ne then his Queen was brought to bed
Of a fair daughter like the morning st^rr.
Nor Phoebus li^ht in glomie darkness spread
Might match with her, she staind that beauty far.
But tho show is most admirable fair,
Her life as strange was as her beauty ra^e.
15.
For finding by his curious searching out
Evne at he^ birth this visione to enswe
H^ thought she was the flamme (if not put out)
That should his croune and kingdom thus subdue
Vheirfore resolud for to prevent mischief
Her death must be the way to his releif.
16.
The dolfull message of this woeful charge
He to a Groom whom he most trusted gau^
A ^outh whoes faith he often had tried at large
Him he commands the infant to reseaue
An^ to t^ansport her to a wood or montaine
And droune her in sum river, Spring, or fontaine.
17.
O crewell sentence barbarous decrie!
O ha^pie child! but oh unhappy Father!
That for a dream, a tove, a fantasy
A vain Chime^a or hell^ vision rather
Would spoil so sweet a creature of breath
And kill thy self to save the ^elf from death.
18.
In Acheron blak Night her self did wrapp
And heaud her head, above the Eastern stream
But Titan dyud in Thetis watrie lapp
While you might see him blushing reid for shame.
Thence to be chass'd with his fearce foe unkind
That braith'd forth darkness to the farthest Ind.
19.
In darkest shadows of the glomie night
This Messinger furthe throw the desert goes
The harmeles Infant harmefull death to dight
That her poor life now got, she now might lose,
So suckling lambs by ravening wolfs ar torn
And doves by Eggles to their deaths forth borne.
20.
This Messinger Kalander heght to name
Whoes Sire the greattest Prince be^eth the croune
Boor rewell o'ur Sparta land of ancient fame
His wit and valor wan him much renoune
Whoes Sone of these tuo ve^tewes wanted nether
But showed him self the Sone, of such a Father
21.
Who going straight unto this crewell act
And moud with pity of the infant^ age
Whoes you^h to young, for dea^he^ procuring fact
And Innocent of Fa^her^ wrathful rage,
Yet fearing if he does prolong her breath
He should p^ocure him self a shameful d^a^h
22.
To Helicons fair mont he taks his flight
Praying the blood of this poor Innocent
Vpone the Fathers head might alwa^es light
That in disgrace and sh^me he might rep^nt
For doting dreams if this poo^e Infant die
His be the fault, the loss, the infamy.
23.
Thus praying he approch'd unto the place
Hypocrene down wheir the Muses sport
Vewing the beauty of this Angels face
Again it moud his pity in such sort
He naught regairds the King, nor life, not all,
But saves the babe from ruin, death, and fall.
24.
Leaving her saiflie by the fontane side
Under the vmbrage of a lofty Pyne
Wishing her frowning Fates for to provide
Her beauty once into the world might shine
Thus he returns, and thus the King beguyld*
And craftily, with suggred words him sild.
25.
When golden-haitd Apollo forth did glance,
His amber loks forth throws irradi^nt beams
And one the esterne waves begins to dance
To murmuring music of the roaring streams
The Muses for to welcome home their Sire
From coutche and secreit Cell did forth retayre
26.
Their daily morning progres is to view
The sacred streams of Aganippe well
whoe^ murmur like sweet lullabies furthdrew
Old Morpheus from out his quiet cell
Vho had the babe with slumbring sleip bereft
whom young Kalander at the fontane left.
27.
These sacred Virgins when they did espy
The babe; sad fear made all their beauty fade
Fearing discovery by sum wantone eye
But vewing well the beauty of the Maid
They vewd admiring, an^ admi^d the sight
Their sight bred wounder, wounder b^ed delight
28.
Such beauty rare till then they nere had sein
But feared it was sum stolen virgini^ie
Wheir With theme selfs so spotles pure and clein
They would not thus defyle in infamy
But instruments the Fates did them ordain
Of pleasure, life perplexi^ie, and pain.
29.
For pity them forbad of creueltie
Unto this harmeles helple^ innocent
Wherefor with grave advise and modesty
The Muses all in uniform consent
Brings up the babe, with care full observation
In virtue, grace, and heaunly meditatione.
30.
The sacred Muses that in virtue shone.
As if they well had known the Fates decreit
Unto the infant would a name impone
A name conform, and to her meritts meit
So that a correspondence might be known
Betuixt her name, and her hid Fate vnshowne.
31.
And dyueing then wit^ drops divyne her heid
Fair Lissa or Laissa they her called
A proppre name for her mishaps indeid
Who subject was to dangers manyfold
For Lissa is as much to say as rage
Vheirin no force her fury could assuage.
32.
When with the Musses she remaind weell neir
wh^le she did rune of fyifteine years the race
Eune ^or the love which they to her did beir
Each one of them endued her with a grace
But lo these gifts made her enuyd of al^
Thus love b^ought gifts, gifts hate, and hate her fall,
33.
Yea to the fair Laissa in her birth
The heauns were all affect'd so feruentlye
Looking with myld a^pect upon the earth
In the horoscope of her natiuitye
That all the gift of grace, and good perfection
They pourd on her most beautiful complexion.
34.
Her face was like the sky both cleire and fair
Her cheeks as whyt with vermeil red did show
Like roses in a bed of lillies rare
Whill they ambrosiall odours from them throw
Feiding the gaizers sense with double pleasure
Such force his beauties all-celestiall treasure.
35.
In whoes bright eyes tuo lyuelie lamps did flame
That dairted beam's lyik lightning blasts of thunder
Cupid tho blind still aiming at the same
Thousands of shafts he send but with great wounder
She breks his wantone dairts with awful ire
And with dreid majesty she quensh'd has fire
36.
The Graces one her ey-lid's seemed to sit
Under the shadow of her bending brows
Her goldin treases couriouslye was knitt
With Pelicans of pearl, and silver doves
These hair like goldin weir one eurye pairt,
Se^ud as a nett for the beholders heart.
37.
Her yuorie fo^head was a table fair
Wheir Loves triumphs we^e cunningly ingrapht
All goodness, honor, dignity was their
In virtues treasure little hade she left.
She was the mirror of celestial grace
That can not be outrune with tym^ swift pace.
38.
And you might sie that alwa^es when sho spak
Sweit words l^ik dropping honey she would shed
Tuo rainge of pearl with rubies tuo would brak
The words betuix them softlye whill they fled
Which made sweit silver sound's whoes noy ^ent forth
Would deadly sadness move to amarous mirth.
39.
And yet her humble and submissiue mind
Was never moud with hellishe pride to rise
But why should I, poor I, descrybe her kind
Which to expres no mortal can devise
Nor can I preis to paint furthe such a feature
Least skilles I should wrong so fair a creture.
40.
Fair Imps of beauty whoes bright shining eyes
Adorn the solid Earth with heaunlie light
Over your great conquest do not tyraneize
Though you subdue all by your seemlie sight
But with Laissaes meiknes be content
And grace your beauty with that or^ament.
41.
To your fair selfs her fairnes first apply
Her courtesy her meik and humble mi^^
Tempred with grace and goodly modest^
It seemd those ^ertues tuo did strive to find
The high est place and stryueig but for dewtie
Each uthe^ helps and but augments her beauty.
42.
While as the Muses see her virtues rare
Her beauty wisdom modesty and all
Surmo^nting them so far that euriwhere
They feared her fame should once procure, their fall
Wheirfore the^ seike with w^^t, eraft, slight and wrath,
Her infamy, her woe, her wrak, her death.
43.
And waiting still occasion when they may
Find out a fault unto her faultles mind
That with the sharpest sentence of decay
Sum punishment they fithe might outfynd
Thus they decreid her death, conspyrd her fall
Fauord by, time, fate, fortune heavens, and all.
44.
It chanced the Muses once vpone a day
Were in an abor neir unto the fontane
While as Laissa at her sport and play
Was gone a hunting through the rockie montane
For Phoebe-lyke it did delight her mind
To chase, to kill, to wound, the heart, the hynd
45.
Alone now coming weary from the chase
And traueling in heat of all the day
H^d sought to bath her in that pleasant place
And with enamourd streams a while to play
While as the Muses wait, they lie, they lurk
Their wrath, their will, their vengeance for to woork.
46.
The streams not deip, nor shallow which did glyd
With pretty whispring noyes so calm and cleir
Thereof the moueing skai^ she could be spied
And yet a heaunly murmur you might hea^e
The Pebles seimd to leap, to swim, to dance,
While as the streams did tremble, move, and glance.
47.
The Pyns, and Poplars bowed theme selfs from hie
From heat and cold that shaddowed all the stream
She dipped her dainty legs up to the knie
That like two snow-white marble Pillars se^me
So polishd Porphyre deckd with purest gold
Does temples tombs and trophies fair uphold.
48.
And being now entysed by the cold
She taks her bow and quever f^ome her syds
Hung in a lace of purple silk and gold
That ouerthuart her snow whit breist diuyds
Tuo azur streams of Nectar-feiding fontanas.
Springing to tops of Alabastre montanas.
49.
And haueing hung her garments on a Pyne
O who had sein so fair a silkin skine!
So dainty well proportioned, pure, and fine,
So beautiful, so Quaint, so cleir, so thine
The thrife thrie Nymphs whom w^ath haid now de^ys'd.
To wo^k her wrak could skarslie be entys'd.
50.
Now beauties shopp, vne los'd begins to be
And shows her store of treasure to the sight
Their all the pleasurs that do pleas the eye
And all was their that does the tut^h delight
The Graces had their clothes about her drawn
To keip the maid unfelt, vnsein, unknown.
51.
Their thoughts contentment, their was hearts delight
Their bankets for vnsatiat appetite
Their wisdom Conqueror whoes only sight
The Tigers tams and Lions fearce does smit
The key of all their weal^h keip't Chastity
Whoes ornament was shamefast modesty.
51.
While this fair Iemme vpone the water lies
With cooling streams she maks a dalleying sport
With leges and arms a thousand tricks she tryes
Toying with swimming in a seemlie sort
As Dolphins do vpone a sunnye day
On Thetis glistring back whi^l they would play.
53.
The Muses that no longer could abide
Out from their privy a^boir ishew'd all
How soon this Paragon has them espyde
She smills and sporting thus to them does call
You Thesphiane dams go seik some other stream
And come not neir this sacred fount for shame.
54.
But they (whill rage within their breasts did suall
Not virgine-lyke but bearing Tigers hearts
Menassing her aloud they began to call
We sie thou thinks to much of thy deserts
Foull Fondling does thou think thy beauty such
That thou deserus our sacred streams to touch.
55.
No, no, these Streams ar only due for us
The dreided Imps of proud Apollos light
For since the foot of fleing Pegasus
Medusaees birth begot by Neptuns might
Let soul the rains of this sole sacred fontane
None else but we presumed to reach this montane.
56.
Of favors we have showen thee great and many
And brought thee up with cairfull pain and charge
Our presens not till now was granted any
And we indewd thee with our graces large
We that before were sacred Muses nine
Made thee a tenth though mortal not devyne
57.
And then they fled, this Lady for her crime
Whom they so dashed that she as half amas'd
Sitts by the fontaine naiked all the time
When lo her thoughts a rose vermiliane raised*
Now red now pale, her color changed often
She sighed, she grond, she qua'ik'd, and stand ^loft.
58.
While as the silver stream that softly slyds
With silent noyes and sweitest murmur sounds
Such heavenly music throw the meadows glyds,
While rocks with rare ^eports there noyes rebounds
That with there Diapason so bereft her
All naked and a sleip they still had left her.
59.
Then Morpheus spread forth his sable wings
The virgin fair enfolding in his arms
Rest, quiet, ease, and sweet repose he brings
Dischairging care; gre^f, sorrow, woes, and harms
Yet through soft sobs, deip sighs, sore groans, salt tears,
Woe, anger, care, grief, sorrow, pain, appears.
60.
While as the Nymphs with anger, wrath and ire
Her name her fame, her glory over waylling
Did sink her shipe (to honor that aspyre)
In seas of sweittest vi^gine pleasurs sailing
Extending all their malice craft, and slight,
To wrape her Sune in clouds of darkest night,
Caput. II.
Argument.
THe Muses send Melpomine
Down to the lowest Hell's
She meits with Night and asks the wa^
Which she unto her tells
To Plutoes kingdom when she came
She past by all the pains
At last out of her dreidfull De^
Alecto she constrains
1.
There is nothing beneth the sky insearte
More moves my mind to pity and compassion
Then for to sie a true and upright heart
Wheir faith and truth has bult her only stati^
By Fortuns snar's and Enuyes crafty baits
Dispys'd, disdained disgraced with falce deceats.
2.
And whither it be kyndest pity lo
Or duty (which I ow all woman kind)
^ know not, but my heart does burst for woe
When harm unto there harmeles sex I find
And my poor eyes Whil as I writting lay
With tears did seem to wash the lyn's away.
3.
Fa'r women should be loved and not envied
Whoes substance is so dainty pure and fine
In Naturs triple fo^nace being tried
Till all the dross be thence remoud, and syne
That Essence pure most Angel-lyk retains
No stain, nor blot, but always cleir remains.
4.
But this poor Lissa beautiful and fair
(Which beauty God did give her as a grace)
Was by decea^ th^owne down in endless care
By Envi Slain that monstre merciles
And suir I think whom God has g^ac'd with beawtie
For them he cars, to them we ought a dewtie
5.
For when he made this great and woundrous frame
Of Chaos mass that shaples lay confused
He took the purest substance of the same
And that which was most beautiful he chus'd
And theirof did he make the Angelis bright
To glorify his name, and show his might.
6.
He made the purest substance which remain
Unto his blissed self a Mansione rair
Syne thrice thee Orbs, whairof the eight containd
Bright shyning starr's, and seven the Planets fair
Nixt placd the Fire because n beauty next,
Syne Aer, then Water, last the Earth he fix^,
7.
Earth then we sie the d^osse of all things yet
Which this great Architector singling forth
By his great migt and all for seeing wit
Is lowest placed according to her worth
But that which was most beautiful and pure
Eune next unto him self he placed sure.
8.
And then that Alcreator did ordain
Each thing according to their substance pure
To bring furthe fruit this all to intertane
Which by his power he caused to endure
Nor time, nor age, nor restles moueing, may
Destroy confound, or weir, or make decay.
9.
First then the Heavens (as haueing most of beauty
Brought furthe the starr's, the Moon, the Suns great light
And aer (conmmanded next to do his dewetie)
Brought furthe all sorts of fouls with fe^h^ed flight
Water brought forth all sort of fish anon
The Earth brought furthe all beasts that leiue theiron^
10.
As heauns are of the fynest substance lo
So are the starr's most beautiful most cleir
But cheiflye Planets seuin theirin does show
Gods powr'full might (werin does well appeir)
He geus them rewll, might, ve^tue, pow're and strength
Our fouls, fish, beasts, tries, herbs, and men at length.
11.
And thus we sie each creatuere furthe does bring
(According to its essence) ill or g'oode
The aer breids fowls, in water fishes spring,
Herbs tries* and li^ing beasts ar Ear^hs gross brood
Yea eur^e thing (^c^o^ding to h^s kind)
Ill fauor'd foul, fair, shynninge, clear, we find
12.
Although it pleased heigh Jove from heaune descend
Fraill man ^o make of earth of d^osse, of clay,
Most fair of all ou'rall to have command
For him, all made to him, all s^o^ld ob^y
Then man should tha^k him prase him, pray him still
To love, to bless, and to fo^sie his ill.
13.
Yea like to his own Image man he maks
In which he shows his love and eak his might
But these to whom most beauty he betaks
These maks he lykest to his Image bright
Wherefore to ^hese we owe great love, and dewt^^
Remembering God the fontane of all beauty
14.
For why when this great God made all things first
To beute did he give the heighest place
Because it was the substance worthiest
Of the aspect of his most glorious, face
Then whosoever eu'with beauty is indewd
Them shuold we love, as through Gods love renewed.
15
And if so be in Chaos mas confused
Sum say their was no l^ght nor beauty fair
But God the fontane of all light) infused
Such be^^eo^s light in all his creturs rare
Then unto whom he beauty geues, to those
His grace, hi^ goodness, and his love he shoes
16.
Yea in my simple judgment this I th^nk
Over beauty God has ^y a special caire
So that with Lucifer they do not shrink
Away from grace and th^nk them selfs too fair
But with meik my^ds upon his holy mo^tane
Give God the praue whose of all beauty fontane
17.
But o my Muse too heighe thou seem;'s to fly
Thy wings ar lag'd with vapos dull and g^osse
That which thou sing's is too too heigh for thee
More meit for pregnant witt's and learnings force
Turn back, least thou repent thy self, advyse,
Wade not too deep in Gods heigh miste^yes
18.
Turn to thy sacred sisters with thy quill
For to ad^y^e with them what must be done
W^^h Lissa fair, whoes beauty works her ill
For lo Melpomene they do inioyne
To bring Alecto from her dreidfull den
Who blood, and war, and mu^^her maks on men.
19.
Melpomene made way throw empty aer
And through the wattrie empyrs wide and deip
Through darkest hollow caves she did repair
And trough he bowell* of the Earth did ^reip*
And low where light of day did neue^ shine
Nor Phoebus show his everlasting shryne,
20.
Wheir Cynthia does steip in silver dew
Her neue^ cheirfull, ever d^ouping light
In Thetis watrie bed whoes a zur hew
Her luster shows in blak ete^nall ^ight
Through fearful, soath fume, foull, and filthy fenns,
Through foggie smook, through dark, and dreadful dens,
21.
She haueing past from Phoebus cheirfull light
Came to a R^gione of eternal darkness
The habitation of the dun kishe Night
It was indeid, so fearful was the ma^knes
She meitts that greislye Hagge with visage sadd
Who was into a cole blak mantle cladd.
22.
And sat into a chariot pitchie blak
Four ieatblack steids that braith'd dark clouds of smook
With ramping noyes made all their harnei^ crak
With braying all the solid earth the, shook
This unacquainted brightness when they saw
Their Mistres down to hell they seemed to draw.
23.
At ^a^t the Muse so often aloud did call
That ugly Night out of there chariott looks
She says most dreidfull Dame so feared of all
Melpomene that tragi^k sadness brooks
Would know thy w^yes, da^k paths, and fearful get^
That down to Plutoes loathsum kingdom lets.
24.
The aged Hagg, with furious rage thus spoke
With gostly sp^eche and dreidfull countenance
Thou Imp of my old foe who seiks my wrack,
Why trubles thou my Regions with thy glance
Lo wheir fire smook and sulphur do arise
In younder den of thou dar enterprise.
25.
The greisly gulf of deip Auernus holle
Above the which my mantle black is spread
About the which a fearful laick does roll
Down throw that flamming gulf thou must be led
Wheir never yet did enter any wight
But feirce Aneas and Sibilla bright.
26.
Eune that same way the sacred Muse is gone
The smook and sulphur ceast their restles flame
And down to Plutoes court she goes anon
The brasin getts burst oppen when she came
At there bright looks and at her beautie^ g^^nee
Feinds spirits and Ghosts fell in a hellische trance.
27.
Over Acheron she past the bitter waves
(Wheir damned souls with sh^iling skre^ks lament)
To Flegithone with fy^e floods that shows
The tort^^ng torment of that element
Wheir Sinners naught but desperatione gains
And thou sand thou sands of eternal pains
28.
At Plutos gate was dreidfull Cerberus
With thrie wyid oppin hollow throats deuoring
And curled hair of sna^ks, most venomous
Gnawing blood, flesh, and bones with fearful roaring
But her deuyne, and Sune-shyne beauties such
Hells porter dar's not once her vesture tutch.
29.
Straight to the house of endless pain she goes
Inuiround with that fyrie flamminge floode
That Phlegithone whoes fearful laick forth throes
A filthy smook out belshing labberd blood
Tisiphone the keipar heght to name
Mother of murder, Sin deceat, and shame
30.
There did the rout of loathsum Harpyis roar
Th^r Sillaes sound, their seuine moth't Hydras houling,
Their Serpents hiss their greisly Gorgons hoar
Their Centaur's, Sphinges, fearful Chymers rouling,
All those and many thousand Monsters more
Where set one burning thrones their Prince before
31.
Their woeful wailing wretches to^'d with pains
With ghostly groans with ouglie yeling sounds
With har^k and jangling noyes of irone chains
Whoes clamors, cries, and shouts throu hell redounds
Those monstres trampling were in da^ksum shed
That horror, dred, fear, death, and terror bred
32.
Their Sulmon crauling was in endless pain
For counterfitting thundreflaught and fire
Their Titius (darling of the earth) was flaine
A Vulter feidding one his filthy lyre
Their was the wheill Ixion turning still
For daring tempt heaun's Queine to lechrous ill.
33.
Their Tisiphus disioynted one a rack
Their Theseus to endless sloth condemned
Their fyf^ie Sisters drawing water wrack
And yet their vessels emp^ie ^till vnstem'd
Their Tantalus with thrist, and hunger slain
Sees meat and drinck yet nether could he gain
34.
At last a foull and filthy sink she sees
Wheir fire and brimstone pitche and tar were smooking
Whoes deipnes dyu'd as far beneth the seas
As it was up to heaune from thence in looking
Above this sink a dragone still repears
Whoes monstrous body feftie h^ids vprairs.
35.
Down in this fearful smook and filthy hole
Were Titans brood and Earths fearce childring thrust
That in their bloody raige did restles roll
In their own blood whill sulphur smook them burst
Tiphon and all the Giants warr's that maid
Against the Gods were their by lightning led.
36.
While in this hollow pit they do remain
They thunder furthe ^uch fearful roaring erye
Confu^dly iarring in their endless pain
Their bodies hudge in flamms still ^osting lie
Which send a stinking smook forth with the cry
That much amazd the Muse in passing by.
37.
At last she came unto a dreidfull cave
Where Furies furthe send many fearful eryes
Their Pride attended on by wraith as Slave
Their Madness that on wraith had fixd her eyes
Their Envy falls one, Virtue still was railling
And their Despair her own hairt forth was trailling
38.
Their Rage did rune her heid against the wall
And their despite satt gnawing of her fingers
Their was the thrie commanders of them all
Woeful because the Earth from miseheif lingers
Alecto, Tisiphon, Megera their
Who work mischief, plague, famine, blood, and weir.
39.
The Muse Alecto forth she calls in have
And said I pray the pas unto Achay
Wheir is the Virgin fair Laissa placed
And work her wrak her ruin her decay
She Is daugh^er too the great Achaian King
And has defyld our fair caballean spring.
40.
This When the Muse hade said she did return
Th^o^w sh^dow^ dim of dark and glomie night
Up to her Sisters who wi^h anger burn
Till wrought was all their veangeance their despigh^
On Lissa fair whom beauty hade in keiping
Who all this while lay by the fontane sleiping
Caput. III.
A^gument.
Alecto moves Achaias Prince
Fair Helicon to view
Butt Man say of the flamming rock
Forbids his iornay new
When unto Helicon he came
Laissa he espyes
Whom he for Sister does not know
And would with love surpryse.
1.
MElpomene now gone, the fury straight
Directs her course up to the ^igh^ of d^y
Deuysing what way best to f^ame this slight
And so be^hinks her on a strainge essay
A sl^ght, a fal^d and a cursed ^euenge
A creweltie, a pl^gue, that seems strainge
2.
And thus it was the for said Phedro had
A lau full Sone Phelarnon called by name
Whose prais and mere^ts was so lairg^y spread
His father ioyid of such a Galants fame
Alecto him from rests hey tour brought down
To search for honor and to find renoune.
3.
When lazy night with sable wings ou'r-spread
The cristall sphers, and dimmed the azure Light
Sleip b^ried men in rest from labo^ fred
In Sleip Phelarnon sies ane Angel bright
To him appei^ and hi^ waik ^i^e torm^nted
With vision strange at last those words presented
4.
Fair Prince as Nature has ordaind the strong
Of good proportioune with a verteous mind
Yea of thy Martial self must be the song
Of after living Poets as we find
Nature in the those gifts has no ways shown^
To bury them unto the world unknown
5.
Who so would win renoune he thus proeeids
Up to the throne or Theater of glory
The first reward of heigh and noble deids
Must be to act the deid (Whose endless story)
shall be reueiu'd with never dyng Fame
In Tyms steill books to etermize thy nam^
6.
Yea verteous worth but glory can not be
Glory on Virtue waits wheir ere she goes
(Evne as thy shaddw follows still on thee)
And all Her deids to endless Fame she shows
Thus his desire, his mind* his will, and all
She framed to work his wrak, his death his fall
7.
Lastly with flattrie thus the feind essays
Brave Youth begot of royal race and bi^th
How spends thou so into obscure thy days;
This stains thy valor and thy woundrous worth
Go then to Parnass meant extol thy name
With virtue, wounder, vadour, glory fame
8.
For know Par^assus mighty mont retains
That which should raise thy glory to the skies
So fates decreis and so the Heavens ordains
Heighe ^oue the wills from sluggish rest to ryes
This said to shaples aershe takes her flight
But left his heart impoyson'd with her slight
9.
For whill she spak his spreit she did in spyre
With hot desire of hono^ glory fame
He wa'k't, he Blush't, h^s eyes did flamm with fire
Whill strength and cour^ge stroaue with sloth and shame
Her strong and venomed word's such virtue had
They Hope, desire, strength, courage, valor bred.
10.
And by this time fair Phoebus ishewing out
Did beautify with brightness of his beams
Fair Leucotheas forehe^d round about
Rising above the wauie Oceane stream's
Athon, and Phlegon trampling clouds that powrs
Melted by fire b^eath in silver showr's.
11.
Getting a tincture to the Spiders wheb's
Waueing above dame Floras fragrant poses
Upon sweit smel^ing birkes and tender sh^ob's
Greine lea^es and prickies of vermiliane ^oses
Whill Aeoll breath^, their pretty tops dec^yning
They dance, they glance, they smyl on Phoebus shyning
12.
Not only heir alone fair Phoebus shaw's
One Neptuns glassie glist^ing back he playe^
Upon whoes restles never ceassing waves
He combs his crispe irradiant heir whoes rays
Would seem to set the hiest h^avns on fire
Whill in our Hemispere is his empyte.
13
But suddenly to darkness turned the day
From skye^ heaune th^eatned earth with roaring thunder
That man and beast and feinds in hell affray
Heavens fire did seem to tear the earth a sunder
Which of this Monarchs fall did warning make
Of death, of blood, of ruin, and of wrake
14.
Ah flattrie wyld and most pernicious
The mask of malice mouer of mi^cheif
The Father old of lies most vicious
The Nurse of falsehood, and the ground of grief
The fall of kingdoms, Princes* and e^tates
The cause of murder, sinck, of all deceat's
15.
The map or purtrat of Hypocresie
Usurping once the office of a f^eind
Thou beirs the name and voice so cunningly
As if the knott of freindship were combined
In the, (while lyik a Slave thouw serves the will)
Yet fram's desire to the desing's of ill.
16.
Thus unto man a Slave thou seems to be
And yet thou still obtains ^he masters hyre
Tho art Conqueror of women's chastity
And over their Sex thou beirs a proud empire
The sharp rebuk's of friends ar better far
Nor suggred words of any flatterer
17.
As cunning Foullers draws (with crafty ^light)
The fouls into the train for theme deuysd
Or fishe^s that allures the fish by sight
Of bai^ which pray has them to death entys'd
So flat^^ie leids a man to his own fall
His shame, his wrack, his death disgrace, and all
18.
As Sirens do (with sweetest sounding songs)
Enchau^t the Sea-mans heart his ears, his eis.
That them to hear ay more and more he longs
Thi^her di^ect'd his winged vessel flies.
T^ll she is clift upon ^he craggie shore
And then the monstre does the man devour.
19.
So Sycophants allures thy mind and thence
In flamm's desire when from their lip's does flow
Stream's rivers floods nay sea's of eloquenee.
That drouns the Senses with a pleasant show
Of all delight yet proves deceat and pain
Which heir is shown'e by falce Alectos train:
20.
Whoes fire in flamed the brave Phelarnon's mind
That ^phero^e to view Parnaessus montane
And from his fathers court (insecreir kind)
He stole vnsein to sie the sacred fontane
While by the way his hope, his hairt, his thought
For praise, worth, valor, and renoune, they sought
21.
While he drew neir the mount he stood to wonder
The earth begone to tremble quack and rapp
As if it would have rent and brust a sunder
With trembling noyes lyik to a thunder clapp
At last he on a fearful flamme did look
Cum from a cave enrold in clouds of smook.
22.
He (whoes undaunted spright naught could effray)
To know this strange adventure would draw neir
From out the flamme he hard a voice to say
Ah woeful Prince Phelarnon back reteir
Death the abyds vpone, Parnassus montane
If thou approache too neir the sacred fontane
23.
He stood as one amazed to heir his name
So called upon, by Whom he could not know^
At last as one awakned from a dream
He said what ghost so er'e thou be but show
Thy name, and why thou threattins me with death
Their of no sign's appeir, I live I breath.
24.
The voice agane made answer to the Prince
My name is Mansay of the flamming rock
That in the bowel's of the earth far hence
(By magic spell*) foresaw thy fatal chok
For this heaune threatening mont whoes streams falls down
Conteins thy wrack and ruin of thy croune.
25.
Wheir fore fly back and leave thy fond conceat
Mar not thy mind with such a frantic story
Lea^ne for to eternize thy endless deate
In anti^que roll's of fame with Ma^tiall glory
Leave to the Muses their diuorc'd empire
Be not over cum with loves alluring fire
26.
And thus fairweel new visions calls me henee
At those his words the Prince amazed stands
He neids would now return but no d^fence
Was left Alectos flattrie him commands
To go and set all dastard fear a pai^t
It is not words but deids that kills the hairt
27.
This was Laissas brother certanlie
Achaias king of children hade no more
For all men deemed Laissa for to be
Dround by Kalander as ye hard before
Alecto (that foull feind the Prince,) has led
Of Lissa fair to be enamoured.
28.
And so resolud he mounted up so hye
That by this t^me the chariot of the Sune
Had neir hand reached the top of all the sky
From whoes reflex all creaturs does shune
Them selfs; and so he sies a grove of tries
Whoes lofty tops did seem to threat the skies.
29.
Wheirto Phelarnon hastily did go
They promeist aid the heat for to with stand
Wheir Summers blossoms made a seemlie show
So thick that heat nor cold no ^ntraunce fand
Whose smell a swit ambrosiall odor throues
Forth throuw the plains the meadows and the groue^.
30.
He much admeird those tries so straight and fine
The Cedar Elm, and Oak, the Ciprus fair
The Esp, the Esh, the Popler, and the Pyne
The Lourell, Ew, the Raintrie, Willow rair
The Birk, the, Olyue, Sallow, and the Mirrhe
The Mazer, Beitche, the Birsell, and the Fur.
31.
There was he led throuw Naturs woundrous store
Whill chi^ming birds did town their chanting lay's
Unto a silver brook that sweetly rore
Whoes murmur on the trembling Pebles play's
Their roaring music Echo ba^k ^e^ou^ds
From hollow caves, heigh rock's, and whisling wind^
32.
And whil he trauel'd throuw these path's vnknown^
He suddanlie was ^avish'd with delight
Of ane fai^ L^die who to him wa^ shown
All naked ^aife her smo^k, and sleipping streght
Beauty would neids triumph and love should wond^^
Love bred delight, and courious sight bred wondes
33.
Her arms owt' croce her comely breast that hing^
As if they would defend i^ from ^ssault
Of frantic Love who wi^h displayed wings
A bo^e her in the are was finding falt
That Jove such sacred treasur would pas by
Whom Juno skarce could keip above the sky.
34.
Her long small hands as lillis whitte did seem^
To joy for being amorous each of other
Their soft embracements sweit they did esteem^
Whill as their fingers linked in pair's together
Her yourie monts (to whose aspyring top's
Blew asure conducts drew sweit Nectar drop's)
35.
Humbled them self unto her coral lips
Who in their precious purple painting dye
Tuo rainge of orie^tiall pe^^le eclipse
From wounding sight of peirsing mortal eye
Wh^t carles sleip neglect's by cur^o^s chance
In ordour lie her beauty to advance.
36.
Her muskie b^ea^h still mounting in the sky
Whose smook ly^k ^weit perfume infects the air
Her deip and hollow throat continually
Se^d^ forth a dulce and dolful^ sound of care
Wheir with ^um skalding sighs were interlynd*
Whoes munti^g show the so^ow of her mind.
37.
Her dainty limbs were shed with flourie knop's
Who loath to part from ^ueh a galant pr^y
Made leauie mant^es of their lof^ie top's
To hyde her dainty skine from heat of day
And flo^^^sht fairer then they did before
Prouyding crouns and garlands for her glore.
38.
Evn'e as the Lyzard through the flourie grase
Beholds a man's fair ^isage w^ill he sleip
Thither in h^ist she craull's with speedy pase
And of her b^ood her kendlinges, taks no keip.
She lies she ^ooks, she loves, and taks delight
To sie his face, and surfeit one the sight
39.
So whill the Prince beheld the sleiping Maid
The beauty of her lovely countenance
Delight, love, wounder, and amazement bred
He stood he stear'd he gaiz'd at eury glance
He blushed; to look wheir touch (no looks) have part
Yet lookd, till looks in lust, hade droun'd his heart
40.
Whill carles sleip thus naked had her left
Left was the Prince in wounder, love, delight.
Delight his heart out throuw his eyes had reft
Reft wi^h each look each thought each gla^ce each sight
Sight wounder, love delight, amaizment breidinge
Hope, passione, heat, desire one lust still feiding.
41.
At last resolulid with silent noyes drew neir
To act this furious woeful tragedy
^ot knowing tha^ it was his Sister deir
Whom he would now bereave of chastity
But o he feird that heauen's revenging flame
Would plague him if he wronged that Virgin Dame.
42.
And now he back reteirs with silent pace
And shrouds him in a shadow grove from sight
Wheir he might still behold her loulie face
Whill she awaking from a trubled spright
With sobs, with sighs, with groans, with tears she says
^h hauen's too long your justest vengeance stays.
43.
But shameing' thus to sie her self so bare
She draws her to her gramends neir hand bye
And being cled she seemed thryce so fair
That dimd the sight of any mortal eye
None might abyd her blazing starr's bright glance
Which back reuerberats their radiance,
44.
Not much vnlyk Apollos goldin light
You first his drousie eyes may weel espy
When he from wattie Thetis taks his flight
And first begins to mount the azure sky
But whane on tope of hiest heauen's he stands
No ey his ey, no look his look, with stands,
45.
Eu'ne so whill she did sleip he might descry
The louelines and luster of her face
But being wakned now her cheirfull ey
Forth throws his spangling reyes in every place
Whose peircing glance with flamming hot desire
Threw lightnings forth, and set the skies on fire
46.
The Prince Phelarnon byds no longer sight
But goes unto the fontane by and by
She that had never seine ane armed Knight
(Before that time) give out a fearful cry
And fled he praes'd with flattring praise to p^oue her
She knew no love, no flattrie then could move her.
Caput. IIII.
Argument.
Feirce Tropalance of Datia
And Prince Phelarnon feght
Laissa and they beth enchanted
Ar by Mansay's might
Great Sigismund ane army brings
Achaias to invade
He vanquished them and causd them seik
To Thessaly for aid
1.
THat griesly child of darkness and of Hell
Who had so well accomplished her desire
Her poison ^n Phelarnons breist did swell
And q^yt for to consume him with that fire
An oath Prince at thi^ sam i am she b^o^ght
Who for the ^yke desy^e of glory sought.
2.
This other Prince whom she had brought apace
Wa^ w^lking throuw th^se groves and did espy
Laissa who manteind her fearful chase
While as h^ thought her beauty dimmed the ^ky
This Knight was Sone unto the Datian Prince
And heght to name the mighty Tropol^nce
3.
Who come ^he fontane Helicon to view
Wh^^e n^me so much throghout the world was known
B^t seeing th^s fair Lady to eschew
A Knight that to him now his eyes had shown
Or him to m^k a conq^e^t then with speid
He breathed forth war^ with terror and with dreid*
4.
The Prince was loath to pairt from such a pray
And preast to shun^ this Knight but all in vain
He lighted down and stoutlye bad him stay
Fur^h draws the blad, had many thousand slain
Wheirwi^h like lightning dints, and blasts of ^hunder.
His strokes bred pain, pain raige, and raige b^ed wonder.
5.
For lo his arm this brand hade raizd on hie
And gave the Prince vpone ^he armed creist
So hudge and heavy blows that now weel nie
He maid his b^ai^h forsake his panting breist
The Prince almost now braith^es fearclie c^yits
Falls miscreant thou deirlie shall abyitt.
6.
And ^hen his murdring blade did fearcely draw
Ad ga^n^ the Paganes b^eist a thrust he sent
Which made him reill that it appeird (in show)
Hi^ cursed life out of her lodge was rent
His shoulder blade received so deip a wound
He gro^eling fell with bloody goir to ground.
7.
The Prince past by and followed one his love
His love, his Sister, and his unknown friend
The Pagaine cursed all the Gods above
And sweir he was sum feirce infernal feind
And yet in this his raige he followed fast
Till of the Prince he got a sight at last.
8.
Who now hade got Laissa in his arms
And with myld words hade pacified her fear
The which to Tropolance bred greatter harms
Then when he did his flesh and armor tear
Her looks he thinks unto his love consents
Wheirby his courage tuentie fold augments.
9.
Now wraith in him began to raige and swell
And thus ^e said fie turn thy feeble face
Leave that fair Lady and defend thy self
Lo dreidfull death abyds the to emb^ace
Wheirwith he strak and peared the Princes syd
With strength, the blaid for blood maid antres wyd.
10.
Then from Phelarnon streamed a luk-warme flood
With purple goir that dyed the grassie ground
Whill as the Pagane spied the streaming blood
The victory he thought he surely found
But as a Lyone moud to raige and wraith.
That teirs his prey with bloody paws to deith.
11.
So now the Prince dealt deildlie dints and blows
That nether arms nor shield might them withhold
Like haill and thundre thousand strokes he throws
At last a stroke he gave with courage bold
This Pagaines breist with this his mighty hand
Gave way unto the lyff revenging brand
12.
Eune as a mighty Cedar (cut be-low
By sharpened aix (falls trembling to the ground
So fell the mighty Tropolance althow
Revenge, raige, fury, strove with fats last wound
And as dry wood when fy^e has spent the same
At his last death sends forth the brightest flame.
13.
So he (though dead in strength) with angry pride
And cursed revenge renewed his deing force
The courteus Prince Phelarnon stepped a syd
No hurt he profer'd but with myld remorce
Requird him yield, who in his dying smart
Sheathed his poinyeard in the Prince his hairt.
14
This was the sorrow of Achaians all
This was the wrak and ruin of their croune
This was the ground and causer of their fall
This was the deith that dang their Phedro down
This brought great Sigismund from out his soil
With many thousand Datians to their spoil.
15.
But lo the grave magiciane Mansay knew
The fatal end of those tuo princely Kn^gh^s
Thus in a da^k blak cloud of fearful h^w
He brought them to his cave with hel^she ^prights
Wheir yeat as then they gasp their lattest breath
And dies in pain yet leiues in endless death.
16.
^he fair Laissa he has their also
En^han^ed still in her amaized mood
B^cau^ she was ^he ground of all thi^ woe
Whylls b^^nt ^n flam^'s and whyls shes d^ound in blood
That Hell it self no greatter burthene beirs
Pain, raige, and grief, her hai^t in pieces teirs
17.
Now Fame began her fether footed race
By many lands and seas she took he^ flight
At last (to rest her swift and speedy pac^)
In Datia land at cour^ she down did light
And in the ears of mighty Sigismound
Those woe full news she woefully did sound.
18.
How that his deirest Sone dier Tropolance
Achaians Prince hade now beref^ ^fly^e
And that into a Ladies fa^ defense
He b^au^li^ died in tha^ co^ragious strife
Then plag^e on p^ague the Tyran^ ear's confoundit
P^yd, anger, ^aige, reueng, blood, mu^ther, so^n^i^.
19.
Revenge proceids of injury by right
A Passione that frail man tormenteth much
It gnawe^ the heart with torment^ of despite
By day and e^ke by night molesting such
As ar^ offendit thus iniust it proves.
For the offendar naught at all it moves.
20.
Sum in revenge does always use to kill
But that is crewell rage and meir despite
For he that would revenge must have the skill
To have a kind of pleasur and delyht
That the re^eng'd may feill with sh^me and pain^
The weight of the Reuengers w^ath and gain.
21.
But Sigismund (of whom we now shall treat)
Used only crewell rage and not revenge
Most vicious and detestable deceat
Most filthy barbarous and yet more strange
A fear, a beastlines, a brut^she passione,
An evil of evils, past all imaginatione.
22.
A passione which with women does endur^
And oftentym's has by that Sex been used
And also by the Vulgar being sure
Of stronger backs, o^ cowards that has chus'd
The weaker contrare party for their fo
And thereupon their courage most they show.
23.
But lo the brave and mighty mynds (we sie)
(Wheir valor dueells) their strength does exerceize
Against the strong resisting enemy
And those whose deids their fame does eterneize
Whom they no soonner to their mercy get
But pity does their cruelty abett.
24.
Such pity used not Sigismund who sweir
To make the Earth with Graecians blood so drunck
That all the world yea heaune it self should heir
The just revenge of his deir Suns deid trunck
Thus soon he raised ane army void of fear
Whoes stomachs stout breathed forth revenge and wea^
25*
This Sigismund a mighty Pagane strong
The scepter held of many mighty land
Which he by right of war or rather wrong
Most Tyranelyk did keip into his hand
Who with this army great to Greece did go
And tour's, and strengths, and touns, did ouerthroe.
26.
And comeing to Achaia at the last
King Phedro old his fury to with stand
An army did conuein whei^ which he past
And met him on the bordours of the land
But this proud Pagan (with his multitude)
Got victory with too much Christian blood.
27.
Twyce after this the Paganes furious wrath
Reuengd too well his ding sons deir blood
Whole feftie thousand he did bring to death
With fyftiene Princes of the royal brood
Their King at last him self in Thebs enclosed
When Princes, lords, and commons all were los'd.
28.
Whom Sigismund incompast round about
With wrath, with pride, with injury and wrong
He swoor that city sold not hold him out
Though It were as Troy as great a fair as strong
But he would mack irt equal with the plain
And theirof should no memory remain.
29.
But Phedro old his threatninges to prevent
(Fearing his wra^k his ruin and his fall)
Andromadan Ambassador he sent
In Thessalie, releif help, aid, to call
Andromodan a great Achaian lord
Whom valor, woorthe, and virtue much decoird,
Caput. V.
Arg^ment.
PEenardo Prince of Thessalye
Is heir unto you shown
Whoes buried deids so long in grave
Shall to the world be known
Achaias great Ambassador
Requyrs Thessalia^e aid
The which is granted and anon
For war prouisione made.
1.
INto the mighty land of Thessalye
Their regn'd a King that Grodane heght to name
By mighty force he conquered Arabie
Throw Greciane land so famous grew his fame
Earthes terror, Europs tour, and Africks woe
Bulwark of friends, and buriell of his foe.
2.
This Grodane had to wife a noble Dame
That Sister was unto the Spanishe King
Whoes life gouernd with ^uch a spotles name
O^d f^me throw empty ae^ this song did sing
Th^y^^ happy Prince of Iasons line that regn's
And to the world an other Jason breng's.
3.
Those tuo were loved with such a lust regarid
She loved, he feird, she praisd, and he renound
The famous city Eregon he reird
And built the princely Palace Pitemuond
And their hi's royal court he intertain'd,
Million's of knights and Ladies their remaind.
4.
He had no children but a Sone alone
Whoes beauty and proportione of his face
Bewrayd his royal Progeny anon
His person Princelye and his comely grace
Most rair, most wise, most valorous, most fair
Most loved, most loathed, still croc'd, with Fortuns sna^^.
5.
Penardo called the object of disdain
The skorne of love, the monument of loathe
The mirror of mischief, the map of pain,
The marck of danger, and the mold of wrath
The Seat of sorrow, and the tomb of care
The wings of wrack, the Burtio of despair.
6.
Yet was he well traind up in feart's of arms
Tilt's, turnayes, and all war-lyk exercise
Whoes brave undaunted Spright espyes no harms
Whoes mighty force his fame does eternize
So loved of all, and yet that all so feird him
That Heaune, and Earth, and Hell, to much admird him.
7.
And had his grand-Syre ( Jason valorous)
Bein now alive he hade not cron'd the Maine
For that his dangling tresses precious
Surmunts the goldin fleece which he did gain
His looks, his gesture, and his countenance
Would chaistest Phoebe move to dalliance
8.
Dame Nature followed him with sad laments
Compleining of her treasurs empty coffers
Proportioune beauty virtues excrements
Was left to her and cheirfullie she offers
To quyt all those if he would prove so kind
To runder back perfections of they mind
9.
And yet sumtyme she (stairing' in his face)
Would seem to love him wowing him with swyll'^
And proud of this her handie work whoes grace
She swoir the glory of the gods beguyl's
And other whills complaining in a rage
She lak'd materiall's for ensueing age.
10.
Which true did prove for Nature was undone
The earth was lost, and mankind was forlorn
Th'ensewing ages monster's proved too soon
Some reasone wants some but proportione borne
Some dum, some deaf, some blind, some leam'd ar seen
Some sensles, witles, strenghtles, hartles bein.
11.
Now whill the Earth was raped with admiratione
Of this fair youth so much admeir'd of all
(One contrary removed) the confirmatione
He seemed to have of all that grace men call
He that in loves despite him self had showen
Yet loved at last and loathed was overthrown,
12.
For who can shunn his fortune or his fate
All to loves live though life were but a night
Cear, traueel woe, with pleasure does debait
Grief sorrow, pain, with pastyme, joy, delight.
The truest happimes one earth remain
Wheir croce is mixed with confort, joy with pain
13.
But Whil fair fame (this royal court to show
Throuw spacious Earth and oceane took her flight
Aduentrous Knight's hade (many year's ag'oe)
Sleep't in dark silence of eternal night
Desire of honor (to the worlds view)
Calls furthe one Youth, deip Danger to pursue,
14.
Penardo as ane Gallant would obey
Whoes brave heroic spright surpast so far
All youths of Greece that he would often essay
The most and best approved Knight's of war
When tuo at once he caused for to effront him
They could not find the meins for to dismont him
15.
Yet whill he sleip't at home in silent pace
The Ambassadors come to the court in haist
From out Achaia whom it pleased his grace
To entertain with many royal feast
Who much admeird the great magnifience
Of his fair court and of his excellence
16.
Thrie days were spent in feasting or repast
When ^hey desyr'd for to be hard of all
The King and counsel being set at last
They were convay'd unto a princely hall
Yea to unfold that costly court so fine
Should pas the might of such a Muse as myn^*
17.
The pillars were of purest yuorie framed
With pearl and precious stone in gold embost
Whoes glistring beam's continual light inflamd
That sable Night her entrance their had lost
The stones to wall's their glances consecrat's
Which ritchest mantles still reuerberat's
18.
Whoes maiest^ was staitlie to behold
For round about the walls the tapestrie
Was goodly arace wrought with Indiane gold
With purple silk and silver gloriously
So viuelie wrought unto the humane eye
Maiestick purtreats lyuelie seemd to be*
19.
Their Cupid painted in his glistring pride
His eyes were shut, yet in his crewell fist
An goldin bow and arrows did abyd
Wheir with he shot at randone when he list
He bends, he draw's, he shoots no shaft in vain
He hitt's the Heart, and yet no marks remain.
20.
There Jove and their the Thebane Semale
Their jealous Juno like her Nurse appeirs
And caused her seik that Jove in majesty
Would come with thundering darts and lightning fyr's
Their might you sie when he performd ye same
Her birne in heavenly fire and schoarcking flamme
21.
Their Leucothea. their was Phoebus bright
In sheape of old Eurimine her mother
Their Orchamus her father tacks her streght,
And eard's her quick (til Phoebus coming hither)
Unto a lamp a star a flamming light
He changed her for to chase from thence ye night
22.
There Mars and Venus at there dallying sports
Their Vulcans artificial yrone nett
Wherein he wrapped these lovers, their resorts
Feir Danaes Sone whom Jove did erst beget
Who cutts Medusa's heid and their the fontane
Wheir he had changed King Athlas in a montan.
23.
Their also feghts he with the monster wyld
That persecutes the fair Andronad ever
Their Cephey and Cassiope bewayld
Their daughters hap, and yet could help her never
Whom thundering Jove iniustlie their detaind
She weip't, she murnt, she sigh't, she prayed, she pla^'d
24.
All these vow might have sein so perfectly
That nothing else but vital breath they wanted
Whil as they seemed to lurk so privily
Sum heir sum their in pairs together hanted
They seemd to blushe when curious eyes did sie them
And shrowed their yuorie limms in fowlds to fly them
25.
So Cynthia does shrood her self from sight
Of weary Trauelers that wandering strayes
W^apt up in darkest cloud's of silent night
Yet through thin clouds often fhoots out silver rays
So seemed they in those fowlds, to creip un known
Yet show them self unwilling to be showen.
26.
Or as the stream's of crooked wynding brooks
Now heighe then low, now rise, then falls again
In darkest corners holes and privy crooks
Will steall unseen Yet can not skaip the maine
Each ^umbling in hudge heap's their homage does
Compleaning on the Earths unkind refuse
27.
Eune so those mantles glorious rich and rair
If strurd will alter chainge and turn in vain
Trembling and wafting moved whith shaples aer
Heir low their heighe their low heir hyeghe again
Which maks sum portrats show and sum reteir
Sum heighe sum low and sum vnwar's appeir
28.
Those strangers stood amazed at that sight
The King to brek their silence low did move him
Upon a bench of gold that grave great light
A Pale lyk heauens-starrd'd can oby above him
The chiefest bowed to ground and then began
To show the King (who heght Andromadan.)
29.
O thouw most mighty Prince of Iasons race
Thou skourge of Paganes and of Persians pride
O thou who did by mighty strength deface
Arabia foelix and the spoils deuyd
Amongst the Souldours with a princely mind
Thy servants come from far, thy help to find
30.
Know that we are Archaian's mighty Prince
Of ancient Greciane blood we are discendit
Against the Paganes we have made defense
Our realm lost our royal blood is endit
Our King our countray kingdom croun^ and all
Arrest and forced before our Foes to fall
31,
By Sigismund great King of Datia
Of Transyluania and Moldauia Prince
Of Seruia and of Valachia
He holds the septure and the governance
With armies great to make his valor known
Our country, tours, and tounes has overthrown
32.
This was the cause, Ill hap our Prince let out
One day the mont Parnassus for to view
Well armed he was both lofty strong and stout
Well fauord fair and of a heavenly hew
Our King Of Children had no more at all
There was he lost, and their our strength did fall
33.
For their he chanced to view a sacred Muse
Enamourd thus he fondly fell in love
Pre sing her deuyne deity to abus
Whose mind from chaist desyrs he could not move
By chance a Kinght arryu'd and sought withal
His pain, his grief, his lose, his death, his fall
34.
And thus they both in combat fought a space
Until there fa^ all hour approached neir
And then they both were slain into that place
Evne then began our woe, our wrack our care
This Kinght was Prince of Datia and was Sone
To Sigismund for him this war begane,
35.
When he had done in silence still he stood
Abiding answer from the King who said
(In greattest ire) he would revenge their blood
And willingly would lend his freind^ie aid
Live happic Prince (said they) in whoes sweitt eyes
Wrath, terror, dreid, revenge, and glory lies.
Caput. VI.
Argument.
THe army marches to Achai,
Encamps on Phocis plain
Grodane seeks peace at Sigismund
Who anfwers with disdame
Boeotia stays their garisone
For Grodans help they sue
Penardo goes to their releef
With all the Aenean crew.
1.
O Amity the worlds only life
Without the which this great and woundrous fram^
Of heaun and earth should so be wrapped in strife
That contrare motion's would co^fund the same
It seems from mighty Jove thou art descended
He send the down when this great work was ended.
2.
Of man thou art the staff and only guide
Without the, man should walk in darkest nigh^
Thou art the stay, and joy of his abide
The worlds lamp her lantern and her light
Of Gods elect the sacred flamme alone
Kindled in heaune before his mercies thron^.
3.
The Nurse of true society humane
Pillar of staitts and policies for aw
Nor any else save Tyrans the disdane
For wheir thou art their is no neid of law:
Law is a second mein deuyed to be
And serus for naught but their wheirs want of the.
4.
True friend ship reulls desire and the affects
The heart, the tongue, the mind, the will, and all
But lay the yock of justice on their necks
For aw of punishment, and fear of thrall
They are constraind their duty for to do
Which friend ship would most willingly go too.
5.
Thus Amity the sacred flamme has beine
That fosters truethe, to duty giving life
Which in this following history is s^ine
By Grodane who had wrapped him self in strife
In him true Amity hade sole dominione
Which gave no place to wordlie base opinione.
6.
For lo his counsel would this way proceid
They could not thus procur so great a foe
Except the King Heir to Achai succeed
Great fools ar they that threatening dangers knoe
And rune but hope but help advise, delay
Headlongs to wrack, to ruin, to decay.
7.
This seemed to grie with reasone but the King
Who feared not, caird not, sought not, gain to crave
True virtue, glory, amity did rigne
In him who could not, should not, would not leave
His friends in strait, in danger, in distress
His aid, they sought and they should find no less.
8.
Wheirat the legatts (falling one their face)
Did weep for very joy before them all
And reverently again they thank his grace
And Thessaly for arms began to call
The Kings will, pleasure, and command declared
Bands, legions, troops, and squadrons were prepared,
9.
Thus through the mighty land of Thessalye
Theirs nothing hard but murder, blood, and wear
Such tumolts did aryss that presentlye^
All nighbour nationes gann his force to fear
Fame fill their ears eune babbling fame too nimble
All feared his name, and fearing all did tremble.
10.
So feared is Nilus proud and mighty raige
That fertile Aegipts land does ouerfloe
When by the hatcheing Crocadills presage
They know how far the Princely stream will go
When ower his bancks he spreds his azure wings
All faints, all fears, all flies the force he brings.
11.
Then while the flower of Thessally repaird
Before Eregon on a pleasant plain
Whoes panting hearts appeald their pow're prepaird
To gield their glistring arms with glorious gain
To wrath they yield, wrath, them to war commands.
Wrath armed their heart's, their hearts has armed their hands.
12.
This great and mighty army was as much
One horse and foot as feftie thousand strong
Wheirof were threttie thousand footmen such
As any was all Christiandome among
The horsemen all were Princes, Lords, and Knights
Great wonders wrought their valors, stre^tghs and might
13.
In Thessaly and Aeneans did dwell
Of all the Greicks those were the most renound
In martial featts of arms they did exeell
Their pedegre from brave Achilles found
Of those ten thousand to this war was sent
Most brave, most strong, most fearce, most valient,
14.
Those guardes the person of this mighty King
And called his Caualarie alwheir
Thus well provided all of every thing
This army martch'd in goodly ordour their
And being come unto the frontiers end
Grodane his legate to the Datian send.
15.
Requiring him from such attemps to cease
And let the Graecians brook their native soil
Restoiring back their cities and with peace
Depart but trouble, pillage, pray, or spoil
And be not proud of Fortuns pleasant hours
Whoes smyls ar mixed with frouns whoes sweitts with sorwes
16.
Although his Sone Prince Tropolance was slain
Him self too weell revenged his death before
For he the Prince Phelarnon killed again
The law of arms prouyds revenge no more
Then should he not triumph and tyrannize
Thus in their fall, their wrack, their miseries.
17.
Eune as a staitlie ship (her foes to urge)
Forth slyds upon the restles, rolling waw
Imperiouslye she cutts the azure surge
One Thetis back she ryds with galant shaw
But when the angry Seas begins to roar
Waves beats her down, that beat the waves before,
18.
So hie vpone the tope of Fortuns wheell
Must neids be thrown down heidlongs at a bloe
In pride he said he would make Grodane feell
The force of datian arms before he go
Although his Sone had else reuengd his death
That kingdom skair sly could suffeice his wrath.
19.
And sure (quod he) if I had known the platt
That Grodane made this war to take in hand
I would have keipt his glory in for that
Yea and perhaps his fury still with stand
For eune before the wall^ of Eregone
My army there in armor should have shoone.
20.
Soon after those disdain full speeches past
The army martch'd sum tuentie legs that so
They being neir to Phocis at the last
Grodane direct'd ane herald for to show
(By sound of t^umpet) that he wild them yield
But they refuis'd, wheirfore he manned the field.
21.
When he haid laid his seige unto the city
His Skoutts brought in a Messinger in have
Who prayed his Majesty to tak some pity
Upon Bieotia that was lost almaist
Tuo days ago they slew their garysone
And maid revolt from wicked Sigismune.
22.
And lo of Transyluania the Prince
(Called strong Phelaston) comes to raze their w^ll
And kill them selfs, their, Enfants but defense
Leaueing no memory of them at all,
This Prince indeid of all the Pagane camps
Was most renound and feared for brave attemp^*
23.
Of manly courage stout of body strong
Bold was his heart and valorous his hand
Crewell his mind enuyous full of wrong
Disdain, pride, raige, yea fury in him fand
A duelling sit (and last to show him right)
Feareles of God, cairles of hells despite.
24.
Wheirfore Penardo neids would show him sel^
And falling one his kneis before his Sire
Desyr'd that he might have the chairge to quell
The fury of that princely Paganes ire
His trembling voice, pale face, and fyrie breath
Shows his true valor and his furious wrath
25.
So does a gentle Lion meik and myld
(For Princes pleasour team'd with teacher true)
If moved to raige and wrath he grows so wyld
His wonted courage in his breist renew
His taill he lifts a loft and ^uffs his heir.
Shoots surth his flamming tongue, and paws to tear.
26.
Loath was his father he should undergo
So greatt a charge in these his tender yeirs
Yet knowing courage did his breist ore floe
In him strength, might, and valor weell appeirs
Whoes sune of glory can no cloud ow'r vaill
Whoes day no night, nor darkness, may assail.
27
To him he gave this great and mighty charge
And with him sent three Princes stout and bold
Whoes name fame, praise, worth, valor shall at large
Be showen above the notherne starr' enrold
And with him went those warrelyk Aenean bands
Terror of earth, and strength and Graeciane lands.
Caput. VII.
Argument.
PEnardo's aid is cum to lat
The town is set on fire
He follows on the Enemy
Revenge is his desire
A visione in his sleip appeirs
The which he does declear
Beneth Apollo's altar, He
Hes found an armor fair
1.
AMbitioune is a passioune woundrous strong
Of noble courage and of mighty force
Which captive leads all g^alant spreits along
And even the strongest passions does enfor^e
Yea love it self which seems to contend
Yet often ambitione victor proves in end.
2.
Ambitione is an flamme that burns the mind
With endless drouth still thristing after glory
A blind excessive gredine^ (of kind)
To be imbost in tym's eternal story
Still hunting after greatness that we sie
Ambitione never satisfied to be.
3.
Ambition heigh is no^ a Passione feat
For baseborne brain's, or wordlie small attemp's
Renoune and glory stoups not to such bait
Those are not capable but ar contemp's
For proud ambi^oune beats and casts them down
Whill as they se^k praise, glory, and renoune.
4.
Ambitione after gain does not pursue
Nor actions reapping profeit does it cair
But ay wheir dreidfull danger does ensu
Difficult strainge unusual and rare
Eu'ne there, ambitione hunts for glory eue^
For base and wordlie gain it caireth never.
5.
This passione Prince Penardo did bereave
Of whom we write this following history
Who thirsting after honor seemed to leave
A famous name in Glorious memory
In him ambitione, crewell war susteind
Against love, and famous victory obtaind
6.
Who as we said rece^'d that army small
Wheir with he should releive Beotias neid
But Sigismundi (the city for to thra^)
Haid send the Transiluaniane Prince with speid
Whoes valarous renoune to heaune did munt
Wheir for Penardo with ambitione brunt,
7.
He freat's) he froun's, he longs to reaue the croune
Of fame and glory from Phelastons head
And set it on his own, which great renoune
To beir it through the world vnconque^ed
More grief he fynds when one goes him before
Then joy in conquing of a thous and skore.
8.
Now he right glade in gaining of this chairge
Tuo days led forth his army one the w^y
At last drew neir and on a plain right large
Would neids refresh his wear^e men a day
And then he sends, to learn, to view to kno
The estate, the place, the number of his foe.
9.
When Phoebus drinsh't his sylver shyning hair
In Thetis lape they saw a cloud aspyre
Whoes smook send suddane darkness throw the ac^
Wherein appeird reid flashing flamm's of fire
As if the earth out of her bowels wide
Had send to choke the lofty heavens for pride.
10.
While as the army vewing stood amaiz'd
Whoes hautie hearts no fear could harbor in
Yeit vew's with fear and fearing still they gazed
Their quiet murmur made a fea^full dine
At last the skoutts returning told ye treuth
Which moved them all to, woe, to care, to reuth.
11.
Know mighty Prince your enemies ar gone
Because they have fulfild their fearce desire
For they have raysd the walls of yonder town
And set it all with skoarching flamm's a fire
Touns tours and walls in c^^well fire does burn
Men, women, babs, by bloody swords ar torn.
12.
This was the cause of their destructione lo
They feared the Prince his aid should come too lait
And la^king soldiers on their wall's to show
For their defense agains their crewell fate
Within a forest full of lack's and fenn's
Three hundredth robe^s lay in caves and denns.
13.
The chief of these was once a citizene
Who playing bancker out, his goods bade lost
Whairfo^e he hyed him to the Robers dene
Who chus'd him chif^ane of their theeuishe host
Him hyr'd they straight with soum's of Indiane gold
To guarde their walls and to defend their Hold
14.
But he who had no pity nor regaird
Unto their lywes but only to their gold
Agreid by p^iuie letter's for reward
And to Phelaston has the city sold
Ah haples wretch that caust dest^oy and kill
Men at thy mercy, thy command, and will.
15.
Eune as the mighty marlion mounts the sky
And soars one lofty wing's with g^aizing eyes
At last the chirming lark she does espy
Chief chante^ in the queir of all that flies
Whose hollow throat, sends forth a thous and sounds
To pearce the azure vaults that back redounds,
16.
Her shrill sweit notts, with silent blowing breath
Now seeing her fearce enemy aspyre
Pearcing the empty aer to fly from death
Whil to prolong she mounteth, still the hyer
Bot with sad looks, whill thus she bids adue
Their she a weary traueler does view.
17.
Whoes heart she often had cheird with chirming cleir
Awaking him from drousie sleip to rise
And warnd him that Apollos light drew neir
And in his long'sum journey did deuyse
New not's wheiron she curious descant founds
Filling his ears with diapason sounds
18.
And thinking now that he would thankful be
She hyes fast down and seiks his aid to beild her
With feirfull shreiks does in his besome fly
Glad that she song to him who now does shield her
But he whoes hairt no pity harbors lo
Delivers her unto her mortal foe.
19.
So did this fructe of ill this wel^h of woe
This curse of hauene in Who vnn^tutall heart
No p^tie could have plac^ but to her foe
The city yelds (for this her good desert)
That often had song sweit not's of educatione
To draw him from his haples constellatione
20.
Eu'ne so the ravening wolf by simple goat
B^oght up, with love, with travel, care, and, pain
And feid upon her teat (such is her loat)
Till strength and force and vigor he retain
Then he whom she brought up so cairfullie
Her deith, het grave, her sepulcher must be
21.
The Prinee that pitied such a sore mischance
Admiring much this monstrous cruelty
Swoor in a rage his army to advance
Till he revenged Boeotias misery
Which did inrol his praise above the skies
His fame, woo^th, valor, woundrous victories.
22.
When Phoebus harbinger in crimsone cled
Chaic'd done to Hell nights hated hew abhorde
The flower that murn's for Phoebus absence spread
Her beauty fur^he and smyl's vpone her Lord
Whoes birning beams and life infusing rays
Confo^ts the Earth and beautifieis ye skies
23.
Then through the camp a murmur gane to rise
All cries for arms the trumpets sounds aloud
There sturdie coursars courage loudly brayes
And seemd to cry for loft^e ^ydars proud
They forward marched whith joy and great delight
Their willing mynds made heavy armor light
24.
And martching thus with such a restles pace
Three days ^he^e nights, a^ last they com in sight
Of their proud foe^ who heiring of their chaice
Had lyk desire lyik will to prove their might
Shouts, clamours, cries, on eurye syd descry
Their will, desire, and hope of victory.
25.
And yet Phelaston lyk ane champioune wise
Forecasting perrells in his throught alone
Feared that Penardo's hardy enter pryse
Was but a crafty train to draw him on
And that the army in some corner lay
His camp vpone a suddane to betreay
26.
Yet being of a mighty galant mind
He shamed to fly at his imaginatione
Wheir fore in have to Athens did he send
Wheir Brando lay at seige to show the fashione
Brando the reull over Seruia did hold
Stout, hardy, wight aduentorous and bold
27.
Which when he hard his seige he raised in have
And to the Prince Phelaston martch'd along
Now know that in his camp their was at least
One horse and fute sum tuentie thousand strong
To Sigismund those news he shortly sends
Who raised his seige from Thebs and thither wends.
28.
Now Primum mobile hade drawn the light
with his sw^ft course out of ou^ Hemispere
And ^pred the ^eatblack mantle of the night
That summonds all the creatures with fear
Unto their rest then for to be their shield
They built a canues city on the field
29.
Whil thus he had encamped in their sight
Set forth his watch his camp intrinshit strong
This Campioune caused disarme them all that night
For their refreshment afte^ journey long
After repast the Prince to sleip is gone
And in his sleip appeird this visione.
30.
A virgin Nymphe (whoes beauty dimd the sky)
Wi^h saddest looks with sobs with sighs with tears
So sorrowful she seemed with weipping ey
Led by tuo feinds of Pluto's griesly fears
Her body seemed all dyed in crimsone blood
Her garment skoarch'd in flamm's of hellish brood.
31.
Thus leading her hard by him (as he thought)
She cried o sweitt Penardo lend thy aid
Whoes only strength the fates decree has wrought
To end the ceasles torments of a Maid
Wheirat him thought he start with suddane fear
Drawing his brand those hellishe feinds to tear.
32.
But then with myldest speech she said no more
Thy willingness suffeizeth at this time
A g^eater danger thou must pas before
Thy happy aid give end unto my crime
But mighty Jove in danger, war, and st^yfe
Preserve thy fame, thy honor, and thy life.
33.
Not far their stands within a pleasant vaill
Ane altar built at Agamemnons cost
In honor of fair Pallas sacred Cell
When he was captain of the Graetiane host
Their, lies a sword, a shield, ane armor fair
Of worth, of wounder, and of virtue rare.
34.
Feight not before you have this armor on
Whose worth shall much advance thy wondrous fam^
For know this much before tuo days by gone
That Pluto has conspyrt to spoil thy name.
For he has send the Feinds in legions forth
To seik to shame, to wrack, to stain, thy worth.
35.
And thus she vanished quyt out of his sight
He wakeing one a suddane from his sleip
^hought this to be a fantasy too light
That from his humor'd brain did fondly creip
Yet warlie did his thoughts one wit attend
Weying if good or ill thereon depend.
36.
Aurora in her purple robe arose
Warning p^oud Titan for to light the d^y
And drew the courtens that did him disclose
In Thetis lovely arms that dalleing lay
Who stole away and in the gloomie East
Reard up above the Earth his flamming crest.
37.
How soon the Prince espyit his goldine light
He called for Mandadorus Prince of Mesone
This Mandadorus was of greattest might
Of all his subjects save the Duik of Thesone
To him he told his dream who said your grace
May try't and trying let the truth have place.
38.
Wheirfore he send and from his ancient room
Causd raise the altar wheir they fand a stone
Of Alabastre builded lyk a Toumbe
In greik sum letters were ingraft thereon
Those we ethe words (ingraph't in gold so fine
That now as first their luster seemed to shine.
39.
This precious stone ane armor does retain
Whose woundrous worth as yet shall no man know
Until the Spreit of them that lives in pain
Eune to a mighty stranger shaell them show
Who with the same recalls relents, releifs,
Thrie Souls from pain, from death, from Hells mischeifs
40.
Hid was the meaning darck the sentence seemd
Of all the truth they could not ripe the ground
But this fair costly armor as they deemd
Had at the famous wars of Troy beine found
Which grave and wise Cassandra had invented
For Paris, Troys feirce fall to have prevented.
41.
Lo thus it was she knowing by her art
The ruin of heaun threatening Troy drew neir
And that proud Paris his unjust de^ert
Should be the cause of such an endless weir
To him by art she had this armor wrought
That all the Gods decree might turn to naught,
42.
For she discending to the lowest Hells
Her mighty power in magic force she show
The greislie Ghosts stood trembling whill she tells
Her will in frameing of this armor new
Loath to prouyd remorce, remeid, releif
Who joyed in blood, war, murder, and mischief.
43.
Yitt fear them forced they durst not disobey
Her mighty art and all commanding will
For she with strainge characters could a lay
The pains of Hell from punishment of ill
Yea she the Suns diurnall course culd stay
And turn to da^kest night the brightest day.
44.
And whill these feinds this armor fine did make
They forgd the metal first in Aetnas flame
And temperd it into the Stygiane lake
With herbs of woundrous force amongs't the same
That mighty st^ong enchantments can with stand
Yea sword, and fire, and water, can command.
45.
Jove's douchter brought king Agamemnon forth
When she with them returning was to Troy
Who seeing them of such a woundrous worth
Bereft the grave Cassandra of her joy
Who had with herbs and flams of Flegitone
Composd a strange and admirable stone.
46.
Which secreitlie she in this armor set
Whose virtue was his owner for to stay
From love, and amorous desyr's to let
Arming the heart against all venereall play
For princely Paris she deuys'd this train
That he might render Helene back again.
Caput. VIII.
Argument.
AChaians fall fair Pallas does
Forsie long time before
And that Penardo should them raise
Unto their former gloir
The Aene^ns tuo batales win^
And by the Prince alaine
The Transyluanian and the Seruian
Disput; both ar slain.
1.
WHen as the Greciane got this armor lo
Jove's brain borne girl did gif him this command
That of this thing no creatur should know
Till he returned unto his native land
Wheir to her name he should ane Altar rear
And secreitlie enclose this armor rheir.
2.
The which he did with duetifull regaird
According to heighe pallas her command
For lo that sacred altar up he raird
Their under laid the armor which they fand
Wheir it had lyine so many hundreyht yeirs
Vn-found vnmark'd unknown as it appeirs.
3.
Sum says that b^ight warlyk pallas did forsie
Eune then, the ruin of Achaias croune
And that fair Lissa cause theirof should be
Trogh her great beauty of so hye renoune
Thus she prouyds, forseis, preuents their fall
By means un sought, or unrequeird at all.
4.
This brought Penardo out of Thessaly
From torment this fair virgin to releass
So faites ordaind such was his desteny
So heauns decreed her torment thus should ceass
O mighty Jove blesd be thy sacred name
That so preuents, sorseis, temeids, our shame.
5.
When they had brought this armor to the Prence
They fitted him so weell on every part
A^ if they had been made for that pretense
Who thus acouter'd with a lofty heart
Ly^k Mars him self his countenance he ba^
That thundered forth blood, victory, and war.
6.
This armor was with red vermilione rosd
And spangled thick with stars of Indian gold
Whose cornert point^ with diamonds imbosd
And silver branches that the stars uphold
He goes they glance they shine while as he sturd
Of all hes praisd, regaird^t, loud, admyrd.
7.
His hautie helmet guildet all with gold
Whoes shynning brigh^nes trembling terror bred
Ow'r all his creist an Eggle did unfold
His goldim wings which proudly ouerspred
The shynning helm and with his tall ones wide
He seemd to tear the metal in his pride.
8.
Vpone his downie cronne their stood upright
A bunsh of plumes discolored diversely
Spangled with spangs of gold and pearl whoes light
Daizled the sight of the beholders eye
Their shadows in the Eggls eyes did glance
That seemd right glad of this their dalliance.
9.
So does a tall and lofty Cedar show
That grows on top of mighty Parnass montane
The myldest blast that Zephyrus can blow
Maks all his leaves to tremble on the fontane
Or Cynthia lyk in silent night that shawes
Her beam's to dance and glance one Thetis wawes:
10.
Of burnisht steill his glanceing shield It shone
The true presage of his ensewing days
Wheir sat a lady on a crimsone throne
A knight lay prostrat at her feitt who says
Ah Fates your fearce Decree I surely prove
That keeps her heart from all the darts of love.
11.
His mortal blad did semlie hing with hold
Within a silver sheath wrought curiously
The hiltes were of the fynnest burnisht gold
Which pearl and saphyre stones did beautefie
No metal nor enchantment could resist
This murthring blade when ever his owner list.
12.
And armed thus he red upon a steid
Whoes pride with pransing beatts the groneing ground
And champing on his foamme bitt with dreid
Would seim with trampling noye the aer to wound.
By lofty volts and rauets showing still
How glade he was to obey his masters will,
13.
Who managed him so weell at wished contents
Wi^h turns and curbits heir and their remoues
And when he slakt the rayns his lofty sprents
Would ^kai^slie tipp the trembling earth with houes
And glad of such a Master matchles rare
With swift impetuos speid would pierce the aer.
14.
Off was his helm, his amorous face and eyes
Like Hesper shynd amongst the lesser lights
His countenance still p^omest victories
Fair smyling, sweitt, and pleasant in their sights
A light but fire a ha^t but fear or dreid
A lamp vnqueinshd a mind unconquered
15.
Then love him self more sweit his countenance
Wheir grace ^ay hid in glanceing beauties lap
Still sending with each smyle, each look, each glance
A thousand amors that the senses rap
With all delight at last he breathed forth
True valor virtue wonder glory wo^the.
16.
Brave Bretherine and Campanions all in wear
Remember your Forefathers lofty feat's
Our sweit Thessalian soil did only bear
Those mighty mynds that all the earth abaits
Our natione with our Jason left their soil
To gain the glory of the goolden spoil.
17.
What brauer spreits in Greece then has be in ours
What greatter glory then our country wan?
What manly mynds and mighty Conquerour's
But we may claim ay since the world began
Yea if we look our lyns discents and bloods
Wei'll shame to fly from worlds of multituds.
18.
(...) leave we honor, fame descent, and blood,
Remember only whom with all we deall
With Pag'anes, spoylars of the christian Good
The ancient foes of Greece we must assail
Nay foes I shame to call them not but Thieves
On robrie theft, spoil, prey, and pillage leeues.
19.
Their Captane strong Phelaston strong I know
Tho called so stout so strong so fearce in fight
Tho Persians, Syrans, and Arabiams too
He foyls yet hes not feltt the G^aecian might
Those naked, bare, vnarmmed, fear maks fall
Bot hautie Greeks surpas them, him, and all
20.
Great victory hy this brave feght shall come
The danger nothing and the labor small
Some fearful strengthles, hairtles, mightles, some
Before our face they fear, they fly, they fall
What neid we mor bat kill tak, stay, and chase
Envy, stryf, discord, throw them flies a pace.
21.
Whereat the army gave a joyful cry
And willingly they rank them selfs the while
Their Captanes and commanders joyfully
Did cheer them up with the reward of spoil
There breists ar sweld with conquest courage wrath
The roaring trumpet's sounds blood, war, and death.
22.
The Prince his battles ordored in this sort
By Mandadorus was the vnegaird led
To whom tuo thousand fotemen did rosurt
Of Aneans a thousand horse he had
Who looks lyk hungry Lions whill they go
That wrath war blood and veangea^ce does foreshow
23.
Phenabon prince of Thays the reirward had
Equal in nombre wepins arm's devyce
Belmondo duike of Toropeia led
The batall great that was as money twyce
All those for war were borne in war they floorisht
In trauells great, great pain great danger nurisht
24.
The Ptince him self would not in batteil stand
But with tuo thousand mighty men of arms
Would give supply wheir any want he fand
And with fresh aid would still revenge their harms
Whille as he said Brave Brotherin let me sie.
That if they fle thei'r slain, if feght they die.
25.
Now by this time the Prince Phelaston had
Hrs army weel in battle rank arrayed
And with new hope their fanting hearts he fed
That nothing now but eourage in them stay it
His venegaird was five thousand at the least
Led by a migtie Pagane Alphorest.
26.
Lagone the reirwaird led a Pagane good
Wheir was five thousand bold strong hardy stout
And with him self the greattest battle stood
Ten thousand strong but fear but care but doubt
Thus martching both they joune the trumpetts sounds
At whoes hudge noyes both heauen'e and earth redou^ds
27.
Like to the blasts of boystrous Boreas
That hurl's with haistie wings from hiest heau'ne
With thundering royes and threatening glorious
To sh^k the Earths fundatione fondlye dreven
Blasting the heauens' that back redounds his blowe^
Beatting' the earth and billowing Seas that showe^.
28.
With swelling waves to soar in lofty skye^
Disdaining the government he keip's
Thath causes all their w^trie empyr's ryes
From silent moueing in the lowest deip's
Raising hudge mont's one. Neptun's azure plain
In foamie drops he throuws them down again.
29.
And up agane through aerie waults from sea's
His bloustring blast^ from North to South he sends
Crushing the clouds that fast before him flies
Together dash't their broken ranks discends
In tearie drops as if they seemed to weip
That he so great gouernament should keip.
30.
Eune so these mighty men of arms did crushe
With furious strenght their weapones each on other
Hudge drops of blood in stream's did always gush
The streams in floods the fluds brought Seas togethe^
That drops, and strem's and floods, and seas took pair^
To drinshe, to dashe, to droune, the Martial heart.
31.
The rank's that stiflie stands agenst there foes
Falls down in slap's waltring in bloody stryn'ds
Whereon fresh ranks (still marching bravely goes
Out over the be^lies of their deing friends
Not yelding to their foes till either side
Does sacrafice their soulls to swelling pride.
32.
Now whilst on eurie syd they fearslie sight
The wantguards met with mighty strength and bos^^
Wheir Alphorest the Pagane show his might
Before his feit lay many deing ghost
Till Mandadorus saw such hauok their
Wheir Alphorest did feght he did repair.
33
And Alphorest (that lyk a Lyoune bears
Him self) espyd the Prince of Meson by
To red him self of commone souldeours feirs
His bloes seemed lightning thundert throw the sky.
And then he lent the Prince a mighty bloe
That almost from his horse he forcd him go
34.
But he acquyts him lighting on his hand
That hand and sword, and all, fell to the ground
And wheir his visar louse he lykewayes fand
He made him, their receive his fatal wound
The Pagans now began to fear and fant
When as their mighty leadder thus they want.
35.
And by this time the greattest battle flies
Eune their wheir as the Transysuanian stood
For that Penardo with his fresh supplies
Had brok in throw their ranck^ embrew'd whith blood
So that in general all began to fly
Except Phelaston their would bravely die
36.
And sure that day his admirable might
If I sold pas untold I were to blame
For that him self alone in single fight
Had slain thrie knights of great and famous name
Lighosthon, Guelpho, Meldabreid, at lenth
By cruel death had felt his might strength
37.
Nor those alone by his accursed hand
Dep^yu'd of life of soul of breath did lie
But Oerard, Ormond, Groian, by his brand
Were slane all Knights of noble progeny
With many mo he in that fatal strife
Hurt, feld, or bruised, or then bereft of life.
38.
Penardo still that followed on the chaise
Belmondo and Phenabon he espied
Both by one Knight were put to great distres
There armor all with crimsone blood was died
In greattest have if he had not come to theme
That Knight alone was like for to undo theme.
39.
Yet woundring that such woundrous force could be
In one to foil such fomous Knights as they
And piteing that other side should die
He trusts him self betuein and bids them stay
And to Phelaston says heir ar no foes
Bot from his brand he answered him whith bloes.
40.
Then he commands those tuo to stand aside
The furious Pagane feiresie he assaild
His thristie blade often in his blood he dyed
At every stroke his armor he dismaild
With equal strength the Pagane countervaild him
Showing his woundrous valor no thing faild him.
41.
The Pagane raisd his sanguin sword in hie
Discharging blows vpone his helmet strong
Whill fyrie starr's out of his eyes did fly
His mou^h furth-casting streams of blood along
Wheirfore he now whith wrath shame raige and woundre
Send bloes lyik lightning tempest, storm, and thunder.
42.
Theirwith redoubled was the Pagans ire
Who said shall one poor knight my strenth recall
And so agane the Prince receaud his hyre
That tuyce he reild and reddie tuyce to fall
At last he blush't for shame, and shook for wrath
Requyting shame whith foil, disgrace with death.
43.
This was the Transyluaenian fearce and strong
Whom he had slain, and fo^ward then he past
And put him self among's the Pag'anes throng
Which scattred chased, and slain to ground he cast
As sand before the northern blast fu^th fleis
So fled those troup's, and fleing falls, and deis,
44.
Werie^ with killing then they sound retrai^
From sending Pagans soul's to Plutos ports
Wheir of a now I cease for to repait
Whill as to them more danger still resorts
For lo a g^eatter host they might descry
With standarts wafting in the aerie sky.
45.
Amazed they stood and knew not what it mein'd
At last the Prince undaunted courage show
By trumpets sound he causd them be conueind
And thus said he itt is not time to rue
Keip what your valor courage might and strenth
Has bravely wone, and win you shall at lenthe.
46.
^^nck then your self's while Courage you relieve
Let fear fly hence to mynds effeminat
These mynds to martial glory doos atchyue
Whoes lyfes to hasards bold ar consecrat
Do from your hands, your swords your hearts, your eie^
Strenth, valor, conquest ^ictorie forth flies.
47.
Then willingly they call for battle new
Still thirsting after glory to aspyre
Their bloodles face and trembling voices show
That wrath within their breist had kendled fire
The warre-lyk noyes of trumpets roaring breath
Steird horse to courage and the men to wrath.
48.
And now began the feght more sharp, and thin
Now their encounters crewell hand to hand
The Datians feghts to keip what they had win
The Grecians to releue their native land
Their v^ctorie and courage mand the field
Their come revenge to force those tuo to yield,
49.
Yet were the Datians stout in dangers strong
Their bodies fresh not woundit bruisd nor bleeding
Their first assault was fearce and lasted long
Them selfs within the Gretians ground intruding
But Prince Penardo blamd their fainting hearts
Whose brave example promeisd he^ghe deserts.
50.
And formast then he led them throw their foes
With deip impressiones in these Squadrons great
His sword so broad a way had made for thoes
That followed him with hope, strength, raige, despy.
While now the Datians seemd to rander back
Their new reft ground a real mends to mack*
51.
But not content with this him self he thrust
With his brave guarde of Princes lords and Knights
Against the great body of ^he battle first
The which he shu^k and br^ck with straggling flights
Transported so with courage might and strength
Forth throw his foes he leaves his guarde at length.
52.
Wheir he his ouerflowing valor shows
His sword that seemd his danger for to know
Such hauock made among his fainting foes
That he was strong^ie now intrinsht and foe
Deid corpse were forts whoes bloody ditches shoes
Feir, terror, dreid, and death to all his foes.
58.
Brave Brando than the Seruiane drawing neir
The great Commander of these mighty maits
Began his woundrous valor to admeir
He loud his deids though their effects he haits
This was the Seruiance Disput whom before
Phelaston send his aid for to implore.
54.
Penardo slew and hurt and chased his foes
None leu'd but these who fled his angry wrath
He like a wyld and hungry Lyone goes
From place to place and with him dreidfull death
But seeing then no foe gainstands his rage
He stays and staying does his wrath assuage.
55.
As winds gainstand by woods hills tours or walls
The buildings shaks and tries by roots uptears
Whil over the oppin plains he myldlie swalls
Eune so Penardos wrath he calmely beirs
When none his strength his will his raige assayld.
But Brando him at length to feght appeald.
56.
And whill their eyes did draw them both in sigh^
Their mynds consents to combat not agr^ing
Wheirwith they now begine a famous fight
Whoes bravery was beheld with thousands deinge
Who raird their heids a loft their lyfe^ ^enew
In deaths despite that combat for to view.
57.
Their no^es how much in feriour to the rest
So much superior they in skillful fight
Their courage was by skill governed best
Their skill secundit by their strength and might
Their terror pleasur shows, unto the eye
Wheir strength with skill and wit with wrath agrie.
58.
Both valiant and both despysing death
Both confident not used to be ow'r come
Yet doubtful both both forcd to draw their brait^
Uniting all their strength they changed their room
With leaps' and turn's, their hands were agill parts
Watchful their eyes and resolute their Hearts.
59
Each stryueing still as Conqueror to be
Their bloes lyk thunder lights on eury side
Brando (that nere before such force did sie)
Thus to be matched for rage and swelling pride
He thinks of this their fight to make ane end
With all his force a furious bloe he send*
60.
Which lighted on Penardos head so sore
That his remembrance left her batterd ludge
At which advantage he redoubling more
H^d se^s^es leyd him with his bloes so hudge
The Prince with shame and pain enduring long
His bloes so heavy great, sore fearce, and strong.
61.
But then o then who would have sein his face
Shame in his che^ks revenge into his eyes
And now to win his honor lost apace
He waits till fit advantage he espyes
Uniting raige, and ^kill, and strength in one
He lights upon his helmet which anon.
62.
He claue; the murdring blade that down ward forc'^
Maks passage for his soul whom he commands
To ouerrune Phelastons wearye Ghost
And first to get a kiss of Plutos hands
And tell him from Penardo that he will
With Paganes souls his darkest regions fill,
63.
The Datians that saw their Campione fall
Began to make their feit^ their best defense
Penardo and his chosen train with all
So stuffed the chase that in their fleing hence
Tuelue thousand skars assuadged their furious hair
While sable darkness made them sound retrait.
64.
This was beginning of Penardos praise
This time, his fame through all the earth proceids
This day, his tropheis to the heauns did raise
This was the birth day of his valorous deids
That hard it was to judge in general
Whither he was most loud, or feird of all.
65.
But Night that for her nevoyes did lament
In sable black attire bevayl'd their woe
Hanging her head sad, louring, dis content
That day their shame unto the world should show
To keip unknown their fault, their flight, their fei^.
She darkness breathed throw heaune throw earth throw ae^
66.
And by this time the skoutts and watch was set
The Captanes brings their lord into his tent
Then eury man unto his rest was let
That ef^er pain sum pleasur might be lent
Thus being cairles of their farther strife.
This first night was the last night of their life.
Caput. IX.
Argument.
THe Aeneans full of fortitude
With valourous d^spyt
Encounters mighty Sigismund
And all his army gryt
But they are slain, Penardos deids
Wins glory and renoune
Old Grodan comes to his releif
And vanquishd Sigismund.
1.
WHen of bright heaune the oriental gate
L^^k glistring gold wide oppin did appeir
Wheir Phoebus in his glorious coathe was set
From wear^e night both heaune and earth to cleir
His goldin loks about his shoulders lies
That throws their glistring beams throw gloomie skies
2.
And daunceing now one trembling Thetis bak
Penardos skoutts they do return on have
And show the Prince that they had sein the tract
Of more then fourscoir thousands at the least
With goldin arm's and silver shynning sheilds
That martch'd within a league out ow'r the feilds,
3,
This was great Sigismund ye hard of yore
Whom Brando did aduerteis long ago
Who hard of these that fled the day before
Of all that past into the batrells tuo
And ha^^ing to revenge his subjects lost
Was come so near with this his mighti^ host.
4.
Great is that woundrous virtue can resist
And boldly feght against all extremity
That for no fear of danger will desist
From honors deids, disdaining misery
Nor for no foree can euer' be forcd to zeild
Bott against all danger proves a mighty shield.
5.
(This virtue rare) fear fortitude does claim
As due to her, that for no grief can groan
Her works ar constant and she feirs no shame
For reassone ^euls her stayed opinione
She works by courage and true valor gyds he^
She feirs no foe, nor from no hazard hyds her.
6.
If fortitude have in our mynds no place
Nor rewil as souering Queen ore all the rest
Owr work^ owr deides our actiones has no grace
She wyshe ponders both ^he warst and best
To life she geues a lustr^ tadiant
and croun's our deids with honors ornament.
7.
For lo indeid the brave Thessalians
Were cround with all the fructs of Fortitude
First in their mynds was great magnificence
Attemping things heighe excellent and good^
Nixt confidence in their most valiant hairts
Bred hope of good event for their deserts.
8.
And thridlie patience was their mighty guide
In suffering for their, country and their fame
And lastly with perseueranc'e did abide
In their opinione fermelie fearing shame
Yea eu^ie one with other seemd to stryve
Who best should use these virtues four alyve.
9.
Which pity draws from roode Barbarian hairs
The feircest Tyrants crewell mind does wound
To sie them (whoes unmatchable deserts
Deseruis with endless glory to by cround)
Feght in their own defense half dround in blood
Not slain but smotherd with hiuge multitude.
10.
Their matcheles mighty General was not last
That brave Penardo whom the world admeirs
Whom death nor danger could not make aghast
In him true valorous Fortitude appeirs
Who Angel-lyk in voice, in face, in speiche
Thus sweitlie, meiklie, homely did beseiche.
11.
My Friends (quod He) of you I made a chose
Not for your valors proof so much of fame
Bot even because I knew you to be those
That more aceount did make of honors Name
Nor goods nor riches, wordly wealth, nor gain
Nor life, nor death, nor pleasure, nor of pain.
12.
This Honor now which you so long have sought
Wheirof so cairfully you make aceount
So well, you have atchyu'd tho deirlie bought
That to her throne this last day you did moun^
Lo now this day she offers for to croune you
And make the world yea heav'ne it self renoun you.
13.
For Honors croune so precious is, that naught
Within the ten fold orbs of heau'ne, remains
Compaird to it, the, which has ay bein sought
And for it all the world has taken such pains
From age to age from time to time we sie
All sues for Honor glory dignity.
14.
For eu'ne the basest sort will not refuse
Pain travel danger yea nor death at length
For it; whill as the brauer mynds do choose
With hazards great to win that glorious strength
So did the Macedonian bold and stout
That victor went the solid glob throughout
15.
Still carles he, still fearles did he venture
Perswadit still to win and never to lose
No thought of lose into his mind could enter
Such was his courage against his fainting foes
By hazards, Fo^tun thus her walth dispons
For hope bred Hap, and Honor both at' ons,
16.
Who against great Darius Monarch of the east
Twyce fought and yet not thryce our number past
Four hundredth thousand Perscans at the last
Encounterd him yet wan he first and last
But you may say they were the Greeks that wan
Ar we not Greeks as well as they were than.
17.
Yes we'ar Greeks Honor for ws preserus
The croune he took such travel to obtain
Tuyce was he proved wheir to his courage sern^
Us also twyce, the third d^es yet remains
The which she keips that we may win the croune,
With all his fame, his glory, his renoune.
18.
Then deirest friends considder what we do
And who we are, of whom we are discendit,
To win the croune we ventred have to far
If life in death, honor in shame be endit
This jemme, this croun, this garland you should have
Shall those weak, feeble, faint, from you bereave.
19.
No no but let us aim at Honor ever
Base fear dar not assail a mighty mind
Let honest shame ws guide and let us never
Care for this life once we must die by kind
A noble heart has only to his lot
To fear for nothing bot dishonors blot
20.
The happiest Prince that over a Natione regn^^
Is he whoes people stands more in aw
Of filthy shame or of dishonors stings
Then of the streittest or seuerest law
Then let me have that happy Prince his statio^
And let you be that ever happy Natione.
21.
Nether deir Bretherien do as I have said
Bot also as my deids shall after show
Before your eyes instructioune have I laid
And next mine own example shall ye know
As He who by your valors must obtain
The greattest glory that on earth remain.
22.
Then galents show your selfs true Greeks in wea^
And only ask wheir is your Enemis
True Greecians disd a^ ^e for to inqueir
What number or what multitude they be
For in their multitude their Hope remains
Bot truest valor victory obtains.
23.
With those his words his face did shine so cleir
That conquest flowed in streams from his fair eyes
And on his lovely forheid did appeit
Grace, valors, worth, triumphant victory
Yea from his look^ (as from a Dyamont stone)
Come victory that sparkled ganc't and shone.
24.
And then this little handful did begin.
Whith cheirfull shouts for batel new to call
So willing were they honor for to win
That eu'ne the lamed and deidly woundit all
From camp from tent from trinshes came to prove
If sicht of deidle wounds reweinge could muoe
25.
And such as might for battle did prepair,
Others that wanted legs and arms did cry
Revenge our blood whill as their wounds they tear
That their hot blood the army might espy
Whoes hearts whith angry woe began to swell
All swearing to revenge or die withal
26.
The gallant Prince Penardo did reiois
To sie their willing minds And thus he said
(Eune with a chei^full and courageous voice)
Greeks are not borne ( quod he) to be affrayde
Thessalians can feir nothing at all
While thei'r on earth except the Heaun's down fall.
27.
Eu'ne as the Lyone when he seis his foe
Dath raise his taill and beat him self so sore
Till kendling wruth his breist does over floe
And then his couragie hot begins to rore
At whoes dreid noyes all beasts with trembling fears
His pray with paws he crushes rents and tears.
28.
Eu'ne so Penardo in his princely mind
Would neids accuse him self of dastard fear
Which so inflamed his courage stout by kind
The Lions brave example he would bear
He feghts, he stricks, he turns to every hand
He wounds, he kills who ewet did him whth stand.
29.
And thus his back his glistring armor fair
He shows his soldiers and his foes his face.
Which was the harangue he could best prepair
Wheir by he sharps their courage whith sueh grace
That roaring trumpet's sounds whith dreidfull fea^
And thunders forth death murder blood and wear*
30.
Their mettings terrible on both the sides
Their salutatione was a warre-lyk noyes
Of snow whyt lances whill their mighty guyds
Hade dy't their why^ in blood lyk crimsone rose
Others in flinders fly to tear the skies
Because on earth they mist their enterprise.
31.
Their nothing hard but clashing armor still
Crushing of staves and justling bodies lo
That sharpest swords resounding bloes did kill
Whose harsh and iarring music mad a show
As beautified with greislines of wound's
With shours, with cries, with groans, with ghostly sounds.
32
Their horses died be^eth their Masters d^ing
And some that in their life their Masters buir
In death were borne by them their others flying
To se^k some ryders that would sit more su^e
Their some with ago^eising death that st^yue
Tears up the earth entoumbs them selfs alive
33.
And yet no sword did pay to Plutos croune
Of Paganes soull's so large a tribut still
As did Penardos brand, who sending down
L^gions that empty kingdom ^or to fill
His wrath his raige his anger cost theme deir
Death on his sword most ugly did appeir.
34.
Those warlyk Aeneans of Thessaly
Would mer^hants p^oue to sell their lives and all
Yea sure the Paganes thought their merchandrie
So deir a^ all their vantage was bot small
For five to one they pay whill as they sie
A Squadron fresh appeir into their eye.
35.
They seemd above five thousand to appeir
That all Achaians were of cour^ge braw
Who of the former victory did heir
For which to rend^r ^hank them selfs they shaw
Andromodane le^ fu^the those troops so long
Stout hardy bold aduenterous and strong.
36.
The Aeneans their rancks were now bot thin
Till this new force their courage did renew
And as they were but new for to begin
A fresh assault they gave wherein they show
Tha^ they from brave Achilles were discendit
Who was so much throughout the world commendit.
37.
The Datians their ground begane to lose.
Whil Sigismund preventing when he saw
Sent Din^mon that brother germane was
Unto that vmqhile Prince Phelaston braw
And with him sent bands, legiones, squadrones stou^
Encompassing side, wing, flanck, front about
38.
Now was their last destructioune drawing near
Now their incompast in one every side
Though terror show her self at first t'appei^
Deckd with the gold of shynning armours pride
Yet now for blood wrath ire and raige she shook
Dreidfull her face, and terrible her look.
39.
With earth with dust with blood were all imbrev
There brokin armor and their mangled flesh
Which seemt a burthene to their soul's that rewit
Their pu^est Essence was defyld no less
Sum vpwart mountes revenge in heau'ne to call
And others draw'ne by Pluto's guarde to Hell.
40.
But neither could those dangers dreidfull be
Nor could they seem as dangers to the mind
Of brave Penardo whoes all conquering eye
Show how his heart to fury was inclynd
They fall, they feir, they fly, wheir er'e he fought
Death on his sword, revenge into his thought
41.
As thunders beats whith lightning from the sky
Heighe tours tall Cedars mighty Roks to ground
As fearce tempestuous wind with angry swey
The rypned corn and grain to earth has bound
So wheir he goes to earth they tumbel all
Sum hurt, sum slain, and sum for fear does fall
42.
When Dinamon his ualour did espy
Who knew that by his sword his brother dyi^
He sought him through the battle couriouslie
Whoes deids might easily make him espyit
That whith his sword had made so spacious roum
As he had known the combat was to cum
43.
And thus they both approatching each to other
Hate in them both had steird desire of trial
They thus begane a combat both together
Wheir courage, wit, nor strength make no denial
With rage and fury each one ather throws
Yet by their wit and skill they deall their bloes.
44.
And still the more they feght they more desire
The more they smart the les they feill their pain
And quickly now to know the victors hyre
They neids would try their valor once again
They strive by might by skill by strength and proves
Wheir valor most abyds whom Fortune loves.
45.
Penardo looked about and did espy
About thrie hundred of his deirest Mates
Whoes mangled flesh with purple painting die
Had masked them up with horrors dreidfull feats
And that no more of all his syd were left
The rest of life (though not of honor) reft.
46.
Eune now and not till now began his heart
To swell with sorrow grief and kyndest love
Ah who would now have sein his face convert
His eyes that wount with furious flamms to move
His brows wheir anger satt in majesty
His countenance wheir courage wont to lie.
47.
All these were banished quytt* his cheirfull ey
Was d^ound with tears the flamms were quyt put out
His countenance was sorrowful to sic
His brows had s^dnes louring round a bout
His heart the sea^t of his all conquering mind
To sighs to greiffes to sorrows was inclynd.
48.
But Dinamon that saw him so amaiz'd
Said knight my sword shall chainge the yet moir strainge
Wheir would thou fly thou hes but fondly gaiz'd
My Brothers Ghost too long abyds revenge
Wheir fore he reuneitts his force again
And said proud Knight isle make the prove with pain.
49.
I send thy brother to the Stygiane laick
But to prepair the passage for thy ghost
Thou stays too long ^eceaue this for his sake
And with the word the bloes redoubled most
That eurie bloe stroaue to be formest still
To make the Paganes soul run post to Hell.
50.
At last one bloe he gave whoes force was such
As re^t not life but sensles has him made
And as a lyone that d^sdains to tuitch
A man but weapins at his mercy laid
So scorns the Knight to spend his force in vain^
One foes that flies, or feirs, or faints for pain.
51.
With wrath and hot desire for to revenge
He thrusts him self in throw the ranck's and made
A long broad way, one every side a rainge
Like to a wall of Paganes corpse was laid
Such wounders their he wrought that one might say
He was the Paganes sepulcher that day,
52.
Still preasing forwart at the last he saw
Ten Pagane Knights incompast round assayes
To ki^l tuo galan^ Knights whom he did know
Belmundo and Phenabon prince of Thais
Who stood so strongly to their own defense
That other ten they had dispatched thence.
53.
But then he sies Belmundo fall to ground
The Prince of Thayis so weary was withal
That he drew neir unto his fatal wound
One him the bloes like lightning down did fall
Their Vrson was and Vrsides his Sone
That o^re Moldauia regn's and beirs the croune.
54.
These tuo did Prince Phenabon greattest harm
Whose lofty courage still disdaind to yield
Till breathles he, and strengthles was his arm
^oodles him self but bloody was the field
Yet feghting still he still does scorn to fly
Not they but death obtaind the victory.
55
Their Captains heart with pity ouersett
In him grief sorrow rage and fury stay
With his fine sword he maid a spacious get
All these were killed that did impashe his way
At last he came wheir Vrson did most harm
Who felt the weight of his all-conquering arm.
56.
One blow did part his body from his heid
The which his Sone young Vrsides espyd
With furious bloes he one Penardo laid
Railling and cursing all his Gods he cried
Ah Vrsone Vrsone deir and with the word
In his heart blood Penardo drinsht his sword.
57.
The rest that saw the Prince was so offendit
Took them to flight and left him all alone
They thought it was sum God that had discendit
To punish them for their presumptione
Such woundrous deids as this one Knight had wrough^
Belonged to none but to a God they thought.
58.
To Sigismound they brought their news in have
That Vrsides and Vrson both were slain
Eune by a God or else sum feind at least
For no such strength in mortals could remain
Euphrastes heiring of this valor strainge
Desire did burn his breist with hot revenge.
59.
Euphrastes was a mighty Pagane strong
He had Vrsides sister to his wife
Who after wrought Penardo mekle wrong
And wrapped him in mischief and endless strife
But let ws show Euphrastes his pretense
That called was of Transyluania Prence.
60.
Who throw the battle has Penardo sought
Till in the body of the battle grytt
He saw them running heir and their he thought
Their ranckes were brokin and disordred quyt
At last he saw and seeing did admeir
One Knight that wounders wrought as did appeir.
61.
^une as a wolf amid the fleecie heard
Some chase sum slay some tear crush ryue and tack
Or lyk a boar whoes face the ratches feared
(Finding the stolen advantage of his back)
Will preas to wound, yet does but move to wrath
Who in his fury crusheth them to death.
62.
^une so this Knight with furious rage does tear
All whom he fand his noble brand dispatched
Such heaps were slain that all the rest did fear
And now the advantage of his back they watched
He stricks he wards he taks he turn's he pays
Behind, before, and round about him lays.
63.
Euphrastes much admeird his val'rours deids
And knew him for Vrsides c^use of death
Wheirfore he fo^ward unto him proceids
And said le^ue of Si^ Knight and turn thy wrath
Against him who better can abide thy st^ength
And for thy deids shall chasties thee at length.
64.
Indeid Euphrastes was a gallant Knight
Who nere before encountered wi^h a foe
But ^hese whom still he vanques^ in ^he fight
With foil, s^ame, death, and euerlesting woe
Now breathd he wra^h war, vengeance, forth like smook
But brave Penardo from a Pagane took
65.
A strong and mighty lance, into his hand
Wheir with so searce enconter did he make
That ne^he^ shield nor armor could with stand
Till the steill head appeird behind his bak
Now fell he to the ground alreddie ded
Whoes name to all the east great terror bred.
66.
The Paganes feir'd and woundred much to sie
That Prince in whom their greattest hope did ly
By this one Knight so overthrown to be
Wheirfore in great dispai^e and rage they cry
Ah Gods iniust how long will you delay
With lightning from the heaun's this Knight to slay.
67.
Thus running on him mad with fury, beats
In every part and thought with bloes to end him
B^t he who little feared of all their th^eats
With such a woundrous valor did defend him
That they assaill in vain and make a choice
In seiking of his life their own to lose.
68.
The tribute of his wrath them deirlie cost
For all the ground their bodies deid did fill
So that it seemd in all this mighty host
Their were not men anew for him to kill
At last he came wheir Sigismund abad
Wheir threttie thousand Knights on horsebak rad*
69.
And their one blow he did not spend in vain
At every stroke he send a soul to Hell
And still their places being sild again
He serud them all alyk with deing baill
When as by Sigismund he was espyde
Who send a Squadrone fresh to quell his pride.
70.
And th^^ with long sharp lances all these bands
Bore him and horse and all unto the ground
Yea surely he had ou'r-schapd their hands
But that this purest remainder him found
Tho hurt and d^i^lie wounded still they feght
Led by that Prince that Mandadorus heght.
71.
Whoes woundrous feits I did too long forget
Four valiant Pagans slew he hand to hand
At last with Sigismund him self he met
Who of his mighty prowes suirlie fand
He bett him to the ground with might and maine
With strength worth valor victory disdain.
72
But when he seis the Prince he neids would act
The laistest pairt of this sad tragoedie
His mangled band still following on his tract
Wheir as the Prince defends him valiantly
Often bet to ground yet still in feght proceids
Strange was his valor, wonderful his deids.
73.
Thus while he fought expecting nocht but death
This band would die and by their death releiuie him
Showing such valor in their deing wrath
They fly they fall they die that first drew neir him
And Mandador from his own horse did light
Horsing the Prince with valor strength and might.
74.
While this small handful held them altogethe^
They red unto them selfs a spations room
But still fresh bands of men resorting thither
Left them their armor for their brauest toumbe
Yet fame their Trophies eterneiz'd with joy
Which time nor death nor hell could not destroy.
75.
But Mandodorus that one foot did rest
Who to his Prinee had lent his horse before
Whas with the multitude so sore oppressed
That he to death his tribut does restor
Thryce happy he who bought whith deaths expe^^
From death his Lord his leadder and his Prince.
76.
By this a mighty army drawing neir
Their speedy pace presaigd a sharp revenge
Whille as the Datians hearts begane to feir
Else wearied with their battle past so strange
Recuilling back with feir fall flight and death
But they pursue with rage blood murder wrath.
77.
This was king Grodane and his mighty host
Who raizing, Phocis walls was come to aid
His sone but scing all his army lost
Amaiz'd he gaiz'd astonished wheir he red
The act incredible the murder strainge
Wheir valor stroaue with Fortun chance and chaing^.
78.
Then brunt with grief woe, sorrow, wraith and ire
Reueinge from woe and pity did redoune
Swelling above the bancks of his desy^e
And send up floods of tears his eyes to droune
So brooks ore flows their banks with late fallen rain
The brook a river, river grows a maine
79.
Revenge revenge, ah deir revenge ah care
Care stopped his breath with grief rage anger wo^
This h^rang so did sharp their mynd's to wear
All cried revenge revenge the trumpets blow
The^r foes that flies they kill, chase, slay not tak
Till night her friends wrapped in her mantle black.
80.
Yet still revenge and kill the army calls
Blood blood kill kill ^eue^ge revenge we most
Whill tuentie thousand dead bofore them falls
The king that feird his only Sone was lost
Caused sound ^etreat and sadly now he murns
When lo Penardo f^ome the chase return^.
81.
And falling one his kneis before his Sire
He craves him pardone for this great mischief
His willingne^ for honor to aspyre
Had been the eaus of all their greattest grief*
Of fourtein thousand which he bro^ght away
Their was not tuentie left alive that day.
82.
Wheirof the King was woeful when he hard
But glaid his only Sone deid live and lo
His ioyfulnes his sorrow quyt debard
He was desirous all the troth to know
Which when he heirs of all that do^s p^oceid
He think a bloody victory indeid
83.
He causd to search the field wheir as he found
Andromodane and Mandador the fair
Belmundo and Phenabon whom entoumbd
He causd to be in glo^ious sepulchair
Those lyns insert their fame to testify
To aige to time to endless memo^ie.
The Epitaphe of Mandadorus.
HEir Mandadorus lies
Of Meson vnqhill Prince
That left his native soil to feght
In Greciance defense
Of brave Achilies stok
He haid his Pedegrie
The chiefest of the Aeneans
That duelt in Thessaly
Of such a mighty mind
And such a trusty faeith
That willingly he paid the ran
Soune of his Princes death.
The Epitaphe of Andromadan.
Heir lies Andromadane
The brave Aehaian lo
That paid his lyif for tribut of
His country to his foe
The Epitaphe of Belmundo
HEir lies Belmundo fair
Whoes honorable Name
Is left in cronicles of Time
To eternize his Fame
A Greciane, true he was
And died in Greece defense
Of Th^ssaly ane Aneane
Of Toropeya Prince
So famous for his worth
And worthy for his works
That Time and fame in memory
And glory him inbarks.
The Epitaphe of Phenabon.
HEir does Phenabon ly
That th^yce renouned Lord
Of Thay's that Paganes mighteli^
Disdain't defy't abhorde
Who diet in the defense
Of Greece his native land
O happy He who deing did
His countries fall with stand
Then who soeu'r beholds
Those Tumbs in passing by
Learn to defend they Countries weell
Or in defense to die
Wheirby thou shalft attain
To glory and renoune
To honor fame and digniti^
To an celestial croune.
84.
This haueing done with cost and large expense
The King entoumb'd the Pagane Princes lo
The Seruain and the Transiluanian Prince
Euphrates Vrson Vrsides also
And causd insert their praises due their one
Which time has rold in blak obluione
45.
But we'll return to Sigismund agane
And of his new discomfeit army shoe
Wheir surely of ane hundredth thousand men
Were skairslie forty thousand left and lo
These weried hurt, fled, feird, with Feght so strang^
Had left no hand, sword, hairt, for to revenge.
46.
Wheir fore he hyes him home in greattest have
Whill loss and shame was all the wealth he gained
Penardo now in sorrow sadly placed
Eu'ne for his friends still murning had remained
At last he stealls troughout the camp alone
In desert wyld for to bewaill and moan.
87.
Now am I forced to leave the gratulatione
Wheir with the Achaians did commend the King
To show Penardo's haples constellatione
His angry Starr's so mightelie did regne
But lo his mother died with in short space
Which made his father home return his pace
88.
Penardo goes throw many diverse ways
Till bright Apollo drensht his goldin hair
In western st^eam's then down him self he lay's
His weary horse to pastur did repair
When to our hemisphere the sable night
From Erebus blak house hade taken her flight.
Caput. X.
Argument.
PEnardo by a visione warned
Does pas trough Pluto's Por^
He killed a Giant, when to him
A Virgin does resort
Who leids him throw a dreidfull cau^.
Wheir fearful ghosts abide
He finds a deing Knight that shous
What their should him betyde.
1.
THe mighty mind that harbors hautie deid's
And is conceau'd with, child of glorious gain
Can rest no wheir but to the birth proceids
Of glorious act's brought fu^th with endless pain
Such restles th^ought's Penardo did torment
Still longing whil the night were over spent.
2.
At last Aurora shows wheir she was laid
In aiged Tithons arm's and up did spring
Blushing for shame that she so long had stayde
Her goldin loks for haist did lously hing
Her crimsone chariot made mo longer stay
From criestal heaun's to chase dark night away.
3.
As Pilot one the seas has stayed his sight
Vpone the fixed Pole his course to guide
Whill foggie smook and tempests cloudie n^ght
The burnisht light of that bright lamp doe^h hyde
Then to his compass has recourse, wheirby
He guyds his hollow veshell steadfastly.
4.
Eu'ne so Penardo that was all alone
Who hade no seruand nor no trusty guide
One hope he setts his stayed opinione
And with that compass constant does abide
And furthe vpone his way he still proceids
Fed with desire of heighe and glorious deids.
5.
Three days he traueld finding naught, at last
With weary bones he laid him down to sleip
Whill as with sudden fear he was aghast
A visione in his restles brain did creip
The Lady which he saw before tormented
Was with those pains agane oppressed, presented.
6.
This was the ghost of the enchaunted fair
Laissa whom Penardo must relieve
E^ne that fair Maid who to him did repair
Before the battles; to prevent mischeive
So much her wrong and her desire so just
That pity bad him aid, and aid he must
7.
And now for to perform his promeis past
She comes agane for to emploir his aid
Requesting him that he would come at last
To end the ceasles torments of a Maid
Whom he within the burning cave shall find
Eune at the foot of proud Parnassus pynd.
8.
The Prince awaking from his sleip arose
From of the grass wheiron he softly lay
And wheir his horse was feidding their he goes
While as Aurora gane, to light the day
He trauel'd still till that the Cave he seis
Led with revenge, hope, valor, victories.
9.
Whose sulphur flams would fearful hairts have stayed
The mounting smook such trembling terror shows
But he who was not bo^ne to be eff^ayde
Still in the greattest dangers did rejoice
And since he saw no entry but by fire
Valor bred hope, and courage bred desire.
10.
Resolving thus his murdring blade he draws
And thrusts him self with fury through ye same
His swords sharp point directing fordwart shawes
His brave assault against the sulphur flamme
Which geueing place diuyds it self in tuo
As if it feird his ualour for to know.
11
Now on he goes till he has past the light
Through caves wheir glomie darkness still abyds
Which seemed the palace of eternal Night
Wheir she her store of ^able treasure hyds
And eeke from whence her mantles black she brings
Whoes dreidfull terror tams all leiuing things.
12.
Yet this our Prince Penardo nothing letts
But on he goes, at last he heirs a noyis
Lyik to the opning up of brasin gatts
Wheirfro their came this dreidfull sounding voice
Who past through Plotos, port without pains.
His due in fyrie Phlegiton remains,
13.
Then ishew'd from a deip and hollow Cave
Tuo Dwarfs that held in eurie hand a torche
By whoes great light the Prince might weel perceive
A monstrous Giant mounting from a porche
Great lyk a tour that braithd furthe smooke and ire
His eyes no eyes but tuo great flamm's of fire.
14.
The Prince was not amaized at the sight
But rather was desirous of renoune
With sword and shield him self he bravely dight
With courage brave to him descending down
whose mass, like to ane irone Bolt on hight
He rair'd, with wraith, power, fury, strength and might.
15.
And beatts with force the Prince his shield a back.
Vpone his face till with that mighty bloe
He forcd him tumbling down the steps, to mack
Homage vpone his face unto his foe
Then with ane other bloe upon his creist
He made his lyuevish breath forsaik his breist.
16.
Thus being sensles laid upon the ground
His mighty hand his murdring blade forsook
The Giant (that pe^ceaud him in that stound)
Up under h^s left arm him lightly took,
So gosha^ks do who ceasing on their pray
Mounts in the aer and lightly flies away.
17.
He caries him throw many fearful ways
Till he ar^yu'd unto a pleasant plain
Wheir stood a palace poynting at the skies
Whoes lofty turretts seemed for to disdain
The basest earth and beautifie'd the aer.
With brightest Alabastre tours so fair.
18.
Then drawing neir unto the castle get
The Giant weary of this burden strong
Threw him to ground and down him self he set
To breathe a while who had not rested long
When by the fall the Prince agane reueiu'd
Aer brought him breath, breath life from death releu'd
19.
And being weel awaked from his dream
He wounde^th at these wounderfull events
When memory returned he blushed for shame
All his confufed thoughts bred discontents
And when he soght up from the ground to cleir him
The giant with his mass agane drew neir him.
20.
Which lighted one his shoulder with such force
That one his hands agane he stoupt to ground
Who by this rude intreatment raiging worse
Raige b^ought him strength and strength his courage found
His armed fist aloft he strongly rears
And beats the Giants brains about his ears.
21.
The giant fell with such a fearful noyes
As when a thunderbolt from heaune does fall
Whoes lightning seems to rent the azure skies
And shaks the powr's of heaune and earth withal
Or lyk a wind whoes furious devastatione
Down throw the aer does shak the earth fundatione.
21.
Eune with such noyes the Giant fell to ground
While presently the earth did him devour
Receaueing him within her hollow wound
Then closed agane like as she was before
Wheir at great Iasons Neuoy was amazd
And deim'd he was sum feind by magic raised.
23.
While he in this amazed mood did stand
Hand at his feitt his sword he did espy
The which how sone he got into his hand
He marrched fo^wart most couragiouslye
But neirer to the palace when he came
He thought him ay the farther from the same.
24.
So thinks the courious man that would attain
By travel to heaune threatening Atlas tope
Mounting as far as first his eyes hade sein
It seems ane other Atlas ryseth upe
Whoes tope did aeirs third regione proudly threat
Compast with clouds and skoartch'd with Phoebus heat^
25.
Then is his hope accompanied with doubt
Such hope such doubt dwelt in Penardos thought
He staid him self and looking round about
His gaizing eyes unto his view sune brought
A Maid who toward him directs her pase
And first saluts him with a modest grace.
26.
Then ax'd him whither he was mynd'tt to go
He said that galant fo^tres for to sie
Quod she thou finds no entres their but loo
If thou would enter thou must go with me
Content was he to go, to know, to prove,
To end the pains of death of life, of love.
38.
At last she came unto a vault or groat
Whoes g^e^slienes was fearful to behold
But he who only had unto his lot
A b^aue undaunted Sprei^ with courage bold
Straight followed he^ from light of day to darkness
And lost her in that vnaquanted marknes.
28.
Where he does heir a dreidfull sounding voice
Lyik to the skritching of the nights blak Houle
Hisling of se^pents, and the gre^slie noyes
Of ghostly spreits in Plutoes court so foul
Who if his armours virtue had not saift him
Of life, of fame, of glory, would had reft him.
29.
Whom they begin to buffet heir and their
Him beat they often unto the ground agane
Ye^ could he nothing find but filthy aer
Whoes smook might weell consume a world of men
Such filthy smook it was such ugly blasts
As Aetna from his dreidfull mouth forth casts.
30
He draws his sword and forward still he goe^
Vowing to sie the end of these events
The fu^^her in, the thicker grow the bloes
At last a fearful noyes to him presents
A thundering sound a fearful trembling shak
Whoes dreidfull voice made all the earth to quak.
31.
Yet he procids and thinks them all but toys
And stumbling down at last to ground he fell
While as he hard a pi^eous groneing voice
Lyk to the sore tormented soulls in hell
That in this greislie cave, this darksum shade
A houling and a yowling sound still made.
32.
The deing groans of sum tormented wight
He seemd to heir amongs these fearful sounds
Their So^ow dwelt, and their eternal Night
Of everlasting horror still resounds
But he no tenor fear's nor danger dreids
But forward goes and throw the dark proceids.
33.
As does the blind in desert fo^rests wide
Ow'r hazards roks caves, craiges and montanes wander
While fear of death has chaste his faithful guide
Eune feir of tempests lightning sto^me and thunder
When as he heirs a noyes, a sound a c^y
Hope th^ow the danger guyds him hastilye.
34.
So wanders he stout hardy fearles bold
At last vpone a deing Knight he fell
Skarce could he speik bott zett this much he told
Ah tho thou seiks for death Despair and Hell
Heir duells sad death plagues, torments, heir remains
Hell brings from this her everlasting Pains.
35.
Ah crewell death, ah blak despair alace
Woe woe and with the word woe chokd his breath
The Prince that pitied such a woeful case
Heau'd up his heid and said relent from Death
Perhaps some hope sum hap, sum help remain
He answered, (nocht but this one word) In vane.
36.
Why (quod the Prence) is thy releife in vain
If God so pleas his grace and mercy lend
But to this house and to this hell of pain
How cams't thou in, or wast thou heir in send
Feign would I know wheir with the deing Knight
Breathd forth these words thought weakly as he might.
37.
Within this cave their is a virgin Maid
Love dairteth lightning from her glorious eyes
Her beauty bright does all their hairts invade
(With death, love, fury, passione) that her seis
Much is the force, the strength, the vigor much
Who seis her, deis for love, the enchantments such,
38.
Many attempt's this adventure to end
But still they end them selfs and it remains
Which I poor I has too too suirlie kend*
And now must pay my life for these my pains
My bosume keips her beauties burning fire
That tears my hairt in pieces with desire.
39.
Ah pity (said the Prence) is their remeid
To save thy life and quensh youths loueing flamme
No no (said he) theirs naine till I be deid
Heir many mo lies buried for the same
Wheirfore go back, leave of, return again
Heir is no heir bot death for all thy pain
40
Then said the Prince I surely were to blame
Not seeing danger, for to leave it so
Quod he then since thou cairs so much for shame
I pray the tak my counsall or thou go
Above this dreidfull Cave their stands a laik
Whoes restles waves this thundering noyes does make.
41.
The Maid is on ane altar sacrafeizd
With sulpher flamms of fire to Pluto's Deity
Tuelf hours within that fire sho's, martyrizd
And tuelf hours dround in blood with out all pity
Before her burns a Taper will not slaik
Bot in the water of that thundering laik.
42.
This Taper you must win with mighty force
Syne drinsh it in the forsaid laik and lo
Her flamm's ar quenshed then with great remorce
But how to quenshe the blood you their shall kno
Yet if you be entangled by her beauty
Thy hairt thy eyes thy hands shall leave their duty.
43.
Now if the burning Tapre thou obtein
To get it back shall many ways be sought
As soon as it thou wants by any mein
As soon shall she from life to death be brought
Bot if thou be entangled with her love
The Tapre from his place thou can not move.
44.
Thus fair you weell* and with the word the Knigh^
Sunck down with sl^ip of leaddin death opp^est
Grief woe, and pity, did ^he Prince affright
His valor, courage, hope, they much distressed
He goes but comfort, whill his guide was cair
His manly hairt assayld with cold despair
45.
Though he was still ^urmoyld with cair and g^^if
Though danger still forbids his i^te p^yse
Tough sad despair th^eat's de^^h without releif
And though Dreid, fame and conquest both denies
Yet fordward still he go^s but cair o^ pain
And hops ane happy succes for to gain,
Caput. XI.
Argument.
THe birning Alters Keeper, of
His life Penardo spoils
He seis the daily funeral
In blood the Virgin boyll^
He that by love could not be win
The Tapre does obtain
About the Queen of love he seis
All thois yat Love had slain.
1.
O Now you Muses matchles and devyne
Help by your sacred skill my gros defects
Make sharp my wit and pregnant my ingyn^
That by your freindly aid in all respects
My pen suplied may boldly breath his name
Inrold above the star's by endless fame.
2,
Whoes mind the feat of royal virtues birth
And who all goodness knew, but knew no ill
Admeird of all the world for his rare worth
Which causd Envy for raige her self to kill
Eune he vwithout all fear or cair did enter
And throw this cave lyk greisslie hell did venture.
3.
At last a thirling light he did espy
Which from a dure did glanceing forth appeit
Wheirto when as the galant Prince drew nigh
He saw a flamme most pure most bright most clei^
Upon ane alter burn and in the same
Brint, skoarch'd, tormented, lay a virgin Dame.
4.
Whill on this piteous spectacle he gaiz'd
From out a corner dark he might perceive
A monstre hudge that maid him much amaiz'd
Whoes greatness seemed to fill that empty cave
He b^eathd furthe clouds of smook which dimmed the flamme
And darkened all the place about the same
5.
So thundering tempests dims the goidin Sun
And darkins all the cristall heauns so hy
The reiking clouds lyik smook down moltin run
By force of fire that thonderis throw the sky
At last such roars he thunders in his ear
It seemd the cave, shook, trembled, quaik'd for fear.
6.
This monstre fearslie did assaill the Prince
Who nimble, quick, sharp, ready, light, avoiding
His mighty bloes, so brave was his defense
Often him he harmed, him self vnharm'd abiding
So that the monstre ^oird for grief and pain
Forth casting Floods, of poysond goi^ a maine.
7.
Thus each perseuing other to the death
With strength with ^aige with fury hait and ire
That neither give the other leave to breath
The monstre still threw forth bright flamms of fire
Who Is skaills bore forth the Prince his furious dint
Lyk tempred Steill, hard diamond, or flint,
8.
Wheir for a strang^r kind of feght he chooses
Quyting his ^word he draw's a dagger fine
His skill his sl^ght his might, and strength he uses
To ridd this deulishe monstre out of pyne
Who lifting up his armed creist with ire
Smook from his mouth his eyes forth sparkling fire.
9.
Did fearcelie forewart to the Prince forth pace
Infolds inrolls in lincks with gaipping jaws
But he with foresight, waying, well the case
His skaillie gorge in his strong arm he thrawes
And through his burninge ey with fatal knyfe
Brought furthe his brains and with his brains his life.
10.
Glade was he to be ridd of such a foe
Yet pity, cair and sorrow, chased delight
To sie so fair a Maid tormented so
His eyes with child of tears his hairt still sigh't
Taeirs from his eyes spring's rivers floods forth sen^
Sighs from his hairt lyk blustering winds vpwent.
11.
When neirer to the alter he was come,
Of so^ow he might he^ the saddest sound,
There grievous g^one^ we^ inter mixed with some
We^k breathing words, that did sad death resound
The words were sweet and pitiefull to heir
The accent soft the voce was sharp and cleir
12.
Those were the woeful words he pitied most
Ah Pl^^o Pluto end this sacrifice
Hell Hell douore my souls tormented ghost
Ah crewell Heavens that gloir's to tyraneize
Ah pain pain pain let endless pain remove
Curs death, curs hell, curs earth, curs heaeuns above.
13.
Whill thus she spak Penardo hard a noyes,
And suddenly appeir'd a greatter light,
A hundredth torches borne by little boys
All cla^^ in murning w^id a wofu^l sight.
Softly the prince ^o vayes him self a side
To sie of these events what would betyde
14.
After these torches were tuo horses led
Whose T^apers were of purple si^k and gold
Such curious work so rich imbrodered
Was admirable ^air for to behold
For greffon lyk they p^ce^ng seemed to fly
With goldin plumed wings right curiously.
15.
These horse were keept by lackaves tuo who had
Two sheilds which seemed of sundry Knights to hold,
And after them tuo Paiges richly cled
Two mighty lances bore with heads of gold
Nixt after them four galant coursers d^ew
A crimsone cotche that seemd of bloody hew.
16.
within this cotche tuo Kinghts were sadly placed
In glist^ing armoor that was fynelie framed
The a^mours shyning luster was defaced
Wi^h purple blude that from their bodies straimde
Sad was their mynds wheir sorrow did remain
Great were their wounds but greatter far their pain.
17.
The one still sighed and g^oin'de but spak no word
For in hi^ brei^t a b^oodlie dagger stood
The other through his bodi^ had a sword
From whoes steill point ran streams of crimson blood
Death over them both long since hade spread her wing^
Yet life by airt, pain, grief and sorrow brings.
18.
Behind the alter stood a brazen portch
Which opp^nd wide for to receive this train
Where enters all the boys with eue^ye tortch
The horse, and all the rest that did remain,
But whill the cotche neir to the alter drew
The woeful dame her sorows did renew.
19.
Ah Heaun's alace come come I glaidly go
Let deith give end to Hells tormenting flamme
Blood blood glut up both soul and body lo
Stop now my braith and suffocat the same
Let these tuo leiue and then impose on me
Ten thousand deaths so I may once but die.
20.
No sonner did she end her plaints when as
Tuo old and aiged Haggs come in then sights
Who bore ane huge great veshell made of bras
That keipt the blood of those tormented Knights
Long gaizd the Prince on their hid mysteries
Whill pain, on pain, and grief on grief he sies.
21.
The virgin from the fire began to move her
The veshell neir, she throw her in the same
While as the blood begane to boil above her
And vtherwhyls above the blood she come
So bubling streams of brooks from hye that fall
Raise up the Pebls pure whyt cleir and small
22.
They gone the Prince did with him self deuyce
To spill the blood bot now he heirs a sound
It seemed a heighe and bloistring wind did rise
And looking wheir the veshell to have found
He saw a pillar rai^ed up whoes end
Reatch'd from the ground almost unto the pend.
23.
Then did he hear a murmur and a noyes
A duilfull murning and a woeful sound
So from a hollow pit resounds a voice
Of one that lies tormented under ground
Or lyk the ghostly and the dreidfull dine
That roaring bulls make hollow Caves within.
24.
The pillar seemed to be of marble stone
In form of ane Pyrameid as it stood
W^thin the which the virgin was alone
Tormented still within the boiling blood
Penardo knew but help of humane hand
That it was fraimd his fury to with stand.
35.
But neirer to the pillar when he drew
Sum goldin letterd lyns he might espy
Whoes meining was as after does ensue
Be not so bold this adventure to try
Least Faits who made the most admeird of all
Should make the most in famous for thy fall
36.
But cairles who had thus menaced him so
Which serud but to affray a fanting hairt
Now round about the pillar does he go
While as he finds sum other lyns insert
Wheirby he knew the former faing'd deny all
Was but to stay him from a farther trial.
27
WHat ere thou be that proves to end the pains
Of this tormented Maid that heir remains
And would undo the great and woundrous frame
Which Mansays art has build it for the same
The tapre from the birning Altar take
And drinsh it in the fearful thundering lake
But first from birning lust search some releiff
For These tuo Princes wrapped in all mischeiff,
28.
Not half so fast the Tiger swift forth goes
Th^ogh desert ways for to redeem her brood
As does the P^en^e when these glad n^wes he knoes
Unto the alta^ wheir the tapre stood
He hopes yet doubt-sum ill might him be fall
To mar his hope, hap, will desire, and all.
29.
Cassandras armor was not now for noght
Else of that dame in ^mour'd hade he beine
For the effect of this enchantment wrought
On eurie one before that had her seine
And being once entangled by her love
Te tortche they could not steir, nor toutch, nor move
30.
Yea surely if his armours virtue strong
Had not resisted the enchantments force
Within the cave he should have stayed so long
While he had diet for love without remorce
Her beauty was of force, strength, pow're, to move
Yea massacre a world of Hairts with love.
31.
But he who in his armor does retain
The rare and precious stone of chastity
(Whoes virtue is the owner to restrain
From love, or lust, or Venus fantasy)
Could not be moved, to love, so none but he
Could end the fair Laissas misery.
32.
And entering now within the brazen portch
The which he thinks to be the only way
E^ne with the light of this his little tortch
He saw some lines ing^aph'd (which made him stay)
Upon the brazen gate he did behold
Inde^ted all with courious warks of gold.
If ought thou lose that thou has brauelye win
Thou deir^^e shall repent thy comeing in.
33.
Now he began to gaize upon the ground
And calling presently unto his mind
The deing Knight whom he before had found
Within the Cave and of his counsall kind
He knew it was the taper to defend
Or else her sorrow should with death have end,
34.
And by this time within a goodly Hall
He entered was when vewing weel this sight,
The rare proportion was maiesticall.
To eurie airt their was a galant light,
And glaid their of joy cheirt his countenance
So Phoebus flour spred's when her lord does glance.
35.
Long stayed he naught when looking heir and their
One his left hand a door he might espy
Within the which he saw a gall'ry fair
Wheir pleasur did invite a gaizing ey
While through this pleasant gall'ry he was walking
He thought he hard sum people softly talking.
36.
Whoes murmuring sound hade drawn him now in sight
Of a fa^ chamber that was richly hung
Wheir sporting at their dalleing delight
Were Knights and Ladies lying all along
Upon ^he pa^ement wrought of cristall rock
Whose glances bright the Prince his sight did chock.
37.
But his delight did him their after lied
Unto ane other chamber much more fair
For their the cristall pauement all was spread
With crimsone velvet costly, ritche, and rair,
And in the mids a pillar stood upright
Of gold that shynd, flamed, gla^c'd, with sparkling light
38.
Adioynd unto the pillar rose a throne
Of beattin gold whoes luster cleir unstained
The beautifullest Queen did sit theirone
That cristall heaune or solid earth containd
And round about her stood a comlie train
Of kings, queins, lords, knights, dames that love had slain.
39
Their was the Queen of Carthage, Dido fair
Who for Aeneas love hade lost her breath,
And for Antonius love with Vipers their
Sad Cleopatra Sting'd her self ^o death,
Their Ariadne that her self hade slain
For proud unthankful Theseus disdain.
40.
Whoes life decre'd to Minotaurus raige
She fred and from the Labyrinthe him gaind
Their was Media by whoes counsel saige
Jason the goldin glorious fleice obtaind
Their Phillis who did many passiones prove
Chuseing sad death for sweet Demophoons love.
41.
Their Iulia the wife of great Pompey
Who died because she feird her husbands death
Their Porsia for Brutus love did stay,
Who with hot birning coalls hade choakd her braith
Their Pisca with her lover loud to be
Who threw them selfs both heidlongs in the Sea.
42.
Their might Pandorus loueing dame be seine
That chus'd for to be buried quick in grave
Rather then be the Persean monarchs Queen
Because he did her lovers life bereave
The Greciane dame fair Camma their did move
Who slew her self and him that flew her love.
43.
These weme^ with their lovers did enjoy
A pleasant life about this princely Queen
And men that did for love them selfs distroy
Menon that hanged him self might their by sein
For to the proud Assyriane King alone
His best beloud Semiramis head gone
44.
And their Tiberius Gracchus did remain
That fund tuo Serpents in his chamber floor
And knowing if the ^emell first were slain
His life should longer not his wyfes endure
The Male he slew so w^ell he ^oude his wife
And m^de his death the ransone of her life
45.
And Marcus Lepidus did their abide
That slew him self eune for his loves disdain
And Platius Numidius by his side
That for his deir loves death him self hade slain
Their old Syluanus that him self hade hanged
Because proud Nero would his love have wrang'd.
46.
Their Pollio grave and sad, a Germane borne
A famous Knight though Fortune wrought his fall
This was the Knight that in the Cave beforne
Had told the Prince what th^i^ should him befall
There many more that died without remorce
For Lissaes love by the enchauntments force,
47.
All these and many thousand their remains
Who to that co^r^ doe^ momen^ly r^so^t
The winge^ boy delights in all their pains
And of their g^eat^est g^eif he maks a sport
But lo that glorious Q^eene b^ed ^ll their joys
Their love their fancy and their amorous toys.
48.
For to inthrall the heart that Queen weell knew
The sovereign Maistres of that art she was
Her wantoune shyning looks and heaunelie hew
With sweitt allu^ements secreitlie would pas
For still the glanceing of her wantone ey
Would make her train, sad, joyful, live, or die.
49.
Her wantoune eyes bew^ayd her inward mind
Her countenance de^laird her hearts desy^e
To burning lust she seemed to be inclynde
Consumeing still with never quenshing fire
Dissembling all wi^h such a craf^ie mind
That any sa^e Adonus would by kind.
50.
Her modest blush would diverse tyms bewray
That which (it seemed) she shamed for to unfold
With amou^s q^eint her wanton eye would play
And from her hairt in sport their message told
Her low^ing look^ or chei^full smyls does move
To laugh to weep, to smyll, to sighe forth love.
51.
Amongs the rest Penardo might espy
Phelarnon brave and Tropolance the bold
Whom by their woeful look^ he did discry
To be eune far agains their will with hold
Phelarnons breist bewray it his ceasles pain
Wheirin a bloody dagger did remain.
52.
And Tropolance his woeful heart was rent
With bloody sword, tormented still he goes
Yea these tuo princes only did lament
While as the rest did seem for to reioes
But now sad shadows of the dankish night
Begane to drive away the cheir full light.
Caput. XII.
Argument.
PEnardo's tempted often and yet
The tapre he obtains
He chaiseth burning lust to hell
And ends the Princes pains
He quensheth in the fearful Lake
The Tapers light anon
He finds sum tombs and sies sum lyn'^
Which were ingraph'd theirone.
1.
WHen hells great Grandame ganher self to rise
For anger breathing forth dark clouds of smoo^
And chaist heaun's cheirfull lamp down through the skies
Then of his wide ^mpyre possessione took
Penardo (...) thundering sound
Lyk Neptune raiging against a stormy wind.
2.
And lo a fearful ^ind did now arise
With dreidfull thunder, lightning flamms of fire,
Ane earth-quak and a tr^mbling in the skies
That seemed to sh^k the world's sure fixed empire
From of his ce^tre and his steadfast statioune
And with proud raige to raise his sure fundatione.
3.
Wheir with of all this ^ryne incontinent
He, s^is not one in twinkling of ane ey
But of their feet he might decerne the, pren^
In the ^iche cloth that on the g^ound did ly
Whei^at Penardo much a mazed stood
But nothting danted was his courage good^
4.
And looking round about whill thus he stard
Ane other dure he saw whei^on he red
Tak what thou finds within for the prepairde
Thus in the b^aue Thessaliane was led
By courage and a fearce undaunted mind
Not feiring hell it self thairin to find.
5.
The royalty of this fair roune was ^uche
As seemed the lyik on earth could not be found
The value of the h^ng^ngs was so much
That from the syling to the paued ground
Did reach all ^ichlie wrought with pearl and gold
Which Hercules great battles did unfold,
6.
There hade he slain the Gyaunt all alone
Who sumtyme rewl't fair Europs fairest isle,
Of whom it got the name of Albeon
And their was seu^ne mouthed Hydrae feirce e're while
Whom he by his al-conquering force had slain
His shafts there, in the monstre did remain.
7.
Their in the Naemeane forest he hade slain
The Lyones fearce' the monstre of the Sea
He slew' and fair Exione did obtain
There the Thessalian Centaurs vanqueist he
Thei^e Cerberus he bond and Captive l^d
And Pr^serpine from Pluto's thraldom fred.
8.
Their did he kill Anhteon feirce and bold
And Nessus there, and Gereon proud of Spain
And from Hesperides renoun'd of old
Wheer did the goldin f^eiced floks remain
He theme From Atlas daughters did disseue^
And bond Philotes as a slave for ever.
9.
Theer his zuelf works bred terror to the eye
And trembling fear unto the boldest hairt
There hade he thrown'e him headlong in the Sea
Who brought to him the strainge Emppyson'd shirt
There he in pain raige sorrow, did lament
Tearing the venom that this flesh did rent.
10.
And in the mids a pillar stood upright
Wheiron a rich and glorious armor lay
Their hung a shield ingrapht whoes glancing light
The arms of Thessaly did forth display
A boue the which a candle-stick of gold
Did hing which seemed but one small lamp to hold.
11.
In this fair chamber stood a glorious bed
Of beattin gold Whoes fyrie sparkling flies
From precious stones and diamond^ which spread
Their pearsing beam is that dimmed the Prince his eyes
The tapers light that in his hand he bure
Gave place to this more shyning cleir and pure.
12.
Four mabre pillars did a table bear
Of yellow glanceing Topas fynlie dressed
And of t^ansparant cristall stood a cheer
As if it would inveit ^he Prince to rest
Who wearied with his toylsum travel past
This profer'd rest accepted at the last.
13.
And gaizing still vpone this glorious wark
The table suddenly was over spread
By whom he knew not bo^ he might remark
With fructefull Ceres danteis it was clade
Their Bacchus plen^ie flowe'd till yis brave Prince
Was weill suffeiz'd then all removed thence.
1.
And all this time the taper did abide
Into his hand wherone he does deuyse
How he might sauelie lay the same aside
And rest In the fair bed till Tytan rise
When presently did in the table stand
Ane candle-stick presented to his hand
15.
Which as ze hard did our the a^mour hing
Wheirof when he the w^^km^nship espied
He did perceive engraven about the ring
Sum lyn's in azure blew them selfs bewrayed
Which if obeyit it ends the ceasles strife
Of Lissa's pain and with her pain her life.
16.
Of me thou only make a chois
Tell thou with sleip thy self repose
I am devysd thy light to hold
Then but suspitione be thou bold.
17.
This youth had goth no sleip tuo days ago
Wheir for to rest a great desire he fand
Bot woundred who so weel his mind did kno
Assaying if his light theirin would stand
A suddane fear assaild his hawtie hairt
He trembled, and he quack'd in every pairt.
18.
And, as a merchant in a darksum night
Does travel in a forest all alone
Wheir he before has sein a fearful sight
Of robbing Thieves and murderers, anon
Does fear and faint, and tremble yea and quak's
So he In eury joint, and sineu shak's.
19.
And wondered what this accident sold mein
When presently their come unto his thought
The deing Knight he in the cave had sein
Who told him all his travel was for naught
If once the tortche were tint or gone; or lost
Lost were her life, lost all his pain and cost^
20.
Then Night begane to hyde her loathed heid
Rendering her place unto her fo so fair
Whose messinger was cled in crimsone reid
Hurling his fyrie beam's throw glomie aer
Melting the clouds in liquid drops that fall
Moystninge the thristie pearched earth with all,
21.
The royal Knight right joyful of the day
That he might bring to end his tedious task
When to the pill^r whair the armor lay
Whene Titan did his shyning face unmask
He saw a goldin image which did hold
A table of black Iasp al wreit in gold.
22.
And toward him the table poynting was
The which How soon his arm did raise aloft
The image le^'t it with his hand forth pas
Vewing the courious workmanship so often
The lyn's he red which shaddowith all deceat
Mischief, dath, discord, fury, wraith, debait.
VOlcane this fair and goodly armor wrought
Which Venus to her Sone Aneas brought
Whoes virtue from all tempting tongue defends
And Hope and courage to she hairt it sends
With vigoraus strenth it does the body seid
And vanquisheth the Enemy with dreid
Who wears the same shall victor still remain
And still his hairts desire he shall obtain
Enchantment strong or any secreit train
Of subtle Foes shall always prove in vain
No humane strenthe can this enchantment end
Except the Trojanes armor him defend.
23.
Sure quod the Prince this is a rair devyce
That no deceat nor dainger can assaill
True valor sold be compted bot a vice
If this were true the coward should prevaill
Then falset cruelty and all deceat
Should truth, worth, valor, virtue, all abait
24.
Falset should banishe purest truth to hell
And wicked wrong all right should ouerthraw
Folly should wisdom leid as slave to Sell
And manly mynds of fazards stand in aw
Of humane kind then to prevent the fall
This evil of evils I Will cut in pieces small.
25.
He cutt's the armor which als soft as brass
He finds and knew it was bot to ent^ape
Him in a snair (bot Fates ordaind his glass
To ^^ne his how^es of life in Fortuns lape)
For lo such deu'lish stren^h the arms retaind
As in the shirt of Hercules remaind.
26.
And sure too great mischief should have betyde
If one him self this armor he received
For first the tap^e he must lay a side
Wheir with Laissa's life hade been bereaved
And also him with fury, raige, and wraith
Pain, so^ow, cair, and grief had brought to death.
27.
But Fortune smyld her looks were gracious
And suffered not frost, storm, haill, cold or rain
A flour so young, so fair, so pratious
With death, decay, or dolor, ^oo be slain
But ridd of this he searching fand a none
Ane ^rone door with this inscriptione.
That dreidfull Dragone heir within does ly
That fosters still the fire of Lechery
Wherein tuo Princes ar tormented still
And can not be removed from thence, until
A Knight shall come whoes chastetie is such
And whoes good Fortune favors him so much.
AS can not be by aine meins entys'd
To fall into the snairs for him deuys'd
He first must lay his sword and sheilld a syd
Then unto him the door shall oppin wyd
Syne prove by strength the weapens for to win
That does the Princes wounds remane within
Wheirwith he must ow'r cum the dragon fearce
Then shall the torments of the Princes cease.
28.
This deuelish dragone was ane feind of Hell
Bred first in floods of fy^ie Phlegitone
In whom the fire of birning lust did dwell
Which sho brought forth from darkest Acheron^
And being bred of such infernal brood
She leui'd on fire, in darkness was her food,
29.
This lustful fire through all the world she send
Wheirwith she hade inf^ct the greattest pairt
Who lyk unto their mother does intend
In darkness for to quensh their burning smairt
There, help they find, but no releif at all
Till for their mother they have searchd' in hell.
30.
Whom Mansay by his airt had brought from thence
Unto this place these Princes to torment
Whose lustful fire had bred their own offense
And first unto their ruin gave consent
But loath he was hes sword to lay a pairt
Which brought his foes to woe, to death, and smairt*
31.
^it seeing no relief he lays a side
His sword and shield and fearles fordwart goes
When presently the door brust oppine wide
And their (a fearful sigh^) unto him shoes
A burning cave that th^ows out flamms of fire
Which from a dragones mouth did still retire
32.
Eune as the d^eidfull Salamander lives
Amid the fire while one the fy^e she feids
The fire her brai^h her life her essence geues
But fy^e she dies in fy^e she leaves and breids
Eune so this feind in smook and flamms so bright
Did burn and shyn and glance, and sparkle light.
33.
In through these flamm's he saw these Princes laid
On burning beds of steill lyk furies fell
Wheir hell they cursed and heaune they did obbraid
With many fearful cry and woeful yell
To sie such galant Princes so tormented
With tears into his eyes he thus lamented,
34.
Ah harmeles Soull^ so pynd cursed be the time
That Mansayes crewell art deuysd such pains
His punishment is more then is your crime
Ah how iniustlie heir he you detains
Your harm done to your self your crime your own
To him no spite nor malice had you shown.
35.
Ah cursed by that Zoroastes old
That first devysd deip incantatioune
Of magic art, whose spells often being told
Brings up that foul infernal natione
The man whoes wit does search forth such ane evil
Is foe to man and friend unto ye Devil.
36.
Ah mighty Jove that does permit such wrongs
And does behold thy creaturs thus pynd
Revenge unto thy glorious self belongs
Mercy thou grantes to a repenting mind
Ah for thy glories saik in mercy grant
Thou by my hand this feind infernal dant,
37.
Nether could fear of terror yiedling fire
Nor world deuoiring monstre him effray
Nor daunt his dauntles hairt that does aspyre
Throw danger for to gain great glories pray
This said, he fwiftly to the monstre hyed
Feir terror dreid and danger he defied.
38.
The monstre now with flamming tongue drew neir
With death, or lustful heat him to inflamme
But these her flamms did not on him appeir
Nor could he be molested be the same
She seith that her hoate consumeing fire
Could not inflamme his spotles chaist desire.
39.
Straight did cast forth a dark black foggie smook
Which with the flamme made this a secound hell
Fixed on the Prince her burning eyes did look
Cl^pping her yrone wings and dreidfull taill
In fixed in this taill were stings anew
The Prince the Knight the Champione to pursue.
40.
These stings if they be fixed the flesh within
Does it infect with filthy lustful fire
Of venamous and poysonable sine
And appetites inquenshable desire
Wo^king throw all the vains, till boiling heat
Makes them the heaune yea God him self forgett.
41.
Into her tongue ar also stings infixt
Who poysone breideth sensual delight
Which with a gluttonus desire is mixed
Wallowing in pleasure, plungd in eternal night
Of all fo^getfullnes and idle sloth
And sklaueth man to pleas his dainty mouth.
42.
For drounkinnes and gluttonnie alone
Draws ef^e^ them a thousand filthy sines
Grief* anger, love, extremity, anon
And birning lust th^oughe all the body rins
That memory, and understanding quyt
Extinguished ar with lecheryes delyt.
43.
It maks a dulnes ow'r the mind to creip
A monst^e maks the body fatt with rest
And reassone thus it lu^leth sound a sleep
Thus man does differ nothing from a beast
These bates in the beginning sweitlie move
But in the end a Cocatrice they prove.
44.
This monstre these her stinges infecting heat
In mortal mynds, infixeth but releif
And howked once allurde with poisoned baitt
She draws them heidlong unto all mischief
At last to death and hells eternal pain
From which all hope of blis'd releiffs in vane.
45.
None of these stings could in the Prince have place
With them she him ^ssayls but all in vane
Wheirfore she fearcelie fordwart flies a pace
Aiming with tearing paws him to have slain
And being now heigh raised above the ground
She beats him with her mighty force a sound.
46.
And aiming for to crush him unto death
In her sharp paws she taks him gredilie
But he (who wa^ not whol^^e void of breath)
Her by the go^ge^ gripeth speedily
And had th'enchanted tapre beine a side
She new'r had gone from thence in hell t'abyde.
47.
But yet although he had no hand but one
Her greislie gorge so strongly did he grip
That she was forced to ryis and with a groan
Her hold about his body to let slip
She roared she yield she brayt she billow't loud
So does the lions, bulls, boars, coursers proud.
48.
This monsters mouth lyk to a golfe appeirs
And their she thinks him quick for to entomb
A filthy smook she throws before his eyes
Which forced him breathles for to leave that room
And farther throw the flamms to seek for breath
She roaring still, still gaip'd still threatened death.
49.
So Neptune in a raiging storm does rore
When Aeolus his bloystring face over blows
His rolling billows fearclie beatts the shore
Gaipping his hollow greedy gulfs he shows
Where in threts to swallow or to wrak
The Plowars of his yrie awful back.
50.
Before she could Penardo over reatche
He came unto the steillie burning bed
And from Phelarnons breist wheir was the breatche
The daggere pull's when with a weappine cled
The monstre seemed more heavy sadd and low
Her force, moir feeble, weary, fante, and slow.
51.
Thus thinks he of this feght to make ane end
And with the dagger to bereave her life
Who with her oppine jaws does her defend
And theirin cacht the dagger which with strife
From him sho ref^ and brak in pieces small
And thus to him no weappine left at all.
52.
Betwixt him and the sword her self she set
Which Tropolance his bloody breist containd
While as such fire and sulphu^ (...) she let
That all the house into a fire remaind
So she a birning Salamander seemed
But nothing of her fire the Prince esteemed.
53.
And yet this kind of f^ght was very strange
That Hercules the lyk did never view
When a^ the Giant Cacus (in revenge
Of Italies enormities) he slew
Nor when the Minyan force before him falls
Raising their mighty seige from Theban walls.
54
Nor when he slew the dragone fearce in fight
Yea none of his tuell labors might be match
To this for that he vsd his strength and might
And with his weapeins did advantage watch
Tuo hands he hand, Penardo had but one
He weapins als our Champione had none.
55.
But now the brave Thessaliane naught amaizd
Maks him as he the drago^e would assaill
Who with her wings above the ground was raised
And to the fegh^ him fearslie did ^ppaill
With opned mouth she ^reasd on him to fly
Who lightly leaps a side and letts her bye.
56.
Then pulls he out the bloody weapine streght
From out the deidlie wound and their withal
Him self addresseth bravely for the feght
Bott lo he sies the dreidfull dragone fall,
With roaring lowed the earth she rudely tear
Down tumbling into hell with greislie fear.
57.
A mighty wind made this fair building quai^
So that the greatter pairt theirof down fell
The ear^he began to ryve and with a shak^
The ed^feice sank dounwards unto hell.
When lo he was upon a pleasant plain
Wheir, of that building did no marck remain.
58
At last he spies a fearful laik in sight
Which restles rowlleth lyk a ^aiging Sea
Whoes billows baits their bounding banks with might
That crubs them from destroying liberty
And whoes huge waves with restles noyes did swel
Though Aeolus nere breathed theiron at all.
59.
Whereby he knew it was the very same
Wheir he to qvenshe the tapre should return
Which being done the strong enchanted flamme
Made all the laik with fear and dreid to burn
At last it raise and like a thunderbolt
With fearful noyes it pearc'd the azure volt.
60.
When as lyk crystal all the stream grew cleir
The which before a pitche color hyd's
No wave no surge no billow did appei^
Bot softly on the goldin channel slyds
The silver stream with sweittest murnming sound's
Which wind's, rocks, caves, woods, montanes back redound^*
61.
He wounder't much at all these strainge events
Amaiz'd he stood and gaiz'd upon the ground
When as thrie pleasant toumb's to him present's
Them self's, wherein he looks what might be fou^d^
The toumbs of mabre richelye wrought with gold
Where on these lines ingraph'd he did behold.
J Laughfull loved and yet
Vnlanghfall was my love
I Am punished justly for my fault
And yet I faultles prove
I die because my crime
Deserves well to die.
And yet no act nor crime at all
Committed was by me
First did I slay my foe
And then my foe flew me
And deid, my Sire I brought to wrack.
Such was my destanie
The Palace wheir I dwelt
Was fairest of remoune
By feftie thousand pillars borne
All which my death threw down
But none can change decrie
Of Fates nor NON RAP HELL
If any for my name enquire
The former line does tell.
62.
This matchles Champioune was the rat amaiz'd
The meining dark he skairslie could desc^ye
But that he knew this trophee now was raised
And that Phelarnon their intoumbd did lie
For NON RAP HELL he knew his name to be
And on the secound toumbe these ly'ns did sie.
Me to my crewell death
Ambitione surth did call
In my revenge my natioune wrought
A stranger natiouns fall
And with their fall their own
Perpetual infamy
Thus am I ground of all mischief
Ordaind by destanie
Ah cursed unhappy love
Love was the cause of all
In spoiling of my Riualls life
I spoyld mine own and all
Then who so ere shall lock
On Tropolance his name
Remember love to be the cause
Of ruin, death, and, shame.
63.
Penardo was right sorrowful to sie
Such galant Princes so bereft of life
For that be thought that he had made them fri^
But at what time he took the fatal knyfe
From each of them out of his bloody breist
Then death from the enchantment them relest
64.
Yet more desire hade he the third to sie
Ane trembling feir through all his body goes
For that he feird Laissa dead to be
And then his longsum travel should be lose
But now in Thetis azure palace fair
With her to dally Phoebus does repair.
65.
Then lowering sad cum f^rthe the cheirles night
Over earth to spread her sable canoby
Whill as the staitlie bir^ing lamps were light
Shyn^ing in Jove's he^ghe palace p^esentlie
Twixt fear and hope dou^e ^y the Prince vnsein
Vpoune the gr^ss^, soft, fresh, went, easy, grein.
Caput. XIII.
Argument.
VPoune the sleiping Toumbe the Prin^^
His trauells seit ingrapht
He seis Laiss^ their ye sword
He from the rock out rest
A spreit or feind of Hell he meitts
Vpoune Danubius fair
That in the shap of Maid him leids
To pain, wol grief, and cair.
1.
NO sonner goldin Phoebus guilds the skies
And shoots forth fyrie beam's throw empty a^^
Wheas the Prince up f^o^ the grass doe^ rise
And in his hairt a thou^and thoughts repair
His courage fled he doubts, he fant's, he
Floods from his eyes send stream's of sylver tears, fears,
2.
K^nd was his hairt tho not resolved to love
Cairfull h^s mind her ^yfe for ^o prese^ue
Constant^^ kyndnes did he alw^yes prove
Courts and cai^full Ladie^ fan to serve
His hai^t a th^one for beauties excellence
If a^^ witheld not Natures influence.
3.
At last to the desired toumbe he came
Which ^eem'd not to be wrought with humane hands
So rich ^o r^ir so wounderfull the same
Wh^^h on fou^ sylue^ sh^nning Pille^s stands
Of beattin gold ^o pu^e fair, cleir, and bright
Whoe^ shynning seemed to skorne fair Phoebus light.
4.
And round about him self ^e might behold
His traeull's throw the birning cave, it show
No painting colors beautified the gold
Bot Emiralds, Pearls, Rubies, Saphirs blew
Which lyue^^e shoes e^ch pu^trat and each pairt
So comely nature helped courious airte.
5.
Their was the purtrat of the Sulphur flamme
In birning Charbunkles and many a ostone
Whoes glanceing light agains the Sune furthe came
Lyk sparklying fire that flamed that br^n^ that shone
^her where the Gy^n^ feld him to the ground
And carried him through all the cau^ a sound.
6.
A crimsone blush a pourple die our spread
His lovely face and made him hing his eyes
Shame, raige, revenge, wraith, fury, anger bred
He loths him self he freats he froun's, he fry's
He thinks these purtrats in despite were shorn
To show him self unto him self in skorne.
7.
But looking farther of he did espy
There wheir The Gyaunt threw him to the ground
And how he rose agane with majesty
Giving at once his foe his fatal wound.
Each purtrat their to pleas his eye contends
And seemed for former faults to make amends
8.
There all the rest of this his longsum wark
Were fynly graph'd in precious stones and gold
The which from point to point he did remark
And their his woundrous valor might behold
Bot lines effrayed his hairt, his eyes, his ears
He feirs to reid yet reids and reids with tear's.
All is in vain all labor is for naught
From Mansayes charmeing spells can non defend
In vain her life in vain releif thou sought
In ending of her pain her life did end
Thou casd her pain and crewell death did send
This is the fruct of all thy travels past
Thou wrought her death her death to the shall send^
Grief, sorrow, cair wo^shame, disgrace at last
^et is thy Sune with clouds of shame over cast
Spent is thy lamp of glory praise and fame
Thy honor fades dishonor buddeth fast
And blossoms beirs of woe, disgrace, and shame
Thy glories done praise dead and fame outworne
Go then of heaune, of earth, of hell, the skorne
9.
Eune as when fearful dreams in slumbring sleip
Would mack a man to shout, to call, to cry
Whi^ fear and horror over his senses creip
Yet speitchles, sightles, mightles does he ly
So now it seemed the Prince was in a trance
And greatly troubled in his countenance.
10.
Thus drunk with sadness and deuoyde of joy
Amaizd he stood bereft of speich and sense
Dounwarde he casts his looks with sad anoy
Grief sorrow cair would life have chaiced thence
Often did he wish the solid earth to ryue
And hyd his shame, by swallowing him alive.
11.
But waiking from this dreaming sleip at last
His lofty wits agane together flies
When as his roaling eyes by chance he cast
Above the toumbe the which he oppin seis
As Seaman in a raiging storm of wind
A^ glaid the land and wished sho^e to find.
12.
So glaid he was hoping to find relief
That sorow's past might have a happy end
Wheirfore to eas his cair, his pain, his grief,
A loft unto the toumb his looks he send
Wheir hope with dreid, and dreid with hope made weir
He feird in joy, and ioyde in mids of feir
13.
For their Laissa fair he might behold
Nay not Laissa bot Penardo rather
For eu'ne the sharpest eye could not unfold
The meinest ma^k of difference tuixt either
And thus not glade whill her he oftin sight'^
But eu'ne him self to sie him self delight's
14.
As that fond boy that gaizd into the well
Wheirin he sies the shadow of his face
And being deip inamoured of him sell
Often looks and often the image would embrace
So in her face as in a glass or well
He loved the only image of him sell
15.
She sat vpone a bensh of glanceing g'old
And lein'd her lovely face upon her hand
Bright looked her eyes wheir love and fancy rold
But lo no spunk of aer nor breath he fand
Yet was her color lyuelie fair and cleir
A sylver tinctour in her cheeks appeir.
16.
He called her often and named herby her name
First soft, then loud, then whispred in her ear
But yet no show of heiring made the Dame
Nor any sign of life could once appeer
Wheirfore sad sorrow sheltred all his joy
And horried pain his pleasour did distroy.
17.
And ean this be (quod he) and art thou dead^
And has the world her chiefest glory lost
Could not my pains thy dearest life remead
Oh no, no pains, of noght but shame I bost
O shame, O fame, shame brings eternal foil
Shame shall my fame disgrace, my glory spoil.
18.
Oh could my life thy life (deir life) redeem
Soon should it by discharged from this breist
Or would the heauns so much my soul esteem
That heir it might dislodge and their might rest
Or that but sin my luck les life might smairt
I to thy ghost would sacrafeize my hairt.
19.
Oh but the faits denies I sold have pairt
Of thy sweit joys, and heauns denies my bliss
That their fearce wraith may make me more to smairt
For this my fault, my injury, my mis
Cursed by the sp^eitt that me deceived twyce
With visions dreams, temptatioune, fantasyes.
20.
Cursed be the time I put this armor on
Cursed be the tongue that me their to intys'd
Cursed be the hands that framed the same alone
Cursed be the wit that armor first deuys'd
Cursed be the spreitts the feinds the furies fell
That built this house of shame, of death, of hell.
21.
And with the word his birning eyes did roll
And shoot forth fearful flamms and sparkling fire
Dispight raige fury madness did control
Wit, reasone, shamefast modesties desire
Wyldlie he lookd, he staird he gaizd about
Raige hade his wit, and reason quyt put out.
22.
Then of his helm and armor did he teir
Which in his furious raige he threw away
Quod he I am not worthy airm's to beir
If this be all my conquest all my prey
Of simple mayds the blameles life to tack
Heaune, earth yea hell it self, abhors the fact.
23
Let brightest heaunes a sable hew unfold
Let grass and herbs be withert wheir I go
Let Sun and Moon in duskie clouds be rold
Loathing to shine shameing my faults to shoe
Which sold be wrapped in black eternal night
In hell in pain in horror and despite.
24.
Thus from the toumb he goes fu^th throw the plain
And wanders far and wounders at him sell
He seiks the flamming rok but all in vain
That led him first unto that field of hell
Their to get out but none save Mansay knew
That fearful cave, and his infernal crew.
25.
This valley's walld about by Natures airt
With mighty craiges, steip rocks, and montanes hi^
Except the cave their is no entering pairt
Which by that flamming fire defendit be
Their set by Mansayes art but now the Prence
The craigs, rocks, montans, climbs, and flies thence.
26.
While this brave youth torments his mighty mind
With woe, di^pair, cair, sorrow, grief, and pain
A marble rock his roling eyes out find
Wheir in he sies a glaunceing sword remain
The sword half in the rock, a shield besyd^
And underneath sum verses he espyid.
27.
But in his fury he disdaind to reid
Which after was the cause of all his grief
For from these verses did his health proceid
His hope, his hape, his joy, and his releif
Yet from the rock the sword and shield he taks
The which, he cutts, he beats, he bows, he breaks.
28.
This was his sword and shield which he did leave
Behind when Lechers birning fo^te he wane
No weapins now he cairs, nor none did crave
He goe^ he knows not why, nor wheir, nor when
Nor stands, nor sits, nor re^ts in any place
Till Phoebus tuyce had sunck, tuyce shown his face.
29.
At last he comes unto that roll^ng floode
Heght Danubie whoes tumbling billows roir
His murmring streams in heaps ^yik montanes shood
To shoulder from his place ^he craggie shoir
Discharging Surges throw the clifted rocks
With thundering noyes the fearful crage he Shok^.
30.
Eune as that mighty yrone ingyne strong
His belly being filled with ^ulphu^e broune
Casts forth a flamming smookie cloud along
With fyrie balls that touns and tow^'s th^ow down
And fills the aer with noyes of roaring thunder
The heauns with lightning and the earth with wounds
31.
Eune so this mighty flood with hiddeous swye
Of surges great beats down his broki^ shoirs
And ow'^ the fertile land doe^ swiftly fly
His sounding streams throw humid aer that roirs
Heir stayed the Prince and heir hei^ forced to stand
Till he espyes upon the silver strand.
32.
A little bairge that fleitted nigh the place
The which a Damsel a lone did g^yde
Bright wa^ he^ color loue^ie was he face
But sorrowful her cou^ten^nce he spyde
Leaving her barck she quik^y to him drew
And sighing said those ^ynes wh^^h ^oeth Insew.
33.
Ah vofull miser wretched cre'ture I
Woe, Pain, and death, grief, sorrow, cair, I find
Long have I gone long sought sum Knight to try
Yet nere the neirer to my iourneyes end
Ah my poor Lady dies for pain and grief
Ow'r cum but cause and vanquished but releif.
34.
Although the Prence was full of woe and cair
Yet for to heir of L^dies one throw
Did his old pain the sorrow he got air
Reneue augment Ince^ss, and cause ouerflow
So do grein wounds their b^eidding stensht and gone
The mind once vexd, again they ryue anon.
35.
And thus he said fair Lady if you please
The cause of this your grief ^ pray you show
To gre^f (in t^ubled mynds) it i^ ane ease
The same t'vnfo^d or pairtners for to know
Wro^gs blaizd abroad will seeldom ^kaipe reproof
On gaind sum hope sum confort sum releif.
36.
Fair sir (quod she) my wrong, my hope, is done
Wrong past releif and hope is turned despair
And though of aid my comfort al is gone
Yet i will unfold a very world of cair
Tears stopped her braith, such cunning could she fram^
Now reid, now pale, her colo^e, went, and came.
37.
Thus silent did the Lady stay a while
And sighed and grond at last from crafty mind
She breathed a souggred lie a crafty guyle
A falls deceat sprung of malicious kind
Yet could she weell dissemble her feigned feirs
With bashful blushe, with groans, with sighs, and tear^
38.
And thus begane, In Transalpina fair
Their regn'd a Prince that bold Euphrastes heght
Who went with Datians to that luckles war
Of Greece their slain by proud Thessaliane might
He left no Heir his sceptour for to hald
But his fair wife the fair Philena called
39.
So young, so wise, so verteous, and so fair
All Regiouns fi^d were with her glorious fame
So excellent in all perfectiones rair
That Monarchs, Kings and Prences, swed the dame
And wow'd, her, sought her, loud her, yet still find
That none could prove or move, or match her mind.
40.
At last fame singes her beauty sounds her worth
In the ears of Antiochs brave Prince anon
The round, the sad and solid globe sought furthe
Apollo shynd not on a brauer one
His might, his strength, his worth, his val'rous deid^
Al^menas fearce unconquered Sone exceids.
41.
Fame kendled so this Prince with hot desire
Which to Philaenas love did him prouock
That nather could he eeas, nor quenshe the fire
Which death ordaind both love and life to choc^
But to our court he come ane errant Knight
And saw her fair, and feing loud the fight.
42.
He serud her long and by his valor wrought
Deids of great wounder, woorthe eternal fame
And for his due rewaird of her he sought
Her love, her favor, marriage was his aim
She no les brunt with loves consumeing fire
Yields to his suit consents to his desire.
43.
At last that day, cursd day wnhappie yeir
When loves vnsein delight and beauties treasure
The fortres which all women holds most deir
She should have randred he receaud with pleasure
Eune that same day with strength, with might, and strife
She is carred thence and he bereft of life.
44
By tuo strong giants mighty fearce and bold
Which Maro fearce and Bramarano heght
That does ow'r Creitt their crewell scepter hold
Which they have won by murder, blood, and feght
Her beauty fame unto their ears hade soundit
Wheir by proud Bramaranos heart was woundit.
45.
This Bramarano sone to Maro is
Who hearing of Philenas wedding day
Come with his Sire and feftie Knight of his
While she (poor soul) was but ane easy prey
For all the court in pomp in joy in stait
Had nether sword shield armis not feared deceat.
46.
Thrie scoir and more into this woeful broyle
Were slain and their the Prince of Antioch fell
Whoes only valor long with stude this spoil
Seune airmed Knights he slew unarmed him sell
On Bramaranos sword at last he smairted
O crewell death, o Tyrant crewell hairted.
47.
This woeful murder wrought, they thence remove
Philaena fair, with travel pain and toil
Nor could her car, her grief, her sorrow, move
Their hearts to pity, nor their hands from spoil
But Bramarano would have rapt the prey
Which eye should not behold, nor tongue bewray.
48.
And yet with tear's with murninge, and complaint
His hairt by Nature furious, fearce, and cr^well
She moved on this condition to relent
Tho love still brunt, and lust still fond the fuel
Where noght but beauty breideth loves desire
Lust feids the flamme, and booldith still the fire.
49.
He was content if in tuo months she could
Find out a knight to vanquish him in fight
Unto her formar liberty she should
Be set and he should quyt discharge his right
Prouyding if no Knight with stood his strife
She should remain his Concubine or wife
50.
And now tuo tym^ has swartishe Cynthia shynd
Tuyce showin her spherick face with borrowed light
And tuyce agane to horned shape declynd
Since I from fair Philenae took my flight
To find sum Knight, sum Champione, or sum Lord
That would to her his happy aid afford.
51.
Yet have I fund not one that hade regaird
To honor glory fame or dignity
Although she geues her self for their rewaird
Who conquer shall so fearce ane Enemy
And now no more but full tuo weiks remains
Of the appointed time which he ordains.
52.
Thus have you hard the sum and heill ^ffect
Of all my toil, my travel, and my pain
Sure then quod he it seems that you neglect
To find a Knight or else no Knights remain
Bot if the heavens so pleas or it be long
I shall abaitt his pride, revenge her wrong.
53.
Thanks sir quod sho, your great good will I sie
But lo you lai^k both a^mour sword and shield
I was but knight^d now of lait quod he
And swoor to wear none till I wan't in field
Why then quod she if our revenge ensue
The heaun's has sm^ld and I have done my due.
54.
The Prince and she both enters in the bairge
But heaun's preserve him from that deeulishe train
Which falsely is deuys'd for him at lairge
To work his shame, his fall, his death, his pain
Who over that great Danubius is gone
A companeid with falls deceat alone.
Caput. XIIII.
Argument.
THe Prince is by this feind furthled
Unto Philaena's bour
He slayes the Giant seine by fair
Philena from her tour
Her raige to love does turn but lou^
Disdaint turns meir despite
She seiks his death he is by an
Angel warnd and flies by night.
1.
Happy ar they that can eschew deceat
Whoes baits ar beauty glory flattri^ gain^
That virtue pulls from honors hie estait
Alluring them by what they would obtain
Thus hope of virtue glory praise and fame
Leads them to death destructione foil and shame.
2.
So does the crafty Crocadeill entyse
(Beneth the fertile banks of flowing Nile)
^he travelers with murnefull platns and cries
^s if it were sum woeful wight that feill
The pains of death but when they come to sie
With terror feir and death to^mented be.
3.
Such kind compassione with Penardo wrought
He goes bot knows not to his death deuys'd
So was decreid and so Philena sought
So with this false deceat she him entys'd
For tatling Fame had ^^id it known to all
That Prince Euphrasies did before him fall.
4.
Whai^fo^e long time she murn'd she sigh't she plaind
At last she send (when for revenge she cries)
For Arebo a visarde (who sustained
And brought her up in youth) with him t'aduyse
Whoes ai^t his wit his will to ill entysde
Ay ill he wrought ill used and ill devysde.
5.
He told her that the Prince Penardo was
So brave a knight whom heaune so much did favor
All slights all straits all danger could he pas
Except he chanced but sword o^ armis to waver
In chantment strong his virtue still commands
If moved to wraith whole armeis he with stands.
6.
Whoes might be then had brought to end (he said)
The fairest rarest wounderfullest warke
That ere be force of magic airt was maid
Yet he the wished end shall not remark
For that shall be vnsein vnfun'd vnknown^
Till time place fates and fortune leave to frown.
7.
Wheir for now fits the seasone for revenge
Now fits the time to croune thy just desire
Now trauells he throw desert montanes strainge
From whence my art shall make him heir reteir
For Bramaeran^ ^end whoes strenth all knows
To the that Gyaunt great affectione shows.
8.
Feid him with shows and shadows of delight
Whoes valo^r stre^th and might so weell is known
If not by him not by the world that Knight
May be orecu^ or vanquish^ or over thrown
Yea if he h^d^ his armor sword or shield
He nor all Europe could not win the field.
9.
Thus did the wiked wisard her entyse
To act thi^ falls deceat and crewell slight
Which was performed eune as he did denyse
And Bramarano brought was to the fight
Whoes fury strength and might so known by fame
That all those kingdoms trembled at his name.
10.
Thus Arebo ane wicked feind hade sent
(In shape of Maid) with whom over that fair stream^
Of Danubie, the Prince Penardo went
Not doubting ill deceat disg'race nor shame
But in her lovely looks deceat did loure
So Serpents lurck amidst the fairest flower.
11.
When over Danubius the Prince was gone
With this foul feind this lady and this guide
Such will have, zeal, and such desire alone
He had that fast he on his journey hy'd
Ah happy Prince hade it been know'ne to the.
Who trained the, brought the bure the compaine.
12.
In falls report no credit nor no hope
Thou would hau^ had nor have beleeud deceat
But mighty Jove who gave thy rains the sko^pe
His Angel send for to preserve thy staitt
Else furies feinds ghostes Spreitts and fairies all
Had brought shame death and everlasting fall.
13.
Guydit by hell although preserud by heaun'e
At last Philenas palace he ^spyde
Vpoun a rock heighe built were castells seau^e
Below a murmuring river softly glyd
Ore which the rock with rugged airms forth lay
Threatening his fall her speedy course to slay.
14.
Thrie quarters of this rock the river folds
And in her asure arms it rude^ye taks
A ^^ou^ie plain thrusts in betuine which holds
The stream vnmet whoes roaring billows braks
With surges great vpone the sandy shore
Yet to the rock the plain a passage boire.
15.
The rugged craiges and clifts that seemed thus brok
Was cled with tries with hearb's with flours witgrasse
Which garland-wayes bedect'd the mighty rok
Pyns Cedars Oaks Palms Eshes Firs Embrase
The stream below wheire, Caves, walks groaues, and sheds
Erects to Venus chambers galries beds.
16.
The Prince with great delight walkd throw the same
At ^ast his ey sight lady says Sir Knight
On top of yonder rok abyds my dame
From whence you must releas her by your might
The giant by the way will you assail
No longer must I stay for fear farweall.
17.
And with the word she glyd's throw shaiples aer
He gazed about to sie wh^ir she was gone
But naught he seis yet nothing could he fear
But fo^ward still he goes and goes alone
By Arebo at last the Prince was known
And to Philena from heighe turrets shown.
18.
Then from hersprings of tears bright flames forth shyn^d
Where raige revenge mischief wraith anger bud
With sorrow care, woe, grief, and saidnes pyn'd
Wyldlie she gaiz'd with rolling eyes as wode
Now Bramaran with tears and groans she moved
She sighed she murn'd she plained she prayed she proved
19.
She moved him proved him wished him tak revenge
Of that fearee crewel proud disdainful Knight
Which if he did she promeist to exchainge
Her self for guerdone of his strenth and might
Her croune her wealth her kingdom al efford
All should be his and he should be her Lord.
20.
As he who gaizeth one the Sune is seine
To have a weak a dimm and daizled sight
So blindit was the giants hungry eyne
Who all this time fed on her beaurie bright
Feir not Madame (quod he) be heaune I sweir
His body from his cursed head to tear.
21.
His looks from love now changed to wraith and ire
Soon was he armed and soon to battle dight
Down from the rok he goes with great desire
To feght to vanquish and to slay the Knight
So does a falcone soaring in the sky
Haist down when as his prey he does espy.
22.
By this the Prince was come the rock hard by
Winds birds and streams thrie pairts sang in his ear
When he that mighty g'yant did espy
Lyk Typhon that appeald the gods to wear
Nor had the Prince swo^d shield nor armor strong
But choos'd a club the sturdie Oaks among.
23.
Wheirwith he martch'd against his mighty foe
Whoes throat send forth a hoarse confused sound
So bulls and lions roir to feght that go
Ah God quod he this simple man confound
Who naiked bear but armor sword or shield
Dars feght or look or meit me in the field.
24.
Ceas quod the Prince thy threats and babbling tongue
Use now thy sword thy hand thy strength thy might
So pleas the heauns i will make the know er long
T'abaitt thy pride God has ordained a Knight
Then do thy worst or best or what thou may
Heauns be my hope my strength and thy decay.
25.
No longer could feirce Bramarano stay
Foame from his mouth fire sparkled from his eyes
Thy spytfull cursed head (quod he) i will lay
In fair Philenas lape for thy defyes
This said together flew the champions bold
Their battle strainge rare woundrous to behold.
26.
Penardo was of body great and strong
Quick nimble active reddie sharp and light
The giant lyk a tour as great as long
It seemed if he but fell upon the Knight
That he would crush his bones to pieces small
So Serpents feght with Elephants more tal.
27
Penardo eye his hand his fute goes right
He nimble shuns the giants mighty bloes
The Giants spends his force in vain, so light
And reddie was the Prince who always goes
Traversing heir and their and often at neid
Stricks wards reteirs turns And assails with speid
28.
Thus long in equal balance stood the field
But far unequal in their arms they fall
The Giant armed with mass arm's sword and shield
Penardo hade no arms sword shield at all
While thus they strive to win stout hardy bold
Philena from her tour did them behold,
29.
Long gaizd she thus and long she looked thairone
At last she said unto the wisard old
Sure were thy words and sure yone Knight alone
If armed against mighty armeis might be bold
It fears me now and sure I dreid his strength
Shall unrevenged my vengeance work at leng^he.
30.
This said the dame for that she felt her hair^
From raige revenge and vengeance to Relen^
Raige myld became and vengeance did convert
To pity, then did cruelty repent
Of ill the sourse dryd up the spring did cease
What discord is it that love can not apaise.
31.
But Arebo (who had her words mistane)
Said ^loe Madame I fear our hope shall chaing^
If he yone weapine from the Giant gain
In vain our toil in vain our wished revenge
Wheirfore me thinks it best thus to prevent
Thy Gyaunts death his life your discontent.
32.
In matcheles Macedone their regnes a Queen
To Geraldinus sole and only Heir
At whoes sad birthe the Destanies were seine
T'ordaine her fate strange wounderfull and rair
Clotho o^daind of all the earth alone
She should be fair and equal unto none,
33.
Nixt Lachesis ordaind and did protest
She should be loud of all that vew'd her face
And Atrope made her spotles pure and chaste
Tho loud of all she nere should love embrace
O beauty rair O chastity, O love
O woundre virtues thrie, thrie vices prove.
34.
For still her beauty praise augments her pride
The love of all her heighe disdain still f^ids
Pride and disdain the ornaments does hyde
That from her spotles chastity proceids
Nor meik nor myld nor humble is her mind
Non she regairds non canc her favor find.
35.
Thus many thousands loves and dies for love
And thousands loves and lives a deing life
And thousands mo (that dar not fortune prove)
Sum kills them self sum killed by Riualls strife
Love breids confusioune war blood discord death
Al loves few lives and none withstands her wraith.
36.
She conquers all and yet her gain is loss
When she has vanquished all she wins but shame
The^e she ore cum's these breids her greattest croce
This crewell Queen Olindo heght to name
Wh^m by my art i will make this Knight to sie*
Her shall he love and lou^ing her shall die.
37.
But fair Philenas ferce revenge or now
Was overcome with pity myldnes love
Sighs groans and tears were all that she could dow
True signs wheirby we true repentance prove
At last she said shall he depairt ah no
I Will have his cursed hairt before he go.
38.
For if stout Bramaran he chance to kill
Eune heir will I inveit him for to rest
Then fitts the time then must I work my will
Then to my wish shall my revenge be best
Loath would I be that any should bereave
The life I should I would and I must have,
39.
This spak the Dame all that her heirs still weining
That she decreit by death to work his smairt
But subtle wemens words hes double meining
Each blow that he receaues lights on her hair^
Often lookd she down often victory she prayed him
And with her looks her hairt flies furthe to aid him.
40.
And all this time still equal stood the fight
The giants bloes could never do him harm
He was so agill nimble quick and light
At last he lighted on the Giants airme
Where his left shoulder band it to his back
Which with his club like Hercules he brack,
41.
Wheirat proud Bramarano raiging more
Cursd all the Gods and cursd heighe he auns above
In vain his blows in vain his mass he boir
In vain his force his strength his might to prove
Wheirfore in raige his mass away he flong
And draws a curtlax keine sharp heavy long.
42.
Wheirwith he fearslie did assail the Prence
Uniting force strength fury raige and wraith
Now against his thundering blows was no defense
He geues not Prince Pe^ardo leave to braith
For now his club was no defense at all The Giant cuts the same in pieces small
43.
Nere was the Prince in danger until now
Now little could his lightness him defend
He geues him wound on wound and blow on blow
Wheirfrom the blood in purple streams descend
So does a fontane made with art and cunning
His streams in sundre oppin pairts forth running
44.
Greats shouts and clamours from the castle came
Wheirwith that wicked crew express their joy
But cheiflie Arebo who said Madame
Our skill our wit our flight no more employ
Ours is the day the feght the victory
His be the fall the wrak the in famie.
45.
Ah quod the Queen it much torments my mind
That Bramarano lives if he should die
My love my self my marriage I assyng'd
To him and death (ye know) it were to me
Him for to wed which he will have perforce
Ah deir revenge ah lait too lait remorce.
46.
Ah heauns I wish yone crewel Knight alive
Till my revenge my self should undertake
If he the Gyaunt of his life depryue
Eune him my thrall and bund slave would I make
No more for grief and sorrow could she say
Her tears her sighs her groans the rest bewray.
47.
But she disguysd her love with shows of hate
Although for love she tr^mble pant and quaikt
These words again did to her self repeat
Eune him my thrall and bond slave would I mak^
But o sweit love should be his prisone good
My airms should be his bands my lips his food.
48.
And thus did she this doubt sum feght attend
With torment fear care sorrow grief and pain
For eurie drop of blood the Prince did spend^
Her hairt a sighe her eyes a tear forth strain
Still when the Gyan^ stricks she starts she crye^
The wounds impressione in her bosom lies.
49.
Amaizement grief and sorrow mixed with dout
Her change of hewes her thoughts confusioune shows
Cold was her blood within but hot without
True witness that her hairt her torment knows
Now reid now paile now pale now reid agane
Her love bred fear fear grief and grief bred pain.
50.
Hard was the stait wheirin Penardo stood
His club now gone long deip and wide each wound
From whenc flou'd rivers of his purple blood
Which dyed in sanguein all the flourie ground
With weknes now he wearies and he faint^
His agill leaps and nimble quicknes wants.
51.
Often sought he with the giant for to close
A^ tho his wounds his strength and life did waist
But all in vain his travel did he loose
Such was the giants wraith h^s raige his haist
That him now heir now their now out now in
He fo^cd about the field for to rine.
52.
At last he stumbled on the yrone mass
Wheirof as then great neid great help he fand
That he it got the Prince right joyful was
Now strength reneu'd into hi^ strengthles hand
Revenge bred ire wraith fury raige and might
Wheirwith again he did renew the fight.
53.
Feirslie he faught but feeble was his strength
His might his sl^ght his cunninge all was gone
And only wratth manteind the feght at length
The gyaunt breathles brusd with blows alone
At last each one so neir to other drew
That breist to breist and airme to airme they threw.
54.
Blood moud the Prence a dreid revenge to tak
Shame moud the werie Gyaunt unto wraith
Shame against revenge revenge against shame does wrake
Their ire their will their veangeaunce unto death
Thryce stroaue the gyaunt in his arms to fold
The Prince, but his left airme refusd his hold.
55.
Which great eduantage did the Prince espy
And in his arms the giant strongly greips
Whill both their feeble forces thus they try
Sad night with sable wings their deids eclip's
Whill as her daughter darkness their resorts
To guide the gyaunts soul to Plutos port's.
56.
Thryce gir't the Prince the Giant in his arms
And thryce again he is forced to let him go
With deip and deidlie wounds the giant harm's
The back the legs the theighs of his strong foe
By on unarmed so ouercum to be
He loathed he scorned and he disdained to die
57.
Thus struggling long at last to ground they pa^
Of fallis the Giants helm the Prince up flies
And quickly with that mighty irone mass
Beats forth his brains and with his brains his eyes
Thus bold disdainful fearce prow'd full of wraith
He yields his soul to hell his life to death.
58.
The Prince gave Jove his prase his thanks his right
But yet this bluddie conquest hade so mu^he
Febled his strenght his ualour and his might
Tyrd were his trembling legs his waiknes such
He falls at last no differ could ye kno
Betuixt the victor and his vanqueist foe.
59.
The Queen Philena fair (who all this while
Hade weel remarked the valor of the Prince)
Cheird up her woeful looks and with a smyle
She haisted down to bring Penardo thence
Whom when she sawly pale cold bloodles dead
She grou'nd she sighed she sank down at his head.
60.
This sight amazed her servants much but more
It troubled Arebo the truth to find
At last his science airte and magik loir
Reueild to him the secreit of her mind
Wheirfore with cair grief sorrow woe and wound*
He fear's least death pairt life and love assunder.
61.
Although eun'e to the death he haits the Prince,
Yet for Philenas cause for him did cair
And softly caused them both be ca^ied thence
Up to the rock and laid in chambers fair
Wheir soon he b^ought by skill art craftingyne
His life his senses and releif from pyne.
62.
When life over death hade got the uictorie
And feir Philena hade reuiud again
Love stroa^e with shame and shame with in famie
And in famie revived what love had slain
But shame revenge hait in famie and all
At last by lou^ was foght foyld bund in thral.
63,
Wherefore these words she sadly did rehears
O lawles Love imperious proud and crewell
Unjust vnteamd vnconquerd strong and fearce
O thou of good and bad effects the fewall
Thou moves mischief shame dath war woe despite
And freindsship true true joy and true delight.
64.
And thus thou ar^ More would ye dame have said
But Arebo she seis who did remove
The Ladies all when she on bed was laid
His cure his spells and mighty charm^e to prove
She that her self bewrayed might now behold
Discoured al, reueild all al she told.
65.
So does a craiftie Traitor to a King
Who with his fellows has conspyrd his death
But fearing once discovery of the thing
Repentance faynes in looks in words in breath
Discovering all their cursed, malicious treasone
And still him self condemn's him self with reasone.
66.
When Arebo had^ hard the taill she told
Still interrup't with groans with sighs with tear's
His hairt inclynd to cruelty he would
And could have been content to stope his ears
But that the love he bore unto the Dame
Stopped up his wraith and quensh'd his furies flamme.
67.
Wheirfor this much he promeist her at lenthe
That he so weell his phislik would apply
Hi^ health his vigor beauty blood and strenth
Should to his senewes vain and arteirs Hie
Which in few days he hade performed so
The Prince began to rise to walk to go.
68.
Whom to Philena eue^ie day repairs
Her chiefest pleasure was, to dres each wound
Her snow white hand she daintelie prepairs
To dight to dry to dres to ripe the ground
Love smyld to sie his nou^sh thus allurde
O happy man so dressed so heald so cuerde
69.
And whill she tuich'd his soft and snow white skin
Which heir and their was staind with purple blood
Tears from her eyes lyk liquid pearl do^n rinne
And on his skin often trembled ^old and stood
To plead for t^eir fair da^me and seemed to move
His hairt to yield to pity or to love.
70.
Some time she eyed his fair and louelye face
His goldin locks his quick sweet smyling eye^
His weell proportioned limms and eurye place
She still remarks still feids on what she seis
She looks she vewes admir's and still she gaizerb
And from each pai^t a wound her love increse^^
71.
Weell might the Prince behold her passiones strong
Yet seemd he naught to know or not allow
Least by deny all he should do her wrong
Whoes martial mind to love could never bow
Yet courteslie her p^ofer'd pains with stands
Which for unkindness she taks at his hand's
72.
Often by her looks yet would she make him know
The passioune that torments her inwart mind
Often hy her p^ettie speeches would she show
She caird not much although he would be kind
And often be simlituds would prove
How far her Sex exceeds his in love.
73.
But nether speech similituds nor looks
Could make him quick or capable at all
He could not sie those baits, allurements hook' a
Or seeing would not sie nor heir their call
Still Mars his Sogeour he him self had sworn
For Cupid he was nather bred not borne.
74.
Yet fair Philena could not leave to love
With new conceats new toys and questions new
Which in ane vthers person she would prove
By parables his sansie to subdue
But seeing another this nor that could move him
With sighs and tear's she told him she did love him.
75.
Wheirat he stood long silent and amaizd
At last resolud to tak it but in skorne
He said Madame i'mt glade you so ar pleased
To t^k your pastyme of a wretch for lorne
Whoe^ birth whoes merit and whoes poor estate
Your basest hand maid would not choose for mate.
76.
By this his simple answer weel she knew
He knew her love her passione and her mind
Wheirat she shamed and changed to vermeil hew
Sham brought in wraith, wraith sweir he was unkind
Wraith brings in haitt in hait away she flong
And whill she flies disdain chased love along.
77.
Penardo left in chamber now alone
Repents him of his answer rashly said
Ah now Philena had you known his moan
And sein the groans, the sighs, ye ^ears he shade
Once more thy cruel mind hade now re^ented
And thy mischief new bred hade new repented^
78.
But heaun's denied his pace and her content
So prone and bent her mind was to mischief
Who now with Arebo has given consent
To end his days and with his days her grief
In throw a privy posterne they should creep
And in his bed should murder him a sleep.
79.
When bright Apollo sank down under ground
And Night looked up with many thousand eyes
Penardo in his bed was sleeping sound
Ane Angel bright descend from heaune he sies
Who said up up heighe Jove commands ye fly
Fly then in haist for if you stay thowle die.
80.
Then he awaks and leaps unto the flure
His birning eyes ^old staird and gaizd about
At first he could not think him self secure
To go from thence or stay such was his dout
Not that he feared whole armies their to find
But called Philenas restles sutte to mind
81.
Whill dim weak hale and feeble Cynthia shine
Her borrowed light she lends to arm ye Prince
With armor bright rich costly rair and fine
And with a sword and shield for his defense
Which fair Philena gave him long ago
And with them would have geu'ne her self also.
82.
Be chance then to ye dure he did repair
Which to receive the murderers oppin stood
And down a black deip dark and hollow stair
Which seemed to lead to hell and Lethes floode
At last benethe the rock wheir waters glyde
Furthe their he come down be the Rivers side.
83.
And thus along the river side he goes
Throw rocks craigs tries woods groves and paths unknown
In silence of the night whill Cyn^hia shoes
Her pale weak pure cleir silver Beam's forth thrown
Throw glomie aer tuixt clouds youth Zephyre brings
Vpone his soaring swift and lofty wings.
Caput. XV.
Argument.
THe Murderers mis their falls intent
Alone Penardo flies
He on the banks of Theissa fair
The Heir of Hung'ry seis
By Argalantes reft away
He kills him brings her thence
He foyls Lord Doreo in her sight
Shes's amrous of the Prince.
1.
GReat harm ensue by over great desire
O vain desire rediculous and ill
That birnes the mind and setts tbe hairt on fire
From the proceids wode furious fraintik uil
A g^oundles deip of ill if ill abusde
Diverse inconstant infinite confusde
2.
Unnatural desires heighe heavens offend
And appetits immoderat and vain
As birning lust but limits bound or end
A sink of sin a gulf a sea a maine
Which draws the soul from heaunlie contemplatione
And beastly bruttshe maks her operatione.
3.
Yea who soere or what soere they be
Suff^ing them selfs with lust for to be led
They are no more them selfs, no more ar fry
Nor from no travel pain and labor fred,
For their desire a thousand ways they use
Nor for it thousand torments will refuse.
4.
Their body not refusing thousand pains
So they obtain their pleasure their desire
Into their mind a thousand he^ls remains
In quenshing (thought vnquenshable) their fire
And their desire their fire incressing still
Turns fury seiks for death if want of will.
5.
Such fury in Philena falls abyds
Who birnes in fire of sensual delight
Wanting her will and her desire prouyds
In fury for to murder this her Knight
Not love of him but lust in her remaind
And therefore crewell death because restraind.
6.
For presently no sooner was he gone
When sextein Knights arryu'd in armor cled
And throw that sec^eit passage goes anon
With cleir sharp swords about the Prince his bed
The which if mighty Jove had not forsein
Their had he died their had he murdre'd beine.
7.
But he whom heaun's preserud for better hape
Did restles on his longsum journey wend
Till Tytan thryce in Thetis watrie lap
Had dyu'd and thryce his spherick course did end
When he vpone the banks of Teissa fair
Lay down and ends his weary journey their.
8.
This Teissa is a fair and pleasant floode
Which Hungaries east bordour rins a long
Neir to that montanes seuine heighe hoarie rude
Which Transyluania fortefie right strong
Heir rests the Prince all night and feids his mind
Wi^h conquest praise and glory brought from Ind^.
9.
And wheir he lay the river from a rock
Poured down his pure cleir silver streams in stoir
Which on the peble channel softly brok
Throw hollow concaues of the crooked shoir
Whoes ghostly roars maks all the craigs to ring
Whill tries birds winds with sweit reports does sing.
10.
Whoes confort rare of music sweit and fine
Soung him a sleip till bright Aurora rise
Whoes mantle br^ght reid whyt and cleir did shine
And alter turn and change in azure skies
A suddan sound (into his ears that rings
A waks the Prince with shouts and murmerings.
11.
He starts a loft and looking round about
He sies ten Kn^ghts come f^o a forest wide
Who Cap^iue led seaune Ladies in a rout
Whom with away in greattest have they ride
He draw^s his sword and with his shield he goes
To wine that prey be valor death and bloes.
12.
One of the ten their passage to make fry
Cums far before and caught his mighty lance
The which he shuns with hand with fute with eye
And quickly did his murdring blade advance
Which in the Knights hairt blood he sheathd perforce
Then took his lance and quickly manned his horse.
13.
By this the Ladies and the Knights drew neir
And swor their fellow should not die for nough^
One moir they send the passage for to cleir
Who se king for revenge a vengeance bought
The Prince eune with his fellows lance a pairt
Pearst throw his breist his body and his hairt,
14.
The rest with raige with fury and despite
The Ladeis dainty hands and feitt hade bund
And taine them fro their horse for feir of flight
And left them sadly weeping on the ground
And in their fury mad for their revenge
All with the Prence began a battle st^ainge.
15.
The Prence who saw the ladies weep and murne
His ire and wraith was changed to pity myld
But pity vnreuengd to raige did turn
Thus l^ke a lyone angry fearce and wyld
His flamming sword he tos'd till they all shoke
Yet fanting striks and tremble whil they stroke.
16.
The Prince rush throw them with his brand heigh born^
Death by his side at each bloe one to catch
As sithe cutts down the grain the grass the corn
So cut befoi^ him fall they eurye wratche
Each bloe a wound eatch wound brought death with pain
Him self vntiutch'd vnharm'd unhurt remain.
17.
Eune as a montane craige or mighty rock
Whom raiging seas or blustering winds assail
Against seas winds storms and lightning thunder broke
Still vnremou'd abyds and never faill
So sted fastlye the Prince with stood their strength
And hurt feld slew or chased them all at length.
18.
Not one now left his fury to withstand
His bloody brand he dights and sheaths it then
The ladies he would louse bound fute and hand
Tormented sore with sorrow grief and pain
And she that Mistres seemd of al to be
Her lows'd the Prence from bands and set her fry.
19.
Mistres she was indeid of all the rest
For comelines for beauty and for grace
For verteous mind unstained pure cleine and chaist
Meik modest myld and sprung of princely race
The field of love did modest virtue plow
And rypt the fructe vnpuld as yet that grow.
20.
Her modest blushe her S^ne shine beauties ray
Her fyrie sparkling light cleir bright and shynning
Their goldin beams sp^ings furt^ in wantone play
Streams on the Prence his face whoes eyes refynning
Hade recolle'ct' her spredding beams in one
And throws them back and burns her hairt anon
21.
So bright Apollo spreds his beam's over al
And sweitlie wa^ms and conforts eurye flower
^ut in a little birning glass recall
His rays he shows his might his strength his power
For that to which before he comfort brought
He birnes he skortches and consumes to naught.
22.
The Prince admeird the beauty of her face
She stood she staird she wounde^t and she gaiz'd
Still from his eyes come lightninge furthe a pace
Which brint her hairt d^smayd and much amaiz'd
For love of eurye glance and eurye look
N^w weapins forged whei^with her hairt he struck.
23.
Thus stood the dame now pale now reid now wane
Which weell bewrayde the passiones of he^ hairt
Till floods of tears from her fa^r eyes down ran
Sighs from her swelling breist vnsolds her smairt
Then love for mend's did change to cristall ball's
The silver globs which from her eyes doun^ falls.
24.
And them he throws at Prince Penardos eyes
Theirwith to hit to wound, or work his smairt
But all to weak his chyldishe airme he seis
To harm the man that hade a Mars his hairt
Wheirsore he sweir in fury raige and ire
To fet eyes hairt and all into a fy^e.
25.
Ane arrow from his quauer forth he drew
The which by chance did bear a leaddin head
Whei^of he nothing in his fury knew
Till in the P^inces hairt he fixed the lead
Then Cupid blushed and sighdt and grond full sore
Who never knew that he was blind before.
26,
Ane other shaft with goldin head he taks
Wheirwith he would undo his wo^k ere long
But all in vain his travel now he maks
For that the vthers poysione was too strong
Yet mollefied the force and did him move
To pity her because he could not love*
27
Then weiping throw the aer young Cupid flies
To show unto his mother his mischance
The dame who now hade cleird her wattrieeyes
With modest blushe and smyling countenance
Gave th^nks unto the Prence for hi^ relief
When lo appei^d more harm and more mischief.
28.
For that a mighty Giant they espyde
Come from the wood vpone a Cameall strong
At whoes hudge fearful sight the ladies cried
O now begins our hell our death ow'r wrong
But she that was unbound with smyling cheir
Said thus unto them all, leave of your fear.
29.
In this most brave and gallant Knight remains
Our hope, our confort, our relief, our strength
Such virtue grace and valor he retains
That he must be ou^ tour and shield at length
Love bred her courage that the taill hade told
What one so feared but love can make them bold.
30.
Such was her love although her love was new
Then leave her secound self she rather die
The Prince that saw the Giant never drew
Said thus to her fair lady now I sie
I may not stay the rest for to unbind
Whei^fo^e that wa^k to you must be assingde.
31.
Go then quod she heauns the preserve from ill
So small a wo^k as this may I perform
He horsed and took a mighty lance him till
Then reddie he abyds the furious sto^me
The Giant neir now dead seis eurye Knight
And cried ah Gods do I behold this sight,
32.
Trembling with wraith with anger raige and ire
He gnash'd his teith and shook his head a round
Out from his eyes flew flamms of sparkling fyr^
And from his throat a hoarce confused sound
His brai^h within his throat his speeches toi^
So bulls and lyones billow feght and roir.
33.
Thus in his madness fury wraith and haist
He coutcht his mast-lyke lance and forth did run
The Prince that hade before his lance in raist
Ly^k haist lyk will hade lyk desire to win
And thus like Pegasus gross earth they spair
And flies like thunderbolts throw boxin aer,
34.
The Gyaunt brak his lance first on the prince
Him self not steirt nor hurt nor moved at all
But against the Prince his arms were no defense
Split was his hairt he down to ground did fall
With such a noyes and such a thundering sound
As maks a mighty tour that falls to ground.
35.
Be this the Ladies of their bonds weref^^d
And saw this bloody monsters fatal end
Terror of him and horror of the dead
Made them to shrink and fearful looks futth send
They stood amaizd dismayed afraid they fanted
Their timorous hairts in their weak bosums panted.
36.
When to the Dam's the Prince reteired back
Those Ladies all falls down vpone their kneis
First Jove then him they thank for this kind act
With tears like pearl that streams from their fair eye^
They myldlie him be seeche request and pray
Of pity mercy grace that he would stay.
37.
As he hade freed them from that Tyrann strong
To be their gairde their gyde and their defense
Against al hazard death mischefe and wrong
Till they were saif at home and far from thence
He lighted down nor strayed till they had done
But sweitlie meeklie myldlie answered soon.
38.
First by the hand he raisd them from the ground
And then he said fair Ladies leave to mourn
A gyde a guairde a servant have ye found
Till you unto your homes may saif return
They thank him praise him joys in such a guide
Then tak their horse furthe on their way they ride
39.
And whill they traueld throw the forest wyld
The Prince inquired how this mischance befell
When one of them both courts grave and myld
With smyl^ing countenance began to tell
Fair fire (quod she) first kno then what we be
Whom your great might and valor has made fry.
40.
This Lady pointing to the Dame whom he
First lowsd from bands (but tied in bands of love)
V^dina heght sole Heir of hungary
Her Parents joy delight and pleasure prove
And thus ^our force the Vngarian hope defend
On her we wait we serve and we attend.
41.
Into this wood often tym's she much delights
To chase the lofty heart and simple hynde
On her awaits Lords Princes Erl's and Knights
That loud her praised her serud her to her mind
Amongst the rest that with the Princes came
Prince Dorio was a Prince of noble fame.
42.
Betuixt tuo famous floods he holds the lands
Dravus the one Savas the uther heght
And Belgrad that on fair Danubius stand's
That mighty town belongs to him of right
This galant Prince should wed Vodina fair
And regne with her as sole and only heir.
43.
This mighty Giant whom you happily slew
The mighty Argolantes heght to name
Ore Misia he regn'd which they may rue
He when he hard of fair Vodinas fame
Send to the King and proudly him command's
To give his only daughter in his hands.
44.
Whom after he had seen perhaps he would
In marriage tak to be his laughfull wife
The King disdaind his pride and suit so bold.
And him refused the which began this strife
The Giant swor in pride disdain and skorne
Her would he have although the King had sworn^.
45.
Thus with ten Knights he in this kingdom came
And skornd with mo this kingdom to subdue
Who thought him self sufficient for the same
Such was his hope his pride his valor true
And knowing by his spyalls eury day
Of this our pastyme hunting sport and play.
46.
On us he come before we was awar
When heat within our tents made us reteir
Our Knights still wandered throw the forest far
Sum heir sum their to bring us in the Deir
Except sum on the Princes that attend's
Whom in short space he brought unto their ends,
47.
Then us poo^e souls he took unto his pray
We that could make no more defense but murn'd
Us with his Knights before he send away
Whil with our Knights he faught that hade returned
But much it feirs me al our Knights ar slain
Heaun's grant that sweit Prince Dorio yet remain.
48.
And this is al fair Sire that I can shoe
Which but your aid hade been more tragical
And if so pleas you would the Princes kno
To whom her thanks should randred be for all
Since to your aid your valor strength and might
Our lyfes our selfs and al belongs of right.
49.
Long mused the Prince and answer long delay'de
For ^oath he was his name should their be known'^
At last their Princes fair Vodina say'de
Whom all this time sadd silence hade over blown
On her new love her fancies new she fed
New thoughts new toys deuyses new that bred,
50.
If I presume or should this much be hold
With Maidens modesty for to dispense
Eu'ne to your courtasie of whom I hold
My life I will bequeath my roode offense
Whoes woundrous worth still Midas lyk is such
Pure gold to make of dross if you bot toutch.
51.
Then this my fault this boldness then forbeir
Tho for not else yet since I am a Maid
For thy blis'd name blisd natione to enquire
And that thryce happy soil wheir you west bred
Resolve me this which to thy worth adds more
More to my bands more to thy fame thy gloire.
52.
Not so Madame quod he theirs not in me
That merits from your lips to have a sound
Much les a praise yet if their onie be
You ar the sourse the root the spring the ground
From whence that virtue spring bud bear or grow
Such force have words if from your lips they flow,
52,
As for my name my natione soil or blood
In Thessalye neir Tempe's flowing fontanes
Vpone the banks of fair Peneas floode
Their was I borne betuixt to famous montanes
That Ossa and Olympus heght and so
From then Pelympus I, no more, I kno
63.
Thus whill be spak attentive was the Maid
To his sweit braith and his sweet voices sound
That peirsd her breast her hai^t and all affray'de
Each word a dairt each dairt a crewell wound
Each wound by force a deidlie poysione framme
A seiknes a diseas a quen'shles flamme.
55.
And whill she thu^ to him heir speak delights
Amid the bushes thick they heir a noyce
Of horses trampling and of armed Knights
Whi^l trembling fear bereft the Ladies joys
But lo the Prince his sword and shield prouyds
And suddanelie wheir was, the sound he ryds'.
56.
Wheir as he seis thrie Knights in armor bright
And in his wraith inquyres what they would have
From the those ladies said the formest knight
First said the Prince you their goodwill must crave
Yes Yes said he but for thy fault thy wrong,
Death thou deserves death you shall have or long.
57.
Who death so frilie geues and no thing wins
Pe^haps mey serve him self before another
For charity ay at it self begins
This said the Prence no answer made the other
But each began to thunder on the bloes
Valor alyk lyk strength lyk courage shoes.
58.
Yet that which harmed the Prince Pinardo mos^
The other tuo did also him assaill
But he whoes neuer-deing valor lost
No time, his deidlie blows began to daill
Do^ne to the breist the one he cleift in tuo
And heidles left the other at a bloe,
59.
His first Apailler feirslie forward ride
Tuo mighty bloes he gave him for his due
One cleift his shield the other pears'd his side
And at the third his sword in pecees flew
Whom at on bloe the Prince hade brought to death
But saw him with out a sword and calmed his wraith.
60.
But he that wants a sword did nimbly prease
To greip the Prince and bring him from his horse
Which he refuses not bot with a treace
Him in his mighty arms he strains by force
He beirs him to Vodina him presented
Who all this time the battle soir lamented.
61.
Yet knew she not those other Knights at all
Love hade her eyes so fixed vpone the Prince
The other Dams fled feared and fanting fall
But love stout hardy bold was her defense
And when the Prince presents to her the Knight
Ah stay quod she thy hand wraith ire and might.
62.
He is my friend and come to find me out
And to relieve me from the Giants thrall
Prince Doreo he heght strong hardy stout
Then my offense my wrong my fault and all
Quod he deserves death ah haist I blame
Haist cause of murning death repentance shame.
63.
Prince Doreo still amaizd dum sensles stood
Love and regaird stroaue with disgrace wraith shame
Wraith bad revenge revenge the others blood
Shame bad revenge disgrace, love said the same
Dismayed, amaiz'd, he staird and gaiz'd about
At last Vodina thus recald him out.
64.
Amaizment Dorio leave and leave to dream
Thank now this Knight whoes valor courage strenthe
Preserved my life my honor and my fame
The Gyaunt and his knights chastised at length
Whom to disgrace to death to shame he send
Thus he began what non but he could end.
65.
Love jealousy disdain hade kendled fire
Of wraith to heir his Mistres praise his foe
Yet cunningly he smudden in his ire
Till time place fate and fortune favor sho
Then quickly turning to the victor Knight
Thus said he sire I shame not by thy might.
66.
To beore cum, since fates hes the ordaind
Most happy and most fortunat of all
Nather do I accout my valor staind
Since Fortune the her Champione does call
Thryce happy thou and famous thryce for why
Thou art Vodinas friend her Seruand I.
67.
Be these his laittest words the Prince weell knew
Love was the only passione of his mind
Wheirat within him self he smyld yet show
Great coutesie for these his praises kind
Nor did he love nor feared he Riualls spoil
Such proud ambitione in his breist did boil.
68.
Then fordward on their way they still proceed
Till they oretack the Ladies that were fled
Whom heir and their in bushes hid for dreid
They find half dead with fear and terror led
Yet all with fair Vodina ford wart pas
To Buda wheir the King her father was,
69.
At last Apollo in the west discendit
And changed heauns goldin smyls to azure hew
When as their journey with his course was endit
Budas heighe tours they look they sie they view
Whoes gliftring splendour fyrie lightnings throws
Through glomie heauns so shynning Cynthia sho^^.
70.
Thus neir to fair Danubius they drew
Mean while swift fame hade tydinges borne of all
How that strainge Knight fearce Argalantes slew
And saved Vodinus shame disgrace and fall
Then from his kingly throne her father raise
And come to give him honor thanks and praise.
71.
They past that famous flood whoes silver stream
Disioyns tuo cities staitlie rich and fair
Buda the one Pesth is the others name
That on his banks heaune-threatning tops vprair
Lift up from earth as if in skies they stood
To view their glanceing beauties in the floode.
72.
Arryu'd wheir as the King did them abide
Vodina kneild before her royal Sire
And told him that brave Knight kneild by her side
That saved her lyif his honor croune empire
Them lifted up betuixt his arms the Roy
Both them he kissed and both embracd for joy.
73.
H'is led betuixt Vodina and the King
Unto their court proud staitlie rich and fair
Still praises new, new thanks new honors bring
Due for his woorthe and happy fortuns rair
And eurye day were new triumphs deuysd
That him to pleasur joy delight entysd.
Caput. XVI.
Argument.
VOdina shoes her love but He
Fayning base birth refusde
She kills her self and Doria him
As Murderer accusde
From prisone long hes brought at last
To burn, But heauns Revenger
A stranger fends that him redeems
And he Redeems the Stranger.
1.
WHill Prince Penardo heir unknown abyds
Under the title of Pelympus still
Inconstant fortune all her favor hyds
And turns her smylls to frouns her good to ill
O wordlie pomp: O glory vane: O fame
A waisting lamp A shadow and A dream.
2.
Long stayt he heir loved praist admeird of all
Of Dorio disdaind invy'd and feared
But poor Vodinas feidle was made thrall
By Ty^ane love* love sowed love reapt love eared
All place to her was loathsum day and night
Except the brave Lolympus were in sight*
3.
And whil she wakes his sight her love augment^
But often in sleip sad visiones frights her mind
In sleep he sad and frowning him presents
Unthankful coy disdainful proud unkind
And death in thousand forms he shows in hate
The presage true of her ensueing fate.
4.
When she awaks she calls him too unkind
Tears droune her eyes, and sighs o'reflowe her hair^
Yet often she wished that he hade known her mind,
Love bids her use some meins love to impairt:
But shame forbids her modesty to pas
Tuix Love and shame a crewell war their was.
5.
Shame says a simple Virgin and a Maid
Should chastely love and modestlye desire
And of audatious words should be afraid
From love propon'd should shune and thence retire
For Mayds that heir and forts that parley loud
Make both the lover and the foe grow prow'd.
6.
Much more if thou propone will he disdain
Thy want on forms and thy immodest love
The glorious name of Virgins shall thou stain
And Maydin hoode a heavy load shall prove
Love by refus all lives but profert dies
A woman conqueres love when love she flies
7.
But Love beguyl'd both Modesty and shame
And thus he said, A woman thou must be
O si^s thou not what stains a woman's Name
No thing so much as Haite and Cruelty
Nature has framd a woman's hairt to yield
And Courtesy and love to win the feeld,
8.
Sure he would speek if he were once assurde
Of such a Princes favor as thine own
His birthe too base thy match to have procurde
Or else long since his fancy hade you known
Tho base of birthe he beirs a Monarchs mind
Then do but spe^k or look and He Will be kind.
9.
What if some new occasion call him hence?
Then shall some other Princes win his hairt
May thou not once with modesty dispense
Before thy love and life be death should smairt
If health love ease and pleasur stays still
Vpone a word theyr'r fools that wants their will.
10.
What also if thy father the constrain
Prince Doreo to wed against thy will
For with a another does thy Hairt remane
Although before thou gave consent their till
Pelympus o Pelympus only He
The sight of Doreo were but death to ye,
11.
Haist then to tell Pelympus that thou loves
Else he goes hence and Doreo shall the wed
But o what if the Knight disdainful proves
O he will not disdain a Princes bed
Although thy beauty could not move his mind
Yet will the croune of Hungare make him kind.
12.
Thus on new Hope begyld with love she fed
Resolueing once for to unfold her mind
Thus argued she thus thought she in her bed
Whill Cynthia pale wan and dimly shynd
At last heauns get above the eastern streams
Oppins and day shoots forth his silver beams.
13.
With heauns bright silver hew the Dame op rose
When Phoebus beams did guild heaune earth and sea
She in a gardine did her self repose
Alone save love that boire her company
She thence her dames and Ladies all hade sent
Till on loves altar she poured forth her plaint.
14.
Then to ane quiet arbor she reteird
Wheir long she murn'd she sighd she plained she prayde
She honored love, love praised and love admeird,
For wheir abyds true luoe but in a maid:
Of^ she complaind that love hade done her wrong
At last she took her Lute and thus she song.
15.
The sensles snaik benouwd with Winters cold
With storm with frost with haill with snow with rain
If her for pity one inbreist should hold
Till cherisht life with heat return again
Then strength and life and Nature maks her bold
To reaue the life that did her life obtain
Of love this is the true similitude
O love the purtrat of ingratitude.
16.
When thou was dead in winters of disdain
And perished quyt in dark obliuions flood
I cherist the with travel cair and pain
And thy sad death my fyrie smylls with stood
But when my breist by heat did life obtain
Thou stingd my hairt and made my bosom bleid
Ah love how can a simple maid offend
That this her love should bring her life to end.
17.
Love brings despair despair brings death and hell
Some say that music often proud love withstoode
But o how can thy hairt in pleasure seall
When as thy very soul is dround in blood
Yet pray perhaps thy prayer mey love compel
But medit at tone is of pray're the food
And crewell love by meditation lives
Then eury thing Pelympus deir reviues
18.
Thus whill she plays thus will she sweitly sings
Throw empty aer the Queir of burds down fly
And spread a round their soft and daintye wings
To shrowed her whill she strains her nots on hye
And when they heir her voice her sound her noyes
Lyik hands they clap their wings; in sign of joys.
19
When she hade done about her heir and their
Some say her song and strain her tender throts
Some laurel leaus and myrtles sweit prepair
In their sharp beiks and then with merry nots
Upon her head they let the leaus down fall
And seem to croun the Virgin their with all.
20.
Others would sit and from their throats forth send
A woeful sund that seemd to move the skies
To pity her sad death and woeful end
Whil as the birds would strain such doolfull cries
As who would say ah love ah beauty murne
For her whoes death your day to night does turn.
21.
But all this time she mused vpone her love
Her love her joy her pleasure her delight
Pelympus brave whoes deids did matchles prove
Non liue'd like him in valor strength and might
Who walked abroad that day to tak the air
Whill fate heaune chance and fortune brought him thai^
22.
She seis him come throw bushes leaves and wands
Then lyk a mabre image up she stood
The Lute falls down betuixt her snow white hands
And her fair eyes power forth a silver floode
Lyk deaw on roses whyt and reid that falls
Or silver globs or pearl or cristall balls.
23.
To wake her from this dumpe he taks her hand
And whill he toutch'd she trembled quakd and shook
Now reid for shame then pale for fear she fand
How her fant heart his wounted room forsook
And vpwart fled from pain woe grief despite
True signs of suddane love or sad afright.
24.
At last the Prince her silence thus remoues
Some say that music does the mind delight
But lo Madame in you the contrare proves
Quod she in hell death horror and despite
Who lives melodious sounds at harmefull still
And still augments but never remeids their il.
25.
To the perhaps my words may seame un faitt
For basheful Mayd's or simple Virgins pure
And not agreing with my heighe estait
To sue for grace whene I should leiue secure
But o quod she if I indecent prove
Not I but shameless tyraneizing love.
26.
The ravening wolf, the simple lamb did catch,
Whom on he thought to fill, to feid, to prey,
When lo the princely lyone did him watch.
First him he slew, then brought the lamb away,
Tho once from death he did the lamb relief,
Afarr more crewel death he did it give,
27.
This wolf was Argalantes, I the lamb,
And thou the princilie lyone made me fre
When lo thine eyes more crewell bands' did framme
And band and chained and linked my hairt to the,
Ah deir Pelympus, deir, too deir, it fears me,
Love shame, fear, hait, in thousand peicees tears me,
28.
Thou stole my hairt out throw my besome pour,
But, o, sweit stelth, sw^it thief, I pardone the,
Mine eyes thou too^ and did their aid procure
And thus I helped to steill my self to the
Deip sob^, and tears, heir stayed her woeful speech
And with dumb signs his pity did beseech,
29.
But all this time the Prince looked down to ground
Rueth, reas^one, pity, woe, amaizement bred
Yet in his besome love no place hade found
But myldest pity hade so far him led,
That hardly he from yiedling was refraind
Yet thus he answers, and from love restraind,
30.
Madame (quod he) your luckles love I rue
And would it mend if with my life it stood
Too base my birthe fair Princes is for you
My worth too small to equaleize your blood
I will not hait and yet I most not love
Mars does my heart from Cupid far remove.
31.
Then drive those fond affections from your mind
Let your wise hairt calm love and leave secure
Love is, a, monster, furius* fer^ and blind
And I Am an errant Knight base woorthles poor^
I Will serve you still if you but love for beir
In joy in grief in confort hope in feir.
3^
Forbeir quod she and must I then forbeir?
O? mad misluck O? love O? chance O Fate!
O, love, O, torment great? O, grief? o fear!
O? plague of plagues! O, desperate deceat!
O sting, O deadly Poysione of the hairt
O hell of mighty mynds o death O smairt?
33.
Forbeir to love O, word of sad disgrace
The task begune by love must love not end?
Nature had framed the fair and sweet alace
But the a crewell Tigers mind did send
O crewell nature man* O man to crewell
To foul a blot to stain so fair a Jewel.
34.
And love forbeir alace that word forbeir
O sad decrie O sentence of my death
O torment of my soul, from verteus spheir
Could such disdane and loath sum hait tak breath
Thou loves to live in scorn of love and me
I live to love, and looth'd, for love must die.
35.
And now alace the hour approached nigh
When her sweet life that sweet hold must leave
She draws a knyfe which hang low be her thie
And tuix her breist's a flood-gat up she reaue
Wheir pity love and beauty long with stood
The fatal knyfe the life the vital blood.
36.
From him she turned her face and did this fact
Then turns and says without, a shrink or pain
Receive this solemn sacrafeize I make
Vpone the altar of thy heighe disdain
Deir sweet receive my hairt my life my love
My Virgin soul, Fairweell I must remove.
37.
And now the star light of her eyes grew dim
Her fair sweet face vpone her shoulder fell
In her paill looks sad pity looked on him
Her trembling kneis grew weak and down she fell
Lyik ane fair flower pure beautiful and young
By frost new slain youth had but newly sprung
38.
^une as discolored opell's change and turn
The white now wan now pale heir reid their blew
Her louelye white grew pale and seemed to murne
The reid in spot's did change to azure hew
The Sune grew dim and smylling heavens did lou^
The cloud's did murne and floods of tears down power.
39.
The Prince that saw both life and soul was gone
His mighty mind began for to relent
His sight his speech his sense him left a none
Woe sorrow cair grief sadness discontent
His life and breath closed in his hairt withal
Pale cold and dead he on her breist did fall.
40.
Thou lies Penardo dead vpoune the ground
Whom myghtie armies could not overthrow
Nor loss of blood nor many grievous wound
Could make the shrink or fly or yield or bow
Although she dyed for love and for thy hait
Yet should thou not be blamed bot crewell fate.
41.
But Fortune would extinguish and put out
His shynning lamp of conquest prais and fame
For Doreo that long hade sought them out
With iclousie and love despite and shame
Was thither led whene he this sight did view
Both joy and grief despair and hait ensue.
42.
Joyful he was to sie Pelympus dead
But deadly woeful for his mistres deir
Tuix contrar passiones finds he no remead
At last revenge on his dead corpse he sweir
That wheir before he was renound and praisde
His infamy to heaune should now be raised.
43.
The fatal knyfe which in her breast he spyed
He pulls away and putt's into the place
The Princes dagger, then alowd he eryede
Ah treassone tresson ah woe woe alace
Whoes d^eidfull noyes th^ow all the palace ring's
And thither Lords Knights Earls and Barons brings.
44.
When they had hard and sein this woeful sight
Their come the King the Queen the Ladies all
Great was their cair their angwish their despite
They weep they murne they sigh they cry they call
That roks wodes montanes sound forth sad despair
Whoes Echos fill the earth and empty aer.
45.
Yet some more ware and wise perseauit the Prince
No^ dead but fallen a soune the which thy tell
In chains in cord's in gyues they brought him thence
Unto a dungeone deep and dark lyk Hell
When he reveiu'd and fand him self in chains
He woundred much at last he thus complains.
Penardo his complaint.
WHat? do I live quod He
And speek and sie and breath*
Whoes damned soul the heaun's abhors
And ^kornes to give me death
And of that guer done due
For sin^ they me depryue
Till I should daily leiue and die
Ten thousand deaths a live
Come death teir forth my hairt
My too too crewell hairt
That of my love more then deserved
Did skorne she should have pair
But death sense thou art used
Poor virgins lyfes to tak
Thou pities so to ease my pain
Since hell abhors my fact
You fearful monstres all
You feends you furies felt
You Centaurs Harpy's Hydra's foull
You Gorgons grim of Hell
Come Plutos damned Ghosts
Come all since death delays
With legiouns of your greislie troops
I Will feght and end my days
But o you fear to veiu
worse then your selfs can be
Mo torments in my soul abyds
Then you in Hell can see
Fa'ine would I fly my self
Because my self I fear
For still my self within my self
A thousand Hell^ does beir
But wheir o wheir is she
Wheir is that Angel fair
With whom abod al grace al good
Al love al beauty rair
Ah thryce unhappy Me
Ah my disdane had pow're
To reaue the Heaun's their Darling deir
And earth her fairest flour
My haples sloth before
Bereft a Virgi^^ breath
And now disdane my mad disdane
Ane other brought to death
Why stay't I not alace
With fair Philena still
She would have given me due reward
And hade preueind this ill
O fantasyes! O dreams!
O foolish visiones! O
Why gave I credit unto you
That twyce hes wroght my woe?
But woeful monstre I
Of luckles love alace
That still must leiue in endless pain
Least death my sorrows chase.
46.
Thus in this agoneizing grief he lay
Long in this doungeone filthy deep and dark
Fast bound in chains nor saw he sight of day
And still bewaild his life his chance his wrak
And this his murning woe grief sorrow care
Turned unto madness often and often despair.
47.
But all this time great woe great pain great grief
Prince Doreo took for his deir Ladies death
And still his mind was bent on heighe mischief
He sought revenge with fury raige and wraith
For in his craft his malice his despite
This vicious wrong he wrought that valiant Knight.
48.
Whill to this gardyne I did walk (he said)
I hard a sound a voice a call a cry
Ah Heauns preserve me let me die a Maid
Thither I ran but when I come hard by
The Murderer me saw and faind he fainted
And fell as life breath sense and soul he wanted,
49.
I little caird his feir his fate his fall
But to the Lady rann whom soon I knew
I cried and in my woeful airmes withal
I took her up but gone was her fair hew
I called her once onee looked she in my face
Once spak this word ah woeful word ALACE.
50.
Into her fair and yuorie breist abaid
The instrument of that fearce tyranes wraith
I pulled it furthe and their with all she said
Thou come to lait for to prevent my death
Her hand I got fairweell she would have said
Wheirof but ( fair) her laister breath furth-layde,
51.
These speeches spak Prince Doreo and with all
So woe begone and sorrowful he sem'd
Often stopd by sighs and often would tears down fall
That eury one him praised and much esteemed
And then the King in wraith revenge and ire
Commands Pelympus should be brint in fy^e.
52.
The night before this woeful Prince should dye
For her he murnes on her he calls he cries
So does the lap-wing when some Sheiphird by
Her brood bereaues all day all night she flies
And weips and calls Yet sleips or night be past
So weeps the Prince and so he sl^eps at last.
53.
And in his sleep the Angel did appeir
That wairn'd him from Philena for to fly
And looked on him with fearce and angry cheir
Saying Penardo O Penardo sie
Jove's wraith prononced if thou not soon repent
Thy wicked thoughts thy words and thy complain^.
54.
Thou do refuse his help his grace his aid
Thou still rebels against mighty Jove's decree
Thy grief at Hells wide mouth thy Soul has laid
O wrarche O man from sin refrain or die
O sie behold thy plaints and Jove's heighe wraith
Leids the to pain to hell to endless death.
55.
Thy visiones come from heauns and not from hell
Why temps thou then heighe heaune with plaints and tears
He hes decreit what e're to the befell
Do then what he ordains leave greifs and fears
Eune of thy good he maks thy self the meins
But thou his goodness grace and love preueins.
56.
Vodinas blood on her own head shall fall
A just rewaird for her unjust desire
For her own sin and her fore fathers all
That race in her must end their proud empire
Nor in thy love no intrest hade ye Dame
Ane other of more worth shall win the same
57.
Who shall preserve thy life ere it belong
Fly not heauns joy heauns peace but heaune obey
This said his face lyk lightning beam's ou^ flong
That filled the house with glorius glistring ray
Which done the Angel thence him self convoye^
And left him filled with conforts hops and joys.
58
Then joyful he awaks and watis the hour
Of life or death as mighty Jove thought meit
No plaints but prayers did the Prince furthe power
Vpone the altar of repentance sweitt
And still he sighd he murn'd he plaind he prayde
To God for grace for help relief and ayd^.
59
Now come the time wheirin this crewell King
Would execute his vengeance on the Knight
Forth to be brint with fire they did him bring
When lo a wearyour bold approcht their sight
In airmour cled it seemed dreid war he brought
He finds the King whom throw the thronge he sough^
60.
And said Sir King perhaps my comeing may
Dismay you much yet i will the truth unfold
And what my guilty conscience bids me say
That none you wrong as now it seems you would
I beir the hand that wrought your Daughters fate
Yone Knight to save her came, but came too laitt.
61.
Fearce Argalantes was my uncle deir
Whoes blood for to revenge, I thither ca^
Long waited I into this forest neir
That yoynes unto your Park your Gardines fram^
And disper at my wished revenge to work
At last into thai gardine did I lurk.
62.
When bright Apollo gilted had the sky
Vodina by misfortune come within
The arbor wheir I secreitlie did ly
And would have fled agane but could not win
I took her would have forcd her against her will
But she dny't whom I in raige did kill.
63.
Her laittest groans yone Knight whom kill you would
Hade hard and come to sie I fled be twein
The Parks and Gardenes to the forest old
The way I come unhard vnmarkd unseen
Ever since within the forest did I stray
Nor out from thence could ever find the way.
64.
And still her ghost unto me does repair
And still presents Hells torments to my mind
And still the greislie feinds throw trubled aer
Sounds furthe the pains my woeful soul should find
In thousand forms her murdered ghost before me
Appeirs; and hell still gaipes for to deuore Me.
65.
This day agane she did her self present
Commanding me to the the truth to sho
Ane other giltles life for to prevent
Else I tormented should in endless woe
This is the cause that I my death desyir
Then set him fry and leid me to the fire.
66.
All that this warryour hard were much amaizd
And looked and mus'de and gaizd and silent stood
Thought pity in the King was never raised
Yet shamed he was to wronged a Knight so good
And causd to lowse unbind and set him fry
And armor horse and all restoird to be.
67.
How soon his horse and armor he receaud
They charged him to depairt the court and fly
But nobly for to dye was all he craved
For to revenge his wrong his infamy
Yet knew not who with death his life would by
But also sweir him to relieve or die,
68.
Whom they had tied with cords and with a chain
Had bound him to a staik his armor on
So he de^yrt and so he did obtain
In armor thus to burn and burn a lone
O kyndnes true that fear of death remove
O praise O virtue great o wondrous love.
69.
To sie that sight amaizd Penardo stood
His breist begane to swell with raige w^aith ire
Pity drew from his eyes of tears a floode
Wraith pity helped, pity blew angers fire
And thus his wraith his pity ire and woe
Brought Suddane war and suddane conquest lo,
70.
Heir love heir proud ambitioune manned the field
And still contend's who most gouerns the mind
Love caused the stranger to the fire to yield
Eune love of Prince Penardo most unkind
Who rewld by proud ambitione skornd to be
Ore matchd in ought and cheiflie courtesye.
71,
He feghts alone amongst a thousand foes
And all of them defyes and overthrew
All whom he fand; to ground with mighty bloes
And still his wraith still his revenge renew
Nor gave them leave to pray to plain to call
Such haist he made to kill to murder all.
72,
Some at his dreidfull angry look aff^ay'd
Fled heir and their and some in heaps down fell
Those that withstoode slain on the earth were laid
And those who leaving could not him repel
With their dead bodies raised a wall a none
And thus gainstoode when other means were gone.
73.
But he but ledder skalled or engyne
Martchd proudly over those walls and fortres strong
And would display his shield for ansigne fine
And toss his flamming sword his foes among
Till he unto that dreedfull fire was come
Some feared some fell all fled to give him room.
74.
That amorous Knight that to the staik was tied
B^holding his strainge deads and wonders strainge
Brek all his bands and through the fire he hyed
Whoes threatening sword did thrist for dreid revenge
Not that he cair'd his life or feared ye fire
But for to aid or d^e was his desire.
75.
Be this the King Prince Doreo hade sent
With him his guarde for to chasteize their pride
Him self reteir'd that mischeef to prevent
He feared some secreitt treasone their t'abyde
This armed band and Doreo now assaild
These warryours stout but nothing yet preuaild.
76.
More deadly then more crewell grew the fray
The Prince and his Companione bak to bak
Such valor show such wounders wrought that day
And with such courage did such hauok make
As Eggles Haulks or ravening Wolfs that rear
The simple sheep or silly fowls that fear.
77.
Those warryours tuo stout hardy fearce and bold
Would thus assuage their hunger quensh their thrist
With bodies dead in gorie blood inrold
Great was the valor of the stranger first
That sharp revenge and vengeance sharp ordain
Ilk blow a wound eatch wound death vo and pain.
78.
Those Champions disseuered were again
Each one with warrelyk troops besett a round
And strove to tak them both but all in vain
They beat them back and kill and fell to ground
Whose a^me straitcht furthe to tak them first would enter
He seis cut of and darrs no further venture.
81.
Penardo still those forces new assaild
Whom he with strenth and might still overthrew
And lykwayes still the stranger Knight preuaild
But Doreo the Prince hi^ strenth weel knew
And theirfore to the stranger Knight he haisted
On him both ire and honor to have faisted.
82.
That galant stranger matchles for his woorthe
Met him amid the reid blood flowing plain
And raige blood war and murder b^eathed furthe
Eatche other strongly hits and hitts agane
At last the stranger's airme alost he bore
And Doreo's heid he brak he clift he tore.
83.
Dreid horror fear and terror of the sight
Made all to feir to tremble and to quak
Conquest once smeld by that brave stranger Knigh^
The Squadrones ranks and bands he roodly brak
Wholl trops to earth he brings he beats he beirs
So winds brinks down the corn and rypned eer's.
84.
As children make in pastym sport and play
Ane spaill to waft to role to toss to fly
About their heid quick speedy nimble lay
That of one thundering spaile it seems thrie
So seemd the strangers sword whoes deids thy thought
Strainge wonderful incredible were wrought
85.
Thi^ ramping lyoune sought Penardo out
And fand him in the mids of all his foes
Whom strong and valiant hardy bold and stout
The heaps of murdered bodies did enclose
So irk't he was and weary their with all
Tho still he faught yet reddie still to fall,
86.
Their Deaths sad court deaths palace their abode
Their tropheis were erect'd unto his name
Their lukwa^me blood did smook and flow abroad
The stranger stood amaizd to sie the same
And softly said O valors only stoir
Whence comes his wealth of conquest fame and gloir.
87.
Now Phoebus from his glorious carre down lies
In Neptuns azure palace whill sad night
A rose maskd up and cled in dreidfull gyis
With fearful shad's of darkness and affright
The worthy stranger to Penardo haisted
And dealt so many deaths till Death was waisted.
88.
But lo the tumulte munting in the are
would pers, ye clouds with plents and vofull sounds
Men women bairnes with fury raige despair
Revenge and vengeans call's till heaune resounds
Now was their danger greatter then before
Thou^ands by heaps almost to earth them bore.
89.
Yet heaun's decried their savetie thus inteir
Bl^k night over all the earth spread forth her vai^
And such a fearful darkness did appeir
It seemed their was no darkness left in hell
With hands they grap't they wander and they stray
So does the blind alone that los't the way,
90.
And thus confused now heir now their they rine
Penardos friend thus to him said but dreid
Sheath now thy sword leave heir thy shield and win
Out throw this lawles multitude with speid
I Will gvde the to the forest heir but stay
Why then I go quod he show you the way
91.
Thus throw the throng unseen vnmark't unknown
They march alone but feir but cair but dreid
Nor was their feirles flight to any showen
But saiflie to the forest come with speid
Wheir in a grove hard by a fontane side
They rest whill light for saifer flight p^ouyde.
Caput. XVII.
Arg^ment.
THe stranger Prince Penardo knoes
Of whom he does reioy's
Who tellis him many woundrous thing's
At last they heir a noyes
The Queen of Macedon they sie
Led by them as they thought
Falls Ar^bo beguyls the Prince
Whom long the stranger sought.
1.
WHen Budans could not thus attain revenge
Of that disgrace and shame was to them wrought
With noyes confused sad shout's and murmur strainge
The slain and murdered bodies home they brought
And to this day Penardo's thought so wyld
That with yat name they still yair weeping child,
^.
Whill they in woeful murning pas the night
Penardo in the forest did remain
With his true friend his unacquainted Knight
That for him took more th^n a freindlie pain
No wounds they hade but wearyed whill they la^
Hard b^ the sounding stream and longd for day,
3.
The Prince said thus since heaun's ar pleased with thise
That I must live who looked for naught but death
Most worthy Knight think not I do amise
To kno of whoes brave mind I hold my breath
And unto whom my indeuores and al
My life my thought my se^uice should be thrall.
4.
Or if the heaun's has sent you to my aid
Since none but heauns my innocence heth known^
Vodinas death was falsely on me laid
Which Jove this day has of his mercy shown
Nor my request because too lait you shune it
Long since if time hade served would I have done i^.
5.
Then quod the other, Prince Penardo kno
I am that maid whom thou redeemed from death
From pain from hell from everlasting woe
From Mansays mighty charms his craft his wraith
Eu'ne I that same Laissa whom throw fred
First from the flamme last from the sleipping bed.
6.
Her words at once bred wounder and delight
Yet in his hairt there could no credit find
Till of she took her eask of sylver white
Then bleiz'st her eyes her, looks lyik lightning shyn'd
Her shining hair about her face down flies
Through which bright vale like stars appear her eyes,
7.
As when the Sun^ throw yealow glase does shine
On alabastre toumbs pure cleir and whyt
With small and pretty goldin streams deuyne
Seems trembling on the stone to tak delight
Of that whyt object decked with cristall rocks
On ^er fair face so shynd her goldin lock's.
8.
Although the night was dark he might behold
Her eyes lyk glanceing comets blaizing far
Or dyamonts in whyt enameld gold
Penardo thou whoes hairt from dreidfull war
Could not be thrald to womanizing love
How thanks thou now this passion for to p^oue
9.
Wheiron now thinks thou wheiron does thou gaize
The same is she whoes lovely self thou saw
Within the sleipping toumbe and could not raise
Nor from enchaunted sleep her senses draw
Whoes bright Idea wanders throw thy mind
Yet can no resting place for love out find.
10.
When thoughts assurde him she the same must be
O^t times he thanks the heaun's for her ^eleef
Has heaun'e fate fo^tune smyld agane quod he
And ar thou now suffe^s'd with my mischief
Heighe Jove his sacred help and aid up steirs
When d^unger most most harm most wrack appeirs.
11.
And fair Madame quod he yours is my name
My life m^ service and my all is yours
You^'s be the praise the honor glory fame
Yours be my deads my acts my happy hour'^
Yours is my lyife by right me shall you have
To be your knight your servant and your slave.
12.
The varient stuf that alter change and turn
Wrought of discolored silk soft subtle cleir
Heir l^^lie white their crimsone reid does burn
Now mingle both and now does red appeir
So she that heirs him turn's and changes so
Heir reid their whyt and then all reid does sho.
13.
Sweit were the sounds that from his lips proceid
Which pearst her tender breist and gentle hairt
Wheiron her old-bred love and fancy feid
Renewes the flamme first in her mind insert
For first she fell in love with him when as
Enchanted sitting in the toumbe she was.
14.
And ever since in love hade she remaind
Far hade she gone far sought to find him out
Till providence of hyer powers ordaind
She should of his sad death remove the doubt
For Cupid of his deads a chain did f^amme
That captive led this fair and amorous damme
15.
Thus whill she gaisd long on his countenance
A modest smyle for answer he received
Often would her eyes steil forth a secreit glance
If not for shame a kiss she would have craved
Each pairt she vew'd she loud she praised with smylling
Such craft can lovers use them selfs beguylling.
16.
From secreit pleasurs and from hid delight
From gaizing thus at length the Prince awaks her
To pas away the long and weary night
With courts speiche and prayers fair he maks her
To tell her life her inuirye her wrong
Her fore past labors and her trauells long.
17.
First then she raised her myld and modest eyes
And cleir'd her countenance with heaunely grace
A fyrie smyle sweit pleasant glade furthe flies
That chased the clouds of cai^ and greifs apace
While beauty of her foreheid made a throne
And sat their to be gaiz'd and woundred on.
18.
My Lord quoth she to show my woeful life
Would tedious prove and never have ane end
For heavens and fortune seime to be at strife
Which should against me most their forces bend
Yet shaell you kno the Muses crewell hairted
And what befell to me since you departed.
19.
My Parents friends nor blood I do not kno
Nor of what house or line I am discendit
Nor of my woeful birth I can not sho
But skairslie well thrie lusters yet ar endit
Since swadled by the Heliconian fontane
The Muses fand me on that pleasant montane.
20.
They brought me up within that holy mont
Taught me their holy reitts and sacred art
One day (a woeful day) as I was wount
When I hade chased the Stage ye Hynd ye Heart
In there swit spring to bath I took delight
Which was my ground of woe grief cair despite.
21.
The Muses for that cause I do not kno
But that was all the fault they did pretend
Left me bereft me and decreid my woe
And by their Pow're deuyne did thither send
Two Knights my love to win to sue to pray
And Riualls both each one did other stay.
22.
Then Mansay did his charms and spirits send
Enchaunting them and me as you have seen
Which by your might and valor brought to end
And you to let when as he saw no meine
Me in the sleipping toumbe he did enchaunt
That saw you knew you tho my speech did want.
23
When from the rook you took the sword and shield
Then from my pain and prisone you redem'd me
I cried I called I sought you throu the field
But Mansay that some better then esteemed me
Appeird to me and told me you ver gone
Which made me weet my cheeks and sigh and moan.
24.
The Wizard then from murning me refrainde
And told me you should saif return again
For you pain cair and sorrow was ordaind
Whair throw you must to glory great attain
So heavens decreit and so you must obey
Thus said throw shaiples aer he went away.
25
His words renewd but somewhat easd my grief
Still on I went over craigs and montanes hoar
But hope but hap but help or but releif
The wraith of heaune, never satisfiet the more
And to augment my cair my woe my strife
I lived this base this poor this serueill life
26.
It was my chance when I had traueld long
In forests wide some sheipherds for to find
Whoes life content secure from fortuns wrong
Would fite my cursd and haitfull days to end
Wheir long I served in poor and mein degrie
Refusde no pain whill pain refusde not me
27.
But Fortun still invying my estait
And skorning this my blist tho poor content
Disdaning so I should eskape her hait
Not suffering death my shame woe grief prevent
Nor pitted she my woe my cair my grief
But pitied I should thus eshew mischief.
28.
One day as I my shaggie flock forth dreane
From fold to grove to medewe and to plain
Evandone Prince of Ephyre did persaue
Within whoes land thoes shipherds all remain
By chance from sporthe com and me esteemed.
More beautiful then in effect I seemed.
29.
And thither often in tyms he did resort
To thrall me chaste desire unto his will
But I still cloyde with cairs and vod of sport
Denyit his suit and preisd to shune his ill
But all in vain my travel was for naught
Me against my will unto his court he brought.
30
Ane youth he was unmarried I confess
And on my head would set his diadem
But I whoes hairt ane other did posses
This spak the dame vnwarrs and bushd for shame
And thus she turned her speech, from whom all love
My cair my grief my sorrow did remove.
31.
When he perceaud my resolutione strong
Un moud nor vows, nor prayers could preuaill
He neids would have by force dispight and wrong
What he could not obtain by louet' assaill
And long he mewed me up from days sweet light
In prisone dark in voes eternal night.
32.
Nor could these wrongs his cruelty suffeize
Nor could he pity puire unhappy me
But in the sight of all the Peoples eyes
He would bereave my spotles chastity
Nor could words prayers sighs or tears him move
To leave so foull so vyld so filthy love.
33.
His vicious mind so odious had him made
That all his Lords and people him detested
Then would he have me bound vpone a bed
When on my kneis this one thing I requested
He would not suffer Rascals bind or bow me
But his own hands yat honor would allow me.
34.
Wheirto he yields and I resolve to die
Then called I thryce on sweit Penardos Name
Thus twyce vnwarrs her passion forth did fly
Twyce she her love bewrayd and tuyce thought shame
O love true love for speeks she or be mute
Her blushe looks smyls or word bewrayt her suit.
35.
Yet love to hyde that had so often burst out
Her eyes tuixt wraith and shame ^old brint and shynd
At last this she excuse she casts about
Quod she Thine aid would their have pleased my mind
I wished the when the Tyrane did aspyre
To act his filthy foull and vile desire.
36.
His dagger then I quickly pulled a pair
And ere he could him self of me releef
I stobd his love but with his love his heart
Wheir with the people cried O sad mischeef
Some in a raige me fouriouslie assayld
But with the greatter pairt my pairt preuaild.
37.
And thus begane a fearce and crewell feght
On at her side were killed hurt brusd or slain
I pitied for my cause my deid my right
They murdered thus should masacred remane
Wheirfor with gentle speech and pleasant words
I both appeased their wraith and sheathd their swords.
38
When they be thought them on the Tyrans deids
His murders great when they to mind did call
They praised heighe Jove from whom there help proceid^
To me they gave yair kingdom croun and all
Which long for to enjoy I could not stay
Whom angry fates and fortune called away.
39.
I vowed yat' rest my body should not find
Till I my country friends and parents kn^
A governor their left I me behind
Then forward on my journey did I go
Long traueld I and money dangers past
Till in this forest I arryud at last.
40.
Wheir whill I lay my weary lims to rest
Beneth the vmbrege of a spredding B^eche
A virgin Nymphish lyk attyrt and dressed
Presents to me this armor with this speech
Arise Laissa now the time draws neir
Wherein thou must a knight no maid appeir.
41.
Mansay the send this armor sword and shield
And their with bids the go to Buda straight
Wheirby thy Fortune Heauns shall to ye yield
By cunning slight by force and dreidfull feght
Thou must that Knight from fire from death detain
That the releeud from fire from blood from pain.
42.
As for thy Parents this he letts ye kno
Thou art sole Heir unto a mighty King
Which tym and fate, and fortun shall ye sho
And end to all thy grief cair sorrow bring
But kno thy hart's delight and greattest joy
Shall be the greattest cause of thy annoy.
43.
This said the Nymphe through shaples aer does glyd
I fond my self well armed on every pairt
And forduart fast my spedie steps I hy'd
Me thought some fear assailt my pancing hairt
Some fear of fortune ill mishap mischeef
Wheirat I tremblit shouk and quakt for grief.
44.
Whill thus I go tuix dreid woe hope and fear
I met By happy chance a Palmer old
Who did the matter all to me dcelair
And how you slew stout A^galantes bold
And tho your name was changed yet weell I knew
Your deads your valor show me it was you
45.
Then Argalantes Nephoy feigned I me
To make you fry non other mein I saw
And to revel to you for you I die
Then knew I weell you all the treuth would shaw
So should you die I leiue for to be sorry
That Earths object was saift and lost her glory.
46.
By this heaun's light Earths confort Darkness foe
From our horisone Night did wairn to pas
And like transparent cristall gave to sho
The hemisphere or lyk bright azure glass
Or lyk a demi-syluer-globe it lies
Vpone the earth earth seems to beir the skye^
47.
No sooner days fair coach man did appeir
When as their talk was interrupt and stayit
A noyes of horse and chariots they did heir
And suddanly they roise as half affrayit
Whill as the sound drew neir they did espy
Some threttie Knights that gallopt softly by,
48.
And round about a coatche they seemd to ride
That four whyt fair and galant coursers drew
In which a lady sat who^s beauties pride
Seemd to contend with bright Apollos hew
Yet throw her beauty looked furthe proud disdain
That show her mind displeasure did contain.
49.
Her crimsone cheek leandon her snow white hand
Her eyes Loves fyrie Comets seemed With child
With tears which woe and anger did command.
And raind down Tempest from her face so myld
On her fair breist lyk diamants whoes rainge
Fyr't by her eyis in thousand colors cheange.
50.
Or like the rory deaw in May that lies
One snow white lilies and on purple roses
So stands the Nectar drops stild from her eyes
Vpone her rosy cheeks sweit beauties poses
She breathed sweit balm whoes odore physic prove
To purge gross sense and sharp dull wits for love.
51.
And war^one Cupid dalieed in her lap
Snatching the cristall balls still as they fall
And at Penardo throws, him to entrap
Too weell that crafty Cupid knew with all
How to revenge Penardos former wrong
Which woefully he acted now ere long.
52.
O thou Penardo brave Penardo thou
What do thou think or whei^ on do you gaize
Heth love over cum the, has one made the bow
Whoes hand over airmyes got the conquiring prais^
But O what hairt so hard or strong to keep
But yeeld's to love when beauty list to weep.
53.
And whill he stood in this amaize he seis
A simple Groom vpone a galant-horse
Who cries and sighs and weeps with watrie eyes
And follows still the ^raine with great remorce
At him he would enquire and run's a paee
Who in few words thus answred him Alace.
54.
Sire Knight if ere true pity pears'd your hair^
Or if the vow of knight hoode you obey
Relieve my Dame and ease her woeful smair^
By cruel tyranes reft and brought away
Tak this my horse and stay my Ladies flight
Thryce happy I if this succeid a right
55.
The haples Prince no questione more would crave
But taks the horse and after them he ryd's
The wicked Groom that did him so deceive
Was not a Groom but in that shape abyds
Falls Arebo so full of all disceat
That sought his death and fall of his estate
56.
For when the Prince eskeap't Philenas train
Wairn'd be the Angel when he fled by nigh^
She would have murdered him for his disdain
But finding he hade saved him self by flight
With Arebo consults for her revenge
Who hade deuys'd this train fearce crewell strange.
67.
This galant Lady whom the Prince had sein
Was fair Olinda whom the fares ordaind
Fair crewell chaste and of all hearts the Queen
Love bowed to her but she all love disdaind
Ore Macedon she regn'd whoes shaip by airt
The wisard fraim'd to work Penardos smairt.
58.
Laissa often requirde the Prince to stay
Ti^l she with him the quarrel hade embraced,
But he impatient of all delay
Told herd he would return agane in haist
Yi^ love made her unfit to follow fast
Till wandering far she lost the way at last.
59.
And wearied with her heavy armours weight
Dround in displeasure sorrows greifs and harms
She traueld till the dark and dreid full night
In folds the world within her lazy airmes
Then rest's she by a font* bevaills her state
Her luck, her chance, her fortune, and her fate.
FINIS.
Heir ends the first book of the famous History of PENARDO and LAISSA.
To the Author.
NAture and art contending which should prove
Most favored of the muses did ordain
Old Orphaeus their Judge who brought his love
From Plutoes kingdom and from hellish pain
But he excused him self his works were torn
And with, times rusly Canker clean outuorne.
Yet Said that he would wish them to ane other
Whoes lines could weall decyd their wrangling stryff
And so thy brave Penardo did discover
Wheirby aste seemed to be bereaft of lyff
Whilst thou her conqur'our to thy greater grace
Makst art to nature euin in art give place.
Then since thu'rt arts Controler, natures Child,
Stird up by virtue to encreass thy fame
Leave not Layssa thus from love exyld
For save thy self non dare attempt the same
And as thou do in us sweet thoghts Inspyre
So go thou one and we shall still admyte.

