DEO and ECCLESIAE D. D.

THE ANATOMY OF ANANIAS: OR, Gods Censure against Sacri ledge. WITH A BREIFE
SCHOLIE UPON Psalm. 83. concerning the same subject.

By ROGER GOSTVVYKE Batchelour of Diui nitie, and Minister of Sampford Courtnie
in the County of Deuonsh.

Negligere quid de se suaque causa [fiat] praesertim cum id eiusmodisit, vt in
eo Dei maiestas violetur, hominum est dissolutorum and ad iniuriam diuini
nominis secure atque impie conniuentium.

Iuel. apol. PRINTED BY CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge.

1616.

TO THE MOST Rev. Father in God, GEORGE, by Divine providence Archbishop of
CANTERBVRIE; Primate and Metropolitan of all England: All saving graces. *
PLEASES IT YOUR GRACE: There have been two arch-enemies that have ever
molested the Church in her periods of peace; the Heretic, and the Atheist.
The first in matters of verity, obducing a cloud, and spreading a curtain of
ignorance and error, before the eyes of Gods people: the latter in things of
piety, withdrawing the cloud, and opening the veil of majesty and honor, to
every vulgar both hand and eye. Concerning the first, as requiring more of the
head, I leave to those learned pens and selected soldiers, whom God has
endowed with greater measure of understanding to fight his battles. But for the
second, that ask more of the heart, I presumed, with the poor widow in the
Gospel, to cast my mite into the donaries of God, to the use of the godly. A
subject I am well assured as necessary, as distasteful for these times: For
whether it be that gain has obturated men's ears, or guilt has obdurated
their hearts, I find abroad men much recalcitrant to this doctrine: yet how
needful it is to be touched, I report me to Christian hearts. But who am I,
that I should irritare crabrones; whose impudency notwithstanding, or
ignorance, or importunity, for so did such vermin signify in hyeroglophicall
learning, if they prove obstreperous, I most humbly crave your Grace to
protect me, if not from their buzzing, yet from their stinging. Whose height,
being placed in the Zenith of this hemisphere, albeit they cannot reach with
hands of injury; yet I fear me, they will not forbear to bark at with
hearts of envy. To your Grace therefore, in the behalf of all this Church, I
offer this simple Treatise: for whose vigilancie and indefatigablenesse, as we
thank the Lord; so we pray him for your long continuance, and happy sitting.

Your Graces most humble seruiter, R. G.

Ad Lectorem.
MIra legis quicunque legis portenta nefandi
Criminis, vt poenas sacrilega acta luant.
Vera legis quicunque legis tormenta nocentum:
Vt delinquentes ira superna premat.
Saepe fit vt sacrum cumuletur sanguine furtum
Saepe fit vt poenas culpa det illa nouas.
Quis non a domino proprium qui curat honorem
Cogitet haec fieri, nec repetendo tremat?
Discite mortales quid sit temerare sacrata
Discite raptrices hinc cohibere manus.
Ad Authorem.
AVse loqui commune nefas, furtumque Promothei,
Rapturas templis and prohibere manus.
Huic operi haud magnas ausim promittere lauds
Da veniam furtis, classicus author eris.
Tu tamen inuisum ne cesses prodere furem,
Qui and noceat scriptis sunt quia sacra tuis.
Laesa tamen nullos non sunt habitura legentes,
Si quis Sacrilegos oderit illa leget.
G. T.
ANte aras tutos prodit tua pagina fures
Prodit and ingenium, iudiciumque tuum.
Illi crimen habent, multisque habuere per annos,
Accusato^em non habuere prius.
At quia non illis, quia non tibi parcere nosti,
Inuitus lauds accipe and inuidiam.
M. C.
QVam facile and tutum est arras hinc fallere disces,
Non tamen hic artem sed scelus esse puta.
Hoc solum suadere pij mouere libelli
Noscere vt incipias non spoliare Deum.
Idem.
DVm loqueris quantum scelus est subducere sacris,
Quotque modis fieri praeda, quibusque solet.
Obstupui commune nefas, mirumque putaui,
Esse aliquid templis quod superesse solet.
At tu sancta Lauernatuos compesce clientes
Aut tu Jane tuas claude timore fores.
M. G.
ROdere Mome time, Dijs est sacer iste libellus,
Et Scriptor sacer est, rodere Mome time,
I. A.
The method and disposition.
Explitation in the Logical resolution. Cap. 1. Part. sin: genesis what:
sacrilege and blasphemy. 2. The Theological tractaction of the partic.
reprehension of the man, or Compellation. 3. matter, or Ennumeration. 4.
aggrauation. 5. censure, or curse of Excommunication. 6. whole Clergy, Papists
appropriations. Cap. 1. Part. 2* Puritans disclamations. 2. Laierie, Great men's
usurpations. 3. Application destructive against sacrilege in Townes-mens
exemptions. 4. part Parishioners compilations. 5. Patrons stipulations. 6.
Instructiue for the uses, Information of fear and care. Cap. 1. Part. 3.
Deploration of good men. 2. Exhortation, general, to all men. 3. special, to
the Parliament. 4. Consolation to the Clergy. 5. Conclusion of the cause and
cure. 6.

Deo and Ecclesiae. D. D. THE ANATOMY OF Ananias and Sapphiraes Sacrilege.
ACTS. 5. 1. Ver. 1.
BUT there was a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, that sold
a possession,

2
And kept back part of the price, and brought a certain [small] portion, and
laid it down at the Apostles feet, his wife also being privy thereunto.

3
Then said Peter, Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart, that thou should
lie to the holy Ghost, and keep back part of the price of the possession?

4
While it remained, was it not in thy power, and when it was sold, was it not
thine own? why have thou conceived this thing in thine heart? thou have not
lied unto man, but to God.

5
When Ananias heard these words, he fell down and gave up the Ghost, and
great fear came upon all them that heard these things.


CHAP. I.
The explication, first in the Logical resolution.
THE white horse that went out at the opening of the first seal, Revel. 6. 1.
whose rider had a bow and a crown, and made victorious Conquests, may seem to
be that suadae medulla, the power of the Spirit in the lips of the Apostles,
that so soon and suddenly wan such worlds of souls to the obedience of the
Gospel; whose confluence and concourse was not more conspicuous for the
company, then prodigious for the Unanimity: where Platoes idea of perfect
community, was really performed; and his excellent model of true Unanimity
was actually established. For here indeed was Cor vnum and anima vna: for
says S. Luke, Cap. 4 38.
The multitude of believers were of one heart and mind, in so much as there
was none that lacked: for such as were possessors of lands and houses sold
them, and laid down the prices at the Apostles feet, and distribution was
made according as every one did need. So did other: so did Ioses a Leuite, and
for that cause was happily of the Apostles surnamed Barnabas, or the son of
consolation, for comforting the hearts of the Church, who as yet were but
barely provided for, persecution being feared without, and penury felt within
her doors. But as he and other did beautify the religion with their devotion,
so there want not that blemish the same with their deep dissimulation.
Therefore S. Luke to illustrate the fact of the one, opposes ex diametro, the
fault of the other, as Chrysostom observes; to the end, the dissimulation of
Ananias may give a luster to the sincerity of Ioses, and show the world, that
there is a consolation in Christ, Phil (...)
a comfort of love, a fellowship of the Spirit, and bowels of mercy, though
profane men neither praise it, nor practice it. This the occasion.

Now here is set down a wicked combination of a man and his wife, in a matter
of Dedication, by themselves done to God and his Church, how to delude and
frustrate both: which counterfeit carriage, the great and holy Apostle, does
both descrie and discover, first to their conviction, secondly to their
confusion. Where first we may read the sin, and then the censure. The sin
is Sacrilege, that is, compilation or cousenage of things now consecrated to
God and holy uses. The censure is Excommunication, or distriction of the
spiritual sword, and that in the heauiest of all heavy curses. The sin is
set down first barely by Luke, by way of historical narration; the censure
inflicted by Peter, by Apostolical jurisdiction; the history is couched in
the two first verses, and comprise the efficients, material, and formal
causes. Ananias and his wife sold a possession, and kept back part of the
price, and brought (...), a certain quillet or quidditie, a thing of nothing
in comparison of the maine, a niggardly share; whereas they had promised the
whole, as Barnabas had done before, and they made show to imitate.

verse 3.
The censure follows; first, in reprehension; secondly, in castigation. The
reproof contains, 1. an accusation, v. 3. 2. a confutation. The accusation is
in the appellation of the offender, Ananias; and enumeration of the parts of
the offense, which are three; 1. The author by whose suggestion, Why has
Satan filled thine heart? where is also touched part of the form of the
offense. 2. The object against whom the sin was committed, including also the
other part of the form; That thou should lie to the holy Ghost. 3. The
subject wherein the matter of the sin consisted, And keep back part of the
price of the possession.

verse. 4.
The Confutation follows, and that is of three secret objections, answerable
to the heads of the accusation, but inuerting the order, as the manner of
Scripture is to do: to the last first.

Object. 1. A man may do with his own what he will; but this was mine: ergo.
To this the Apostle answers by letting pass the mayor, as being
impertinent, and denying the minor, with distinguishing upon the time: first
for time of possession* granting it, when it remained (unsold) remained it not
to thee? namely, the land: secondly, and for time of alienation yielding it,
and when it was sold, was it not in thine own power? namely the price:
thirdly, but for time of dedication, denying it strongly by interrogation, and
passing it over by a crypsis of method, as if all law and logic, all rule and
reason, did disavow it: for thou had no more right to the money now given,
then to the land now sold.

Object. 2. As to the author, he might say, if it were an offense, yet was it
not mine but Satan's, as your self avouch. To this he answers with a non
sequitur, though Satan's by temptation, yet yours also by approbation: he might
have as one notes, suadendi astu^iam, not cogendi potentiam, he might suggest,
he could not enforce: he was the founder, the woer, the father; thy heart was
the worker, the spouse, the mother: why have thou conceived this thing in thy
heart?

Object. 3. Well then, though a fault, and in some sort my fault also, yet no
such great fault as needed so sharp and public reproof; at the worst, being
but to a few simple men, that could challenge nothing of a free donation, and
might have received other satisfaction. Answ. Yes, your sin is not so much to
men, who are but the Assigns to whom the benefit of your donation should have
acrued, as unto God who is the donor; who by such fraud is frustrated, and by
your dodging dishonored: not only the father that foundeth his Church in his
Son, and the Son that collecteth it by his Spirit, but the holy Spirit that
sequestreth it by his power, sanctifies it with his grace, beautifieth it with
his gifts, combineth it with his love, preserves it by his providence, and
honors it with his truth: Thou have not lied unto man, but unto God: even
God the holy Ghost.

verse. 5.
This is the reprehension, the Castigation follows: when Ananias found himself
first thus deprehended in the darkness of his own deceit, like the fish
Sepia, that misteth her self in her own mud, and reprehended for the
blackness of his sin, by the wisdom of the Spirit, and peircing words of
the Apostle: and lastly, confuted in the simple Labyrinth of his own Logic,
it remains that he is confounded by the inward remorse of his covetous
conscience; and as at the hearing of his own funeral sermon, falls down dead
in the place, by the fulmination of the fearfullest anathema, anathema
maran-atha, a temporal consternation of the body, cut off from the grace of
life, and eternal malediction of the soul, deprived of the life of grace, an
exemplarie vengeance to other, a fearful judgment to himself, by a sad, a
sudden, and unrepentant death: not so much in form of words, as in the effect
of deeds; When Ananias heard these words, he fell down and gave up the ghost.

Lastly, the use of this curse annexed, what effect it should and did produce
to other: trepidation and fear, illustrated by the extent or quantity, both
of the affection, and the subject, or auditors; Great fear came upon all them
that heard these things. And thus much for the Context and analysis, or
logical resolution.

CHAP. II.
The Theological tractation. First, of his sin in general, how great it
was, and what.
COncerning his sin, that it should be proportionate to his punishment, all
do not agree; the most avouch that it was Sacrilege, none say it was less,
but some say more, as namely that sin unto death, the sin against the holy
Ghost. I think it was both. First, that his sin was Sacrilege, it is First,
Sacrilege.
too apparent to be gainesaid, as I am of opinion, although the learned Fulke
upon the Rhemish notes Fulke in locum.
seems to deny it, as I take, in heat of dispute. For the detaining or
detracting of any thing dedicated to holy use, though dedicated but by mental
intention, has been defined to be sacrilege, by such as have defined that
sin; and so the stream of ancient and modern Divines does run generally
that way: as thus, S. Augustine, De verbis Apost.
Ideo cito mortuus est Ananias, vt paterit quam magnum peccatum esset, quod
oblatum est iterum retrahere: Ananias died suddenly, to show how heinous a
sin it is, to revoke anything that is offered or dedicated to God.
Chrysostom, in locum.
Vides quid hoc crimen imputatur, eo quod pecunias suas accepit quas
consecrarat: thou see how he is charged with a crime for taking away his
moneys which he had consecrated or hallowed. And a little after, Sacrilegium
enim valde grave and magno contemptu plenum: for sacrilege is a very grievous
sin, and full of great contempt. S. Ambrose, ser ^. 9.
Dum ex co quod promiserat partem su^trahit, sacrilegij simul accusatur and
fraudis: for defaulting a moitie of that which he had promised to God, he is
charged with sacrilege and fraud. So the old. Calvin, in locum
Sacrilega fraudatio quod partem eius subducit quod sacrum esse profitebatur:
it was sacrilegious iugling to diminish that which he professed holy. Aretius,
in locum.
Furtum fuisset in re propria, fraud retinere quod simulat publicare: it had
been stealth or ordinary theft in his proper and private goods, fraudulently
to hold back what he made show to make common: Ergo, this was sacrilege.
Beza, in annot.
Cum totum pretium deo consecrasset, post per sacrilegium partem separabat:
having vowed the whole, he subtracts a part to his own use. So the new.

Now to define Sacrilege, historians use the word diversely: for noting this
siune to be both heinous and odious, therefore they call all heinous and
hateful sins by the name: as sorcerie, murder, violation of parents,
trucidation of Princes, and whatsoever engenders public detestation and
slander.

But indeed the word in proper signification has respect to God, whether by
derogation of his glory, or violation of his law, or opposition of his truth,
or usurpation of his titles, or profanation of his Temples, or vilification of
his service, or diminution of his revenues and things dedicated to his honor.
The Etymologists of both Tongues, derive it from stealing ^om. ^. (...).
, as (...) and sacrilegus do import.

Therefore, 1. the heathen defined it from robbing of the heathen temples: 2.
the Christian Ciuilians from Christian Churches: 3. our common lawyers, set out
the force of the word, by the fellonious intent, rather then the subdolous
manner, whether of secret lurching, or open purloyning: 4. Divines both school
and reformed, quicquid fit ad irreverentiam sacrae rei: as 2. 2. q. 99. (...) ^.
Th. Aquinas: Zanchius, lib. 3. de ex^e^cult.
Violatio sacrorum: Vrsinus, Catech.
ablatio rei sacrae: derogation of holiness, abuse, or lurching things deputed
to holy uses. Therefore Innocentius, more by way of allusion, then true
notation, says that sacrilegium is sacriledium, any such abuse whereby God or
his religion is prejudiced and depraved.

Whosoever therefore takes away, or alienateth to other persons or uses, goods
or things (chattels our Lawyers call them) of the Church, that have been given
to maintain Gods Church and service, the Canonists say does incur ipso
facto, crimen laesae Maiestatis, that is, sacrilege or treason to the highest
Majesty: and as high treason to the King is the highest degree of a subjects
enormitie, so in proportion is sacrilege to God: but in Ananias this is joined
with a higher, whereby his sin is out of measure sinful.

Secondly, the sin against the holy Ghost.
This seems to me also to be very plain: first, by the literal oneration of
S. Peter in the third verse, lying to the holy Ghost: where the very
nomination of that person of the Trinity, who guided and governed as present
and president, this whole business, does insinuate no less. For who does work
the miracles, but the holy Ghost? who does reveal the Donors most intimate
intentions, but the holy Ghost? who does kill with the word of his mouth d
the incorrigible sinner, but the holy Ghost? who does so powerfully congregate
so many thousands by e
the mouth of ideot-fishers, but the holy Ghost? who does segregate this goat
from the blessed flock, for infecting further, but the holy Ghost? therefore
the holy Ghost particularly is, and peremptorily affirms himself to be aimed
at in this business of holiness: therefore the sin against that person, is
that sin, the sin of the holy Ghost. And hereunto the holy Fathers also
accord: as Hesychius, lib. 1. c. 10. in Leuit.
quoted by Doct. Fulke upon the place, on the Rhemish Testament: Dominus dicit
omne pec^at^^e hominibus dimittitur, blasphemia au^em in spiritum sanctum non
dimittetur: hoc Petrus ipso opere ostendit, quia Ananias and Sapphyra spiritui
sancto ^ecutiti sunt, ait ^d eos, quare, etc. The Lord says, Every sin shall
be forgiven unto men, but blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven: this did Peter really declare, because Ananias and Sapphire lied to
the holy Ghost, he says unto them, Why has Satan blinded or filled thine
heart? and thus he. And Doct. Fulke himself ^n them. test.
is of the same opinion, as it were denying Ananias sin to be sacrilege,
because the Seminaries said it, and avouching it to be this sin.

The same also does Aretius affirm, alleging another interpretation of those
words, (why have thou lied to the holy Ghost: mentiens spiritum sanctum; i.
fingens se habere spiritum sanctum: belying the holy Ghost, that is, saying
that he had the holy Ghost,) but rejecting it, and cleaving to that
construction, contra spiritum sanctum, against the holy Ghost, that it was the
sin of the holy Ghost. And that which puts it out of question, M. Calvin in
locum.
, in saying Ananias sin was sacrilege, proves it thus that we now speak
of: for as it has been observed by learned writers, That sin is no one
single sin, but aggregativum Gers. par. 2. compend. theol. de 7. vit. cap.
quid, a collection of many great sins: 1. an advised sinfulnes: 2. a
resolute wilfulness: 3. an obstinate maliciousness: 4. an vninersail
wickedness, or general apostasy: all which, or the most with some addition
Calvin observes in this sin, and they are not hard to be found all have: for
Thomas says, there Aquin. de nature divine. lib. 2. c. 7.
are six species or spices of it: 2. against God, 1. in forbidding, 2. in
remitting sin against both which this sinner does offend, 1. against his
justice forbidding, by presumption: 2. against his mercy pardoning, by
desperation. 2. Against himself, 1. dolor de commisso: 2. propositum de noli
committendo: grief for that which is past, and purpose for that which is to
come: against both these also is this sin; 1. obstinate and malicious
persisting in sin, 2. final impenitencie and purpose not to leave sin. 2.
Also unto other, 1. amor boni, 2. agnitio very; the love of all that is good,
and the embracing of all that is true: in stead whereof this sin has, 1.
impugnationem veritatis agnitae, 2. invidentiam gr^tiae supernae: 1. wilful
resisting of known truth, 2. envious hindering the heavenly grace: all which
are not obscure in Ananias. As for example, 1. He knew that God did know his
doubling, yet is not afraid says Calvin to practice the same. 2. Whereas S.
Peter did preach the hainousnes of his sin unto him, he had a heart that
could not repent, and therefore unfaithful to lay hold on the mercy of Christ.
3. He was so far from repenting, that he grew harder, purposing to die, and
dying in his purpose of non repentance. 5. He loved his goods more then
goodness or good men. 6. Resolved that no man should be saved by his help.
These things in brief may serve to show, that the sin of Ananias was both
Sacrilege, and more: which yet shall be more fully declared in an other Cap. 4.
place, where we shall more particularly unfold the several properties of his
sin. So much in general of his sin.

CHAP. III.
In particular. 1. Reprehension of the man by compellation or personal rowsing.
ALthough that these delinquents had seen and heard enough in the sermons of
the Apostles, and exercises of the Congregation, to have instructed them in the
power and justice of God, and have called them away from halting between
covetousness and godliness; yet such is the foolishness of sin, and
blindness of sinners, till God comes home close unto them, that they will
never believe that God either sees or dislikes them: and therefore the holy
Spirit takes such a course in this place, as is fittest to rowze up a sinner,
sitting in his chair, and sleeping his nappe upon his couch or cushion of
security, as his conscience may be soonest convinced, and his state easiest
recovered: and that is by singling him out particularly, by his name and
nature, that he cannot shift the notice that is taken of him. It is small
question but he knew his own name, which in him, as in all other in those
times, was significant: 1. humbled, 2. afflicted, 3. answered by God; so says
Aretius does Ananias import. 1. His ambitious desire of credit, being loath to
be at the cost, was to be humbled. 2. His evil heart and worse eye, envying
the Apostles any maintenance, or the Conuerts any sustenance, was to be
afflicted. 3. His corrupt and cankred manners was to receive such answer from
God as they most deserved. This because he himself would not remember, his
love to money having raced his own name, like an other Cervinus out of his
mind, the holy Ghost does rub his memory of, reducing all these notions
unto his remembrance, by striking this string, and sounding that name to his
understanding. The officers of the Inquisition, when they suspect a party, and
cannot probably convince his concealing, they will suddenly pronounce his
surmised name, and observe how he is affected at that sound; by which
stratageme they have come to the cognizance of notable disguisers, which they
might have despaired any other way to have won. Which course God seems
oft-times to take with men, not that any can so halt before him, as to go
unknown, but because by so particular a course he would bring them both to
know themselves, and also to know that he does know them* so did he to the
protoplast, Genesis 3. 9.
Adam, where art thou? and his eldest son Caine, Genesis 4. 9.
where is thy brother Abel? and the mother of Ismael, Genesis 16. 8.
Hagar Saraes maid what do thou here?

The reason hereof David seems to touch, Psalm. 10. 13.
Sinners do flatter themselves in their wickedness, till their abominable
sin be found out: and ever since Adam was driven to his shifts in paradise,
he will find some fig-leafe to cover his nakedness, and with that siely, hide
his head in a crowde, saying, in populo magno non agnoscar, the throng shall
hide me: and is there knowledge in the most highest? Therefore does God go very
particularly to work, as in the lot of Ion. 1. ^.
Jonas, and Jonathan 1. Sam. 14. 86.
, to mind the offender: for example, There is Josh. 7. ^6.
a sin committed, for which the army is overthrown, and no man will confess
the fact; it must be found that God may be reconciled, the camp freed, and the
party punished: the ordinary course as in those cases, must be by way of lot,
where the hand of God is immediate index and iudex. The lots are cast into the
lap, and the tribe of Judah is taken; here Achan, unquiet before, begins to
startle now, yet hope of impunitie hardens him so, as he will confess nothing:
a second draught of the family of Zarites, frees the rest of Judah, as the
lotterie of Judah had secured the other tribes: now the man begins to change
countenance, and purposes some-deale to save all labor, and confess of
himself: but because he lingers, the third draught finds the house of Zabdi,
then he falls to quake and tremble, so that all men that saw him, might read
his fault in his face: and while he is astonished between passion and purpose, he
hears himself to be named, when lo, he falls down and sinkes under his
sorrow; and if it were to begin again, he would stay the search, and yield
himself prisoner. Why did he not that sooner? If we would judge our selves, 1.
Cor. 11. 32.
we should not be judged: now when we are judged, we are chastised of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. And thus does Peter in
this place, not only to point at, but to paint out a double dealer: who had he
any spark of grace, had prevented judgment, and cut off by timely confession,
so fearful a condemnation. But nothing would serve to wring his unhappy
purchase out of his fingers; so hunger of booty, and hope of impunitie, betray
most men: who were we well assured, we should one day be called to personal
account, we would never for so miserable pleasance, buy at so dear a rate so
certain repentance. Sins are debts, and debts are as sons, who grow so
well, that they will cry after us, and own us by our name, if we stay them
not within, or stop not their mouth without. As the staff and the ring did
challenge Genesis 38. 13.
Judah, so we shall be bewrayed by the same token, if in time we take not up the
matter, with a lamb or a kidde of the fold, by the hand of our friend the good
Adullamite: and so much of the Apostrophe, or Compellation.

CHAP. IV.
Reprehension of the matter, or enumeration of the parts of the offense, which
are 1. the author, 2. object, and 3. subject.
ALthough in the 2. Chapter I laid down his sin in some generality, by way
of explication, yet now order leads us by the hand of the text, to unfold the
branches somewhat more particularly, by way of demonstration, not as hunting
out the heinousness thereof in any one arm or division thereof, but showing
the form and materials in the whole jointly together. The first part
therefore is the author, and prime moouer, which is here by the Apostle said to
be Satan.

1. The author, Satan.
Now although the Prince of darkness does work in all the children of
disobedience, and the devil has his hand in every sin, yet it is not usual
to name or mention him, but in some very notorious and greatly outrageous; as
in that of Judas Ioh. 13. 17.
, that the Devil entered into him: and of Elymas Act. 13. 10.
, that he was the child of the Devil: and of Antichrist 2. These. 2. 9.
, that his coming is with the effectual working of the Devil: and in the
Ecclesiastical history, when the horrible heretic Cerinthus Eusebius.
greeted Saint John the Apostle and Evangelist, with non nosti nos? know you
not me? received this answer, noui te primogenitum diaboli, yes, I know you to
be the devils eldest son. So that as the Poets in inextricable exigencies,
do bring down Jupiter upon the stage, (...), by a devise or engine: so does God
in matters that pass the ordinary pitch, bring in Satan to show the
transcendencie of the sault.

We are then to know, for the fountain of sin, that there are cogitationes
immissae, Satan's iaculations, and cogitationes ascendentes, humane ebullitions:
this of Ananias is mixed of both, as appears in the next words, where repeating
the same matter he alters the phrase, saying, why have thou conceived this
thing in thy heart? so that both Satan did fill his heart, and his heart
conceived it; Satan by enticing, moving, persuading; he by consenting,
yielding, obeying: Satan by casting in his fiery darts of temptation, he by
blowing these coals of destruction. By the envy of the devil (says
Syracides) Was 2. 14.
sin entered into the world: yet out of the heart (says our Savior) Mat. 15.
19.
arise evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, thefts, etc.

Wherefore, as Satan entered into Judas, August.
non tam vt tentaret, quam vt possideret, not so much to tempt him, as to
possess him: non vt alienum, sed vt proprium, not as a stranger, but as his
peculiar: nec tam vt possideret, quam vt transformaret, not so much to possess
him, as transform him: whereupon our Savior Ioh. 6. 70.
said, have not I chosen you twelve, and one is a devil? so he tempted,
possessed, transformed Ananias, with an extraordinary temptation, a souraigne
domination, an universal transmutation: so that as Judas was a traitor before
he did betray, (as our Savior insinuates) quod Ioh. 23. 27.
facis, (in the present tense) fac cito; for being so wholly set upon it, with
head, and heart, and hand, that had his heads been as many as Cerberus, or the
whore of Babylon; and his hands as many as Briareus, or any King of whom it is
said, An niscis multas regibus esse manus? he would have set them all on work;
so full he was up to the top, non ^am facit peccatum, sed est peccatum August.
: it was too small a predication to say he did sin; for he was converted into
sin, he was nothing but sin. And yet this was but one half of his sin,
that he left no place for God, no place for goodness, Satan had taken up all
the rooms in his heart, as interpreters do observe. And all this is but his
stamp of one side, whose man he was, and whom he entertained. Come to the
other side, whom he (I will not say) kept out, but drove out, his sin against
the holy Ghost; the second part of the sin.

^. Object, against whom.
Although lying be sometime set for dissembling in the holy book: as where
David says, Psalm. 18. 44.
his enemies shall lie unto him, speaking both of the type, himself or his
son, and the Messiah, to note the hypocrisy and false-heartednes of his
vanquished subjects: and again of the like, Psalm. 81. 15.
they should have been found liers unto him, that is, they should humble
themselves with false obedience and forged submission: yet as we have noted,
Cap. 2. very learned Expositors, besides the advantage of the letter, have
taken it for that irremissible blafphemie, that is directed against the third
person in Trinity, not of ignorance, or of infirmity, as to the son, and the
Father; but of malice to the fountain and author of holiness; which as the
schoolmen say, Thomas.
Id^o colorem non habet excusationis, quod quantum in se est, direct
impugnativum est medici and remedij, per quod fit remissio peccati: it has no
color of excuse, because as much as in it is, it does directly oppose both the
Physician, and the Physic, whereby remission is wrought. Bellarmine, de poen.
l. 2. cap. 1.
Direct resistit and repudiat gratiam Dei, it plainly resists and refuses
Gods mercy: such is the sin.

Now if we look when or wherein this sin by him was committed, we find
nothing but this fact, for which he was tainted or touched; then this very
sin, quatenus, he promised such goods to the author of holiness, to be a
help and means to propagate holiness, as it concerned the person cui, was
blasphemy, being frustrated and falsified in the effect: as it considered the
thing in quo, the detension of that which was so devoted, was sacrilege: which
is the third branch of his sin, now coming in order to be touched, or the
circa quod.

3. Subject wherein.
Wherein we must now no more set our eye upon the party, to whom the
origination and procuration of holiness does pertain (the last thing which we
considered) but the materials of holiness, or the things sanctified and
separate for holy service themselves; of the fellonious diminishing whereof
Ananiis here charged, as we saw before: and it is severally set down in the
next words, by a disjunctive conjunction, thus, and keep back part of the
price of the possession.

Wherein beside his impious legier-de-maine, that Ficta oblatione Deum and
Ecclesiam fallere vouit, says Calvin, by a false show of a bountiful heart,
he went about to gull both God and his Church; we observe his foul
profanation of a fair constitution, for it was now a voluntary grant or a
customarie practice, received for law in that little commonwealth, that such as
had should improoue their love to the highest link; when he like Jonas worm
does blast the honor of God, the use of goods, his own devotion, and others
sustentation, with one cast of hypocrisy.

I will not mention his foolish ambition, that for a small air of humane
applause, he could be content to forfeit his reward in heaven: nor his Paganish
incredulity, that thought God either would not in so many coufluences of
Proselytes, or could not in so great encumbrances of opposites, maintain his
Church; and therefore thought to have more hold of his hand, then he had of his
tongue.

These be the parts of his sin severally laid open in themselves, and yet in
such reciprocal aspect and position one to another, that they touch and take
essence and efficacy one from another: for the fullness of Satan argues, his
total and final apostacy from God; and his sin against the holy Ghost,
confirms his sacrilege to the holy Church; and lastly, his envying and
spoiling the holy Church, proves his complete deuillishnesse. Of which
particulars before we collect the total sum, let us gather such uses of
these points as lie scattered in our way, that both our path may be the
smoother, and our provision for the rest of our passage the better.

First, then we here observe the truth of those words of Solomon, Pro. 22. 15.
Sin is folly.
That folly is bound up in the heart of the child: that is, that we are all
both naturally and habitually addicted to all kind of sins, as having Satan
to our father, and an irreligious and corrupt fountain for our mother. And this
folly is no other, but in which sense those two words are equipollent, being
termini convertibiles: only the difference is this; the one has relation to
the head, as principium laesum; the other to the hand, as organum corruptum;
and therefore we are no less endangered by ill thoughts, then prejudiced by
ill deeds. Men commonly think that thought is free, and so it is in some
sense, in civility, because the Magistrate takes no notice of them, unless
manifested with outward proofs; not in divinity to think what we list in
regard of God: for he is scrutator Heb. 4. 13.
cordium, a trier of the hearts and reins; and evil thoughts eat out the
heart of religion: therefore Solomon Eccl. 10, 20.
counsels, not to curse the King so much as in thought: and Peter Act. 8. 12.
bids Simon Magus, pray that his thought might be forgiven him: for the very
thoughts Prou. 15. 26.
of the wicked, are abomination to the Lord: the transgression of the evil
angels was but in thought, and oftenne Laws, there is one to reform the
cogitations.

Secondly, Abyssus abyssum vocat, says the Prophet, one depth calls another;
which is no less true of the inundation of sin, then of the seas: for by
custom of sin, and delighting in a tenor of disguising, we bring our selves
to that pass, that all the balm in Gilead will not cure us: too much dallying
Sozom.
with sin, brings to the deadly sin. Julian did banish grace so long, donec
omnino gratia spoliabitur when we begin with impiety, and go on with
hypocrisy, we commonly end with apostasy. Sampson played so long with Dalila
mock-holiday, that in the end his locks were shaven in good earnest. The loss
of greatest Justin.
pieces comes by the least breach unespied, or vnrepaired. Ninus victories were
not only gainefull for the present, but useful for the future, sequentium
etiam causae, the means of more; so is it in sin, it has not only lapsum,
but reatum; besides the illness of the fall, it leaves a pronenesse to fall
further: therefore rightly and obseruantly called by the Apostle, deceitfulness
of sin: for besides the harm that is in view, there is more danger in that
which is concealed.

Sins are sores, first but vicious humors, then they grow to angry
tumors, and after they turn to burning ulcers, within a while to eating
cankers, and last of all to incurable tortors, not only morbus, but mors
animae, as Bernard says. Therefore let us not Esaias. 5. 18.
draw sin with cords of vanity, nor transgression with cart-ropes. Cables or
cart-ropes were first threads, then cords, last cables: so is the twisting of
sin: 1. against knowledge: 2. against conscience: 3. against the strongest,
not motions only, but reclamations also of Gods Spirit. Malice against any men
is heinous, against holy men dangerous, against God and holiness damnable. Let
that always be our prayer, Psalm. 19. vlt.
Keep us, O Lord, from presumptuous sins, so shall we be innocent from much
offense, from this offense. And so much of the enumeration of the several
branches of his sin.

CHAP. V.
The aggrauation of the sin of Sacrilege.
NOW then to sum up all that has been said: spectator, but a busy actor,
and so busy as not to send any small troops, or lend little help, but to
replenish with the fullness of his iniquity the whole heart of this peccant
party; it is given us to understand, that Sacrilege is no small defection, or
transgression, but an entire desertion of Gods spirit, and solid interest of
Satan in the child of perdition: for as, de quo vis ligno non fit Mercurius,
every logge will not make a Mercuriall; so de quo vis luto non fit Sacrilegus,
every mould will not serve for Sacrilege. We may well set down, that this is
a foul, a fearful, a fundamental sin, not razing the skin of Christ's
scalpe, like the Jews crown of thorns, but renting the sides of
Christianity, like the soldiers spear, as we read in the Gospel. For which
cause the Canonists were wont to allot Burchard.
seven years penance unto it, as Ivo, Burchardus, Gratian, and the rest agree;
where so many days sufficed other sins.

that is irremissible, the sin unto death, the blasphemy of the holy Ghost;
we have a fair aim to descrie the sinfulness of Sacrilege by the old rule,
that teaches, noscitur exsocio qui non dignoscitur exse, Eccl. 9.
a man's gate, his countenance, his company, will soon show what he is.

Now here he goes hand in hand with a hea^ie sin, and if they should contest
for prioritie, has here the precedence, as carrying the denomination:
therefore of force we must confess that it is very Romans 1. 22.
heinous. In Paul he marches in equipage with a high sin, the sin of
idolatry; and of Idolatry Drus.
the Jews have a Proverb, Idololatra totam legem abnegat, the idolater
disanuls the whole Law: the like then must Sacrilege, being of the same size
and latitude, renounce the whole law: not only Iam. 2. 20.
as S. James says, he that offends in one commandment is guilty of all, but
because all the second table depends upon the first, and all the commandments
upon the foremost; and therefore resemble Hippocrates twins, laugh and weep,
live and die, stand and fall, with equal simpathie.

Blat. 10. de leg.
For first the divine Plato, in those excellent books concerning laws, having
in the former touched the violation of sacred persons, coming in the tenth to
speak in excellent method of sacred things, auerreth expressly thus much of
the sacrileger, that he must needs persuade himself one of these three
things, 1. that there is no God at all, 2. or if there be, yet that he is
nothing so just and terrible to his oppugners as the world is made believe, 3.
or at the least, that he is very facile and flexible to be reappeased, when by
sacrilegers he is abused: every of which do raze the foundation of all religion.

So that these men aim at no lower level then God himself, and are therefore
those presumptuous giants, that by antiquity were said to mutiny against
heaven; because as they know no goodness, so they would acknowledge no God:
and being enforced to that necessity, envy him all service and servants. And
therefore it is well observed of an heathen writer, Soli sacrilegi pugnant
contra Deum, it is no Q. Cur. lib. 7.
other then your sacrileger that wars with God, and make rampires against his
Majesty. Thus then Plato has soundly concluded all sacrilegers to be very
Atheists: for albeit they do not totidem verbis, in direct Psalm. 14. 1
terms, deny there is a God with David's fool, and those abiects of the
forlorn hope; yet do they the same indirectly, and by necessary consequence,
when they deifie a false, or idolize the true God: which is by denying his
essential attributes, and divine properties. As, 1. of holiness, with such as
do think him like themselves; that is, a God that delights Psalm. 50. 20.
Psa. 5. 4. Deuteronomy. 28. 4.
in wickedness* 2. of justice, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in
the stubbornenesse of my own heart. 3. of power, like the Aramites, that said
he was a God of the 1. King. 20. 28.
hills, and not of the valleys. 4. of providence, saying, he does neither good
nor evil.

Lib. 2. de vit. exter. cult. ^. 3.
But M. Zanchius says, that sacrilege is species irreligionis, a spice of
atheism; iumping with Aquinas, that says it is oppositum religioni, crossing
religion: and S. Augustine, that says it is direct contra deum, opposite to
God in point blanke; whose reasons are most reasonable, because it can proceed
from nothing but open contempt of holiness, and plain impiety: for else why
do men lay theeuish fingers upon things consecrated to religion, but because
they care not for religion: or whereto tends the spoil of holy things, but to
the overthrow of holiness? for men know this, God cannot be served without
men, nor men be maintained without means: therefore the substracting such
means, is the disappointing such service: therefore Zanchius reduces
Sacrilege to the second commandment, where Gods service is established and
provided.

Because it is here set out in his own colors, it is not amiss to take a
taste of the fulsomenesse of it. The donations of former times that were given
to God, Luke 21. 5.
were called anathemata, either for their sequestration from profane use, or
suspension on the walls and pillars of holy Temples. Now what the Latins
called anathemata, from the Greek, the Hebrews called cherem: 1. for their
consecration: 2. for their execration: the one in their use and end; the other
in their nature and effect: of all which the Lord to Moses gave (...) ^3. 1^.
this caveat, Let none of the cursed thing cleave to thine hand: because in that
case, the spoil in war, or any such thing as the Lord reserved to himself,
did always (...).
so prove: as is expressed in Iosuah, Keep your selves from the cursed thing,
least it make you accursed and (...)*
trouble you: as fell out to Achan in the valley of Achor, or of trouble.

Therefore the censers of the rebellious Levites, being once consecrated, when
they perished, were Number. 1^. 38*
commanded to be preserved, not for any, or profane uses, but to make a
covering of the Altar. But Prou. 20. 25.
to devour such holy vtensils or donation, Solomon pronounces to be a curse,
or snare, or destruction, (as several translations do read it) that is, to
appropriate them to private uses.

I^r. 2 ^.
The like Metaphor does Jeremy use to show their nature, Israel was as a
hallowed thing unto the Lord, all that touch him shall offend: evil shall come
to them says the Lord: nothing the vengeance on their enemies, to be no less
then Sacrilegers. Paul compared it as we Romans 2. ^2.
saw with idolatry, which destroys the whole law: and Samuel with idolatry
and witchcraft; as the 1* Sam. 15. 23.
contrary obedience with the holiest sacrifice: God Mat. 3.
himself, with other theft, where the circumstances of the person augment the
gradation, Will any people rob their idols, which are their gods? Solomon
with the Prou. 2^. 24.
hainousest theft among men, He that steals from his father and mother, and
says it is no sin, the same is a compinion of the destroyer.

Prou. 6. 3^*
Wherefore to conclude; 1. if in ordinary theft, he that steals to satisfy
his soul when he is hungry, if he be taken shall restore seven fold, or give
all the substance of his house. 2. if the flying book of Gods Zac. 5. (...)*
vengeance shall enter into the house of the thief, (which book was 20 cubits
long, and 10. broad,) that is, a terrible curse, though but to his substance.
3. if he that steals from his father, shall be destroyed. 4. if idolaters and
witches must not live. Or to gather the argument more narrow, 5. if that man
that ^. ^am. 2. 25.
sins against another is to be judged of the judge, and make so large
satisfaction: what rule of proportion will serve sufficiently for our
computation, for a man that shall sin against the Lord, who shallplead for
him? what shall be done unto him? We may be sure that if Caine be revenged
seven times, and Lamec 77. how many millions, how many myriads of millions,
shall he be revenged that sins against God, that took vengeance of Caine and
Lamec both? for finiti ad i^finitum nulla est proportio. And so much shall
serve for the aggrauation of this sin.

CHAP. VI.
The Censure, or Excommunication.
HItherto we have seen his sin, which we may truly pronounce to have been a
sin of sins: now follows his punishment, and that well proportionate, a
curse of curses: anathema even maranatha, the most high, the most heavy, the
most horrible of all degrees of ecclesiastical censure: for that it was an
ecclesiastical censure, the whole series or order of the causes do euince. 1.
the efficients both principal and isntrumental: 2. the form of spiritual or
ecclesiastical jurisdiction: 3. the matter, execration or extirpation: 4. the
end, that other may fear.

Now then for our better understanding both of his sin, and of his suffering,
the learned Drusius Drus. quest. (...) 1. qu. 9.
does teach us, that among the Jews where this fell out, there were three sorts
or several degrees of Church censure, apparent enough in both Testaments. 1.
Called niddui of nadah, a word that signifies, expellere or elongare, to expel
or drive far away: this we have in Esaias, Hear ye the word of the Lord, all
ye that tremble at his word: your brethren that hated you, and cast you out
for my names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified, (that was the form as we
see in Achans story) Ios. 7. 30.
but he will appear to your glory, and they shall be ashamed. And this is
that which in the new Testament is called, casting out of the Synagogue, as
the Pharisees served the blind man whom Christ had healed, having Ioh. 9. 35.
made a Canon, that whosoever should confess Jesus to be Christ, should be
excommunicate, or cast out of the Church.

charam.
2. The second was Cherem, of the root that signifies occidere or excidere, to
kill or cut off: this we find Deuteronomy. 7. 2.
in Moses, where God speaking of the cursed nations, whom his people were to
exterminate, and possess their places, says thus, as the vulgar translation
does well deliver it, anathematizando anathematizabis eos; the English, if not
so significantly, yet as effectually, thou shall utterly destroy, or root them
out. And this S. Paul had respect unto, when he said, I would to God Gal. 5. 12.
they were cut off that trouble you; and where be would have the incestuous
Corinthian committed to Satan. 1. Cor. 5. 5.


3. The last was that which the Jews call Sammatha, or Sammatizatio of Shamam,
that signifies desolare, and ad stuporem vastare: and atta, tu, q. d. let such
a curse fall upon thee, as is vltima execratio or maledictio, the uttermost
execration or accursednesse. Or as some think, of shem for hashem, which is
the name of God, and atha, venit, or to come, to express the everlasting curse
^il the coming of the Lord: which Paul elsewhere alludeth to. This word we
find in Jeremy Lam. 5. 18.
his lamentations, Sion is laid desolate. which lamentable estate of the Church,
in that book is fully 1. Cor. 16. ^2*
deplored, Ier. 12. 11. This S. Paul as I said before did express in that
imprecation or denuntiation of a most zealous heart, Who so loves not (that is,
hates and persecuteth) the Lord Jesus, let him be anathema maranatha,
everlastingly accursed, q. d. till the coming of the Lord to judgment, and a
day after. And these were the Church censures.

Now are we to examine, for as much as it is undeniable but this of Ananias is
such, which of all these three it is, that is here inflicted. First, of a
certain not the first, for that was but a deprivation of the spiritual estate
for a time, concerning the company and comforts of the Church, with condition
annexed of reconciliation and repentance: now this here was corporal, as well
as spiritual and eternal; with a bar against repentance, therefore not that.

Secondly, nor the second, which as some think either was not corporal, such
as the civil sword could inflict; but a permission or emancipation only to
the power and regiment of Satan, who has his kingdom out of the Church, to
who^ such sinners were delivered over, to the end that the flesh (that is, ^.
Cor. 5. 5.
the old man) might be mortified, and the new renewed: or as Augustine speaks,
vt moriatur error, viuat homo, that the sin might be killed, and the sinner
saved. Or if a corporal also, as we must confess of Achan, the Cananites, and
other, upon whom that curse was corporally executed on earth upon their bodies,
which was pronounced and enacted in heaven; yet but corporal, having time and
means of grace offered for repentance. Therefore it must be the last,
partaking of both, but exceeding both so far as extreme does go beyond
partial, and eternal sutmounts temporal. 1. a temporal and extemporall
cutting off the body from the grace of life, and a spiritual and eternal
cutting off the soul from the life of grace: the sorest, seuerest, extremest
vengeance, that can be afflicted on a man in this world; forsaking and forsaken
of God. A sudden and unrepentant dissolution of body and soul; a present and
immediate manumission from God and grace, to the place and torments of the
damned, a just guerdon for him that gave himself over to the full sway of the
Prince of death, to mock that God of heaven, defeat his spouse on earth, and
blaspheme the spirit of sanctification. I tremble to think; that any child of
man, specially a child of the Church, an auditor of the Apostles, a professor
of Christ, a benefactor of the Church, no apparent professed enemy or atheist,
or persecutor, or apostata, should be liable to so execrable a sentence to be
excommunicated, anathematized, sammatized for grudging a few pence or pownds to
God and his Church. But leaving secret judgments unto God, we must needs
acknowledge, that God sees not as man sees, for that which man's eye could not
perceive, the eyes of God that pierce the heart, did see in his carriage a
mal^tio us, and obstinate, a presumptuous and desperate, hypocritical
persecutor, and envious Apostata: the essential marks of a certain,
reprobate, and forlorn sinner. If any yet beside the exigence of the fault,
will needs require more reason for so great severity, for their further
satisfaction may lift off their eyes from looking upon S. Peter, as if he
either of his own Act. 3.
power, or his private humor had slain the party, and remember it was the
holy spirit, that in defect of temporal magistracy, (not yet Christian) did
moderate the whole matter: whose wisdom so far as we either may or can look
into, might commend these reasons: 1. the Church was to be kept in awe and
fear of God: 2. as in a new established polity or government, as there must
be examples of reward for the righteous, so also of punishments for
delinquents: 3. that under the color of religion and new conversion, one
should not defeat or defraud another: 4. it was requisite, that the authority
of the Church should be wrought among them without, and they prepared by such
exemplarie justice to like, and love her government. These and such like,
which Calvin and expositors do allege, may serve to stop any curious
mouth, that will have God to give account of his judgments.

Here then are we taught first of all, of the wonderful effect, and
supereminent power of the word of God, in the mouth of his holy Apostles, and
faithful ministers, not only and always serving in cases of edification, but
sometimes also for destruction; albeit 1. Cor. 12. 10
the Apostle; and (...), the sword of the Ephesians. 6. 20.
spirit, to hack and hew the ungodly in pieces; and (...), weapons not carnal,
but mighty in operation: and as David cherev pipijoth, two mouthed Psalm. 149.
or edged sword: with this did Moses strike Corah and his accomplices: God
himself Nadab and Abihu, Er and Onan, Iezabel and Athalia; Joshua Achan, and
them of Canaan; Elizeus the 42. children; and this did Peter draw out here
against Ananias and Sapphira. Whereby we see the Church censures are no bruta
fulmina, little childrens pot-guns, beadles and boltles artilleries; but
tearing and roaring Cannons; nor left to the swaying of Peter alone, much less
to that man of Rome, to brandish not so much against sins as Sovereigns: but
left in trust to all the true Ministers of the Gospel.

Neither is it without need, that there should be such rods and swords in the
Church of God, for such as are so audaciously insolent, bad by self impiety,
but much worse by our impunitie. To the end therefore that the wicked may be
corrected, the exorbitant ^euoked, the timorous affrighted, the sound secured,
and the judgments of God that hang over our heads and the land auerted, let
Moses and Aaron, the Cherubios of the Lord that are set to keep the way to the
forbidden tree, wave their fiery blade against all blasphemous disturbers,
pertinacious resisters, impious atheists, perfidious heretics, wayward
schismatikes, erroneous idolaters, and incroaching sacrilegers.

It is true we have a sword, and that does not just in the scabbard; but as
Petrus de Aliaco did sometime complain in the Council of Constance, it is
subject to much abuses, vulgaritie, partiality, triuiali^ie, which make it
almost a wooden dagger; Gladius (says he) qui in primitiua ecclesia veneranda
raritate erat formidabilis, iam propter abusum contrarium contemptibilis factus
est: the Ecclesiastical sword which in the Primitive Church was seldom used
and greatly reverenced, is now become by daily distriction of small account,
and little esteem.

(...) 4* sect. did 18.
The like complaint does Scotus make, so as we may truly say with the Poet,
-- at te genitor, cum fulminatorques
Nequicquam horremus, coecique in nubibus ignes
Terrificant animos, and inania murmura miscent.


Now concerning the usurped propriety, which the Bishop of Rome does claim to
himself, as Peter's successor, that is, the sole temporal and spiritual
monarch, whose iron must bear down all swords, whose keys must open all
locks, whose led must blunt all steel, and crosier put down all scepters,
(albeit between these two propositions, Peter for sacrilege stroke Ananias
dead, and the present Paulus 5. may excommunicate King James of great Britain
for non conformity, there be many gulfes to fill and casmaes to make up) I
leave to be further confuted, by the learned pens that at this time fight the
Lords battles, against that man of sin. Sure I am of one thing; this is not
Peter's petra, rock of salvation; but Neroes Tarpeius, the break-necke of
destruction; nor eloquium Dei, but laqueus diaboli; nor ignis spiritus, but
Iam. 3. 15.
ignis fatuus.

I come to some other point more near our matter, that all things are naked to
his eyes, and that there Heb. 4. 1^
is no creature that is not manifest in his sight: and confirms those
doctrines of the Prophets, I the Lord Ier. 17. 9.
search the heart, and try the reins: and of the Apostles, Thou that know
the hearts of all men, show whom thou Act* 1. 24.
have chosen. Such a God is it that we serve, that can discern himself, and
disclose to other the secretest malefactors: Jonas in the shrowds, Nathaniel
under the figtree, Ieroboams wife under her mask, the Assyrians plotting in
his privy chamber, the iugling of Gehezi, the blanching of Iehoram, the
bloodinesse of Hazael, the blending of David, the idolizing of the Jews. For
which the heathen in their hieroglyphics disciphered Jupiter by an eye and an
eagle; to insinuate that such a nature beseemed the highest majesty, as was
not deceivable by any obscurity.

The consideration of which point may serve to disrobe us of all Adams
fig-leaues, and bereave us of all hope of impunitie, in our secretest
villainies, and most inveloped treacheries. Erasmus brings in a pair of amorous
pigeons, looking for some very retired room where they might renew their lewd
acquaintance, but never could so be covered in any corner, that the eyes of God
should not descrie them. Therefore in that description of him in the vision,
Reu. 1. 14.
his eyes are said to be as a flaming fire, that is, eyes for observing, sire
for revenging: according to the Poet, Eurip.
(...). This one persuasion if well concocted, would strangle our wicked
proiects, much better then those simple supposalls of the heathen, of Sen.
epist.
Cato or Scipioes ouer-seeing what we do.

3. Exact. justice. Nyss.
observes in his judgments. Those (says Gregory Nyssene) are the purest
stones and finest chrystals, that do most truly represent the faces of the
inspectors; yielding back to merry visages, merry reflections, but to sad and
sour looks the like again: such are Gods doings, which represent to us our
just deseruings: so that it is easy to read our own deeds, in his very
doomes. As for example:

Gen ^.
The old world was plagued with inundations of waters, because of their great
inundations of sins: Genesis 29.
the five cities were consumed with sulphurous flames of fire against nature,
because they boiled with sulphurous flames of lust against nature. Pharaoh that
Exodus 7.
had been as a staff of protection to the people of God; so soon as he turned
serpent to hiss and sting his benefactors to death, is shown himself in a
real emblem, by the staff in the hand of Moses: and his unnatural subjects
had their waters turned into blood, for defiling their rivers with the innocent
blood of the Israelites children; and in the end were drowned in the red sea,
for drowning others children in their Nilus.

1. Sam. 15.
Saul no sooner rejected the word of the Lord, in the spoil of the Amalakites,
but he heard himself rejected from being King: and as the sword of that Agag
whom he so spared had made many women childlesse, so was his mother also by the
hand of Samuel made childles herself among other women. Adonibesec that had
cut off the thumbs and toes of 70. ^0^1.
Kings, and set them to pick crumbs under his table, was by Joshua served with
that same sauce, in the end himself.

This sea of examples has no bottom. David's adultery was repaied him by his
son; Ioabs blood, Ahabs field, Dives alms, and a number more.

Heraclius the Emperor following incestuous lust, Paul. Diac.
had such distension in that part of nature, that he could not let his urine but
in his own face. Brunechildis a wicked Queen of France, that ioyed in nothing
but the discord of her children, was in the end taken, after she had made away
10. Princes, and infinite other, and was torn in pieces with wild horses.

Cran.
Boleslaus King of Cracow who put Staniflaus his Bishop to a cruel death, for
his honest admonitions, and carved his flesh among his dogs: being driven out
of his Kingdom, and wandering in Hungary, was torn in pieces of his own
dogs. But to insist in Blo^d.
this very sin: Leo Emperor of Constantinople, taking a rich Coronet out of
a Church, set with diamonds and other very rich stones, and setting it on his
own head, had instantly his head so pearled with boiles, and crowned with
carbuncles, that for extremity of torment he instantly died.

Magdebur.
There was one Addo Archbishop of Mentz, that having a number of very poor
people in his country that craved his relief, he caused them all to be
collected into a barn under a color of alms, and so set it on fire; and when
with their extreme yelling and howling they had with their noise peirced unto
him where he sat in his Palace, he used this sarcasme while they were dying,
that he heard the mice cry: for this bloody Paganism, God sent such armies of
rats and mice upon him, that he built a tower in the midst of the Rhine to save
himself from them, but all would not serve; for mighty shoals of them took
the water, and destroyed him most miserably, where he trusted for security.

So to say no more, Ananias meddles with the execrable thing, as Achan had done
before, and is thereby himself made execrable: and this is that retaliation
Exodus 21. 24.
which Moses mentions, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. I end this
point with a speech of Augustine, fitting both Ananias and us: Dum altenum
rapis, a diabolo raperis; and dum alienum detines, a diabolo detineris; retines
aurum, and perdis animam: iniustum lucrum, sed iustum damnum; lucrum in arca,
sed damnum in conscientia pereat ergo mund^ lucrum, per quod fit animae tuae
damnum: While thou preiest upon another, the devil preieth upon thee; and
while thou withholdest that which pertains to another, he l^ieth hold upon
thee; he takes thy soul, while thou take away thy neighbors silver: thy
lucre is unjust, but thy loss is most just; the lucre is in thy cofer, but thy
loss in thy conscience; defy therefore such gain of this world, whereby thou
loosest thy soul in the other.

And so I come more particularly to note the severity The vengeance of God
against Sacrilegers.
of these two, we are plainly given to understand, what guerdon they are ever
to expect, that violate the sacred revenues of God; a fearful expectation of
extremest vengeance both of body and soul: a consideration able to strike us
through with horror and amazement, if our hearts were not harder then the
nether millstone. If any shall doubt of that I say, and mock at my words, as
speaking for our own particular, and pleading for our own profit; let him
turn back a few leaves, and consider the true reasons hereof; both in the
second chapter, where in general we did explicate his sin, and in the fourth
chap. where in particular, we handled the members and branches of his
sacrilege.

Wherefore I proceed and say, that there was never any rob-God, that embarked
themselves in this impiety, but he ran a course of endless infamy, and utmost
extreamitie.

Genesis 4. 14.
To begin with the very beginning, Caine the General of this damned crewe,
if his world of misery was not solie for this, yet I dare avouch it was from
this, that he lived a proiected runnagate, and died a rejected reprobate: of
whom the fathers observe this, that he offended if not in the quantity of his
oblation, yet in the quality thereof; declaring by the coursnesse of that he
offered, the abiectnes of his esteem of him to whom he offered, the refuse of
his crop, and linings of his corn. Which impiety of his unto his Creator, was
first punished with unnatural inhumanitie to his brother; and that again with
obdurate impenitencie unto God, till altogether they brewed him a loathsome
extraction of a hateful life, and a desperate procuration of a cursed death.

Ios. 7. 16*
The fact of Achan is so obseruantly set down, that I may well pass it in the
Catalogue of these Catiues, and see some other.

^. Sam. 4. 12.
The sin of Hophni and Phineas, consists of triplicities; 1. it was
sacrilege, 2. heinous sacrilege, 3. blasphemous sacrilege: 1. Sacrilege:
for not contented with the priests portions, they usurped also upon the Lords
part, which was to be burnt to him in sacrifice. 2. Heinous; for the sin of
the young men is said to have bin great before the Lord. 3. Blasphemous; they
were not only rake-hellish extortioners, but abominable miscreants, causing
the sacrifices of the Lord to be abhorred. Such was their sin. Their
punishment also had triplicities: 1. Fearful comminations; there came a man of
God to expostulate with Elie, and to denunciate his cruel judgment. 2. Dismal
exterminations; the Arc taken of the uncircumcised, the sons slain in
battle in their priestly pontificals, the father breaks his neck at the news,
the wife dies in abortiue deliverance, the Priesthood removed to an other
family, and their issue deprived both of honor and honest means of life. 3.
Odious commemorations in after ages, to deter both Priests and people from
their predecessors profaneness. God alludes to them, Go to my place at Silo,
and see what I did to it for the wickedness Ier. 7 10.
of my people Israel: and because you have done the same works, I will do to
this house as I did to Silo, and cast you out of my sight as I cast them. Note
how extirpation Nota been.
still is the reward of Sacrilege. I pass over Saul, as 1. Sam. 15. 34.
I did Achan; the same sin, (the devoted thing) the like cutting off, if not
of life present, yet of Gods favor which is true life, by utter dereliction,
and final extirpation of life and lineage, when God saw time.

D^n. 4. 30.
Nebuchadnezar, because when the Lord was angry with his own people, and had
made him the rod of his wrath, he went beyond his commission, defiling himself
with sacred compilations, was metamorphosed for a time, as Sedulius has
described him; Sedul.
Nam quod ab humana vecors pietate recessit,
Agrestes pecorum consors fuit ille per herbas,
Aulica depasto mutans conuiuia faeno.
Pronus ab amne bibit, septenaque tempora lustrans
Omnibus hirsutus syluis and montibus errans.


with which punishment God seemed contented for his time: but when God came
again in visitation, and found his grandchild carowzing and profaning those
very bowls and sacred vtensils, in the midst of his courtiers and concubines,
and breaking jests upon Cyrus and his army that then had surrounded his city
with a strait siege, in all security and confidence, and scoffing among, at
the feebleness of the Jews God, that could not keep that much and massy
plate, he saw his fate pourtraied before his face upon the wall, how that he
was numbered, balanced, and rejected, which that instant was accomplished: his
city surprised, his life bereaved, his Empire that had been above a thousand
years intailed to his ancestors, in a moment translated, not to another
family only, but to an other country.

Now let them that intaile their sacrilege unto their posterity, as they do
their substance, remarkablely consider but this example, and see if such
prescription may prevail any more with God, then to hasten and accelerate
their fathers judgments on them and theirs for ever.

Ioh. 12. 6.
I hasten to Judas, who least he should lack any damned sin, was also a
Sacrileger: for says the Gospel, he was a thief, and kept the bag. which
Saint Augustine does thus illustrate: Judas fur sacrilegus, non qualiscunque
fur, sed fur loculorum, sed dominicorum, loculorum sed diuinorum: Judas was a
sacrilegious thief, no common thief I tell you, but a thief that stole
money; nor common money, but his masters money, even Gods money. Well then, did
he improoue it? he bought a halter to hang himself withal: now he Act. 1 1^.
was accursed that hanged on a tree; for first in token of fearful
malediction, such an one seemed rejected of both elements, both resting places,
both receptacles, heaven and earth: secondly, he burst in sunder in the midst,
as if his impure spirit was not deighned to be let out at the door that other
men's do, because he had kissed with those lips his Masters mouth. Lastly,
he went to his own place; as if sacrilegious persons had a peculiar in hell,
exempted from the common pit, where according to their transcendent impieties,
they should receive transcendent penalties. What Antiochus did and suffered 1.
Mac. 5. ^1*
in this kind, presuming to rush into the holy Temple of all the world, and
taking away the holy vessels with polluted hands, plucking down the holy
donatiues, that had been dedicated by other Kings, to the augmentation of the
honor of that place, and carrying thence the sacred treasure, 1800. talents, we
may read in the sacred volume: but God smote him with 9. 5.
an incurable and invisible plague, convulsions in his belly, imposthumations
in his bowels, till he concluded a hateful life, with an abhorred death.

Theod. 4. (...).
The Ecclesiastical story mentions Julian, Uncle and steward to the
Apostata, with Felix his companion, like impurest spaniels pissing against the
Communion Table, and giving the bastinado to the Minister that did reprove
them, and scorning at Christ, that the son of Marie should be served in
silver plate, and carrying the Church treasure into the Emperors Exchequer,
with a number more of contemptuous prophanations, at the last were thus
rewarded: the one had his mouth converted into a iakes, that way avoiding the
superfluities of nature; the other the same way evaporating his soul together
with all his blood.

I might here allege Caesar the Dictator, of whom the Poet thus in a true
Epithet,

Lucan. lib. 3.
-- Tristi spoliauit templaruina: and Marcus Crassus, who going to the Parthian
war, first at Rome robbed the sacred treasury; and for that cause of his
own Tribunes, was omnibus diris deuotus, cursed with bell, book, and candle,
as the Papists call it. Then Ios* antiq. 14.
taking Jerusalem in his way, took out of the holy Temple 10000. talents at one
time, beside a great beam of gold, waighing 300. pound, which Eliazarus the
treasurer, upon Crassus oath to redeem the rest, delivered unto him. In that
voyage he was occisione occisus, he and his army slain every mothers son,
and by that loss his country fell into most miserable slavery.

Magdeburg. Cent.
Arnulfus successor to Carolus Crassus in the Western Empire, at the beginning
was very fortunate; but once coming to enjoy peace, and falling to rob and
rifle the Churches, his former felicity did utterly abandon him, and God
punished his greedy hunger, with the lowzy evil, of which in great despair,
within a short time he ended his life.

I might annex hereunto along bead-role of the heathen indignities both of the
Grecians, as Euemerus, Messenius, Hippo, Diagoras, Sosius, Epicurus, and
Dionysius: and Latins, as Q. Scipio, L. Crassus, Fulvius Flaccus, Plemmenius,
Pyrrhus Bremus, and other, that dishallowed their own dieties, and came to
great miseries: for although they were but very devils, or mere idols,
usurping the honors of the true God, and therefore may be said to be but
worthily served, having neither merit to deserve, nor might to revenge those
gross indignities: yet I say not, it was they that inflicted those executions
upon their dishonourers, but our God, as Lactantius has noted; Lac. diu. just.
lib. 2. 4.
not because they abused his corriuals, and those that were not Gods, (for
illumined Princes have used them far worse:) but partly for contemning the
things, which themselves in erroneous judgment, did esteem for Gods; and
partly for profaning those well intended donations, which in intention of
deuourer minds, were meant to the true God: and so becoming first impious
robbers, and then scurrilous deriders, (which were not sufferable) of those
gods which themselves professed, and the good things which other had hallowed.
And this does mightily confute the audacious pillages of our profane people:
for if they were so revenged that wronged the false gods: how much sorer
punishment do we deserve, that worshipping the true, yet practice so high
contempt, so contrary to the principles of our true religion.

Examples in this kind are infinite, but I reserve the rest for another place,
where we shall be occasioned to see further of this matter: these for the
present shall suffice to set forth the horror of this crime, and the
heaviness of the curses that God for the most part uses to inflict upon those
people, that lay unhallowed hands upon his houses, or such chattels, as are
sacred to holy service.

And so much for the first part of this Treatise, which stood in Explication of
the sin, and Censure of Ananias. I hasten to the second in Application.

THE SECOND PART of this Treatise, which stands in Application: and is first
Destructive, in confutation of sundry Sacrilegers.
CHAP. I.
Against Papal alienation of holy demeanes, allotted to holy Worship.
PLato and those virtuous Sages, the first founders of all Philosophy, where
ever they observed either weakness or wickedness in other men, were wont to call
themselves home to private scrutinie, and say, Number and ego sum talis? am I
such? Christians then, whose learning and Philosophy is much more high and
happy, and requires more heart then head, more doing then knowing, must much
more call themselves to account, whether as their books are better, so their
hearts are cleaner then other men.

2. Tim. 3. 16.
Now for as much as all scripture being divinely inspired, is profitable for
doctrine and reproof, for correction and instruction in righteousness, it is
necessary, as we have laid down the doctrine, that we now proceed to the
disclosing of error, that we may encounter such offenders as are eminently
faulty that way. The first and cheise whereof are they of the Church of Rome,
the very heads whereof, the Popes themselves, have done most harm to the
Church of God: First by taking and making away much or most of that, which the
devotion of Christians had bequeathed to God; then set on their champions, I
mean their Chaplains, to mainetaine with reason, that which they had done
without reason.

Thus have the heirs and successors of S. Peter, as they call themselves, made
havoc of the patrimony of S. Peter, like young striplings newly come to
their lands make good penniworths of that they never purchased; and then their
Friars like hungry parasites, must reckon up their discommodities of Tithes,
as if it were the church-mens best husbandry to have nothing. And this has
been perpetrated many ways; I will reckon but four: 1. Lavish profusions:
2. Lewd incorporations: 3. Heathenish alienations: 4. Sacrilegious
compilations. It would ask much time, and wast much paper, to prosecute all
these points as they do deserve: I will touch but the chief heads, and make
my assertion good.

1. Popish profusions.
1. For their sumptuous prodigality, and immodest and immoderate abuse of
church goods, all stories are full, and they that saw day at a little hole,
have said more then enough, which yet was nothing Hierom.
to that which followed. S. Hierome in his 2. Epist. ad Nepotianum, says thus,
Nonnulli sunt ditiores monachi, quam fuerant saeculares, and clerici possident
opes sub Christo paupere, quas locuplete diabolo non habuerant; etc.

Bern.
Bern. ad Cler. in Synod. Remmensi: How should not men follow the vanities and
fooleries of this world, be proud and haughty, idle and apish, when they see
such pride and surquedry in the very Churchmen? De patrimonio crucis Christi,
non paratis codices in ecclesijs, sedpascitis pellices in thalamis: with the
patrimony of the cross of Christ, you do not purchase books in the Church,
but pamper baggages in your chambers. Hence is your bravery of curtezans,
gesture of stage plaiers, apparel like Princes, and plus nitent calcaria quam
altaria, your spurs shine brighter then your altars: hence are your tables so
neat, your presses so full: so goes on, hoc non est ornare sponsam, sed
spoliare; instituere, sedprostituere; pascere gregem, sed mactare: this is not
to adorn the spouse, but to undo her; to instruct her with holy, but infect
her with whoorish conditions; nor to feed the flock, but to kill it.

See Edgars oration to the Clergy. Fox. 220 page
More did that good man speak to Eugenius himself of their pomp and pride,
to Gulielmus Abbas of their luxurious and lavish diet: and not only he but
other also, Mant.
Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara Cynedis
Seruit, honorate divum Ganymedibus aedes.
but I leave this kennell.

2. Popish incorporations.
2. To the end the spring might never be dry that fed their prodigality,
they devised the gulf of incorporations, and cesternes of additions, driving
away the oxen that labored, and eating up the while; their fodder, by keeping
the fattest both tithes and glebe in their own hands, and staruing up the
poor mass priests, and impouerishing the Churches to maintain but four or
five, where so many decads should be maintained. By which devise the silly
staruelings, to get some husks to stanch their hungry stomachs, taught
observation of days, pompaticall funerals, costly commemorations, to build
Churches, set up chapels, erect altars, keep wakes, mumble masses, say
collects, make offerings, hear confessions, purchase redemptions, and a number
more of like superstitions: for live they must, and means they had none left,
but such as they could raise by making themselves necessary.

3. Poplsh pillage.
As for their compilations, where shall I begin, or where shall I make an end?
Boniface the 7. being driven out of Rome for his symoniacall intrusion, robbed
S. Peter's of all the wealth and jewels it had, and went to Constantinople,
where so soon as he could stamp his purchase, a mighty mass, he returns to
Rome, and bribes the chief men, oppresses his opposites, Platina.
and puts out the eyes of John the Decan Card. and recouers his chair again.
Behold, says Platina, a high Priest, a holy father, a Vicar of Christ, robs
the holy Church: and he that should have punished other sacrilegers, is
himself the greatest.

Gregory the 7. to appease the Romans for setting up Rodulfus against Henry
the fourth, divided among them 100000. pound in gold, which he had corraded out
of diverse Churches. Clemens the 6. residing at Auinion, gave leave to them
that kept Naples against the Duke of Aniou, to sell the Church plate to pay the
soldiers. Vrbanus the 6. to assist Charles King of Hungary, whom he had
crowned King of Sicil, robbed all the Churches of Rome of their Chalices,
images, and metal, to turn into money for the army. For the expedition of
Charles 5. against the Turk, it was granted in the Conclaue at Rome, that all
the Clergy should pay five tenths; whereby many religious houses were hardly
driven, many beneficed men forsook their livings, many Churches sold their
plate, and many Colleges pawned their lands; yet went the L. Cardinals free,
that had many fat benefices, as those that were to support the glory of the
sea of Rome.

Clemang^^.
What heaps, what masses of money have gone to the Popes chamber by Annals,
vacations, preuentions, commendations, dispensations for age, for order, for
irregularitie, for deformity? Expectatiue graces, deuolutions, future
vacations, privileges, exemptions not to visit at all, or to visit by proxy,
transactions, permutations, mandates, expeditions, creations, new foundations,
immutations, permutations, reductions of religious into secular, reductions of
secular into religious, procurations, perceptions of profits in absence,
legittimations, non obstantes, indulgences, reuocations, restitutions,
tollerations for keeping concubines, persolutions for not keeping concubines,
rescripts, and a thousand other Chimeraes of names without moment of nature,
and all to be mere nets to catch money, devised in the kitchen?

Not^ be^^.
Which I would have all those well to consider, which think all the geese of
Rome to be swans, and whatsoever bears the Popes stamp to be perfect silver,
persuading us back again to the Babylonian bondage, not knowing (God wot)
what they desire; not a Saul, but a Sisera, with nine hundred chariots of iron,
to bruise and crush both body and soul in sunder.

4. Popish appropriations.
4. Lastly, the appropriating the Tithes and church reuennews to vpstart orders
of superstitious, or more truly sacrilegious hypocrites, until all was taken
away from the true owners, and a miserable pittance left to such as performed
divine service, hardly able to hold life and soul together; as if all religion
had been weary of the Church, and taken up her lodging Doc. Ridlie.
in a cloister: as my learned and worthy Master has showed, in his view of
both laws, most learnedly.

For at what time that learning was almost clean extinguished, partly by the
inundation of barbarous Colonies, who plucked down churches faster then ever
their fathers built them: partly by the distraction of vpstart heresies,
amazing the eyes of most men, with the flourish of formal hypocrisy; then
came Friar Benedict, the founder of regulars, with his discontented devotion,
like a new Saint lately dropped out of heaven, envying himself and his
followers, not only the delights of life, but the necessaries of meat,
drink, apparel, propriety of any thing; and flie-blow'd the world with the
herds of hornets, Praemonstratensis, Cluniacenses, Templaria^s, Hospitallers,
Cystertians, Ioannites, and the rest. So that all the world, especially Popes
and Princes, were wholly ravished with the wonderment of their singularity,
and vied each with other, who should most demerit their devotions, some
enriching them with lands, other enfranchizing them with privileges, all
zealing them to the uttermost of their power.

Among many other ill advised prerogatives, there were two superlatiues, very
pernicious to the Church of God. 1. The appropriation of presentatiue
benefices. 2. The exemptions of Abbey lands from paying tithes: I will but
touch the first. When that hedge of appropriating was once by these wild boars
broke down, then all the beasts of the forest ran thorough, and made it
wider. Then Charles Martell father to King Pepin of France, under color to
end the barbarous wars, wressed all the Tithes into his hands of that country,
protesting to restore them again to the owners, at the end of those wars;
but perfidiously brake his oath, and divided that booty amongst his
launce-knights, that had served him in Balcu^.
war: whereupon there was devised a tale, that Eucherius saw in a vision
Martellus soul in hell; and his grave being opened, nothing was found but a
monstrous serpent in room of his body: for he had deprived Eucherius of his
Bishopric of Amiens before; and also this was but only to the end, that Pepin
should restore the tithes again which his father had taken away. But Martellus
learned that lesson of the Popes themselves; and they when themselves had done
it de facto, made their Friars maintain it de iure: as first Alexander of
Hales, and Aquinas his scholar, the first that maintained that Tithes were de
iure ecclesiastico, not diuino: which Popish conceit has been by diverse
learnedly confuted; as D. Ridlie, D. Carlton, D. Downham, etc.

Cran. 1. 2.
Another reason of alienations (for then were men's wits set on work to devise
colors) was the stiffenes of some vanquished countries; as Freezeland by
Carolus Mag. which could never be brought to pay the Conqueror any tribute,
being free people: but as for Tithes, because other Christians paid them, they
would not much refuse.

Another cause alleged by the same author was this, that the Pope and Bishops
mistrusting that Princes would not otherwise defend their rights and reuennews,
were content to share with them the endowments of the Church under color of a
fee or pencion; choosing of the two, rather an inconvenience, then a mischeife;
who thereupon passed them away unto their seruitours.

And that this is true, appears by an oration of Frederick 1. in an Imperial
diet, to this effect: Id. 6. 52. Sax.
As to you my Lords of the Clergy, the Pope and you think much, that lay men
should hold any Tithes, or any thing that has bin given to the Church, not
remembering that in your need, you have been beholding to our arms: in regard
of which pious services, we were requited again with such things as these, you
having enough beside: Thus the Emperor.

Aventine. 4.
Others, as the Bishops of Bauaria, gave all they had of Church living and
vessel to the people of Hungary to redeem their lives and liberties: for
necessity had no law.

Among other in England, William the Conqueror upon his victory over Harald,
appropriated 3. parish Churches to the Abbey of Battle, which he built in
memory of the same where he had fought: and William Rufus 20. parishes of the
new forest, to the Church of Sarum: and many other, many like matters.

And all this we may thank the Pope for; who in this country alone, as M.
Cambden has observed, M. Cambden.
of 9284. parishes, impropriated 3845. that is, almost the one half: so that
they need not charge our religion with that scurrilous proverb, that Pater
noster built up Churches, but Our father pulled them down again. For 1. it was
no Protestants that did alienate at all: 2. no Protestants that did procure the
suppression of religious houses in the time of Henry 8. but the proud Cardinal
himself: 3. not Protestants only that inhabit those houses at this day:
lastly, not Protestants that have defended this fact in their writings to the
world: and therefore we may retort their Latin with their own learning, Pater
noster, and Aue Marie, have been the rankest thieves in Christendom.

From these comes that distinction to some of ours, de iure diuino, and humano,
that tithes partake of all the three of Moses laws; 1. Moral, for a
competencie: Ceremonial, for a mystery: Iudaical, for that policy: decepti
and decip^entes, taking error up first upon credit, and after retaling it out
to their petty chapmen.

Now then let us a little consider this Popish argument, whereupon they have
grounded all this fact Of Tithes.
of Alienation, whether it will endure the Test or no.

Thus then both Hales and Aquinas have reasoned; The Papists a^gum.
the first as the Irrefragable, the second as the Angelical D. Whatsoever is
not of divine right, but positive by the Church, that is no sacrilege to alter
or to alienate: but Tithes are not of divine right, but merely of the Church:
ergo.

^ib 2. 79. of Eccl. pol.
1. Concerning the Mayor, our learned Hooker and many other, have answered
thus: The obligation wherewith the Church of Christ has now bound herself, by
vow and consecration, to pay tithes, having many ages since dedicated them unto
God as a free will offering, makes them so firm, that it is not in the power of
any now to retract them, or unhallow them again; ergo, the Mayor is mainly
false.

That they are diui^ (...).
2. But to the Minor it has bin showed, that t^thes stand upon the same ground
that the Sabbath does, being both in their number before the Law, and by Moses
only repeated, as many other things that were commanded, before they were
prescribed. The morality or naturalitie of which was this, that God out of all
the fruits of the earth, and cattle fit for man's use, should have a tenth;
first, as an acknowledgement of his Universal government: secondly, for the
contentment of his seruitours and attendants. The Ceremony or Leuiticallitie
(fauelle verbo) to be annexed to the Priests and Ministers during the standing
of the Tabernacle; but alterable and altered from the Jewish Synagogue to the
Christian service. Ob. But what evidence out of the New Testament, what footing
in the Apostolical writings? Ans. First, it needed no directer reestablishment,
and expresser naming then the sabbath; therefore idle to ask it. Then if it
did need, yield we so much reverence unto Proved by th new testament
the Fathers, that as they came nearer those prime and purest times, so they saw
more in their illumined learning, then we of dimmer sight and abortiue births.

Mat. 22. 2^.
1. Then S. Augustine has grounded Tithes upon that of our Savior, Give to
Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods. Hom. 48. sermon.
quadrag.

Mat. 23 23.
2. Origin upon those words, These things ought ye to have done, and left not
the other undone. Hom. 11. in Numb.

Act. 6 2.
3. Chrysostom. there, as Zanch. has delivered, It is not fit, that we should
leave the word of God, and serve tables: therefore look out men among your
selves, namely for the collection of Tithes, etc. de redempt. praecept. 4.

4. Other, in Paul, If we have sown spiritual things to 1. Cor. 9. 9.
you, is it much if we reap your carnal? as M. Sclater has touched.

Gal. 6. 6.
5. Luther there, Let him that is instructed in the word, make his instructor
partaker of all his goods.

Heb. 7. 8.
6. Some there on this, Here men that die receive Tithes; but there he
receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives: as Bede, of which
Carlton.

Which foundations for Tithes, if yet they shall seem not sufficient direct, I
doubt whether such questionists will not yet doubt, whether snow be white.
Reasons, why they ^re not mentioned in Scripture.
But it is often required, why did not Christ or his Apostles name Tithes, and put
the matter out of controversy? let me first retort this argument, as he did,
who when his adversary had said, Si satis est negare, quis erit nocens?
replied, Si satis est accusare, quis erit innocens? but I will show why.

First, very many matters, that touch the foundation pass unmentioned, but
not vnmeant; the consubstantialitie of the Son, which the Arrians did oppose;
particular faith, which the Papists; pedobaptisme, which the Anabaptists; and
the Sabbath, which the Antisabbatarians do object, are not named, of which it
is heresy to doubt or deny; therefore the reason is rotten, to say they are not
named, therefore are not.

Secondly, the Synagogue was yet standing, whereto by divine prescriptions
Tithes were tied; which though by the death of Christ, she received her deaths
wound, yet then was not dead; and when dead, not presently buried, but with
reverence and honor, as the Fathers say, to be put into the grave; so that
till after her funerals, there was no paying of legacies.

Thirdly, the state of the new Church was such as yet had neither peace nor
prince, so that this was no time to put in her claim, but to expect till God
should stir her up some foster Fathers, to order her right.

Fourthly and lastly, for fear of scandal: for as Christ did forbear a time
to tell of his passion; and at his death, I have many other things to say unto
(...) 1^. 16.
you, quae non potestis portare modo, which you are not able to bear as now: so
did the Apostles somewhile conceal the point of the resurrection, till the
world was better acquainted with their doctrine. The like reason was of this,
least they might be thought as out of covetousness to provide for themselves:
which modesty as it was in them commendable, so it has been in us
prejudicial; the world serving their own turn upon our ingenuitie; thinking we
need nothing because we say nothing. And this may be sufficient for the silence
of the new Scriptures.

What a cloud of witnesses, both of the Fathers, Councels, heathen, schoolmen,
late writers, all writers, D. Carlton, and other have collected, I omit to
touch, least I should actum agere, or put my sicle in others harvest.

I will add a few reasons, that joined to their authorities, may make it
plain, after I have named the writers that are direct in this point. 1. For
Fathers:

1. Fathers.
1. Origin in Numb. 11. 2. Cypr. Epist. 66. 3. Chrysostom. hom. 4^. in Mat. 4. Ambr.
sermon. 40. 5. Hierom. in Mat. 3. 8. 6. August. hom. 48.
2. Councels.
1. Malisconens. cap. 5. 2. Cabitonens. cap. 18. 3. Mognatin. cap. 38. 4.
Rotomag. cap. 10. 5. Triburtin. cap. 13. 6. Anglican. cap. 17.
3. Schoolmen.
1. Hug. de san. vie. par. 12. c. 4. 2. Aqu. 2. ^. q. 87. ar. ^. 3. Carthus. in
Mat. 22. 4. Rabanus in Mat. 23. 5. Bed. in scintille. 6. Pererius in Genesis 14.
4. New Divines.
1. Brent. in Leuit. 27. 30. 2. Iunius in parall. 3. 7. 3. Gual. in Matthew. 23.
and Luc. hom. ^8^. 4. Nansea hom. 75. de temp. 5. Zanch. de oper. redemp. lib.
5. c. 18. 6. Hospinian de orig. decimar.
5. Heathen.
1. Plutarch. in Lucul. 2. Diodor. Si^ulus. 5. 2. 3. Pausanias lib. 5. 4.
Herodotus in Clio. 5. Plin. de Sabae. and Ethiop. 6. Purchase of the Turks and
Alarbes in Africa: beside Zenophon, Festus, etc. And now to the reasons.
6. Reasons.
1. To the end that neither the giver may brag, nor the receiver blush (says
one,) that is, the people should not vpbraid the Minister with their bounty,
nor the Minister be ashamed to take his duty, therefore in old time, they
were to do both in the Temple; therefore where tithes are not paid in kind,
the Minister must sooth his Masters, or he shall be sure to sigh for his
means. So* Philo and Thephylact.

2. The Apostle commands, and the world expects, that the Minister be given
to hospitality, although S. Paul's (...), differs much from that keeping good
houses which men expect of their Minister, which cannot be done by them that
live upon a dry stipend: and therefore tithes in kind are the most convenient
for the Minister.

3. Tithes of all other kind of maintenance, (as our men are enforced to
confess, that think they are but of humane constitution) are the most
natural, convenient, wise, safe, indifferent of all other: therefore rightest
way to maintain the Minister: except we will say, that God has not provided
so meetely for those that preach the Gospel, as might be done.

4. The first intendments of appointing Tithes (in all the judgments of
reverent antiquity) by God to the old Priesthood, was to serve for an
acknowledgement of his Universal power and right of the creatures, granted to
their comfort. In which regard, the learned Calvin calls tithes, proprium Dei
ius, and regium vectigal, his peculiar right, and regal tribute: now the
equity of this remains in the Church, no less then in the Synagogue: Ergo.

5. The Ministers, as they are in their callings the means of Gods blessing
subordinate to Christ, and types of his dealing to all the people; so it is
equal they have equal share, in the mercies and judgments of God, that they
may both ways sympathize with their people, and serve their turn with their
sensible prayers: which is not done in a set stipend; neither singing at the
harvest, nor weeping in times of dearth; neither winning nor loosing, how ever
the world goes.

6. And lastly, for the parishioners own particular; he cannot have so
comfortable a fruition of the creatures of God; nor satisfy his conscience any
way so soundly, as by sacrificing a portion of his corn and increase unto his
God, and communicating with his Minister in all his goods. These I take it may
serve in this matter, to prove that Tithes are due. I meddle not exprofesso,
with that question, my purpose is only to show that these things being holy
(whether by divine ordination, or humane constitution,) they should be
inviolable, (...), and should not have been prostituted by the unholy fathers,
as they have been. In which case I can say no Aelian.
other, but that the devil has done like Anytus, one of the 30. tyrants, that
usurped upon the State at Athens; who finding Socrates to stand in his way, and
hinder his conclusions, devised this means to be rid of him: he hires the
idle-headed Poet Aristophanes, to traduce the good man openly upon the stage,
both to work him that way some open disgrace, and to sound the peoples liking
of his worse entreating. The matter sorted so well to the tyrants mind, that
the Poet for gain, and the people for game, gave way to the cup of hemlocke,
and Socrates death.

The enemy of our salvation does bear the like spleen to the ministers of the
Gospel, thorough whose sides he seeks to wound, and work out true religion,
as men that indeed do mar his markets. The Pope in the devils pageant has
acted the Poet, to scandalize their profession, by withdrawing their
sustentation; persuading the world, that high poverty is the way to high
perfection, and that a freeze gown is habit enough for holy professors,
(wherein I wonder so holy a father does not go before, or at least accompany
us in the way to holiness) and to possess nothing, the only way to
happiness.

Therefore let them that have any portion of Gods spirit, any spark of grace,
any conscience of well-doing, any care of God-seruing, stop their ears at this
Siren of sin, the charms of profit: remember but whose brat it is, out of
what scullerie it came, and let them if they can, if they dare approve it.

Mark but how he has in all times wrought upon this advantage, see whether he
be not indeed of that woluish kind that first gave Rome suck. Observe what he
has done through Christendom, by that he has done by a few countries.

Cleman.
Clemangis says, that he had out of France from Cathedral Churches and
Abbeys, not accounting Bishoprics, or other inferior callings, 697. thousand
750. franks of yearly reuenew. Whereunto if other did proportion themselves,
his incomes were little less then 6. or 7. millions by the year.

Vespergen.
Germany paid him yearly 300000. florens, and Charles Duke of Aniow for the
Kingdom of Sicilie 40000. ducats.

Mat. Pa:
To leave other, Wallo, Otho, Steven his legates here, conveyed out of England
mighty masses, and banks of treasure; and when they had taxed all above
ground, they extorted a good sum also for the corn under ground. Peter
Rubeus at one time carried more money out of the land, then he left behind him:
Martin when there was no more money to be had, took the very horses out of
the stables: and it was proved in a Parliament, that in the space of 44.
years, that is, from the beginning of Hen. 7. to the time that Hen. 8. did
clean expel him, he received for Bulls alone of Bishops, ten hundred and 60.
thousand pounds.

No marvel then though he grew rich, and all the world poor: for he rightly
resembled Gedeons fleece, who was wet and moist when all other were dry, and
shall again be dry, when all the world is wet. For John 22. left behind him
25. thousand Antoninus.
thousand crowns, or 250. tons of gold. Calixtus 3. 150000. florens, in a
false bottom under his chamber. Sixtus 5. 5. millions of his own corrading.
Well fare their hearts; all sacrilegers that ever were, were but bunglers to the
Popes. For as a poor pirate sometime A^lian.
answered Alexander the great; I scour the Aegean, but you the Ocean, I rob
a poor merchant or two, but you make purchase of all the world: so are other
offenders in this kind, to their holiness: by which means, he has been the
most bloody persecutor that ever infested the Church. For as it was said of
Dioclesian, that he was no body to Julian: for Dioclesian did but tollere
presbyteros; but Julian sustulit presbyterium: for the hand of the one was but
against the professors, but the other aimed at the profession, taking away
their saleries, not meddling with their safeties: so that it was hard for
Christianity, when they had no means left to teach and instruct the comers
on, which while it was had, sanguis martyrum was semen Christianoru^, the blood
of Martyrs caused more Christians. But of the Pope enough; and so much of the
first sort of offenders in sacrilege.

CHAP. II.
Against Puritans Cauillations at the means and matters sacred to Gods service.
I Come next to encounter another enemy of this doctrine, clean opposite to
the Papists upon the other hand: The Puritan or Separatist, who are according
to their own definition, refined protestants, but to others, Gospellers out of
their wits; men drunken with their own wine, but with difference, some more
soberly besotted, other more frantickely intoxicated.

These misliked the maintenance of Ministers by Tithes, as either Papal, or at
least Judicial: but your stipends and contributions, under the nature of pure
alms, that is just for their tooth: and I wish them the cold reuersion of a
cast almes-house for their labor. And no marvel, for I have known some that
have thriued better, and have been feathered warmer, upon brethrens
benevolence, (being able to purchase lands, let out money to use, by railing at
the State, and barking against Bishops, and lying by the heels in humor) then
many of their betters could ever do upon ordinary provisions, or
extraordinary promotions. No marvel then they mislike the maintenance: their
way is better: and before they misliked the Church means, they fell out of
love with the Church it self, the edifices, ornaments, ceremonies, sacraments,
and whatsoever is not purum putum.

These men I say are sacrilegers: for first they have defiled our holy
sacraries, with their Bedlam Rhetoric, more fowly then ever they were with
Babylonish relics: tearming them Temples of Baal, sties of Antichrist, cages
of unclean birds, etc. Nay, some have commenced to such a degree of holy
frenzy, that they have abhorred the very tongue wherein superstition has
talked, as the language of the beast, (then happily true, when themselves do
speak it.) But I leave the persons, and come to the point, only adding thus
much: as Sampsons foxes were sundred I^dg 17* 4.
in the head, but combined by the tail; so the Puritan and Papist, though their
devises differ, their ends are one, to subvert religion; not professedly as do
the Turks, yet by consequence and necessary ^. H* Spelman.
inference, most subtily. For as a learned Gentleman has lately written; Tithes
have been Gods ancient demean, and nobler part of his inheritance, founded
primarily on the law of nature, as that principle which teaches to honor God;
(we being in justice, bounty, and gratuitie, bound to acknowledge his bounty
and Sovereignty:) But glebe land, and houses (howsoever now used in the nature
of moueables) are his fixed inheritance, and seats of his mansion, not so
ancient, yet now as proper, given by devout men, grounded on the warrant of
the Leuiticall cities, as it were a holy portion of lan^ for his Ministers to
dwell on.

For Vrbanus the sixth, Bishop of Rome, in anno 222. did first alter that
Communion of the Primitive Act. ^. 34.
Church, that we read of in the Acts: who thought it expedient in those purest
times, for the perpetual releife of the Church, not to sell the lands, as they
did in the Apostles times (as this fact of Anantas shows) but to keep them
themselves; because of the casualtie in pecuniarie contributions.

(...) Temp.
And although Abbey lands were given to s^perstitious uses, yet both Ciuilians
and Canonists agree, that long custom may prescribe in this case, though the
beginning had been erroneous. And as we shall see elsewhere, in donations to
superstitious uses, their super may be mended, but their stitious continued.
As for Abbey lands, I wish King Henry 8. had not taken away the subject of the
question, there is an other reason and question of them. But Bishops lands were
given upon the first planting of the Churches; and if such Temporalties of
Bishops, and those which they called matrices Ecclesiae: much more tithes of
Gods own institution, or at the least given by the common consent of the
Christian world. All which endowments, not we, but the ancient Fathers (as
Hom* 18 in Act.
Augustine, Cyprian, Chrysostom, and the rest,) call patrimonium Christi, dotem
Sponsae, Christi sacram possessionem, and praedia sancta.

Therefore let us not correct magnificat, and in presumptuous novelty,
condemn and contemn all antiquity. The word Church, or as our Northren
Brittan calls it, Kyrck, is but the corruption of (...), to say, the Lords
house: which so long as the world was enflamed with the sacred fire of
devotion, every hand and heart desired to sanctify it self, to adorn, and
endow. But now since that was quenched, and the sacred fire of rapine and
sacrilege has bin kindled; men leave to be zealous, and learn to be
sacrilegious, becoming execrable by touching execrables.

As for those lights of Gods Church, whose learning we love, and names
reverence; I speak of Calvin and the rest, whose authority is urged against
us; who for the profanation, fell out with the Consecration of these things;
like the Athenian that came to Aristides, Arist. Pol.
to have him write Aristides name to banish him by the law of Ostracisme; yet it
was not for any crime that either had committed, but that for want of means,
and leisure from other employments, they were no better acquainted with the
parties: yet Calvin misliked of tithes, only because they were obtruded
sacerdo^ali iure, not if they had been maintained ministeriali iure: being well
assured that reverent man would be little pleased were he living, to hear his
name opposed against the Church, that spent all his time and means in the
behalf of the Church: no more then he was with his zealous Auditor, that so
extolled his sermons, that if S. Paul and S. Calvin were to preach in one
hour, he would leave S. Paul to hear S. Calvin.

For you, I wish you better advised, least God observe by whom he is impeached:
your meaning may be good, but have of your way has out-galloped your good
intent; and precipitancie in judging, has forestalled your judgment. For I
beseech you look back into your preposterous courses, and tell me what manner
of propositions these be: Tithes, Prelacies, Churches, demeanes, and dignities
are all Antichristian, the marks of the beast, the garments of the whore, the
sties of the devil. Lentardus 600. years since, made himself away in very
deep desperation, having taught that these things were idle and superfluous:
and many among you, having been drawn away from the mother Church, after your
whistles and oaten pipes, finding hollownesse in your holiness, have done
little better: whereby many of your Doctors have been murderers of Gods people,
and if not violatores, inuaders your selves of Gods inheritance, yet ye have
been traditores, betrayers of it to other, and traitors to your Master. For as
in the trade of pursing, there are setters, and there are actors; so it cannot
be denied, that if you did not commit the robberies your selves, yet you
plotted the matches, and were partakers of the purchase.

For who were they that egged on the Herodians to beg our revenues, and set on
the soldiers to cast a chance for Christ's coat again? were they not some men
in your coats, that put up bills and petitions to the Parliament house, to
pluck down Churches, to erect Chapels, to ruin many to rear one? Who were
they that would have made the world believe, that Bishops were Antichristian
callings, and elders were the worthy governors? that so not in every
Diocese, but in every parish, for a Bishop you might erect a superintendent in
name, a Pope in truth? Who was it that called the Vultures to the spoil, and
the beasts unto the prey, with an Edomites voice, crying, Down with them,
down with them even to the ground; and a Moabites tongue, Up Moab to the
spoil? by which means both the Canaanite is still in the land, and the
Edomite has devoured all: and all the cost bestowed on Gods house is counted
Popery, and all the means that comes not of Alms is held tyranny: So that
shortly we shall not be so holy as horses; for they may be stabled in Churches:
but we shall not have our ceremonies so well as in stables; but either in
houels, or under hedges, the Ministers having no more respect then grooms and
ostlers; and the land no religion at all, or so many as there are Churches, by
means of every new fanglednes. 2. Pet. 2. 3.
But what says Peter? They who through covetousness make merchandise of the
word of God, their judgment lingreth not, and their damnation sleeps not:
and our Savior, Who so breaks the least of these commandments, and teach men
so to do, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven. And so much of
the second sort.

CHAP. III.
Against Laymens usurpations of holy demeanes, with answer to their cauils.
NOw come I to Laymen, who have invested themselves with Tithes and Church
possessions, some under color of pious offices, most without color, making
them or taking them for things of mere appropriation; like the frosen Serpent,
so long harbored by the farmers fire, till it had recovered life, and then
driving his kind host out of his own house. Many of whose court-rowls, if they
were well suruaied, would be found as women's accoustrements, which is mundus,
indeed a world of trinkets; but in that world, the woman is minimapars sui: so
if every bird had her own feather, and every Church her true tithe, many of
them would not have the tithe of that they hold. Such is the age wherein we
live, wherein nothing is accounted ill that can be gained: the names of sins
for the most part (as this of Sacrilege) containing more horror then the sins
themselves, as I could instance in many. The sin of Usury, that was of old
so odious to God and man, the usual theme of childrens declamations, is now
grown so well reconciled, that no trade is more compendious, warrantable,
universal; as if the venomous teeth were either fallen out with age, or the
vicious quality were so well corrected, that all borrowers were enriched by
it. But as one has well said, if the teeth are rebated for biting, yet the
gummes are hard in nipping: so that it may be truly said of this, as is spoken
of the great Turk, The grass will never grow more where the Grand Seniors
horse has set his foot: sieldome has any state recovered, that has been
beholden unto the Usurer: Yet call a demure professor, by the name of usurer,
though Nouerint Vniuersi, all the world does know it, he will have an action
against you. Now what is the reason of this, but that he cannot endure to
hear, what he can be content to be? the word contains some kind of
malignitie, the money has none, but like the Tole-monie which the Emperor
Vespasian raised of his subjects urine, bonusest odor lucri ex re qualibet. I
might in like manner go through the whole Cyclopadie of sin, theeuing,
whoring, swearing, drinking, and stabbing: the same is the case of sacrilege,
the word is harsh, the name infamous, but the thing of a better aspect, and the
profit of good acceptance.

In which regard many of our great Magnificos have acted us Hercules furens,
who coming into Venus Temple, and there finding a golden Adonis, put that in
his pocket with this pretty quip, At tu nihil sacries: Your mastership is no
deity: so whatsoever these men could finger in Church or churchyard, so long
as it is neither Saint nor shrine, they hold for good purchase, and have been
content to pocket many such wrongs.

Yet the King of Ammon shaued but half the beards of David's Ambassadors (for
they might be too long) and clipped but half their clothes (they might be too
heavy) but our shauers, because they would be sure to leave no superfluous
excrement, have taken away also the necessary tegument; so that in some sense
we may (though with our shame) be challenged by the Papists, that Pater noster
built up Churches, but Our Father has plucked them down again.

Our devout predecessors out of their ignorance, did but abuse the materials of
holiness; but our modern demure professors, out of our much learning, have
quite taken them away. Many joined in the work of the reformation, without
true meaning to reformation, more studying for gold then serving of God, and
more thirsting for the goods of the Church, then any good to the Church: so
that we may write of our reformators, as a Frenchman did of the last civil
broiles of their pacificators, Vulcanum aut folles, aut ars ignota fefellit
(...) dum vult cudere, cudit (...).
All sat not well with Vulcan sure, his hammer, or his head:
Reformers he did mean to make, but has deformers bred.
For as S. August. said of some heretics, to establish their own devises,
misinterpreting the Scriptures, de medicamentis sibi vulnera faciunt, make
themselves sores of the very salues: we may truly say to have fallen out in
this case, that the medicine has proved worse then was the malady: the one
failing but in the manner, but we in the very matter; as is touched elsewhere.
Therefore as foolish and iladuised Plut.
people, flying the invasion of thieves or wild beasts, fall into whirle-pooles,
or break-neck places: so while these undertakers had their eye another way,
flying from superstition, have ingulfed themselves in irreligion; either
ouer-looking, or at least ouer-leaping true religion between them both. For
whereas the first donors showed humanity in the efficient, impelling, or
moving cause; our goodly correctors have failed in the final: for where men
of more devotion then instruction took superstition for religion, which was
the minor; these men of more greediness then godliness, have taken
destruction for edification, which is the mayor: and so the last error has
been worse then the first. Wherein they seem little to have differed from the
soldiers, that cast a chance for Christ's coat: saving that those suffered
Christ to have his life in it; these have not only parted his garments among
them while he is alive, but so much as in them lies, pushed at his life, to
possess them securely, embezeling the maintenance that should propagate his
Kingdom.

Abuse objected.
But it has been much and often objected, that the Ecclesiastical livings were
fowly abused in former times; and therefore it was thought good by the State
they should be suppressed. I grant the abuse: but what? is abuse become a
warrant for abolishment? what Logic is this? or what law for poor Churchmen?
The Philosopher would deny though wine is abused, that the vine should be
rooted out: the like would the scholar do for books; the Statesmen for arms;
the Lawmakers for scepters; the Divines for Scriptures. All which things if
they may have leave to stand, and to rectify their abuse, shall the Church yet
forfeit all, if her revenues shall be abused?

But say that Abbeyes and Monasteries were abused; and let it not be the fault
so much of the men, as of the matters themselves; what have our Cathedral and
rural Churches deserved? Admit that Babylon must go down; but why must
Bethelem bear her company? May I not as truly complain herein, as sometime
Athanasius did; Esto, peccauerit Athanasius, at quid alij Episcopi fecerunt,
aut quem Arsenium occiderunt? Suppose that Athanasius indeed were guilty, yet
what have other Bishops done; have other Bishops killed Arsenius also? So
though Abbeys had deserved their doom, what can be pretended against
Bishoprics, Deanries, Dignities, Cathedrals, and Colleges, and poor country
Parsonages? all are not tainted with the same imputations, yet all have been
exposed to the same maledictions.

Which had they been spared, and Gods houses pell-mell not so invaded, the wills
of the dead had bin better fulfilled, the infanterie of learning otherwise
provided, the honor of God more carefully furthered, their dying consciences
better comforted, and their own successions and estates more firmly
established. Now desolation is written upon many of their doors, and
extirpation has seized on their families, while Zim and Iim dance in their
parlors, Ochim and Ostraches scritch in their palaces; the fathers for the
most part dying either comfortless, or childlesse; the sons living either
graceless, or landlesse: the fathers sustaining the infamy of robbers, the
sons enduring the misery of beggars: both fathers and sons like Jonas
whale, sick in their states and stomachs, until they had regorged the fat
morsells which their hungry stomachs had too hastily swallowed. Nay, tell me if
your selves have not observed, that many of such demeanes have proved like
Seianus horse, that never had owner, but either he brake his neck, or blessed
him with some other misfortune. Avery remarkable judgment of God, to infuse a
malignitie into the very lands, that no man should thrive that holds them, no
man should escape some egregious mischief that has them. I will say nothing
of the Suppressors themselves, of whom a very great man of this Kingdom has
written, L. Cook.
that eadem temporis periodo, it has been fatal to some mighty Monarchs at
the same term of time, to have their successors exterminate that invaded the
holy possessions, De male quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres.


There was a far better president shown unto the world some 300. years
since, against such kind of Stat. Eduar. 2.
Alienations, by a statute made by Edward 2. by disposing the goods of the
Templars, (who for their great impiety of their disordered order, was then
extinguished) to the hospitaller-Knights of S. John in Jerusalem; with this
prouiso, Ne in pios vsus erogata, contra donatorum voluntatem in alios vsus
distrah^rentur; to say, that the lands so given to pious uses, should not
against the Donors intension, be distracted, and turned to other profane
purposes. Which equal dealing might also in this case have been practiced, if
men had equally propounded to themselves their aim, the glory of God, and not
their own gain.

Other objections.
But there are many things slanderously devised, and injuriously enforced
against us, to legittimate their own sacrilegious dealing, and justify our
deserved suffering: their high deserts, our great unworthiness; the
disproportion of the things themselves, and the incongruity in other countries.

Of all which in general I may say, as sometime Hierom.
Hierome did, Ingemui fateor, minus nobis inesse voluntatis ad propugnandam
veritatem, quam inest illis inuidentiae ad inculcandum mendacium: it grieved me
I confess, to see that we have less will to auerre our true propositions,
then our enemies have malice to enforce their false conclusions.

Great men's great deserts.
1. First, therefore as to their deserts; let me say as Alexander did, to
silence Ephestion contending against Craterus: At quantae opes, aut quod tuum
facinus, si quis tibi demat Alexandrum tuum? and I pray sir, what may your
mighty means or merits be, if we except your Sovereigns favor? To be
clothed in scarlet, and fare deliciously every day, is cause enough to ery,
heu quanta patimur! oh our pains! oh our services! But supposing that the
services were as big as their ambitions can feign them; and as many as their
parasites could strain them; yet not like the merits of Zopyrus to his Master,
that to win him Babylon, did endure the ampulation of his ears, and mutilation
of his members: But though they had won their King another Monarchy, yet
must they still fall short of the Clergy; and howsoever, yet not to be rewarded
out of the Church, but the Exchequer.

But alas, that men cannot raise the walls of their own worthiness, but upon
the rubbish of others ruins. We envy not their honors, nor seek to supplant
their fortunes: let them despise us as supercisiously as they please, yet when
they have done, our calling shall be both honorable with God, and noble in it
self, and meritorious to the world, howsoever our persons shall be esteemed;
both for birth and breeding not inferior to many of our maligners. But to omit
these titles not ours, why should not Pallas and Apollo have as fair charters
to invest their clients with earnests of honor, as any of the other dieties?
Why should not the arts and learned studies, privilege as much as the Hall or
Burse? why should not the Queen of learning Divinity, raise her followers as
high as an other petty Lady about the town? Therefore let no man, that has
nothing to allege but his fathers conueiances, vpbraid our callings and
degrees of schools, with superannated cauillations: for even our inferior
Graduates have paid more, and deserved better for those their titles of
approbation, then they that mock them, and only know thus much in themselves,
that they know nothing worth knowledge. Chrysostom as is well known, writes a
tract of set purpose, beside many other places of his works, to prove that a
Bishop is not only equal, but superior unto a King: which if it be a strain
too high, yet it is clear, that the most eminent Princes that ever were,
thought it their glory, to annexe the illumination of Priests to the
sublimations of their Soueraignties. And those greatest Prophets, Esaias and
Daniel, that were of the blood royal, thought it no disparagement to serve the
Church: Bartholmew among the Apostles, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Petronius,
Metrophanes, Eusebius, Emissenus, Victorinus, Cassianus, and a number more of
the famous Bishops, were very nobly descended. But what speak I of such, or of
yesterday? are not the ^. Sam. 8. 18.
sons of David the most noble Princes of the blood? 1. Ch^o. 18. 17.
yet elsewhere termed sacerdotes, priests? not that they were so in propriety
of speech, but because that title deciphered the truest honor and best
nobility among the ancient Worthies. And what is that title and emblem, of
not only honor but also use, of that calling, which not a Prophet of Israel
to magnify his own calling, but a King of Israel styleth* Elisha 2 King. 1 12.
by, My father, my father, the Chariots of Israel, and horsemen of the same: a
predication incompetent to the greatest Monarch.

But whether do I digress in my just complaint, which I end with the Princely
Prophet, Have mercy Psa. 123. vlt.
on us O Lord, for we are utterly contemned, our soul is even filled in her
self with the scornful reproof of the mighty, and with the deceitfulness
of the proud.

To return then to the point, men must not rob Peter to pay Paul, or more
truly rob both Peter and Paul, to pay a Centurion, or gratify a minion. The
Church and commonwealth are two distinct bodies, having each their offices,
their charges, their pensions: concerning which our Savior has set down,
date Caesari quae sunt Caesaris, and Deo quae Dei sunt.

As to the validity of Princes gift in this case, who am I to decide such
questions? and yet learned men have been of this mind, that howsoever in their
own individual persons, they may by their Unction be enabled to possess such
lands; yet may they not transfer the same from themselves to any other, not
in like sort qualified: as things that are alterius fori and eminentioris
sceptri, matters belonging to a higher Court, and subject to a greater
cognizance. Therefore the learned Kickerman, is so bold as to Syst. Proli^. 1.
2^.
bind the hands of Princes in this case, saying, they may not transfer things
sacred and dedicate to holy uses, no not in case they had been abused to
superstition and profanation. And therefore holy Bishops, as Ambrose, and
Bernardus of Halbertade in Germany, chose rather to die, then to part with
their Churches, and Church livings. We read how stoutly that Madgebur.
Father did contest with a mighty Emperor; We yield (says he) unto the
Emperor all that is his due: is it his tribute that he does demand? his
tribute we deny not: is it the Church he does require? we may not betray the
Church unto him: Gods Church is none of Caesar's charge, he may not have to do
therewith, etc.

But God of heaven be blessed, we need no such Apology for the Kings person,
who are most bound to God for his Majesty's most Royal and religious heart,
that has been so far from taking away, that he has labored earnestly and
zealously to restore back again whatsoever is essential to the Church; but
as for other we say no other, but those words of Act. 19. 15.
a homely author: Paul we know, and Jesus we know, and Caesar we know; vos autem
qui estis? but who are you, that so defraud Jesus, and Paul, and Caesar also?
And so much to them that plead their deserts to Churchliuings.

The Clergies unworthiness.
2. I come to a second, Church-mens unworthiness: Bishops do not preach, and
dignified men do no good; conclude, therefore laymen may, nay must have In
Cyropaed.
their lands. Zenophon did whip young Cyrus for a better argument, because he
gave the greater coat to the greater boy; not because he had right unto it,
but because it fitted him better: and the lesser coat to the lesser boy; the
Prince therein offending in distributive justice, a point of Ethics only. But
were Zenophon now alive to judge of this fact, he would I fear me, hang up
them that should commit such solecismes against Ethics, politics, logic,
and divinity: Bishops do not preach; therefore Barons must have their
Bishoprics: why? do Barons preach? church men do no good, therefore churles
must have the Tithes: why? do church robbers so much good? Blush impiety: does
he care for preaching that plucks down the Church? or he mind goodness, that
is enemy to godliness? what is this but to strain at a gnat, and swallowe a
cammel? to devour the Church, and cough at the chair? although I rest assured
it is not the dew of heaven (preaching,) that you look after; but the fat of
the earth, the pottage and portion of Esau. Moses gave a dispensation to
quinquagenarians, to cease from the ordinary services Leu. 4. 2.
of the Temple, to commence to places of regiment: and will you tie the graie
hairs of age and reverence, to an everlasting apprentiship of study and
speech? like your mill-horse at home to his wonted task? shall your seruitour,
and horse of service, and the very mill-horse which I named, have immunitie
and cessation of years and labor; and must your spiritual Pastor and Father,
your Priest and Prophet, run rownde in an everlasting circle, damned to this
destiny by your inequall doom; and clime up into the pulpit, till he can no
longer come down, but tumble down with age and feeblenes, to be the miserable
laughing stock of the profane fry? nay, are there not more and more
honorable, and no less necessary services for old men, then are of young? Oh
teach not thy son, thy servant so evil a lesson to curse thee in thy age.
The youngest infant in the chimney corner, is often made the rod of Gods wrath,
to revenge the irreverent carriage of a wicked Cham, to an aged Noah. But
Bishops do preach, witness the most commendable and indefatigable pains of
many of those prelates, that are most eminent in the land; whom neither this my
answer can honor, nor your imputation slander. I say no more, Non tali
auxilio, nec defensoribus istis Tempus eget. --

The rest do no good, you say, they keep no houses* is all goodness in
housekeeping? then much of the nobiltie and gentry of this land, do very
little good: yet Churchmen keep houses; not for you perhaps, that would live
at free cost, yet for their poor neigbours: howbeit perchance neither all, nor
for all, nor always: for quis ad haec sufficiens? but those that do not what
they may, aetatem habent, I leave to their own apologies. Wherefore this
eauill of our unworthiness, I hold but the idle euaporation of godles brains,
that hold other men, especially our calling, worthy of nothing; themselves
worthy of all: but they are not our judges, neither is it reasonable, that our
enemies should be both our accusers, and witnesses, and judges, and excutioners
also. God did never license any Laymen so far, when ^sa. 56. 10.
the Priests were at the very worst, dumb Dogs, idol Mat. 8. 16.
Shepherds, drowsy watchmen, blind guides, to withhold their dues: and good
Kings have ordained, that no man under color omitted by the Minister, Hen. 8.
shall detain his Tithes, etc. and so did the old Canons, Nonnulli vitam
clericorum quasi abominabilem Conc. Constan.
detestantes, decimas subtrahere non verentur, etc. But as thou shall answer
for thy fraud so shall they for their faults. To conclude, their unworthiness is
questionable, but this is out of question that many worthy men are unworthily
wronged, while envy and avarice sit as judges of their worth.

The nimi^ti^ of Tithes.
3. An other objection is, the muchnes or measure of such demeanes, the lands
too great, the Tithes too large: and all that fall beside their mouth too much.
But in the mean time, their apish vanities, epicure like superfluities,
fuliginous fooleries, sacrilegious robberies, Fimbrian-like injuries,
Tarquinian like surquedries, Esauish profanities, and Iulianish apostasies are
not too much. But to the point, which aims at some reason, but lined with much
malice. Some of the Popes clawbacks, to daube up the faults of those holy
Fathers, (as I have showed elsewhere) maintained, that Tithes were grounded upon
all the 3. Laws of Moses: moral for the equity, ceremonial for the
affinity, Judicial for the policy; because the Jews were 10. Tribes,
whereunto 2. other were added to make amends for some men's bad payment: all
untrue. But if the Priests were then M. Robarts.
the tenth part of the people, where was that proportion before that Law? But it
has been further proved, that the Leuits were not the 10. nor 12. nor 20.
part of that people, nor the 40. but at least the sixtieth: yet let us observe
their portion and proportion. The learned D. Downeham has collected, De Dig.
min.
that the Priests income, being brought home to them without labor or charge,
with their 48. cities, was more to them (being as the honorable Sir Water
Raleigh has proved not much bigger then Wales,) then all the Bishoprics,
benefices, College lands, and all other Ecclesiastical endowments and profits
in this land, though the Popes of Rome, nor any other had never alienated any,
as now they have done one half. And this was not only among the Jews, but
from the first preaching of the Gospel: so soon as the scepter turned
Christian, Eusebius.
all Tithes were instantly restored, all lands and donations that under the
persecutions had been taken away, all Images, treasure, and furniture of
heathen temples: yearly sums amounting to a great quantity out of the
Exchequer it self: all the goods of such as died intestate, all new erections
of well disposed people: and to knit up all in one word, the same to be
hereditarie, as under Moses.

And thus stood the affairs of the Church, till Antichrist confounded things
sacred and profane; and Cymmeriall darkness dispossessed the world, as of
illumination, so of true devotion; only some small good meaning did sometimes
undo themselves, to endow the Church, wherein it became so superlatiuely
prodigal, that it has been hide-bound ever since. And now are we arrived at
those times, where the children carry it out much faster then ever their
Fathers brought it in: where our insatiable churchhownds, do not as Cerberus
did with Sybillas inchaunted sop, -- tria guttera pandens
Corripuit, rursusque immania terga resoluit
Fusus himi --
snatch it greedily, swallow it hungerly, and lay him down again to sleep
quietly: but like Erisicthon, another whelp of the same litter, who for
sacrilegious famine was fained to be inspired of hunger; as Hor. says, --
Ingluvies, tempestas, barathrumque (not macelli, but) sacelli. -- quodque
nubibus esse
quodque satis poterat populo, non sufficit vni.
Like Salomons horseleach that ever cries, give, give: Pro. 30. 14.
Omniscient in espying, omnipotent in consuming: whom God will one day repaie in
like kind, punishing their sin of greedines, with the greedines Ephe. 4. 18.
of sinning.

Other countries.
4. An other maine objection is laid hold upon, either by gentlemen that have
travailed, or Ministers that relish a little too much of the Geneua fashion,
that other Countries do not mainetaine their Ministers by Tithes, but
contributions, poor salaries, such as the policy of men, or the iniquity of
times have left unto them. But we are here to dispute, not de facto, but de
iure; not what is, but what should be done: Viuendum legibus non exemplis: it
is not the deeds of men, but the doctrine of God that should be our guide: for
the same Countries allow of tolerations, shall I say? or commixtions rather of
all kind of religions.

But whatsoever other do either upon error or necessity, non fuit sic a
principio, the syncerest times and primest Churches have better presidents.

For many have enthralled theit livings and liberties together, to the
importunities of their troubles, or abitrement of their Kings: as the French to
Carolus Gaguin. lib. 6. Auen. 4. lib.
Martellus, says Gaguine; and the Churches of Saxony, says Aventine, who to
redeem their lives, Cent. 10. 1.
gave all the Church -- demeanes unto the Turk, though they were redeemed by
Arnulphus Duke of Bauoir.

And some have thought, that what the Bishops in that case have done, is good
against themselves; but it is to childish to change the most natural and wise
order of the world, for an idol of a travelers brain: seeing it can neither
be bettered, nor paralled with the like: some in inequality must be confessed,
which might be redressed, which is accidental, no deformity that is
substantial. And so much of Lay men's usurpations, which needed not so much
proof, as reproof.

CHAP. IIII.
Against the exemptions that some Cities and great Towns do clame in Church
duties.
THere is an other sort of men, that albeit they lurch not the Church lands,
nor count them Antichristian, yet enfranchise themselves with a false
privilege; that they are as free from the commandment of God in this case, or
any other ordinance of man concerning that matter, as from the rescripts of the
Sheriff of the out-shiere; to pay nothing for the maintenance of the Minister,
more then their own mind shall voluntary condescend unto, or order taken upon
their agreement at the Hall, shall make them liable unto. And therefore it
seems a thing most absurd, and very unreasonable, that Personal Tithes of
Artificers, tradesmen, and Merchants, should be demanded. By which means
they sad and dull the hearts of their Ministers, by a covetous and
unconscionable prescription, to allow him nothing, but his two-pennie offerings
at Easter, and a very small quillet not to be accounted of beside. But they
must understand, that first at least a personal Tithe is due, which that poor
portion no way does counteruaile by a thousand part. Secondly, if not in act,
yet in equity, some proportionate sum unto that which God, and man has
indifferently set down. And of this assertion I have these reasons, beside
those I have set down in general.

1. It is the dictate of nature, and positive law of Why Cities and Towns
should pay personal Tithes. Pro. 3. 9. Genesis 14. Genesis 2. Number 31.
God, to honor God with our riches, and the good things of this life as is Gods
ordinance, and as the holy men of God have done, Abraham, Jacob, and all the
holy nation, and all our country beside. What charter then or charity, what
custom or conscience can be pretended, to free us from that which all the
Christian world, nay all the Universal world are bound unto?

They may object, that one man may serve that turn for a whole City or Town,
and for one man their maintenance may be sufficient. First it is not credible
or possible, that any one should feed more thousands with a morsel of bread,
then ever Christ fed with 7. loaves, and 2. fishes. Besides, what Stento^s
voice, or Eolus lungs, or iron sides, may be sufficient to stretch to so many
thousands? but that is as gross as all the rest, that he that should take so
much pains, should have no more then that slender reward.

2. Will not God at his general Audit object this unto such; that laborers in
the Country, and fishermen in poor Towns of the coast, whom he never
honored with the tenth of their ease, the twentieth of their opportunity, the
hundredth part of their happiness, yet return him by Tithe a couuenient portion
of their labors, and his blessing: but these that ought to have been many
miles before them in godliness, come short of them many leagues in
gratefullnesse. Matthew. 25. 14.
The parable of the talents is well known and remembered, but not ever
practiced: and therefore God many times sends us other remembrancers: Pirates at
sea, and prowlers at land, to consume our substance, bringing men ofttimes from
the wealth and pride of the City, to the want and drudgerie of the Country,
for such forgetfullnesse and contempt.

3. The service under the law was a costly service, where men were to allocate
the third part of their estate to the ministration of the Tabernacle, what by
sacrifices of all sorts, what by peculiar charges rising on some occasions: but
under Popery, this charge was doubled and trebled, where the third part of the
land went to the blind and the lame Clergy. From the first we are freed by
Christ; from the second by Christian Princes. What? to be exempt as by a Magna
Charta, from all suit and service that belongs to God? No: but we are still
tied to perform to God an honorable service, that his Gospel may be continued,
his prayer perpetuated, his ministers maintained, his houses repaired, his
members comforted, his infanterie nursed, his servants saved. What pity is it
then to see so many sheep without shepherds, so many shepherds without
means, that of so many parishes as are many times found in such places, all
the wages of single and double halls together, not able to amount to one
sufficient stipend of a good Minister; that is to say, where the most
householders shall give a matter of two shillings two pence to his Minister by
the year, and the best but four shillings four pence, (I speak within
compass) under 5. shillings, and yet some of these men by their own esteem,
and other men's, worth many thousands; and as they are merchants, may gain many
hundreds of pounds that year. And where I may be challenged, that even this in
all the Town and City through, may rise to more then a competent living for
one man, though I spoke of no more then the parish maintenance, I will put all
the Lecturers wages in beside, it will not so be more then enough or
competent: when all can accrue hardly to 200. pounds by the year; and that to
such a man as I speak of, and they should labor for, yet scarce competent: for
why should we not value a godly, learned, well borne man and Minister, in equal
rank with the best merchant, when as in such an one the sum would be but
beggerie, yea no way but in wealth qualified like the other.

4. And because I have mentioned the Ministers person, let that be another
motive, the love we are to show unto them. Now what kindness can this be, to
defraud him of his true allowance, and to mince him out such mites, and micas
(crumbs as commonly men do, and count him highly beholding to them for that
also? I will not say as Tullie does in like case, that it is latr onis
beneficium, who think the traveler is much bound unto him for his life, which
he might have taken as well as his purse: But this I say, I fear me those men
that now in the liberty of the Gospel deny us our own; if any other color of
religion should turn trumpe, will hardly give us their own.

5. Another cause why such places should pay personal tithes, or like liberal
maintenance, is the securing of their own estates: for this small tribute that
we do so return our God, is sepes diuitiarum, the fence of our fortunes, and
causes the legittimation of our other goods. For men must imitate the (...) ^7.
Apostle, to cast superfluities ouer-boord, to secure the vessel, and willingly
to part with some portion to save the stake: whereas now men are grown like
Usurers, not to deal with God almighty himself without sufficient sureties,
and bond besides. The charge which they pretend daily to grow upon them for
impost, etc. are mere cauillations: for that they fetch up again upon the
poor country, and themselves grow rich the while.

6. Lastly, would they do as the mother City, where they pay not by the hal,
but by the rent of the house, the tenth of that, as is I think intended by the
statute: they would procure both wealth and wisdom, love and learning,
religion and renown, to wreath them a chaplet, to make them happy, and all
their daughters and neighbors by them: where bountiful means allures the
best men, and kind usage of all that comes, draws all the learning of the land
unto them: for vbi populus ibi questus, vbi cadauer ibi aquilae: whereas now
the niggardize that is used in many places, breeds many unkindness between
the Ministers and people; and the small means the Minister has to live on,
breeds him baseness, baseness contempt, contempt discouragement: and on both
sides, all the dislike and unfriendly words and wishes, that may be imagined.
By these reasons I am induced to mislike the course that runs common in great
places, and to revoke men to the right and prime institution.

Objections.
But guiltiness is never without gainsaying, and man's nature is stubborn not
to yield to the word. Some pretend poverty, and in that case men are to be
pitied, not burdened; therefore God requires, according 2. Cor. 8. 12.
to that we have, not according as we have not, to use liberality, much more
gratuity to God and their Minister. Yet it is not equal, that men not having
to their minds, should therefore pay nothing, but eat or spend Gods part as
they do their own. And who in these places is so poor, that he does not
feast once or ofter, in the year, in such sort that the very reuersion of
their riot, would not be a comfortable refreshing to his minister, if he had it
in money.

But poverty is not always truly pretended: for compare the husbandman with
the citizen, in diet, apparel, house, furniture, building expenses; and then
tell me which is the poorer? there I am sure the Townesman will have all things
excellent, whatsoever it cost, so that he is rich at home, and poor at the
August.
Church: as one says, Etsi in domibus sunt auro diuites, tamen in Ecclesia sunt
mendici: for their own occasion they will find money, but for Gods they cannot
spare it.

2. They are subject to many charges, and greater losses, then those of the
Country: and is that any cause to deny God his tribute? that is, the Minister
his due? I should think that binds them to be more thankful for his favor,
mercy, and providence: as Numb. 31. 26.
we see in the Israelites, being but a small band, yet vanquished five Kings of
Madian: first parted with one half of the prey unto their fellows that went
not into the field; and of the other moitie gave a tribute to God, one of 500.
and further for Gods unexpected deliverance, having not missed one man, offered
unto him of their own accord another oblation of the jewels and ornaments of
the pillage, to the value of 16750. shekels of gold.

But we can be content to offer unto God, as many good words as he will, but no
money; but then we August.
verify the speech of the Father, we do not offer vitulos labiorum, but labia
vitulorum, not the calves of the (...)
lips, but the lips of calves. And as another, we will seek Christ with the
wise men, but we will leave our budgets at home, we will not open our treasures
to him as they did. David had a quid retribuam? what Psalm, 116.
shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits that he has done to me? but we
point where is none: quid? retribuam? what? shall I render unto the Lord any
thing? ill done.

3. He would so be too rich, and too well acquainted with our estates. 1. This
is to be wiser then God; for he made no such prouiso. 2. What hurt if thy
Minister knew in general, nay in particular the blessing or cursing of God
upon thee? were that any harm to thy soul? thou shall be sure of one comfort,
to have one that will simpathize with thee, and one that will supplicat for
thee.

Lastly, for I will not follow these foxes to any more holes: If ministers
would not challenge it of debt, but take it as alms, or contribution, or
benevolence, they should fare better. This is a burden too heavy to be borne,
especially where all commodities are so high rated as they are.

1. Why should any account that burden ouerheauy, which God has laid upon
them? 2. which other bear cheerfully, that are far more unable? 3. that
brings so great benefit and blessing with it, to have the light of Goshen, when
other sit in the darkness of Egypt? 4. that is a thing so necessary? 5. which
our predecessors yielded so willingly unto, to bind themselves and their
heirs for ever to perform? 6. Or what comfort is it to impropriate in this
manner, that which God and all good men have annexed? Is it dishonor to
acknowledge a debt to our better, a duty to our Prince, a tribute to our God?
is it dishonest for the Minister that in Gods behalf does require the same?
why then should we be angry with him, that tells us what is due, or to rail on
them that refute our falsehood? this snarling against the preacher, is but
recalcitrating against the word. It is not the man, but the matter, to have our
covetousness detected, our oppression checked, our usury reproved, our
extortion ransanked: it is Mammon that stings us, not the minister that offends
us: but beware what ye shall do in this case; to be pricked in heart for our
fault is one thing, but to prick his heart that discouers our sins; is not to
stomach him but his sender: to omit a truth or duty upon ignorance, is one
thing; but to oppugn the truth out of malice is an other. Sacrilege may go
single, but if it be combined with obstinacy, and obstinacy attended with
impenitencie, where before there was but one devil, now there will be seven;
and where there might have been hope of reformation, there godly minds will
fear, an end in desperation. And so I leave this point.

CHAP. V.
Against Parishioners Compilation of holy duties by fraud and sophistication.
HItherto we have had to deal with them that play at sweep-stake, now I come
to the pettielassons of the Church, if I may so call them; such as either by
sacrilegious substractions, or iniurous calumniations, or customarie
compositions, or colored extortions, circumuent the Minister, and defalke of
his duties.

For not to move the same question so often, though Tithes were not of Gods own
institution, but of mere humane imposition, yet now being consecrated to God,
whosoever shall under any pretense diminish the same, let them look how they
can wash their unholy hands from Ananias fault.

The people in many places have taken up the trade of the unjust steward, in
steed of 100. to set Luke 1^. 6.
down 50. and to write in their Ministers right, 8. for 80.

So many customs are extant and compositions, so many privileges and
prescriptions, so common supersedeas and prohibitions, that he that seems best
provided in that kind, has his living pared to his hands, much after the
manner of a Banburie cheese, whose very parings are more then all the meat.
Let a Minister complain hereof, they answer with the Jews, We have a Law: but
such laws are against Ioh. 19. 7.
their Lord, and such customs eat out the heart of all conscience. Such
customs the ancient and modern Pharisees did use to obtrude: but we answer
to both as S. Augustine to the Donatists: Veritate De vni^o bap. ^.
manifestata, cedat consuetudo veritati: and again, Nemo sit qui ausit prefer
consuetudinem veritati: when the truth is once known, let old customs give
place unto it, and let none be so bold as to prefer custom to truth.

Cypr. contr. Aquar.
And S. Cyprian, Si consuetudini suffragatur veritas, nihil consuetudine debet
esse firmius, sin consuetudinem stabiliat impietas, eadem facilitate reijcitur,
quae affertur.

If custom does rely upon truth, it is reason nothing should infringe it: but
if your customs be built upon treachery, they may be as easily refused, as
Len. ^8 30.
they are tendered. But God has forbidden his people to do after the fashions
of the heathen: and our Savior (says Chrysostom) did not allege that he was
custom, but truth.

There are two kind of customs that are not good: 1. Consuetudo peccandi,
quae tollit sensum (non reatum) peccati: 2. Vetustas erroris, quae quo magis
obtinet, magis grauet. There is a custom of sin, which takes away the custom,
but not the guilt of sinning: and there is an antiquity of error, the which
the more it is in request, the more it offends.

Decretals.
But to say all in a word, the Canonists have well confined the valitidie of
Customs: Consuetudo non derogat iuri naturali, seu diuino: therefore all such
customs as are derogatorie to the Church, are to be reuersed.

Now what are the customs that are laid in our dish, for the most part, but
impious, injurious, unreasonable, absurd, unconscionable, and unnatural?

1. Gods word does legimate the minister in all Gal* 66.
the goods of the Auditor. Now all and small, the whole and none, do differ
much: mere contradictories cannot stand both together. 2. The law of nature 1.
Cor. 9. 9.
says, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn:
custom of some places does not only muzzle the teachers mouth, but cut his
throat, leaving him so small a portion, as if it were to diet him for surfeit,
not to reward him for service. 3. The law of nations says, the labourer is
worthy of his hire, and Christendom has determined this portion of wages;
but custom says, we have contrary customs to all the world, late
exemptions, other dispensations: and thus in effect we sill up the measure of
those ancient hypocrites, transgressing Matthew. 15. 3.
the commandment of God by our traditions.

But of this point I will speak no more, but refer the reader to the
writings of Ma. Eburne, that Eburne.
in 2. or 3. treatises has taken good pains in this point, and conclude;

If this plea will not be taken in Westminster-hal, that we had a custom in
our parish not to come to service, nor to receive the Sacraments, nor to keep
the Kings peace: how do we think it will be taken at Gods tribunal seat at
the dreadful day of justice, to plead the custom was such, where we had
abode, to be impious, sacrilegious, profane, unconscionable, and cruel to
God, and man; to abridge the Minister of his due, God of his service, our
souls of their comfort? therefore be not deceived, God is not Gal. 6. 7.
mocked; for whatsoever a man sows that shall he reap; if to the flesh
corruption, if to the spirit life everlasting.

But beside custom (which then when it took beginning, might have some
reason, though time has now eat out those letters,) there is cosenage also,
pretending custom, and it is not so; or detaining that which is most due, by
palpable wrong, or colored forgerie: in all which cases the world is very
prone to favor themselves; and the best cauiller against the Parson, is
reputed the best parishioner. Some plead that Tithes are not due, iure diuino,
and therefore lawful to catch what they can from him: but first as in a case
of less consequence, when Plut.
once it was strongly avouched the enemy would not give battle on that side; it
was replied, but if he do, are we not then undone? so I say here, if they be of
divine right, are we not then plain robbers and resisters of God? therefore as
he, Stultum est in id periculi remconijcere, vbi si in credendo erraueris,
nulla dabitur corrigendi copia: it is a mad venture to put the matter to such a
push, where if our judgment be miscarried, we are irrecouerably undone. 2.
Though that has bin already proved* that Tithes, are due by divine right, yet
this cannot excuse them from sacrilege, that with a Si Spy, shall diminish
the Ministers portion: for now they are dedicated to holy use: therefore what
God has called holy, let no man dare to profane, or lay theeuish fingers upon
them. 3. The least^ accent that sounds to profit, we affix our marginall note
unto it, hoc facit pro nobis. The slightest reasons, the singlest pretenses,
the falsest syllogismes, the fowlest elenchs; the simplest shows, are of force
omnipotent to carry us that way, fauores ampliandi: but the strongest proofs,
the soundest arguments, the euidentest demonstrations, the authority of
Scriptures, the judgments of the Fathers, the decrees of Councils, the
determination of laws, the consent of times, the concurrence of opinions, the
clamours of conscience, are utterly void of force, and quite ^lumbous to draw
us to part with monie^ odia restringenda.

Lac. 2. 8.
There was at Rome one Clodia, not all of the best report, who when the ship
that brought up Berecynthia the mother of the gods was stroke on ground as it
passed up the river, so as no strength of hand, nor help of people could fetch
her off, this honest Vestall upon her knees besought the goddess, that if she
were innocent of that imputation that was strong upon her, she would be pleased
to follow the guidance of her girdle; and so fitting the same unto the pinnace,
that which thousands of hands, nor all the strength of Rome could not effect,
very gently came off without more ado: The like good luck this cause in hand
has ever had; the deepest disputes of learned schools, which no wit could
unwind, like an other Gordius nodus; the rustiest reason of a country farmer,
can as easily snap in sunder, as Samson did his withes, or hempen bands.

But let them learn to eat their own bread, and not say with the strumpet,
stolen bread is sweet, for Prou. 21. ^.
the bread of deceit will turn to gravel; and the manna that is gathered
contrary to commandment, will turn to worms: and the gathering of
treasures by a deceitful tongue, is but vanity tossed to and fro of them that
seek death.

Remember that protestation, little less then an execration, which the people
were solemnly to take at the end of every harvest: When thou have made an
Deuteronomy. 26. 13.
end of tithing all the tithes of thy increase, and have given it to the Leuite,
etc. that they may eat within thy gates, and be filled: then thou shall say
before the Lord thy God, I have brought the hallowed thing out of my house, and
have also given it to the Leuite, according to thy commandment, which thou
have commanded me: I have not transgressed thy commandments, nor forgotten
them; I have not eaten thereof in my mourning, nor taken ought thereof for any
common use, nor given ought thereof for the dead: but have hearkened unto the
voice of the Lord my God, and have done according to all that thou have
commanded me: look down out of thy holy habitation from heaven, and bless
thy people Israel (accordingly.) Now if I should demand what law pertained this
unto: if to the Ceremonial, it must prefigure something in or under Christ; if
Moral, it stands in force; if merely Judicial, yet the equity does bind
perpetually: so every way it binds still. And therefore as in trial of the
suspected wife, if she were innocent, the potion made her fruitful; if
nocent, painful; so is this oath, to true dealers with God and his minister
profitable, to unjust detainers* damnable. And so I end with them.

CHAP. VI.
Against the stipulation of Simoniacall Patrons for Tithes or Church
preferments.
THE last offenders that I will encounter, are such Magnificoes and Gentlemen
of eminency, whom God or gold has made Patrons of those places where they
have their lands. Which right how it was purchased, I dispute not at this time:
only thus much, in the times of superstition those offices or privileges,
together with the lands were devolued to the Abbeys; and when the Abbeys were
suppressed, they became vulgar aucupium, very common game; and when all those
things were set to sale by the drum, then nemo non fecit lignationem, they
that had money and appetite caught up these commodities: and so have the
patronages of the Church been engrossed into great men's hands, that often times
use them neither as patronages, nor things of the Church: for those poor
collations that should be bestowed upon scholars, and were indeed deposita
pietatis, the pledges of piety; doctrinae praemia, the rewards of learning;
laborantium stipendia, the wages of holy workmen; and sanctorum munera, the
gifts of holy men, have quite been put to other employments, not given at all,
or given to some old serving men, or kept in the patrons own hand, or sore
curtaild in the putting off, or saved for pensions for younger sons, or sold
in a market to the best chapmen; that we may truly verify that quip of S.
Gregory, boues arant, and asini pascuntur, laborious in Job. 1.
scholars take the pains, and idle drones eat up the gains.

For the common sort of Patrons have used us for all the world, as the Jesuits
do their nouices, whom they promise fair, till they have put themselus and
their states into their hands, and then they ever after use them in the nature
of younger brethren: so do these new masters handle us, who were once
freemen, and had somewhat of our own; but now are turned out of our gowns
into a lighter habit, by annexing the Church maintenance to their own
inheritance, and then feeding us with pittances, as sitting in the place of
prayer: or if they use us any better then words, it is after we have sued our
livery, and fined for our match. But as Tully says, Nullae sunt occultiores
insidiae quam quae latent in simulatione officij, there is no snare to that
which goes under the show of service.

The first institution of patronage in the Church, as is commonly in other
cases, (ex malis moribus, bonae leges) was excellent and necessary: but as the
fair streams of Jordan fall into the dead sea, so in the current of like
Conueniences, through the fault or frailty of man's nature, the very best
things degenerate: so fell it out here: for as it was said of the Clergy,
Religio peperit diuitias, sed filia deuorauit matrem: so is it true of the
laity, the Church did first hatch them, but they have eaten out the belly of
the dam.

Pa^. 2. cap. 14.
Marsil. Patauinus in his defensor pacis, has set down their original in this
manner: Antiquitus viri sancti, and ministri Euangelici, Christum imitari
volentes, contra nullum voluerunt contendere iudicio, etc. In old time the holy
men and sincere ministers of the Gospel, desirous to imitate Christ, would not
contest in law with any, etc. Therefore the propriety of such temporals as
were appointed for their maintenance, remained in the founder or donor of holy
demeanes; who being so ordained for the maintenance and defense of the
Churches lands, were called the Patrons thereof. For so soon as religion began
to grow into some dimensions, and the Church to get some matters of
inheritance, envy and avarice began to be too busy about her, so as she had
much ado to hold her own, or recover her right: and so fast did the eagles
follow her carrion, and the birds of pray stoop for booty, that the decrees
of almost 40. Synods and Councils, besides decrees of the first Hospin.
Popes, and Statutes of Emperors, were all too little to curb their
covetousness, or restrain the harpies from devouring all, while the holy and
heavenly minded Clergy, were loath to entangle themselves with secular
encumbrances, or giving over their books, follow worldly profits. Whereupon to
salve this sore, it was decreed in the Council Melevitanum, that a petition
should be drawn and presented to the Emperors Arcadius and Honorius, that they
would be pleased to appoint the Church certain delegates or Advocates to defend
their rights: the like was done at other times: who at the first did not bestow
the livings, but only defend their lands. And founders of new erections
reserved no other power in themselves, but the bare Aduocation and presentment
to the place. It were too long and intricate to follow the mutations of the
times, while sometime the Donors, sometime the Donees, sometime the Patrons,
and lastly the Bishops did manage all the business that way; till in the end
devotion had surrendered all right into the hands of new erections, out of
their zeal unto the regular order of Friars: and so when the religious houses
were put down, these went also with the other lands into the fowlers net; and
became every man's purchase, as I said before.

Now what affinity have the modern with the former patrons? if these be our
defenders, who shall defend us from our very defenders? the Abuse is evident,
I need not open it; the Presentor and presentee have changed offices; the
scholar must present the patron with Church angels, or he shall not be
presented Bern.
to be an angel of the Church: qui primi debent esse ad subsidium, primi sunt ad
sacrilegium: her prime succors, are become her principal suckers; and
chiefest pillars, the chiefest powlers. Our song of Venite exultemus, is turned
to super flumina Babylonis: Simon Magus has succeeded Simon Peter: the buyers
Ioh. 2.
and sellers, whom Christ whipped out of the temple, are let in again at the
posterne door.

Which sin, although in propriety of speech it notes but the buyer, yet now
the whole transaction of that market, is commonly so called; because Simon
Magus proffered money; not for any infusion of grace upon himself, but for the
multiplication of his coin to the best improouement, as divines have noted.

And herein the Canonists have observed many enormities, as Atheism,
idolatry, theft, and murder. 1. For making the Church, non domum oratioonis,
sed negotiationis, not a house of prayer, but a hole for prey. 2. For turning
God into gold, and making not godliness their gain, but ganie their godliness.
3. For robbing their parishes of the bread of life. 4. Staruing the incumbent
with unrecoverable penury of body, and perjury of soul, and the whole
Parrish with him, both of bodily relief, and Ghostly life.

Clemang.
So that we may renew the old rhyme, of such kind of Clearks, that was once of
the Pope, in every man's mouth, Tales regunt Petri nauem, and ligandi
potentiam: Tales gerunt Petri clauem, Hi nos docent sed indocti, indicat
scientiam: Hi nos ducent and nox nocti, Such men S. Peter's ship do steare,
and power to bind and lose. Such men S. Peter's keys do bear, These teach us,
and themselves lack light, her knowledge does disclose. These lead us, and so
night to night, And therefore as I said while ere, the Church is little beholden
to such patrons: for these resemble the beutiful gate of the Temple, or fair
porches of the poole of Bethesda, where lie a great number of Lazars, expecting
the waters next motion, the Churches next promotion: wherein they have fair
occasion to demerite both of God and men: for God, who sees not how much he
might be glorified, if that care were taken in the choice of a worthy preacher,
that ought to be: and as for men, it is equally apparent, what profit would
redound to the world for instruction and edification. But in my poor
understanding, in the neglect of this so pious service to God, and to his
Church, as they are faulty and defective to both them, so no way more
preiudicious then to themselves; not only in the account that they shall one
day give of that stewardship, but in depriving themselves in the mean time, of
a learned friend, a godly associate, and a ghostly advocate: for who is so fit
to converse familiarly with a gentle or noble man, then such a minister, who
both for his honest birth, and liberal breeding, sweet learning, and wise
counselling, may be both an adiuvant for his souls health, as an ornament to
his worldly state. For if it be true, that scientia be vitae sol, and amicitia
vitae sal, knowledge the light, and freindship the delight of this life; how
dark and unsavory must his life needs be, that depriues himself in the
place where he does or should live, of a learned counselor, and friendly
comforter.

But how ever their own occasions may be to be called to higher places in
their own persons, yet every noble minded Moses should labor to remove this
stone, which the enuyous Madianites have rolled upon the wells mouth, that the
Lords flocks may be seasonably watered; least that both for the present, the
world be pestered with idol-shepheards, that have eyes and see not, ears and
hear not, tongues and speak not, of which the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 115.
They that make them are like unto them; and in the next age, the world be
ouergrowne with barbarousnes, rousnes, to the utter prejudice both of Church
and commonwealth.

All which, as me seems, were not hard to be helped, if either the oath of
Simonie were equally tendered to Patron and petitioner, or all presentations to
Churches were in the hands of Colleges and Universities, where no such
corruption, for the multitude of the suffrages were to be feared. Whereupon
further conueniences would likewise accrue; both the making room for younger
scholars, and ridding the springs of old students, which lie there in great
number, some 20, 30, 40. years, to their own grief, and the Churches loss,
but to vpbraid the world of the times iniquity, and learnings misery. And so
much concerning the abuses.

The second part of the Appli cation, which is Instructiue.
CHAP. I.
Of the several uses of this doctrine.
AS they that have been present, at some doleful tragedy, or solemn exequie
of some of their dearest friends, executed for causes criminal; especially, if
they themselves have been any way accessarie to the same, cannot but be much
affected, both sleeping affrighted with melancholy visions, and waking
astarted with dumpish passions, which leave the impressions of very sad
remembrance long time after in their minds: so we that here have had not the
dismal story related, but the deadly spectacle of Ananias and Sapphiraes
suffering, as if it were even acted before our eyes, near friends of ours, I
am assured, associats and copartners in wicked sacrilege; if we be not void of
all humanity, it must of force affect us very deeply, and pierce our hearts
to the very quick, with a true prognosticate of our end and judgment.

^. Sam. 2* 23.
Therefore like Ioabs men that followed the chase upon Abners host, when they
came to the place where Asael lay wallowing in his blood, there made a stand,
in wonder and pity how so brave a man came to so bloody a death: so let us
make a pause at Ananias grave, and in wonder and horror somewhat chew upon the
matter, and frame the argument but in this manner to our selves.

1. If Ananias, that might otherwise be a good man, at lest one ciuilly
righteous, and outwardly religious enough, favoring good men, and
countenancing good matters:

2. If he that committed this sin but once in all his life, and made no trade
of it, nor living in it as in a known sin, either years or months, as we
do:

3. That did it not in so high a measure, nor so heinous manner, by the lump
and the load as we do, not mincing one manner only, but mouthing many:

4. That had no example before his eyes of the wrath of God against that sin,
no Ananias and Sapphira stroke dead before his face, to fear him from it, at
lest so fully:

5. That had not the means of conuincing his conscience by Scriptures or
arguments, by examples or evidences, of the fowlnesse of the fact, as we have
had so plainly:

6. That did not profess it in the sight of the sun, nor bolster it up with
open conrestations, nor blanch it off with fearful execrations, as many of us
have done:

7. If she that came in but as accessarie only, and upon the by, for her
husbands sake alone; which humane law would either approve, or at least not
punish:

8. Lastly, if they that faulted in a matter of their own donation, whereunto
no law did enforce them, no bond compel them, but their own free minds and
voluntary promise: If they I say, had so heavy a doom, as not to die the
common death of other men, nor to be visited after the visitation of other
folk; but that God did show a new work upon them, a strange example, a
fearful judgment, to strike them dead, to kill them presently, to slay them
suddenly, to deny them repentance, to curse them with an everlasting curse, to
sammatize them as has been showed: then let us make a true commensuration of
our own demerits, and bethink our selves, how we shall escape, that have all
things contrary, and opposite in direct angles, in comparison of them.

1. As in whom there is no goodness at all, not so much as demure carriage to
extenuate our sins, or ^lcuate our judgment in the least respect with God or
the world.

2. That do no service all our life long, from the cradle to the grave; but
many study how to wrong God and rifle his Church, sorrowing for nothing but
that they sin no more.

3. That offend not only in tanto, but in toto, envying our Ministers half a
living, but swallowing our selves many Churches, in act or in desire the mean
while.

4. That sin not of ignorance, as he might; but of malice: not of infirmity,
but of presumption; nor confessing it with repentance, but professing it with
obstinance.

5. That have not one Ananias before our eyes, but many; nor single men, but
millions confounded with judgments, and howling out of hell, Discite iustitiam
moniti, and non tem^ere diuos.

6. That come not to our purpose with single impiety, but with fraud and
oppression, with oaths and peierations, as if sacrilege were not sufficient
without such milstones to sink us to hell.

7. That come not in as accessaries only, for others company, but breaking
the ice, and showing example as prime and principal, only sorry we sin no
more.

8. That do no good our selves, non suffer other: but doing ill our selves,
and teaching other: that invade the holy patrimony our selves, and persuade
other; that give nothing our selves, but rob others.

These and many more the like considerations, which we may represent unto our
selves, should be so many arguments to dissuade us, so many thunderbolts to
fear us, not rattling in our ears only, but battering our conscience also,
and tearing our souls with the fearful expectance of deserved vengeance.

If we should but thus enforce this argument, from their action to our
instruction, it could not but startle and amaze a great number, that now lie
and die in a maine piece of Athcisme, without all sense or remorse; and so go
down to hell, before they once know what they do: qui tantum non audit
fragorem, August.
non dormit sed mortuus est: he that hears not this piece of ordnance, is not
asleep, but stark dead; wants not so much sense, as soul; is not a man, but
a very monster.

S. Augustine does teach us this instruction, saying of the rich glutton, Si
sterilitas in ignem mittitur, rapacitas quid meretur? and si qui sua non dedit,
semper ardebit; quid recipiet is qui aliena tulit? If unfruitful men shall be
cast into hell, what do they that are injurious deserve? and if he shall
burn in everlasting flames, that gave nothing of his own, how shall he be
saved, that takes away that which is other men's? and if he be so fearfully
punished that offends in a little, what hell of hels shall suffice for such as
rob and rifle all that is holy? bereauing almighty God of his worship and
service, the Church of God of that which is sanctified to religion, the Saints
of God of the instruments of salvation? for this sin must be apparelled in
his own circumstances, things consecrate by holy men, dedicated to almighty
God, so peculiar unto his service, sinning with so high a hand, impouerishing
our souls soliciters, in famishing many hundreds of bodily and ghostly
provision, defrauding our selves of the bread of life, and many such like. Well
then to come to the particular uses.

(...) 1.
The first is fear against security: this is taught us out of the fearful
judgment that fell upon Ananias, and the prime use that the congregation made
of the same what effect it did work, namely to affect and raise some passion
in the heart in general. Secondly, what that was in particular, the affection
of fear. Thirdly, the measure or extension, great fear. Fourthly, the subject
in whom, in those that heard it. And lastly, the universality of the subject,
not one, or two, or a few, but all, so many as heard those things.

Exodus 14. 31.
The like we find in other places: the like impression upon the like occasion
when the Israelites saw the great work of the Lord upon the Egyptians; it is
noted, that the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant
Moses: the same is observed of David in the sudden breach of Vzza, David was
afraid of 2. Sam. 6. ^.
the Lord that day, so that he durst not bring home the Arc to his house: many
like examples are extant in the holy Pages.

The reason is this, we never fear God so well, as when we are awaked with his
thunders, and roused with his judgments; for every affection must be raised by
his proper object; love by his mercies, hope by his promises, trust by his
providence, and fear by his judgments.

Now in his judgments, God is set out unto us as a terrible God, a consuming
fire: and therefore a fearful Heb. 12. Heb. 10.
thing to fall into his hands: therefore the Apostles admonish us, Paul, to
work out our salvation with fear Phil. 2. 12.
and trembling, and Peter, for as much as we call him Father, 1. Pet. 1. 17.
that without respect of persons judges according to every man's work, to
pass the time of our pilgrimage here in fear.

Psalm. 90. 11.
But as Moses complains, who regards the power of his wrath? answearing
himself in his own Esa. 58. 1.
interrogation, as Esaias, else where, who has believed our report? surely none or
very few: Luther thus resolves the question, who? none before affliction,
either on himself or another: for men have a double curtain drawn between
God and them. First, of proud knowledge, or presumption; a knowledge without
the feeling, a bare speculation, without answearable affection, that which God
does so often complain of, Esa. ^. Mat. 13. Act. 18. Ro^ 11.
eyes without seeing, ears without hearing, hearts without understanding,
understanding without practicing: such a sense as is between sleeping and
waking, such a luke-warmnes as is between cold and hot, such a consent as is
between choosing and refusing.

The second is hardness of heart, that when his judgments be thundered we fear
not, when his mercies are proclaimed we rejoice not, when exhortations are used
we move not, as the wise man E^cl. 8. 11.
says, Because sentence against evil works, is not presently executed,
therefore the hearts of the children of men are set to do evil: that which we
hear does little profit us, for still we think (as we heard out of Plato)
that Gods words are untrue, or his arm is but weak. For the first, he that
has verified all his prophecies and promises hitherto, why should we doubt of
the effect of his threats to sin? if all is not performed in our time, yet
there is another place to consummate his word, and make good his promises.

For the second, he that put down both all the Monarchs and Magicians of the
world, with the production of the lest vermin, the work of his little finger;
how should he be impotent or weak in auenging on us, whatsoever we do sin?
the burning of the world is but the breath of his nostrils: and if all this be
little, he can arm himself with deadly weapons, bows, swords, speeres, armies
of creatures, chariots of fire, millions of angels: and if this also be yet but
little, he is purtraied moreover as a Giant, and that armed cap a pe, as a
Lion; nay all that is strong, a Judge, a General, a Prince, a God.

Again, if he be weak, who are we, or what is our strength? not such as he
needs to come against us with all his power, with crows of iron, or greatest
ordnance, but with grasses, strawes, hairs, worms; and if they should also be
to seek, but to commit us together, and dash us one against another; therefore
we are to fear him in himself, much more when he arises to rage, when he
speaks, threatens, strikes.

The prisoner that is attached for criminal causes, fears the coming of the
judge: the idolater, that is not in his religion secured fears before his
painted timber or stone: the devil that is ascertained of his torment, fears
at the thought of his judge and God: therefore he that fears not God, making
his sword drunken with sinners blood, is more desperate then the ruffian, more
doltish then the idolater, more damnable then the very devil: and this shall
serve for the first use.

Catal. test.
2. Care against impiety: it has been observed by wise men, that the word
Conscientia has in all times had very hard success, so that it never could be
full written together in all his syllables: for in the first nonage of the
Church, the primer times, they had Con and Sci, but wanted entia: for as
another says, they had aureos sacerdotes, but lignea vasa, golden chaplains,
and wooden chalices, good conscience, and great learning, but small reuennewes.
The middle times had Con and entia, but wanted Sci; honesty and honor, but
little or no learning. These last ages wherein we live, have abundance of the
Sci, but have lost both Con and Entia, learning Gods plenty, but our good
meaning and good means are gone one to seek the other: In which regard our
piety is become very proportionable to our charity, cold and comfortless,
like the Doctors recipes, which Demosthenes Demost.
speaks of, neither so sufficient to keep alive, nor so deficient to let us die.

It is an error, I may say an heresy, to think that lost that goes to God.
There began Judas treason, at quorsum perditio haec? to what purpose is all
this wast?

Philo Iud.
Victus sacerdotum largior, argumentum est pietatis publicae: it is a sign
religion is going, when we see Tertull.
the ministers are well maintained. And another, Pietas est pro pietate sumptum
facere: it is a part of religion to spend our goods upon religion. Whereupon ^n
Lu^. 21. 4.
S. Hierom, speaking of the poor widow that increased donaria Dei, the holy
treasure with her two mites, as many other holy men and women did, says thus,
Implantes illud quod scriptum est, redemptio animae viri diuitiae eius, they
fulfilled the saying of the Prophet, a man's riches are the redemption of his
soul.

ser. de eleem.
And S. Cyprian, vt intelligamus haec omnia Deo dari, and cum quisquam haec
facit Deum promereri, Christus illa do^^ Dei appellat, etc. That we might
learn that all these things are given to God, and when any does thus, does
make God his debtor, Christ terms them Gods donaries: therefore so long as
these stand good, our fear of God, our care of his service, our constancy in
his religion stands upright: but if we let them fall, or pluck them down, our
commerce does cease with heaven, we renounce our right in heaven, our portion
in the son of God of heaven. And so much briefly of the uses.

CHAP. II.
The complaints of sundry learned and godly men for the wrongs to the Church
of God.
NEither is this the complaint of one or two discontented men, as the world is
made believe; but many more, both in former time, when things were not
altogether so evil: as S. Bernard, sermon. 6. on the Psalm, qui habitat: and
sermon. 33. in Cant. most elegantly and excellently: Vae generationi huic a
fermento Phariseorum, quodest hypocrisis, si tamen hypocrisis dici debet, quae
amplius latere prae impudentia non quaeris, prae abundantia non valet: serpit
hodie clades per omne corpus Ecclesiae, and quo latius eo desperatius, eoque
periculosius quo interius. Si insurgeret apertus inimicus, mitteretur for as
and aresceret: si violentus inimicus, absconderet se ab co, nunc quem eij^^et,
aut aquo absconderet se? Omnes amici and omnes inimici, omnes necessarij and
omnes aduersarij, omnes domestic^ and nulli pacifici, omnes proximi and omnes
quae sua sunt quaerunt: honorati incedunt de bonis domini, and domino honorem
non deferunt Olim praedictum est, and nunc tempus impletionis aduenit, Ecce in
pace amaritudo mea amarissima: amara prius in nece martyrum, amarior post in
conflictu haereticorum, amarissimanunc in moribus domesticorum: non fugere non
fugare licet. Et pax est and non pax; pax a paganis, pax* ab haereticis, sed
non profecto a filijs. Vox plangentis in tempore isto, filios enutriui and
educaui, ipsi autem spreuerunt me, spreuerunt and maculauerunt me, a turpi
vita, a turpi quaestu, a turpi commercio quid restat nisi vt reueletur ille
homo peccati, daemonium meridianum? To say thus much;

Woe be to this generation because of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy, at least if that may be called hypocrisy, which for the
generality cannot, for the impudency cares not any longer to be concealed.
There is at this day a disease spread over the whole body of the Church, and
the further the more desperate, the more secret the more dangerous. If it were
an open enemy that had risen up against her, he might have been cast out, and
have withered: if a violent persecutor, she could have hid her self from him:
now whom should she cast out, or from whom be hid? all are friends, but all
unfriendly; all of kind, but all unkind; all of a house, yet none at peace; all
near neighbors, but nearest to themselves; they adorn themselves with the
holy inheritance, yet honor not the holy of holies. It was long since
prophesied, and now fulfilled: Behold, in my greatest peace, is my bitterest
persecution: bitter it was in the death of my martyrs, more bitter in doing
with heretics, but most bitter in the manners of familiars. It is peace, and
it is not peace: peace from the Ethnic, peace from the heretic, but not from
the hypocrite. I may justly take us that complaint; I have nourished and
brought up children, but they have despised me; both despised and despited me,
with their faulty life, with their filthy lucre, with their foul contracts,
covetousness, sacrilege, and symonie. What remains more, but that that man of
sin, the daylight devil should be revealed? Thus far he. The like does
Venerable Bede in his scintillae, to which I refer you. So have very many
other: among whom I find one Celsus de Ce^s. de Veron.
Verona, his disswasiue to the state of Venice, wherein he does demonstrate,
that ever since they took courses to enrich themselves with the spoils of the
Churches, (wherein they were fowly tainted, as Paulus Iouius Iouius 12.
does set down, in one war against the Turks imposing five tenths upon the
Clergy, to pay sailors wages: and Rentius their General, spoiled the Churches
of their jurisdiction, as at Bergamo, to the very bells, which they cast for
Canons and Culuerins to serve in the wars: and what could the Turk have done
more) that ever since, I say, such their sacrilegious dealing they never
prospered, but lost to the Turk, lost to their neighbors, went downward
strangely both at home and abroad, and were never able to stand on their legs,
as they had done before. But I descend to lower times: for as to the former I
may well use the byword, Bernardus non vidit omnia: and as to the latter, Bid
in comparison of us, had no cause to betake him to his beads.

D. Luther of the places and times of reformation, In Gal. 6. 6.
says thus; I have often wondered why the Apostle so often and earnestly
exhorts the Churches to nourish their teachers: for in the time of Popery, I
saw all men give frankly to the building and the guilding of their gorgious
temples, to the liberal maintaining of the idolatrous service; so that the
Clergy every where possessed the most and best lands of all countries; in so
much that I thought it superfluous for God to give any such commandment, for
as much as they abounded and super-abounded with plenty of all things. I
thought it more needful to persuade men to hold their hands, then to give any
more: for I observed how by this excessive liberality, the covetousness of the
Clergy did but more increase, and the rest of the world grew very poor. But
now I see the reason why they did abound in that measure, and we on the
contrary suffer so much want. In former time, when nothing else was taught but
error and idolatry, they grew so wealthy, that of Peter's patrimony (when
himself had neither silver nor gold) the Popes had advanced themselves above
Emperors, Cardinals above Kings, Bishops above Princes: but since the time
that the Gospel came in, preachers have ever been as poor as ever Christ was.
We find then by lamentable experience, how necessary this precept of well
maintaining the ministers, is in the world: which Paul both here and elsewhere
so insists in, and beats upon. Therefore when I read this exhortation of Paul,
I both muse and blush, that so great an Apostle should use so many words about
this matter. I would be loath to slander and defame this country, which is
nothing in comparison of Corinth, which he so much shamed by begging for the
ministers and the Saints. But this I see is the lot of the Gospel, that not
only no man is forward to give to scholars and the Clergy, but every man is
ready to spoil and take away that which they have. In brief, men seem to
degenerate to savage and cruel beasts: for all the while that men did teach
and preach unto them the doctrine of devils, they were open-handed even to
prodigality to those deceivers; but to those that deal the word of God
sincerely, they envy that they have, and think every thing too much.

By which we perceive how necessary this exhortation is, even to true
professors: Satan can abide nothing worse then the light of the Gospel; which
when he sees to break forth, he labors tooth and nail to hinder it, both by
false spirits, and bloody persecutions, and famishing up the teachers. And
because he could not here suppress it by any of the former means, of false
doctrine, or opposition, he attempteth it by the latter, by withdrawing the
living of Ecclesiastical persons, to cause them by poverty and necessity to
forsake their standing; and so the people wanting instructors, to grow wild and
wicked. This devise the devil sets forward by wicked magistrates in cities and
towns, noblemen and gentlemen in the country, who take away the Churches
revenues, whereby the ministers should be maintained, and convert them to
profanenes; as the Micah. 1. 7.
Prophet Micah complains, from the hire of an harlot it came, and to the hire
of an harlot it shall return again. Some other he diuerteth from the Gospel
with too much abundance: for when the word of God is plentifully taught, many
fall a loathing and neglecting of it; and few will set their sons to
school, or to divinity, but apply them rather to more gainful trades.

It is not then without need that Paul warnes all Auditors, to communicate with
their Pastors in all their goods, it being sit and equal to requite spiritual
things with temporal. But both Court and country, town and city, does abuse
this doctrine at this day, under color thereof to enrich themselves.

In Popery great sums were given unto the Priests for masses, dirges,
trentals, and such trash: begging Friars had likewise their shares, besides
that which pardons, indulgences, and other Antichristian merchandise carried
away: from these and a number more the like extortions, we are freed by the
Gospel: but we are so far from thankfulness to God, that of prodigal
giuers, we are become sacrilegious takers, and grow lame-handed for bestowing
any thing upon the religion and Saints of God; which is an infallible token,
that men have lost both the word, and says, and all goodness together: for it
is impossible for such as are religious indeed, to see their Pastors live in
want and necessity. For as much then as they joy to see their ministers bare
and poor, keeping their livings from them, or not paying them so sincerely as
they should; it is more then manifest that they are worse then the very
heathen. But they shall feel ere long, what will follow upon this in
gratitude, by the loss both of temporal and spiritual blessings: for it is
impossible but this sin must be both speedily and heavily avenged: and I am
persuaded that the Churches of Galatia, Corinth, and the rest were so pestered
with false Apostles, for no other cause but the small account they made of
their true teachers: for it is a just reward, that they that will not give a
penie to God, the author of all blessings and goodness, should give pounds to
the devil, the author of all evil, and everlasting misery: and that he that
will not serve God with a little to his own eternal renumeration, should
serve the devil with much to his utter and inevitable confusion.

Nevertheless it is not the Apostles meaning that men should give away all
that they have, but only such liberal maintenance, that their Ministers may
live in honest and decent fashion. And this he prosecuteth further, adding a
fearful commination to his former reproof and exhortation, saying, God is
not mocked: where he touches to the quick the perverseness of men, who
proudly and profanely despise their ministers, and make themselves sport with
their miseries: as great men for the most part do, that make their Pastors
their very abiects and vassals; so that if we had not a godly Prince, we had
long ere this been driven out of the Country. For when the Pastors demand
their dues, or complain of their wants, the fashion of men is to exclaim,
that Priests are covetous, and would have they know not what; no man is able to
satisfy their asking: if they were true Gospellers indeed, they should
possess nothing, but in great perfection follow their master Christ. Therefore
the Apostle grievously threatens such mockers and blasphemers, so despitefully
and inhumanely scorning and insulting on their poor ministers; yet forsooth
will seem great gospellers: as if he should say, Beware you despisers,
although God defer his punishment for a season, yen in his good time he will
find you out, and punish* you for this profaneness, and hate against his
ministers: you deceive not him but your selves; and your wrong will not
pertain to him, but return into your bosom.

And yet our proud Gentlemen, and Citizens, are little moved with these
dreadful threats, who at their death shall well understand, that they have not
mocked us but themselves: in the mean time, howsoever superciliously they laugh
at our present admonitions, we will speak this to our own comfort, knowing it
is better to receive, then to infer wrong: for patience is ever joined with
innocence, and God will not suffer us to want, but when the Lions shall lack,
we shall have enough. Thus far that great and worthy man of God, D. Luther,
whose pen and pains God did so powerfully use and bless in the work of the
restoration of the world. Unto whom I will adioyne another great instrument of
Gods glory and the light of his Church, John Calvin* whose name has terror
attending on it in the Kingdom of Popery to this day. Where let me observe
one thing very remarkable, that these great Saints, so mighty in*word and
deed, yet having done what was in men to do, against false doctrine, yet could
never put out this inbred irreligion: as if this sin were in the Church, as
it is written of the heart in the body, primum viuens and vltimum moriens: or
like death, the first and last enemy we should encounter. But what says M.
Calvin, we must needs confess in Act 4. 34.
that our bowels are of iron, and our hearts of brass, that are no more touched
with the reading of this story, where the faithful give so bountifully that
which they had: whereas we at this day cannot be content, to hold our own
hands from giving any thing only, but most injuriously take away also that
which is given by other: they did simply and honestly dedicate their own; we
devise a thousand evil shifts to hook and catch, that which other have
bestowed: they laid down theirs at the Apostles feet, we take from thence
that which is given to God: there men sold their possessions to give to godly
uses, here we buy and purchase all we can: then every one gave somewhat to
the Church and the poor, now men are so inhumane, that they envy the poor,
the commonest things of this life, the very Elements of nature: this must shame
us, and teach us another lesson, etc. so M. Calvin.

Last of all that famous man of worthy memory in Gal. 6. 6.
M. William Perkins, whom I may term in some sort the Father of the Prophets,
or at lest, a learned man that finished that work of his, (but out of his
notes) as I take it, complains in this manner; We may hence collect (says
he) the great want of devotion in the most men of these days: for as the c^ie
of the poor in the streets, is an argument of the lack of mercy among us;
so the number of the needy and wandering Levites, which offer themselves to
serve for a morsel of bread, and a suit of apparel, is a pregnant proof,
there is no devotion for the maintenance of religion, especially in those that
are so straight laced, in bestowing any thing for the good of Gods Ministers,
and yet in keeping of hounds and hawks, and worse matters, players, and
iesters, yea, fools and flatterers, are lavish and profuse. This has bin the
practice of the world, and the condition of the Ministers in all times. 400
false prophets were well and plentifully provided for at Iezabels table, when
the true Prophets of God in the mean time were driven to hide their heads,
having scarce bread and water to live upon, and that also not without danger of
their lives: her practice shall condemn a number of our professors: Nay, our
forefathers zeal and forwardnes, notwithstanding their great blindness, shall
condemn our coldness in this behalf. The very stones and rubbish of the ruined
Abbeys, and other religious houses shall rise up against us: for they
maintained 30. or 40. idle bellies most of them, which did nothing but nuzzle
them in idolatry and ignorance, where now the same place will not mainetaine
one competent Preacher to instruct their souls unto salvation: for we take
from the Church faster then they gave it.

In the old time the saying was, what shall we bring to the Seer or man of God?
but now the wicked rob-gods say, come let us take the houses of God for our
possessions. The Jews were even prodigal in their contributions to the
tabernacle, offering more then enough, so as they needed to be inhibited with
the sound of the drum and proclamation, (as our forefathers also were by the
statute of Mortmaine:) this lavish giving to the material temple, shall rise
up in judgment against our little giving to the spiritual ministry, the
living temple of God; nay our taking away from it, being far better then the
Leuiticall Priesthood: for look by how much God has diminished the cost of
the altar, and the charge of the ceremonious worship of the old Testament, so
much more liberally does he look to have the ministry maintained, and the
spiritual worship furthered in the new.

Lastly, if they that help not to uphold the ministry shall be condemned,
what shall become of them that rob the Church of her revenues, and devour the
holy things? And thus much of that matter.

CHAP. III.
A disswasiue to all men not to meddle with things devoted.
NOw here I desire all men to consider, how prejudicial it is unto the Gospel,
how dishonorable to God, injurious to his seruitours, ignominious to our
country, and dispendious to our own salvation, to beggar and distress those,
that for their work sake, should be had in high esteem and worthy reputation.
If a man should by covenant and oath bind himself unto the devil, to do his
v^most endeavor and faithfullest service, in oppugning and ruining the
kingdom of Christ, he could never devise to attempt it more directly, then by
driving and compelling the Ministers of God to such straights and difficulties;
that wanting convenient maintenance, they must be forced to give over that
function, or never undertake it, flying ouer-sea to Rome, or Rhemes, or
Amsterdam for more liberal allowance and means of maintenance: or if not so,
betake himself to some base and illiberall trade for better supportation: or
last of all, as bad as any, to persist in the calling without encouragement or
comfort, exercising the same neither with profit to other, not with content to
themselves: so that neither themselves can do any good in it, and other are
kept off from it, as not being ouer-willing to buy misery and contempt at so
high a rate. Now what is this but a part of that persecution, which Julian
sometime raised against the Church, by depriving the Clergy of their
preferments, the ministers of their maintenance, and the Preachers of their
salaries; by which means he did more hurt to Christianity in one year, then
many of his predecessors had done by seeking their blood; in many: for as one
has observed, he did tollere presbyteriu^, but they presbyteros; so do they
that by any colored forgerie, or professed impiety, do wrest or detain from
the Clergy their just inheritance: they pluck the sun out of the firmament,
bring idol-shepheards into the Church, deprive Gods people of instruction,
themselves of salvation.

Therefore in this one piece of service, God seems to have placed life and
death, blessing and cursing: that, in the kind and conscionable usage of the
men and matters of God: this, in the wronging, and sadding of them.

Consider some passages of holy scripture to this effect: The Prophet repeating
some judgments of God to the people, speaks thus; I will come near to Mal.
3. 5.
you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the soothsaier, the
false swearer, the adulterer, and those that wrongfully keep back the
hirelings wages, and vex the widow, the fatherles, and the stranger, and fear
not me, says the Lord of hosts: Now what this defrauding is, Iam. 5. 1.
and who be those laborers is seen in that which follows, v. 8. Will a man
spoil his Gods? yet you have spoiled me, and say, wherein have we spoiled
thee? in tithes and offerings: ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have spoiled
me, even this whole nation. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that
there may be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith says the Lord of
hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven unto you, and power you out a
blessing without measure. And I will rebuke the deuourer for your sakes, and he
shall not destroy the fruit of your ground, neither shall your vine be barren
in the field, says the Lord of hosts.

Pro 3. 9.
The like has Solomon, Honor the Lord with thy riches, and the first fruit of
all thine increase; so shall thy barnes be filled with abundance, and thy
presses shall burst Eccle: 35 1.
with new wine. And Salomons imitator, Who so keeps the law, brings offerings
enough, and thou shall not appear empty before the Lord: for all these things
are done because of the commandment: the offering of the righteous makes the
altar fat, and the smell thereof is sweet before the most high. v. 8. Give the
Lord his honor with a good and liberal eye, and diminish not the first fruit
of thy hands: in all thy gifts show a joyful countenance, and dedicate thy
tithes with gladness give unto the most high according as he has enriched thee,
and look what thy hand is able, give with a cheerful eye: for the Lord
recompenceth and will give thee seven times as much. Now by the way to
explicate this, the learned have observed, that the Jews did first pay their
first fruits: secondly, thereuma or leuatio: and thirdly, a twofold tyth, the
greater, and the less. Now the thereuma might not be less then the fourth,
fifth, or sixth part: and these they called of a good eye, an indifferent, an
evil eye.

The tithe again (S. Hierom writes) was of four sorts: the 1. to the Leuite,
the 2. from the Leuite to the Priest, the 3. to the Lord at Jerusalem, the 4.
to the poor every third year: which being not perceived of some reverend men
of late times, bred in them this error, that tithes are Judicial, because
they were to go to the poor once in three years: which was but one kind of
Tithes, not the whole genus of them, as this father has showed. This for the
good and evil eye, which Syracides so beats upon.

Ser. de temp. 219.
S. Augustine does mightily enforce this matter: Deus qui totum dare dignatus
est, decimam dignatus est accipere, non sibi sed nobis profuturam: he that
vouchsafes to give us all we have, is pleased yet to keep the tenth himself,
not for his profit, but for ours: O homines stulti, quid mali imperat Deus, vt
non mercatur audiri? foolish men, what hurt is there in his demand, that he
should not be thought worthy to be heard? thou do not give it, but shall
receive it again with advantage. Since then by paying thy tithes, thou gainest
both heavenly and earthly blessings, why do thou s^and in thine own light
by thy niggarddize and folly? Hear you this, O you profane worldlings; all
that you have is his, and will you not let him have his own? he asks no gift
at thy hand, but that which may be for thy good; he begs no alms, but asks
his honor: the tithes and first fruits are not thine but his, and yet thou
hold them from him. What would thou do if he should give thee but one of
ten, and retain the 9. to himself, as he does by restraining the blessed
showers, so that thy harvest is starued with drowt, or nipped with frost:
Quidigitur auide supputas, ideo tibi nouem parts detractae sunt, quia tu
decimam dare noluisti: why do thou cast thy reckoning on thy fingers ends?
thou loosest 9. parts for denying the tenth: haec est enim Dei iustissima
consuetudo, si tu decimam dare nolueris, tu ad decimam reuoceris: so God uses
to deal with them that deny him his tenth, to leave him nothing but the tenth
to live on: Dabis impio militi quod non vis dare sacerdoti, thou shall give to
the extortioner, which thou will not give to thy Minister. This and much more
S. Augustine in the same place.

Hom. 48.
And again in an other place, bringing in a man pleading his charge of
children, he says thus; quam curam agis filiorum, vt eos obruas lachrymis
miserorum? nolo sic prouideas, vt magis inuideas: sic enim Solomon, qui
congregat aliena, relinquit filio dolorem: what care is this thou take for
thy children, to overthrow them with the tears of poor men? I would not have
thee so provide for them, that thou should rather seem to envy them: for
Solomon says, He that gathers other men's goods, leaves nothing but grief
unto his child. It was said by Christ, Give to Caesar that which is Caesar's,
and give to God that which is Gods: for therefore our ancestors abounded in all
wealth, because they paid their tithes to God, and their tributes to Caesar.

In all which regards the Jews, who of all the world were both the most
bountiful, and the most true tithers of all their goods, called that action
diuitiarum saepem, the fence of all their fortunes: and to that purpose have to
this day a proverb amongst them, decima vt dives fias, the only way to thrive
well, is to tithe well. For which cause the Canonists also make it a ruled
case, that a man not thriuing upon his living, if he be such as, has been
noted backward in payment of Church duties, his Landlord is not bound in
equity to abate his rent, because it is to be presumed, that his poverty is
from the hand of God to punish his ill dealing that way. Which opinion does
reside yet in the Jews to this day, and some elder Christians, who are
scrupulous or rather almost superstitious in this matter, who paying their
duties justly, and fearing to possess any of the Churches demeanes most
conscionably, will rise up in judgment against many of us, of righter religion
and deeper learning: which part of Gods fear being raced out of many of our
hearts, makes us to defile our hands with holy pillage, and secretly draw
down the judgments of God upon our selves and our successors, without any
knowledge, or ar least acknowledgement of the true cause, as Achan that
troubled both his own house and all Israel, by such ungrateful injury, and
injurious ingratitude to God and his Church.

I heard it once in some earnest lamented, that the goodly copes, and rich
accoustrements of the Church have been a long time sick of a consumption, and
kept their chamber, and as it were sometimes to take air, would look out at
the windows, like prisoners at a grate, as bewailing their long and undeserved
durance: whereunto one more merrily then bitterly did strait reply, that it was
no marvel: for fools did first bring them in, and knaves had again carried
them out. I censure not the sarcasme, but I think they were not so foolish
that endowed the Church with such as then seemed superfluous ornaments; as they
faulty, that (with them) have bereft the Church of her necessary habiliments.

Hier.
Olim orbis ingemuit, videns se factum Arrianum, hodie ingemiscit videns se
factum Atheum: the time was once, that the world wailed to see her self so
suddenly turned Arrian, now she has cause to cry to see her self turned
Atheist. That which our Savior said was only necessary, we hold the only
unnecessary: But God forbid that these should be the blossoms of our
religion, to rob God of his honor, his Church of her revenues, our souls of
selfecomforts, and heaven of her inhabitants. Yet this is not the worst: for
when we complain us of our greiuance, we are scoffed at with Iulians
sarcasmes; who when the Christians craved redress of their wrongs; would
answer them, Your Master bad you use patience, that when one took your cloak,
you should give him your coat also: so are we preached unto. O blasphemy, to
insult on our sufferings! O impiety, to trample on our misery! must we be
silent while you are sacrilegious? must we be patient while you are impudent?
God grant it be not said of this sin as was of the like, that caused his
sacrifices 1. Sam. 3* 14.
to be blasphemed, The Lord has sworn to the house of Eli, that the sin of
the house of Eli shall not be purged with sacrifice nor oblation for ever.

The world at this day finds much fault with the non-residence of Ministers,
and facile est inuenire ba^ulum ad caedendum canem: howbeit I will not excuse it
altogether, yet this I speak of knowledge, that the cruel encroachments of
many parrishioners, enforce some men to be non-resident against their wills,
being so daily vexed with the abuses in this kind, that they are enforced to a
hard choice, to live among them with daily molestations, or to seek any weak
stay to live from them, for their ease to give way to their neighbors
importunate compilations: singing to themselves that comfortless carroll; Sic
ego nec sine te, nec tecum viuere possum.
I speak not this in hope to do any good, (yet God knows) I fear the evil is
cureles, the malady remediles, not because there is no balm in Gilead, or
physician there; but for that, when they would have healed Babylon, she would
not be healed: yet I must speak it, if not ad correctionem, yet at least ad
conuictionem: we shall shortly bring things to that pass, as sometimes Tully
spoke of the commonwealth, not to make it the question qualem ecclesiam sumus
habituri, sed an habituri sumus vllam; not what Church we shall have, but
whether we shall have a Church or no: nec iam de terminis, sed de
totapossessione erit contentio; the suit will not be about the landmarks, but
the very lands. We are already come to Fimbrias quarrel, to bite and whine,
to stab and complain that the dagger went in but half way: we are driven to
crave some small pittances of our own possessions, and cannot be heard; or if
we be, we are braued with bounty, and vpbraided with benefits: they may indeed
be benefitia, but as Tullie calls them latronum, thieves benefits, to whom we
are therefore beholden that they do not kill us, when they rob us. Most of the
lands and manors of old erection are begged for fools, a few Prelacies
remain, though not vnpluckt, yet not wholly devoured; some dignities and
Ecclesiastical livings have escaped the common wrack, yet narrowly looked into,
and vigilantly viewed, to be scored up for the next seazure: men being
ouer-busie and officious to light candles and sweep corners, as a reverend
Prelate not long since complained, not to find and restore the lost 3. pence,
but to search and seek the left penny.

But let them beware it prove not too hot for their handling, like the money
of Delphos, or the gold of Tholose, which so many as touched came to disaster
destinies. Gods part has ever been like God's ark, which so long as it was in
the hands of uncircumcised Philistims, never left plaguing them with sundry
vengeances, till the heifers brought it home again to the true possessours:
like Eagles feathers, that consume and canker all other among whom they are
mingled; like the flesh of the altar, wherein a coal was couched which burnt
the neast Chrysoft.
of the bird that ceazt it: Pauca male parta, multa been comparata perdiderunt,
says one, a few goods evil got, have wasted a great deal that has been
honestly come by: Nolo quis habeat contra Deum, ne non habeat Bern.
and Deum, says another; some having, has the devil and all.

Before the Universal deuastation of the holy city, an Angel was heard many
days together to vt^er these words, as Josephus a Priest has left recorded,
Migremus hinc, migremus hinc, Let us away, let us away; as if God and all his
holy Angels would take their leave, when sacrilegers are suffered to harbor in
the Temple. Strange has bin the horror wherein such people have been had among
the heathen, and fearful torments have been devised for them; as propination
of Ophiusa, luxation of the body, precipitation from the rock, inhumation of
the corpse, intestation of the goods, detestation of the memory;
anathematization of the party among us, imprecation and execration against
body and soul: as thus; If any shall take away from the holy Church of God
her proper inheritance, or such hereditaments as by my will and Testament I
here bequeath, (which I hope no man wileuer attempt to do) let his account be
without mercy at the dreadful day of judgment, when he shall come to receive
his doom at the hands of the Judge of heaven and earth, to whom I give and
dedicate the same. Whose heart does not tremble to consider such prayers?
wherefore let men be well assured, that the pulling down of Jerusalem will
cost deerer, then did the rebuilding of Jericho, whose foundation Hiel laid in
the Ios. 6. 16.
death of his elder son, and set up the gates in the blood of his younger.
Turno tempus erit cum magno optauerit Vir. A^n. 10.
emptum Intactum Pallanta*

Psalm 6^. 10
It had wont to be song, mons domini, mons pinguis, the mountain of the Lord
was fat and cruddie, but now her proud flesh has been greatly taken down,
like Pharaos fat kine in the last lean years, that it is not seen that ever
she had bin so foggy: another says, Psalm. 78. 10.
Mons Sion, mons sanctus, mount Sion is most sacred: the Church as it is most
venerable, so it should be most inviolable: and is now the plucking down the
service of God, the best service we can do to God?

Luk 7. 7.
To love the nation, and build a Synogogue, was once both thought and pleaded,
as a point of highest merit? and does all desert now stand in demolishing the
same? Our Fathers build not Synagogas, but Basilicas; no simple oratories but
sumptuous palaces, and endowed them with plentiful patrimonies, as
depositapietatis, and domicilia diuinitatis, the earnests of their piety, and
houses of the divinity: and shall we so far degenerate from divinity, piety,
and humanity also, as to chalk upon our Churh door, quo vitius eo melius, a
barn or a stable, a houell or hogstie will serve the turn as well? Oh far be
it from Christians to think it, from religious to do it: the blindest Sauadge
in the desolatest Islands that serves his Zemes the devil for God, is not so
impious.

Plut.
The Athenians could not endure to hear Phideas any further, when being asked
what was the best matter to make Mineruaes statue, he said Iuo^ie, as being of
longer continuance and lesser cost then any thing else.

Aelian.
It sauoured but of Atheism which Leonides Alexanders master had wont to
admonish him of, that he should not be so profuse in sacrificing frankincense
unto his gods: for it is noted he was ever so magnificent that way, that he
never burnt other wood in his temple, nor offered less sacrifices then whole
hecatombies, oxen by the hundreds: therefore he would tell him, you shall do
well, sir, to be more sparing of your hand, till you have conquered those
countries where those precious odours grow, Alexander was not well content with
this lesson, but held his peace till he had indeed vanquished the East, and
then he sent his master for a token many talents of those excellent perfumes,
with this salvation; Because thou shall know that I have conquered the
Arabians, I have sent thee some of the gummes for a token, and that the greater
quantity, because thou may leave to be illiberall and a niggard to the gods.

Aelian.
It has bin observed, by the very heathen, that never any Barbarian, or of
the common sort of Naturalists did deny God or his power, or durst offer to
their dieties any of those prodigions indignities that we read of; only the
fine witted fellows the Grecians, whose learning indeed had made them mad,
were the first if not the only that did it: Euemerus, Messenius, Hippo,
Diagoras, Epicurus, Dionysius, who played his prizes with all his Gods one after
another, shauing the golden berd away of God Aesculapius, because forsooth his
father Apollo wore no berd; dimasntling god Apollo of his robe of gold, and
giving him another of linsie-wolsie; because the gold was too heavy for
summer, and too cold for winter; not only robbing, but deriding whatsoever to
them was holy. Though one do much stomach it, Tullie,
that after all this he should ride at sea so calmly, reign at land so
prosperously, and die in his bed so peaceably: yet another does assure us, that
all was not gold Val. Max.
that glistered: Nam sacrilegorum poenas quas vivus effugit, dedecore
filij-mortuus exoluit, he had but sour sauce to all his sacrilege: for when
he was dead in his grave, he paid for all in the follies and misfortunes of his
son, which all his life he had escaped.

But most memorable was the fact and fortune of Cyrus, who brake up in Babylon
the tomb of Semiramis, invited thereunto by an inscription upon the same, in
hope of much treasure; which sounded to this effect: What King soever shall
want money, if he dig down this grave shall find sufficient. Now this tomb had
thus stood many years inuiolate, till at last Cyrus coming hither, and
reading the writing, he fell to spoil the sacred monument; but having spent
much pains to little purpose, still frustrate of his hope, all last upon a
stone he encountered another writing to this purpose; Surely had thou not bin
a very insatiable wretch, thou would have never violated the temples of the
gods, nor ransacked the graves of the dead to fill thy greedy desire: but go
thy way, ere long thou shall find enough: and so indeed he did: for he was
caught in the ambushes that Queen Tamaris had laid for him, beheaded, and cast
into a but of blood, with that bitter exprobration, Satiate sanguine quem
sitisti.

The like disaster had Xerxes for breaking up the temple and sepulcher of Belus
in hope of gold, where he was disapointed of his hopes, but found something
which he would not, a viol half full of oil, wherein were the ashes of that
old King, and a scrow^e annexed, containing this scripture, Whosoever shall
break up this monument, and not fill up this viol with oil, let him rest
assured there remains for him very heavy fortunes: Whereupon he attempting to
fill it, found it a thing impossible, the glass either by magic or miracle,
never admitting repletion: whereupon in despair he gave it over, expecting the
portended mischeifes so threatened unto him: which fell out in fine
accordingly, for warring against the Grecians he received an irrecouerable
discomfiture, wherein he lost at the hands of a handful of men, 50 myriads of
followers, and running away most basely and dishonourably, was put to death by
the hands of his own children.

Aelian.
An other example most remarkable in humane stories, is of one Macareus, a
Priest at Mytelene, who first robbed, then killed a man in his vestry, that had
entrusted him with some treasure: This Mystes shortly after solemnizing the
Trietericall rites of that region and religion, as he was busy in the midst of
his ceremonies surrounding the city, new gone out of the temple, where he had
left the fire requisite for his sacrifices, his two young children who had
observed their fathers fashions, fell to imitate his sacrifice, and one with
the blade which was used in the service, playing the Priest, killed his brother
in stead of a beast, as he had seen formerly performed: the mother in her
house near adjoining to the temple, at the noise of the cry came hastily in,
and seeing what was done, in great rage snatching a brand that lay on the fire,
stroke the suruiuer dead in the place: These sorrowful accidents soon being
spread all over the city, came to the cares of the father, who was still in his
pageant and idolatrous pomp: but soon leaving his service, he ran to the
place, and finding his wife bewailing her fact, with the torch he yet held in
his hand, the unhappy instrument of his holy devotions, he killed her at his
foot; for which himself was instantly apprehended, tortured, examined; where
between the terrors of torment, and horrors of conscience, he confessed the
whole matter from the beginning to the end; for which he presently received
condign punishment, being put to death to make up the tragedy.

But come we nearer home unto our selves, for as much as far fet examples
have but far off respects, and it seems to concern us little, what was done
so far from home. I will look no higher then the Conquest, where we shall
find Earl Godwin, Earl of Kent, father to Harold, whom the Norman overthrew:
how treacherously, how impiously did he inuest himself with holy possessions?
First, by captious sophystrie cosening the Archbishop of Canterbury for his
manor of Boseham in Sussex, with this devise putting a trick upon him: He had
instructed his followers what he would do, and bad them be ready to bear
witness what the Archbishop answered to his subtle sophisme, and then he
requests my Lord to let him have his boseam; the good Bishop thinking he had
asked his blessing, little minding his manor, made answer, My Lord I give you
my boseam: and so he wrangled the good man out of his land, ouerbearing him
with the testimony of his treacherous attendants. Then by a worse piece of
villainy he possessed himself of a Nunnerie at Barkly in Glocestershire, by a
kinsmans wicked working, left sick among them, who never left working till he
had made the most of the virgins there pregnant, and then begd their house, and
turned them out a begging. Many other like exploits did that man, but in the
end himself at the Kings table was choked with a piece of bread, according
to his imprecation: and we know what befell his son, and the whole land, not
only slain with most part of the ancient nobility of this land, but the
scepter translated to a foreign Prince. I say no more.

The next is the same foreign Prince himself, William the Norman, surnamed
the Conqueror, who using his victory very hardly, beside other things, to
make his new forest dispeopled no small compass of ground, 36. parishes with
their towns and Churches, of whom a Bishop of Winchester made those verses,

Templa adimit diuis, fora ciuibus, arua colonis, etc. But what befell him, to
say nothing of his own discomforts upon his death bed; his son and successor
surnamed Rufus, in his hunting in the same forest, Rex cervum insequitur,
regem-vindicta -- says the same Poet, as fast as he pursues his game,
vengeance pursues him, he was by chance shot through by Sir Walter Tyrrel. His
next son Richard died of the plague: his eldest son Robert, after many
mischiefs and miseries done and suffered, had his eyes put out by his own
brother, and died most miserably in durance and prison: and Henry his nephew by
Robert, in the same forest also came to Absaloms end, being hanged in a tree
as he chased his dear. So Sacrilege ends for the most part with extirpation,
as has been noted.

The last I will name, not the least in this catalogue, shall be D. Voisie
Bishop of this city of Excester, who from a petty Canon in the Church, rose
to the Bishops mytre; but there sell to that wicked resolution, that the wicked
Nero sometime had done, (...), when I die, I care not though all the world die
with me: for this high Priest forgetting that ever he had been clarke, or not
caring whether there should be any after, like politicians newly risen, plucked
up the ladder after him, that no more should ascend: for of 13. goodly manors
that belonged to the sea, he made so good riddance, that he scarce reserved one
for them that should follow: This Bishop at one time relating unto Steven
Gardener then Bishop of Winchester, what provision he had made in the Church
for his grave, received this answer, My Lord, what talk you of a Church? a
dunghill is fitter for your deserts then a Church, which have so shamefully
mangled that goodly sea: you have played the beast and deserve no better place
then a beast: and so (I have heard) indeed was served. But this I have been
very credibly informed of, that with his holy pillage he purchased many
privileges to his native soil of Sutton Colfield in Warwickeshire, and
enriched many of his kindred, which now they are but little the better for; many
of them, or as they say the most, having bin weeded out by dishonorable ends.

These have been the successes of sacriledgers for the most part, God having
set a mark upon them, as he did upon Cain* that all the world may take notice
of them: and as David says, that the righteous may rejoice Psalm 5^. ^0.
when he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his feet in the blood of the
ungodly, and men shall say, verily there is fruit for the (sacrilegious:)
doubtless there is a God that judges the earth.

I will end this chapter with an example of another kind, that is of mercy
for the rarenes of it, and that T^^them.
of Dagobertus a King of France, who newly coming to his Crown, lived a most
dissolute and deboshed life a long time; yet in the end by a great and gracious
visitation sent from God, he had a fair coming off again, as had ever any.
This man first married two wives at once, besides Mistresses sans ^ombre, some
whereof he carried about with him whersoeuer he went, other he maintained very
sumptuously as queens in many places of the Kingdom; it is not possible to
comprise the lest part of his lewdnes in any mediocritie of words, which when
his Bishop Amandus reproved him for, he very unjustly sent him into
banishment; whom he had no sooner rid his hands of, but he fell to fowler
matters, robbing of Churches, and pulling down religious houses, and turning
out the Ecclesiastical persons into the open world to take air. At length
when God saw his good time, he sent a very heavy visitation upon him, (I find
not what was the particular) that thorough the good grace of God wrought so
holy and wholesome contrition in him, that he vowed to God, if he did recover,
to make some amends: which he faithfully performed according to the devotion of
those times, erecting churches, building Colleges, founding monasteries,
always and openly confessing, that the judgments of God had been sent unto
him, principally for his outrages committed that way.

Among other monuments of his repentance and humiliation, he founded the
monastery of Wissenburg in Germany, where he left for a monument of his true
conversion, a confession penned with his own hand, to this effect;

In what manner almighty God has plagued and restored me again, I have
thought good to publish by these presents to all the world, to the end that all
men may take notice of my fall and folly, and likewise of my restoration and
restitution, but chiefly that so many as shall hear of my doings, may be
afraid to make havoc of Gods holy Temples, and learn to perform such
reverence thereto, as best beseems.

Be it therefore known, that after my Father Lotharius was dead, I took upon
me as next heir, the government of the kingdom, but being transported with
errors and lightness of youth, I neglected the duty of a good Prince,
discharging neither justice nor conscience, but as I was carried by humor and
favor. Among many other my excesses, I became a ruiner of Gods inheritance,
and a demolisher of his worship, which I ought to have set up and maintained,
till at last that God in mercy to chasten my rebellion, did dash my pride, and
cast me down; and when he had bruised me sufficiently, he received me again to
mercy: and this confession I leave against my self here in record, that none
may dare in like presumption to violate this holy place, at this present by me
devoted to God. Thus far Dagobert: which I have set down the more fully,
because there are so few examples of reuersion in this kind, as it is in the
fable of the Fox, replying to the Lion for not visiting him,

-- quia me vestigia terrent,
Omnia te aduorsum spectantia, nulla retrorsum. And so much shall serve for
disswasion.

CHAP. IV.
An humble Obtestation to the Hon. and Worcester. Knights and Burgesses of the
Parliaament when time may serve to remedy this mischeife.
ANd now most worthy Patriots, let me address my speech to you, that manage
the greatest affairs of this kingdom, and that not by way of oneration, but
most lowly summission; May it please you seriously to consider this matter with
me; and see wherein your service may be honorable to God* glorious to your
selves, comfortable to the Church, and profitable to your country. It is no
new thing for us to complain, or for you to hear of the mischeifes of
church-wormes: for sacrilege does deserve to hear of his doings, having been
often delated, bound over, scourged, branded for incorrigible, and condemned
for felony against God and man; but yet he finds such friends among those of
the bench, that he is still repriued, and either pardoned his fault, or kept
unexecuted; by which means he still breaks out again, and I know not whether
more efferated by former attatchings, or animated by his often dischargings, he
ever rampeth more feircely then before, and threatens his accusers, to ruin
all that is holy. To you therefore does the poor mangled and menaced Church of
this renowned Island, in suppliant manner hold up her hands: from you she
looks, she chalengeth, she deserves supportance. Among you she is assured
she has very many in whom she is more then ordinarily interessed, as who are
risen by her fostering, grown great by her favors, and even sly with her
feathers: therefore to you she sues, and if she could be understood, she would
thus complain, and thus entreat;

Alas my sons; and are these the rewards you render your mother, for her
pains in bearing, and her patience in rearing so noble spirits, and worthy
wits, both formerly not without sore travel and interruption; and lastly, for
60. years together without stop or intermission; to think you are not well
sed with my milk, except you draw my blood also? What means those old
dismembrings, these new detractings, enuyous pryings, odious beggings, sad
disputings, savage incroachings upon me and my small indowments? What good will
these small remainds of my dowry do you? what pleasure will my undoing breed
you? if this little estate that is left, make you rich and me poor, you great
and me small, what will be the end of such gains? Is having grown so
toothsome to you, that you make no care from whence it comes? is holy
demeanes so wholesome a dish, that you will contend who shall do most harm? is
temporal riches so necessary for you, that you fear not to make it up with
the spoil of spiritual? are your sons so dear unto you, that they must be
raised with the ruin of your fathers? Cannot you be indulgent parents, except
you be unnatural, impious, sacrilegious children? are you so smally beholden
for means unto your father, that you must break in and rob your mother? or is
it my conniuence at former wrongs, that makes you presume to wrong me more?
Grow you weary now of your mothers blessing? do you envy her being? desire
her cursing? If it be so, my sons, that you will either sell me at home, or
send me abroad, yet give me my dowry that I brought you with me, my peace I
have procured you, my plenty wherewith I have crowned you, my treasures that I
have caused you, and the millions of good things wherewith I have blessed you.
Woe is me, that I am grown so vnfauourie to be hated, so ugly to be abhorred,
so barren to be rejected, so decrepite to be scorned, and that of mine own
cradle. Is a stepmother become so lovely, or an empty house so handsome, that
I am driven away for an other to have my room? Alas my sons, I will say what
I see, the lickerish look after my poor estate, shows too great to your
greedy eyes; the deceitful luster of a painted beauty bewitcheth your
lascivious eyes, as you think to enjoy, as I know to endure her glorious
beauty in glorious tyranny; who if she comes in, will not only fetch back
all that was mine, but also fetch in all that is yours. Remember this, but whom
you dishonor, and whom you please: did not the enemy triumph enough before,
while you unripped the seamlesse coat, but you must yield them more content by
distressing me their hateful opposite? What mean you to do? remember but to
whom you do it, and do your will; to one that vpholdeth the scepter,
maintains you, secureth all you have: they are my seruitours that stead you,
my Priests that bless you, my ministers that profit you, who cause your God to
be obeyed, your governors honored, your people informed, your country
renowned, and your happiness continued. Who watch for your souls but they?
who wake for your safety but they? who avert your imminent judgments but
they? who procures your eminent blessings but they? Grieve nor, O grieve not
their souls by grudging them their lines: if you once drive them from their
station, or discourage them in their function, you shall be ungrateful in
grieuing them, impious in expelling them, miserable in missing them. If I have
not been barren or abortiue in my breeding, nor defective in my fostering, nor
illiberall in my loving you; be nor ingrate to them, unkind to me, auerse from
God. If I have interest in your loves, or part in your lives, or portion in
your hopes, by the father that begat you, by the womb that bare you, by the
breasts that sucled you, by whatsoever of mine has been dear unto you, I will
and command you, I entreat and beseech you, I bind and adjure you, not to
suffer your mother any more to be dishonored, not to let your fathers any more
be impouerished, not to suffer your souls any more to be deceived, nor your
hands with holy pillage to be defiled, nor your hopes of everlasting bliss to
be euacuated: so shall God even your Father bless you, the Son receive you,
the holy Spirit comfort you, the holy Angels observe you, my arms embrace you,
and all the company of heavenly Saints serve you: so shall the judgments that
hang over your head pass by you, the evils that are gone out escape you, the
devils that now smite not hurt you, and hell that now gapeth not devour you:
so shall your pollitie stand unconquered, your families be continued, your
candlestick vnremooued, your God appeased, your souls saved, and all your
holy wishes most happily accomplished.

If the Church the mother of us all could be heard or understood thus to
speak, and thus to plead; what could ye answer, what Apology would you make,
or excuse pretend to her as affectionate as just complaint? but now not only
she, but I am well assured God himself in the greiuances of his Ministers
does say the same with a more audible voice, and more real effect: that God I
say, whose houses ye have suffered not to be robbed only, but ruined also, his
reuenews diminished, his Churches demolished, his donations alienated, his holy
things usurped, his portions interuerted, and his worship dishallowed.

All the world till late days, thought the Church the safest sanctuary to
repose their treasures in, their wealth, their good works; but now the poorest
cottage is far safer then the strongest Cathedral. Then it was thought as
great an immunity to the deponent, as honesty and honor to the recipient: now
the Orphan is injured, the widow wronged, the father discouraged, the
Sanctuary profaned, and the ^ot^en.
Priest of all other avoided. I read what time the city of Ephesus was
beleaguered with a long and dangerous seige, and the inhabitants with doubts of
war daunted, the governor gave this advise, to tie the walls and gates of
the city with ropes and cables to the Temple of their Goddess; to the end
that when all they had were so peculiarly surrendered unto their Deities
patronage, it should not only be impious, but sacrilegious to the enemy to
attempt that which was now sacred. Oh, what is become of ancient holiness, that
have now inuerted the method of true security, when we do not annexe our chests
to Churches, but incorporate the holiest of Churches to our private chests and
patrimonies!

Sigeber.
Justinian the second, having a great desire to pluck down a Church in the
city of Constantinople that stood in his light, fast joining to the Palace,
that in the room thereof he might erect a Tarras for the people to see and
receive the Emperor, entreated Callimacus then Patriarch to persuade the
people that it was neither displeasing to God, nor offensive to any, to convert
Churches to other uses, as those had done that had overthrown the heathen
temples, and disposed of them otherwise. To whom the holy Archbishop made this
reply, Sir, God forbid, that ever I should use my tongue in persuading men to
pull down Churches, who have need to incite them all I can to build more.
True it is, this request and this repulse proved fatal to both: for the
Emperor bearing spleen to the Patriarch for this, the Patriark joined with
Leontius to depose Justinian; and Justinian after much hurly burly recovering
the diadem, first blinded, then banished the Patriark. It is too well known
with what animositie S. Ambrose resisted Theodosius in like case, which
elsewhere remembering, he uses these words: Meministis ipsi, Offic 2. 24.
quoties aduersus regales impetus pro viduarum imo omnium depositis certamen
subierimus: You remember how often I have been put to my plunges, in the
behalf of the Churches, the common bank of the widows and all the word,
against the great assaults and impetitions of the Emperor. The like he
records of another, whom he calls Episcopus Vicinensis. Oh that there were
the like spirit in our modern Bishops, in your honorable Senators, that when
any sacrilegious bill, or mercenarie tongue shall rise up to persuade to like
dishonorable courses, he may by your learned speaker, or religious members, be
quashed, silenced, committed. Howeuer you shall please to humor any in like
suit, may it please you out of the greatness of your place, and seriousnes of
your employments to consider your private estates, your houses honor, your
Empires glory, your Saviors worship, nequid Ecclesia detrimenti capiat: For
further persuasion hereof vouchsafe to hear this wholesome advise, which
though for the author ye are to repudiate, yet because it is an Oracle, not to
calumniate.

M. A^^el.
What time Camillus was banished to Capua, and the French under Bremus were
possessed of Rome, L. Clarius the Consul was sent by the Senate to Apollo
Delphicus, to demand counsel what they might do; where he remained 40. days
together in humble supplication before the shrine, without once being heard or
vouchsafed answer: and so after 6. weeks expense of time, and loss of much
treasure he returned as he came: Then the Senate, thought it good to send the
Priests, out of every Temple in Rome two, who ariuing there, were presently
answered in this manner; Marvel not ye Romans, that I have thus long
refused to answer: for foolish people use never to seek to God, till men do
sail them; but therefore does God refuse to counsel such in their extremity,
because they never come at them but in extremity. Take this of me, never leave
God to fly to men; for it more avails to hold league with God, then love
with all the men alive; be wary how you offend God, for he can damage you more
then men can do: God forgets not men, except he be much and often forgot of
them; and therefore suffers he them to persecute one another, because they
all join to persecute him or his: if then if you will look to have him
favorable to you in time of war, you must be sure to serve him in the time
of peace: and know this, that extreme chastisements, are for extreme sins.
These are the Mementoes I send to the Romans: and as to L. Clarius, I
vouchsafed to make no answer to so evil a messenger: for take this from me,
and if you find my counsel ill, then take no more: In foreign ambassages send
alwaeis your most eloquent Orators, in Senate at home put always the wisest
men, your wars abroad commit always to the most valiant Commanders, and in the
negotiations of god, put always the most innocent Priests: for god will never
appease his just ire against unjust actions, but if your solicitours be most
holy and righteous. As for the French, they cannot be driven from Rome, till
Camillus and all the guiltless citizens that are now in banishment are
recalled home: these wars do but warn you of your offenses past; for look
what evil wicked men do to the good in diverse days, by other as evil they
shall be sure to be repaid in one.

This was the answer which Apollo gave the Flamines that were sent unto him; an
answer to say no more, that might have befitted a far better author; but it
is not speaking, but doing that saues; wherein we have the start of the wisest
Atheist or Devil in the world. Consider, I beseech you of the matter, and apply
it if you please.

To conclude, as they recommended all their State to the wisdom and
providence of their Senate, so do we the poor and despised Ministers of this
Kingdom, in the behalf of the Church, recommend the care of God and his
Gospel to your wisedoms and devotions our Consuls and Senators: not as finding
defect in your diligence; but as he, Qui monet vt facias quod iam facis, ipse
monendo.
Laudat and hortatu, comprobat acta suo.
And so in all humble duty recommending your consultations to the spirit of
wisdom, and the great Counselor, and your lives and spirits to the God of
spirits and life, I end.

CHAP. V.
Consolation to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren of the Clergy, against the
injuries of the times.
MY Honored Lords, Reverend Brethen, and beloved fellow laborers in the
Gospel of God: Considering the daily and dangerous in justice which the world
does practice upon the Church, I need not tell you that the same does concern
all you, that are the deputies of God in this case, as from God to men in
matters of grace and internal benediction, so of men to God for temporal
tribute, and thankful retaliation. If then we find our charges ingrate, our
Superiors sinistrous, our neighbors injurious, our auditors sacrilegious, not
respecting our labors, nor requiting our cares; neither reuerencing our
persons, nor abstaining from our pensions; what remains for us to be done, but
to descend into our selves, and examine our consciences in the sight of God and
his holy Angels, whether it be the guerdon of our sins, or the gaging of our
graces, which he looks should be real and eminent in us. And albeit we must
truly agnize that such vsages are the portion of our cup, and the inheritance
of our profession, which our Master has left unto us; yet it cannot be denied,
but we shall find sufficient cause within our selves, to ascribe the same to
our deserts and aberrations.

Pet. Mart.
It is written in the late histories of the Indian people, that if they find
in their Temples and Sacraries of their superstitions, any horrid or abhorred
creatures, as owls, or backs, or toads, or serpents, which men account as
hateful and ominous, they dispose themselves to all the shows of humility,
that their holiest ceremonies can declare, to expiate the anger of their
displeased Zemes and furious Deities, which they hold presaged by such
impurities. The like I take it are we to do, and make collection of these
unclean vermin in the sanctuaries of God, that God is most highly offended
with us, and that these impure monsters, and prodigious Harpies do really
prognosticate the threats of heaven, as to the whole land in general, so to us
of the holy ministry in particular, whose the Temple is, and the signs
portended there more peculiar appropriate to our calling.

Wherefore we shall do well to search and diue into the true reason, and
howsoever their creeping in or sculking under some groundsell or threshold,
makes them nothing the holier, but helps their damnation as desperate
hypocrites, yet the desert is from our selves: so that as we denounce his
judgments to them, so are we to descrie his justice to us, so to suffer us to
loose our reverence and rights, that are fallen away from his fear, honoring
our selves more then his Son, more respecting our riches then our religion,
and more caring for gold then we do for God.

I beseech you then, right reverend and renowned Fathers and Brethren, give me
leave with a light finger, if not to lance this sore, yet not blanch the
search: for I take it it is no dead flesh that needs any boisterous rifling,
but tender and sensible to iudure the ransacking, nec vt verenda retegam, sed
vt in verecunda confutem, as sweet S. Bernard; rather with Sem to awake your
drowsinesse, then with Cham to display your nakedness.

First then I fear, it may by some be thought, that your ambition, my Honored
Lords has excited these Harpies of state, whereby you have laid open your
chests to their ravening hands, and your Churches to their irreligious hearts.
Or it may be you the Canons and Prebends of the greater Churches, that are
either covetous, or vmbratilous, or polypragmonous: or you my brethren and
fellows in the country, partly schismatical, partly symoniacal, men seditious
or scandalous, more frequenting the palace then the pulpit, and more soliciting
the hall with suits, then heaven with Saints; that have opened the mouths of
these cursing Shemeis, and railing Rabsake^s, and strengthened the hand of
sacrilegious Achans, and irreligious Atheists. Or it may be as every one
severally, so all combinedly have sinned, and committed something
preiudiciously to our persons and patrimonies: As for example;

When a symonizing Scholar, agrees with a Gehezying Patron; and a Iudaizing
Bishop, to make a diabolizing impropriation: or as Malmburiensis writes of one
half Bishop of Norwich: when there meets in one individual, a Scholar, a
Courtier, and a flatterer; a Symoniake, a Bishop, and a Pirat. Howeuer it be, I
would to God that our symonie, and policy, and idleness, and covetousness, and
absence, and silence, and baseness and business, which has drawn this
misery upon us with cords, and this mischeife with cart-ropes, were sifted and
expiated as it ought, that God might see our humiliation, and the world our
satisfaction.

Therefore we must take this as Gods most just retaliation; forasmuch as we
have let go those greater points of holiness, mercy, justice, faith, and
faithfulness, it is but meet that we should loose these diminitiues of mint,
and anise, and commin: because we give not God his due, other give not ours to
us: this being the condition of our obligation, That they shall be honored
that honor him, and they 1. Sam. 2. 30.
but little esteemed that despise him: and this is that which S. Augustine
says, Our inferiors both men and members, derie us that obedience which we
detain in our places from God.

Magdeb.
The history of the renowned Bishop Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, is well
enough known, and the stratageme he used to the Emperor Theodosius, to show
him his error in the matter of the Arrians. The holy Bishop had solicited this
Emperor to expel the heretics, that had as then too much favor in the
Empire, as some of their fellows have at this day with us; but the Emperor
out of his mildenes had forborne to do it, as some other do also now; so as
by this conniuence they had almost mard all* whereupon the good Bishop was
driven to bethink himself of some remedy, to awake the Emperor out of his
dead sleep: for which cause having within a while occasion to come to the
Court to visit his highness, he found the young Emperor Arcadius (whom his
Father had newly created to govern with him) sitting in state together with the
old Emperor. The good Bishop made humble reverence to the Emperor
Theodosius, but to Arcadius did none at all. The old Emperor thinking he had
done it by oversight, put him in mind to salute Arcadius also: the Bishop
replied, it sufficed to honor him, and therefore needed not reverence his
son also. The Emperor now growing into choler at so high contempt, bad he
should be carried out of the Court: whereupon the Bishop taking the
opportunity, told the Emperor to this effect; And do you, sir Emperor, take
the dishonor of your son so hainously? then I beseech you consider, how God
will take it at your hands, to dishonor his Son. The Emperor pawsing
somewhat upon his speech, and waighing the justness of the reproof,
acknowledged his error, and presently took order to avoid the Arrians out of
the Empire.

Therefore who knows whether God has bid Shemei curse David, or sends
Senacherib to spoil Jerusalem: for as Achior speaks unto the great Commander,
If there be error in this people, or that they have Iud. 5. 10.
sinned against their God, then may thou go up, and overcome them: and as
Zeres speaks, If we have begun Esth. 6. 14.
to fall before them, it is to be feared we shall fall more: for they are Jews:
but if we shall repent us of our sins, and resume our first love, who knows
if he will returns Io^l 2. 1^.
and leave a blessing behind him, a meat offering and drink offering to the Lord
our God: therefore let the Priests and the Ministers of the Lord, weep between
the porch and the altar, and say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine
inheritance a reproach, that the heathen may rule over us: so shall the Lord be
jealous over his people, and restore the years that the locust has eaten, the
canker, the caterpillar, and the palmer-worme, even the strong host which he
sends among us.

But in case for all this, that God shall think good to verefie that on us,
which was said of Christ by John, Me oportet minui, illum autem crescere: yet
let us show the world our Christian patience, and holy confidence, against
their fury and falsehood, that we serve not God for meed, as they object; but
in the midst of malice, in the midst of penury, in the midst of infamy, we
will follow our leader without forsaking our calling: Malus est miles, qui
imperatorem gemens sequitur: he is but white-liuered, that follows arms but
in fair weather.

The world has been persuaded I fear me, too truly of too many, that
scholars fly to the Ministry, as malefactors do to the Sanctuary, for
sinister and oblique respects; for imunitie, or impunitie, for ease or honor;
as many of them that have had either foolish or deformed, needy or unthrifty
children, such they set aside to wear the Ephod; and other do gladly recount,
how their ruined estates and forlorn hopes have been wholly supported by the
pillars of the Church, which otherwise had sunk in everlasting undoing: so
making the Church their vltimum refugium, the shoot-anker of their fortune, and
the bawd of their bankruptnes. Thus measuring others feet by their own last,
presume the same of our diuersions: now let them by our carriage be confuted,
and given to know we had no Cynosura, but Sion, no collimation but conscience,
no aim but Gods honor. And that if God shall please not only to touch us,
but to take all the rest from us, and give Satan sufferance, not only to
winnow, but to wast us, yet we will be the same, and serve him still: this may
be our comfort, that God deals no worse with us; this our hope, he means no
more harm unto us; this our harbinger, that he may call us to a harder trial.

For have we any assurance to fare better then our Fathers? any privilege of
birthright to sit safer then our brethren? we have not yet resisted unto
blood, perhaps we must; therefore let us not love these things too much, lest
we leave better things for them* let this weane us from the world, and teach
unto serve God in all weather.

As for our enemies and overthwart neighbors, let them not triumph in our
tribulations; the fate of Babel, comes in next after the fall of Sion: now the
time is, that judgment must begin at Gods own house: 1. Pet. ^. 17.
and if it first begin at us, what shall the end of them be that obey not the
Gospel of God: and if the righteous be scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly
and sinner appear? wherefore let them that suffer, according to the will of
God, commit the keeping of their souls to him in well-doing as unto a
faithful Creator: for this is Gods use, when he has beaten his children
sufficiently, he will cast the rod in the fire: and the Apostle says, It is a
manifest 2 Thessalonians. 1 5.
token of the righteous iudgemen of God, that ye may be accounted worthy of the
Kingdom of God, for which also ye suffer: seeing it is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you that are
troubled, rest with us when the Lord Jesus shallbe revealed from heaven, with
his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God,
and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shallbe punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his
power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired of
all that believe in that day.

CHAP. VI.
The conclusion: where are touched the fountain and remedies of all this evil.
ANd now I feel my pen weary with the chase of this noisome beast, I will
sound a retrait and draw to end: so often as I enter into the serious
consideration of this sin, and the great inconveniences that it has and
daily will derive unto the Church of God in this land, (as I often do) I
cannot but think of that word of Abner upon the play of the 2. Sam. 2. 16.
young men, shall the sword devour sor ever: know thou not it will be
bitterness in the latter end? for seeing the dead sea, into which things must
needs descend, in the farthest fall is nothing but atheism and all manner of
impiety, let us a little look upward unto the head, and search whether it may
be stopped in the spring, or diuerted some other way.

The true cause then of all this ramping, and reuelling against God and his
holy Church is first, profanes; and seconly, covetousness; a very contempt of
heaven and all true happiness, and a greedy desire to inglutte our selves with
Esaus pottage, the commodities and emoluments of this present life.

For the first, if ever this land fall back again, by a fearful recidiuation
into the carnal impieties, and earthly sensualities of the Romish religion, as
it is in a fair forwardnes unless God prevent it, it will be by the means of
our notorious Atheism and fearful Apostasy from the true fear of God, and
care of all goodness: for these are at least subordinate one to another, if not
identities: for they that will but look into the manners of the modern times,
shall well perceive that many that had escaped the Scylla of superstition, are
again very dangerously beleaguered in the Caribdis of irreligion; teaching
their hearts with Platoes Atheist, either that there is no God at all, or that
he is not such for mercy or justice as men are made believe, or at least that
men may do (as in too many spiritual courts) buy out their heavy penance
with light commutements. To which purpose I call to mind a strange narration
of M. Greenham a zealous preacher sometime of our Church, of a certain
instable sinner, that at first had been a Papist, till ariuing at better
reason, he found their fashions to come much short of their gawdie shows: then
turned he his tippet, and became Protestant, where he staid not long, by reason
they showed much coldness in their profession: at last he separated, and was a
Fami^st. Now whether it was he had not left himself any further choice, or
took a better taste of their religion, there he fastened: now the first
principle that they sought to instill into him was this, that there was no God.
Now whether it was the just dereliction of God to punish his giddines; or the
fatigation of a wandering spirit to purchase quietness; or the correspondence of
the maxim suting well with his wickedness; he drunk in this position very
greedily, and thereupon began to frame conclusions; If there be no God, then
there is no heaven nor hell to reward men's actions: if neither of these, what
madness is this to defraud my soul of certain pleasures for uncertain
fantasies. This diabolical collusion rather then conclusion, so far prevailed
with him, that like some ignis fatuus, it carried him headlong into all manner
of licentious downefalls: first for pleasure, to eating and drinking like
another Evangelical Epicure; then to mainetain that charge, to robbing and
stealing; and last of all, as the reward of such courses, to apprehending and
hanging. Now at the place of his death, and the point of the last gasp, he
requested a stay, where confessing his whole manner of life, his wallowing in
and out of all religions, his beginning in Papisme, his continuing by
Protestisme, and his ending in Anabaptisme, he delivered these words; Now do I
find at my death, the error of all my life: I was taught, and did believe there
was no God: but here I find the contrary, and that he is most just to reward
all wretched contemners; and so he ended the Catastrophe. I question not the
truth of this story, because I knew the reporter: I will not scholie upon his
volubilous expatiation, voluminous gradatio^, meritorious conclusion. Let us be
afraid of these excentricall motions, which the Prophet calls Spiritum
vertiginis, a spiritual giddines, whereby men wander in the labyrinths (...)
sim. 3. 6.
of their own leuities, like Paul's (...), ever learning, and never come to
knowledge; and Col. 1. 23.
let us follow the Apostles Cubical station, continuing grounded and stablished
in the faith, not being moved away from the hope of the Gospel.

For the remedy then of this peccant humor, the counsel of the Philosopher
is not amiss, to bend Arist. Ethic:
the bough the contrary way: for diseases lightly are cured with their
contraries; as fulness, with fasting, malice with mercy, avarice with alms,
impiety or contempt of God, with an awful fear of his greatness, a
faithful love of his goodness: for he will be honored either a nobis, or de
nobis, by religious adoration, or dangerous direliction. Therefore if we serve
him, he will serve us; but if we shall cast off all his fear, pluck down
his houses, mangle his inheritance, hinder his service, discourage, dishonor,
disanull his ministers and ministry, hoe will leave us to the counsel of our
own hands, to make lust our law, and might our moderator, punishing impiety
with incredulity, and incredulity with complete misery, as he did our
heathen ancestors, whom he gave up into a reprobate mind, to do all Romans 1.
30.
such things as were not convenient, being full of all unrighteousness,
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousnes: full of envy, murder, deceit, debate,
taking all things in the evil part; whisperers, backbiters, haters of God,
doers of wrong, proud, boasters, inuenters of evil things, disobedient to
parents, without understanding, couenant-breakers, without natural affection,
unplacable, unmerciful: God still punishing one sin with another, till we
come to that height, as to leave our selves neither sin to commit, nor place
to repent; as all robbe-Gods do.

2. The second maine wellspring of Sacrilege, is that root of all evil,
Covetousness:*quid non mortalia pectora cogit Auri sacra fames -- the world
now adays does build their worth upon nothing but wealth, and their whole
reputation upon that false position, tantum sumus (not quantum scimus, but)
quantum possidemus: acknowledging no Dietie but Pluto, and no God but gain;
framing to themselves not heavenly, but hellish felicities: for he that knew
them better then we, called riches thorns; now thorns we know, though at the
spring they show fair with their green leaves and white blossoms, yet are
they but thorns, and he that touches them, except he be better armed, shall
feel their prickles; 1. Tim. 6. 9.
so do riches: for they that will be rich fall into tentations and snares, and
into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction: for the love of money is the root of all evil: which while some
have lusted after, they have erred from the the faith, and peirced themselves
through with many sorrows.

sanct.
Take one example, in stead of a Comment upon Paul's text, of Mauritius the
Emperor, adopted by Tyberius the second to succeed in the Empire: He at the
beginning was an excellent and fortunate Prince, subduing and vanquishing the
enemies of the Empire, with great applause and admiration, as the Armenians,
Persians, Scythians, Lumbards, and Hunnes, and many worthy exploits besides,
with much praise and commendation: but in the end being mightily transported
with filthy avarice, he addicted himself to no other thing but scraping and
hoarding of money, and that by any foul or base means whatsoever: for beside
other sordide and dishonorable courses, he fell to defraud his soldiers of
their pay that served in his wars, in countries far off, and weather very
grievous: by which courses having lost the hearts of his men of war, he
received an exceeding great overthrow, whereby a mighty multitude of
Christians were taken prisoners of the Barbarians, for whose ransom he would
not part with one penny, albeit Caianus offered their redemption dog-cheape,
(singulos captiuos, singulis nummis, says my author) which nummus in gold was
but 15s, in silver 16 a piece; which rather then he would part with, he
suffered the Scythian to cut all their throats. Now see what misery befell
this miser.

There was a certain religious man, that in a prophetical spirit ran through
the streets of Canstantinople half naked and mazed, that in the hearing of
all the city fore-spake that the Emperor should die a most bloody death:
whereupon the Emperor having very hardly escaped with his life in a tumult
that rose in the town; coming to himself, and revoluing in his mind his
wretched courses, and how many thousand Christians he had cast away by his
horrible niggardize, and barbarous parsimonie, he fell to great repentance,
craving with all earnestnes at the hands of God, all the vengeance that this
life is capable of, so that he might be spared everlasting torments: for which
cause sending about his messengers and presents to all the Churches through the
Empire, and into the wilderness and woods to the holy Monks, he desired to be
recommended to God in all their devotions, that he would be pleased to be
merciful unto him, and to punish his sins here, and not hereafter. Now while
in great humility he sued thus to God, he had a divination or vision sent him
in his sleep, to this purpose: He seemed to be brought before the image of
his Savior, which stood over the brazen gate of the palace, with an infinite
mul^irude of people round about him, and he in the midst. Then came a voice as
it were from Christ, saying, Set me forth Mauritius; which being done, the
Serieants and officers of the Assize brought him to the bar, where the Judge
with his own mouth said thus unto him, Say Mauricius, where will thou have me
punish thee for thy evil life, upon the earth, or else in hell? to which
question he presently answered upon his knees, Most merciful Lord and just
auenger, in this world: with that the Lord commanded, that he, and Constantina
the Empress, his sons, and all his linnage, should be committed over to
Phocas a soldier in the army. Now then so soon as he awoke, he sent with
all speed for Philippicus his son in law, whom he had long had in jealousy,
as laying wait for his life and crown, and craving pardon for his suspicion,
he told him all his vision, and demanded who that Phocas was, who made him
answer, that he was a Lieftenant in the army, a deboshed young man, and an
arrant coward: upon which relation the Emperor concluded, that if he were
such, nothing would satisfy him but his blood. Now for the further
confirmation of this dream, a blazing star appeared, portending the same
event. Again, Magistranus his ambassador to the Churches returned to the
Court, that had solicited his cause to the monasteries and ministers abroad,
and from them all, returned this answer, That God had accepted of his
repentance, and was pleased to save his soul, but for his life and state the
sentence would not be reuersed. All which things suting well together,
Mauricius gave most humble thanks to God, committing all things to the
heavenly providence, and for the accomplishment of his fatal destiny, rested
patiently in hourly expectance. Not long after, the soldiers now lying in
garrison, I know not whereupon, rose in mutiny, and crowned Phocas so often
mentioned, to be Emperor; who presently addressing himself for
Constantinople, and by sudden surprisall taking the city, through the
negligence of the warders, by the Patriarch and all the people was soon
confirmed, some few excepted, who because Mauritius was yet living durst not
assent, which Phocas had forgot: so presently he goes to the palace, and
searching for Mauritius, he found him fled into a monastery; whence plucking
him out, and carrying out to Calcydon, they put him to cruel torments, killing
his wife and his five sons before his face: during all whose death and his
own danger, he did nothing but pray with great devotion, ever repeating these
words, iu^tus es domine, and recta iudiciatua, righteous art thou O Lord, and
true are thy judgments: and so most patiently commending his soul to God, he
took his death. Thus far the history.

By which we note the truth of the Scripture, which calls riches deceitful
things: for though they present, as I spoke of the hawthorne, a fair luster to
the eye, and promise much happiness to the heart; yet they are like the
Apothecaries boxes, which are written upon, Cordials, but are rank poisons:
for although poverty is the undoing of many, yet riches are the undoing of
far more, as one says. Wherefore our Savior directing his speech to the
rich, Luke 12. 15.
says thus, videte and cauete ab auaritia; see the effects, beware the danger.
The world thinks gold is good Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
for the eyes; and so says Moses, to make men blind; and the blind, says
Christ, are in danger to fall into the ditch: therefore see and beware; the eye
must show, the feet must shun the danger: that is double, 1. for 1. Tim. 6. 9.
this world, Temptations and snares, and foolish and noisome lusts which drown
men in perdition and destruction: 2. for the other, whose god is their belly,
and glory their Phil. 3. 20.
shame, minding earthly things, their end is damnation.

As the anguish, so is the antidote also double: 1. Heb. 13. 5.
contentation: Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content
with that you have. 2. dependence on his providence: he has said, I will not
fail thee nor forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper,
I will not fear what man can do unto me.

Let not any indent with God, or crave a bill of his hand; If I had so much, I
would trust to Gods providence for the rest: for we must simply surrender our
selves unto him. The readiest way to get the world, is to sacrifice it unto
God, as Abraham did his son. Solomon asked but wisdom, and had all other
with it: happy if he had also asked grace: But greediness is the portion of
them that want godliness; therefore the Caribes and Savages set their heart
upon the earth, because they have no further hope in heaven. Does God care for
oxen, says Paul? nothing like as he does of his children: why then should his
children care for oxen, or the earth more then for him? But here is a brow and
wall of brass, ever rebounding, and ever resounding, non persuadebis etiamsi
persuaseris, which God amend: and so I end.

Let God be glorified.
Psalm. 83. Briefly paraphrased and scholied: wherein is declared the
Universal Conspiracies of Gods enemies, for the utter subversion of the
Church: with a prophetical imprecation or prediction of their fall.
A Song of Asaph] this Asaph was a Leuite, of the sons of Cohath, by David
made magister chori, to say, Deane of the Chapel, for his excellent skill in
music, but more excellent gift and eloquence in Theology, as appears by
many Psalms of his making, Psalm. 50. and from 73. to 83. as was also his
brother Heman, the pen man of some other: for which they were of great account
and esteem in Court and Church.

The notation of his name (for all this Psalm through, he runs upon that
figure) does signify the Congregation, and thereunto fitteth his invention in
this place, wherein is descried the estate of the Church and Congregation of God.

The parts are 3 first the exordium or entrance v* 1. then a proposition
against the enemies of the Church, 1. against their envy, 2. Blasphemy
against God himself: where is an enumeration of their names, and those nations
that were of the league, from ver. 2. to 8. Lastly an imprecation or prayer, 1.
Touching the Church, that God would deliver it from the force and fury of her
enemies, as formerly he had don in like impetitions. Which part is amplified
with a reason, because they seek to ingrosse the inheritance of God, which
pertains not unto them, from 8. to 12. 2. Respecting the enemies, that God
would defeat and confound them, as he best knows. 3. Regarding God himself,
that he would glorify his glorious name, either in the conversion of them that
sin ignorantly, or subversion, that sin maliciously, etc.

verse. 1.
Keep not thou silence O God, hold not thy peace, and be not still O God. The
70. and vulgar read it, who is like unto thee? but the Hebrew yields not that
sense, except the preposition el had been with it. This then is spoken (...),
as men seem to sit still, when they do not succor their friends; so does
God, when he takes not the defense of the Church upon himself.

The note: God so long seems to defer his help, while we stand as men amazed
at our tribulation, and look not up to him: therefore if we would have God to
hear and help us, we must importune him with our prayers, and pierce his ears
with our cries. Again, though God seems to defer his help, to exercise our
patience and increase our zeal, and to let the wicked run on till their
sins be ripe, yet that is but to set an edge to our devotion, and to punish
their security the more severely.

verse. 2.
For lo, thine enemies make a noise, and they that hate thee lift up their
head:] Here he sets down the behavior of Gods enemies like feirce and
furious beasts, whose voice in proper, is not sermo but sonus, a murmr of
brutishnes, no manner of manlines. The note, 1. it is not possible they should
be men bearing Gods image, or children of the Church, or indewed with grace,
that seek to ruin Gods house and inheritance: but like S. Iudes (...), beasts
without reason, corrupting themselves in those things they know by nature. 2.
he calls the enemies of the Church the enemies of God, which is no small
comfort to the godly, that they are so near allied to him, as to have communes
amicos and inimicos, the same friends and enemies, opposites and participants.
Such was his couenaut with the Father, and all the sons of faith, to bless and
curse those, that bless and curse them.

verse. 3.
They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against thy
secret ones,] super populum tuum malignauerunt, says the vulgar. The note, 1.
the grudge and malice of the world, (which is truly Ecclesia malignantium) is
not of others desert, but their own enuyous nature and odious rancour, whose
swelling and stinging came from the old serpent, and does reside in all the
brood; which deadly feud will never Revel 12. 7.
end, till Michael cast out the Dragon, so that his place may be no more found
in heaven.

2. God will in time assuage the fury of his enemies, the red dragon and his
accomplices that now spit fire, and spew out floods of water against the woman,
his Church and spouse.

3. His hidden or secret ones are such, as dwell under the defense of the most
high, and abide under the shadow of the Almighty: who howeuer they seem to
lie open to all incursion, yet are indeed safe-garded from real harm in his
secret pauilion, not only from the strength of hands, but even the strife of
tongues of their most virulent ill willers.

verse. 4.
They have said, Come let us cut them off from being a nation, that the name
of Israel be no more remembered: These are those soni absoni, and (...), brutish
noises and brabling resonings above mentioned, of men conspiring to dismantle
Gods house, and depopulate his inheritance. The note, 1. the cause why the
wicked are so enraged against the religion is this, that Satan seeks with
incessant malice to race it out, and therefore exciteth his deboshed
instruments to war against it: but their attempts are as frivolous, as their
intents barbarous, by thinking to overthrow the counsel of God, on which the
perpetuity of the Church is grounded. 2. Persecution is not ever against the
blood and life of Gods Saints, but against the means of life, the provision of
the profession: and surely those Neronian humors are less bloody then your
Julian rancours, who did, noua more expugnare Christianos, devise a new kind
of persecution, by withdrawing their salaries and exhibitions.

verse. ^.
For they have conspired against thee with one consent, and are confederate
against thee:] Here are the holy leagues, the strong combinations, the mutual
conspiracies of might Princes and people, bending their conjoined forces
against the Church. Note 1. what arms, what ensigns, what preparations, what
provisions, what conscriptions, what proscriptions does the Church of Rome at
this day raise against the religion, and all to put out their name from under
heaven; yet the Jews continued a nation, and Israel a people, when Moab and
Ammon lay in the dust: therefore let us in like concatenations of our enemies
repair to God, and we shall see Antichrist not only disarmed, but dismembered;
and hear Romes both deuiction and deuastation. True religion shall stand, when
Popery, though all the world should underprop it, shall be brought down;
Valeat, vincat, regnet veritas. 2. Though they do not in direct words bid
battle to God, and set up a flag of desiance against heaven, that rob the
Church; yet because through his ministers sides they strike at his Majesty, he
makes himself a party: for it is no halting before him.

ver. 6. 7. 8.
The tabernacle of Edom, and the Ismaelites; of Moab and the Hagaren^; Gebal,
and Ammon, and Amalec, the Philistims, and the inhabitants of Tire: Assure also
is joined with them to help the children of Lot.] Here is a full congregation,
enough to overrun a world. Note, 1. It is fatal to the Church to have all
the world against her: for error and vice is ever more popular then truth and
goodness. 2. It is customarie, not only to have the foreign enemy on our jack,
but also domesticke neighbors: no devil to your familiar. 3. He reckons up
such enemies as bordered upon lewry, whose names and notations shadow out such
enemies as shall ever endaunger the Church: as for example, 1. Edom, a red
(that is bloody) or earthie enemy. 2. Ismael, hearing and obeying his own
lusts. 3. Moab, of the father the devil. 4. Agarens, strangers in affection
and religion. 5. Gebal, the limits of extreamitie. 6. Ammon, a troubled or
troublesome people. 7. Amalec, a lickerish nation. 8. Philistims, drunken in
pleasure. 9. Tire, besiegers or procurers of trouble. 10. Asshur, an eying and
envying, a conquering and domineering adversary. 11. The children of Lot,
decliners and Apostates. These are the names and natures, as Athanasius and
Augustine expound them, of our opposits. And thus much of their malice, and
blasphemy: now follows their fortunes and misery.

ver. 9. 10. 11.
Do unto them as unto the Madianits, to Sisera and Iabin at the brook of
Kison, who perished at Endor, and became as the doung of the earth: make their
nobles like Oreb and Zeeb, make all their Princes like Zebah and Salmana. This
is the prophetical prayer, Non votum sedprophetia, non maledictio sed
praedictio. The note. 1. God does most commonly defer his help and
deliverance till the exigent and last cast, to the end his help may then be
more conspicuous, and his glory more illustrious. 2. His former actions and
deliverances remembered and considered, will not a little serve to comfort our
affliction, and give hope and strength to our expectation. 3. As the former, so
also these paint out our spiritual haters: of whom we read in Joshua, chap. 4.
7. 8. 1. Midian, shifting or declining of judgment. 2. Sisera, exclusion of
joy. 3. Iabin, fleshly wisdom. 4. Oreb, a crow for dilation of repentance. 5.
Zceb, a wolf for ravenous greedines. 6. Zeba, a sacrifice. 7. Salmana, the
shadow of commotion. 8. Kishon, hardness of heart. 9. Endor, the fountain of
earthly generation. Such were the men, and such were the places where they
fell: but in what manner? they became as the doung of the earth: simus
foecundat not propagat, it makes the ground fertile, it is not it self
fruitful: the examples of evil men are not evil.

verse. 12.
Who have said, Come let us take the houses of God into our possessions] Here
they declare themselves. Note: 1. Let worldlings pretend what shows they
please, they name devotion, but mean deuoration: it is not the good of the
Church, but the goods of the Church that they seek after. 2. Churches,
Colleges, and houses of old dedication are called Gods, not for his residing
in temples made with hands in proper sense, but because such places are
dedicated to him, consecrated to his service, intended to his ministers, as
officinae religionis, instrumenta pietatis, and deposita deuotionis. 3. As good
husbands esteems their houses and patrimonies, not suffering them to be ruined,
or wrested from them, no more will God suffer his enemies to invade his
possessions, or usurp his inheritance: and therefore such things ought to be
inviolable and inappropriable, to any other or any other end; for which cause
let them look upon them that have done the like, who they were, how they
fared, where they miscarried; they lined impiously, died desperately, are
remembered infamously: foxes in their births, woolues in their life, asses in
their death.

(...) 13. 14. 15.
O my God, make them as a wheel, as the stubble before the wind, as the fire
that burns the wood: and as the flame sets the mountains on fire, so
persecute them with thy tempest, and scare them with thy storm.] Answerable to
the old cursed nations, he prays here, or prophecieth rather of the end of
the sacrilegious brood. Note.

First, seeing the pride, rage, and rapine of the enemy is so presumptuous,
associating themselves so dangerously, conspiring our ruin so mischeiuously,
assuring themselves of the spoil so confidently, we have no other hope but to
have recourse unto our God, by the example of the ancient godly, by our sacred
and serious supplications, desiring him to inhibite them as he best can, and
shall best please; for that their tumults cannot otherwise be tamed, nor their
spirits charmed.

Secondly, many are the means that God can frustrate his foes by; sometime
making them like a wheel, unstable and unconstant, deluding their firmest
conclusions with variable resolutions* sometime like stubble, causing the
matter of temptations to euaporate in fearful transgressions: sometimes like
wood, ouer-copious but ever fruitless: sometime like the mountains, subliming
their proiections into empty eleuations: sometime dispersing with the storms
of his indignation, such stubborn humors as will admit no other impressions.

Thirdly, it is not for nothing that the Spirit does accumulate so many words
to the same purpose, as names of enemies, forms of ruin, similitudes of
vengeance; but either to show us the vehemency of the Saints affection, or the
certentie and celerity of the adversaries destruction; or else the pertinacie
of their opposition; or lastly, the difficulty of the oppresseds consolation.

verse. 16.
Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy name, O Lord:] Hitherto
of their end to themselves and us: now as it respects the glory of God.
Note: 1. Many men by stripes and smaller judgments, are sometime drawn to
some confused and obscure knowledge of God, so that their consciences are
convinced that they have sinned against heaven, to the end that their
truculencie, which is increased by impunitie, may be confined in some bonds of
mediocritie. 2. We must make a difference of men that join in the same sin,
Limus vt hic durescit and hic vt cera liquescit, Vno eodemque igni: for some
are fearfully hardened, other are wholesomely shamed by one and the same
judgment. 3. But how is this, that his very pesecutors do seek his name?
did not Saul go to Damascus a lion, and returned to Jerusalem a lamb? so are
many laid prostrate, as he was, upon their faces for conversion, when other are
cast down too, but on their backs for confusion: but such as belong to Gods
election, sic confunduntur vt placeant, sic pereunt vt permaneant.

verse. 17.
Let them be confounded and troubled for ever, let them be put to shame and
perish: the former use concerned the corrigible sinner, this the indurate and
reprobate. Note. 1. All are not made of one metal, nor created to one end;
there are vessels of honor, and vessels of dishonor, there are none so
desperate but may pertain unto election, none so demure, but may be of the
reprobation; therefore Augustine prays, aut conuertantur vt redeant, aut
confundantur vt percant. 2. Hardness of heart is a fearful sin, and a
fearful sign: that is, such as Bernard writes, quod nec compunctione
scinditur, nec pietate mollitur, nec mouetur precibus, minis non credit, and
flagellis duratur, which neither is pricked with sorrow, nor softened with love,
nor moved with prayers, grows sturdier with menacings, and harder with
chastenings: this is a symptom of final desertion.

verse. 18.
That they may know that thou whose name is Jehovah, art the most high over all
the earth.] He ends with that which is the end of all, Gods glory. Note:
1. Though contemners do hate the light, and like the fish called of some
Atramentarius, conceal themselves in their own suds; yet God will declare his
glory so in them or on them, that they shall, maugre their hearts, confess the
same, though they had rather be ignorant of him.

2. God is known to excel all men, when he sets forth his wisdom,
majesty, and power, so palpably and plainly, that man with all his
imaginations, can neither darken nor deny it. Which must serve to beat down
all our opposition and reluctation against him, for as much as no policy can
alter, no project resist that which he has decreed; and that is the up
holding of his Houses.

FINIS.

