ADMIRABLE AND MEMORABLE HISTORIES CONTAIning the wonders of our time.
Collected into FRENCH out of the best Authors. By I. GOVLART. And out of French
into English. By ED. GRIMESTON.

The Contents of this book follow the Authors advertisement to the reader.

Imprinted at London by GEORGE ELD 1607.

To the Honorable Knight, Sir Walter Cope.
Sir,
IT may be held indiscretion, that having lately escaped Shipwreck, I should
so suddenly thrust out again from a safe Port into a tempestuous Sea of men's
humors, and subject my self to a new Censure. I must confess that silence had
been more secure, yet I may freely say, that neither conceit of mine own
ability, nor any vain affectation of applause, did make me run into this
danger, but only a desire to spend such idle hours as I could steal from my
daily attendance in Court, in such sort as others might reap some content
thereby. At the request of my friend I undertook the translation of this
work: the title whereof shows the subject to be extraordinary, and if many of
these Histories shall seem very strange, miraculous, and it may be fabulous,
for that they exceed our common sense and apprehension, I must with Mounsier
GOVIART, refer them to the Authors, out of whose writings they are collected,
who being learned and judicious, it is to be presumed would not incur so
foul an imputation, as to be reputed Liars. There is nothing mine but a bare
tanslation, the which I have faithfully performed; Such as it is, (being this
last Lents exercise,) I have presumed to offer unto you, as a pledge of
thankefullnesse for many kind favors. If it be not answerable to your worth,
Impute it to my defects, and not unto my will, whose desire is to give you
better satisfaction, that the old saying may not be verified in me. Tritum
est, perire quod facis ingrato. If it shall like you, I know it will please
many, and my self shall reap a desired content, with which hope I will rest.

Yours ever to be commanded. EDW. GRIMESTON.

The Authors aduertisment to the courteous Reader.
I Have noted for some years many thousands of Histories collected out of
sundry Authors, to whose consciences I refer you, engaging my self for
nothing of their writings, but a faithful collection which I have made, and yet
thinking that they would offer nothing that were false or foolish to be
published, without good consideration. I call them Admirable, for that the
reasons of many of them are far beyond my apprehension, and that to my
judgment they are miraculous. They are also Memorable, for the contentment,
instruction and consolation which good and quiet souls may gather thereby. I
have very seldom exceeded the age that went last before us, and will forbear
it more in those books that shall follow, If GOD will give me leave. The
History of our times is an abridgement of all the wonders of fore-passed ages:
Do not blame me if I were desirous to offer unto you some patterns, to revive
your thoughts. When you shall have seen the continuance, if you shall remember
any thing worthy to be left to our posterity, you may surmount our example.
It shall be easy for you. I do inuit and conjure you. GOD cannot be better
known and reverenced of us in his judgments and mercies. Those which can
perform it in a heigher style, will not disdain my weak affection. As for
others which cannot or will not do any thing but censure and inueighe, I wish
them true understanding and a good conscience. In my opinion GOD in this new
age does raise up men, who in diverse places are careful to note in Iournals
and Annals, all that we see worthy to be reserved for instruction of our
successors. I would not set out in colors these plain Histories, which I
represent unto you. As good stomaks have no need of saulces, so strong spirits
are content with a simple reading, the which they study to convert into
quickening substance. The end of this collection and of the following, shall be
Fear GOD, and keep his Commandments: this is the duty of man. For GOD will
call every work into judgment, be it good or evil.

GOVLART.

The Printer to the Reader.
IF any think these Histories strange, he may see the very title says as
much: And it is good for an author to be as good as his title: And this being
a translation, it must be strange. If any think that by the name of Histories,
all should be true, he may know Historiographers confess they may write as
they list. And Lucian entitles his most fabulous narrations a true History:
And if these be but tales, yet either he is Master, or he cites you his
tales-maister, (more then most men will do) And very tales are heard or read by
most of us with good delight. These from good authors to good purpose are in
good sort set down. Then sit thee down and make thy good of them: for have
thou a good memory and they will prove memorable: that nor thou repent
reading, nor he writing, nor we translating and Imprinting. This is all, and of
this make thy best.

A Table of the Chapters of this Book.
A Strange accident of a young Maid. fol. 1. Accusation false severely
punnished. fol. 7. Aduertisements merueilous. fol. 20. Adulteries punnished.
fol 22. Agillity and force. fol. 36. Ambition ridiculous and vain. fol. 44.
Apparitions merueilous. fol. 45. Apparitions Satanicall. fol. 49. Apparitions
in the Air. fol. 51 Appetite of eating and drinking lost. fol. 71. Appetites
strange. fol. 72. Age grown young again. fol. 616.
B
BArbarous people made mild and gentle through wisdom. fol. 87. Bodily
strenght. fol. 277. Blood letting wonderful. fol. 539
C
COmmets. fol 129 Compassion violent. fol. 133 Conceptions and deliueries
before they were of age. fol. 134 Continency notable. fol. 135 Consciences
guilty. fol. 138 Cruelty punnished. fol. 143 Children, many memorable Accidents
before and after their birthes. fol. 214. And many borne at one birth. ibid.
Delivered at diverse times of one bigness by superfetation. fol. 224. Dead in
their Mothers wombes and put forth by strange means. fol. 228. Miraculously
preserved. fol. 240. Ungrateful and perverse. fol. 246. Brought up amongst
Wolves, fol. 292. Supposed or practiced. fol. 255. Of stone. fol. 256.
Caesarian section or cutting out of the Mothers belly. fol. 256 Commotions
caused by exactions. fol. 268 Cure extraordinary. fol. 289 Cursinges
detestable. fol. 368
D
Deliverances notable and by extraordinary means. fol. 148 Demoniackes, with
examples of diverse illusions of Satan. fol. 161. Desperate persons. fol. 185
Death worthy of observation. fol. 447
E
Earthquakes. fol. 565
F
Fires great and extraordinary. fol. 209 Fantastiques. fol. 274 Fury horrible.
fol. 248 Fasting wonderful. fol. 352 Father fertile in his offspring. fol. 411
Floods and ouerflowings wonderful. fol. 525
G
Giants. fol. 244 Gout and one lame of it preserved. fol. 290 Gould and silver
contemned. fol. 530 Grave desired. fol. 541
H
HEart of man diverse histories thereof. fol. 123 Hayle and rain prodigious.
fol. 504
I
Jealousy horrible. fol. 292 Impiety punnished. fol. 296 Imagination. fol. 296
Impostures notable. fol. 304 Imprecations profane and blasphemous speeches.
fol. 319 Judgment rashly delivered. fol. 333 Judgment famous and remarkable.
fol. 339 Judges no Judges, but most unjust and detestable. fol. 345 Justice.
fol. 355
L
LIght hurts proved mortal. fol. 89 Liberality. fol. 358
M
Man's body hardened and become a stone. fol. 127 Man before Age. fol. 292
Magnanimity. fol. 361 Marriages secret and unequal unfortunate. fol. 362
Marriage lamentable and doulfull. fol. 460 Melancolick, mad, frantike, furious
and enraged persons. fol. 370 Memory and the excellency thereof. fol. 406. Lost
and recovered. fol. 408 Mothers fertile in lignage issued from them. fol. 411
Mothers vigorous and strong. fol. 412 Mother and Children preserved from
death. fol. 413 Murderers discovered by strange means and punished. fol. 415
Modesty singular in yielding to a severe censure. fol. 444 Mocker mocked. fol.
445
N
NAture changed. fol. 450 Nature wonderful. fol. 451 Nature recompensed diverse
ways. fol. 520
O
Old Men. fol. 615
P
Pain and the contempt thereof. fol. 414 Persons that lived a long time
without eating or drinking. fol. 429. Passions, of sorrow, joy, jealousy fear
and heaviness. fo. 465 Perjury punished. fol. 503 Predictions. fol. 509
Prisoners freed. fol. 511 Process ended by extraordinary means. fol. 513
Progrostications dangerous. ibid.
R
RAsh attempts punished. fol. 77 Ransom wonderful. fol. 514 Rape miserable.
fol. 515 Rauishers punished by a valiant hand. fol. 519 Resolutions generous
and memorable. fol. 526 Resemblance or likeness of persons. fol. 527 Ruins,
strange, pitiful and wonderful. fol. 531. 532 Rashness miserable. fol. 556
S
SWallowers wherein is contained marvelous Histories of some that have
swallowed diverse strange things into the stomach, and what has insued. fol. 78
Swallowers that have been in danger by things sticking in their throats and
what pitiful accidents have followed. fo. 82 Strange, horrible, and very
pitiful Accidents. fol. 113 Sleepers merueilous and wonderful. fol. 199
Satan and his strange efficacy and power. fol. 205 Spirits prodigious. fol.
271 Sparkles of fire. fol. 273 Sorceries, Impostures and strange illusions of
satan discovered. fol. 542 Sweat bloody. fol. 555
T
Thieves and murderers. fol. 101 Tooth of gold in the mouth of a Child of
Silesia. fol. 183 Thunder and lightning. fol. 280 Thieves cunning and notable.
fol. 356 Turkish pillgrime strange and wonderful. fol. 501 Treasors found,
spoiled, lost, sought for again vainly and dangerously. fol. 557 Traitors
punished. fol. 564
V
Valor. fol. 574 Vanity. fol. 587 Vanity of the world represented in state.
ibid. Vanity furions. fol. 590 Visions strange, fearful and horrible. fol. 620
Visions* in the air, strange and wonderful. fol. 640
W
WOman in child -- bed that abounded with milk. fol. 19 Wounds cured. fol. 90
Women that have become Men. fol. 275 Worms in man's body. fol. 593
FINIS.
ADMIRABLE AND MEMORABLE Histories of our Time.
A strange accident of a young Maid.
CORNELIUS GEMMA, a Physic reader at Louvain, in the end of the fourth
Chapter, of his second book, of a work entitled, de diuinis Na^urae
Caracterismis, settes down an admirable History at large; the which I will
relate as briefly as I may. A young Maiden remaining (says he) near unto me,
whose Father was a Cooper: being fifteen years old, of a good constitution
of Body, fair and of a good spirit, of a melancholy complexion mixed with
sanguin: her Name was KATHERINE GAVLTHIER, fell sick and weak, through diverse
accidents. About the month of January in the year 1571. her monthly terms
advanced twice or thrice: but being staid, presently through the vyolence of
her infirmity, they caused a great weariness over all her body. It was
suspected she had been poisoned by a certain Woman of an ill fame, who had
given her a piece of a Cake. Eating it, she felt it painful to swallow. After
the which, she began to feel strange pains at her stomach; she grew lean,
vomited sometimes, her stomach failed her, and she felt a dysinesse in her
Head, with other accidents which torment Women with Child, especially in the 4.
and 7. month, For about mid June she was subject to Feauers and some kind of
Convulsions. Her pains did in like sort increase; so as like a mad Woman she
tormented her self, growing big, pale and short-winded, and in the end, she
was so oppressed with pain, as she grew black in the Face, like one that had
been strangled. She was so tormented as four men could scarce hold her, for
casting her self from her bed to the ground, there was no kind of Convulsion,
but did afflict her. These panges having continued by fits unto the 9. month,
her Parents, began to fly unto the Physicians. I was first called, because I
dwelt nearest. But being from home, they repaired to Master BEAVSARD, who
considering of this disease thought she had been troubled with Worms. It
happened after many grievous pangues, that Nature working by her force, made
her to void a quick Eele at her seege, the which was presently brought unto
me. It was a very Eele, great as a man's thombe, and a foot and a half long,
with a good proportion, and all parts perfect. Three days before it came
forth, both the Maid and those that were about her, heard a great noise, and
as it were a hissing in her belly. And being come forth, the Maid said: That
she had felt the Eele put forth her head before, and draw it back again, and
then to thrust forth suddenly and with violence. This Eele remaining among the
excrements, seemed for a great space dead, but being put into a pot of water,
it did stir very strongly. After the voyding thereof, the extreme pangues
which had so much tormented her, began to cease. But the Eele which they had
ripped and cleansed, being hanged up whereas neither Cat not any other beast could
reach it, vanished in an instant. Soon after the Maid began to cast up great
abundance of water, the which I came to see being like unto urine, and of a
strange taste, as the Patient said* This vomiting continued 15. days, in
every one of the which, she voyded about 24. pounds weight of water at the
mouth. I report not these things by hearsay, but for that I did see and
touched them with my hands. I was no less amazed to see, that besides this
great abundance of water which she voyded at her mouth, she made water in great
abundance, twice or thrice a day, without any swelling of her belly, or any
other part of her body: neither did she drink above one cup of Wine, Beer
or other liquor in a day. I asked her, if she felt no pain in one of the
Miseraicall veins? She answered me, that her left side had always troubled
her much, since the voyding of the Eele, and that before, she had felt some
heaviness in that place: but since she was troubled with great gnawing and
pricking, which made her to cry out, when I did but touch it with my finger.
After she had vomited so much water, she began to cast forth lumps of hair at
her mouth, some as long as a man's finger, some more, some less, such as we
see fall from old Dogs, in great quantity for certain days, enough to
have stust whole dozens of Tennice Balls. She cast them up with great heauing
at the heart and much pain, falling one night into wonderful transies. Having
found her in a manner, like unto one that was ready to give up the Ghost, and
carefully observing all things, being laid upon her belly, I did see her cast
her self so so dainlayd from one side unto the other, as if she had not been
presently stayed, she had beat her head against the wall, oragainst the bed
post. She held her hands so strongly together, as it was impossible to open
them. Sometimes she beat her breast so violently, as she was like to kill her
self. This fit continued from seven of the clock at night until nine, and
then she knew not any one. Oftentimes (as in the suffocation of the Matrix)
she grew wonderfully red, and seemed very weary and toyled, with some
beginning of a Fever. Once or twice she fomed about the mouth. And an other
time, being in the extremity of her fit, she fell suddenly into a great
laughter, and then presently wept bitterly. Being come unto her self, and
falling presently into a long ecstasy, she began in an instant to speak, as if
she had addressed her self unto GOD, holding her hands up to Heaueh, she
spoke these words in effect. O great GOD; seeing thy beauty is so great, and
incredible, how long shall we remain here? when will thou take me out of this
World, that I may inioye thee? having said thus, as it were awaking and looking
on them that were about her, she said: Which of you has done me this wrong to
call me back into this valley of misery, and into the prison of darkness,
when as I did rest so sweetly, and did sport my self in the goodliest Gardens
that could be immagined? I do not think that a simple and ignorant Maid, (as
this was) could utter such words but in ecstasy. In the mean time she cast up
great lumpes of hair mixed with much white matter, and very thick: and
sometimes like unto the dung of Pigions or Geese. In this abundance of filth
appeared little pieces of wood and shreds of Parchment. A little after she had
an other vomiting of a matter as black as coals; you would have said properly
it had been Ink, or rather coals beaten to powder and mixed with water, the
which continued a good while, two or three pounds every day, sometimes with
such store of white hair, long and hard, as it would have made a good Ball.
After two days, she did vomit about two pounds of pure blood, as if a vein
had been opened. This monstrous casting continued a whole week, coming still
at a certain hour: and then the fits of the Epilepsie wherewith she was daily
tormented ceased, the which notwithstanding continued sometime, once in three
days, and in the end every seventh day. In the mean time she did still cast
hair, but not so abundantly as before: but blacker and shorter, as if they
had been cut small, and with it a slimie humor, like unto thick matter.

About the midst of September, she did vomit great pieces of parchment, half
a spanne long, like unto the thick and fleshie skin of a man's body.
Afterward she cast up others, that were thinner, but all black. In the end
she did vomit some that were very thin, but strong, amongst the which there
were three a foot long made in fashion of lozenges, with strange marks and
figures. After these skins, followed an infinite number of stones, which she
did cast up at a certain hour every night, with great noise and sounding,
such as is heard in walls that are pulled down: some were thick, others
pointed, unequal in form, and of a dark coullour: they were all small, and
yet such as they did still fear the maid would have been strangled: some
were covered with Chalk, and cymented together, in such sort, as they might be
said to have been pulled out of a wall. Once in my presence she did vomit a
pointed stone, as big as two Chest-nuts. This stone remained above a quarrer of
an hour in her throat, during the which she had no pulce nor respiration, so
as laying a light feather upon her mouth, it did not move: her hands and feet
grew cold, and her body stiff, as if it had been an Image. Thinking that she
had finished her course, and that pain had ended all her miseries. I went out
of the chamber, saying that she was dead: when as the Mother called me suddenly
back again, saying, that her daughter did stir, and opened her eyes. As
soon as I was returned, she did cast up this stone with great violence: I did
see it come forth, and heard the noise thereof falling into a basin, the which
did amaze both my self, and all that were in the Chamber. At the same instant
she did spit out a piece of wood as big as ones thombe, but with less
difficulty then the stone: and withal some black hairs, but few. There
followed after an other accident almost incredible, wherewith the maid had
almost been choakt, for she did vomit up a bone of a Triangle form, sollide
without, and hollow and spungious within. The next day she cast up little
boanes of diverse forms and proportions. Amongst all these were seen stones
and hair, and then pieces of Glass and Copper. CORNELIUS GEMMA sets down the
remedies which he did apply, and maintains, that part of her infirmity grew
by natural causes, and part by the Impostures and illusions of the Diuill, who
was a chief Agent in these accidents which we have reported. This History is
written by MARCELLVS DONATVS in his second Book of his Admirable Histories of
Physic, the first Chapter.

A false accusation severely punished.
Master IVLIAN TABOVE the Kings Attorney general in the Parliament of
Chambery, being incensed for some admonitions that were made unto him by the
Court, goes into the Country, and ingageth his honor, by an accusation which
he framed against Master RAYMOND PELISON President, JOHN BOISONNE Priest,
LEWIS GAVSLERANT called ROZET, GRAFFINS and other counselors of the said
Court, charging them with many corruptions and false-hoods under his hand, both
before the great Council, and the Parliament of Grenoble, upon thirteen Acts
proceeding from the foresaid President PELISSON, and the above named
Counselors. The first was a sentence given in the said Parliament of Chambery
for the Count de la Chamber, the 11. of May 1539. The second a decree for
Master ANDREW PILLET, the 13. of June the same year. Other two decrees for
the Bishop of Morienne, the 19. of March, and 20. of December, in the year
1540. The 5. the admonitions dated the 11. 13. and 18. of January 1541. made
and delivered to the said TABOVE, the 1. of February 1542. The 6. a Commission
given by the said Court of Chambery to the said BOISSONNE, the 6. of February
1542. The 7. the Articles sent to the said BOISSONNE the 25. of February 1542.
The eight, other admonitions made to the said TABOVE, and a sentence given the
23. of February, the same year. The 9. a sentence pronounced in the said
Court, the 23. of December, the same year. The 10. a Commission given to
Master NICHOLAS de la CHESNAY, Councellor in the same Court. The 11. a Letter
delivered unto unto him, and written in the name of the said Court, to the
Chancellor of France, the 1. of April 1545.

The 12. an Answer made by the Judges of the said Parliament of Chambery the
17. of December 1541. to the aduertisments sent unto the King by the said
TABOVE, termed in the Process, the five points. The 13. and last, a sentence
given in the said Court, the 23. of June, in the year 1540. touching a suit
betwixt the Kings Attorney general and the Lord of Eschelle. This matter
being delivered unto the King, and found hard and of importance, for the
gravity of the cause and of the persons: it was committed to the Parliament of
Bourgondy at Dijon, where the said President and Counselors yielded themselves
prisoners, TABOVE being their accuser. After that their cryminall and
extraordinary Process had been made, many sentences were given. The first was
the second of May against GRAFFINS Councellor, whom they found to be least
charged, who notwithstanding was condemned in a fine of three score pounds unto
the King, and twenty pounds unto TABOVE, and suspended from his place for a
year. TABOVE pleaded then with great show, thanking GOD, after the manner of
MOSES, IOSVA, and others, for the victory which he did see coming toward
him, even as (said he) the ancient Fathers had done, for the victories which
GOD had sent them: he began and concluded his oration with a verse of DAVID.
Hic est dies quem fecit dominus. etc. But herein the poor man did singe like
unto the swanne. The said GRAFFINS yielded to this sentence, and sought no
redress. The second sentence was the 28. of July in the said year 1552.
against the President PELISSON: by the which it was said, that the decrees
contained therein, and impugned by TABOVE made by the said President, were
false and falsely framed: declaring the said President, for ever incapable to
hold any royal Office, condemning him to ask mercy of GOD, the King and of
Justice, and to pay a thousand pounds fine to the King and two hundred to
TABOVE, his goods to be forfited, and to pass the remaynder of his life where
it should please the King. The solemnity of the pronouncing and execution
thereof was: that the said President, having one half of his body be-nummed
with the palsy, old and broken with age, diseases and cares, was brought into
the open Court, the doors being open, and the Judges sitting in the Castle
of Dijon, where he was prisoner, by two Archers in a chaier, attired in blake
taffata pinckt, with a roabe of black satin, a little night-cappe of silk,
and his square cappe in his hand. At this spectacle and in his presence, TABOVE
made a speech. The sentence was afterward pronounced, and the poor old man
was constrained with much a do, and through the help of his gards (that had
brought him) to kneel down, holding in his hands a burning torch of wax
weighing 4. pounds and asked pardon of GOD: the King: of Justice; and of
TABOVE. The said decrees and other pieces that were impugned were torn in his
presence, which done he entreated the Court that he might be freed out of the
Castle for the weakness and great infirmity of his person. Answer was made
him, that the Court would consider of it. The third sentence was the fourth of
August, against the above named BOISSONNE a Priest and Councellor, by the which
he was found guilty of fals-hood and other crimes mentioned in his process,
and the decrees, declarations, and other pe^ces declared false; deprived of his
Counselors place, and condemned in a hundred pounds fine to the King, and
forty pounds to TABOVE, and his charges: and to remain a prisoner, and for
the common offense, he was sent unto his Ordinary. The fourth sentence was the
same day against ROZET an other Councellor, all one with the former.

After all this, the said President, BOISSONNE and ROZET Counselors, having a
firm confidence in themselves that they had not offended, notwithstanding
these punishments, they go unto the King and show him, that if the crimes,
whereof they are condemned be proved true, it were a monstrous thing to see
them live in a commonweal. But if through the slander of their accuser, they
have been reduced unto that extremity; there is no reason, (for the dignity
wherewith his Majesty had honored them in the Sovereignty of Sauoie,) that the
cause should be referred to one Parliament aloane, consisting of a small
number, to degrade and deprive them in that sort, of their good names,
fortunes, and honors, leaving them nothing but their souls, which is only a
remainder of grief and perpetual sorrow. They beseech him to allow of a
reuision, the which is g^aunted, and the cause committed to the Parliament of
Paris: whereas all being well viewed and examined, it was said and judged by a
sentence of the sixteen of May 155^ that the former decres of the 28. of July
and the fourth of August, were void and that the cryminall process, by the
which they had been given, should be viewed and Judged a new, without any
respect to be taken of the said decrees, and TABOVE condemned in costs, damage
and interests. The Court at Dijon, advertised of this decree, at the instance
of TABOVE, being much troubled in the beginning, come unto the King, debate
the reasons, and maintain their decrees, she wing that it would cause impunity
of crimes of importance, and blemish the prerogative of his Parliaments. They
had good audience, with the said TABOVE, who pretended new matter, and
concealed nothing which he thought might avail him: alleging that this
accusation framed by him, was always with the quality of the Kings Attorney
general, being so received and never reproved, and therefore he ought not to
be condemned in costs, domages and interests, like unto a private party,
although the accusation were not so well grounded as this was. Some of the
Court Parliament of Paris, which had assisted at the resolution of the said
decree of nullity, were sent for; they come, and are heard with them of Dijon.

All being duly examined, it was decreed by the Privy Council the 7. day of
March. 1555. that the sentence given the 16. of May, upon the said Nullities,
should take effect, and touching the principal cause, the parties should be
sent to the Court of Paris, to be judged in the presence of a President, and
two Counselors of the Court, named in the decree, and three other Counselors
having assisted at the judgment of the said Nullities; three Counselors of
the Parliament of Dijon, named by the said decree, and three others of the said
Court of Dijon which had assisted at the judgment given against the parties
accused, and by six Masters of Requests. The Process being in question,
TABOVE, (fearing that which after happened to fortify his accusation, or
rather to hinder the decision) frames new crimes, whereof no mention had been
made in the former Process: whereunto the parties accused oppose. Whereupon the
King by his Letters Pattents of the 15. of September the same year, made a
declaration, that sending them to the Parliament of Paris, his meaning was not
that the Court should take knowledge of any other cause or crimes, then those
for the which the parties had been condemned in the Court of Parliament at
Dijon, and whereof they had complained unto the King: the Kings Attorney
general excepted, who upon view of the said Process, finding the accused to
be guilty of other crimes, might make pursuit against them at his pleasure.
Moreover they were charged by the said Letters to do right upon the repetition
of money, adjudged to the said TABOVE, for the pursuit of the Process. The
said letters were allowed and regestred the 18. of September. The Parties
accused are again examined and heard by the Court, upon the crimes wherewith
they were charged. TABOVE is allowed to make new productions, and the accused
to contradict them. In the end this cause being examined in so goodly an
Assembly, a definite sentence was given in these terms that follow.

The Court doing right to all, and without respect to the quality of the
Attorney general in the court of Chambery, taken by the said TABOVE in the said
Process: but so far as it does touch the corruptions and falseties pretended
by TABOVE against the said PELISSON BOISSONNE and ROZET, had absolved and did
absolve the said PELISSON, BOISSONNE and ROZET respectively, of the said
pretended false-hoods, and did condemn the said TABOVE, for that respect, in
the charges of the same suit and in domages and interest of the said PELISSON,
BOISSONNE and ROZET: which domages and Interests, the Court for some causes
them moving, having taxed and moderated, that is to say to the said PELISSON
two hundred pounds; to BOISSONNE four score pounds; and to ROZET the like some
of 80. pounds: and that, besides all other expenses, domages and Interestes,
which were adjudged unto them by a sentence of the 16. of May 1555. for the
paiement of which domages and interestes the said TABOVE should remain in
prison. And as for all other accusations and crimes objected by the said TABOVE
against PELISSON, BOISSONNET and ROZET, (the knowledge whereof was referred to
the said Court) both they and the parties were discharged by the Court, and
freed from farther suit, without any charges, damage, or interest of either
party: reserving notwithstanding power for the Kings Attorney general, to
proceed against the said decrees of the 11. of May 1539. the 9. of March, the
20. of September, made in favor of the said Earls of La Chambery, and Bishop
of Morienne, by way of Nullitie, and for them to make their defenses to the
contrary.

And for reparation of the false and slanderous accusa tion, framed by the said
TABOVE, against PELISSON, BOISSONNE, and ROZET, and for other misd^meanors,
appearing as well by the ancient as the later productions, made in the said
process, the Court had condemned the said TABOVE to do penance in open
Court, on a day of pleading, the doors being open, bare-headed, and
bare-foote, on his knees, in his shert, and a halter about his neck, holding in
his hands a burning Torche of two pound weight: and then to say and declare
openly with a loud and intelligeble voice, that falsely, maliciously,
slanderously, wrongfully, and against the truth, he had charged and accused
the said PELISSON, BOISSONNE and ROZET of the said pretended falseties,
crimes and offenses, for the which he was sorry, and desired pardon and mercy
of GOD, the King, the Justice, and of the said PELISSON, BOISSONNE and ROZET.

And moreover the Court did ordain, that the petitions and complaints
exhibited unto the King by the said TABOVE, together with the suggestions of
falsehood made by him against the said parties, should be defaced and rent in
his presence. And this done, to be led in the same sort by the Vshers of the
Court, and set upon the marble Stone, being at the end of the Great Stayres of
the Palace, there to do the like penance, and so to be carted from the same
place unto the Pillorie at the Halles in the City of Paris, and there being
set by the Hangman to be turned thrice about, and then to be carried back to
the Concergery or prison of the Palace. And moreover the Court did condemn
the said TABOVE to do penance in the open Court of the said Parliament of
Chambery, whether he should be safely conducted, and to pay two hundred pounds
for a fine unto the King, and to continue in prison at Chambery, until the
full payment of the fines, charges, damage and interest adjudged, as well to
the King; as to the said parties: after which payment made, to be perpetually
confined to the said Country of Sauoy, or to any other place within this Realm
that should please the King. And moreover the Court did declare his other goods
confiscate to whom they did belong, the said fines, charges, damage and
interests being first paid and discharged. And for certain causes and
considerations then moving the said Court, did ordain, that the said PELISSON
should be sent back, to receive those admonitions that were appointed to be
given him, inioyning him to keep and cause to be kept the Kings royal
ordynances in the said Court of Chambery, and not to infringe them upon pain
of an arbitrary punishment. Given in the Parliament at Paris, the eleventh of
October. 1556.

No Reader of judgment, ought to tax the Judges, who have censured this cause
with so great contrariety, as the like has not been heard. The Court of
Dijon assured themselves in their conceits to do well without fraud or malice.
Those of Paris according to their custom, showed their authority, which is
supreme; descouering (it may be) some thing that was new, and not before
known. It is not for me, being a simple Collector, and who fears to speak
of such assemblies, to give any reasons of the said contrarieties. It suffices
to set down the fact, and to compare the greatness of the Parliament of Paris
with the rest, yet I may not conceal, what I heard a Counselor of one of the
above named Parliaments say, that (in the question of Justice of such contrary
decrees, upon a crime pleaded before the King, who desired to understand the
truth) those of Dijon had judged according to their consciences, and those of
Paris justly and according unto Law. Before I leave this matter which is so
exemplary and of such consequence, in regard of many the like accidents which
do daily happen, I will advise the Reader to observe the end of this
accusation, where the Hunts-man is taken in his own snare.

This poor ACTEON, relying upon his quality, and governed by his passions,
came to this end, having drawn many great personages into danger: for seeking
revenge only, he ruined himself. The which may serve for any one that shall
attempt to accuse an other. He was the Kings Attorney General, in a sovereign
Court, and therefore a public Accusor; and in this quality, he had power to
inform against all such as he knew to be Offenders, without fear of the like
punishment. ( L. omnes de dela^oribus lib. 10. c.) But he was found unfurnished
of parts required in that place, being transported by his passions and
surprised in slander. In which case, without respect of his quality and place,
he was subject to the punishment of a Slanderer. ( L. si cautiones C. de ijs
qui accu. non pos.) Whereas doing his duty according to the necessity of his
place, and no otherwise, he needed not to have feared any thing. And as it is
most profitable (as it appears by the continual complaints against all sorts
of Offenders) to have special men for the defense and preservation of the
commonweal, of Laws and good manners, and to accuse Malefactors: so it is
necessary they be Diligent, Constant, Just, of a good life and singular
integrity. For he that will take upon him the charge to accuse, must first
examine exactly, and make proof of his own life, before he shall examine and
search another: and must think, that in the end he shall reap shame and
disgrace, in seeking to cause an other to yield an accoumpt of his life, when
as he himself is subject to the like trial. In this case the accusers
simplicity imports much: who ought to be free from hatred, revenge and other
passions, which are contrary to the sincerity required in those places: for
that it is hard to have a sound judgment with such passions, the which do
hinder the true office of an accuser, which is, that in accusing any one he
should no less fear the touch of his own honor and good name, then the
party accused the preservation of his life and goods: and the accuser (if he
be an honest man) must think and believe, that in beginning to accuse, he
brings his own honor in question, which should make him careful not to
propound any thing, whereof he is not assured. To this end the ( l. criminis C.
de ijs qui accus. non pos.) is not able and worthy to be often read, the which
comprehends the said parties. It is likely that the Judges at Chambery were
linkt together in many things, and that TABOVE being froward, and rejecting
some admonitions that were given him, framed this accusation against his head
and President, who had power to command him, and under whom he did exercise his
place of Kings Attorney general, of whom he should have endured something,
considering that the dissimulation of injuries, which he pretended to have
suffered in his own particular of the said president, would have done him more
honor, and given him greater content, then the revenge which he got by a
sentence at Dijon, although it had taken effect. The conflict of men of that
sort is unjust and inhumaine: and has been in old time reproved at Rome in
many judgments. L. PHILO seeking to accuse C. SERVILIVS his Praetor and
commander, whose Treasurer he had been, was not admitted. The like was
adjudged against M. AURELIUS for L. FLACCVS his General. T. ALBVTIVS had
governed the Sardes a year, under whom POMPEY was Treasurer. They had carried
themselves after different manners: ALBVTIVS like a Thief, and POMPEY like an
honest man. The Sardes made their complaints to I. CAESAR, accusing ALBVTIVS,
POMPEY hindered, saying, that he was best reformed of his life, for that he had
been always with him, and served him as his Treasurer, demanding the charge
to accuse him from the which he was rejected. CICERO in his first accusation
against VERRES, to obtain the place of an Accuser, and to keep Q. CECILIVS,
(who presented himself) from audience, he objected the three principal
reasons before mentioned. The first, that he was not free from blame himself,
and namely in the government of VERRES, under whom he had had charge in
Sicilia. The second, that he professed himself his enemy, and therefore
transported with affection, which is always to be suspected. The third, that
VERRES is his Commander and Praetor, and therefore cannot be accused by him,
without violating all public respect of honesty. In the Process made by
NONIVS the black Provost of Rome against CATELYNS confederates, it was taken
ill, that the said NONIVS in his Interrogatories, had examined the prisoners:
if JULIUS CAESAR (being then Praetor) were not of the conspiracy: for the
Pretoriall dignity which he then held, the which was one of the highest, and
equal with the Consul: for the which the Provost was blamed and committed to
prison, although that one of the prisoners had named CAESAR, and that he was
presently to provide for the preservation of the commonweal, the which might
well allow the accusation of a Magistrate during his time, especially by one
of his family, who had been commanded. The which the Law has declared
intolerable, and worthy of punishment, as it appears in L. si quis ex
familiaribus, (and in the last law.) C. de ijs qui accus. non pos: whereas the
Emperors declare such absolutions abominable, excepting no crime but treason.
To conclude, Vocem familiarium funestam amputari potius volunt quam audiri, I
have set down this History at large, for that it is famous. I. Papon lib. 19.
of his collection of Decrees and sentences. arr. 9.

A woman in Childbed which abounded with Milk.
I Have seen in a Town of Breslaw, a Midwiues Daughter lying in Childbed, who
had such abundance of Milk in her breasts: as in two or three days she
filled a pale, containing twelve quartes. They scummed off the Cream, with the
which they made Butter and Cheese that was very sweet and sauorie: neither
durst this Cow with two legs eat in a manner any thing, for else she did
yield great abundance of Milk. N. MARTIN VVENIRICH, in his Commentary of
Monsters.

Marvelous Aduertisements.
JAMES the fourth of that name King of Scotts, having in the year 1500. or
thereabout, defied HENRY the eight King of England: as he was riding toward
his army, being at Evening prayer in a Church at Limnuch, there came in an old
man, his hair somewhat reddish and hanging down on his shoulders, bald before
and without an hat, apparelled in a long blew roabe, and girded with a Linen
girdle, bearing a grave and reverent presence: who desiring to speak with the
King, made way through the prease, and without any other ceremony, went and
leaned on the Chair where the King sat: saying unto him. Sir, I am sent unto
you, to admonish you to desist from your enterprise, and to proceed no
farther. If you despise my advertisement, ill will come to you and to all your
followers. Furthermore I am enjoined to tell you, that if you haunt women too
familiarly, and follow their counsel, it will turn to your shame and
overthrow. Having said thus, he presently thrust himself into the press.
Euen-song done, the king made this old man to be sought for, who could not be
found: and that which is yet worthier observation, diverse that had heard him
use those speeches, and desired to understand the particularities, could not
perceive what became of him. Amongst others there present, DAVID LINDSEY was
one, a learned and a wise man, and of a sound life, who reported this unto me.
Not long after, the King contemning the good advise of the principal Lords of
his Counsel, prosecuting his deseigne gave battle to the English, in the
which he was slain with all the flower of the Nobility of Scotland. G.
BVCHANAN, in the 13. book of the History of Scotland.

LEWIS the second King of Hungary, being at Buda, and the Castle gates shut
(as the custom is) whilst he was at dinner, there came one in the likeness
of a deformed cripple, who cried out that he would speak with the King, to
whom he had matters to impart concerning his great good, and the peace of the
whole realm. At first, they made no reckoning of him, according to the manner
of the Court, where the poor and simple are despised: but he began to weep
and cry out, desiryng that with all speed they would go and tell the King of
him, so as some of the guard moved with his speeches, and to be rid of the
importunate cries of the man (who protested he would speak to no other ear
but the King) went and declared it unto him. The King commanded one of his
brauest Courtiers, to go and know that secret, and to feign himself to be
the King. But the cripple said presently unto him; thou art not the King, I
have nothing to say to thee: and seeing the King makes no more account to hear
me, go and tell him he shall perish and that shortly. Pronouncing these words,
he vanished away from before them all. The Courtier, the Guard, and the King
himself, not regarding this, lost their lives a little after in a battle
against the Turks. I. LEONCLAVIVS in the Pandects of the History of the
Turks.

Adulteries punnished.
NInty years since or there abouts, a No^leman of Piedmont, found that his
wife (issued from a mean parentage, whom he had married for his pleasure,)
forgetting the honor of GOD, the honor which her husband had done her, and
her own honor, had execrably poluted the house, chamber, and bed of her Lord
and husband, by continual adultery with a Gentleman his neighbor whom she had
wickedly allured to her will. The Lord meaning to take the^ in the fact, and
that they might pretend no excuse, he laid many plots, and among the rest, he
caused a packet of letters to be brought unto him, by the which his Prince
called him to Court, meaning to send him into France, where he should remain
some time. He imparts these letters unto his wife, continues a whole day with
her; makes very much of her: acquaints her familiarly with the whole estate of
his affairs: leaves her means, Jewels and all that was precious in his
house; and after a loving faire-wel, he departs with all his train. At night he
stays with one that kept a Castle of his, and descouers unto him his
misfortune and his deseigne. In the mean time this wicked woman had sent for
her Adulterer, who being shut up in one chamber, continued their filthy life.
The Lord being followed only by this keeper of his Castle and a grome of his
Chamber, well armed, and furnished of all things necessary, in a dark night
they came unto the Castle, where the Chastelane made himself known unto the
Porter, saying that he had letters of importance from his Lord, the which he
must deliver presently to his Lady. The Porter opes the gate presently to one
so well known, and suddenly al enter. The Lord forbids the Porter to make any
noise, and commanding him to light a torch, he goes directly to the Lords
Chamber, where the Chastelane did knock. At this noise, an old woman (who had
bin their baude,) asked who was their? It is I answered the Chastelane, who
bring a letter unto my Lady from my Lord, who passing hastily by my house,
commanded me to bring it with speed. This woman, drunk with her vilany,
commanded the old woman to receive the letter at the door, without entering, and
she would perform the contents. The old woman opening the door a little, was
suddenly overthrown. The^ the Lord and the two others enter armed, and seize
upon the Adulterers being naked, and confused in their shame. The servants of
the house being suddenly called, the Lord having given a grave and severe
sentence upon his detestable Wife, condemned her to hang up her vilanous
Adulterer with her own hands in the presence of them all, having bound him
hand and foot with halters. This sentance being pronounced, the Lord sent for
great Cartnales, the which he caused to be knocked upon a beam in the Chamber,
and calling for a ladder, he forced this wicked woman to tie the halter about
her Adulterers neck. And for that she had need of help in this execution,
her Baude was condemned to second her. These two together did hang up this
wretch, after whose death, the Lord caused the bed to be burnt, and all that
did participate of their Adulteries, and commanding all the other mouables of
the Chamber to be carried away, he left nothing but a little straw for these
two Mastiues to lie on, appointing that the body that was hanged, should
remain there, and that the two women should keep it, until the stink of it
had choakt them: he caused the windows and the door to be walled up, leaving
only a little hole, by the which they might give them bread and water. Having
past some few days in the stench, without consolation, oppressed with grief
and despair they ended their miserable lives. Written in the Histories of our
times.

In our time an Advocate of Grass in Prouence, called TOLONIO, married a
virtuous young Gentlewoman, he managed the affairs of the Signior of Chabrie.
A Gentleman living in a Castle not far from thence, coming one day among
many unto this Gentleman's house, who was then absent. Having familiar access
to him and to the Lady (who was about fortye years old, and the Mother of
four children, whereof two were with her, young Gentlemen well bred) he went
up into the Chamber, and found this Lady in bed: being set down by her, after
he had acquainted her with some business for the which he was come unto the
Castle, they entered into strange and detestable discourses, against the honor
of GOD, and all respect of honor and virtue. The end was that from that time
they poluted themselves with a horrible and infamous Adultery.

Being plonged into this Gulf, Satan and their filthy lusts did th^ust them
headlong into others, that were more horrible and fearful, for having made
many practices together, the first attempt of their cruel wickedness, was
against the Signior of Chabrie, who was massacred, walking alone in his warren,
by two murderers subordned by the Advocate. After this paracide, the
Adulterers return to their accustomed filthye course* without all shame or
remorce, giving scope to their execrable lusts: the which the eldest son^e
could not digest: and seeing his mother could not live any where without the
Advocate, he gave her a grave admonition, adding many reasons to excuse his
boldness. This cursed mother dissembling her rage against her Son,
complaynes of his conceit, iustifies her self impudently: and these drops of
water of good and necessary advice, did more inflame the fire of their
unbridled lust. After she had bitterly reprehended the indiscretion of her
Son, and highly extolled the Adulterous and Murtherous Advocate, she forced
her son to make a submissiue speech unto him full of excuses. But not content
herewith she resolved to kill him. There was a Gallery in the Castle, whereas
the young Gentleman did usually walk, to behold the Gardin and pleasant
country about. It was high advanced, and hung over a steep Rock, at the
foot whereof lay this Garden. The Advocate by the advice of this cursed
Mother, did cunningly loosen certain boards in the Gallery, so as the young
Gentleman coming soon after in the morning (according to his custom) to take
the air of this prospect, setting his foot upon these disioynted boards, he
fell down headlong where his brains were beaten out. This was the second
murder.

A younger son was yet remaining in the house, who doubting nothing that his
Mother had been the cause of these two Parricides, was yet grieved to see the
Advocates carriage: In the end he descouered so much villainy in their
familiarity, as he held them to be the cruel murderers of that noble
Familye, making some show of his discontent, to see their brutish conversation.
He speaks roughly to the Advocate, and looks but sowerly of his Mother.
These wicked wretches resolved to prevent him, fearing that he would attempt
something against them. The Advocate corrupts one in the house with money to
murder him, who observed this young Gentleman so diligently, as one day being
a hunting, whilst his Hunts-men rewarded his Hounds, he staying upon the side
of a Rock, which ouer-looked a low champian, the descent whereof was very
dangerous toward the valey, by reason of the steepness. This murderer, who
had all the day watched for an advantage, did run behind him, and thrust him
down so forceably, as this poor Gentleman was sooner at the bottom slain,
then he felt the murderer, who had so outragiously murdered him. These
murderers after all this (finding that the servants of the house, did mark
and observe them,) did practice to mar^ie together: but there was one betwixt
them, the Advocates wife. They conspire her death, and the Advocate (having
many imaginations) lying one night by her, he strangled her with a Napkin, and
she being ready to give up the ghost, he began to cry out aloud, and to call
for his servants and neighbors to help him. They come from all parts, and he
cries and laments, saying, that a violent Catarre had suffocated his wife. The
simple and vulgar sort believed this report. But the father of this honest
Gentlewoman, looking nearly into it, and seeing her face extraordinarily
swelled, and her throat black and pale, with other signs of a violent death,
seemed to allow of their opinions: and having persuaded his Son in law to
provide for his Wives funeral, he went speedily to the criminal Judge, and
brought him with his officers and some friends, to visit this poor carcass,
and to demand Justice. The Son in Law being accused, and charged by the
Magistrate to answer directly, is mute, and by his silence confesses the
crime: the Physicians and Surgions having given their opinion, that the
Gentlewoman had been strangled. The Judge sends this execrable Parricide to
prison, who without any torture confesses the fact. The Parliament of Aix
advertised of this fact, sends for him to see him. As for his detestable
associate, having some notice thereof, she packs up the greatest wealth she
had, and flies speedily into Sauoy, and from thence to Genoa, where she changed
her name. The Advocate, being brought to Aix, (besides his last Parricide)
confesses the detestable crimes before mentioned with all the circumstances.
He was condemned by a sentence of the Court of Parliament, to be sent back to
Grass, there to be quartered alive in the Marketplace, where he was
executed, to the great content of his father in Law, and of the whole country.
As for that cruel Lady of Chabrie, she was condemned by contempt, and
executed in picture. In her voyage to Genoa she was accompanied by a base
fellow, called JAMES PALLIER, who being somewhat jealous of the cause of her
flight, a month after her coming to Genoa, in a morning when she was gone
into the Town, he took away all she had but the apparel she wore, and was
never more heard of. At her return, finding her self bare and naked, after
many discourses, oppressed with care and despair, in the end she went to serve
a Widow woman, whose Daughters she did teach, living yet some years,
confounded in her conscience with shame, and dying in the hands of GODS
Justice, having escaped that of worldly Judges. The History of our times.

About fifty years since a Milanois having notice given him in France, that
his wife carried her self but loosely, who being well informed thereof (as it
seemed) took post, to come the sooner to Milan, where being arrived, without
going up into his house, he caused his wife to be called for, who coming
down speedely to embrace him, counterfetting great joy at her husbands*
arrival, she received a stabbe with a dagger in exchange of her embracing,
calling her villainous, wicked, disloyal and treacherous. After which blow,
leaving his wife in that estate as he should no more need to fear any such
lewd dealing, he took his horse and saved himself. The histony of Italy.

Many years before, a rich Gentleman of Sienna, called NELLO, being well
advanced in years, married a young Gentlewoman, who suffered her self to be
corrupted by a young Gentleman, using a Chambermaide for the close conuaying of
their filthy trade, NELLO having discovered (by the means of a servant of his)
the wrong that was done him, and not able to surprise the young gentleman that
had so vilanous^y poluted his house, he revenged himself upon his Wife and
her Chamber-maide, the which he caused to be strangled in a Country house of
his, whether he had retired himself for the better effecting of his purpose,
where he past the rest of his days like a man confined. The History of Italy.

A French Gentleman, whom I will not name nor the place where it happened (for
some good respects) being married, fell in love with one of his Tennants
daughters, coming thither oftener then he was accustomed, and showing more
familiarity then he ought. This maid had a Brother who was a Priest, but a man
of a good spirit. He presently discovered whereto this Gentleman tended, yet
for a time he dissembled it. In the end, seeing that this Gentleman did not
cease to court his Sister (whom he had corrupted) and meeting him one day as
he came forth, he said unto him. Sir pardon me, excepting the respect and
duty which I owe you, I see that your intent of coming hither is neither good
nor honest, and therefore I entreat you to forbear to come, else I swear unto
you, if I find you there any more, I will make you repent it. At these words
the Gentleman did only shake his head, and laughed at the Priest. Some fou^e
days after he returned according to his custom, and having satisfied his
villainous lust, he went forth. The Priest who had almost surprised him in the
fact, moved with a just disdain, met him upon a Bridge in the amidst of his
servants, and stabbed him with a Dagger, in despite of them all. The Priest was
presently slain by the servants of this miserable Adulterer, who carrying the
Dagger in his breast, went and dyed in his wives arms. An heroycall and worthy
act, not of a Priest, but of a BRUTUS, or of any one more generous and valiant.
VRB. CHAVETON in his discourses the 19. Chapter of the first Book of the
History of the new World. Whereas BENZO the Author thereof reports, that the
Spaniards going to seek Gold near unto the gulf of Vraba their Captain
carried away the daughter of the Ca^ique or Lord of the place prisoner, who
soon after came unto this Captain accompanied with some of his friends,
making show that he came to redeem her, and to give what ransom he would
demand. But when he was come into his presence* he not only spoke proudly unto
him, reproching him with injurious words, but also offered him violence,
shooting a poisoned arrow at him, with an intent to kill him, but he wounded
him only in the thigh, whereof he was in some sort cured by the application of
a burning iron, the which was the reward of his wickedness. The Spaniards
hearing the noise, came in suddenly with their swords drawn, and slew the
Cacyque, his wife, and all his company. As for this villainous Captain called
HOIEDA: BENZO says, that having endured all extremities in his retreat out
of the Country in the end he came to Hispaniola, where finding himself ill of
his wound, he died within few days after, with extreme pains. He lost
almost all his men upon the Sea in the voyage. And Gomara in the 2. Book of
the general history of the Indies Chapter 57. says, that growing desperate for
that he could not continue his Conquests begone, he left all, and became a
Friat with his thighe ill cured, and died in this new profefesson* The rest
remaining in Vraba, to the number of seventy only, under the command of
FRANCIS PIZARRE, expelled by famine from the land, they did imbarke in two
Bria^gtines, but the winds and waves made strange war against the^. Being
gathered together at Sea by one called ANCISO, they returned again by land,
where after infinite toiles, some were slain by the Indians, and the rest died
miserably of diverse diseases, as BENZO and GOMARA confess.

In our time a Bourgesse of Vlmes, an Imperial City, finding that his wife
began to grow disordered, he did advertise her seriously to carrye her self
in a more civil and honest sort: but seeing that she made no account of his
admonitions, on a time he made a show to go into the Country, and suddenly
slipped back into his house without discovery, hiding himself in a fit place,
whereas he perceived that the servants were busied in preparing a Feast: he
did see the Adulterer enter, and his wicked wife embrace him, yet he retained
himself until that Supper was ended, then seeing them to enter the Chamber to
go to bed, using filthy speeches the witnesses of their wickedness, partly
executed, and that they meant to continue it. He comes out off his Ambush, and
first kills the Adulterer, and then his wife, and having justified his
proceeding before the Justice, he obtained pardon for this punishment, which
proceeded from a just indignation.

Whilst that our Kings of France held the Duchy of Milan it happened that a
Frenchman came to Milan, and being lodged in the house of a Gentleman of
respect and reputation, he began to look laciuiously on his Hosts wife, to
make much of her, and to solicit her to adultery. The wife discouers this
unworthy attempt unto her husband, and they resolved to punish this vilanous
seducer. She prepares him a banquet, seeming to yield to his intreties: instead
of dain^y wine, she gives him a drink, which casts him presently into a deadly
sleep; and the Milanois comes and cuts the throat of this ungrateful guest.

In the year, 1506* about Christmas, an Advocate in the City of Constance,
corrupted an Attorneyes Wife. Who having some notice of their detestable crime,
feigned that he had some special business which drew him into the Country for
certain days: he parts and returns at night, hearing that they were
together in a Whot-house at an old woman's that dwelt by him: he goes thither
with three of his friends, whom he left in the street, to hinder any that
should come to help them then he enters into the house, with a strong
Curry-combe of iron, made for the purpose. He falls upon the Advocate being
naked, and curries him so rudely as he pulls the eyes out off his head, tears
off his stones, and almost all the skin of his body: he did the like unto his
Wife, although she was with child. The Advocate dyed within three days in
great torment: the Attorney transported himself to an other place, and his
Wife spent the remainder of her days there, confounded with shame and infamy.

Some years before a certain man making profession to teach chastety to
others, did wonderfully importune an honest woman, to deprive her of her
honor, and made her to waver: the husband discontented at this wrong,
threatens the other to punish him if he found him in his house: yet he
continues his old course: so as one day passing before the door, the wife
(having given a watch word unto her husband) began to look familiarly on him,
the which moved him to follow her even into her chamber, where the husband
enters, who with a naked dagger in his hand, said that now his time was come
for to be gelt, the other changing his fear into fury, fell upon the husband,
takes the dagger from him, and forces him to promise that he shall suffer him
depart freely. Having extorted this promise, he leaves his hold, and is so
deprived of understanding, as he lays the dagger, upon the table. The husband
being freed, regards not this forced promise, but seazeth suddenly upon his
dagger, and then with a new fury, with the help of his wife, lays hold upon
his enemy, binds him fast, and presently gelds him, and so sends him home
bleeding to his lodging, where having continued long sick, in the end he was
cured, but he left running after women.

A Germains wife of Voitland, was so unchaste and impudent as (of many that did
entertain her) to call three to a banquet which she had prepared for them. But
the husband (who had not been sommoned) came to make it a bloody feast, for
having a Pertuisan in his hand, he entered into the Stoue, kills him that was
set nearest unto his wife: runs after the two other, who being seized on with
fear, leap out at the windoes and so kill themselves. He returns to his
wife, and perceth her through. A German Gentleman having dishonestly allured
the Wife of a certain Citizen, the husband desirous to be revenged of this
insupportable affront, hid himself in a secret corner of his house, and sees
his enemy come who continues his insolences. Night being come, these two
wretches retier themselves into a chamber, where they sup and lie. The husband
comes out of his hole, goes into the kitchen, and being desirous to drink, he
made a noise, in setting the water pot in his place. The wife would have called
up her servants, but hearing no more noise, she returned to her Adulterer. In
the mean time the husband was entered into the Stoue, to take a Caske and his
Curirasse. The wife awakes at this noise; she rises, comes into the Stoue, and
demands who is there. The husband says nothing, but follows her so near, as
he enters suddenly into the Chamber, and at the first kills the Gentleman,
notwithstanding any resistance he could make with a Pertuisan, which stood
near unto his bed. His wife had cast her self on the other side of the bed,
to whom the husband, (discerning her through the light of a candle) cried, come
out you strumpet, else I will thrust thee through. She having often cried him
mercy comes forth, and not able to pacify him, she beseeches him to suffer
her to be confessed and to communicate before she died. Why then, says he, do
thou repent thee withal thy heart for thy offense. Alas, I: answered she. At
that word he thrust her through with his sword: then laying the one by the
other, he shuts the chamber. The next day all was published, and the husband
(charged for this execution) by the advice of his friends, absented himself,
least he should fall into the hands of the Gentleman's friends.

A Gentleman of Hungary, having taken one in his chamber that came to commit
Adultery with his wife, cast him into a prison, resolving there to famish him.
And to torment him the more, he caused a roasted Hen to be sometimes presented
unto him, that the smell thereof might sharpen his appetit, and make his hunger
the more violent: to the end this punishment might hasten his miserable death.
Having continued six days in this torment, the seventh he was visited, where
they found that he had eaten the brawnes of both his arms.

We read the like history of a German Nobleman in Thuringe, who used a
Gentleman that had committed adultery in the like sort, who lived 11. days
with the smell of delicate meats that were presented unto him: his foul offense
being punished by this cruel torment. The like is reported by three famous
writers, of a man who under color of devotion did corrupt many women who were
before reputed honest: as in old times TYRANNVS SATVRNS Priest did in
Alexandria. Being discovered and convicted he was put to death. An other
learned man and of great reputation, (being taken in Adultery) was stabbed and
left dead in the Chamber. Among other gifts which he did wickedly abuse, he
spoke French, Italian, Spanish, German, Polonian and Latin perfectly, and
was much favored by the Emperor and the Princes, it was about 80. years
since. About the same time an other famous man seeking to ravish the honor of
a Woman, in steed of a Bed he fell into a Cave, where he brake his neck.

A Surgion disdayning his honest wife, had abandoned himself to a strumpet.
Going on a time to horseback and asked by his wife, whether he went, he
answered skornefully. To the Stews. Going presently to his Adulteress: after
a while he returns to Horse, and offering to manage his round, the Horse
leapes and bounds, and casts this wretched Man out off the saddle in such sort,
as one of his feet hung in the Bridle: The Horse being hot, began to run
so furiously upon the stones as he beat out his brains, and never stayed
until he came before the Stews, where this miserable man remained dead upon
the place.

In the year 1533. a certain man in the town of Clauenne in the Grisons
Country, having looked upon a fair young Maid with an unchaste eye, he tried
often to corrupt her. Having no means to obtain his desire, under the color
of apparitions and revelations, abusing the sacred name of GOD, and of the
blessed Virgin, after an execrable manner (the which I will forbear to report,
for that I will not offend the eye nor ear of any honest and devout Reader) he
seduced this poor maid who having too late descouered the Imposture, the
wretch was committed to prison, notwithstanding the allegation of his order,
immunities and freedom, and beheaded publicly, and his body burnt to Ashes.
Stumpfius in his 10. Book of history of Suisse.

Agilitie and force.
IT is put in the number of the wonders of Nature, the flying and ballancing of
those which run and guide themselves upon a rope. Some few years since,
there was one well known throughout all Italy, called the little Venetian, as
well for that he was borne at Venice, as for his small stature, but so nimble
and expert to run upon a rope without any difficulty, as sometimes he tied
himself up in a Sack, having nothing but his hands free, to manage his
counterpeize. Some times he put a round Basin under either foot, or Balls
under his heels, and so did run with an incredible swiftness upon a long
rope tide to the top of a house. Moreover he was so strong, as with his knee he
would b^eake the thigh bone of an Ox, how big soever. With his hands he
would wrest in sunder three great Nails as big as a man's little finger, as if
they had been soft and pliable. He would take upon his shoulders a beam of
above twenty foot long, and a foot thick, supporting it long, without any
help of hands, and then would he remove it from one shoulder to an other.
THEODORE a Doctor of the Law, who had seen these feats of agilitie and
force, with many other witnesses, have reported it unto me. A Physician of our
time makes mention of the same, or of the like, whom he says he had seen at
Ausbourg. And of an other in Silesia, who with his teeth would take up a great
Pipe, like unto the Tons in Germany full of Beer, without any help, and
cast it over his head.

FERDINAND D' AVALOS Marquis of Pescara, Lieutenant to the Emperor CHARLES the
5. in the Duchy of Milan, had a Spaniard in his troops called LVPON, who was
so strong and so light of foot, as he would with a sheep upon his shoulders,
out-runne any man; he was valiant and hardy to attempt and execute any thing,
for the confidence he had in his nimble force. The Marquis desiring to be truly
informed of the estate of the French Army, lying then near unto him, gives
charge unto LVPON to run unto their Camp, to discover some thing. LVPON
bethinking himself, takes an Harguebuzier on foot with him, in whom he
trusted: and being approached near unto the Camp a little before day, he
viewed the situation thereof, and then coming near unto a French Souldior
that stood Sentinel, who was not well awake, he suddenly leapes upon him: and
although the Soldier were strong and of a big stature, yet LVPON takes him
up upon his shoulders, notwithstanding any resistance he could make, or his
crying out for help, and carries him upon his neeke like a Calue, and so
returns with speed, being supported by his Harguebuzer, who short at them that
would approach near them. Being come unto the Spanish Camp, he laid his
burden at the Marquis his feet, who having laughed his fill at this
Stratage^e, and learned from the Prisoners own mouth (so pleasantly carried
upon a Gennet with two legs) the estate of their Camp, he presently charged
the French, giving them so whotte an Alarm, ^s he prevented the execution of
that which they had pretended against him and his. PAVLVS IOVIVS in the life of
the Marquis of Pescara.

A Spaniard called PETER, came to Naples in the year 1555. where he made
trial of his force, as follows. A man that was strong and heavy, satte
striding on his right shoulder, and another on his left: on his right arm he
carried a man, and on his left another: He had two men upon his feet, and
walked up and down with all this burden, as if he had not carried any thing.
Then b^nding down his hands, he caused a man to stand upon either of them:
which done, he stood up, and raised his hands as high as his head. After this,
they bound his hands with a strong cord, the which ten men laid hold off, and
standing as firmly as they could, they sought to shake him, but he on the
other-side, drawing his hands unto him, laid them cross upon his breast with
such violence, as many of the ten fell down. With his forehead (as if it had
been with a hammer of Iron) he did beat a Nail half in into a wall, true
it is, that he did hurt himself a little with that blow. Stretching forth his
arm, he did shut his hand so fast, as those ten men together could not
force him to open it, nor to bend his arm. Two thieves finding him alone would
have stayed him: but he took them both by the necks, and beats their heads so
violently together, as their brains flew out, and they were found dead in that
sort upon the place. He had a pleasing aspect, a quick eye, and a gracious
severe countenance, not too tall, but well proportioned, and his flesh was so
firm and synewie, that when he did stretch forth his arm, and shut his
hand, it was impossible to pinche him. His voice was strong and clear, and he
did sing very well. He was no great feeder.

ANTHONY of Nebrisse affirms, that he had seen a man at Siuille, borne in
one of the Islands of the Canaries, who without retiring his left foot out of a
Circle where he did set it, did offer himself as a mark to any one that would
cast a stone at him eight paces of, and was never hitte, for that he did shift
and turn himself in such sundry sorts and fashions, as it was impossible to
touch him, and for a farthing he would show any man this sport. Nebris in the
2. Decad of the Hist. of Spain lib. 2. c. 1.

We have seen a man in Italy, marching and dancing on a rope, which was
strained in the air, holding two long swords, having his thighs armed, so as
he was forced to open his legs. He did go firmly and boldly thereon: Then
would he tie Basins to his feet, and with them would run upon the rope,
showing such nimble tricks, as they seemed impossible to them that had not
seen them. SIMON MAYOLVS an Italian Bishop, in his Canicular days. Colloq. 4.

In the year 1582. at the sollemnity of the circumcision of Mahomet, the 3.
son to AMVRATH Emperor of the Turks, among many other sports, there
appeared 50. men on hors-back well armed, with Cymiters by their sides, their
Targets about their necks, bows in their left hands, and in the right staves
like half pikes, after the Arabian manner. In the Park appointed for Iusts at
Constantinople, they had raised up eight hills of sand, of equal height and
distance, 4. of the one side, and 4. of the other. In the midst there was a
narow passage, but well covered with fine sand, that if any one should chance to
fall in running, it might be less dangerous: upon these hills of sand there
were posts set* the four of the one side having round blankes at the end, and
the other four had Ouals, all made of Lether and Paper very artificially.
These were the marks where at these fifty horsemen did aim, who began to
march easily by this way, first in troop, and then in ranks, as it were in
Battle. Suddenly they dis-band, and begin to run with a full carrier, one
after another, so near and so justly, as one was at another heels. In
running they took their Arrows out of their quiuers, and shot with such
dexterity, as they did hit the marks so swiftly, as the beholders eyes could
not discern the shot nor the blows. At the second course, whereas they had
shot but at the round blankes, they now delivered their Arrows against both,
with a wonderful dexterity, sometimes using the left hand, sometimes the
right hand, with one motion: for the third charge, in shooting off their
Arrows, they sometimes discovered the right shoulder, som-times the left,
with their Targets, and that with an incredible swiftnes. Moreover, in running
a full carrier, they drew out their Cymiters, and cut these round marks, and
carried away the walls, the which was done in one course. Then turning head
suddenly, they shot against the marks, and with their Cymiters, which they
drew out again, they beat them down, and suddenly they bend their bows
again, and shoot into the air. They did wonders with their half pikes, in
diverse kinds of Combats, and in the end they made even these hills with their
Cymiters, pulling away those stakes that were set upon the hills of Sand; they
cast them into the air, and in running, they received them again, and held
them in their hands. Then standing upon their feet in the Saddle, they began
to run, and to handle their Cymiters, bows and staves as before, without any
further repetition of these particularities, I will noate one notable Act, the
which perchance will be held a fiction: but I did see it. Of these fifty there
were two goodly young men which withdrewe themselves from the rest. The one
stood upright in his saddle, and bare his companion standing upon his arms.
Being in this posture, they run the horse a full carrier, and yet stood
fast, yea the uppermost shot certain arrows at a peele of wood which he that
carried him held in his right hand. Moreover these two having tied two horses
together by the bridle, one of them set one foot upon one saddle and an other
upon the other, standing as firmly upon both as if they had been glued
together, and carrying his Companion upright upon his arms, and holding in his
hand that peele of wood, against the which the other standing aloft, shot
without missing, whilst that the two horses did r^nne most swiftly.

There were others which having six naked Cymiters tied the points upward,
unto their saddles, set their heads into the saddle, and their heels upward
and in this sort did run their horses so swiftly, as you would say they had
flowe^ Besides their were two that did sit in one saddle, and as the horse did
run in his full speed, they would leap down and up again presently. Others
did turn in their saddles, their horses running swiftly sometimes behind,
sometimes before, doing admirable tricks. This done the^ did all run in
troop and standing upright in their saddles they shot many arrows. To end the
sport, standing thus upright, they did run one at an other with their half
pikes, doing many exercises, which Lanciers are accustomed to do in their
Courses on hors-backe. To conclude, whatsoever is done in skirmishes, Courses,
Combats; Duells, Battles, Retreats, and other military Acts, was there
practiced by these fifty Caualiers. GEORG LEBELSKI a Polonian in the
description of things done at Constantinople, at the Circumcision of AMVRATHS
Son in the year. 1582.

At this feast of the Turkish Circumcision, many dancers upon the roape made
goodly proofs of their dexterity* but there was one which won the spurs
from all the rest. I know no man but was ravished, seeing him run so
swiftly, with so good a grace, and without stay. An ancient Poet said in one of
his Commedies, that the vulgar sort were amazed to see one that went upon a
Roape. But if this Poet had seen one like unto this, he would have been
amazed for he mounted upon Roapes tied unto Piramides, to the heighest that
might be seen, with such celerity as any one would have thought they had been
steps or degrees: then he came down back-wards, or upon his belly, having
no other support but a small staff which served him as a Counterpeze.
Sometimes he leaped upon the Roape with both feet, sometimes with one, then
embracing the Roape with both his feet, he hung downe-ward, and turning about,
raised himself again. He did slide with a strange resolution, from the top
unto the bottom, and that which I esteem most in this agilety, at night he
would tie six naked Cymiters to either foot, and continued his sport by
torch-light with such admiration and applause of all the world, as if happily
any of the Spectators had desire to sleep, this man by his admirable agility
did presently awake him. So as by the general consent of great and small in
this sollemne Assembly, he was called the chief master of his art. The same
LEBELSKI, in the same description.

I have often seen with amazement, in the Court of the Prince of Bamberg, a
German peasant, norrished and bred up (as he himself did aduowe) among the
beasts in the near Mountains, who was so active and nimble of his body, as
all that did see him in his motions and tumbling, were amazed, and thought that
he used some incha^tment: the which he never drempt of. That which was most to
be admired in him, he showed his nimblenes, not standing upon his feet, but
going upon feet and hands, like a Dog or a Cat. In the same Court there was a
Duarfe which ^id upon the peasant as if he had bin a horse, making him to
turn and bound, in diverse manners, as a rider would do a Genet of Spain: but
when the Peasant list, he would overthrow the Dwarf do what he could.
Sometimes he would fight with mastiues and great English dogs which his Prince
had, and by a certain counterfeit barking and a furious doggish snarling, he
would make them run away. This done he would bound upon his hands and his
feet, with a wonderful agility clyming up, at the Corners and on the wainscot
of the hall more nimbly then an Ape although otherwise he was rude, big, and
of a heavy moulde. I did twice see (being at the Princes table) after that he
had cast down the Dwarf, and chased away the dogs he leaped upon one of the
guests shoulders, and from thence to the Table, without overthrowing of dish or
goblet, and then he leaped so suddenly down, as you would have judged him to
have been a squirrell or a wild-cat; He would usually run as fast upon the
tops of houses built pointed and sloape, as our house Catts would do. He did
so many other Apish tricks, as in diverse places they talked of him, as of an
extraordinary thing and not heard of I would not have set any thing down in
this book, if I had not seen his tricks with mine eyes, and that there were
not many credible persons yet living that had seen them. When I collected my
Historical discourses, he was then living and married. PH. CAMERARIVS a learned
german LAVVIER, in his Historical meditations. Chap. 75.

When as a certain Turk danced upon a roape in the City of Paris, his feet
being in a basin, many seeing him in danger to break his neck, trembled for
fear, and durst not well look on him. AMBR. PARE. in his 13. book. Chap. 11.
The Lord of Montaigne says, that he had seen his Father (being above three
score years old) laugh at their actiuities; he would leap into the saddle,
with a furred night-gowne about him: he would turn about the table upon his
thombe and did seldom go to his chamber, but he would leap three or four
steps at once. Montaigne in his Essaies. lib. 2. Chap. 2.

Ridiculous and vain Ambition.
THis tale displeased me, the which a great person told of a kins-man of mine,
a man well known both in peace and war. That dying very old in his Court
tormented with extreme pain of the stoane, he spent all his latter hours in
great care, to dispose of the honor and ceremony of his Interment: and did
conjure all Noblemen that did visit him, to assist at his funerals: yea he
made an instant suit unto this Prince, who went to see him when ^ee was drawing
on, that his servants might be commanded to accompany him, alleging many
examples and reasons, to prove that it was a thing which belonged to a man of
his sort: he seemed to depart content, having obtained this promise,
disposing according to his own mind of the order of his show. I have not
often seen a vanity more permanent. It is an other contrary curiosity
(whereof I want no familiar examples) which seem cousin-germaine unto this, to
go studying with passion, of this last act, to dispose of his funerals after
a private and unaccustomed kind of thrift, with one servant and a Lantern.
Montaigne in his Essaies. Chap. 3.

A meruaylous Apparition.
A Personage worthy of credit, that had travailed in diverse parts of Asia and
Egypt, affirmed to many, that he had seen more then once in a certain place
near unto Caire (whether a number of people resort on a certain day in the
month of March, for to be spectators of the resurrection of the flesh, as they
say) of bodies deceased, showing and thrusting themselves as it were by little
and little out of the ground: not that they see them altogether, but now the
hand, then the feet, sometimes half the body: which done, they in like manner
hide themselves by little and little again in the ground. The rest not giving
credit to such a marvel, and I for my part desiring to understand the truth
of it, enquired of a Kins-man and singular friend of mine, a Gentleman as
thoroughly accomplished in all virtues as may be: one that has been brought
up in great honors, and that is almost ignorant of nothing. He having
travailed in the aforesaid countries with another Gentleman, a great and
familiar friend also of mine, named the Lord ALEXANDER of Schullembourg, told
me he had heard of many, that this apparition was most certain: and that in
Cairo and other places of Egypt, there was no question made of it. And the more
to assure me, he showed me an Italian book, Imprinted at Venice, containing
diverse descriptions of voyages, made by the Ambassadors of Venice into many
parts of Asia and Africa: among the which one is entitled, Viaggio de Messer
Aluigi di Giouanni di Alessandria nelle Indie. Toward the end whereof I have
extracted certain lines Translated out of Italian into Latin (and now into
English) as hereafter follows.

On the 25. of March, in the year 1540. diverse Christians, accompanied with
certain Ianissaries, went from Cairo to a little barren mountain, some half
a mile off, designed in times past for burial of the dead: in the which place
every year there usually assembles an incredible multitude of people, for to
see the dead bodies there interred, as it were issuing out of their Graves and
Sepulchers. This begins on Thursday, and continues till Satterday, when they
vanish all away. Then may you see bodies wound in their sheets, after the
ancient manner, but they are not seen standing upright, nor going, but only
the arms or thighs, or some other part of the body, which you may touch. If
you go a little way off, and come by and by again, you shall find that those
arms, or other members, appear farther out of the ground. And the more you
change place, the more do those motions appear diverse and greater. At that
time there are a number of pauilions pitched about the mountain, for both sick
and whole, which repair thither in great troops firmly believe that
whosoever washes himself on the Thursday night, with a certain water that
runs in a marish hard by, it is a sure remedy to recover and maintain
health. But I have not seen that miracle. It is the report of the Venetian.
Besides the which we have a Iacobin of Vlmes, named FELIX, who has travailed
in those parts of the Leuant, and has published a Book in Dutch touching all
that he has seen in Palestina and Egypt. He makes the very same recital. As
I have not undertaken to maintain this apparition to be miraculous, for to
confound these superstitious idolaters of Egypt, and to show them that there is
a resurrection and life to come: neither will I refute it, nor maintain it to
be a Satanicall illusion, as many think, but will also leave it to the
judgment of the Reader, for to determine thereof as he shall think good. PH.
CAMERARIVS, Councellor of the Commonwealth of Nuremberg, in the 73. Chap. of
his Historical Meditations.

I will add somewhat hereunto, for the content of the Reader: STEVEN DVPLAIS a
cunning Goldsmith, and a man of an honest and pleasing conversation, being now
some 45. years old, or thereabout, having travailed diverse Countries of Turkey
and Aegipt, made me an ample discourse of the apparition before mentioned, some
fifteen years since, affyrming he had been spectator of it with CLAVDE
ROCARD, an Apothecary of Chably in Champagne, and twelve other Christians,
having for their truchman and guvde a goldsmiths of Ottranto in Apulia, called
ALEXANDER MANIOTTI.

He told me moreover, that he (as the rest) had touched diverse members of
those ress^stitants. And as he was taking hold on the hear of a Childs head,
a man of Cairo cried out, Kali, Kali, ante matarasde: that is to say; let it
alone, let it alone, thou know not what thou do: Now for-asmuch as I
could not well persuade my self that there was any such matter as he told me
of, though in diverse other reports, conferred with that which is to be read in
our modern Authors, I had always found him simple and true, we continued a
long time in this opposition of my ears to his eyes, until the year 1591.
that having showed him the aboue-sayd observations of Doctor CAMERARIVS: Now
you may see (said he) that I have told you no fables. And many times since, we
have talked of it with wonder and reverence of the divine wisdom. Furthermore
he told me thereupon that a Christian dwelling in Aegipt, had diverse times
recouted unto him, upon talk of this apparitio^ or resurrection, that he had
learned of his grandfather and Father, which their ancestors had reported,
having received it from hand to hand time out of mind, that certain hundredth
years ago, diverse Christians, Men, women, and Children, being assembled in
that mountain, for to do some exercise of their Religion, were enuironned and
compassed about by a great number of their enemies, the little Mountains being
but of a small circuit) who cut them all in pieces: and having covered their
bodies with earth, returned to Cairo. Ever since the which, this resurrection
has appeared the space of certain days before and after that of the
massacre. Behold a summary of STEVEN DVPLAIS discours^, by him confirmed and
renewed in the end of April 1600. when I wrote this History, whereunto that
can be nothing prejudicial which is recited by MARTIN BAVMGARTEN in his voyage
to Egypt, made the year 1507. published by his successors, and imprinted at
Nuremberg, in the year 1594. For in the 18. Chapter of the first Book, he
says, that these apparitions are made in a Mosquee of the Turks hard by
Cairo. There is a fault in the copy: and it should say Hillock or little
Mountain, not on the bank of Nilus, as BAVMGARTEN writes, but half a mile
of, as we have declared.

Satanicall Apparitions.
WHen I studied the law in the University of Wittenberge. I heard my Tutors
often tell, that on a time, one being attyred after a strange manner, came and
knocked at the door of a great Divine, which then read in the same University,
and dyed in the year 1546. the servant opened the door, and asked him what he
would have? Speak with thy Master quoth he. The Divine willed him to come
in: and then this stranger propounded certain questions touching the
controversies which were at that instant about matters of Religion: whereunto
the Divine having given a ready solution, the stranger put forth harder, thou
do somewhat trouble me, said the Divine, for I had other things in hand: and
therewith rising out off his chair, showed him in a book the exposition of a
certain place where-about they contended. In this strife he perceived that the
stranger in steed of fingers had claws and tallents, like a bird of prey.
Whereupon he began to say unto him. Is it thou then? Hearken to the sentence
pronounced against thee: (showing him that place of the third of Genesis) The
Seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. He added moreover. Thou
shall not swallow us all up. The evil spirit mightily confounded and enraged,
vanished away with an exceeding great noise, leaving such a stink behind him
in the Stoue, that it stunke of it a long time after. JOHN GEORGE GODELMAN,
Doctor of Law at Rostoch, in the treatise, De Magis, Veneficis, Lamijs, etc.
book 1. chap. 3.

In the town of Friburg in Misnia, the Devil presented himself in a humane
form, to a certain sick-man, showing him a book, and exhorting him to recon
up all his sins he could remember, because he would note them down in that
book. At the first the sick-man was somewhat amazed, but recovering his
spirits, he answered: Thou say well, I will set thee down all my sins in
order: but first write these words on the top in great Letters, The Seed of
the Woman shall break the Serpents head. The Devil hearing this condemnation
of his, fled away, leaving ths house full of an extreme stink. The same
Author.

In the year 1534. May. LAVRENCE TONER Minister of a certain Town in
Saxony, employing some time about Easter to confer with some of his
parishioners, according to the custom, touching scrupels of conscience, the
Devil appeared unto him in the shape of a Man, and entreated him to give him
leave to confer with him: whereupon he began to pour out horrible blasphemies
against the Savior of the World. TONER resists and confutes him so coragiously
by authorities out of the holy Scripture, as this wicked Spirit confounded,
(leaving an intolerable stink in the place) vanished away. JOB FINCEL in his
first book of miracles.

Diverse Apparitions in the Air.
IN the year a thousand five hundred, there was seen in Alsatia, near to
Sauerne, a Bulls head, and betwixt the horns shined a very great star. In the
same year, on the 21 of May, there was seen over the Town of Lucerne in
Suisserland, a fiery Dragon, horrible to behold, as big as a Calfe and twelve
foot long, the which did fly toward the bridge of the river of Russe which
passes there. In the year 1503. in the Duchy of Bauiere, over a little town
called Visoc, was seen a Dragon crowned, casting f^rth flames of fire at his
mouth. Over the City of M^lan, in the day time, the Heavens being clear,
were seen many stars shining very brightly.

In the beginning of January in the year 1514. about eight of the clock in
the morning, in the Duchy of Witemberg were seen 3. Suns in the firmament:
that in the midst was much bigger then the rest. All three carried the form
of a long sword, of a shining color and marked with blood, the points whereof
d^d stretch out far. This happened the 12 day of the month. The next day over
the town of Rotuil, there was seen a Sun showing a terrible face, environed
with circles of diverse colors. Two days before, and the 17. of March
following were seen three Suns: and three Moons also the 11. of January,
and the 17. of March. JAMES STOSEL a Physician of Memming made an ample
discourse, prognosticating upon these apparitions, which were followed by
great troubles, namely in Swaube. In the year 1517. on Christmas day, about
the Abbey of Vinaire in Saxony, at midnight, the Heavens being clear and
bright, there was seen a Cross of a reddish color.

In September, in the year 1520. at Vienna in Austria, there were seen many
prodigious signs in the heaven. The first day from three of the clock
afternoon, until five, the Sun was seen environed with two great circles.
Three days after about noone, there was seen a burning Forke. The fifth day in
the morning there appeared three Suns, with many Rayn-bowes of diverse
fashions. The sixth day about nine of the clock at night, the Moon appeared
full, trauersed with a Cross, compassed in with a Circle, and above it a half
Circle. On the seventh, at the break of day, were seen three Suns again:
and from six of the clock until seven a Rain-bowe with three Moons.
PAMPHILVS GENGENBACH caused these prodigious Meteors to be cu^te, and
published a discourse, the which he sent to the Emperor CHARLES the fifth. The
same year the inhabitants of Wissenbourge, a Town seated upon the River of
Rhine, heard at noone day, such a strange and horrible rushing of arms in the
air, and such a noise of men fighting and crying as in a set battle, that it
struck snch a terror and amazement in them, as all run to Arms, thinking
the Town had been beseeged, and that the enemies were at their Gates.

When as the Emperor CHARLES the 5. was crowned in the City of Aix la
Chapelle, the Sun was seen environed with a great Circle, and a Rain bow
in the Heavens. In the Town of Erfor'd there were three Suns seen. Moreover a
burning Cheuron, the which was terrible, by reason of the greatness and
length. This Cheuron declining to the earth, made a great spoil, then mounting
into the air, it was converted into a cercular form, JOB FINCET in his
Collection of the maruells of our Time, notes, that in the year 1523. a
Peasant of Hungary, going a journey with his Wagon, was be-nighted and forced
to lie in the fields attending the break of day. Having slept a while, he
awaked, and goes out off his Wagon to walk, looking up into the air he did
see the resemblance of two Princes fighting, with their swords drawn one
against an other. One was of a tall stature and big: the other was less and
carried a Crown upon his head. The greater ouer-threwe and slew the less,
then having taken away the Crown he threw it as it were against the earth, so
as it was dispersed in diverse pieces. Three years after LADISLAVS King of
Hungary was slain in battle by the Turks. The same year in the month of
May, there were three Suns intermixed with diverse circles seen at Zurich in
Suisserland. Two years after, a little before the defeat of the King of
Hungary* three other Suns were seen in Hungary, which some did interpret
that FERDINAND (after wards King of the Romans,) the Vaiuode JOHN and the
Turk, should be at war for the Kingdom. In the year 1525. there was seen in
Saxony, about the death of the Elector FREDER^C, surnamed the Wise, the Sun
environed with a great perfect round Circle, like in color to a Rainbow. In
August the same year, the Sun showed it self for certain days like unto a
great Bowl of fire, and of many strange colors: Soon after followed the
sedition of the peasants in Germany.

In the year 1526. near unto Kauffburen, a famous Town in Swaube, there were
three Suns seen, environed with many Circles. And for that there has been
often mention made, and shall be again of the apparition of three Suns,
which they call Paralies. I will tell you what it is, with their generation and
signification. About the true S^nne created by GOD, and making his limited
course in the midest of Heaven, there appear in the clouds certain lights,
the which in brightness and form resemble the Sun in such sort; as one
would say they were very Suns, so as you can hardly discern the true from
these imaginary ones, called Paralies, Para Helios, as one would say, near or
right against the Sun. For such shining Images, and fashioned like the Sun,
seem to be right against it, although they be many thousand miles under it:
for the Sun is in the midst of the Heavens, and the Paralies are in the
air. Sometimes by this name they understand the likeness of the Moon. And
when they appear, PLINY says they are called night-Sunnes. It is most
certain, that they are made in the clouds, and not in the firmament, which can
receive no such impressions, by reason of their thinness, and continual
transparent brightness which has no bounds. There is no figure but must be
received in a body that is limited by some means whatsoever. Those things
which are made in the Heavens, last and continue: but contrariwise the Parelies
vanish soon. Neither are they in the very air, which is transparent and not
limited, yet they seem to be in the air, the which is the receptacle of
exhalations and clouds: so as the Pareleis are fashioned in the clouds. Besides
the cloud where they are made, must be somewhat thick, equal and moist, to
make a body, wherein the form of the Sun or Moon must be graven, and of a
mean thickness, for if it did abound, it could not receive this impression.
It must also be united like unto a Looking-glass, else there can be no
representation. And moist, that the brightness and resemblance may pierce into
it, to make a reflection. Such Images cannot be received but in transparent
bodies.

Moreover, this clowd must be opposite to the Sun, to receive and represent
the whole face of it, the which should appear but by halues, if it were on the
one side, or not at all, if the Sun should shine directly above the clowd.
The reflection also of the beams is necessary: for if they did pierce through
the cloud, there would no Image appear. The air must also be calm and
without agitation. For if the winds did blow, the cloud would be shaken,
and so nothing disposed to receive any such impression. As you cannot see your
face in the waves of a flood, but easily in a clear and calm Water, the which
is limited in a Basin or other vessel. If the Sun shines in such sort, as
there is any reflection of the beams you shall see the resemblance of the Sun
in this water, even as in a Looking-glass. The like is seen in a cloud
compounded of water, as has been said naturally, these like or seeming
Moons, are signs of Rain: for that they are not conge^led but in clouds
that are of a reasonable thickness. Such clouds are matter for rain.
Supernaturally, they are forerunners of the judgments of GOD, punishing the
World with Plague, War and Famine: As we have seen in our Times.

In the same year 1527. There was a great noise heard in the air, as of Armed
men, that gave Battle. Soon after the Sun shining in a clear sky, it was
suddenly environed with a great cloudie Circle. In the year 1528. about
mid-May over the town of Zurich, there were 4. seeming-Moones seen, environed
with 2. whole Circles, and the Sun compassed in with four small Circles. The
same year the Town of Vtrecht, being straightly beseeged, and in the end
taken by the Bourg^ignons, there appeared in the air a foretelling of their
misery, wherewith the Inhabitants were wonderfully amazed, which was a great S.
Andrews Cross of a pale color, and hideous to behold.

The ninth of January 1529. about ten of the clock at night, there was seen
in Germany an opening of the Heaven, described by IOVIANVS PONTANVS in his
Meteors. Two years after over Lisbone in Portugal, were seen fiery and
bloody apparitions in the Heavens, and soon after there fell many drops of
blood out off the Clouds upon the Earth. The eleventh of April 1542. about
seven of the clock in the morning, there were seen three Suns distinctly
shining at Venice, with two rain-bowes opposite to the Sun. The first did not
continuel ong. The second being less, remained until nine of the clock* the
one was very round like unto a Crown; the true Sun was in the midst, and the
two seeming at the ends: the other Raine-bowe above this Crown was very large,
the two ends being equally distant from the Earth. Those seeming were so
resplendent, as Man's eye could not endure to look on them, no more then of the
brightness of the true Sun, but that of the left hand toward the South, did
shine more then the other looking toward the North, the which continued
longer, and was more resplendent in the declyning. They were of a reddish
color, extending their beams very far in the Air, even unto the Earth.
About the end of the same month of April in the same year, there was seen
in Suisserland a great white circle shining like cristall. In many Provinces of
Europe there were Dragons seen flying in the Air in great troops, sometimes
to the number of four hundred, having all royal Crowns upon their heads: and
their heads were like unto those of Swine, especially the groine. Those of
Munster in West phalia, did see in the day time, the sky being clear and
bright, an armed Knight running in the air.

The great commander of Malta, caused to be published in the year 1532.
Throughout al Europe a strange apparition which happened in Assiria that year,
which was this. About the seventh of March a Woman named RACHIENNE was brought
in bed of a goodly Son, which had the Eyes sparkling, and the Teeth shining.
At the same instant that he was borne, Heaven and Earth were strangely moved,
the Sun did shine as bright at midnight as at noone-daye, and in the day time
it was so dark, as from morning until night they could not see any thing in
all that country. Then afterward he showed himself, but of an unaccustomed
form, with diverse new stars wandering up and down. Over the house where
this infant was borne, besides other prodigies, fire fell from heaven, which
slew some persons. After the eclipse of the Sun there happened a horrible
tempest in the Air: then there fell pearls from heaven. The next day they
might see a fiery dragon fly throughout all that Clymat. Moreover there
appeared a new Mountain, higher then any other, the which did presently
divide it self into two parts, and in the midest of them appeared a colomne or
pillar, where there was a certain writing in Greek, showing that the end of
the world approached, then was there a voice herd in the air, exhorting, every
one to prepare himself. The Child having lived two months, began to speak
like one of years, and by diverse delusions, grows into such credit, as he
was adored and worshipped as a GOD, discovering it self to be an evil spirit,
the which had a great force of error in all those Countries. Near unto Iuban a
Town of Lusatia, was seen in calm and clear sky, the day after Whitso^day,
in the year 1535. about two of the clock in the afternoon troops of armed
me^, adua^cing from the North, to the part opposite, and there were cries heard
in the aier, like to men that were in battle. Over the town of Vanaire in
Saxony, were seen three Cheurons of fire in the air. And the day before the
taking of Munster, there appeered over the town in a clear sky, a Cross and
a naked sword. About the end of July the same year, in the Confins of Zurich
in Suisserland, there fell a furious and never herd of torment in the air,
being all on fire, with most horrible thunders. There fell out of the air
great flames of fire the which did quite consume 5. houses nere unto Adelsinge.
The same month as the Inhabitants of Smelwi^ were in the Church, at their
mornings devotion, there suddenly appeered a wonderful light in the air, then
fell lightning which slew two men, and with the force of his exhalation,
overthrew thirty others to the ground, half dead: having burnt all their
clothes: but their bodies were preserved, being more affrayed then hurt.

The 7. of February 1536 about two of the clock, after midnight, there was
seen in the Element, over one quarter of Spain, two armed men, running one at
an other with their swords drawn the one carried on his left arm a target, on
the which was painted an Eagle, with this Motto about it Regnabo, that is to
say I will reign. The other had a great target with a star and a Cressant,
and this inscriptio^ Regnaui. I have reigned. He that Carried the Eagle
overthrew the other. The like Combat was seen in Hongary 20. years after,
the which we will note in order. In the year 1537. the first of February there
was seen in Italy an Eagle flying in the air, carrying in the right foot a
bottle, and in the left a serpent wrethed up: being followed by an infinite
number of others. At the same time also there was a Bourguignon cross of
diverse colors seen in the air. 15. days before there was seen in
Franconia, betwixt Bamberg and the forest of Turinge, a star of huge
greatness, the which declyning by degrees, turned into a great white circle,
out of the which soon after proceeded great gusts of wind and flasshes of
fire, which falling to the ground, did melt the heads of pikes and the bitts of
horses, without hurting of man or house. In the year 1538. there were seen in
the air, over diverse parts of Germany, armed men fighting, and as it were
killing one an other.

Toward the East there did shine a Star of an unaccustomed bigness, having
beams as red as blood, and near unto it a bloody cross and a flying
Standard. Two years after was seen an other star in the clouds, very
bright, as at the break of day, it appeared the 25. of December. The next day
there came out of the Moon two twinkling Stars shyning very bright.

There was seen in the year 1541. three Suns, compassed in with a Rainbowe.
The year following, there were seen in Saxony, Rodds and Torches of fire. In
the year 1544. the 7. of April at eight of the clock at night, the sky being
very clear, there were seen over a little Town in Suissarland, called Wilen
Turgau, in the face of the Moon, a white cross shyning very bright, the four
ends whereof (especially the nethermost) did far pass beyond the face of the
moon. Two days after there was seen over Golaries in Suissarland, an hour
before Noone, the sky being very clear, a great white circle shyning, whereof
the Center from the right part unto the left, was environed with a Rainbowe, as
it does usually appear. This circle turned at four of the clock right before
the midest of the rondell of the Sun. The 29. of March 1545. about eight of
the clock in the morning, there fell about Cracouia a flash of lightning after
a horrible thunder, so as al Poland was troubled thereat. Presently after there
appeared three red crosses in the Element, betwixt the which there was a man
armed at all parts, who with a burning sword did fight with an army, the which
he defeated, and thereupon came a horrible draggo^ which swallowed up this
victorious man: presently the heavens did open as they had been all on fire,
and so continued for an hours space. Then there appeered three Rain-bowes in
their accustomed colors, upon the highest of which there was the form of an
Angel, as they do represent them in the shape of a young man, that has wings
at his shoulders, holding a Sun in one of his hands and a Moon in the other.
This second spectacle having continued half an hour in the view of all those
that would behold it, certain clouds did rise which did cover these
apparitions.

In base Hongary, there was seen in the year 1546. for the space of a whole
hour, the heavens open, from the which did fall great abundance of fire, upon
this fire there appeered a black Ox, the which seemed to piss fire. Above
Belgeen a Town in Misnia, and the Country about was seen an other opening of
Heaven, the which continued two hours in the night the 10. of February, and
cast forth beams even unto the earth. At the same time were seen three
burning Cheurons, and of diverse colors, flying in the Air. In the year
1547. there was seen above Halberstad in Saxony, a black boule coming out of
the midest of the Moon, and running violently toward the North. The 15. day
of December the same year, the Mariners of Hambourg, did see in the element at
midnight, a burning globe and shyning as the Sun, rolling toward the South,
whose beams were so hot, as the passengers could not abide upon the hatches,
but were forced to hide themselves thinking the ships would be set on fire.
They did also see in Suisserland, two armies in the Air, fighting together.
And two ramping Lions fighting, whereof the one pulled of the others head with
his teeth. Above them appeered a white Cross stretched out in length, having
the lower end fashioned like a whippe. The same year the twelfeth of April
and the two following, presently after noone the Sun was seen in his
Sphere, like unto a globe of fire, and at Noonday the Stars appeered. Ten
days after, which was the 24. in Saxony, Turin, Suisserland, France and
England, the Sun appeared with a cloudie and bloody Countenance, for the
space of four hours, to the great amazement of many. It continued in this
sort some other days following. The first days of October following, about
seven of the clock in the morning, there was seen in Saxony, the form of a
dead man's Beer, covered with a black cloth and a Cross upon it of a reddish
color, accompanied both before and behind with many figures of men in
mourning weeds, either of them carrying a Trumpet wherewith they began to sound
so loud as the Inhabitants of the Country did easily understand the noise. In
the mean time there appeared a man all armed, and of a terrible aspect, who
drawing out his sword cut off part of the cloth and then with his hands he
tare in pieces the rest which done, both he and all the rest vanished. In
December the same year, about Rome there appeared in the air, three days
together, about three of clock in the afternoon, a beesome as it were dipped in
blood, and a red Cross, over the which did houer an Eagle. In the month of
May precedent: about Saxony and the Marquisate of Brandebourg, were seen two
Globes of fire, leaping about the Sun, the greatest of them did so cover the
Sun, as at Noonday, it seemed as it were rustie. They did also see the same
year a furious Combat of two armies in the air over the Town of
Quendelbourg.

The year 1548. the 23. day of Iulie, the Moon being at the full, it appeared
of the color of blood, oue^ Rosensel a Town of the Duchy of Wirtemberg: and
in this Moon was seen an arm of a blackish color, with a hand stretched
out: soon after the Moon having recovered her usual light, it was again
seen with three Cheurons or large bars of the same color that the arm
was, which did cross it distinctly. These bars being vanished, there
appeered a Bourguignon cross, black, underneath the Moon, at the two sides
there appeered two other small rondells. The year following, which was 1549. in
the morning, the Sun being very bright, in the month of May, upon a quarter
of Germany, there was seen in the air the figure of a man, attired like a
German Prince, above the which, there appeered on the other side a Lion and a
Sheep, which seemed to embrace one an other willingly: before this Prince was
a great garland of flowers, the which he would have taken in his hand, but not
being able, he took up a sword, the which was under his feet from the
beginning, wherewith he flourished twice or thrice about his head, and then all
vanished into the clouds. In the year 1550. were seen in the night, over the
Town of Lipsick in Misnia three Globes of fire. And in August the same year,
about Nuremberg, the sky being very clear, the Sun was seen of diverse
colors, and over it a vessel, the which leaning on the one side, there came
forth blood, wherewith the Sun was made read. On the other side there
appeered an Eagle with his wings spread abroad of diverse colors, but without
any feet. A little beneath the Sun and the Eagle, was a Raine-bowe, and
directly underneath it was a Man, holding a horse by the bridle with his left
hand, and with his right (...) white hound.

The 19. of July before, near unto Wittenberg in Saxony, there was seen in
the element the form of a goodly Heart and under it armies which did fight with
great noise and feare-full cries. During this conflict there fell a shower of
blood upon the Earth, the Son appeared very hiddeous and as it were out of
his course, divided in two and in show approaching near the Earth. Some weeks
before, there was seen almost in the same place, a bloody sword in the Air,
and a piece of Ordinance, mounted upon wheels. The 24. of June betwixt six
and nine in the morning, the time being very clear, there was seen in the
Element, a black Cross with a Iauelin, having a fish-hooke at one of the
ends, and at the other three small bars like unto rests. Over Lisbone in
Portugal, there appeered the 28. of January 1551. a great handful of bloody
rods, with fearful fires: it rayned blood, and there followed Earthquakes,
so as two hundred houses were shaken and overthrown, whereby above a thousand
persons were slain. The 21. day of March, about 7. of the clock in the
morning, there were seen at Magdebourg seven Rain-bowes and three Suns; and
at night three Moons, whereof that in the midest, which was the right, kept
her ordinary color, the other two were of the color of blood. These three
Suns were also seen at Witenberg in Saxony, with ten or twelve Circles that
did inuiron them, some round, others but half and very spacious, others less,
and some very small, almost all of the color of the Rainbowe. The last day of
February, which was three weeks before, those of Antwerp in Brabant had also
seen three Suns, enclosed in diverse Circles and Rainbowes.

In the year 1552. the 19. of February, about three of the clock in the
afternoon, those of Maclin in Brabant, did see the Sun first of a blew
color, then red, environed with a great circle and a Rain-bowe. About eleven
months after, the 23. of January 1553* about eight of the clock at night,
there was seen at Basil, the Moon environed with a great and clear circle,
of the color of the Rainbow, the which continued three whole hours. In June
following, there were seen in the air, being clear and bright, over the
Town of Cobourg, betwixt five and six at night, diverse sorts of men, then
armies which gave battle, and an Eagle houering with her wings abroad. In
July were seen two Serpents joined together one eating of an other, and
betwixt them a fiery cross. The same year the City of Magdebourg was
straightly besieged, and among other maruailes, the day after Easter the Sun
appeared very bright at the rising, and environed with a great circle as white
as milk, the which were crossed with four Rain-bowes, the goodliest that ever
was seen. Ten days before, betwixt seven and eight of the clock in the
morning, were seen over the same Town, three Suns: the right had his
ordinary brightness, the other two had a bloody color. Having continued
almost the whole day, at night there appeared 3. Moons, whereat all the
Inhabitants of the place were much amazed, they were of diverse colors: and
after they had continued some hours, the two apparent Moons or Paralies,
became red as blood, then dispersing themselves into long streams, in the end
they vanished: the right Moon which was in the midst, retained her
accustomed brightness. The same year died Duke GEORGE Prince of Anhalt, an
excellent Divine. The day of his death, there appeared in the night over the
Town of Wittenberg a blew Cross. A few days before the battle, given
betwixt MAVRICE Duke of Saxony, and ALBERT Marquis of Brandebourg, there
appeared the image of a great man in a place of Saxony: from the body of this
man, which appeared naked, first there began blood to fall from him, drop after
drop: then they did see sparks of fire come from him, and in the end he
vanished by little and little. In January 1554. there appeared three Suns
twice in Saxony. The 1. of February following, about Chalons in Champagne, was
seen a great flame of fire, which went from the East to West, like to a
burning Torche, bending as a Cressent, the fire did crack, and ^ast out sparks
of all sides, like unto a bar of Iron coming out of the Furnaise, which the
Smiths did work with their Hammers. Some add that this Torche appeared about
the Moon, and showed the point of a Lance at one end. The 19. of February.
were seen at Nebre, two Crosses of a blew color. And the same day at Greisen
in Turinge, they did see in the Sun which shined brightly, a blew Cross, so
great as it covered all the face of the Sun: on either side it had a great
Cheuron of fire, with diverse Circles. The 9. day of April, above Sultzfield,
half a days journey near unto Schuinfort, an Imperial Town, there appeared
two Moons in the night. In March before, were seen Suns of diverse
greatness, with some Circles in Bauaria and the Country about. First the 6.
of March betwixt eight and nine of the clock in the morning, were seen two
Suns with a Rainebowe. The 23. of the same month, about an hour
afternoon, those of Nuremberg did see as much: and moreover a Raine-bowe
toward the West, and the Suns environed with white Circles, continued three
hours together, with a long burning Cheuron. The eight day following, there
were three Suns seen at Reinsbourg. Their beginning was about an hour after
noone: betwixt two and three they did shine brightly, and ended at four of the
clock. They did cast out beams of the one side like unto a Commet: that in
the midst toward the North, and the other two toward the East and West.

In March the same year, were seen over diverse Towns in Germany, betwixt
four and five of the clock at night, diverse Bourguignon Crosses, but most
white, and in a manner touching one another. The 23. day of the same month, a
little before Sun set, were seen two Parelies environed with the Sun by a
great Circle over the Village of Blech. Not far from Noremberg the eleventh
of June, there appeared a Rod of a bloody color through the Sun, with
Stars or Boules of Azure. Presently after there were seen two Squadrons of
armed men, the which had blew Cornets, who for the space of two hours,
incountred together furiously, to the great amazement of many which did see the
beginning, the continuance and end of this apparition. The 13. of June, about
five of the clock in the afternoon, over the Town of Iene, the Sun was
seen of a bloody color, to whom there approached presently from the South and
West, great and many boules of fire, the which did darken the light of it. And
then appeared two Cheurons of a very red color, crossing through the Sun.
The 24. day of July, about ten of the clock at night, there appeared in the
air, in that quarter of the Country which is called the high Palatinat of
Rhine. Toward the forest of Bohemia, two men armed with all pieces, the one
being of a far taller stature then the other, having on his breast a bright
shining star, and a flaming sword in his hand, as also the lesser had. They
began a furious combat, bu^in in the end the lesser was beaten down, and
could not stir: whereupon a chair was brought unto the Victor, in the which
being set and remained some time, still menacing with his sword in his hand him
that lay at his feet, as if he would strike him. In the end they both vanished
away.

The 5. of August following, at 9. of the clock at night, near unto Stolpen,
in the South part of Heaven, there appeared troops of warlike men, who with
great cries and noise of arms, charged one another furiously, when the first
charge was ended, there came abundance of fire out of the clouds, which
hindered the sight of these troops. This fire vanishing, they returned to the
second charge: then the fire kindling again, you would have said it had been
a kind of retreat, to rally themselves again together on either part: which
ended, they return again to a third charge, the which being done, they all
vanished. The same year at Fribourg in Misnia, was seen in the open day, the
representation of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, as many Painters are accustomed to
represent him, sitting in a Rainbow, the colors whereof were exceeding
lively. And about another town called Zopodee, the Sun rising appeared as red
as blood, having about it a stately Palace, the which was all on fire. On
either side of the Sun was seen a high column, very artificial fashioned
and of the color that the Raine-bowe. It seemed that their foundations did
touch the ground, and were very large. The next day the Sun did rise with a
pale color, and this Palace was above it shining very brightly. The columns
or pillars also appeared, but not so fair and long as the day before. The 10.
of February 1555. there were three Suns seen at Vinaire in Saxony. And the
13. of March, there appeared in the air about Turinge a fl^ming sword. The
eleventh of January 1556. toward the Mountains which compass in the City of
Ausbourg of the one side, the element did open, and seemed to riue, whereat all
were wonderfully amazed: especially by reason of the pitiful accidents which
followed* for the same day the messenger of Ausbourg slew a Captain at the
City gates with a Pistol. The next day, the wife of one that made sword
blades, thinking to get a great booty, slew a Merchant in her house: and
presently after her servant killed her self with a Knife. A day after, a
Butcher was slain in a quarrel: and two villages were quite burnt. The 15.
day of the same month, the Keeper of S. Katherins forest was found dead,
being shot through with an Harguebuse. The 17. a Goldsmiths man falling into
despair, drowned himself. The night following many were wounded to the death
in the street. I had forgot to note, that the same eleventh day of January,
when the Heavens did open about Ausbourg, there happened such a change in the
air about Mickhuse in Bauicre, and so great a light appeared in the night, as
it did obscure the light of Candles in their shops and houses, so as for three
hours space, those which would work, had no need of any other light then that
of Heaven. Some months after, the Heavens began to open in another part of
Swau^e, out of the which there proceeded such abundance of fire, as many were
stricken dombe with fear: there were some villages and small Towns burnt and
quite ruined. They did also see in the air certain resemblances of Camels*
the which devoured armed men.

In diverse days and months of the same year 1556. were observed other
apparitions: as in February in the County of Bats, there were seen in the air
armies of foot and horse, the which did encounter together furiously. In
September, over a little Town in the Marquisate of Branaebourg, called
Custerin, about nine of the clock at night, they did see infinite flames of
fire coming out of the air, and in the midst two great burning Cheurons. In
the end there was a voice heard crying, Misery, Misery unto the Church. We
have said before that in the year 1536. there had been seen in the air in
Spain a Combat of two young men. VVLFGANG STRANCH of Nuremberg writes, that
in the year 1556. over a Town in Hungary, the which he calls Babatcha,
there was seen the 6. of October, a little before Sun rising, the
resemblance of two naked boys fighting in the air, with Cymiters in their
hands, and Targets upon their arms. He which carried a spread Eagle upon his
shield, did charge the other which carried a Cressant so furiously, as it
seemed the body being wounded in many places, did fall from the Heaven to the
Earth.

At the same time, and in the same place, was seen a Rainbow with his
accustomed colors, and at the end thereof two Suns. Not far from Ausbourg,
there was seen in the air a Combat betwixt a Bear and a Lion, in December
the same year: And at Wittenberg in Saxony the 6. of the same month, three
Suns, and a crooked clowd, marked with blew and red, stretched forth like unto
a bow, the Sun showing pale and sad, betwixt the Paralies or seeming Suns:
four months before three Suns had been seen betwixt Euschoin and Basil.

Touching the significations of all these apparitions* I will not meddle with
them. Since that year, many are observed in diverse climates of the world,
especially in Europe, other wonders in the air, even unto this present age:
whereof we may make mention in other Books. At this time we do only
represent that which CONRADVS LICOSTHENE: has collected. JOB. FINCET. MARC
FRYTSCH, and many others, in his great volume, De Prodigijs et Ostentis. As for
Comets, showers of blood, prodigious hayle, and other wonders of Heaven, we
will speak of them in their proper places.

Of some that have lost all appetite of drinking and eating.
WE have seen in some diseases, the patients have lost all appetite of eating
and drinking, in such sort as they took in a manner no sustenance. Of this
number was a Nun in the covent of Saint Barbe at Delft, who being fallen sick
of the Iaundise, in the year 1562 continued in her bed six weeks together,
without eating or drinking. All this time she received no nourishment, but
some Kernells of Lymons, the which she held in her mouth, and did sometimes
suck. The Father of this Covent led me thither, not to minister Physic unto
her, but to see her as a miracle, by reason of her long abstinence: but the
next day after I had visited her, she dyed: That which I will add is more
worthy of admiration. In the same Town of Delft, being accompanied by a
Surgian, I did visit a certain sick maid, of seven and twenty years old
and a half, it was in May 1556. after the age of sixteen years, she had
never come out of her bed, having eaten every day since that time but a little
morcell of dried Cheese (as her keeper had protested) neither was it possible
to make her swallow any liquor, and yet she pist sufficiently: she went not to
the stool but once in eight days. More-ouer she was borne blind, she fell to
be full of the dropsy at the age of twenty years, but this water vanished
away, and then she had a sound in her belly like the noise of live Frogs, in
great abondance, accompanied with a strange rising and falling of her belly,
so as do I what I could, laying my hand upon her belly, it was heaued up. This
motion did increase at the full Moon with great pains, as also at the flowing
of the Sea: but at the wane of the Moon, and the ebbing of the Sea, she found
some ease. This motion continued with her seven years: and every tenth week
she had her Terms, as her keeper did confess unto me.

Strange Appetites.
THere is no man almost living, which knows not some particular Histories of
the extraordinary appetites of certain women with child, for the which the
learned Physicians give a reason. We will report some Examples, to incite the
reader, entering into the consideration of them and others that he shall call to
mind, to honor GOD in so many wonders, without naming in particular the diverse
sorts of these Appetites, which are as variable as the countenances, and
conditions of women that be with child. I have seen one who longing to bite a
young man by the nape of the neck, and for that she had forborne a little to
satisfy her furious desire, she began to feel gripings and exteame pain in
her belly. She therefore like a desperate woman leapes upon this young man, gets
hold of the nape of his neck, and bites him so sore, as he thought to have
died of it. L. Viues, in his Comment upon the 7. Chap. de Cituit. dei. Chap. 25.

My Mother bearing me in her womb: an Appetit took her to eat Creueses. She
sent suddenly to seek some, and being impatient to have them washed and made
clean, she began to eat them raw and alive, until that she had satisfied her
desire. Trincauelle. lib. 7. Chap. 5. Of the means to cure diseases in man's
body. A Woman of Nisues, being with Child, and seeing a young man, a Fuller of
cloth bare legged, she came so near him, as with her teeth she lays hold of
one of his Legs and carries away a piece of it. He was content she should
use him twice in this sort, but seeking to return the third time, he refused
her and went his way. This poor woman a while after was brought in bed of
three children whereof two were alive and lusty, and the third dead. An other
woman with Child longing for a Bakers shoulder, which carried her bread unto
the Oven, she rejected all other meat and drempt only of that. Her husband
desiring to content her, wrought so with the Baker, as for a certain some of
money, he was content his wife should taste of that shoulder she had so much
desired. He had endured her teeth twice but she had bitten him of sore, as he
would not endure a third charge. The woman Longing still, sell in Labor of
three Sons, two alive and the third dead.

In a village not far from Andernac a Town seated upon the Rhine, belonging
to the Bishop of Colleyn, a Country woman being with Child and distasted, did
long to eat of her husbands flesh. Her desire was so furious, as she killed
him, eat half his body, and pouldred up the rest: soon after the rage of her
appetite being gone, she confessed the fact willingly unto her husbands friends,
that sought for him. At Lymbourg in Silesia, the Town where I was borne, a man
coming out of a Bathe bare Legged, with his pantofles, he was followed by a
woman with Child, who desirous to taste of such meat, gets hold of one of his
thighs and with her teeth pulled of a piece of his heel, the man crying out
murder, yet would she not leave her hold until she had done. I cannot pass
over with silence what happened to a Noblemans Concubine, who diverse mornings
did eat whole handfulls of fl^xe or towe, being ready to spinne. Being fallen
sick through this disordred appetite, an old woman brought me her water;
having understood that she was distasted, and being demanded of the old woman
what I thought of the Urine, I answered her that the gentlewoman did wind more
flax with her mouth then with her spindle. The old woman thinking that the
inspection of the Urine made me to divine this, gave it out that I was an
excellent diuiner, the which purchased me such credit, as afterward every man
regarded me with admiration.

EVE SIBYLLE my wife, had a sister called GENEVIEFVE, sometimes married to
PETER le FEVRE of Heidelberg, who being with Child in the year 1562. and very
big, went to the Bouchery to buy some piece of flesh. Having attended long
and not able to stay any longer, she snatched up a piece of flesh, entreating
the Butcher to wey it. This rude uncivil fellow pulls it out of her hand,
weyes it, and gives it to an other woman that was by: wherewith she was so
mooned, as her nose began presently to bleed. The which she wiping above the
upper lip, the Child wherewith she went, received such an impression, as after
some weeks, her time being expired, she was delivered of a Son, who had only
the nether lip, and so lived thus deformed a whole year, and then died of the
plague, N. JAMES FVTER in his Observations of Physic. I have known women with
Child which have devoured quick Eeles, not leaving any part. In Delft there
was one which did eat a whole sheep skin with the woole. An other in the
Town of Alcmar, did swallowe down whole ladles full of Tar, where with
mariners use to calke their ships* as if it had bin sauory pottage. Such
furious longings do not only torment women with child, but even men and
children. MARY daughter to PETER SASBOT, being with Child did eat great
abundance of chalk. We may produce diverse examples of women who during their
being with Child, insteede of bread and good meat, have eat nothing but
earth, ashes and coals of the harth, plaster pulled out of the walls,
saltpeter in sellers, Snailes, Frogs, Pears, Apples, and Plummes not half
ripe, and when their desire has not been fully satisfied, their Children have
suffered for it. And as for signs and marks, scarce shall you find ten among
a hundred, that have not some token of this violent passion of their Mothers.

Sometimes, if in these appetits in women with Child do not suddenly get what
they long for, they feel of it long time after they are delivered. In a
village called Schuueden, in the Bishoprike of Fulde, there was a woman with
Child, who passing by the way met with a fisherman, whom she entreated to
sell her all the fish he had taken, but this rude fisherman refused her, not
caring for her earnest request. Being returned very sad to her house she began
to weep bitterly, for that she had been so frustrated of her desire.
There-vpon she fell suddenly to have an extreme desire to drink water: but
the more she drunk, the more her desire increased: so as in one day she did
drink above thirty pound weight of water, the which she voided presently by
Urine. She continued six months after her delivery to drink daily, without
interruption fourteen pounds of water: In the end she came to ask advice of
me, and to seek some remedy for this passion, being accompanied by other women
her kins-folkes and friends, who with oaths did confirm this extraordynarie
drinking to be true, and that during her lying in, she did drink every day
twenty pounds weight of water. The wife of FRANCISCO BARBARIN a magnifico of
Venice, during the time of her being with Child, did eat at diverse times,
about 20. pounds weight of Pepper and not miscarried. After her delivery she
had a menstruos flux the which was cholerike and thin, the which caused an
ulcer in the Matrix, whereof she died M. N. of Florence. Cha. 30. of the 4.
treaty, sermon. 5. I have seen a woman which has continued with this
extraordinary and disordred appetite, a year after her delivery, the which
made her pale, flegmatike and very lean. Her Child, did not live long. GESNER
in the History of birds, speaking of the Pie.

Rash Attempts punnished.
MArc S^hutigius a Citizen of Misnia, having a quarrel with an other of the
same Town, and meeting him unarmed he began to provoke him with iniu^ious
speeches, the other approaching near him pulls his sword from him, and
therewith gives him eight wounds, whereof he died presently, the 25. day of
August 1564. In many Combats allowed in our time, especially in France, it has
often happened that the Challengers have bin slain upon the place by the
defendants. There is not any one but may remember diverse examples of this
kind: GOD does Judge and is to be feared.

Not long since a French gentleman much given to quarrel presuming upon the
skill he had of his weapon, he caused a dagger to be made, and these words to
be graven upon it. I respect not any man. He did usually carry this dagger,
and playing one day, it fell out of the sheath and he upon it, wherewith he
was so wounded in the thigh as he had almost died. I know not whether this
made him any wiser, but every one may see that his poinard respected not him.
Neither had he made any exception in the writing. At the least he should have
reserved his own person, and caused to be graven. I respect none, but my
master. In the wars of our times, infinite number have been surprised and
slain by there own arms, wherewith Martial men may fill whole volumes if
they will spend the time.

Swallowers. Merueillous Histories of some that have swallowed diverse strange
things into the stomach, and what has ensued.
I Have seen a man who for a farthing, did swallowe pieces of glass, nails
and such like things in great quantity, then presently pinching in his belly,
he did cast it up all again at his mouth. The same man at one time did eat
four score raw Leekes. To such men the belly is a sack, and they be of the
nature of Diue-doppers. We have a stranger at Ferrara, who did swollowe and
digest pieces of Leather, pot-shards and broken glasses, in such sort as
every man called him the Ostrige, the which does digest iron, as we have made
proof of one that was in Antwerp. I remember that in my youth I had seen a
German Captain in the French Army who did swallowe his wine without any
motion of the throat. We have seen many Commedieus and such like in our
time, swallowe wine and meat, as if it were cast into a sack. Others which
did cast up as speedely as out of a sack whatsoever they had eaten, without
any strayning. I have known some men, that for a piece of money would swallowe
many flint stones, and then void them out with the excrements. ABRAHAM Deporte
Leon, in his Dialogues of gold.

Some few years past a young begging boy, went up and down BASIL, getting
something to live by after a miserable manner: for two deniers he would
swallowe many stones and whole nuts, wherewith he so filled his belly, as
touching it you might hear them rattle, as if they were in a sack. Then
casting them all up at his mouth, and washing them, he would swallowe them
again, or others, as it should please them that gave him any Alms. After some
months I found him at Fribourg, where he used the same trade. But I could not
learn since what became of him. In our time a Spaniard did swallowe in a short
space four goodly great Pearls, with a Cross of Gold, garnished with five
precious stones, and the string whereat they did hang; all which did belong to
a Curtisane of Venie^. Having solicited her to lie with her, she meaning to
sell this unlawful pleasure at a great rate, demandes of him fifty Crowns
for a night. The Spaniard agrees, and promises to pay her before hand. She
thinking to over reach him, entreated a Venetian gentleman (that entertained
her) to fit her with some of his Wives Jewels, that she might seem the more
brave and pleasing to the Castillian: who seeing this preye, tells her out
fifty Crowns. Then having her in his power all the night, finding her fast a
sleep, he took the Collar from her Breast, and swallowed up the Pearls,
Cross and stringe and in the morning he retired himself leaving the
Courty^an to compownd after-wardes with the Venetian for her Pearls. A.
VESALIVS in the fifth book of his Ana^omy Chap. 3. It was told me that a
certain man had swallowed the broken point of a knife, and then did void it
again in his Seege.

Mounsier de ROHAN had a fool called GVYON, who did swallowe a rapiers point,
about three fingers long, and twelve days after cast it out again by the
seege, the which was not without many strange Accidents: yet he escaped. Many
Gentlemen of Britain made him to do it M. AM^ROS PARE. lib. 24. Chap. 16. He
reports an other History which I will add unto this; CA^ROL Surgion to the
Mar^shall Danuille did assure me that FRANCIS GVILLEMET, a Surgion at
Sommieres, a little Town four Leag^es from Monpellier had cured a Sheperd,
whom certain thieves had made to swallowe a knife half a foot long, the
handle being of horn as big as ones thombe, the which continued the space
of six months in his Body, complaining much by reason of his pain, which
made him dry and very lean. In the end, an Impostume brake under his arm
pit, casting forth abundance of very stinking, infectious matter. By this
I^postame, in presence of the Officers of Justice, the knife was drawn forth,
the which Mounsier IOV^ERT a famous Physician at Montpellier kept in his
Cabinet, as an admirable, memorable and monstrous thing. The which JAMES
GVILLE^ a sworn Surgion at Paris, did assure one he had seen in the Cabinet
of the said IOVBERT.

We will add out of the same Book and Chapter two other Histories of things
that were swallowed down unwittingly, no less memorable then the precedent:
M. ANTHONY, B^NIVENIVS a Physician at Florence, writes that a certain woman
did swallow a needle of, brass, feeling no pain for the space of a year.
After which time she felt a great pain in her belly, for the which she had
the advice of many Physicians, making no mention of the needle which she had
swallowed. No man being able to give her any ease, she lived in this sort for
the space of ten years. In the end this needle came out at a little hoale
nee^e unto her nauill, and she was soon cured of it. The other History is of a
Scholar named CHAMBELLANT, borne at Bourges, and studying at Paris in the
College of Plessis. He swallowed the ear of an herb called Gramen, the which
a while after came out whole at his side, whereof he had like to have dyed, and
was cured by FERNELIVS and HVGVET, Doctors of Physic.

We have by fit potions, sometimes lenetiue and sometimes strong, cured a
servant of the Lady of la VALS, who had swallowed a Key. And a fool in the
City of Tours, when as Fencers played before the King, gathered up a swords
point, the which he suddenly swallowed, being almost half a foot long. A
certain man (the reason thereof is unknown) having swallowed a stick of the
length and bigness of ones middle finger, he kept it in his body for the space
of a year, in the end being in a certain place among many others, he was
troubled with a violent Collicke, the which forced him to return unto his
house, where he voyded this stick by the siege. There was at Zurich a Preacher
well known, who having one day voluntarily swallowed a quick Eele, voyded it
whole and alive by the siege. Gezner speaking of Eeles lib. 4. of his History
of beasts.

In the Emperor CHARLES the fifts Court, there was a gluttonous fellow, who
with a draft of Beer swallowed a great Herring whole. And in the Town of
Alcmar in Holland, an other at one draft, did swallow three Dollers of Silver,
in a Pot of Beer, and three days after voided them by the seege. The same
PETER FOREST in the above named Book and Chapter.

The following Histories report the dangers many have been in, that
unwittingly or otherwise, have swallowed things that have stuck in the throat,
or else where by the which there have followed diverse troublesome and pitiful
accidents.
A Country-woman in Holland, of the age of fifty years and more, feeding one
day with a good stomach: she put into her mouth a great piece of flesh, dried
and hardened in the smoke, and having swallowed it without chawing, it stuck
in her throat, and there continued three days without any help. She could
receive no nourishment whatsoever, the passage for meat and drink being quite
stopped. In the end calling me, I found that the morcell was gone far, applying
diverse remedies, but she expected nothing but death. At the end of the fourth
day, as she was sipping of Whey, this morcell fell violently into the stomach,
by means whereof she recovered her health. A Man's Daughter of Delft, being
three and twenty years old, having eaten a Cowes tripe greedily, being hard
and gluie, some morcels stopped her throat, so as for three days space she
could not possibly swallow any thing. I caused a strong suppositarie to be
given her, and after that I had caused her neck to be anointed with Oil of
Lillies, and sweet Almonds, and then bound it about with a Cataplasme fit
for the grief, when as all that were about her attended nothing but death, she
was cured. An other maid eight and twenty years old, having in September in
the year 1582. swallowed a piece of flesh that was hard and sinewie, was in
the like danger for the space of 24* hours, and in the end eased, the piece
falling into her stomach.

A certain man having eaten a Peach, would also swallow the stone, the which
stuck in his throat, where having stayed a little, the party drunk a great
draft, which thrust it into the stomach, and passing from thence into the
guts, it stayed at the great gutte near the fundement, so as for three days
together he could not go to the stool, in the end it past forth with the
excrements with such a noise, as if a Pistol had been discharged. But after
that time he was always tormented with the Emeroydes, by reason of the
excoriation of that part, caused by the roughness of the stone. A young maid
having eaten much of a sheep lights, and finding her stomach charged, had a
desire to cast, but the morcell stayed in the upper part of her throat, so as
they were forced to use Yrons to get this morcell which was swollen, and had
stopped the passage, of the which she had like to have dyed. Master I. HOVLIER.
The like did happen to an other, who had eaten the Lights of an Ox, he had
continually a Hickotte, and could not swallowe any thing. She was ^ased
without the application of Y^ons, but by the means of Ventoses and other
means, in the end she cast up the morcell, which from the stomach was mounted
into her throat. The Scheliographes upon the 1. Book of M. I. HOVLER of
inward diseases.

A young boy of eight years of age, having swallowed one of his fathers
Counters, which he used to cast his accoumpt withal, felt nothing for the
present of this excess: only he began by little and little to loose his
flesh and to grow thin. After a year, he voided this Counter with the
excrements, but so consumed by the natural heat, as every man did wonder at
it: Aneat. Port. cent. 2: cur. 69.

An honest mother of a family at Dusseldrop, being about to dress a young
child in March 1564. having two pinnes, the one great, the other lesser in her
mouth, it chanced that her child was in danger to fall into the fire. This
fear made the mother forget her pinnes, the which she did swallow upon this
apprehension, having no other care but to save her little one. The pinnes
remained some hours in her throat with great pain. Being called to succor
her, I commanded they should forbear to give her any meat or drink, before I
had tried with an engine to draw out the pinnes. Being returned, I understood
they had made her drink some broth, which did force the pins downward a
little above the orifice of the stomach: this caused a new pricking pain: to
remedy it, I caused her to drink a great draft of Beer with Butter, and some
big pieces of Rye bread mingled with it, hoping that the weight of the bread
with the drink would drive down the pins into the stomach, seeing it was not
possible to get them out above. The which took effect some few hours after*
the next day I made her to be fed with good brothes, and Buttered Beer, then
to rest on her right side, without any weight, upon her belly, having Cushions
under her arms, and under her thighs, to give more scope, for the pinnes to
descend into the guts. After noone they took her up, but I did forbid them
that they should not shake her in turning her from one side to the other, but
without bending her forward or backward, she should walk up and down easily,
that the pinnes might pass into the guts: the which they did, and then she
voided them, the greatest was somewhat bowed. She was exceeding sick upon
this accident, but soon after she was cured: A Venetian maid lying with a
Needle in her mouth, that was four fingers long, fell a sleep, and swallowed
it: at the end of ten months, having been grievously tormented, she voided it
in her Urine, but in a marvelous form, for a stone of the bigness of a Hens
Egg, was grown about this needle Alex. Benoist. lib. 2. of his Anatomy,
Chap. 9.

A certain Gentlewoman of the Duchess of Iuillers Chamber, co^fing her self,
and holding her pinnes in her mouth, was struck behind by a certain
Gentleman, where with she did start, and with fear swallowed the said pinnes,
the which she voyded with her Urine two days after, without any harm. At
Nieumegh^n, a certain dissolute man meaning at one of the feasts of Easter to
show some sport to others, offered to swallow a Hens Egg whole, but the Egg
being too big it stayed in his throat, and so stopped the passage, as this
dissolute man was presently choakt. In the year 1588. an other dissolute
fellow in the City of Rouan, saying that there was no boane in a Cowes foot,
land a wager that he would swallow one at a morcell. They bring him one, he
takes it and thrusts it into his mouth: but having it in his throat, there it
stuck. Notwithstanding all the care and applications of Physicians, he
continued in this sort nine days, and in the end dyed without speaking, having
his face monstrously swelled. Every man went to see him, serving as a spectacle
of Gods judgment. Histories of our time.

BERNARD de NOIRS, a Mantuan Gentleman, of the age of three score and seven
years, a spare man, but lusty, having in his mouth a piece of flesh that was
full of sinews, the which he had not chewed well, he swallowed it. This
morcell sticking to the orifice of the throat, did so stop the passage, as it
was not possible for him to swallow any thing, no not clear water. He could
scarce breath, the slimie flesh did stick so fast, as the Surgions could not
possibly draw it up, nor thrust it down. After seven days, being rotten and
dissolved, it fell into the stomach: so as the patient was freed from
suffocation. But for all this he escaped not; for his throat being inflamed
with pain, and the application of yrons, besides his weakness growing
through the want of nourishment by the space of seven days, had subdued all
the forces and faculties of his life, so as the foureteenth day he dyed.
MARCEL. DONAT. lib, 2. of his Admirable Historics, Chap. 8. An other learned
Physician does justify, that he had seen one, who being tormented with a
pointed bone, which stuck in his throat, after two months it came forth
through the skin.

A Barber being to Tent a woman in the bottom of her mouth, he unadvisedly
let it slip, so as it went by her throat into her stomach, which caused
such an indisposition in the poor woman, as being wasted and dried up, after
she had languished many years, she dyed. I remember that a young man of
Harlem, who had swallowed Guernettes alive (they be little Fishes of the Sea,
which some call Squilles, or Primotheres) he felt so great pain in his
stomach, as in the end he dyed of a consumption. An other having swallowed
three Gogions alive, was choked with the third, and dyed. A certain woman
having unadvisedly swallowed a needle, could not be cured, but in despite of
all remedics, having languished sometime, in the end she dyed, all wasted and
consumed. CHARLES SODERIN was sometimes troubled with an ague, without any
apparent cause, whereof in the end he dyed, being 35. years old. Being opened,
they found a steel Needle sticking in his liver, BAZANCE a Surgion drew it
forth, all eaten and wasted with age, and showed it me. CHARLES being but three
years old, had swallowed it by chance. NERVEE a Physician of Florence in his
observations.

Barbarous People made mild and gentle through wisdom.
ROBERT of Saint Seuerin a very valiant Captain in his time, making a voyage
into Syria, and going toward Mont Sina, (to accomplish a certain vow made by
him, according to the devotion of those times) having descouered certain
troops of horse, which came toward him, he demanded of them which did conduct
him from the Sulta^, what people they were. When they had answered him
trembling, that they were Arrabians, the most dangerous thieves in the world,
with out any show of amazement, but incorraging his company he said unto
them, that they must unlade their carriages, to the end that those which came
might find dinner ready as soon as they were arrived, whereof they had great
need, considering that they had been much tormented with heat and dust. And
whilst his people did what he had commanded, he went to meet them, and
saluted them after a gracious manner, (being by nature a goodly personage, both
for his stature and countenance) making much of them and seeming to have no
distrust of them, but with a smiling countenance he told them by his
truch-man, that they were wel-come. Which words being pleasing to these
Arrahian thieves: they did willingly accept the offer which he made them, so as
they dined cheerfully with him: and after they had received some small
presents, they went their way, having forgotten all their barbarous cruelty,
and giving him many thanks for his good cheer. In this report we see of the
one part an act of great Judgment, he falling suddenly and unawares into the
hands of men without mercy: and on the other side an act of great humanity of
men which seemed to have nothing human but the face, and in cruelty
receiving the nature of Lions, Tigers and other savage Beasts. So as in my
judgment the Poets would not have given much less commendations to this
Captain, then they gave to ORPHEUS, for that with the sweet sound of his
harp, he had mollefied the hearts of cruel and savage Beasts. Conformity
of ancient wonders with modern.

Light Hurts proved mortal.
A Brother of mine called Captain Saint Martin being three and twenty years
old, who had made sufficient proof of his valor, playing at Tenis, he
received a blow with a ball, which did hit him a little above the right ear,
without any show of contusion or hurt. He did neither set down, nor took any
rest for it: but five or six hours after he died of an Apoplexy, which this
blow did cause. A quarrel being betwixt two young men, the one gave the
other a box under the ear, whereupon he fell into an Apoplexy and died
within few hours after. He that struck him was presently put in prison, and
the Physicians were called for, to know their opinions upon the cause of this
young man's death. Some did attribute it to the blow it self, saying that the
matter had been moved therewith: others imputed it to repletion and
superfluity of humors, caused through excess of eating and drinking: others to
the humidity of the place, whereas death had before long slept. This diversity
of opinions stayed the Judge from pronouncing of a definitive sentence. We have
also known a fuller of cloth, called PETER, who slew a young man with his
fist, hitting him on the stomach ANT. BENIVENIVS in the 110. Chap. of his
Physical examples.

ARDOVIN du FERRIER, a young youth of 13. years age was lightly hurt with a
^allowe staff on the head, being cast by chance out at a garret windoe. There
was no fracture nor breach to be seen at all, but the sixth day, there grew
an inflammation in the wound: the next, day a Convulsion and a palsy in the
right thigh and left arm, with a fever and a fenzie, and the eleventh day he
died. FR. VALLERIOLA in the. 1. observation of his 3. book.

Wounds cured.
FRANCIS of Lorraine Earl of Aumale and after-wards Duke of Guise, s^aine
before Orleance, was sore wounded before Boulleyne with a Lance, the which
entered under the right eye declyning toward the nose, and past through betwixt
the nape of the neck and the ear with such violence, as the head with a piece
of the Lance was broken, and stuck in his head so fast, as they could by no
means draw it out, but with a Smithes pincers. Notwithstanding all this great
violence which was not without some fracture of bones, sinews, Veins,
Artieres, and other parts, yet he was cured and lived many years after, he
was afterward slain at the seege of Orleance, in the end of the first civil
wars in our time in France. The History of our time.

HENRY of Lorraine his Son, in an encounter nere unto Dormans, in the year
1575. having had the better and pursuing some that fled, received a shot with a
pistol in the cheek; some said it was with a harguebuse, with the which he
fell down half dead upon the place, yet he was cured, and afterward slain
at Blois in the year 1588. History of HENRY the 3. The Seigneur of Saint Iean.
One of the stable to King HENRY 2. at a Turney before the house of Guise,
received a blow with the splinter of a Lance within his viser, of the length
and bigness of ones finger, under the eye, which ran three fingers into his
head. I had him in cure, being assisted by many Learned Physicians and
Surgions, and although the wound through the violence of the blow, were very
dangerous, yet he was cured, with the help of GOD. M. AMB. PARE, lib. 9. Chap.
9.

A servant of the Seigneur of Champagnes, a gentleman of Aniou, was wounded in
the throat with a sword, so as one of the ingular veins was cut, with the
Artier of the winde-pipe by means whereof he had a great flux of blood,
neither could he speak at all, until his wound were sowed up and dressed.
Whilst that the medicaments were liquid, he drew them through the stitches,
and put them out at his mouth. So as considering the greatness of the wound,
and the nature of the parties that were wounded, especially of the Artier of
the winde-pipe and of the ingular vain, the which are spermatike, cold and
dry, and there hard to join together again, besides also that the Artier is
subject unto motion, which is made in the swalloing, by reason of the inward
filme, the which holds to that of the asophage (which is the passage for eating
and drinking) the one obeying the other by a reciprocal motion con^idering
also the use of the said parties, which is that the Artier serves for
respiration, the which is necessary for the symmetry and vital heat of the
heart: and that the ingular vein is very necessary for the norrishment of the
superior part. Moreover having regard unto the great quantity of blood which
he had lost by his wound (the blood being the Treasure of nature, the
preserver of natural heat and of the vital spirits) and other accidents: I
did conclude that he was but a dead man: yet I can assure you that he escaped:
the which I believe happened rather through the grace of GOD, then by any help
of man or medicaments. M. Amb. Pare. lib. 9. c. 31.

Being at Thurin, in service with the deceased Lord of Montiean, I was called
to dress a soldier called L'EVESQVE, borne at Paris, who being then under the
command of Captain Renouart, had three great wounds given him with a sword,
whereof the one was on his right side under his pappe, running into the
emptiness of his breast, from whence there had fallen great abundance of blood
upon the Mydriffe, which stopped his respiration, neither could he speak but
with great difficulty, having a very violent fever, and with a cough he cast
blood at the mouth, saying, that he felt an extreme pain on that side that
was hurt. The Surgion who had dressed him first, stitcht up his wound in such
sort, as nothing could come forth, the next day I was called to visit the
patient, where being come, seeing the Accidents, and death approaching. I was of
opinion to vnsowe the wound in the Orifice, whereof I found congealed blood, so
as I caused the patient to be lift up often by the legs, his head downward,
leaving a part of his body upon the bed, leaning with one hand upon a stool
that was lower then the bed. Being planted thus, I caused him to shutt his
mouth and his nose, that his lights might swell, and the Mydriffe rise, and the
muscles betwixt the ribs, and of the upper part of the belly together, should
retire themselves, that the blood fallen into the stomach, might be cast out by
the wound: and the better to effect it, I thrust my finger deep into the
wound, to dissolve this congeled blood, so as there came forth nere seven or
eight ounces, already stinking and corrupted. Then I caused him to be set in
his bed, making iniections into the wound, with barley water, in the which I
had caused Melrosarum and sugarcandie to be boiled, then I caused him to be
turned from one side unto an other, and again I made him to be lifted up by
the Legs as before. Then they might see come forth with the said Iniection
little gobbets of blood. This done the accidents decreased, and by little and
little did cease. The next day I made him, an other Iniection, to the which I
added Centory, worme-wood and Aloes, to cleanse it the better, but the patient
having told me soon after, that he felt a great bitterness in his mouth and
had desire to cast, I found that these bitter Iniections profiting one way, did
hurt an other, so as I did not continue them, but entreating the wound more
mildly, the patient was cured beyond my hope. The same Author. lib. 9. Chap. 32.

M. PETER SOLERY a famous Physician of Aurillac, being pursued during the first
troubles by certain horsemen, which sought his life, and ouer-taken a quarter
of a league from Argentat in Limosin, as he thought to save him self with
others, he received many dangerous wounds and yet was myraculously cured: as
it was verefied by such as did visit and dress his wounds, first he had a shot
with a Harguebuse, hitting him above the thigh boane and passing to the other
side, then he had an other shot under the left arm four fingers from the
shoulder which carried away a piece: he had a pistol shot upon the same
shoulder sloping downe-ward. and an other in the face, taking him under the
eye, and passing under his chappe* He had four wounds with a sword upon the
left arm, from the elboe downe-ward, he was stabd with a dagger under the left
pappe, the which meeting with a rib past no farther: he had an other shot with
a pistol almost in the same place running betwixt the skin and the ribs,
and coming forth behind, and a great wound with a sword above the eye, and an
other upon the head.

Being thus wounded and left as it were for dead, these murderers having taken
away his purse and three gold rings, having continued about two hours upon the
place, in the end he did rise: and as he labored to creep he espied a soldiar
coming toward him with a naked sword, of whom having demanded help in GODS
name, it moved the soldiar to do him no harm, but seeing him in this estate,
he fled as if an enemy had been behind him. Hereupon, creeping forward a
little, as well as he could, he meets with a young Son of his own being
but eight years old, who flying also had strayed in the fields, who supporting
him of the one side as well as he could, he conducted him unto a village,
where all the relief that he could get was that they did not make an end to
kill him, although that he were in this pitiful Estate, and that this poor
Infant with tears and lamentations, did offer them his clothes, and would have
stripped himself before them, to the end they should succor his poor Father,
Passing on farther, sometimes standing, sometimes lying down, GOD presented
unto him an other of his Sons, about ten years old, and being supported by
him on the other side, GOD gave him strength enough to come unto an other
village, where with some difficulty he recovered two eggs with some hurds, the
which were applied to his greatest wounds: then giving him a little wine, and
setting him (as well as they could) upon a Mare, they conducted him to an other
village, where his Wife (who remained with a gentleman that was neighbor to
that place) came presently unto him: and was assisted by the singular and
extraordinary grace of GOD so as he recovered his life and health. History of
France under CHARLES the 9.

During the said first troubles, among other batta^les that were given, that of
Saint Gilles in Prouence is noted being the 27. of September 1562. In the
which certain Spanish Captains with their companies, who striving to make it
good upon the dis-route, got nothing but blows, and were in a manner all cut
in pieces and slain upon the place. Those which suruiued lay still and did
counterfeit themselves dead. Of this number there were two Captains, the one
called ALPHONSO, the other MANRIC, both were Castillians. ALPHONSO had seven
wounds with a Courtelas upon the head, his caske having been beaten of and he
ouerthrown: four of them had entered into his head, the other three had but cut
the flesh unto the boane: on either arm he had four great cutts, two about
one of his Elbowes and his wrist, besides he had six thrustes in his thighs.
He and MANRIC with 260. others that were wounded did save themselves as they
could and were carried to Arles a near Town, where they were dressed. MANRIC,
had many wounds in the head, arms, breast, sides and face, contynuing two
days without speech or pulce. In flying he had cast himself into the River
of Rohan, where he had remained in the Water up to the chyne, for the space
of 4. hours, sometimes lifting up his head, sometimes playing the Diue-dopper,
until the night was come, and the victors being retired, he swamme over the
river. Above a hundred others that were wonded did strive to pass the river,
desyring rather to hazard themselves in that sort, then to fall into the hands
of the French, who were justly incensed against them. But many of them were
drowned, their strength failing them in the midest of the waves. Those which
escaped half dead, died in a manner all in the Hospital at Arles. The two
above named Captains, after they had endured new deaths in the hands of
Surgions and Physicians, were after some weeks set on foot again, but well
marked in diverse places to serve for a remembrance and an example to their
Countrymen, who notwithstanding have not well considered of it. MANRIC had
received two thrusts with a Halbard betwixt the ribs, but there came not much
matter out of his wounds: but at the end of three weeks he voided abundance
of rotten filthe by his fondement, to the great amazement of the Physicians,
for that from the breast unto the gutts there is no common passage, for any
corrupt matter that is in the said breast. In the same Battle a foote-man had
a shot with a Harguebuse, the which peerst the lest Temple, and came out on the
other side a little under the right Temple, having shattered his head in two:
yet he was miraculously cured. He had been dressed at Nismes, but finding
himself not well cured, he came to me, and I did succor him with my best
skill. Yet he continued blind and deaf of this wound. Neither the brain nor
the filme of it had not been touched, but the boullet having broken the head
had past close by it unto the other side. Moreover, by reason of the blow and
the contusion, some little blood dispersing it self into the sinnews of the
sight and hearing, it caused an obstruction, whereof followed a blindness and
deafness. An other borne at Marseilles, being Ancient to a company, had a
Harquebuse shot in the breast, so as the Bullet came forth at his back, and yet
he was cured.

Another of Arles, had his head half cut off with a Courtelas, so as it had
need to be propt up, the blow being given betwixt the first and second
Vertebre (a joint in the body, where the joints so meet, that they may turn
as in the hucle-bone) so deep and so large, as they might lay their hand in
it, yet he was cured, and lived four years after this wonderful wound.
Another called CLAVDE of Sauoy, having his head almost cleft in two with a
Courtelas, he never had fever nor any other accident (the which are usual in
such like wounds) but the broken bones being taken out according unto Art, in
two months he was cured. Two others, the one having his thigh all broken in
pieces with a Faucon shot, (the bullet whereof was drawn out of it,) and the
other wounded in the Ancle, after they had suffered much, were cured, without
cutting of thigh or leg. FR. VALLERIOLA, in the 4. Book of his Physical
observations, sets down these Histories at large, and the remedies that were
applied, and the means that were used to cure these hurt men, the which we
describe not, it belonging to learned Physicians and Surgions, who besides the
medicaments, have respect to many necessary circumstances, which are to be
considered of in such accidents. In an encounter near unto Cisteron, a
Gentleman called the Cadet of Monstier, was shot with a Harguebuse, betwixt the
fifth and sixth rib: the Bullet crossed his breast, and came forth within two
fingers of the back bone. There were drawn forth with the Bullet; twelve
ringles of a shirt of Mayle which this Gentleman did wear: many others
ringles of the same side, remained among the Muscles, betwixt the ribs and
the back, and some others driven into the body came forth with the corruption
of the wound, whereof he was cured within a year. But he had a difficulty
in breathing, the which continued the remainder of his days, by reason of this
wound. A servant belonging to the Seigneur of Meianes a Gentleman of Arles,
being shot in the right arm, in the same encounter, betwixt the elbow and the
shoulder, and ill handled by the Surgions that were in the Army, he came to
Arles, having his Arm putrified and stinking so strongly, as no man could
endure him, it was all black, soft, and extremely cold, the patient falling
sometimes into a swound. The Surgions being assembled with me, we resolved to
cut off his Arm speedily, to save the rest of the body. Having therefore with
a Raisor cut his Arm above the dead flesh, they cut the bone in sunder with a
Saw, and stopped the Flux of blood with Canters fit for it: so as within one
month the man was cured. VALLERIOLA in the same Observation. At the same
encounter, a Prouencall Soldier was shot into the arm with a Musket, the
which brake the bones and did so tear all the rest, as the Arm did not hold
by the thickness of ones finger, from falling. All the Surgions were of
opinion to cut it off, except one called Master DIDIER TEST, a man very
expert in his Art, who in one month cured this Soldier, who had in a manner
all the motions of this Arm thus tattered, whole and sound. An other Soldier
stricken with an Harguebuse shot in the face, the Bullet entering at the mouth,
and coming forth at the left side, toward the left Temple, having broken the
upper Iawe-bone, yet he was well cured.

A certain Porter in the Town of Arles, falling to be a Soldier in an
encounter, he received a thrust three fingers under the Navel, on the left
side, given with such force, as it pierced unto the back, betwixt the third
and forth ribbe near unto the bone: yet he was cured by the above named
Surgion. We have (says VALLERIOLA) held these aboue-named cures worthy the
report, that none should despair of difficult things, nor be too confident of
those which seem light. For that sometimes we see him dye, whom the
Physicians assured to see soon recovered, and him to escape, of whom they had
lost all hope. And that both Physicians (and all others that shall read these
Accidents) may remember that wonders do fall out in such wounds and cures, as
in other works of Nature, to the praise of Almighty GOD.

In the war of Sauoy 1589. and following: a young Soldier had a Harguebuse
shot in the forehead, and the Bullet remained in his head. He was had in
cure by an expert Surgion, so as within few months he returded again to
Arms. And in a certain Scallado, being fallen from a high wall into a ditch,
he did so bruze his head, as he dyed. The Bullet which remained of the
precedent wound, was found in the hinder part of his head, without hurting of
any part about it. Memories of our time.

An other in the same war, having a Bullet passing betwixt the great gutte,
the bladder, and the stones, was not hurt in any part of them, but after he
had been carefully dressed and looked unto, he was ever after well, and so
continues at this day. In the same Author.

I have dressed many which have been thrust through the bodies with Rapiers, and
shot through with Pistols, and have been cured. For example, I had the Clarke
of the Kitchen to the Ambassador of Portugal in cure at Melun, who had been
thrust through the body, whereby the bowels were so hurt, as in dressing him
there came out at his wound a great quantity of filthy matter: and yet he was
cured. I was an other time called by a Gentleman of Paris, whose name was GILES
le MAISTRE, Seigneur of Belle Iambe, remaining in the street of Saint Andrew
des Ars, in the presence of Mounsier BOTAL, ordinary Physician to the King and
Queen, and RICHARD HVBERT his ordinary Surgion, and JAMES GVILLEMEAV the Kings
sworn Surgion at Paris, men well practiced in Surgery, who had bin thrust
through the body with a Rapier, so as for many days he voided blood by the
mouth, and by the siege in great abundance, which showed that his bowels and
inward parts were perished: yet in fifteen or twenty days he was cured.
Master AMBROSE PARE, lib. 10. chap. 4.

A Shoemaker of Auignon, having been sore wounded in the night upon the head
with a sword, which had cut him even to the first Membrana or Filme, there
followed many fearful accidents, so as after his first dressing and letting
blood, he fell into a sounding or swonding, and was seven days without
speaking, yet in the end he was cured. The same Author in the 9. observation
of his 5. Book.

ANTHONY my fathers servant, a Fleming by nation, being ouer-laden with Wine
at Shrouetide, and being mounted up into one of the highest chambers of the
house, he leaned at a window that was open, when being oppressed with the fume of
Wine, his head carried away his body, so as he fell upon the stones in the
street, whereas his head was in a manner all beaten to pieces, and he held for
dead: for he moved no member, had no feeling nor speech but like a stock: and
as it were giving up the ghost, he continued seven days together in his bed
in that estate: notwithstanding three of the Physicians at that time in
Montpellier, that is, GRIFON the elder, TRAMPLET and FAVCON, accompanied by
PETER ALZINE, ANTONIE BARELIER, and NICHOLAS le BLOIS Surgions, did warrant his
life with the help of GOD. True it is, that he continued almost blind and
quite deaf of this fall, all the rest of his life. The same in the 4.
observation of the 6. Book.

Of Thieves and Murderers.
A Learned Divine of our time, reports a History almost like to that of
IBICVS, for he says that a German being in a voyage, fell into the hands of
certain thieves, who being ready to cut his throat, the poor man
discovering a a flight of Crows, said. O Crows, I call you to witnesses and
reuengers of my death. He was presently murdered by these thieves: who three
days after being drinking in an Inn, behold a flight of Crows come and fall
upon the top of the house. Then the thieves began to laugh, and to say one unto
another. Hoe, behold those which will be revenged for his death, whom we
dispatched the other day. The servant understanding this speech, discouers it
unto his Master, who makes report unto the Magistrate, and he apprehends the
thieves, upon their varications and diverse answers, he does so press them,
as they confess the truth, for the which they were executed. In the
collection of Memorable speeches made by this Divine.

CONRAD de la ROSE, Secretary to MAXIMILIAN, the first Emperor of that name,
a valiant and wise Gentleman, having crossed through a long Forest, and forced
by reason of the approaching night to lodge as he could, he entered into an
Inn, where as the host was a Thief. Being in his Chamber, and reasonably
well entertained, he perceived the servant to weep, and did secretly
understand from her, in what danger he was. She told him among other things
that the Hoasts custom was to ring a little Bell, at which sound many thieves
entered into the lodging, and presently one among them entered into the Chamber,
whereas the passengers were lodged, who making a show to snuff the Candle,
should put it out: then the thieves entered, and falling upon the passengers,
slew them. CONRAD bethinking himself, caused a Lantern to be brought him by
the servant, and a Candle light in it, the which he hid under a bench, held his
wepons ready and attended his enemies. He was scarce set at the Table, but a
peasant enters, who counterfetting the varlet, puts out the Candle. But CONRAD
causing the Lantherne with the light to be presently drawn forth, and having
his arms and his servants ready, he valiantly resists these thieves, slew
some, put the rest to flight, lays hold upon his Host, and delivers him unto
the Magistrate, who caused him to be executed. The same Author. Some years
past, I did see broken upon the wheel by the judgment and sentence of the
Bayliffe of Morges (under the government of the Seigneurie of Berne) a young
man, about the age of twenty years, who counterfetting himself dumb, and
asking alms of passengers, under color of passing on his way with a little
Bell in his hand, which was as a watchword to his companions (the number of
the strokes making them to discern the number of the persons and their
qualities) was found to have been at two and twenty murders, and with his
own hand, had cut many men's throats. He dyed miserably, roaring like a Bull
when they brake his bones. The Emperout CHARLES the fifth being in Germany,
whereas affairs of war kept him, he was constrained to send one of the
chief of his Court into Spain, to have a care of affairs and difficulties
that should arise. This Viceroy, a young Prince, much given to hunting, was one
day in the kingdom of Granado, and being in pursuit of a wild Beast, he
strayed so far from his people, as following his game through a great wood
without respect of time or way, he found himself in a desolate place and
be-nighted. By means whereof he began to look all about him, to see if he
could discover some house or other place where he might shrowde himself.
Thereupon he sees a little Cottage, and riding thither, he intreates the
Peasant that dwelt there, to lodge him that night. The which the peasant
granted, and received him into his Cottage, where at that time there were six
persons, that is, the Peasant, his Wife, his Sun of twenty years of age,
his Daughter in Law, newely married, a servant which kept his Cattle, a rough
fellow and of an ill aspect, and then a little Daughter. The Prince being
lighted from his horse recommends him unto this vallet, and then he enters into
the Peasants house and draws near the fire, whilst they make ready supper,
not dreaming of any harm. These people not knowing the Prince, nor he
discovering himself to any; they seeing him so richly appareled, and of a
goodly presence they held him to be some great rich-man, and thinking it not
fit to let go so fat a preye, they began to devise some means to kill him,
and to get his spoils. After supper they prepare him a bed in a certain
Chamber, which had but a weak door, easy to force. In going up and down,
the Daughter in Law newly married (who had an Inckling of this cruel plot)
taking pity of this young Prince, whom she did see of so goodly a stature,
and of an honorable port and carriage, called him aside: having drawn him a
part and entreated him to keep secret what she should tell him, she
discouers the enterprise breefely unto him, whilst the Father, Son and
vallet were complotting again a new in the stable. The Prince moved at this
report, and inclyning to believe some thing was ready to discover what he
was. But doubting presently that it would but hazard his life, in committing it
to the faith of such barbarous people, which did so wickedly violate all the
rights of humanity and hospitality, to conspire against any man, whom they
did see in so brave equipage, well mounted, and courteously received by them:
he chose rather (under GOD) to trust unto his own valor, then unto the word
of men that had no faith, and whose hearts were covered with dissimulation and
blood. He suffers himself then to be conducted by the Peasant into this
little chamber, and having shut the door unto him he drew a great heavy
Chestvnto it, to serve as a Barricadoe, and then he held his rapier ready, and
by him was a long pistol bended and primde, watching and attending what would
become of the report of the Daughter in Law: Presently the Peasant (who
thought he had been a sleep by reason of his travel of hunting) came softly
to the door, thinking to enter it without any difficulty. But being frustrate
of his expectation, he began to entreat his guest to open him the door, for
that he would take a covering for a bed out of the Cofer, of the which he had
great need. The Prince (who slept not) answered. Retire importunate man, I am
now at rest, and will not open the door at this time. Then the Peasant began
to exclaim, cry out and say, that he was undone and that there was one would
brave him in his own house whereupon he falls to his arms, and threatens to
break all, yea to kill him that was in that little chamber if he did not
presently open, and yield unto his mercy. The Peasant and his man coming to
break down the door, the Son sought to enter the Chamber by a window, and
all together made a marvelous attempt. The Prince seeing himself reduced to
extremity, discharges his pistol at the door, peerceth it easily, and kills
the Peasant, then drawing back the Chest, he issues forth with his rapier in
hand, dispatcheth the Son, and runs after the servant, who saues himself
by flight. But all was not yet done, for the cries of the hostess, and the
extraordynarie noise that she made, did awake the other neighbor shepards,
who came running with their Arms, environed the house, and cried out murder.
The Prince standing upon his guard, had patience until it was day, and seeing
this troop of mutiners to increase, he began to let them as then understand
what he was, threatening to cause them all to be hanged, if they did refuse to
assist him and to conduct him. If they would not believe him, they should fetch
the Magistrate of the next place: and if they did not accept of that condition,
their ruin and confusion was at hand. Being moved with the speech and
presence of a personage so far different from their condition, they began
to grow somewhat mild: yet in such sort as they lay hold of him, bind him,
and are leading him to the Governor of a Town, which was some leagues from
rhence. The Princes gardes arryuing in the mean time, seeing him in this
equipage were ready to cut all this troop of Peasants in pieces: but the
Prince did expressly forbid them. All the former being discovered and examined,
the Peasants confederates were punished according to their merits, the servant
was broken upon the wheel, the thieves house burnt, and the Daughter in Law
was richely recompensed for her faith-full advertisement.

An Italian called FRANCISQVINO, having continued some-time at Bolonia the
fat, one of the best Gentlemen's houses of the City, and had been held for
some honest gentleman, and of a good house, considering his stately carriage*
In the end he was discovered to lead this life which follows, under color
of keeping the ordynarie house for play at dice and cards, and seeming also to
be very desirous to have still new Company, and to show him self stately,
he made himself to be visited by them that were newely arrived in the
City. And as soon as they were entered, after that he had performed the
usual complements of the place, he would set him down to play with them,
commanding in the mean time that they should make ready dinner, supper or a
banquet, according to the hour of the day. But in steed of preparing it.
FRANCISQVINO had a thief or murderer, who stood hidden behind and prepared
to beat him down that drempt not of it, when as FRANCISQVINO should give him
a sign. He continued this train so long, as they say when they were taken
and had confessed all, there were found in Priuies fourteen or fifteen
bodies of such as had bin thus slain, by FRANCISQVINO and his murderer. In
the end this was their punishment. After they had been pincht with hot burning
pincers, their breasts were opened, and their hearts suddenly pulled out, the
which were showed unto them. Conformity of ancient merueills with Modern.
lib. 1. An other thief in our time called VILLEVINEVF, of the Cou^ty of
Tonerre, had with him a servant which served him for a murderer and a Laquay.
Al three were taken in the end and punished at Paris, the Laquay was whipped, the
murderer burnt alive and the master broken upon the wheel. In the same
book. A certain Hermit living in a mountain of Suisserland, where for
certain years he had lived austerly, and with reputation of holiness among
them of the Country came one day to Lucerne, and lodged with a certain widow,
whom he approached nere unto, either to deprive her of her honor, or to take
her purse: she crying out, a servant of hers came, whom the Hermit slew
presently with a Dagger. The widow running speedily out of the house, cried out
for help. A countryman comes in to succor her, and is slain as her servant
was: then a Bourges of the Town, and after him his servant. Some others
running thither, (but better advised by the example of the former,) surprised
this thief, who falling to the ground, spoke no other words, but Ictz have ichs
offder teaschen* that is to say: Now I have past the game.

A Weauer borne at Basil, given to riot and gourmandise, and not able by reason
of his small means to continue this wicked course of life, he practiced a
notable villainy. Remaining in the territories of Soleure, he resolved to go
visit a Kinsman of his at Basil, called ANDREW AGER a Binder of books, a very
honestman, who had been Tutor, and as it were a Father to this lewd young man
called PAVL, who determined to kill his Kinsman and Tutor, and to spoil his
house. The 15. of February 1563. he came early in the morning and knocked at
his Kinsmans door: the maid (who knew him well, and suspected no harm)
opened him the door. He enters into ANDREVVS Chamber, who was yet in bed,
being an aged and a sickly man. After the manner of the country, ANDREW asked
him courteously the cause of his voyage, and how his wife and children did. For
answer, this Thief takes up a Binders Hammer, and kills the good old man. The
servant which had opened the door, being an honest young maid, called SARA
FALCKISE, allied to ANDREW, and which governed his house, who the day before
had been promised in Carriage, and made sure to JOHN HOSPINIAN, a professor in
Philosophy at Basil. She running up at the noise, was beaten down by the
thief with the same hammers, and then he cut her throat with a knife which
booke-binders do commonly use. Then he opens the Chests, and finds some
goblets of silver, with little coin the which he carries away. To hide this
horrible fact, he setts fire of the Stoue, hoping that the house being fired,
both these bodies should be consumed to ashes. But the fire being soon
quenched by the neighbors, they found these two bodies thus miserably
murdered. This wicked wretch was so tormented with the revenging furies, and
pricked with remorse of Conscience, as he could not fly away that day, but was
taken in a village nere unto Basil, and brought back unto the City, where by
reason of his theft, murder and burning the house, he was executed alive by
three punishments, by the wheel, the gibet, and by fire, the last day of the
same month. THOMAS RODOLPHE of Schafouse, one of those who under the name of
students give themselves more liberty then they ought, having descouered that
JOHN SCHVANFELDER and his Wife, (in whose house he had formerly frequented)
were gone to Francfort, he went presently to Sprendeling a nere village,
whereas the above named remained, and gives them to understand that they were
returning and near at hand, with good company with them, and that he was
come before to make ready dinner. He therefore sent the servant to fetch some
fish* and then he began to entreat the Daughter of the house called AMELIE,
to draw him some wine. She saying that they must stay for her Fathers coming
he grows into choler, and demands a knife to pill an aple, with this knife
he kills a young Child of four years old, grand-chid to JOHN SCHVANFELDER, and
then AMELY, who would have defended her Nephew. He then flies away, and the
Peasants run after him, overtake him, and bring him to the Castle of
Ofenbach, where he confesses the fact. But one night following, by an
extraordinary means, he vnchaines himself, getts out of a Dongeon, and enters
cunningly into the Earls Chamber, being then absent: there he remains hidden
two days, pickes a Cofer, and takes out a bag with five hundred florins of the
Rhine, and castes it upon the bank of the River of Min, which runs along
that Castle, then he slides down by a window that was grated, with the
help of the roape of a boat which he found tied there: and so flies to
Francfort, where being descouered by the Countrymen unto the Magistrate, the
two and twenty of February 1570. he was pincht and broken upon the wheel.

Not long since there were two English men lodged together, nere to Saint
Marceaux gate at Paris: whereof the one had good stoore of Crowns and a great
Chain of gold, with some other rich Jewels which he commonly carried about
him. His Companion intending to be Master of these Jewels, drew him out to
walk toward Bois de Vincennes, and being in the vygnes, he fell upon him,
and cut the windpipe and the mouth of the stomach giving him cer^aine stabbes
with his dagger, and thinking that he had slain him, he left him in a manner
naked. Having committed this treacherous Act, he returned presently to the
City. He that was wounded, making show to have been dead, rises up
afterward, and creeps to peasants house, who for pity caused him to be dressed.
He was carried to Paris, where soon after one of his Companions sent for me to
have him in cure: and I found that he had the Artere in the wind pipe and the
mouth of the stomach (which is the passage for meat and drink) quite cut. I
did suddenly stitch up the wound taking the Artere, and drawing the two
extremites as nere as I could possibly one unto an other, but not of the mouth
of the stomach, for that it was retired toward the stomach, then I applied
remedies unto his wound, with astringents and fit Ligatures. As soon as ever
he was thus dressed, he began to speak, and to name him that had committed this
excess. The murderer was taken soon after in the Suburbs of Saint Marceau,
and was found seized of the patients goods whereupon he was put in prison, and
the fact verified after the patients death, the which was the fourth day after
his wounding. The murderer was broken soon after and laid upon a wheel
near unto Saint Catherine du Valdes Escholiers. M. AMB. PARE. lib. 9. Chap. 31.

In the first troubles a gentleman having joined with the troops that did
beseege Moulins in Bourbonois, was so surprised with sickness, as he could
hardly follow the Company which dislodged; and being lodged at a Bakers,
called JOHN MON, who seemed to be his friend and servant, he had such a
confidence in him, as he had rather stay behind then go any farther,
having made his host acquainted with his money, who promised to keep it safe
for him (contrary to the common course of such men) with an other younger
Brother of his of thirteen or fourteen years of age. But they wretch kept
no promise with them, but contrariwise as soon as night was come, he led them
out of the house unto the ditch, where he did but half kill them so as they
remained there Languishing a wholedaie, and could neither live nor die: Yet no
man had compassion of them: But GOD took revenge a while after: for it
happened, that this murderer being in guard, a Companion of his shot him by
chance through the arm, whereof he languished for three months, and then
died mad. History of France under CHARLES the ninth.

The City of Bourges having been yielded by the Seignieur of Iuoy during the
first troubles, those which had held it before were forbidden to talk within
the City nor without, norto meet above two together. Among those which made
a pastime, under color of this decree to murder such as they met talking
together, there was one called GARGET, Captain of the Quarter of Bourbonne,
who made a practice of it. Who falling soon after into a burning fever, did
run up and down the street, blaspheming the name of GOD, calling upon the
Diuill, and saying unto all, that if any one would go with him into hell, he
would pay his charges, and so he died mad, whereat his Companions did but
laugh. In the same History.

PETER MARTIN, a rider in the Kings stable, holding the post in a place called
Liege, toward Poitou, a man without reproach, upon a simple accusation, without
any other form of process, was condemned by a great Nobleman, during the
fury of the first troubles to be drowned. This Nobleman commanded a faulconer
of his presently to execute the sentence, upon pain to be drowned himself if
he did it not. The which was done. But GOD stayed not long to take revenge: for
three days after, this Faulconer and a Laquay, being fallen out for the
spoils of this man, they slew one another. The which being reported unto the
Lord, (a most unjust Judge) it forced him to have some remorse, and to say
openly, that he would it had cost him five hundred Crowns, so as this poor
Rider had not been drowned. But it was a small esteem he made of an innocent
man's life. In the same History lib. 7.

Some troops of Peasants of Couleurs, Cerisiers, and other places in
Champagne, having committed many murders and spoils in diverse places, were
defeated here and there, and did in a manner all perish of violent deaths,
during the first troubles. I will note here two notable particularities
concerning two of those troops. The one seeking to set fire to a house, fell
down stark dead, being casually shot with a Harguebuse by one of his
companions. The other dragging a poor man and his wife to a post to have them
shot, received a shot with a Harguebuze, which deprived him of his life,
and his prisoners escaped by that means. In the same Book. It has been
observed in the last peace, that of a thousand murderers which have remained
unpunished in regard of man, there are not ten which have not felt the
revenging hand of GOD, and have not made most wretched ends.

Strange, horrible, and very pitiful Accidents.
IN our time, a Countryman of Beause, who was reasonably well to live, binding
up sheaues in the field, sent his Son home to fetch him somewhat, with whom
(being returned) he was so angry (because he had stayed longer then he would
have had him) that he flung a great clod of earth at his head, wherewith the
boy fell down dead to the ground. The Father seeing it, covered him with
sheaues, and in great despair got him home to his house, where his wife was
bathing her self, and giving suck to a little child, whereof she was newly
delivered: and went into his barn and hanged himself. Which being reported to
the poor woman, by one that by chance had been in the Barn and seen him,
with the fear she was in, and have that she made to run thither, she let her
child fall into the bath, where it was drowned. Presently thereupon, the poor
woman almost beside her self with the woeful spectacle which she had seen,
finding at her return the infant drowned, entered likewise into such despair,
that she went back to the Barn, and there shutting the door to her, hung her
self by her husband. What strange and horrible effects of the choler of an
ill advised Father? and how great cause have Fathers, Mothers, and Children, to
recommend themselves humbly and incessantly to GOD. Conformity of ancient
meruailes with modern.

In the year 1578. a woman in the town of Bochne, bathing her little child,
heard a pretty big boy of hers cry very pitifully without doors. Whereupon
she ran out in all have, and found him wounded to the death with a knife that
he had in his hand, whereon by mischance he was fallen. The Mother exceeding
heau^e, returned to the little one in the Bathe, and found it drowned.
Therewith the husband came in, and being in a mighty rage at such a spectacle,
fell on his wife and killed her with beating. Seeing those three so strangely
dead, urged by his conscience, and with compassion of such a sight, he sought
about for a cord, wherewith he strangled himself. ANDREW DVDITIVS in the
Treatise of Comets.

In the Marquisate of Brandebourg, a certain Mother transported with a
wonderful fury, killed her husband and two of her Children, and then having
tied great stones about their necks, took them and cast them all three into
the bottom of the River Odera* Master ANDREW HONDORFF in his Theater of
Examples.

The year 1536. in a village of Silesia, named Kukendorff, another woman
killed three of her Children, in the absence of her husband, and then killed
her self. In the same Theater.

The year 1540. in a Village by Anneberg, a certain Countryman killed and
flayed a Calfe, in the presence of some little Children he had. And being gone
abroad not long after about business, and his wife forth of doors, the
children which were left at home, with a little one lying in the Cradle, went
and committed an horrible Act. They took a Knife, and cut the little ones
throat: singing, We will kill the Calfe. But seeing the blood, and the little
one dead, they began to be affrayde, and went and hid them in the Furnace of
the Stoue. The Mother suspecting nothing, came home, and before she went into
the Stoue, kindled a great armefull of Hemp shailes, and threw them into the
Furnaces then she went into the Stoue, and seeing her little one killed and
lie bathing in his blood, she ran out into the street, crying for help.
The neighbors came to her, and asked her what she ayled: she carried them into
the Stoue, and showed them the murder. As they were b^sie looking on the
child, the mother asked for the rest. They were called and sought for up and
down: at length with the noise which the last made giving up the Ghost, they
were found smothered in the Furnace. One of the neighbors had heard them sing,
We will kill the Calfe. JOB. FINCEL. in the 2. Book of the Meruailes of his
time.

The twentieth day of November 1551. in a Village of Hesse, named Weidenhausen,
a woman strangely desperate, having shut all the doors of her house, took a
sharp Axe, and ran after her eldest Son, being some eight years of age. He
perceiving his Mothers bad mind, ran away into the Cellar, and hid himself
behind a barrel. She lighted a Candle, and sought him up and down in every
corner of the Cellar. The Boy seeing her come, held up both his hands, and
with tears be^ought her to pardon him. But she neither regarding his tears
nor prayers, cloue his head in two, and then cut his arms in pieces. That
done, she went out of the Cellar, and ran after a Daughter she had of five
years old, whom she cloue down to the middle. Behind the door stood a
pretty ladde of three years old, whom this fury caught by the hair of the
head, and dragged him into a little yard, where she cut his throat. There lay
an Infant of six months, crying in the Cradle, him she drew from his rest,
and hurled him into the yard, and at the last chopped off his head. Which
done, and no body left, she stabbed her-selfe with a Knife into the throat:
wherewith not-with-standing she died not presently. The neighbors that too
late had heard the Children cry, after they had knocked a good while at the
door, in the end brake it open, and finding that pitious spectacle, ran to
the mother, who come to her self, and remaining a pretty while after alive,
declared all that had past, and with great acknowledgment of her sins, and
hope of GODS mercy, yielded up the Ghost. JOB. FINCEL in the 2. book. Master
ANDREW HONDORF in his Theater.

The year 1550. in a certain village of the country of Alsace, one ADAM
STECKMAN a laboring man, that got his living by dressing of Vines, having
received wages of a master of his that had set him on work, went to the
Tavern and lost his money at Cards. Being exceedingly griued, and thereupon
taken with a pain in his head, he fell into desperation. Easter come, his
wife, constrained by necessity, took her eldest son with her, and went to
work in the Vines: desiring her husband to look to the house and children til
she came again. Being alone, he fell into such thoughts, that overcome with
despair by reason of his poverty, he determined to make himself away.
Whereupon he took an Hammer and sought up and down for a place where he might
knock in a nail to fasten a cord on, and hang himself. But finding none to
his mind, a girl he had of seven years old, came unto him and asked him what
he sought: without answering her, he went into the Stoue, where a little boy
som-what younger followed him and asked him for bread: bring me a knife, said
he, and I will give thee some. The girl ran and fet him one: wherewith he cut
both their throats, and another little ones in the cradle. The mother at her
return seeing that pitious spectacle, swouned, and died with grief. The
murderer was apprehended, and executed as he deserved. The same.

In the year 1555. a countryman hard by Aldendor^ in Hesse, asking his wife
for his dinner, and she otherways busied, not making such have as he would
have had her, the wretch went and cut off one of the thighs of a little child
he had lying in the Cradle, and carried it to the Mother, saying: Hold thee,
take this giggot, and go roast it. GASPAR GOLET VVRM, in the Treatise of
Meruailes.

The same year, a woman great with child, in the Diocese of the County of
Isenberg, gently entreated her husband to inuit certain women to dinner, who^
she meant to have at her labor. He surprised with strange fury, spurned and
kicked her with his feet, then stabbed her in diverse places with his dagger,
and killed her together with her fruit. The same. It is 40* years ago, or
thereabout, that a certain Italian named BARTHOLMEVV, being overthrown in a
certain suit he had at Venice, which concerned his whole estate, so much
forgot the power and mercy of GOD, that he concluded with himself, that his
three daughters when they came to age, instead of being honorably married, were
of necessity to be prostituted. To prevent the which he found no other mean
(in his shop of whom he then took counsel, and that had put such a conclusion
in his head) then to cut their throats while they were young: which he executed
one night, having to that end borrowed a Barbers Rasor, the evening before. The
next day, every one ran to see that pitious spectacle, and found that one of
his daughters had her hand almost half cut off, wherewith it is to be presumed
she had thought to have resisted the fathers rage. The report went afterward
that this wretch had thrown himself down headlong from the top of a certain
mountain, toward the County of Tirol, whither he was fled. In the treatise of
the^ conformity of ancient meruailes with modern. A Switzer having taken his
wife in adultery, and pardoned her for the time, a little while after bethought
himself, and reuoking that pardon, killed her: alleging he could not endure a
woman that had played him such a pranke. Afterward, he dispatched his children
likewise, saying, he would not have children, that should be called the
children of a whore. And it is said, that when he had murdered his wife and
children, he also murdered himself, falling down headlong from the top of a
high Tower, having first written in a paper, which he pinned about him, the
fact he had committed, and the reasons which had induced him thereunto, and
that knowing he should die for the said fact, he chose rather to execute
himself, then to suffer a shamfull death. In the same treatise. A Millanois
about the year 1560* understanding in France that his wife played false with
him, and (as it is to be supposed) being thereof thoroughly informed, took post
horse, and rode home to Milan. where alighting, he went not in, but sent for
his wife to the door, who coming to him, and seeming to be very joyful of his
return, he shot her through with his Pistol, which done, he suddenly mounted
again on his horse, and saved himself. In the same treatise. About the same
time, or a little after, a woman of Switzerland having received another into
her bed in steed of her husband, and perceiving afterward that she had been
deceived, and that it was not her husband that had line with her, was so
overcome with anger and grief, that she went and drowned her self. In the
same.

IOVIAN PONTANVS recounts, that an Italian Lord having killed one whom he
suspected with his wife, was so straightly besieged by his brother, that out of
all hope to escape, he killed her first, and his children after, and then threw
himself down headlong from the highest tower of his Castle. Whereupon the
brother of him that was killed, most cruelly murdered all such as he could
meet withal, and knew to be any way of kin to that Italian Lord. In the same
Treatise.

A young Spanish Maid, having abandoned her self to a Gentleman, upon promise
of marriage, which he had made her, though she were but meanly descended,
understanding that he was married to another, conceived such hatred against
him, that she conspired his death by all the means possible she could devise.
And at last used this same: she persuaded him by her flattering letters to
come again and see her. The time appointed, she attended him, having made all
things ready, with the aid of an old woman confederat with her, for to
entreat him as her wicked mind, provoked with an extreme desire of revenge,
counseled her unto. Wherefore the better to accomplish her design, although at
first she had received him with tears and complaints, yet seeming at length to
be satisfied with reasons that he alleged, and to be som-what appeased, she
permitted him to use the same priuitie with her as before. Whereupon the
Gentleman got him to bed, and she with him, staying but till he was a sleep
for to execute her furious enterprise: which she performed, and not contented
with many mortal wounds that she had given him (for awaking at the first, he
found himself so pestered with a cord, which the old woman drew over him,
that he was not able to stir either hand or foot) she used diverse cruelties
against the dead body, before the fury of her rage could be extinguished. And
for this strange murder she was beheaded, having voluntarily accused her
self. In the same Treatise.

The Wife of GEORGE WEDERING of Halberstad, of the age of 24. years, modest
and virtuous, being brought in bed the 15. of November 1557. of a Daughter
baptized the next day, was not found in her bed. The servant hearing the Child
cry, came to the bed, thinking to find her Misters, and to awake her. Being
amazed at her absence, she runs to her Master, who being wonderfully
perplexed, takes the Child in his arms, and seeks the Mother in every corner
of the house. The streets were covered with snow, so as there was no show
that she had past out of the house. In the end the husband and the servant with
others, went into the seller, but they here some trampling in the well which was
near unto it. The husband much perplexed calls to his neighbors, and tells
them his misery, whereupon they heard one in a gardine which knocked at the
door, and having opened it, they see the poor woman almost dead with cold,
complaining that she had been long in the well, as her apparel did witness.
Being demanded how she came into this well being closse, and which had but a
very little entrance, she could give no reason, neither was there any one
that could conceive how it came. Being afterward very sick for some days
she began to recover her health, so as the 24. of December she did rise,
swadled her Child and set her down to dinner. The maid going into the Celler
to draw beer, she goes to bed and falls a sleep. The servant being returned
finds her mistress a sleep, and the Cradle empty. Being amazed she runs
to the well, coming unto her mind, and sees the Infant upon the water, the
which was taken out by two of the Senators of the Town, in the presence of
CONRADE de la PERCH, Minister of the Church. The Mother slept soundly. After
they had prayed at her beds feet, she opened her eyes, and began to say unto
the assistants, why have you awaked me? I did enjoy an unspeakable content. I
have seen my the Savior, and I have heard the Angels, falling a sleep
again, after four hours she did awake, remembers her child and calls for it,
and finding it not, she afflicts and torments her self after a pitiful
manner. A certain man named JOHN GVY, Son to EME GVY a Capper in the towe of
Chastillon upon Lion, had bin very disordred all his life, caused for the most
part by the indulgence of his parents. It happened one Sater day in September
1565. that the Son was debauched according to this custom, and returned home
very late, whereat the Father was much displeased, saying, that seeing he
continued this wicked course, he should be in the end constrained to chase him
out of his company. To whom the Son (being full of pride,) answered
presomptuously, that he was ready to depart, even presently, so as they would
give him his clothes: upon this dispute the Father went to bed, being forced
to threaten his Son, if he would not be silent. In the end, seeing that he
prevailed not, and not able any longer to bear the proud replies of his
Son, he rise out of his bed in chollor to punnish his vndutifullnesse: who
seeing his Father approach in choler to beat him, he suddenly laid his hand
upon his sword, and rebelling against his Father, thrust him through the Body.
whereupon he fell suddenly to the ground, crying out with a loud voice that
he was dead. The neighbors amazed at this cry, came in presently, and soon
after the Justice: who found the old man laid all along ready to give up the
Ghost, dying presently after. The bloody sword was also found by his Son,
who warmed himself, to whom the Father (moved with compassion, and
forgetting the cruelty he had used against him,) had often said. Son save
thy self. I pardon thee my death: the Mother had also given him the like
council to escape: but GOD by his power did so stay him, as he had no power
to fly. Being carried to prison and examined, at the first he covered his
parricyde, accusing his Father that he had slain himself. But his excuses
being found frivolous, he was condemned to have his right hand cut off, then
to be pinched with hot pincers, and in the end hanged by the feet upon a
gibet, and strangled with a stone of six score pound which should be hanged
at his neck. A wicked counterfeit being prisoner with him, advised him to
appeal unto Paris. But having freely confessed the Parricide, he revoked his
appeal and was executed. The History of our times.

Of the Heart of man. Diverse Histories thereof in our time.
Having perced an Impostume grown of a long time upon the seventh turning
joint, where through the venom of his corruption, it had made a great ouerture,
and gnawne the innermost membrane of the heart* those which were present beheld
one part of the heart which I did show them A. BENIVENIVS, in his book de
abditis, causis Chap. 42.

Two Brethren gentlemen falling out at tables, the one of them gave the other
a wound with his knife, just on the seege of the heart: the hurt gentleman
bleeding exceedingly, was carried and laid on a bed: whereas all signs of
death appeered. Being sent for I applied that to the heart which I thought ^it
to strengthen it. The patient having been as it were at deaths door until
midnight, began to come to himself; and having used all the means possible
I could devise for his preservation, at length I saw him cured: whereby I
knew the heart had not been perished, as at the first I doubted, but the
filme or Capsula thereof (called PERICALDION by the Greeks) was lightly
tainted. The same Author Chap. 65.

We have seen ANTHONY AL^IAT hurt, and having his Pericordian untouched. True
it is that he did sigh very much and loud. The internal parts being hurt,
bring death four ways; either through necessity of their function and office,
as the Lunges: or by reason of the excellency of their nature, as the Heart: or
through much loss of blood as the Liver, the great arteries, and veins: or
through the malignity of Symptoms and accidents, as the neruie parts, the
ventricle, and bladder. Although some parts be incurable, yet are they not
mortal of absolute necessity: otherwise, death would ensue upon the incurable
hurts of boanes, gristles, and lygaments. The Pericordion then is not mortal
of it self* but because it is impossible to attain it, without offending many
other noble parts. CARDAN in his Commentary on the Aphorisms of Hipocrates,
book. 6. apb. 18.

Anatomizing a Scholar of mine, dead in the University of Rome, I found that
this young man had no Pericardion: by means whereof in his lifetime he
swounded very often, and seemed as one dead* through which defect at length he
died. COLVMBVS, book 15. of his Anatomy.

A certain Thief, being taken down from the gallows, where he had been
hanged, and not quite strangled, was carefully looked unto and recovered. But
like an ungracious wretch as he was, returning to his old trade again, he was
apprehended and thoroughly hanged. Whereupon we would needs Anatomize him, and
we found that his heart was all heary. Which is likewise reported among the
Grecians of Aristomenes, of Hermogenes the Rhetorician, of Leonydas, of
Lysander, and others, namely of a dog that ALEXANDER the great had. This hair
denotes not only promptitude of Courage, and perverse obstinacy: but many
times valor contemning all danger. BENIVENIVS in Chap. 83. de Abditis causis.
Upon a certain time making the Anatomy of a man at Ferrara, we found his
heart clean covered over with hair, and indeed he had been all his life
time a desperate ruffian, and a notable thief. AMATVS the Portingale, in
Centur. 6 Cur. 65.

Being at Venice and present at the execution of a very notorious thief, the
hangman that quartered his body, found his heart marvelous hairye. M. A.
Muret book. 12. of his diverse readings, Chap. 10. I have see^e the sep^um,
that distinguishes the ventrycles of the heart, to be a gristle in some men's
Bodies: in others the left ventricle wanting, or so little as it could hardly
be discerned. Columb. book. 15. of his Anatomy. I found in two men's bodies
that I opened, a boane in the roots of the great artery, and of the arteryall
vain. CORN. GEMMA in the 2. book of his Cyclognomia, page 75. In another I
found a little boane between the gristly circles of the heart, and the chief
artery and arteriall vein, like to the boane which is commonly found in the
heart of a stagge. CORN. GEMMA in the 1. book Chap. 6. of his Cosmocritif.

Doctor MELANCHTHON in his first book of the Soul, testifies of CASIMIR
Marquise of Brandebourg, a Prince greatly afflicted in his life time with
sundry griefs, and consumed with long watchings, that being opened after his
decease, the humor enclosed in the fylme of the heart was ^ound quite dried up,
and the heart so scorched that it was like a pear burnt in the fire. TH.
JORDAN. in the 1. book of signs of the plague, Chap. 16.

Not long since a Roman gentleman died, after he had languished along time.
Being opened, no heart appeared, neither was there any part of it but the fylme
left: the unmeasurable heat of his long sickness having wholly consumed it.
BERN. IELASIVS in the 28. Chap. of the 5. book, of the nature of things.

A young Prince, being sickly, and very much troubled with a pain at the
heart, assembled a great many Physicians together for to consult of his
dissease. Among others there was a young practitioner, who declared how he had
read in certain notes, that the use of garlic every morning expells a kind
of worm that feeds upon the heart. But both the remedy and the young man that
propounded it were despised. Not long after this Prince died, and his body was
opened by the commandment of his Father, for to see the cause of his sickness
and death. The dissection made, they found a white worm, having a sharp bill
of horn like a p^llets, gnawing the heart. The Physicians took it alive and
laid it on a table, in a circle made of the juice of garlic. The worm began
to writh and wriggle every way, still eschuing the juice that compassed it
about. Finally surmounted by the strength and savor of the garlic, it died
within the circle: to the astonishment of those that had despised so easy a
remedy. I. HEBANSTEIF in his treatise of the plague.

It is not long ago that in the great Duke of Tuscans Court, a certain
Florentine being assistant at the merry conceits of a pleasant iester, was
suddenly seized with unexpected death: whereat the company and his friends
being much abashed, for their better satisfaction, after he was known to be
stark dead, they had him opened: and there was no cause discerned of such a
death but only a live worm, which the A^atomists found in the capsula or filme
of the heart. P. SPHARER Physician: in his Observations.

A certain woman having voyded for the space of many da^es together a thick
and purulent urine, at length died, and being opened, was found interressed in
the heart with certain impostumes and two stones. I. HOVLIER, Comment 1. on
the 6. book sect. 2. aphoris. 4. of HIPPOCRAT. and the Comment. on the 75.
aph. of the 4. book. The Emperor MAXIMILIAN the second had three little
stones found in his heart of the bigness of a pease, but not of equal quantity
and weight. In his life time he was very much afflicted with a panting of the
heart. I. WIER in the 4. book Chap. 16. of the impostures of evil spirits. In
the heart of JEROME SCHEIBER that died at Paris in the year 1547. and was
opened in the presence of SYLVIVS, HOVLIER and FERNEL, professors in Physic,
there was found an hard, blackish round stone as big as a nutmeg and weyghing
Certain drammes, to the great wonder of all men. AER MVRGEL Physician.

In diverse men's hearts there are found Corns or hard things, like unto stoanes
of the bigness of a nut: in others fat in the ventricles, or very thick
Carnosities, sometimes of two pound weight: or other substance like the
marrowe of sodden beef. Also tumors and impostumes of the bigness of an hens
egg, which in some have caused co^ruption of the membrane of the heart, in
others wasting of the heart it self, in others mattory and long congealed
ulcers. The History of them are described by the Doctors of Physic.
BENIVENIVS, IACOT, VESALIVS, ERASTVS, COLVMBVS, FERNELIVS, HOVLIER, IOVBERT,
and others in their observations, Commentaries, and disputations. Which it
shall suffice to have touched in a word.

Touching the hurts of the heart, FERNELIVS in the fi^t book of his
Panthologia, Chap. 12. holds that if they be not deep, and penetrated far
into the ventricles of the heart, the person hurt dies not presently. To which
effect JOHN SCHENCK, of Grafenberg, Doctor of Physic at Fribourg recounts in
the 2. book of his Physickall Observations, Observe 209. that he had heard a
learned Physician tell, how a certain scholar studying at Ingolstad, beaing
stabbed with a poygnard into the heart, the two ventricles whereof were found
pierced through and through, ran a good way bleeding, and lived a full hour
after, speaking and commending himself to GOD.

I protest I have seen a gentleman at Thurin, which fought with another, that
gave him a thrust under the left pappe penetrating even into the substance of
the heart, and yet for all that he struck diverse blows at his enemy that ran
away from him, pursuing him the length of two hundred pace, and then fell down
dead to the ground. After which I opened him, and found a wound in the very
substance of the heart, so big, that one might have laid his finger in it,
and a great quantity of blood fallen upon the Diaphragma. AMER. PARE in the 9.
Book, Chap. 32.

Of Comets.
IN this Section I will briefly represent the Comets seen in Europe for these
hundred years or thereabouts, adding that which GARCEVS in his Meteorologie,
LICHOSTENES and others have observed upon this point. In the year 1500. in the
month of April, a Comet appeared in the North, under the sign of Capricorn.
The same year Prince CHARLES was borne, afterward Emperor, the 5. of that
name: and SOLOMON Sultan of the Turks. Soon after followed the spoil, which
the Tartares made in Polonia, the famine in Swabe; a plague throughout all
Germany; the taking of Naples by the French; A rising of the peasants in the
Bishop rike of Spire, against the Bishop and the Canons: the taking of Modon
and some other places in Morea by the Turks: ISMAEL Sophie expelled out of the
kingdom of Persia by the Turks, whereof they ceazed. The second year after
the plague, made a horrible spoil, almost throughout all the whole world, the
which had for forerunners, figures of crosses falling out of the air upon
men's clothes. A war followed in Bauaria two years after this plague. after
the which many great men, both spiritual and temporal died. The Emperor
MAXIMILIAN the 1. vanquished the Guelders; and then the Hongariens, whom he
reduced under his obedience. In the year 1506. a Comet appeared in August
toward the North, covering the signs of Leo and Virgo, having near unto the
Chariot a thick and shining tail, stretched out betwixt the wheels of this
Chariot, for which cause some Astronomers called it the Peacocks tail. In
September after, died PHILIP the 1. king of Spain, father to CHARLES and
FERDINAND Emperors. The same year the Turks were defeated in battle by the
Persians, and on the other side, they took Modon in Morea from the Christians,
and defeated their fleet. Then followed a civil war betwixt BAJAZET and his
son SELIM: and FRANCIS SPORCE Duke of Milan, was taken in Italy by the
French. As for that which happened in the following years, the History of our
time does show it, as well in respect of wars, Inundations, death of famous
men, and merueilous alterations in Europe, the causes whereof we will attribute
to the just judgments of GOD, punishing the sins of the world: we say only
that Comets seem oftentimes to be forerunners and Trumpets of the wonderful
judgments of the Lord, as a French Poet speaking of a Comet seen in the year
1577. said in the 2. day of his week.

O frantic France! why do not thou make use,
Of the strange signs, whereby the Heavens induce
Thee to repentance? can thou teare-lesse gaze,
Even night by night on that prodigious blaze,
That hairy Comet, that long streaming Star,
Which threatens Earth, with Famine, Plague, and War:
(The Almighties Trident, and three forked fire,
Wherewith he strikes us in his greatest ire?)
But let us consider the other Comets, according to the order of the years. In
November 1523. there was seen a Comet, and soon after, the heavens seemed all
on fire, casting forth infinite flames of lightning upon the earth, the which
did tremble: afterward there happened strange Inundations of water in the realm
of Naples. Soon after followed the taking and captivity of Francis 1. King of
France: Germany was troubled with horrible seditions. LEWIS King of Hungary
was slain in battle against the Turks. There were wonderful stirs
throughout all Europe, and Rome was taken and spoiled by the imperial Army.
In the same year of the taking and sack of Rome, which was 1527. there was
seen another more fearful Comet then the precedent: there followed after it
the great spoils which the Turks made in Hungary: a famine in Swabe,
Lombardie, and at Venice: war in Zuitzerland: the siege of Vienna in Austria:
the Sweat* in England: the ouer-flowing of the Sea in Holland and Zeland, where
it drowned a great Country, and an Earthquake in Portugal* which continued
eight days.

In the year 1531. from the 6. of August unto the 3. of September, there
appeared a Comet, marching slowly by the signs of Cancer, Leo, Virgo, and
Libra, the which was followed by many troubles and great changes in Germany, in
Denmark and elsewhere: and another Comet was seen the year following
greater then it. Soon after in the year 1533. appeared an other Comet in the
end of July. Historians write the wonderful changes which followed it. Those
of the year 1538. 1556. 1558. and in the following years unto this age, ^aue
bin wonderful, having Ecclipses of the Sun most commonly going before them.
And as for that which has happened since in Europe, no man is ignorant
thereof, if he be not exceeding ignorant. The most fearful of all the Comets
in our time, was that in the year 1527* for the sight of it struck such a
terror into many, as some died, others fell sick. It was seen of many
thousands of people, seeming very long and of a bloody color. On the top
thereof was seen the representation of a crooked arm holding a great sword in
his hand, as if he would strike. At the point of this sword were three stars*
but that which touched the point directly, was more clear and shining then the
rest. On either side of the beams of this Comet were seen many battle-axes,
daggers, bloody swords, among the which they did mark a great number of men's
heads cut off, having their beards and hair horribly curled. And have we not
seen for the space of 3^. years, throughout all Europe, the terrible effects
upon the earth of this presage in Heaven. But we may not forget the new star,
as great as the day star, the which appeared among the fixed Stars, near
unto Cassiopeia the 9. of November 1572. having the form of a Lozenge.
CORNELIUS GEMMA and other learned Astronomers, which have written Books
thereof, say that it continued still in one place for the space of three
weeks, and they hold that it resembled the star the which appeared to the
Wisemen coming to adore JESUS CHRIST in Bethlehem, presently after his birth.
It continued in the firmament 9. months or there abouts. Others say that it
lasted until the beginning of March 1574. fading by little and little. GEMMA
speaks wonders in the 2. Book of the Cosmocritique. Chap. 3. But for that he
does discourse and dispute thereof at large, it shall suffice us to note this
wonder, the which he esteems merueilous (as in deed it was) among all the
extraordinary wonders of Heaven, since the nativity of our Savior.

A violent Compassion.
HVSSAN AGA one of SVLTAN SOLIMANS Chamberlins, sent by his Master to treat a
Peace, with the Persian, according to the commision that was given him, he
seized upon BAJAZET son to SOLIMAN, being prisoner in Persia, and by the
fathers commandment strangled him with a bow-string. His four sons past the
same way. Flying out of Amasia he had left one newely borne, the which SOLIMAN
had caused to be carried to Prusse in Bithinia, where it was brought up. But
news being come, that BAJAZET was dispatched, SOLIMAN sent a grome of his
Chamber (in whom he trusted much,) to Prusse, to put this little Infant to
death. This Eunuch or Grome of his Chamber, being a man of a mild disposition,
had carried with him one of the Vshers of the Chamber (a man fit to execute all
desperate and bloody Commissions) to use him for the strangling of BAIAZETS
little son. He enters into the Chamber, and putting the cord about the
childs neck to strangle him, the Infant began to smile on him, and rising up,
stretches forth his little arms to embrace him, striving to kiss him. This
countenance did so move the heart of this Barbarian, as not able to pass any
further, he fell down dead in a swone.

The Eunuch amazed at his long stay, goes up, and offering to enter, he found
the Usher lying all along at the Chamber door, but not daring to fail in his
Commission, he strangled this poor Infant with his own hands. Which shows
that the Grandfather SOLIMAN had not spared his little grandchild a while,
for any pity that he had; but delayed it according to the opinion of the
Turks, who say that GOD is the author of all things that are done, so as the
event be to their liking. And therefore so long as BAIAZETS affairs were in
any doubt or suspense* SOLIMAN would not have the little Infant touched: least
that if he did prosper, they would say, that SOLIMAN had resisted the will of
GOD. But after the death of BAJAZET (held as it were condemned by a divine
decree, seeing had been disapointed of his disseignes, and then rooted out)
SOLIMAN resolved that the child was no longer to be kept. The Seignior of
Busbeque in the discourse of his voyages into Turkey. Epist. 4.

Conceptions and Deliueries before they were of age.
FERRAND of S. Seuerin, the worthy Prince of Salerne, last deceassed, has told
me in the Town of Alais, where he was married; that for certain, in his
Country of Salerne, a young Maid had borne a child, being but 9. years old,
the which lived, I have heard speak of an other at Paris, who was delivered of
a child at ten years of age. It is very credibly reported, that at Lectore a
Town in Gascony one had a child at 9. years of age. She is yet living, called
JOAN DE PEIRIE who was married to VIDAV BEGHE, being in his life time Receiver
of the Fines for the King of Navarre in that place: she miscarried of a Son
at the age of 9. years, then at 11. she had a Daughter which lived, and has
had children: at 14. she had a son called LAVRENCE, yet living: at 16. an
other also living, called PETER. Five years after, which was the 21. year of
her age she had a daughter, at this day Widow to an Apoticary: And then she
left being with child: although her husband lived: she was a little Woman nor
very corpulent, who in April 1577. was 44. years old. I have seen her and
talked with her fully of these matters. She told me among other things, that
after her first child, whereof she miscarried being but 9. years old, she had
always her courses very orderly. Having left bearing of children at the age of
21. years, she continued still with her husband the space of 19. years.
May. LAVRENCE IOVBERT lib; 2. of popular errors. ca. 2.

Monsieur CHAPPELAIN Physician to King FRANCIS the 1. protested unto me, that
he had seen a maid that at nine years of age was with child, went out her
time, and was delivered. SILVIVS in his Comentary of Women's terms. I. FOXIVS
has written the like of a maid of 9 years old.

Notable Continency.
LVCHIN VIVALDE a rich Gentleman of Genoa, young, goodly and of a good fashion,
fell extremely in in love with a poor young Maid, that was exceeding fair,
called IANIQVETTE, and tried all means possible to win her for his
Concubine. But it was in vain; this Virgins chastetye was invincible, who in
the end was married to a Bankerour, with whom although she lived by the
labor of her hands with pain, yet she carried her self virtuously, and had
many children in this loyal marriage. LVCHIN, who had married a fair and rich
Gentlewoman, by the advice of his kins-folkes, did not leave to love IANIQVETTE
still, and under pretext of favor and good will to the Bankerout, he labored
to corrupt his Wife, who was constant and immovable, to the great amazement of
LVCHIN, who admired this singular virtue; and in the end seemed to su^ceasse,
yet not all-togeather renouncing his pursuit and vicious hopes. It happened
(during this time) that the Bankerout was taken prisoner by Pirates, and carried
away, so as his wife at one instant seemed to be oppressed with extreme want
and despair. The dearth was great at Genoa, she was charged with four or
five small children, crying for bread which she wanted, and all humane means
to help them. Motherly charity drives her to a resolution of despair. She
goes directly to LVCHINS house, whom she met all alone: he being ravished
to see her, was more amazed at her countenance, then at the words she used.
Being prostrate at his feet, she said, she was come to yield her self unto
him, that she was ready to submit her self wholly unto his will, without any
resistance, as she had formerly done: beseeching him to relieve her poor
children oppressed with hunger. LVCHIN surprised by contrary motions, was in the
end vanquished by reason, and poslest with a good spirit, he said unto the
poor woman kneeling at his feet. I will now vanquish my self; I will
preserve your honor, which I have contrary to my duty so much sought to
spoil, and will assist you with a sincere affection, as mine own Sister* In
saying so, he led her to his Wife, reporting all that was, and recommending
poor IANIQVETTE unto her, who was relieved with all her family, and LVCHINS
continency was presently published, to the great amazement of all men. History
of Italy.

Of a Man's body hardened or become a stone.
IN the year, 1596. Monsieur BILLIOCTI, an honorable person of the Town of
Aix in Prouence, being at Lions, he reported to the Lord and Lady of Botheon,
(many others being present) and then set it down under his own hand, that
which follows. In the year 1583. a Citizen of Aix in Prouence, having a
place planted with Olives a Harguebuse shot from the Gates of the Town, he
resolved one day to cause a certain little rock to be broken which was in
this Orchard. Having well advanced the work, there was found in the midst of
the Rock, the body of a Man whole, of a small stature, incorporated within the
Rock, in such sort as the stone of the rock did fill up the void places that
were betwixt one member and another. And that which was yet more admirable,
although the bones were very much hardened, yet in scraping them with your
nail, they went to powder. But the marrow of them was so hard as no stone was
more, neither was it possible to pull any away. His Brain was so hardened and
stony, as with an iron (such as the strike fire with) the sparkles would fly,
as out of a flint. All these things of the brain and marrow remained in the
custody of Master BALTHAZER de la Barle dwelling at Aix, and first Audiencer
in the Chancery of Prouence. All this above written I have seen with mine eyes
said BILLIOCTI, being a good witness, having held in my hands the Brain of
this body covered with a skull of one side. The which I attest to be true. In
witness whereof I have signed this present, the 22. of November 1596.
BILLIOCTI. Memoires of Lions.

Guilty Consciences.
THere is no ramper to a good conscience, nor a crueller torment the^ an evil.
Examples of the one and the other are infinite. As for the terrors of
conscience caused by the remembrance of misdeedes, especially in regard of
innocent blood, behold some histories. A certain Host being a man of good
reckoning in a town of Germany had one only daughter, well qualified and of
good means. The servant of the house, an honest and a proper man, sued to have
her in marriage: but was denied, by reason he was a stranger and a poor
servant. Nevertheless because he had always showed himself faithful, the
goodman going to the Bath with his wife and daughter, left him the charge of
his house. During their absence, a Merchant came to this Inn, where the night
following he had his throat cut by this servant, who buried him in the stable,
and the next day sold his horse and apparel. This murderer remained unknown.
The Host returned from the bath, and thinking his servant had governed his
house as he ought, began to love and esteem him more then ever he had done
before. Not long after the Murderer bethought him of a wile. He counterfetted
letters, in certain of his kins folks names, which advertised him of his
fathers death, and therefore councelled him to come down into the Country.
Returning from market, he showed these letters, and 80 pieces of Gold to his
Master: adding that though his friends had willed him to buy a horse, he would
not be at such charge, but was minded to go a foot; and that he undertook
this journey very unwillingly as desiring nothing more then to continue still
with his said master To who^ having given the most part of his gold to keep,
with promise to return again, he went his way. Though it were somewhat
discommodious at that time for the Good Man to let him go, yet thinking those
letters to be true, he gave him leave. Within a while after he came again,
and committed a greater sum unto his Master, giving him to understand that
his father had left him very much, and played his part so well that the Host
gave him his daughter to wife, and finally he became heir to his father
in-lawe: and in time because he carried himself exceeding honestly, he was
elected into the number of the Magistrates of the town: wherein he so well
discharged his duty, that there was noe fault to be found in him. But his
Conscience so tormented him, that condemned by it, he chose rather to accuse
himself and di^, then to languish any longer. Being one day called by his
fellow Magistrates to sit upon a certain Murderer, he rose betimes in the
morning, and going to hear Mass, desired his Wife, with whom he had always
lived very quietly and lovingly, to make him ready some good bit or other,
alleging he was not very well, and was to be that day at an Araignment.
Being returned home from Mass, he was told that there was a Calves head
provided for his Breakfast, a meat which he loved maruaylous well. Desirous
to see it, he opened the Cupbord where it was: but seized with horror and
fear, he asked who had locked up a man's head into the Cupbord? his Wife
showed him that he was deceived: whereupon coming to himself, he made a
light breakfast, and going to the Council Chamber, sat down in his
accustomed place. When it came to him to deliver his opinion, having declared
that by the Laws the Murderer upon whom they sat was to loose his head, he
stood up, and said, that he had also deserved the like punishment. Where upon
he declared in order the circumstances of the murder by him perpetrated in
his late Masters house, and all that had insued thereof* earnestly desiring
them, that he might be beheaded. Some thinking that some melancholy humor
made him talk so, counseled him to go home, and get Physicians about him.
Whereunto he answered saying, I know you have a good opinion of me: and
indeed I am not culpable of any Crime punishable by man's Law, but this same.
Notwithstanding I instantly beseech you to take my head from my shoulders, and
so deliver me from the horrible torment I have endured and that justly, ever
since the time of my offense. Therewith the Judges caused the place to be
dug, which he had told of, where the bones of the murtherd Mercha^t
according to his saying were found whereupon he was lead of his own accord to
the place of execution, and beheaded with the other murderer. JOHN JAMES
GRYNEVS, a learned divine, in his Commentary on the Proghet JONAS, Chap. 1.
page 123. etc.

I have heard that not many years since a certain man in the town of Lipsic
went of his own accord to the Judge of the place, unto whom he voluntarily
confessed that he was one of them which had robbed the Electors wagons of
Saxony, adding that he had rather die, then endure the torment of his
conscience any longer. The same Author

Some forty six years ago or thereabout two brothers dwelling at Lausanna,
and hewing wood in the mount Iura, the younger fell out upon some slight
occasion with the elder, and gave him such a blow with his axe on the head,
that he ouerthewe him to the ground, where he made an end of him, and then
buried him. Returning home, he told their Mother that his said Brother had
willed him to excuse him unto her, and was gone into Germany, for to see the
Country, hoping to be at home again by such a time. Their Mother being
therewith satisfied, the murderer went up every day to the mountain, and
kneeling down on his brothers grave, wept very bitterly and asked GOD
forgiveness. Having continued thus certain months, and never suspected of
any such matter, coming one day from the mountain, as he was almost at home,
he looked behind him, and spied the Burgomaister, (which is the chiefest
magistrate of that place under the protection of the Canton of Berne) followed
by an Officer in his livery, he ran away as fast as he could to the other end
of the town. The Burgomaister meruayling at it, commanded his officer to run
after him. The Officer followed him, and cried stop him, stop him.
Whereupon diverse came running into the street and stayed him. The
Burgomaister, a wise man, committed him to prison, where having examined him,
he confessed the whole matter unto him, and was executed as he deserved, going
to his death with such constancy and penitent sorrow for his offense, that
all that beheld him melted into tears. I received this discourse from an
excellent personage, that was present at his arraignement, and saw his end.

One called N. LAIN, borne at Toulouse, having attempted his Fathers death,
escaped away, and got to Geneua, where he continued a certain time unknown.
Upon a day walking along by the Town ditch, and espying some of the
Magistrates with their Officers afar off, he ran as fast he could toward
the bridge of Arua, which was hard by, for to save himself in another
Seignorie. The Officers ran after him, and with the aid of those that met
him on the way, apprehended him: who presently in his own talk bewrayed
himself. Being carried to prison and kept very close, at last he confessed
his detestable attempt. The Magistrates of Geneua sent an Herald to Toulouse,
and by a Copy of his indictment, which was sent them, understood the truth of
LAINES confessions, who was executed, and even to the very last gasp showed a
lively and notable repentance of his faults. Memorialls of the History of
Geneua.

Eceeding strange Cruelty punnished.
THe year 1514. happened the horrible sedition and butchery of the Croysadoes
in Hungary. There was a general disco^tent amongst the people against the King
and the chiefest of the realm, because they went not about to conquer those
places again from the Turk (then very much entangled elsewhere) which he held
in Hungary. But King LADISLAVS loving his ease, little regarded it, and his
Nobles ruled him in such sort that he commanded them in nothing. Thereupon the
Popes Legate publyshed pardons for all those that would Cross themselves to go
war against the Turk. Suddenly there gathered together a wonderful
Company of thieves and robbers, from every corner of Hungary. And therewith
all great multitudes of the Commons (not able any longer to bear the
insolences of the Nobility, much less of the Bishops) flocked from all parts
to the Camp. The Kings negligence had given liberty to the intolerable
dissolutnes and Cruel^ie of the Lords over their subjects. This army of Commons
having created them a general, in an instant dispersed themselves and
committed a most horrible spoil almost all over Hungary: murdering all the
Gentlemen and Bishops they could meet with all. The richest and those that
were noblyest descended were empaled alive. This cruel rage contynuing, the
King began to stir, and by his command certain towns joining their forces to
a number of the Nobility under the conduct of a Lord named BORNEMISSE, had
some Conficts with those Croysadoes, wherein a great sort of them were slain,
and many taken which were executed in the Capital City of the Realm. Finally
JOHN the Son of VAIVODE STEVEN* (that afterward possessed himself of the
kingdom) defeated them in a set Battle, and having cut the most part of them
in pieces, he took their Leaders, whom he put to death with such strange
torments as I have horror to remember it, for he caused the General of these
Peasants called GEORGE, to be stripped naked, upon whose head the executioner set
a Crown of hot burning iron: then he opened some of his veins, and made
LVCATIVS his Brother drink the blood which issued from them. After that the
cheifest of the Peasants (who had been kept three days without meat were
brought forth, and forced to fall upon the body of GEORGE (yet breathing) with
their teeth, and every one to tear away and eat a piece of it. In the midest
of these horrible torments, GEORGE never cried; but only bee-sought them to
take pity of his Brother LVCATIVS, whom he had forciblie drawn into that
war. GEORGE being torn in pieces, his bowels were pulled out and cut into
morcells, and some being boiled and the rest roasted, the Prisoners were
constrained to feed on them: which done all that remained with LVCATIVS were
put to most horrible and Languishing deaths. An example of greater cruelty
can hardly be-founde since the world was a world. And no marvel if GOD has
punished the King and the Realm of Hungary for such strange and extraordinary
Cruelties, suffering the cruelest people of the North, namely the Turks, to
make that spoil which they have and continually yet do there. Cruel
chastisments are prepared for them that be cruel and inhumaine. The following
Books shall represent a great number of other Histories of strange accidents
and cruelties. IOACH: CVREVS in his Annals of Silesia, page 233.

During the Peasants war in Germany, in the year 1525. both before and
since, a Gentleman their enemy, not content to have massacred a great number,
even of those which had humbly craved pardon of him, confessing that they had
been ill advised, he gloryed in all companies of his brave exploites, adding
thereunto a commendation of his thefts, having cut many good purses, and slain
great store of Cattle. Some months after this fury, he fell sick, and
languished many days of an extreme pain in the Reins of his back, the
which thrust him into such despair, as he did not cease to curse and deny
his Creator, (who is patient, just, and fearful in revenge,) until that both
speech and life failed him. The severity of GODS Justice does yet pursue his
house: for soon after, his eldest Son seeking to exalt the prowess and
valor of his Father, who in the Peasants war had done wonders above
mentioned, and excelled all his companions: and vanting much of these valiant
exploites in an open assembly at a Banquet, a Countryman, moved at this
bravery, draws out his Dagger, and strikes him dead upon the place. Some few
days after, the plague falls into this cruel man's house, and kills all that
remained.

In the year 1577. in the beginning of September, the fire of the second
troubles being kindled in France: the President of Birague, (afterward
Chancellor and Cardinal) being at that time Governor of Lion, there were then
in Lion, two Brethren called BOVRGATS, Goldsmiths by their professions, but
very much disordered. As the liberty of those times did give means to many to
glutte their passions upon them whom they did malice: the BOVRGATS laid
hands upon a companion of theirs a Dyer, upon pretext that he was of a
contrary religion: but it was to revenge themselves for a quarrel which they
had formerly against him, and not ended to their liking. They take him and lead
him to their dwelling house, toward the Abbey of Esnay, being out of the
way, far from resort of people. They bind him fast hand and foot* and then
tie him by the neck unto the Chimney, so as he did hang upright, not being
able to sit nor lean any way. They leave him in this sort a whole day,
threatening him with present death. At night they bring in men of their own
sort and living to Supper, to be spectators of this Tragedy: they are merry
and make good cheer, and after Supper they spend the time, some in playing at
Cards, others in pinching, pricking, and burning the nose of this poor
prisoner, being bond hand and foot, and tied in the corner of the Chimney.
This continued until eleven of the clock at night, when their companions went
away and retired. As for the BOVRGATS, without proceeding any further, they
cast themselves clothed, with their Swords by their sides, upon a Bed, where
they both fell presently a sleep. Their Laquay (who was in the corner of the
Chimney,) does as the Masters. The prisoner perceiving them all a sleep, and
remembering how they had threatened him, begins to think how he might escape,
and having recommended himself to GOD, from whom only he attended help,
he did st^iue in such sort, as he untied one hand, and then the other,
afterward his neck, and lastly his feet. Being thus loose, he was mightily
perplexed what he should do. For if these people did awake, he was but a
dead man, having no means to defend himself, they being armed, and he
disa^med, and he alone against three: for the Laqueye was grown great. If he
had had a Table cloth, a Sheet or a Covering, he might have slipped down by
the window: but in opening it, the noise might awake them, so as they might
follow him and over take him, the ways being strongly and very straightly
guarded: In this grievous perplexity, he discouers, that the Laquay (who slept
in the other corner of the Chimney) had a Dagger at his Girdle. He therefore
resolves to kill those two brothers his enemies with this Dagger.

But there was some difficulty and hazard in the taking of it, for that the
Laquaye awaking would give the Alarm, yet by the light of the fire, he comes
softely unto him, and draws out his Dagger, so quickly, and in such sort as
the Laquay stirred not. Having it, he suddenly went up into the Chamber, and
leaped upon the BOVRGATS, and stabbes either of them in the breast with this
Dagger. As he would have doubled his stroke, one of them leapes up and lays
hold of an Halbard which stood hard by, he runs after the Dyer, who flies down
the stairs apace to save himself, at the foot whereof this BOVRGAT fell, and
presently dyed. The Dyer mounts again, and finds the other dead in the
Chamber. He begins to threaten the Laquaye to kill him presently, if he made
any noise: he took a Candle, lead the Laquey into the Seller, and forces him
to eat, and to drink a Glass of Wine, then he binds him surely, doing him
no other harm, bars the Sellar door, comes up and takes that which was
easiest to be transported, out of his enemies Chamber. And at the break of
day, the Gardes being raised, he leaves the house locked, and so gettes out
at Saint SEBASTIANS gate, without any hinderance or stay, the which was to be
admired, seeing they suffered none to go out but with a Pasporte. The friends
and companions of BOVRGATS, seeing them neither in the morning nor after
Dinner, grew into some doubt, and after notice given to the Captain of the
Quarter, under whom these BOVRGATS had charge and command, with his consent,
they brake open the door, and then drew forth the Laquay, who cried for help
in the Sellar, and found the rest as we have said. The Dyer lived some time
after, and reported this History to many, and dyed elsewhere. Memoires of
Lion.

Notable deliverances and by extraordinary means.
SIMON GRINEVS a learned personage, among many of our time, being gone from
Heidelberg to Spire, in the year 1529. where there was an Imperial Diet held,
was desirous to hear a certain Preacher much esteemen for his eloquence. But
hearing many propositions come from him against the Majesty and truth of the
Son of GOD. At the end of the Sermon: he followed the Preacher, saluted him
courteously, and entreated him to hear him with patience. They enter mildly
into discourse. GRINEVS shows him his errors gravely and plainly, and puts
him in mind what POLICARPVS (a Disciple to the Apostles) was accustomed to
do: if he chanced to hear any untruth or blasphemy in the Church: exhorting
him in the name of GOD to think of his conscience, and to leave his erroneous
opinions. The Preacher cuts him off short, seeming to have a desire to confer
more privately, as having have to go home to his house: He demands GRINEVS
name, and surname, and his lodging, in^iting him to see him the next day, to
discourse more amply together, and makes great show to affect GRINEVS
friendship: adding, that the public should receive great profit by this their
conference. Moreover he shows GRINEVS his house, who resolved to visit him at
the hour appointed, and so retires to his Inn. But the Preacher distempered
with his censure, devised in his thoughts, a prison, a Scaffold, and death, for
GRINEVS: who dining with many worthy men, reported unto them, what speeches he
had had with this Preacher. Thereupon one calls for Doctor PHILIP, being set
at the Table near unto GRINEVS, who goes out of the Stoue, and finds a grave
old man, of a lovely countenance, well apparelled, and unknown, who with a
grave and pleasing speech began to say: That within one hour there would
Officers come into the Inn, sent from the King of the Romans, to carry
GRINEVS to prison. The old man adds there-with-all a commandment to GRYNEVS
to dislodge speedily out of Spire, exhorting PHILIP not to defer it* And then
the old man vanished away. Doctor PHILIP, who has reported this History, In
his Comentarie upon the Prophet Daniel, Chap. 10. adds these words: I came
unto the company, and delivered what the old man had said unto me, willing
them to rise from the Table. Presently we crossed the Market place, having
GRINEVS in the midst of us, and went directly to the Rhine, which GRINEVS
past speedily with his servant, in a Boat. Seeing him in safety we returned to
the Inn, where it was told us, that presently after our departure, the
Sergeants were come to seek for GRINEVS. GOD be praised, who has given us his
Angels for Gardiens, that with more peaceful thoughts we may do our duties
in the vocation whereunto he has called us.

In the year 1539. in the beginning of June, an honest widow-woman, charged
with two Sons in Saxony, having not where-with-all to live in a time of great
famine, attyred her self and her Sons in their best clothes, going toward a
certain Fountain to pray unto GOD, to have pity of them and to relieve
them. Coming forth, she meets with a grave man, who salutes her courteously,
and after some speech, he demands of her, if she thought to find any thing
to eat at that Fountain? The woman answered; Nothing is impossible to GOD. If
it were not difficult for him to feed the Children of Israel forty years in
the desert, should it be troublesome to nourish me and mine with water?
Speaking these words with a great courage, this man (whom I hold to have
been an Angel) said unto her. Seeing thy faith is so constant, return to thy
house, and thou shall find three laden with meal, she rerurned, and did see
the effect of this promise. Doctor ANDREW HONDORF, in his Theater of Examples.

In the year 1553. the 18. of November, it happened at Sehilde, a little Town
in the Diocese of Torge, that VRBAIN ERMTRAVT, an inhabitant of that place,
having a deep Well, but half dry, by reason of certain stones that were
fallen out of the wall, did bargain with a Mason called VRBAIN HEMBERG, to put
those stones into their places. Having fitted himself with pieces of wood, and
a scaffold in the Well, he goes down lower with a Ladder, to take up a Hammer
which he had left among the stones. He was scarce gone down, but the earth
and stones shake, and fill up the Well, and cover the Mason who was at the
foot of the Ladder. All run thither, and hold the man to be smothered,
adding that they must fill up the Well, and that should be his grave. The
Justice resolved, that they should pull out all this rubbish, and ordaines,
that the Masons body should be buried among other Christians in the common
Churchyard. According to this decree, they begin to work the 11. of the same
month. About two of the clock after noone, the worke-men labor to draw out
a great stone, and finding that it was hollow underneath, they put down a long
pole to sound the depth. They prick the poor Mason on the nose with the end
of this pole, who began to cry and to entreat them to draw him out. The
workmen hearing this confused sound labor with more courrage then before, and
about ten of the clock at night they epsy him standing right up behind the
Ladder, being up to the knees in the myer. Being all glad, they prepare to
draw him forth. But behold an other fall of Earth which couers him above the
head. Then every man thinking that he was dead, was ready to leave the work:
but by the advice and commandment of the Bourguemaster called JAMES le FEVRE,
they return to their work, and having taken away the Earth, about midnight
they find him alive and without any hurt, and draw him out of the well Where
he had been almost four days and four nights without meat or drink. JOB.
FINCEL. lib. 2. of the collection of wonders of our time. In the year 1552.
FRANCIS PELVSIEN a maker of Wels, of the age of 60. years, digging the 5. of
February a Well at Lio^s in a farm of LEWIS d'HEXE, on the side of St
Sebastians mount toward the red Cross; this well being made forty foot
deep, the earth falls and fills it up. The poor man being in the botome
shrowds himself under aplanke, by means whereof he was preserved from this
heavy weight of earth, which else would have smothered him; having some means
to breath, thrusting his fist into the Earth sometimes, to have the more air.
He continued thus covered in the botome seven days, without eating,
satisfying his stomach with his urine, and hoping only in GOD for his
delivery. He cried out sometimes for help, but they heard him not; yet he
heard them that walked, and the noise they made above, yea the speaking of Men,
the striking of the clock, and the sound of Bells. The seventh day, when they
thought to find him dead, and that they prepared his grave, they that wrought,
heard his voice in the botome of the well, which made them to hasten their
work, hearing him to cry for help. In the end they descouer him, and having
made him to take a glass of wine, they drew him out with a rope, the which
he held lustely* without bynding or the help of any person. Being out, and
sound of Body and mind, after that he had given thanks unto GOD, he opened
his purse, in the presence of many, and after he had counted his money, he
said merrily, that he had been with a very good Hosts, seeing that in
seven days he had not spent any thing. Memoires de Lion.

There be many that escaping out of dangers are compelled by the consideration
of strange events, to confess that GOD has delivered them without the aid of
any second cause. Of many examples I will choose and recite one which is worthy
of note. The Dukes of Saxony FREDERICK the Elector and JOHN his brother went
one day by bote along the river of Elba from Torque to Wittenberg. The water
was all covered ^uer with great pieces of Ice newly broken. Those pieces so ran
against the boat and bruised it in such sort, that as soon as the Princes were
landed, it split in two and sanke. The Princes with great astonishment
(considering such a spectacle from the shore, and in what danger they had bin
by reason of the greatness, depth, and fury of the river) acknowledged, that
GOD had preserved the boat, until such time as they were landed. And having
bin a long time in this consideration, without speaking a word, the Elector say
to his Brother. Let us confess that GOD has preserved us, and therefore let us
give him thanks for his assistance in this and many other dangers. But whereas
you saw the boat fall in pieces as soon as we were out of it, verily I am
affraied that our house of Saxony will go to ruin after the death of us two.
PEVCER in his Commentary of the principal sorts of Diuinations, book. 1.
Chap. 13. The year 1558. a marvelous thing happened at Mech^rode in Almaigne,
confirmed by the testemony of diverse credible persons. About 9. of the clock
at night, a personage attyred in white, and followed by a white dog, came and
knocked at an honest poor woman's door, and called her by her name. She
thinking it had bin her husband, who had been a long time in a far Country,
ran presently to the door. This personage taking her by the hand, asked her in
whom she put all the hope of her salvation? In Jesus CHRIST, answered she. Then
he commanded her to follow him: which she refusing to do, he exhorted her to
be of good courage, and to fear nothing; that done, he led her all night
through a forest. The next day about noone he set her upon an exceeding high
mountain, and showed her things which she was never able to express. He
enjoined her to return home, and to exhort every one to turn from their
wicked ways: adding that an horrible destruction was at hand: and he
commanded her also to rest her self eight days in her house, at the end
whereof he would come to her again. The day following in the morning, the
woman was found at the towns end, and carried home to her house, where she
continued eight whole days without eating or drinking. When her neighbors and
friends persuaded her to take some sustenance, her answer was that being
extreme weary, nothing was so agreeable to her as rest: and how within eight
days the man that had carried her forth would come again, and then she would
eat. As indeed it came to pass* but afterward, this woman stirred but little
out of her bed, sighing from the bottom of her heart, and crying out very
often: O how great are the joys of that life! and how miserable is this life!
Being demmanded whether she thought the personage attired in white, which
appeared so unto her, to be a good Angel, or rather some evil spirit that
had transformed himself into an Angel of light? She answered, It is not an
evil spirit: it is an holy Angel, who has commanded me to pray incessantly
to GOD, and to exhort both great and small unto amendment of life. If any one
questioned with her concerning her belief: I confess (said she) that I am a
poor sinner* but I believe that Jesus CHRIST has obtained me remission for
all my sins through the benefit of his death and passion: The Minister of the
place testified the singular piety and humble devotion of this woman, adding
that she was well instructed, and could yield very good reason for her religion.
JOB. FINCEL in his 8. book of Miracles* etc.

In the year 1546. a great personage of Germany, having been stayed three
days at Hale in Swabe by the fury and roughness of the Waters, finally urged
by necessity to pass over, he embarked himself in a small bote for to
cross the River, accompanied with three of his Sons and a learned Divine his
friend. And seeing his bote ready to be overwhelmed, and himself and the
rest drowned, without any appearance of rescue, full of faith and hope in GOD,
he said to his friend: What triumph would Satan make think you, and how glad
would he be, if we two, and my three sons should be drowned in this flood?
But having escaped the danger, they came safe to land, and that personage
having taken order for certain great affairs, dyed within a while after very
peaceably, in the invocation of the name of GOD. Master ANDDEVV HONSDORFF in
his Theater of Examples. page 296.

The year 1535. in a village of Silesia, named Olst, hapened the strangest and
most furious tempest in the air that ever was seen: for it made even the
strongest houses that were built of hewed stone to shake, and ouerthrewe
diverse. One of the inhabitants of the Village, named LAVVRENCE THOPHAROSKE,
having his house joining to the market place, and being verily persuaded that
the end of the world was come, by reason the Element was all of a flame, and
that great flakes of of fire flew about, shut himself up in his house, and
falling on his knees with his wife and children, began to pray very earnestly
unto GOD, and to sing Hymns and Psalms of repentance. During these holy
exercises, a great clap of Tempest, with a wonderful violence, tore away the
upper part of the house, that was all of hewed Stone, together with the roof,
and flung it all to the ground, without hurting either the Father, the Mother
or the Children. But in another place this tempest did great harm: for having
ouer-throwne a Pinnacle of the Towne-house, made all of great four squared
stone cimented and fastened together with Clampornes and bars of Iron, five
persons were slain with the fall of the houses, whereupon this ruin lighted.
Whereas contrariwise three others, and a Child lying in a little bed, were
preserved in another house under the same ruin: and it being demanded of the
Child, that began to prattle, who had helped him in that danger, he lifted up
his little hand, and pointed to Heaven. M. AMBROSA MOI^AN in his exposition of
the 19. Psalm.

No-lesse horrible and dreadful was another tempest that ran over all the
Country of Misnia upon the 13. day of August 1559. Which thundering very
strangely in the air, and overthrowing all that it encountered: a certain
woman got her self with all speed into her Stoue with four Sons she had
and her maid. And then turning her self unto them she said, we have often
heard tell of the last day, but we never regarded it till now we see it come:
which said, they all fell down on their knees, calling unto GOD for mercy.
Thereupon a furious gust of wind tore away the roof of the house, and tearing
down the walls, brake the posts, seelings and bords of the Stoue all to
fitters. But in the midst of this fearful tempest, the Mother, Children and
Maid remained safe and unhurt, although the timber and stones flew as thick as
hayle about their ears. Satan seeming to be in the midst of this storm,
and confounded by the fervent prayer of the little flock, darted a great beam
of twelve foot long, as though it had been an arrowe flying in the air, with
the aid of a violent whirle-winde, just through the window of the Stoue at
this poor company kneeling against a bench. But the holy Angels turned it
another way, so that it lighted with terrible fury in a corner right against
the furnace of the Stoue. The same tempest ouerthrewe a Country-mans house,
upon his wife and some of their neigbors which were in it at that time, and yet
they were never hurt with the ruin. FINCEL in his 3. book of the meruayles of
our time.

JOHN SPAVGEMBERG, Minister of Northuse, going to an hot house according to the
manner of the Germains, and remaining there a good while with his Children
bathing themselves, as soon as ever they were gone out of it, the place sanke
and fell down without hurting any body. I MANLIVS in the first book of his
Collections.

Upon Easter eve 1565. after horrible whirle-winds, thunder, lightning, hayle
and signs of fire in the air, a violent inundation of waters, disgorged it
self upon a great village named Groesse in the dioces of Friberg in Misnia:
the torrents and streams whereof swelled with such fury in an instant, that
they over whelmed forty houses in that village, without the loss of any
creature save one Child. There were many preserved as it were by miracle: two
Children with their mother were sound untouched of the water under the ruins
of a house in a heap of straw also two others in a Cellar: a nurse with her
Child leaning against a Ladder, a blind man in his entry, and diverse others
both great and small in high places which with-stood the fury of the water. PH*
LONICER in his Theater of examples in the example of the 3. Commandment page
198.

I knew an honorable woman of singular piety and modesty, that some twenty
years since, through an extraordinary and long suppression of her terms was
a great while and at times very sorely troubled in mind* so that she was often
determined to have killed her husband sleeping, and her self after. One day
her keeper being gone forth about some business, she rose out of her bed, and
in her smock ran into a garden behind her house, where by a rope of the
well, which was seven or eight fathom, she let herself down to the bottom,
and then by the same rope got up again, and returned all wet to her Chamber,
having been up to the Chin in water. Not long after, seeming to be somewhat
better, she walked abroad, and carried along with her a Son of hers, that is
now of very great hope, but was then some 4. or 5. years old, with full intent
to drown him and her self in a river that was thereby: unto the bridge
whereof she made many iournies, being still entertained with the Childs
comfortable prattle. Returning home again, within a while after she was
easily recovered, namely, by letting of blood in the Saphena, and taking of a
gentle purgation. After which she had 4. or 5. sweet Children. She has many
times told me that in those accidents a man attired in white, and of a very
pleasing countenance appeared unto her, who took her by the hand, and kindly
exhorted her to trust in GOD. Being in the Well (and som-what that was very
heavy lying on her head and laboring to make her let go the rope, for to plunge
her over head and ears in the water and so drown her,) this same personage
came unto her, took her by the arm, and help her to get up again, which she
could never have done of her self. He also comforted her in the garden, and
led her very gently to her Chamber, where he vanished away. In like manner he
met her as she was going toward the bridge: and followed her a loofe of
until such time as she returned home. Being thorough well, she desired
nothing so much as leave this world, and her prayers da^ely tended to that
effect. At length GOD heard her, and about a month before her sickness
whereof she dyed, going into the kitchen for to wash her hands and her face,
one of her eye teeth on the right side fell out of her head, without any
precedent or ensuing pain. Whereupon she went unto her husband being in bed,
and showing him the tooth said unto him, husband the Lord calls me: and it is
the accomplishment of my desires. O what an happy creature am I! Her husband
some what moved there with, endeavored notwithstanding to comfort her, and
falling of purpose into other talk, arose, and went and prayed. After that,
this honorable dame showed her self always merier to her husband and friends
then before, being grave and severe to her children, and was fairer and lustier
then ever she had bin in seauentene years that she had lived a wife. Toward
the end of the month, there being no appearance of any such matter, as she was
going to rise betimes in the morning, according to her custom, for to look to
a young child she had, and to tend the affairs of her house, she was
constrained to keep her bed. Whereupon her husband coming in, she put him in
mind of her tooth and the speeches she had used to him about it, and
therefore exhorted him to submit himself unto the will of GOD. He being gone up
for to commend his dear moitie unto him that never rejects the prayers of
his servants, she took al her jewels and putting them up in her purse sent
them by her eldest Daughter to him, and desired him to keep them for her sake.
He came down, and gently rebuked her for this apprehension. Oh husband, said
she, I have no need of any thing in this world, for I am going to my GOD. O
how blessed am I! during her sickness, which lasted twenty days, I was for
the most part present with her, being tied there unto for diverse reasons. She
put me in remembrance again of that I have declared before, and from so many
excellent deliverances drew an assured argument of her salvation. The day of
her decease approaching, she began to smile, and being demanded the cause
thereof by me; she answered softly in mine ear, I see my man. O how
beautiful he is! then crying out she said; Stay for me, stay for me. All the
while she was sick, she made no account neither of children, kinsfolks,
friends, nor of any other thing in the world. And when her husband many times
brought their children unto her, she said nothing, but, God bless you, God be
your Father and Mother* and to the youngest of them; Hah, little Soldier! She
never commended them but once unto her husband. And after that, she beheld
them with a regardlesse eye. A quarter of an hour before her departure, she
called for her Petti-coate to rise, and as she was about to go out of her bed,
she desired to be made unready, and being laid down again, she sent for her
husband and used these words unto him. Behold the end of my desire, and the
beginning of my felicity. JESUS CHRIST is my hope: Good husband, I desire but
one thing of you. Pray unto GOD for me. Her husband and children being
prostrated on their knees, after an earnest prayer unto GOD, she closed her
eyes as if she had been going to sleep, and died with a sweeter countenance
then ever she had had in all her life before. Extracted out of my Memorials.

Demoniacks. Examples of diverse illusions of Satan.
ALthough there be many times some natural causes of frenzy or madness: yet
is it without question, that the Diuill enters into certain persons, and in
them causes furies and torments, either with natural causes or without them:
seeing such as are so diseased be often cured by remedies which are not
natural. Many times also such spectacles are so many prodigies and predictions
of things to come. Some do^en years since, a woman in the country of Saxony,
which could neither write nor read, being tormented of the Diuill, and her fit
being past, she talked both in Greek and Latin, of the war of Saxony that
happened afterward, and pronounced words in Greek and Latin, the sense whereof
was, that there would be great trouble upon earth, and sedition among the
people. PH. MELANCHTHON in one of his Epistles.

Four years before that, there was a Maid in the Marquisate of Brandebourg,
who pulling away the hairs from the Furre of any ones garment that came before
her, those hayres were presently turned into pieces of the country money, which
this maid gnawed on with an horrible grating of her teeth. There were diverse
that having snatched some of those pieces out of her hand, found them to be
very money indeed, and do keep them still. This maid was very much tormented
at times: but within a while after she was thoroughly cured, and ever since
lived in good health. She was oftentimes prayed for, and never any other
ceremony was used. The same.

I have heard, that in Italy there was a woman a very idiot, possessed of the
Devil, who being demanded of LAZARUS BONAMI a very learned personage,
accompanied with his Scholars, which was the best verse in VIRGIL, suddenly
answered.

Discite institiam moniti, and non temnere Diuos. This said she, is the best
and worthiest verse that ever VIRGIL made, get thee gone, and come no more to
tempt me. PH. MELANCHTHON in his epistles. G. PRVCER, in the 1. book of his
Comentary of Diuinations, Chap. 9. P. BOVISTAV, in 26. Chap. of his Prodigious
Histories.

ANTHONY BENIVENIVS in the 8. Chap. of his book of the hidden causes of
diseases, writes, that he saw a young woman of the age of 1^. years, whose
hands bowed very strangely backwards, as soon as a certain pain took her in
the bottom of her belly. At her fearful cries, her belly swelled so big, that
one would have thought she had been gone 8. months with child: finally she
lost her breath, and not able to continue in a place, shetumbled from one side
of the bed to the other, putting her head many times between her legs, as if
she would have played some tumbling trick. Then being questioned concerning that
which had be fallen her, she never remembered any such matter. But searching,
says he, the causes of this disease, we were of opinion that it proceeded from
a suffocation of the Matrix, and from malignant vapors fuming upward, to the
detriment of the heart and brain. Whereupon we endeavored to ease her with
medicines, but that serving to no purpose, she became more outrageous then
before, and at last began to vomit long crooked Iron nails, tagges of points,
filled within with wax, and wound all about with hayres, and so great a
portion of her breakfast, that it was not possible for any man whatsoever to
swallowe it whole. Having sundry times began such manner of vomitings in my
presence, I mistrusted that she was possessed of an evil spirit, which
charmed the eyes of the assistants, whilst he cast those things abroad. As
presently thereupon it was verified by more apparent signs and proofs: for
afterward we heard her making predictions and doing other things, which
surpassed all vehemency of sickness, yea all human understanding. I* WIER
in the 4. Book of diabolical impostures, Chap. 6.

MEINOR CLATH, a Gentleman dwelling at Boutenbrouck, a Castle in the Duchy of
Iuilliers, had a servant named WILLIAM, who 14. years together was tormented
of the Diuill. One day swelling mightily about the throat, and looking very
pale, so that they were afraid he would have fallen down: IVDITH his Mistress
a very honest Gentlewoman, gathering her folks together, began to call upon
GOD: whereupon there suddenly issued out of this WILLIAMS mouth, amongst
other trash, all the forepart of a Shepherds breeches, Flint-stones, some
whole and some broken, little bottoms of thread, a false head of hair, needles,
a piece of a boys silk doublet, and a Peacocks feather. Being demanded
concerning the cause of his sickness, he answered that he met with a woman
hard by Camphuse, which blowed in his face from whence he thought it proceeded.
But afterward when he was well, he confessed that this accusation was not true,
and that he was induced by the diuill to say so. Furthermore, he added, that
all those prodigious things came not out of his body, but were thrown against
his mouth by the Devil whilst they saw him vomit. One day being more carefully
looked unto, by reason they were afraid he would have done himself some
mischief, his eyes remained so fast closed together, that it was impossible to
open the^. At length GERTRVDE, CLATHS eldest daughter, of some 12. years of
age, coming unto him, exhorted him to pray to GOD, that it would please him to
restore his sight again: whereupon WILLIAM desired her to pray, which she did,
and her eyes were immediately opened, to the great amazement of all that were
present. The Diuil often persuaded him not to give ear either to his Mistress
or any other that troubled his head, with talking to him of GOD, who could not
help him, seeing he was once dead, as he had heard it publicly preached.
Another time striving to put his hand under the Kitchin-maides clothes, and
she rating him for it by his name, he answered in a big voice; My name is not
WILLIAM but BEELZEEVB: whereunto his Mistress replied; Think thou therefore
that we fear thee? He in whom we trust, is of far more infinite power and
strength then thou art. Then CLATH incited with a holy zeal in the presence of
all his house, commanded Satan, in the name of JESUS CHRIST, to come forth of
him, reading the 11. Chapter of the Gospel of St. Luke, where mention is made
of a dumb Diuill cast out by the power of our Savior, as also of BEELZEBVB
Prince of Diuils. In the end WILLIAM began to take some rest, and slept till
morning, like a man in a trance: then taking a little broth, and feeling
himself through well, he was carried home to his friends, having first
thanked his master and mistress, and desired GOD to recompense them for the
pains they had taken with him during his affliction. After that he married, and
had children, and was never tormented more of the Diuill. I. WIER, in the book
etc. before mentioned.

Upon the 18. day of March 1566. a very memorable matter happened in the town
of Amsterdam in Holland, whereof Master ADRIAN NICHOLAS Chancellor of
Gueldres, makes a public discourse, containing this which ensues. Some two
months ago, or thereabout (says he) thirty children in this Town began to
be tormented after a strange manner, as though they had been lunatic or
mad. By fitts they threw themselves against the ground, and this torment
lasted half an hour or an hour at the most. When they rose again, they
never remembered any pain they had felt, nor any other thing they had done in
their fit, but thought they had slept. The Physicians to whom they had
recourse, did them no good, because they were of opinion that their disease
proceeded not from natural causes. Whereupon their Parents imagining they were
bewitched, resorted unto Witches: but they prevailed as little with all their
sorcery. Finally they repaired unto Exorcists, by reason they were persuaded
their children were possessed, because upon the sudden they said many things
which surpast their capacity and age. These Exorcists employed all their
cunning, and lost their labor. During their exorcismes, the children vomited a
great sort of Needles, Pinnes, Thimbles, lumpes of Cloth, pieces of broken
Pottes, Glass, Hair, and other such things: for all which not-with-standing,
they were never the better, but at times fell into the same extremity again,
to the great astonishment of all men for the rareness of so strange a
spectacle. I. WIER in his 4. Book, chap. 8.

The like happened at Rome, the year 1553. for in the Hospital of the
Orphans, about seventy Girls were possessed in one night, and continued in
that estate above two years. CARDAN, in the 4. Book de variatate, Chap. 176.

JOHN LANGIVS a very learned Physician writes in the first Book of his
Epistles, that in the year 1539. this which follows happened at Fungestall,
a Village in the Bishopric of Eysteten, verified by a number of good
witnesses. VLRIC NEVSESSAR a laboring man dwelling in that Village, was
miserably tormented with a pain in his hips. One day the Surgeon having
made an incision in the skin, drew out a great Iron Nail: the pain abated
not for all that, but contrarily so increased, that the poor man became
desperate, and with a sharp knife cut his own throat. As he was carrying
forth to be buried, two Chirurgions in the presence of a great many people,
opened his stomach, and there found some round pieces of wood, four Steel
Knives, some very keen, and some dented like a Saw, also two Iron bars of
9. inches long a piece: and a great lump of hair. I wonder how that Iron
could be contained within the capacity of his stomach: but no question, it was
a devise of the Diuill, who cunningly supposed all those things for to make
himself be feared. I. WIER in his 4. Book, Chap. 9.

The torments where with the Diuill afflicted certain Nuns at Wertet in the
County of Horn, are marvelous and horrible. Which came first (as it is
reported) by the means of a poor woman, who in the Lent time borrowed a
Quarte of Salt of the Nuns, weyghing three pounds or there-about, and paid
them twice as much again, a little before Easter. After that they found little
white Pellets in their Dortor, like to round Sugar Plummes, and Salt in taste,
whereof not-with-standing none of them did eat, nor knew not from whence they
came. Shortly there-vpon they heard a thing, which seemed to groan like a
sick man: they likewise understood a voice, willing certain of the Nuns to
come to one of their Sisters that was sick: but there was no such matter when
they came. If at any time they chanced to make water in their Chamber Pot, it
was suddenly snatched away, so that they all berayed their beds. They were
often drawn about the house by the heels, and so tickled in the soles of
their feet, that they swouned with laughing. Some had pieces of their flesh
plucked away, and others had their legs, arms and face turned back-ward.
Diverse of them being thus tormented, vomited a great quantity of black licor,
like unto incke, although they had eaten nothing in seven weeks before, but a
little i^yce of rapes, without bread, some were hoisted up in the air to the
highth of a man, and presently thrown down against the ground. As certain of
their friends came to the Covent for to make merry with them who seemed to be
almost well, on a sudden some of them fell backward as they sat at table,
quite deprived of speech and sense: the rest lay all along as though they had
bin dead, with their arms and legs bowed back-ward. One amongst them was
hoisted up in the air, and albeit those that were present strove with all
their might to hinder it, yet was she snatched up spite of their teethes, and
then so thrown against the ground, that she seemed to be dead: but rising up
again within a while after as if it had been out of a sound sleep, she went
out of the refectory having no hurt. Some went upon their knees, as if they had
no feet. Others climbed up to the tops of trees, and came down again as
lightly, as if they had been Catts. This torment of the Nuns continued three
years openly known: but afterward it was kept close. I. WIER. lib. 4. Chap.
10.

With this same agrees that which happened to Saint Brigitts Nuns, in their
Covent hard by Xante. Sometimes they skipped and bleated like sheep, or rored
in most horrible manner. Sometimes they were thrust out of their pues in the
Church, or had their vailes pulled of their heads: and many times their throtes
was so stopped, that they were not able to swallowe any meat. This strange
calamity endured the space of ten years in some of them. And it is reported
that a young Nun surprised with the love of a young man was cause thereof:
for her parents having denied her him in marriage, the Devil taking the form
of that young man upon him appeered unto her in her greatest flames, and
counseled her to become a Nun, as incontinently she did. Being shut up in
the Covent she grew as it were furious, and showed every one strange and
horrible sights. This inconvenient like a plague infected diverse other Nuns.
The first being sequestered, abandoned herself to him that kept her, and had
two Children by him. Thus Satan within and without the Covent wrought his
detestable effects. In the same book and Chapter.

I have heard that the Devil for certain years together tormented the Nuns
of Hessymont at Nieumeghen. One day he entered with a whirle wind into their
Dortor, where he began to play so melodiously on the Lute and Harp, that the
Nuns feet tickled to dance. Then he took the form of a dog, and leaped
into one of their bedds, it was suspected of incontinency. Other strange things
happened there, as also in another Covent hard by Colen about the year 1560.
Where the Diuill walked in the likeness of a dog, and hyding himself under
the Nuns Clothes, played most filthy and shameful tricks. The like he did
at Hensberg in the Duchy of Cleues, under the figure of Catts. In the same
book and Chap.

ANTHONY SVCQVET, Kinght of the order of the golden fleece, a personage of
great reputation over all Flanders, and Counselor in the privy Counsel of
Brabant beside three legitimate Children had a bastard, that took a wife at
Bruges: Who a little after her marriage began to be pitifully tormented of the
evil spirit, insomuch that where-souer she was, even in the midst of Ladies
and gentlewomen, she was suddenly carried away and drawn up and down the
room, and many times, cast now into one corner, now into another, albeit those
that were with her labored to hold her and keep her from it. But in these
agitations she took but little harm in her body. Every one thought that this
inconvenient was procured unto her by a wench whom her husband, (that was a
proper gallant young man) had sometimes kept. Amidst these accidents she became
with Child, but ceased not for all that to be tormented of the spirit. The
time of her delivery come, there chanced to be but one woman in her company,
who was presently sent to the midwife and other women for to come to her
labor. In the mean time it seemed unto her that the wench (of whom I spoke)
came into the Chamber, and served her in stead of a midwife: where with the
poor gentle woman was so exceedingly frighted, that she fell into a swound.
Being come to herself again she felt that she was discharged of her b^rthen:
and yet no Child appeared, whereat every body was greatly amazed. The next day
when she awaked she found a Child made up and laid by her in the bed: to the
which she gave suck at two several times. Falling a sleep again within a
little while after, the Child was taken from her side, and never seen more.
The report went that certain scrolles and* magical Characters were found about
the lock of the Chamber door. This history was recounted unto me, by my
brother in Law a learned and virtuous gentleman who had received it from the
gentlewomans husband and brother, and from diverse others that had visited her
in her Child bed. I. WIER in his 3. book Chap. 34.

Here we might report the monstrous and innumerable convulsions which happened
to the Nuns of Kentorp in the Country of March not far from Hammone. A
little before their fit and during the same, they cast forth a stynking breath
out of their mouths, which at times continued certain hours. In the midst
of their pain some of the^ were of good memory, and both heard and knew those
that were about them, although by reason of the convulsion of their toungs and
parts, serving to respiration, they could not speak in their sit. Now some
were tormented more then others, and some less. But this was common to them
all, that as soon as one was tormented, at the only noise of that one the
rest, separated in diverse Chambers, were also tormented. One of the ancientest
of the Coue^t, and of the first that was afflicted, named ANNE LENGON,
discoursed the whole history unto me. When first of all she felt a pain in her
left side, and that it was thought she was taken with the falling sickness,
she was sent to the Monastery of Monherric: whereunto she consented through a
certain devotion, and after she had drunk there in Saint Cornelius head, the
report went, that she was much better then she had been: which was found
clean otherwise. For both she and the rest, being in worse estate then before,
sent to a cunningman, who certified them that they were all poisoned by their
Cook, named ELSE CAMENSE. The Diuill taking hold on this occasion, began to
torment them more then before, and which was worse, induced them to bite and
beat one another, and to throw one another to the ground, which they did
without any harm, and as easily as if they had been feathers, insomuch that
they very well perceived their will was not in their own power. When they were
kept from fighting and doing any other violence, then they tormented themselves
in most grievous manner, and as soon as they were let alone, they fell to biting
of one another, and yet never felt any hurt. If ANNE spoke in her fit, it
seemed to be done by means of some other that drew her breath in and out. She
understood her self speak: but the speech ended, she remembered not a word of
that she had spoken, unless it were repeated unto her again: for then she
remembered that she had pronounced it. At any time when she set her self to
pray, incontinently she was molested by the evil spirit: fo that she could
not, as willingly she would, either attentively prosecute her purpose, or move
her tongue. But if she chanced, without thinking on it, to mutter a Pater
noster, or an Aue Maria on her Beads, she was so far from being hindered,
that then she felt ease. Otherways, she was altogether dull, and destitute of
sense, discretion and judgment: so that she could never think a suisedly on
any thing what-so ever. If any good deuo^te man that feared GOD, fortuned to
confer with her, then it seemed the Diuill would punish her for it. But
contrary wise, if other women talked with her about trifling and ordinary
matters, therein she took pleasure, and was eased by it. Now all these
Nuns thus tormented felt a pain, that got up ward by little and little from
the soles of their feet, which seemed to them to be skalded with hot seething
water. And though they were all thus strangely afflicted, yet lost they not
their appetite, but still received sustenance. The Devil spoke very often and
much by the mouths of the youngest which had their spirits troubled; unto whom
he presented himself in the form of a black Catte, and in the likeness of
Else Kamense, or of her Mother, or Brother: so as every one thought, (but
falsely) that those persons were the cause of such torments. ANNE being
resolved to return no more to the Covent, from whence her parents had taken
her, but to serve GOD devoutly, so as (with as more settled judgment), this
calamity left her: notwithstanding if she received but letters from the
Ablesse, she felt a shwering through-out all her Body, as if she should
presently have fallen again into her former inconvenience. Not long after she
married, and was never troubled with that calamity more. She told me also that
ELSE KAMENSE was afflicted in the same manner as the rest were, namely with the
falling sickness, and that many times she talked idely too whereupon the
Nuns were persuaded that she had bewitched her self, to the end she might
not be suspected of that she had done, insomuch that they all set upon this
maid, whom the cunning man had told them was a witch. The poor wench being
carried before the Justice, at the first confessed that she was cause of that
heavy spectacle, wrought by means of the mixture of certain poisons: being at
the place of execution, and ready to die, she protested that she had never
used any poison, but only at times pronounced certain curses.

After that Else and her mother were burned, some of the inhabitants of
Hammone, a town there by, began to be tormented of the evil spirit. The
minister of the place got four or five of them into his house, for to instruct
and fortify them against the impostures of the enemy. But when he had recited
some articles of a Christans belief, they began to mock the Minister, and
to name certain women of the Town, to whom they said they would go, mounted
upon Bucks, which should carry them thither. Incontinently one of them got him
a stride upon a form, crying out that he was ryding away. Another stepping up
behind him, fell back-ward quite over and over, and lighted against the
Chamber door, which flying open, he tumbled from the top of the stayres
down to the bottom, and had no hurt. About the same time, in a village named
Houel, hard by the same Town, diverse men were cruelly tormented of the evil
spirit. I. WIER in book 4. Chap. 11.

The Nuns of the Covent of Nazareth at Cologne were tormented almost like
those of Kantorp. Having been a long time diversely vexed by the Devil, much
more in the year 1564. For they were laid along upon the ground as if it had
been to have had the company of man: during which indignity their eyes
remained closed, which afterward they opened very shame fastly, and as if they
had endured some grievous pain. A young wench named GERTRVDE, of 14. years of
age, gave way to all this mischief. She had been often abused with those
wanto^ apparitions in her bed, whereof her laughter made proof, although she
had tried diverse means to remedy it, but all in vain. For as a fellow of
hers lay on a pallet by her, only for to keep her from such apparitions, the
poor wench grew affraied hearing the noise that was made in Gertrudes bed,
of whom at length the Devil took possession, and began to afflict her with
sundry sorts of Convulsions. In her fit, she was like a blind body, uttering
strange and inconstant speeches tending to despair. The like did diverse
others: and so this plague prevailed by little and little, and augmented much
more, when these poor afflicted souls began to have recourse unto unlawful
remedies. Now whilst the Devil tormented them thus, some of them were taken
with the plague, and as long as they had it, the evil spirit never troubles
them, through a singular goodness of GOD, who lymiteth unto Satan certain
bounds, which he cannot pass (witness JOB) in afflicting those who^ GOD has
delivered up unto him for a time in this world. The beginning of all this
calamity proceeded from certain lewd youths, who having gotten acquaintance,
by playing at stoole-ball thereby with one two of those Nuns, climbed over
the walls, and enjoyed their loves. But afterward leaving of that course, by
reason they were deprived of the means to continewe it, the Devil corrupted
the fantasy of those miserable creatures, and entreated them as has been
declared. I. WIER book 1. Chap. 12.

To these may be added another Nun of the Covent of Bosledue, hard by Saint
John's Church, named IVDITH, whom I have seen tormented of the Diuill with
strange convulsions for he so stopped her throat that she could not swallowe
any meat, and many times held her tongue in such sort, that he kept her from
speaking: likewise I have heard her utter ridiculous and horrible speeches.
With her I will join another maid servant to a Nun of a great and noble
house. A Country fellow had promised her marriage* but he fell in love with
another: whereat she was so grieved, that being gone some half a mile from the
Covent, she met the Devil in the likeness of a proper young man, who began to
talk very familiarly with her, discovering unto her all the Country fellows
secrets, with the speech he had used to his new love: and that to the end he
might have made the wench fall into despair, and so drawn her to have made
her self away. Being come to a little brook, he took the bottle of oil,
which she carried, that she might the better pass over the bridge: and enticed
her to go with him to a place that he named, which she refused, saying what
would you have me do going along those marshes? Whereupon he vanished away,
which so affrighted the poor maid that she fell into a swound: her Mistres
being advertised of it, sent a litter to fetch her to the Covent. Where she lay
a long time sick, and as it were deprived of sense being troubled in spirit
after a strange manner, and diverse times complained that she was miserably
tormented of the Devil, who would have her and carry her away through the
window. Afterward she was married to that Country-fellowe, and recovered her
former health: The same.

At Leuensteet, a village belonging to the Duke of Brunswick, there was a maid
named MARGARET ACHILS about twenty years old, dwelling with her Sisters. Upon
the second day of June, going to make clean a pair of shows, she took one
of her knives, that was some half a foot long: and as she was beginning to
scrape them being set in a corner of the Chamber, and very weak with an ague,
that had held her a long time, suddenly an old woman came in, who asked her
whether she had her ague still, and how she felt her-selfe in her sickness;
and so without any farther talk departed. After the shoes were made clean,
this maid let the Knife fall into her lap, which she could not find again,
although she had sought very diligently for it: whereat she was somewhat
afraid, but far more, when she perceived a black Dog lying under the Table,
whom she drove away, hoping to find her Knife. The Dog being (...) began to
show his teeth, and grinning at her, got into the street and ran away.
Presently whereupon this maid thought she felt I know not what, running down
on the one side of her back, as it were some cold humor, and immediately she
swounded, continuing so till the third day after, when she began to find a
little ease, and to receive some sustenance. Now being demanded concerning the
cause of her grief, she answered, that she was well assured the Knife which
fell into her lap was entered into her left side, in which place she felt a
pain. And although her friends contradicted her, because they attributed this
indisposition to a melancholy humor, and that she talked idly by reason of
her sickness, long abstinence, and other accidents: yet ceased she not to
persist in her continual plaints and tears, so that her head became very
light, and sometimes she remained two days together without taking any
thing, although they used both fair means and foul to draw her thereunto.
Her fits were worse at sometimes then at other some, insomuch that she took
but little rest, because of the continual pains that tormented her: whereby
she was constrained to go even double on a staff. And that which more
augmented her grief and diminished her ease, was that she verily believed the
knife was in her body, and yet every one obstinatly contradicted her in it, and
propounded the impossibility thereof, imagining that her brain was distempred,
considering nothing was seen that might induce the^ to such an opinion, save
her incessant tears and complaints, wherein she continued the space of certain
months, and to such time as there appeared on her left side a tumor of the
bigness of an Egg, like to an half Moon, which increased or decreased
according as the swelling waxed more or less. Then the poor wench began to
say: You would not believe the knife was in my body till now: but ere long you
shall see how it is fixed in my side. And indeed on the thirtith day of June,
namely about thirteen months after, she had first suffered this affliction,
there issued such an abundance of matter out of the ulcer which was grown on
that side, that the swelling began to assuage, and then the point of the knife
appeared, which the maid would have pulled out, had she not bin staid by her
friends, who sent for Duke HENRY'S Chirurgian, being at that time resident in
the Castle of Wolffbutel. The Chirurgian coming thither on the 4. day of July,
desired the Minister, to comfort, instruct, and encourage the maid, as also to
observe her answers, because every one thought she was possessed. She consented
to be ruled by the Chirurgia^, although she was persuaded that present death
would ensue. The Chirurgian perceiving the point of the knife which appeared in
her left side, with his instruments drew it forth: and it was found in all
respects like to the other that was in her sheath, and very much used about the
midst of the blade. Afterward the ulcer was healed by the Chirurgian. In the
same book, chapter 14.

CARDAN writes that a certain labourer a friend of his and an honest man,
declared unto him, how for many years together he was sick of an unknown
disease: during the which, by means of certain charms, he had oftentimes
vomited glass, nails, and haite: and although he was afterward recovered by
that means, yet he felt a great quantity of broken glass in his belly, which
made a noise like a great many pieces of broken glass tied up together in a
bag. Moreover he added how that noise very much troubled him, and that every
eighteenth night, about seven of the clock, for eighteen years space, after
he was well, he felt as many blows on his heart, as the Clock struck hours:
which he endured not without great torment. In the same book, Chap. 7.

But yet farther to show the sleights and subtilties of Satan, who with
efficacy of error turmoiles such as the divine justice delivers up unto him, I
will add another history touching a child Demoniack, written by D. HENRY COLEN
of Bosledue, to AUGUSTINE HVN^VS a Doctor of Lovaine the 3. day of March 1574.
as follows. A child of our town foretells, that the wicked and tyrranicall
complot of the rebels of the Low Countries shall now take an end. We fear
notwithstanding least it be some devise of the evil spirit: albeit no man can
discover any such matter yet. This child cries out and bids every one pray
heartily and incessantly unto GOD: he himself with hands heaued up, prays 3.
times a day. He has foretold merueilous things of our time, and all that he
has foretold is come to pass, not failing in any circumstance. Also he
says, that the Angel GABRYEL has revealed unto him, how all these Tragedies
of Flanders shall end, before next Summer be half past: and how the King of
Spain shall come into the low countries, and appease all by most happy means.
He has likewise foretold the very moment of time of the taking of
Middelborough, and infinite other things come to pass according to his
predictions. I (most unworthy) was also called to examine this child, and was
wonderfully amazed to see so simple a thing, which can neither write nor read,
answer so readily to all demands, and resolve the greatest difficulties could
be propounded. And because Satan transfigures himself into an Angel of
light, I objected many and sundry questions unto him: but so far is it from
an Angel that abhors the cross of our Lord, or the name of JESUS: that
contrariwise it has taught the child a prayer, in substance containing these
words: O JESUS of Nazareth, which was crucified for us, have mercy upon us:
help us poor sinners that we may return again unto the faith. I. WIER, in
1. Book, chap. 10. where he adds this censure. The contrary event has
manifested, that this child was possessed of the diuill, who spoke and
prognosticated by his mouth. For the troubles of Flanders ended not the Summer
following, nor three years (we may say, nor five and twenty years) after,
neither was, nor is there any news of the King of Spaines coming into the
Lowe-Countries. Now the spirit of GOD cannot fail nor err in the least point
that is. Therefore one may perceive who that GABRIEL was, that could declare
the very moment of time, of the taking of Middelborough in Zealand: to wit, the
Diuill, who being a spirit, transports himself in an instant from one place to
another, by reason of his incomprehensible swiftness. He it was that moved
this child to the prayers before mentioned, the better to color his
impostures and lies. For so he has accustomed to mingle truth with falsehood.
As Doctor COLEN may acknowledge, if he be still alive, in the beginning of this
new age 1600. If he be departed this world, I leave the decision thereof to
his companions.

The year 1594. in the Marquisate of Brandebourg, there were seen above eight
score persons together Demoniacks, which uttered marvelous things, and both
knew and named such as they had never seen* amongst those persons they noted
some which were dead long before, that walked crying out unto every one to
repent, to leave off all dissoluteness in apparel, etc. and denounced GODS
judgments, affirming that they were commanded by the Lord to preach amendment
of life, whereby sinners might be brought again to the right way. These
Demoniacks raged exceedingly where-soeuer they came, and belched forth infinite
outrages against the Ministers of the Church, talking of nothing but of
apparitions of good and evil Angels. The Diuill showed himself in diverse
shapes, and in the Sermon time flew over the Church with a terrible noise and
cry: strawing points and pieces of gold and silver all along as he went.
IAQVES HORST Doctor of Physic, in his History of the Silesian Childs golden
tooth. Let us add that which a certain Frislander presents, in his collection
of Histories, entitled Mercurius Gallobelgicus, the year 1594. in this
manner. I will shut up this discourse with the words of IAQVES COLER a Doctor
and Preacher in the Marquisate of Brandebourg, who has published a Book of it
in Dutch. After he had exhorted the Almaignes to give over all dissoluteness,
excess and disorder, principally in apparel: then all oaths, execrations and
imprecations: finally he condemns the wicked custom of his country, where
when any one will maintain this or that to be true, presently he says. If it
be not so, such, and such a Diuill take me. Or when one will wish another ill,
he prays that an hundredth tun of Diuils may enter into his belly, and there
remain so well closed, that not one of them may get ou^ again. From thence
proceeds it (says he) that now at Spandaw, Friberg, and other towns in the
Marquisate of Brand^bourg we heard the Diuils cry: You have called for us a
long time, wherefore we were forced to come, and lo here we are.: you have
made no account of your Superiors, but we will obey you, whether you will or
no. We preach amendment of life unto you, although it be against our wills. As
the evil spirit was about to make a maid of Spandaw whom he possessed, to
drown her self, and certain good folks labored to hinder it, alleging the
History of the Gadarens, into whose Swine the Diuils could not enter, but by
the permission of JESUS CHRIST: the Diuill stretching forth the ^and began to
say: You are those Swine, and because there is nothing but gluttony and
drunkenness amongst you, you are all in my power. Others being demanded, why
they tormented GODS creatures, answered: The Lord commands us to do it, you
will neither hear, believe, nor pray: therefore we are your tormentors. Doctor
Horst shows diverse reasons, how that resurrection of the dead above mentioned,
was diabolical, and such another as the apparition of a false SAMVBL raised by
the witch, mentioned in holy writ, and in all the rest does prove, that in
all these accidents they discover the imposture and fury o^ S^than, the
fearful executioner of GODS just judgment.

A Golden Tooth in the mouth of a Child of Silesia.
A Countryman called IHON MVLLER, a Carpenter by his trade, dwelling at
Weigdeldorff a Village of Silesia, belonging to a Gentleman called FREDERICK de
GETHORNE, under the Sovereignty of the Emperor, took to wife one named
HEDVVIGK of Endesdorff, a Village in the Duchy of Bres^aw, in the same
Country. These two married folks, living very honestly and without reproach in
their mean condition, had between them a Son, borne the 22. day of December
1585. four days after he was Christened and named CHRISTOPHER, carefully
brought up, and in the year 1593. sent to the School of the Village amongst
other Children. A little before Easter, a certain Girl discouers that this
Chlde has the last great Tooth of the left side appearing all of clean Gold:
diverse others thereupon find it to be so. Suddenly the report of it is
dispersed all about, so that the Dukes of Silesia, Lignits, Brige, Munsterberg,
etc. and diverse Gentlemen and Citizens of credit, cause the Child to be
brought unto them, that they might see him. Amongst others, Monsieur ANDRE,
Bishop of Nisse, and chief Governor of Silesia, made him to be expressly
brought unto him to Nisse, where in his presence certain Chirurgians very
diligently and attentively considered the force, matter, form, and disposition
of this tooth. In the year 1594. about the month of September going into
Silesia for to sell a certain house that I had at Sueidniz, and staying at
Reichenbach a town distant some hours journey from Weigeldorff, I easily
obtained of FREDERICK de GELHORNE (unto whose Son being at that time sick,
I minystred physic,) to have this Child brought unto me, by his Mother to a
kinsmans house of mine, named MELCHIOR HORST where^ with the principal men of
the place, in the fore-noone a little before dinner, I very diligently beheld
at two several times this golden tooth of CHRISTOPHERMVLLERS, I took hold of
it with my fingers, and wagging it in and out, I found it firm and inmoueable:
having made him open his mouth, I saw the gold of the said tooth, shyning very
bright: it was the last great tooth of the lower ^awe on the left side, being a
little thicker then the other great teeth, but of the same form and higth,
having the gum very sound, soft, red, and in every point as it should be. I
observed also that at that time the Child being about eight years old had all
his teeth except the great tooth next to that of gold, which by means thereof
thorough a special providence of GOD appeared much the better! Hereupon being
in doubt whither he chawed with that tooth as well as with the rest, I desired
mine host to make the Mother and the Child to stay dinner. We were no sooner
risen from table, but I sen^ again for the chiefest persons of the town, and
in their presence I opened the Childs mouth, where I found the meat yet
remaining chawed upon this tooth of gold. Then causing his mouth to be washed
very clean with fair water, with a touchstone I touched the tooth, and found
that the gold approached to the carat of that of Hungary. This Child is of
complexion hot anddrie, prettily in flesh, of a good stature and a lively
spirit, peaceable and marvelous studious, insomuch that I was feign to give
him a couple of books that he begged of me. I. HORST Doctor of Physic in
his Historycall and Philosophical doscourse of the Silesian Childs golden
tooth.

Desperate Persons.
A Desperate man in our time dying (among many other horrible speeches) said
that he wished to be already in hell. And being demanded the cause of so
wicked a desire: for that (said he) the apprehension of torments which do
attend me, cause me presently to feel a double hell: when I shall feel it at
the full, I shall not expect any more.

I have heard an other desperate man, who being exhorted to turn from the two
vehement apprehention of GODS Justice, unto his mercy, which was open unto
him, he answered very coldly, you say true, GOD is GOD; but of his Children,
not for me: his mercy is certain: for his elect, but I am a reprobate, a
vessel of wrath and cursing, and I do already feel the to^ments of hell:
When they did exhort him to call GOD his Father, and JESUS CHRIST his Son. My
mouth (said he) does speak it but my heart has horror of it. I beeleeue that
he is the Father of others, but not of me. When they did lay before him that
he had known GOD, heard his word, and received his Sacraments. I but (he
added) that I was an hipocryte, and guilty of many blasphemies against GOD. And
then he returned to his ordinary discourses, I am a vessel prepared to wrath
and damnation, I am damned. I burn. H. BELON in the treasor of a Christian
soul.

A learned man at Louvain called M. GERLACH, having profited so well in his
studies, as he was one of the first among the Learned of our time, being
touched with a grievous sickness, he sighed continualy, and feeling himself
to draw near his end, he began to descouer the ground of his sighs,
speaking such fearful words as desperate men are accustomed to proferre:
crying out and lamenting that he had lived very wickedly, and that he could
not endure the Judgment of GOD: for that he knew his sins were so great,
as he should never obtain pardon: so as in this distress he died, oppressed
with greeuious and horrible despair. The History of our Times.

M. ARNOVL BOMEL, a learned man of the same place, receiving an impression in
his brain from a Sophister, of strange opynions touching our Salvation, he
began to grow wild. One day going out of Louvaine with three Scholars to
walk: Upon his return unto the Town, he did sit down near a fountain,
fayning to rest him. The Scholars went a little before, not doubting any
thing. In the mean time BOMEL does secretly draw forth a little knife, and
stabbes himself in the breast. The Scholars returning toward him, espied him
to fall, and running to him, they did see the fountain red, with blood. They
came to him all amazed, and find^ng the wound, they carried him as well as
they could to the nearest house; and doubting that it might be deadly, they
exhorted him to ask GOD mercy, for that he had done violence unto himself.
He seemed unto them to have some remorse, as well by his outward countenance
as by some words which he delivered with a languishing voice. But in the
mean time, seeing a knife hang at one of the Scholars girdels, he seized
thereon suddenly and strikes himself to the heart, whereof he died presently.
In the same History.

Mr. JAMES LATOMVS, one of the chief Doctors in the University of Louvain,
being one day out of countenance in a Sermon before the Emperor CHARLES the
fifte returning ashamed and confounded from Br^xelles to Louvaine, so as after
he did so apprehend this dishonor, as he fell sodenlie into despair,
whereof he gave many testymonies in public: the which did move his friends
to keep him close in his house, from that time unto his last gasp, poor
LATOMVS had no other speech, but that he was rejected of GOD, that he was
damned, and that he hoped for no mercy nor salvation, as having maliciously
made war against the grace and truth of GOD. He died in this despair,
neither was it possible for any friends nor Physicians to make him change this
opinion. The same author.

In the end of the year 1545. in a small town of the territory of Padoua,
called Ciuitelle there was a learned Lawier and Advocate, a wise and very Rich
man, and an honorable Father of a famelie, called FRANCIS SPIERA, who having
said and done diverse things against his conscience, to maintain himself and
his charge, being returned to his house, he could never rest an hour, no not a
minute, nor feel any ease of his continual anguish. And even from that night
he was so terrified and had such horror of his actions, as he held himself
for lost. For (as he himself did afterward confess) he did see plainly
before his eyes, all the torments, all the pains of hell, and of the damned,
and in his soul did hear the fearful sentences being drawn before the
judgment seat of JESUS CHRIST. The next day and so following, it was
impossible to see him resume any courage: but his spirits were strangely
troubled, and the terror took from him all rest and appetite. This Accident
was so grievous to his friends and familiars, as some repented them much, that
they had been the cause of so great an inconvenient by their prayers and
entreaties. Others, thinking it did proceed from some choleric or melancholy
humor (the effects whereof are oftentimes strange in those brains which are
violently touched) were of opinion to send him to Padoua, to be Physicked by the
learned Physicians, revived by honorable company, and settled by the
conference of learned men that were there, to some of the which he was well
known. His wife and children, with some of his familiar friends did accompany
him, and he was lodged in one of the chief houses. FRISIMILEGA, BELLOCAT and
CRASSVS (famous and excellent Physicians) did visit him, and give him Physic
with a singular affection: and found soon that he was little sick in body,
but grievously in mind: for in all other things he discoursed gravely and
constantly, so as none of his familiar friends could decerne that the
quickenesse of his discourse and reason was any thing impaired or weakened,
continnuing still in this continual anguish, many were much troubled, and
daily his Chamber was full of people; some curious to see and to hear; others
(but very few) were desirous to draw him to hope in the mercies of GOD. I was
present at many of his speeches, with some men of honor and learning. To
deliver that which I could observe. I began first to note his age and his
fashion. He was about fifty years old, free from the violent passions of
youth, and from the coldness of old age. Nothing came out of his mouth that
was lighly or foolishly spoken, or that might discover any doting in him;
although he did day lie discourse of grave and important matters with the
learned, and that some did propound unto him high questions, especially in
di^inity. I will briefly relate some speeches they had with him, during his
abode at Padoua, and I will not forget that he declared with a settled
Judgment, that he did see the eternal vengeance of GOD prepared against the
sin which he had committed. For that he did find in him self, that those
things which GOD had given to others, to rejoice their spirits and to live well
and happily, had all conspired against him in despite of his horrible forfet.
For although (said he) that GOD for a great blessing had promised to many
holy men, a goodly issue and a great number of Children, in whose love and
obedience they may repose their age, and that there was nothing more pleasing
in this present life, yet in the midst of his miseries, the hands and faces
of his Children were as horrible unto him as the hang-mans. It cannot well be
expressed, what grief and vexation he seemed to receive, when his Children
brought him meat, forcing him to eat, and threatening him when he refused it.
He confessed his Children did their duties, and yet he took al in ill part
(saying) that he did not acknowledge GOD any more for his Father, but did fear
him as an adversary, armed with judgment. For he had bin three weeks in this
apprehension, when he spoke these things, without eating or drinking, but what
they forced him unto, the which he received with great difficulty, the which
he resisted withal his power, spitting out that which they forced him to
take. Some of the Assistants were of opinion to make him a fraied, to make him
the more apt, to receive food, first for the Soul, then for the body: asking
him if he did not fear greater and sharper torments after this life, then
those heethen felt? He confessed that he did expect far more sharp, and
had already horror of them: yet he desired nothing more then to be cast
headlong into them, that he might not fear other more greeuious torments.
They asked him again, if he thought his sin to be so foul, as it could
not be pardoned through the bounty and infinite mercy of GOD? His answer
was, that he said sinned against the Holy Ghost, which was so great a sin,
as it is called a sin unto death, that is to say, subject to the eternal
vengeance of GOD, and to the pains of hell. Whereof this poor wretch
discoursed amply, learnedly and to subtilie against himself. Learned and
Godly men, which did assist him, omitted no testymonies that might assure a
wounded conscience, that GOD is merciful, gentle and ready to pardon. But all
this could not divert him from his opinion, neither could they draw any other
thing from him, but that he desired much that he might return to some hope
of pardon. But it fares with me (says he) as with Cryminall persons, shut up
in close prisons and fettered hand and foot. Sometimes they are saluted by
their friends passing by, who advise them to break prison and to deceive their
gards if they can. Such prisoners would gladly follow their counsel, but it
is a vain desire. Even so is mine said he. As for the scriptures which were
cited unto him, touching the love and affection of GOD the Father by reason of
his Son JESUS CHRIST, he did aduowe them, adding, that they did belong
only to them whom JESUS CHRIST did repute his Brethren and his members: but
as for him he had renounced that love, and willingly rejected all Brotherly
alliance: neither was he ignorant in how great tranquillity of mind they
might be, who had once embraced the promises of salvation, and did rest
themselves continually therein. For confirmation whereof this his sad desaster
(said he,) was propounded for an example before all men's eyes: that if they
were wise they should not hold it light, nor happened by any chance: but to
learn by his ruin, how dangerous it is to fall any thing from that which
beelongs to the great glory of the Son of GOD. Adding that it was a
slipperie and a very dangerous passage, yea most fearful to him that stood
not carefully upon his guard: Moreover forasmuch as such evident examples of the
vengeance of almighty GOD, did seldom appear to the eyes of men, they
deserved to be the more carefully regarded. That amongst a great multitude
and number of reprobates in the world, his calamity was not singular; but his
only punnishment and ruin did satisfy GOD, a just Judge to admonish all
others to have a care of themselves. He added with all, that therein he did
acknowledge the severity of GODS judgment, who had chosen him to make him a
spectacle rather then any other: and to admonish all by one man's mouth, to
abstain from all impiety: confessing moreover that there was no reproach nor
punnishment which he had not deserved, by reason of his foul offense. After
that he had discoursed sincerely and gravely of the divine Justice; he said
that they should not take it strange this his long speech touching the true
reason of the will of GOD: for that oftentimes GOD does wrest out of the mouth
of reprobates most assured testymonies of his Majesty, his Justice, and his
fearful vengance: as we see in IVDAS confessing his own sin and
iustefying his Master. Using a long discourse upon this sentence, and desirous
to show the greatness of GODS Judgments: there are some (said he,) who have
all things so wishfully, as they live in all delights, without fear or
apprehension of any harm, as having attained the higth of all felycitie: who
notwithstanding are registered for perdition, whereof JESUS CHRIST propounds an
example in the rich man, enjoying all the pleasures of the world with a full
gorge, being after his death tormented in hell: whereof mention is made in the
sixteenth Chapter of the Gospel after Saint Luke. That GOD does often propound
unto makinde a hope of reward to draw him to the right belief of His holy
will; and oftimes he does withdraw them from their Impieties by prodigious
and fearful signs. And yet as Impiety is natural to Men, they make not
their profit of such instructions, and think not that it concerns them: but
contrariwise impute it to any other thing, rather then to the wisdom of GOD,
to fear and reverence him. Hereupon he made a bitter inuectiue against a
certain Philosopher, whom he had known above twenty years before, for that
this MOROSOPHE had been so impudent, to deliver in his lessons, yea to write
it, and to publish it in Print, that all the miracles that JESUS CHRIST had
done upon the earth, might well be done by a man, that were skillful in the
knowledge of Natural things. It were hard to represent the admiration
wherewith they were surprised, and with what compassion they were moved that
came to visit him, for the discourses which they heard from his mouth. Every
man labored earnestly to reduce this poor man to some hope of his salvation.
Among others, there was one, a reverend man for his holiness of life, who
departed not from the patients bed: It was the Bishop of Capo d' Istria, in the
Venetians territories. He ceased not to exhort SPIERA, and labored by many
testimonies of the holy Scriptures to divert him from that apprehension:
beseeching him by their friendship, by his love to his Wife and Children, and
for that his health should be precious unto him, that he should have a care
of himself, and print in his heart a hope and trust of salvation by JESUS
CHRIST. Adding that he did not think that his spirit was altogether void and
destitute, of some good and heavenly inspiration, seeing he spoke so holylye
and devoutly of the excellency of Christian religion.

Although the sick man knew well that these admonitions proceeded from a
sincere and true heart: yet for that he had diverse times rejected them, he
began to frown, saying unto the Bishop. You believe as I think, that I do
willingly nourish this obstinacy in my mind, and that I take delight in this
vehement passion of despair. If you be of that opinion, you are deceived. I
will tell you (to the end you may know my resolution) that if I could be
persuaded that the judgment of GOD might by any means be changed or
mitigated for me, it should not grieve me to be tormented ten thousand years
with the sharpest pains of Hell, so as I might have any hope of rest after
this long sufferance. But even in that whereby you do exhort me to gather
some hope: I see all means of health, and pardon taken from me. For if the
testimonies of holy Scripture have any authority (as they have) do you
think that JESUS CHRIST has said in vain. That he which has renounced him
before men, he will renounce him before his heavenly Father? do you not see
that it concerns me, and that it is as it were particularly verified in my
person? what shall become of him whom the Son has disauowed before his
Father? when as you say that we must hope for no salvation but in JESUS
CHRIST. Thereupon he did expound certain passages of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, and of the second Catholic Epistle of Saint Peter, out of the which
he drew terrible conclusions against himself.

We cannot believe with what gravity and vehemency his words were
delivered, neither was there ever man heard pleading better for himself, then
SPIERA did then against himself. He did allege notable things of GODS
Justice, detesting his fore-passed life: admonishing all that were about him
very earnestly: not to think that a Christians life was a light thing, and
easily discharged. That it does not consist only in having the head Baptized,
in reading certain verses and Texts of the Gospel, and to be termed an
honest man: but it was needful he should live as the doctrine of truth does
command him. Thereupon he repeated a Text out of Saint Peter, exhorting us to
show through holiness of life, certain signs of the love of GOD toward us,
and of the confidence we should have in him. He said moreover, that he had
known many, who after they had tasted the sweetness of true felicity, they
suffered themselves to be so carried away, as they had no longer care to
perform that which belonged to a Child of GOD. He protested that he had
sometimes imagined that his sins had been hidden, and that he could not
be punished, for that CHRIST had made satisfaction for them: but then he knew
too late, that those things belonged only to the elect and chosen of GOD,
betwixt whose sins, and the heavenly and celestial Throne, JESUS CHRIST
setts his precious blood, and the dignity of his obedience, as a vale and
shadow to cover them: and does plant them against the divine vengeance, as a
high and strong Rampar, that sinners repenting them, might not be oppressed nor
drowned with the deluge and ouer-flowings of their offenses and sins. As for
himself, seeing that he had renounced our Savior JESUS CHRIST, he had as
one should say, overthrown this strong Rampar with his own hands, so as after
this ruin and ouer-flowing, the deluge of waters of this vengeance, had
covered and swallowed up his soul. One of his most familiars said unto him,
that he did hold the cause of this his great torment to proceed from abundance
of melancholy humors, which did so trouble his brain. SPIERA remembering,
that he had many times refuted that opinion, and seeing they were to begin
again, said unto the other, you may think what you please: but GOD in truth
has troubled my spirit, and deprived me of judgment, seeing it is impossible
for me to have any hope of my salvation. Having continued in such and the like
speeches, during his abode at Padoua, they carried him back to his house at
Ciuitelle, where he dyed in this despair. This which is worthy of
consideration among the Histories of our time, is drawn out of a discourse
published by Master HENRY SCRINGER, a learned Lawyer, who was then at Padoua,
did see and many times talk with this poor SPIERA.

About twenty years before, a very famous Doctor throughout all Germany
called KRAVS, remaining at Halle in Swabe, having oftentimes turned his
conscience, sometimes toward GOD, sometimes toward the world, having
inclined in the end to the worser part, said and confessed publicly, that he
was undone, and fell so deep into despair, as he could neither receive nor
take any comfort nor consolation, so as in this miserable and wretched estate
of his soul, he slew himself most miserably. In the History of Germany.

Cardinal CRESCENCE, being at Verona, to pass on farther about some matters
of importance, was much troubled the 25. of March with writing, and having
labored very late at night, rising a little out of his chair to take breath,
he imagined that he did see a black Dog, of an exceeding greatness, having
fiery eyes, and his ears hanging to the ground, which came directly toward
him, and then hid himself under the Table. He was presently like one in a
sown, but being come again to himself, he cried out alowd, calling his
servants that were in the former Chamber, and commanded them to seek this
Dog with a light. But not finding him there, nor in the antichamber, a
Fever seized on him, and increased in such sort, as he dyed. Toward the end
of his life, he cried often to his servants: Drive away this Dog which comes
up to my bed. It was not possible to resolve nor to comfort him. But he died
in great despair at Verona. History of our time. SLEIDAN, lib. 23. of his
Comentaries

Under the reign of King FRANCIS the second, the Kings Advocate in the
Parliament of Daulphine, called PONSENAS, after that he had sold his
patrimony, his wives, and borrowed much money of his friends to buie this
office, he consumed what remained in keeping of open house, hoping to be soon
recompensed to the double. But being fallen sick of a disease unknown to the
Physicians, he fell into despair of GODS help and mercy: and representing
daily unto himself the death of some innocent persons executed at Romans and
at Valence, whom he had pursued. He denied GOD, called upon the Diuill, and
made all the horrible curses and Imprecations that might be imagined. His
Clarke, seeing him in this despair, spoke to him of the mercies of GOD,
alleging certain passages of the Scripture to that purpose. But instead of
turning unto GOD, and asking pardon for his offenses, he said unto him; O
STEPHEN how black thou art? the young man who was redish hayrd, excused
himself: the Advocate replied again, how black thou art? but it is with thy
sins. That is true answered the Clarke, but I hope in the bounty and mercies
of GOD: then expounding his saying at large, PONSENAS began to cry out like a
desperate man, detesting his servant, as one of the wickedest and most
miserable men in the world. At this cry some of his friends came running, whom
he commanded that STEPHEN should be had to prison, and his process made.
Hereupon despair did so increase in him, as with sigthes and howling he gave
up the ghost, after a fearful manner. His Creditors did scarce give them
leisure to draw the body out of the bed: for every man sent to seize upon the
moueables which PONSENAS had left, and of all his goods, the which was far
short of their due. The which all men did find very strange: for that before
he entered into that office, he was held to be as rich as any one of his
profession. Yet there was never so great misery seen, for there was nothing
but the straw left for his Wife and Children, who were taken away in pity to
be broughtvp, else they must have been glad to have begd their bread, or dyed
for hunger, so bare this house was made. The History of France, under FRANCIS
the second.

Merueylous Sleepers.
I Knew a young man who dreaming in the night that he was to ride forth about
some business, rose up being fast a sleep out of his bed, made himself ready,
put on his Boots and Spurs, and getting upon a Pole that served to hang
clothes at a Garret window, he set a-stride on it, and began to Spur with
his heels, as if he had been on horseback. But awaking presently, he was so
terrified with this accident, as he came unto me for remedy. P. SALIVS DIVERSVS
Physician, Chap. 18. in his Treaty of the affected parts.

I did help another, who being of a chollerick and quarrelling disposition,
used commonly to dream that he was fighting with one or other, and thereupon
rising out of his bed, ran to his weapons, drew out his sword, and fencing it
after a strange manner, struck and foyned at the Chamber walls, insomuch that
they were feign to take away every thing out of this Chamber that might either
hurt himself or others. In the same.

Besides these two I knew an Artificer that in his sleep rose out of his bed,
and going out of the Chamber went up and down the stairs, and all about the
house without any harm. Upon a time he went stark naked in his sleep to his
shop, and with his Keys unlocked the doors of it: whereupon being awaked by
some of his friends that met with him, he became so ashamed, that he never
fell into the like again. In the same.

Lying in an high chamber in the College of Francfort upon Odera with master
MARTIN GVTTENBERGER, student in Physic, a young man of a lively spirit, small
stature, and slender body, but of a moist brain: and chancing to awake, I saw
him walk stark naked up and down the Chamber being fast a sleep, and then
get up into a great window that was wide open, and there stand. Suddenly I
ran to him and caught him in mine arms, fearing lest he would have tipled
out of the window, and having carried him to bed, I asked him what he did?
Nothing said he: and when he awaked he never remembered any thing he had
done. I. HORST. Physician, in his learned treatise of the nature of
night-walkers.

Before I went to study Physic at Francfort, desiryng to see other
universities, I was sent for to be Tutor to three young gentlemen of Misnia,
whose Father named GEORGE de SCHLINITZ, Councellor to diverse Princes, and a
grave and unreprovable personage, told me that he and two of his Brethren
had walked many times in their sleep whilst they were students at Lipsic, yea
and gotten up into garrets and climbed up on the tops of houses: so that one
of his brothers chanced to fall and break his thigh. At length their Tutor
looking narrowly unto them, whipped them wel-fauoredly, as soon as they got out
of their bed: which having continued twice or thrice until such time as they
awaked, by that means they were helped. The same.

Three young gentlemen brethren, lying to gither in one Chamber, one of them
rose up naked and sound a sleep, carrying his shirt in his hand, and went to
the window, where he caught hold of a cord hanging at a certain pulley, and
winding up himself to the top of the ouse, met with a Pies neast, got out
the young ones, wrapped them up in his shirt, let himself down again,
re-entred into the Chamber window, laid himself down in his bed, and slept as
before. Awaking in the morning, he began to say to his brothers. Wot you what I
dreamt to night? me thought I rose out of my bed, went to the window, and got
up to the house top, where I found a Pies neast and brought away the young
ones. His brothers laughed at it: and after other talk, going to rise, he
sought up and down for his shirte, which at last he found with the young Pies
wrapped up in it. They ran presently and looked up to the top of the house,
and saw where the Pies neast had been pulled out. The same.

A young Scholar at Blackenbourg did many things sleeping. As Soon as he had
suppt he would have fallen into so dead a sleep, that for any noise could be
made he never waked. After that with pinching and pulling of him they had made
him look up, if they carried him to bed, he slept as before: but the next
morning he never remembered any thing had bin done over night. Moreover,
whatsoever he held, being so a sleep, were it the end of a table, a nail in
the wall, a napkin or any garment, they were feign to have two or three men to
open his fingers, and make him let go his hold: insomuch that many times
holding his clothes in his hand, they were forced to carry him to bed, and
let him lie so with them till he awaked of himself the next morning. The same.

It is not long since that the Duke of Holst Cook rising in his sleep went
down out of his Chamber, and having past through a great wide-court, entered
into the kitchen, and got into the Well stradling with his feet, and with his
fingers clinging so hard to the sides of it, that in this sort he descended
with nothing but his shirte on till he came to the water, which wetting the
skirte of his shirte it struck so cold on his heels that he awaked, and began
to cry out in his language, O mein bein helffe mir that is to say. O my legs,
help me. The folks of the house wakened with the cry, and somewhat
understanding the voice, sought for him, and finding him hanging by the hands
and feet against the sides of the Well they reached him down a ladder with a
candle and a lantern. But not able to get him up that way, they let down a
great bucket willing him to put his right foot in it, and with his hands to
hold fast by the chain of the Well. By which means he was drawn up having
been as it were frozen in the Well, they carried him to bed, where he lost
his speech and opened his eyes very seldom and that with pain. Being sent for
to visit him, I spent all that day in fighting with the apoplexy. At length
he began to stir a little, and to mutter forth some words, but vomyting
exceedingly. The next day I found him come to himself again and talking: he
told me how that night that he was so in the well he dreamt that he was
walking, and with stumbling had like to have fallen, and that him thought he
had been over head and ears in water. Finally after afewe days he was
thoroughly recovered again. The same.

A Spanish gentleman, surnamed TAPIA, rose oftentimes in his sleep, and did
many things about the house, going from one place to another without awaking*
but to the end no mischance should come unto him, he had always a basen of
water set by his bed side. Now one night in the Sommer-time he arose in his
shirt, put a cloak about him, got him forth a doors, being all this while
fast asleep, and met (as him thought) with another man who demanded of him
whither he went so late. It is so hot, answered TAPIA that, I mean to go and
wash my self. And so will I quoth the other, come lets go along together.
Withal my heart* says TAPIA. Thereupon they got them to the river, where TAPIA
putting of his cloak and shirte, was going into the water: but the other
ieasting beeganne to say, you cannot swim I am sure: marry but I can,
replied the gentleman, and it may be better then you.

Well (quoth the other) then follow me. And saying so, he got him up on a
bridge that was thereby, and leaping down into one of the deepest places of
the River, swamme up and down and called to the Gentleman, since you brag
so much, do as I have done. TAPIA follows him, and leapes into the River as
all this was done in his sleep, so as soon as his feet touched the water he
awaked and laboring all that possibly he could, he began to call that
other who was not to be seen. Whereupon fearing it was some evil Spirit that
had drawn him into that danger, after he had recommended himself unto GOD,
he swamme over the River, took up his cloak and shirte, and returned home,
recounting that which had happened unto him: and afterward used means not to
fall into the like perrill, again. A* de TORQVEMADOE in the end of the third
date of his Hexameron.

There have bin many found, who rising thus sleeping, and going up into
windows that have been open, have fallen down to the ground, breaking their
Arms and legs: others have been found stark dead: and some so grievously
wounded, as they have soon after given up the ghost. But it suffices us to
propound such as have escaped (the which are set down in Books that we have
seen) until that time may discover the rest, by some man more diligent then
my self, who may note all if it please him.

I have heard of a young Maiden at Paris, which did usually every night go to
bathe her self in the River, being a sleep: The which she continued long,
until that her Father being advertised thereof, watched her in the Street,
and whipped her well, to make her leave this custom: whereat the Maid awaked,
and was much ashamed to see her self naked in the street. Master L. IOVBERT
lib. 3. chap. 10.

It is also reported, that a Scholar, having had a quarrel the night before
with one of his companions, rise up in his sleep, and went and slew his enemy
lying in his bed in another Chamber, and then he returned to his own bed
without waking, as it was supposed: for the next day the Justice being called
by the Host, found him a sleep, and his Dagger bloody, confessing that he
had dreampt that he had sl^ine him, who they said was murdered. In the same
Author. There are (said he upon this report) many such examples, by the which
we may conclude, that besides the natural and vital faculties of the soul,
(the which he affirms to be very powerful in sleepers) these also that are
dedicated and subject to our wills, do labor, caused by the means of the
Muscles: as to go, to embrace, to speak.

Strange efficacy and power of Satan.
MAster THEODORE Son to CORNELIUS sometimes Consul of Goude in Holland,
reported this History unto me that follows, auouching it to be very true.
In a village called Ostbrouch near unto Vtrech there dwelt a widow, who had a
servant whom she employed about necessary affairs of the house. He having
observed, (as servants are often curious) that this widow went late in the
night, when all were at rest, into one certain place in the stable, stretching
forth her hands upon the rack, whereas they usually put haie for their
Cattle. He wondering what it meant, resolved to do as much without the priuity
of his Mistress, and to try the effect of this ceremony. Soon after,
following his Mistress who was gone into the stable, he goes and takes hold
of the rack. Suddenly he feels himself to be lifted up into the air, and to
be carried into a Cave under grownd in a little Town called Vuich, whereas he
found a Synagoge of Sorcerers, devising together of their witch-crafts. His
Mistress amazed at this unexpected presence, asked him how he came into that
company: to whom he reported what had happened. She began to be in a
great rage against him, fearing least those mighty assemblies should be
descouered by that means, yet she consulted with her companions what was to
be done in that difficulty. In the end they concluded to entertain this new
guest friendly, forcing a promise from him to keep silence, and to swear not
to descouer the secrets which then had been made known unto him, beyond his
hope or merit. This poor man promises wonders, and flatters every one: and
least he should be more toughly handled, he makes a show to be admitted of
that Sinagogue, if it pleased them. In these Consultations the time was spent,
and the hour of departure approached. Then they make an other consultation at
the instance of the Mistress; whether for the preservation of many, it were
not expedient to cut the servants throat, or to carry him back. By a common
consent they inclyned to the milder course, to carry him back again, seeing
he had taken his oath not to reveal any thing. The Mistress undertakes this
charge, who (after protestations made) takes him upon her back, promising to
carry him back unto her house. But having made part of the way, they
discovered a Lake full of reeds. The Mistress meeting with this occasion, and
fearing still that this young man (repenting himself that he had been
admitted to these hellish feasts) would descouer what he had seen: shakes
him violently from her shoulders, hoping (as it was likely) that he should
loose his life, as well through the violence of his high fall, as that he
should be buried in the mudde of the Lake.

But as GOD is infynitly merciful, desiring not the death of a sinner; but
that he should convert and live: he did limmit the furious desseins of this
Sorceresse, and would not suffer this young man to be drowned, so as his fall
was not mortal, for tumbling down, he met with a thick tufte of reeds,
which did abate the violence of his fall: yet he was very sore hurt, having no
means to help himself but with ^is tongue, being all the rest of the night
in extreme pain in this muddie couch. Day being come, in lamenting and
crying out, it was the will of GOD that some passengers being amazed at this
extraordinary Clamor, after they had sought dilligently, found this poor Body
half dead, having both his knees out of joint. They inquire whence he was,
and how he came in that case: and hearing the whole discourse, after they had
drawn him out of that miserable place they caused him to be transported in a
Cart to Vtrecht. The Bourgemaster, called JOHN of Colombourg (a virtuous
Gentleman) ravished with admiration for so strange an accident, made a
dilligent inquiry of the matter, and caused the Sorceresse to be apprehended
and committed to prison, where she confessed all that had past voluntarily
and without torture, beseeching him to take some pity of her. But by a
general consent this woman was condemned and publicly burnt. The servant lay
long before he was cured of his hurtes, especially of his thighs, being
punnished for his detestable curiosity. Master BAVDOVIN de ROVSEY in his
medicinal Epistles. Epist. 50.

ERASMUS in his Epistles upon the report of HENRY of GLARIS a learned man in
our time, writes that the 10. of April 1533. in an Inn at Sciltac a Town in
Suisserland, distant some eight good Leagues from Fribourg, as night approached
they heard a certain hissing, which seemed to come out of one of the Chambers.
The master of the house suspecting there were some thieves did run to that
place. Whereas he found not any man, but he still herd the same voice in the
garret, and from thence on the top of the Chimney. Then presuming it should
be some evil spirit, he sent for two Priests to conjure it, who having
begun their exorcismes, the spirit answered them, that he cared not for
the^, for the one was a whore-hunter, and both were thieves, so as in despite
of all they could do, he would burn the Town, as he had undertaken. Some
thought it was for Jealousy which he had conceived against the hosts Son
and the maid of the house, of whom he had had carnal knowledge, by the
space of fourteen years, as she confessed afterward at her death. Having
therefore raised this creature in an instant, to the top of the Chimney, he
delivered fire into her hand, commanding her to fire the Town, the which she
did, so as in less then an hour all was consumed to ashes, neither could
water or vinegar quench this fire. This was a real thing, and the fire also
which the Devil brought, was real and material, but of an other nature then
the common fire, or any artificial that can be made. And yet it came not from
above, as the fire of lightning, the which burns little, if it fall not by
chance among gonpowlder, as in the year 1500. it happened at Paris in the
Tower of Billy: and sense at Macklin in Brabant and at Venise. Blaise Viginere
in his treaty of Comets.

I will add unto this history what PHILIP CAMERARIVS reports, who says that
the fire fell here and there upon houses like unto fiery boullets, and when
that any one did run to help to quench his neighbors house being on fire,
they called him back presently to save his own. They had great difficulty to
save a Castle of free stone, seated a good way from the Town. I have heard
the particularities of this terrible visitation, from the mouth of the Curate
of the place, and other Inhabitants of good credit, who had been spectators of
all. The Curate told me, that this evil and cruel spirit, did counterfeit
the singing and melodious tunes of diverse birds, and many that were in my
company did wonder with me, to see the Curate have as it were a Crown about
his long hair, which he carried after the ancient manner, all of diverse
colors: saying, that it had been done by this spirit, which had cast the
hoope of a Hogshead at his head. He added moreover, that the same spirit did
ask him one day with some others, if they had never heard a Raven croake? That
thereupon this enemy, made so horrible a noise, as all that were present were
so amazed, as if it had continued any longer, they would have dyed for fear.
Moreover, this old man did affirm, (but not without blushing) that oftentimes
this enemy of man's salvation, laid open to himself and to others, that did
accompany him, the secret sins they had committed, so exactly, as all were
foreced to leave the place, and retire themselves to their houses ashamed. In
his Historical meditations, Cha. 75.

Great Fires.
I Do not enter at this present into the consideration of fires growing
through the fury of the War, having reserved the description thereof among
the incredible miseries, caused by the wars in our (...). In this Section we
will only treat of fires proceeding from other means. The last of June about
a hundred years since, toward night: Cracouia the capital City of Poland
was set on fire, the which was in a manner all burnt. It was a wonderful
ruin, by reason of many thousands of houses that were consumed to Ashes.
Master Cromer, lib. 30. of the History of Poland.

In the year 1514. the 11. of January at night, fire took the Realte at
Venice, and first consumed the rich shoppes, which were very many. A Northerly
wind blowing very vehemently, carried this fire to the next houses: in an
instant all was on fire: so as infinite buildings were ruined. Saint JOHN'S
Temple, the Meal Market, and all the buildings about it. The shoppes of
Goldsmiths and changers were consumed. This fire continued all night, and
could not be quenched, but in making place by the ruin of houses, and whole
streets. Most part of the City was defaced by this accident. Since it has
been so reedefied, beautified, and enlarged, as this loss, has not been
seen these many years. P. IOVIVS, lib. 12. of his Histories.

The year 1518. in June, after a horrible Eclipse of the Sun, there
followed at the same hour a terrible fire at Vienna in Austria, the which
burnt a quarter of the City. The Emperor MAXIMILIAN the first being with his
Court at Inspruch, fell sick hearing of this news, and dyed of a continual
fever. CVSPINIAN in the life of the Emperors.

In the year 1536. the 2. of May, a gust of wind having scattered sparkles
here and there, fire took in many houses at Delft, a great, fair, and famous
Town in Holland, so as in few hours the greatest part thereof was ruined,
and had like to have been all consumed by this fire. But it has been so
repaired since, as at this day it is one of the pleasingest and most
delightful Towns that can be seen. In this fire there happened a memorable
accident. Men of credit did see that time a Stroke (whereof there are great
numbers in Holland) which coming from her prey, discovered, that the fire had
taken the nest, where her young ones were. She began to fall upon it, to see if
she could preserve them from the fire: but for that they were yet vnfethered,
and that there was no means to draw them forth, she fell upon them with her
wings spread abroad, and covering her young ones, was so consumed to Ashes with
them. What a reproach is this charitable Bird unto some fathers and Mothers,
which have no feeling of nature, nor of humanity, but only the face. ANDR.
JUNIUS in his description of Holland.

In the year 1539. betwixt June and July, upon a Thursday at night, fire took
at Constantinople, near unto the prison appointed for criminal persons, in
the shops of such as sold Tallow, Rosin, Oil, and such like stuff, so as it
took hold of the prison which was barred very close, and there smothered
seven hundred men. From thence it dispersed it self on every side through the
City, and coming to another prison, they were constrained to let them forth,
else they had all perished: for in a moment this prison was consumed to Ashes.
Then the fire advanced toward the wodden gate, where as the Smithes forges be,
and such as deal in Iron works: from thence it took hold of the Captain of
the Ianisaries house, and consumes all it meets in that quarter. Then it gets
into the Tauerners street, and that being consumed, it does seize upon a great
place called Tachral Cala, then it turned toward the Copper-smiths, and the
Glassehouses* enuironing all that quarter that is about the painted Stoues.
Then going on, it came to the place where the Jews dwelt, where it made a
wonderful spoil, for that the houses stand very close. The slames flew to the
gate of the Fish-market, and consumed all that it incountred betwixt that and
the Jews Street, whose houses were burnt to Ashes. Neither was it possible by
any means to quench this fire, so as it continued all night, and the next day,
even unto the evening, haueing wasted and consumed the best part of the City,
and Suburbs thereof, unto the Sea-shoare. The Annals of Turkey.

In the year 1546. on Saturday the seventh of August, fire fell from Heaven,
upon Macklin in Brabant, and fiered a Tower, where was a hundred Barrels of
poulder. This Tower was quite ouer-throwne, with a piece of the Town wall, of
two hundred paces, near unto the said Tower. Then the fire of this poulder
took hold of the near places, and did so fire all the Town, as if a great
shower of rain had not fallen, this great City had been consumed to Ashes.
The next day they found so many dead carcases, and so stinking, as they were
forced with all speed to make great holes, and to bury them by dozens at a
time. All the Sunday was spent in such burials. The number of the hurt exceeded
a hundred and fifty. They found a Woman with Child smoothered under certain
ruins, who being speedilye opened, her Child was found breathing, and was
Baptized. A Gentlewoman leaping out of her bed to open a window in her
Chamber, her head was cut off with a Thunder-boult, so as it hung without
life by a piece of the skin. In a corner of a street, near unto BERNARDS
Palace, a Tauerner called CROES, being gone into the Seller to draw Beer for
his guests, whereof some played at Cards: the house in a moment was
ouer-throwne, the players among others were crushed in pieces, having the Cards
yet in their hands, when they drew them from under the ruins. No one in the
house escaped but only the host, preserved by means of the valted Cave into
the which he was gone. Three days after this pitiful Accident, there were
many found in Caves dead for hunger, others smothered, or fainted away, with
the terror and insupportable stink of the lightning. They found a man and a
woman that were carried away, and as it were tied fast betwixt the branches of
a Tree. The suburbs of Neckecspsis were in a manner all ruined. This City so
pleasant and fair before, was all disfigured, and as it were torn in pieces:
her stately buildings spoiled and overthrown: among others, the Emperors
Palace, the Lady MARGVERITS, and that of Berque, were struck with lightning,
and ouer-throwne. The house of the Italian Bankers was quite ruined: the Post
lodging spoiled, and the Stable carried away with the Horses. A part of the
Augustines Covent, and of other Temples in the City were broken. The Count of
Hocstrats house endured, and brake the shocke of this storm, the which ceased
when it had ouer-throwne it. With out it nothing had been left standing,
neither within the Town nor about it. There were found huge quarters of free
Stone cast by the Tempest, above six hundred paces from the Wall, to the great
hurt of those places where they fell. It was a fearful Tempest, a presage of
the war of Germany, whether the Emperor CHARLES the fifth then marched.

CHILDREN. Memorable Accidents both before and soon after the birth of some.
THE year 1551. in the month of August, a certain German woman of Misnia,
was brought in bed of a Daughter, which dyed within six months after of the
small Pox, five days before she came into the world, she was heard very
intelligibly to cry in the Mothers belly. I did present it to be Baptized,
with the Wife of Master JOHN KENTMAN, a Doctor of Physic. G. le FEVRE, Lib.
3. of the Annals of Misnia.

In the beginning of January 1558. an other woman of the same Town. being at
a Sermon, the Child which she carried in her belly, did cry thrice so loud,
that such as were about the Mother, did understand it plainly. A month after
she was happily delivered. The same Author.

Many Children borne at one Birth.
I Will represent here some Histories of former ages, by reason of the
rareness, hoping the discourse will be pleasing: protesting in the mean time
to contain my self in other things with-in my intention, which is not to
exceed the wonders of late days, whereof I will produce some examples.

In the Country of Agenois is the famous house of BEAV*VILLE, sometimes very
rich, and of great possessions, from the which the Marshall of Monlucs wife
was descended. It is held for a true History, that the Grandmother of the said
Lady had nine Daughters at one birthe, that were all married and had Children.
The Mother and the said Daughters successively were interred at Saint Crepasi,
the Collegiall Church of Again, built and founded by the said house of
BEAV-VILLE: the Mother having made her Tomb in the Church upon a portall,
betwixt nine others which she had also caused to be made for her Daughters, in
memory thereof. I have seen some of them being at Again in the year 1577. in
the said Church. The others have been ruined during the civil wars: And
this was the History. The Lady of BEAV-VILLE had a Chambermaid that was fair
and lovely, with whom her husband seemed to be in love, so as she to be
honestly rid of her, married her. This Maid at her first lying in, had three
children, which made the Gentlewoman suspect that her husband had a share in
them, imagining it not possible that one woman could conceive by one man such a
number of children. The which increased her jealousy, and not-withstanding any
persuasions, she began to defame and hate this poor Maid more and more.

It happened a while after that the Gentlewoman was with child, and so big, as
she was delivered of nine daughters. The which they did interpret to be a
punishment sent from GOD, that she might be ashamed of her slander seeing they
might object unto her a greater fault, as if she had been familiar with many,
for she did always obstinately maintain, that a woman could not conceive
above two Children by one man. Being much ashamed, fearing to be diffamed, and
condemned by her own sentence, she was so tempted by the evil spirit, as she
resolved to cause eight of her Daughters to be drowned, and to keep one:
keeping the matter secreat betwixt the Midwife and her Chamber-maide, to whom
this cursed Commission was given. But it was GODS will that the husband coming
from hunting met with the Chamber-maide, and descouering the practice preserved
his innocent Daughters from death, caused them to be nursed unknown to the
Mother, and at their Christening called them all BORGVE, by one name, and so
he did the ninth which the Mother had reserved. When they were somewhat
grown, he caused them all to be brought into his house appareled in one
livery, having also attired that with in the house of the same sort. Being
altogether in one Chamber, he caused his wife to come in, accompained with
their Parents and familyar friends: and bid her to call BOVRGVE. At this call
every one of the nine answered, where at the Mother was much amazed, and the
more for that they were all of the like stature, face, countenance and voice,
and in the like apparel, which made her heart to give that they were her nine
Daughters: and that GOD had preserved the eight, which she had exposed, and
held to be dead whereof her husband did satisfy her, reproching unto her her
inhumanity before all the company, and showing her that this might chance to
confound her in the bad opinion which she had always held of him concerning
her Chamber-maide. M. L. IOVBERT. lib. 3. Chap. 2. of his popular errors.

I have heard that in the house of ESTOVRNEAV in Perigort there chanced the
like Accident about 300. years ago. The Lady had 9. Sons at on birth, and would
have exposed eight of them, the which were happily preserved (through the grace
of GOD) by the Fathers meeting them. All nine lived, and were advanced to great
places: four were of the Church, and five of the world. Of the Clergy men one
was Bishop of Perigueux and Abbot of Branlaume. The second was Bishop of
Paniez. The third Abbot of Grand-Selue, and the fourth of the house of GOD. Of
the secular men, one was the Kings Lieutenant at Reole against the English. The
second had a government in Bourgongne, and the other three were in great credit
about the King. All this is to be seen at this day painted in a great Hall,
in the Castle of Estourneue, as the Seigneour of Estourneau has told me,
being issued from that famous and very ancient house, and now Steward of the
King of Nauarres house, which is now King of France. The same Author liber. 4.
Chapter 2.

That of the Pourcelets of Arles in Prouence, is almost like unto this, out of
the which is issued the Noble house of the Conuertis: who were so called, for
that the Chamber-maide which carried the eight to drown, being met by the
husband, said that they were Pigges which she went to drown for that the Sow
could not keep them. Some say it came by the curse of a poor woman, who
begged an alms of the gentlewoman of the house: the said poor woman having
many little Children about her. The which the gentlewoman reproched unto her,
as proceeding of wantonness, and that she was too much given to men. The poor
woman, (who was honest) did then pray, that the gentlewoman might conceive
with as many Children, as a Sow has Pigges. It so fell out by the will of
GOD, to let the Lady understand, that we must not impute that to vice which
is a great blessing.

They report as much of the Noble famelie of Scroua at Padoua, which carries a
Sow in their Arms, in Italien called SCROFA, and in corrupt Langage Scroua,
which is the surname of that famelie. In the Annals of Lombardie it is
written, that in the time of ALGIMONT the first King of the Lombards, there was
a strumpet brought in bed of seven Sons, and that the one of them
succeeded the said ALGIMONT. JOHN PICVS Prince of Mirandola writes in his
Commentaries upon the second Psalm, that in Italy a German woman was
brought in bed at twice of twenty Children, at the first birth she had
twelve, and that the burden was so heavy, as she was feign to keep it up
with a towell. ALBVCACIS a great Physician, and an Arrabian Surgion, is a
witness of a woman that had seven Children, and of an other that miscarried
of fiueteene well proportioned. PLINY makes mention of one that miscarried of
twelve. MARTIN CROMER in his History of Poland writes that the wife of the
Earl VIRBOSLAS in Cracouia was delivered of six and thirty Children alive,
in the year 1269. But that which exceedes all other examples and which is
extraordynarie, supernatural and miraculous, is that which is written of a
Countess of Holland, the which LEWIS GVICHARDIN does set down in his
description of the Low Countries, as it is testified in an Abbey near to the
Hage. MARGVERITE Daughter to the Noble Lord, Plorent Earl of Holland and of
Mathilde Daughter to HENRY Duke of Brabant, Sister to WILLIAM King of Germany,
being about two and forty years old, was brought in bed on friday before
Easter, in the year 1313. (as Histories do write) of 365. Children, males and
females, the which (in the presence of many Noblemen and Gentlemen) being
laid orderly in a great basin, were Baptized by a Bishop: the males were all
called by one name JOHN, and the females ELIZABETH. All died soon after, and
so did the Mother, and were buried together in one grave. L. VIVES; ERASMUS and
others which report this History, say, that it was for-asmuch as the said
Lady had mocked a very poor woman as she was a begginge some relief of her,
for that she carried two Twins. She did blame her very much (saying it was
impossible that a woman should have two Children beegotten at one time of one
Father. Here-vpon the poor woman made her earnest prayer unto almighty GOD,
that (for proof of her innocence, being wrong-fully accused) that the
Countess might carry as many Children at one birth as there were number of
several days in the whole year.

To return to our Histories of fewer Children at a burden, we have seen a
woman at Aubenas in Viuares, who at her first burden had two Children, at her
second three, and at the third four. At Orillac in Auvergne the Wife of one
called SABATIER, had three Sons at a birth. The first and the last lived 24
hours the middle (who therefore was called JOHN of three) came to man's estate;
was married at Paris, and lived long. The Wife of a Capper in Rouan, crooked
and little, had five Sons at one birthe, in the year 1550. All this is
extracted out of Master L. IOVBERT. lib. 3. chap. 1. of his popular errors.
Let us add hereunto some other Histories.

In the year 1554. at Perme in Suitzerland, the wife of IHON GELINGER a
Doctor, was delivered of five Children at one birthe, three males and two
females. PLINY talks of a Greek, who at four burdens had twenty Children,
whereof the most part lived. DALECHAMPS in his French Chirurgerie writes, that
a Gentleman of Sienna, called BONAVENTVRE SAVELLI, had assured him, that a
slave and Concubine of his, had seven Children at one birthe, whereof four
were baptized. And in our time betwixt Sarte and Maine, in the parish of Seaux
near unto Chambellay, there is a Gentleman's house called Maldemette, whose
wife had the first year she was married two Children, the second year three,
the third four, the fourth five, and the fifth year six children, whereof she
dyed: one of these six children is yet living, Seigneor of that place of
Maldemette Master AMB. PARE lib. 24. chap. 5.

They have seen often in Spain, a woman delivered of three Children: and not
long since, a woman had four at a burden. It was generally reported a good
while since, that a great Lady was brought in bed at Medina del Campo of
seven Children. And they say that a Stationers Wife at Salamanca had nine.
Seeing we treat of those Admirable Histories, of many Children delivered at
one birthe, I will report what AVICENNE does witness in the ninth book of
Creatures, of a woman who at one birth brought forth 70. Children well
proportioned. And ALBERT the Great writes that he has heard for certain of a
Physician, which being called in a certain Town in Germany, to visit a
sick Lady, found that she had been delivered at one birth of 150. Children,
all wrapped together in a little filme, as big as a man's little finger, all
which came forth alive with their just proportion. A. TORQVEMADO in the first
days work of his hexameron. It is admirable, that a woman should have so many
Children, so small, and yet proportioned and alive, as we have seen of the
Countess of Holland, and other women above mentioned by AVICENNE and ALBERT.
For the explayning of the whole. I will add that which CONSTANTIVS VAROLIVS a
learned Physician at Bolonia the fat does write in the 4. book of his
anatomy. I have seen (says he) an abortiue fruit of three weeks,
confusedly proportioned of the bigness of a barley curnell, where I did note
the head and the breast, but no arms nor thighs. Moreover I have seen an
other of six weeks old, having a distinct form of the bigness of a Be, where
did appear the eyes, the nose, the mouth, the heart, the lights, the ribs,
the back, the liver, the Midriffe, the stomach, the reins, the bowels, the
yard and other parts: the which I showed unto many. The arms and thighs
began to bud forth, being very small in proportion to the rest of this
little Body, for the thighs were no bigger then a grain of mill, and the
arms twice as big. I have seen many other such aboriue fruits, of the
bigness of a bean, a snaile or a frog. Whereas I have always found all the
parts, and did ever observe that the extremities were less in proportion then
the rest: in such sort notwithstanding, as the spirit quickening this mass,
does fasshon and shape all the parts thereof together: but he does bring in
successively the fall and perfect fynishing of the form. This our Body is a
rich and admirable web, a piece of tapistrie of high price, the which should
move us think often, of the contents of the 139. Psalm.

CONRAD LICOSTHENES in his collection of prodigies, reporting the history of a
German, who at two deliueries had twenty Children, adds that in the
territory of MODENA, an Italian called ANTONIA, about forty years old, who
had been always accustomed to have four Children at a time, or three at the
least, had then forty as the Bishop of Como does testefie, who writ the
History.

Leaving these ancient Histories, whereof we could produce a great number, we
will report some of our time. A Country woman in Suisserland in the year.
1535. had four Sons at one birth the which lived some hours. An other woman
about Zurich had also four Sons at one time the which were Christened.
STVMPSVIS and LICOSTHENES. A Sicilian named PAMIQVE, married to BERNARD
BELLOVARD of Agrigentum, was so fertile, as at thirty birthes she had
seauentie three Children. A woman of Misnia being four and twenty years
old, had nine Children at one birth whereof being delivered, both she and
all her Children died. TH. FAZEL. lib. 6. of the 1. decade of the History of
Sicilia.

In the year 1579. there lived a woman called SALVST^, fat and low, the which
at two lyings in, had eighteen Children. I. MICHEL PASCAL. in his Annotations
upon the 1. book of P. PAVL PEREDA of the cure of diseases. Chapter 59. At
Bolognia the fat JULIUS SCATINARE, a man that had many Children was the
seventh Child of birth. His mother was sister to the Seigneour FLORIAN de
DV^PHE my kinsman, and I have seen a woman in the Town of Carpi have five
Sons at one birth. CARPVS in the Anotomie. We read in the Annals of GENOA,
written by AVGVSTIN JUSTINIAN in his 5. book, that in the memory of our
Fathers BARTHOLOME the wife of JOHN BOCCANE had at one Childbirth nineteen
Children, every one as big as a date, having but a confused form. A
Counselors wife at Bolognia, had at her first delivery two twins, at the
second three Children, whereof one had life: and four at the third, which died
incontinently. TRINCAVELLE liber 11. Chap 17. of cure of diseases. In the time
of the Emperor MAXIMLIAN a Suisse had three Sons at one birth, and they alliued
to the age of marriage. I. RVEF. lib. 5. of the conception and generation of
man. chapter 4.

Some few years past, the wife of an Artificer called BRANDIMART 26. years
old, being eight months gone with Child, not able to bear her burden
any longer, was delivered of four Children well proportioned, two Sons and
two Daughters, the which soon after they were Baptized died, and the Mother
living. All the people of Mantoua did ru^ne to see this woman and her four
Children. The Duchess her self did honor this poor woman with her
presence, and gave her great ^eleefe. MARCEL DONAT lib. 4 of his Physical
Histories* Chapter 24. A woman in the Town of Leyden in Holland, living yet in
the year 1597. and then about 38. years old, had had eighteen Children at
four birthes, whereof four then lived. Memories of our Time.

Children delivered at diverse times, of one bigness: by superfetation.
NOt long since in the Country of Agenois, there were three Children at one
birth, and one delivered eight days after an other. They write of a woman of
ALEXANDRIA, which was seen at Rome in ADRIANS time, with five Sons, whereof
the fifth was borne forty days after the other four, borne at one time. M. L.
IOVBERT. lib. 3. of popular errors Chap. 1.

At Beaufort in Vallee a Country in Aniou, a young Wife Daughter to MACE
CHAVMERE was brought in bed of a Child, and eight or ten days after, she
fell in labor of an other, which they were forced to pull out, of her Body,
whereof she died. M. AMB. PARE. lib. 24. Chapter 5.

A great Lady of Spain, being in travel of Child, delivered one, the news
whereof being carried to her Lord and husband, his answer was to them which
made the report: return all is not done she will have more. He spoke the
truth: for some hours after by fitts, she was delivered of five Children
more. A. TORGVEMADO in the first Iourne of his Hexameron.

The Wise of ZACHARY of Scarparia, being brought in bed of a Son, three
months after was delivered of another, and both lived: the one being a G^ocer
at Florence in Saint Lawrence street, NICHOLAS in the 6. discourse. tr. 1.
chap. 22. A certain woman was first delivered of a goodly Son, and the next
day of a very ^oule one. It was thought she had trespassed against her honor.
GORDOINVS in his book entitled Lilium sect. 7. cap. 2. Although the birthe of
Monsters be rare, yet supertation is more, yea so rare, as some hold it
impossible: yet not-with*standing we have had one example in an honest man's
wife, she was brought in bed of a Son at her full time, the 7. of December
1570. at ten of the clock at night, with the delivery of all that which is
accustomed to come after a happy birthe: the next day at the same hour,
contrary to any apprehension of her self or of the Midwife, she was
delivered of an other Son, the which had not gone half the time, for that
the eyes, nostrils and mouth, had no vents or opening. DODONEVS in his
Observations upon the 3. chap of Anth. Beniucnius.

The wife of Monsier GAILLART, President in the Chancerie of Valence, four
months after the death of her husband, was brought in bed of one Son and
five months after of another. PE. PAVL PEREDE. I have seen a Gentlewoman with
child with two Twins, whereof the first came forth dead, the first day of
the ninth month: the seventh day following she was brought in bed of the
other, which was living. A. LAVRENT. lib. 2. of his Anotomie. quest. 32.

The Lady MARIE of Neufchastell, having had nine Children by the Baron of
Cremaille: in her second marriage with the Seigneour of Malortie, she was with
Child of three Sons, with which number being but small of stature) she was
so ouercharged, as about the 5. month she was delivered of one only. And
she thinking, (as M. THIBAVT, a famous Physician at Chasteautierry did also)
that they were but burdens; he prescribed her a strong purgation, to make her
void those things, the which brought down the other two children, so whole and
lively, as the Physician him self (repenting him) said, that without doubt
they would have gone out their full time, notwithstanding the miscarrying of
the other, if the purgation had not done them wrong. Afterward, she was often
with child, and almost always with Twins; sometimes with sons, sometimes
with daughters: in the one of them she was so hurt with a dog, as finding
her self presently ill, she feared that her fruit was dead; so as fifteen
days after, she was brought in bed of two children, whereof the one was dead,
being very apparent that it had been long before suffocated: the other was
alive, but so weak, by the communication of his brothers harm, that for 3.
days he could not suck; yet he was so carefully tended, as he recovered, and
was since a Page of the Kings Stable. M. FRANCIS ROVSSET in his Commentary of
Children that are cut out of the mothers womb, cap. 7. sect. 6. As for
natural superfetations, it is certain that two children conceived at several
times, one after another, prove it sufficiently: the which I did once observe
at Pithuiers, in a woman that was delivered of a second child three weeks
after the first. The same Author.

The wife of JOHN PLIE^E, of a village called Rixheim, two hours journey from
Basil, having carried two Twins her full term, the first lived a year: the
second came into the world six weeks after his brother; he lived long, was
married, and had eight children. Master GASPAR BAVHIN in his Observations.

CHRISTIAN SCHLECHTIN having had ten children by her first husband, she
married again with MICHAEL VOGEL Provost of Bollickhein, a village three
hours journey from Basil, and being with child about the fiftieth year of
her age, and the thirtieth of her marriage, in the year of our Lord 1575. one
Sunday in April she fell in labor, and was delivered of a daughter named
MARIE, which died within fifteen days. Being up and laboring about the
house five weeks and five days after this first delivery, she had had new
throaes, so as she was delivered of a son called PHILIP, by his fathers
name, who lives yet: after that she had not any more children. The same Author.

In the year 1584. there died at Hirshorn, a little town of the Pallatinate,
near to Heildelberge, a gentleman Lord of that place, called PHILIP LODOVIC of
Hirshorn, leaving no heirs of his body, but a widow with child; those which
pretended to be his heirs (if the widow miscarried, or that the fruit of her
womb did not live) began presently to molest and trouble her, pulling the
keys of chambers, coffers, cabinets, caves, and greniers from her by force;
the which did so much afflict her, as laying her hands upon her head, she
began to cry out amain, and within few days after she was delivered of a
son, but dead, having no head. The heirs run presently and seize upon his
succession that was dead: but they did not long enjoy it. The widow being risen
out of childbed, felt her self very heavy, thinking it had been the swelling
of some humors gathered together in her body by reason of her heaviness. Some
Physicians (whose advise she did ask) were of the same opinion, not once
dreaming of that which followed soon after. And therefore they advised her to
go to certain bathes and mineral waters along the Rhine, whether she went,
accompanied with one maid, where she arrived in July. At that time the Elector
of Saxony was there with his Wife, and many other Princes and Princesses, so
as the poor widow being destitute of a lodging, was forced to repair to the
Provost or Mayor of the place, acquainting him with her condition. In the end
she obtained with great entreaty to lodge in the Prouosts house for that
night: This night (being ten weeks after her first birthe) she was brought in
bed of a goodly Son: whereof the Princes being advertised the next day, and
of the whole History, did honor her, for the Elector of Menzt made her a
stately feast according to the custom of Germany. He of Saxony gave her a
thousand Dollers, and they forced them that had seized upon the inheritance, to
leave it to the lawful heir newborn, who was left in the guard and keeping
of his Mother. The same.

Children dead in their Mothers wombes, and put forth by strange means.
LOVYSE POVPARD, wife to Master NICHOLAS SEVIN, called Champgaste of Orleans,
thinking that her terms were not stopped, but by reason of a quarten ague (for
then they do commonly cease) was conceived with Child: but not believing it,
she used such Physic, letting of blood, and other applications, as they do
usually, as well for the quarten ague, as for the hardness of the spleen, the
which they took then for the child that was in her belly, not conceiving what
it was, but rather some mass gathered together, by the pretended retention of
the menstruall blood. In the end the child being dead, and the parts grown
more soft, being rotten, without any show of delivery, in time the bones
disioyned within her, and did pierce the Matrix behind toward the great
gutte, so as she then began to void them by little and little by the seege,
and among others a whole bone of the leg. Having languished thus a long time,
she dyed, and was opened the sixth day of February 1565. by FLORENT PHILIP, and
MICHEL PICHARD, who found nothing within her but rotten bones, and especially
those of the head, with admiration how she could so long sub-sist. This woman
seemed to have been curable, by the Gastrotomia, or section of her belly, if
her grief had been known in time, and the remedy that is used in Caesarien
birthes, practiced discreetly. FR. ROVSSET in his Histerotomotie.

CATHERINE des FIEFS, Lady of Oucy near unto Milly, in her second marriage
fell sick, and with Child at one instant, not imagining that she was
conceived, and was Phisicked at Paris being sick, as the other had been at
Orleans, with many helps, yea entering into a sweating diet, notwith-standing
that one of the Queens Mid-wiues did judge her to be with Child, by all the
accidents of a woman in that case, orderly observed by her, from the staying of
her terms, unto milk in her breasts, and so to the ninth month: at which time
all did cease with the free motion of the child, having then pains of
childbearing without effect, and presently after there followed all the signs
of a dead child: whereof they yet took no heed. So returning from Paris to
her house, she ever after carried this child suffocated, even unto her dying
day, which was fifteen months after the ninth precedent, that it was alive.
The soft parts rotting and falling away beneath, were held with good reason, by
N. PONET a learned Physician of Melun, for filthe coming out of the Matricall
ulcer, and the bones remaining for a tumor of the spleen. In the end being
dead and opened, the 3. of October 1570. by LVC CHAMPENAIS, and JAMES DAZIER,
Barbers at Milly, in the presence of the Seigneiors of Verran and la Gainiere,
with many others, there was yet found in her much corruption, no matrix, and
all the bones of a child, some rotten, others whole, and among others one of
the two that join unto the shoulder upon the breast, having already pierced the
skin that covers the bowels, and the Muscles of the belly, nothing remaining
but the skin which did appear without on the left side all black, the which
had long before been taken for a tumor of the spleen. If her grief had been
well looked into, by the concurrence and continuance of signs in her
greatness, the child being dead, and other co-incidences well observed by
order, and known what it was: there had been hope, when as she could not be
delivered, to have saved both her and her fruit by the Gastrotomia, or
Caesarien section: or else the child being dead, to have preserved the Mother,
by the means of this section, being then the only and most necessary
remedy. In the same Treaty.

The like mournful effect follows the like cause, in the Wife of a
Surgeon at Montpellier called AVSME, assisted (as it is to be presaged) by
the most famous Physicians of that reverend College: who as Master RONDELET
reports in the 65, Chap. of his Method of Curing) having a child rotten in the
Matrix, cast out a part by morcels, the great bone remaining behind, so as
within a while after she dyed. In the same Treaty.

Master I. ALIBOVX a learned Physician at Sens in Bourgongne, writes in a
Letter of his to FR. ROVSSET these words. Here near unto my lodging has
fallen out an accident, as strangely as your Caesarien section. A woman with
child, being aged, or otherwise, could not be delivered but by morcels: she
had either side of the bottom of her belley very much swelled, by reason of
the violence of their Instruments, with all signs of an Impostume, the which
did also communicate with the passages of Nature, from that part of the belly
(being laid open by corosey) came a great abundance of filthe, and as much
more of the like substance and color by the nether parts, she would not
suffer me to sound it with the Instrument, to descerne precisely and advisedly
the bottom of the Synuositie: but without it, it appeared plainly, that the
Impostume and the ouer-ture thereof did pierce into the Matrix, by the common
accidents observed and kept, according to the order of times, and by the like
excrements, the one and the other being cured by the same means, and at the
same time. In the same Treaty. A dead Child, having been violently drawn
with (...) from a bakers wife called COLETTE SIMON, without hurting the skin
that lapt the Child in the belly; she happened in 5. days to have a great
swelling of either side in the bottom of her belly, with appare^t signs of an
Impostume, so as an opening was made by Corosiue, on the one side, from whence
the Surgion did draw with his hand a quantity of congealed blood, rotten and
stinking, the other side abating nothing, neither could the Surgion bring away
any of the skin that lapt the Child being forced to make a new opening on the
other side, from whence he did draw the skin that lapt the child, not without
extreme pain in this danger and despair: for she remained as one half
dead, and kept her bed three years, two years after she went with Cruches,
then with a Staff, and in the end she recovered her health in such sort, as
she had many Children and among others, one named SEBASTIEN, who lived long.
In the same treaty. M. N. de VILLENEVFVE an ancient Physician in Prouence,
writs to the same FR. ROVSSET these words. I confess in this long time that I
have lived (he was then sixty years old and lived above five and twenty
years after in great vigor of body and mind) I did never see this practice
whereof you write unto me, of a woman delivered of her Child by the side, and
yet to live. I do well remember that MADAME de PILES NONIES having the lower
part of her belly much swelled, I caused Master MAVRACE a Surgion of this
Town of Vaureas to make an opening in the belly by an actual Corosiue,
peercing into the hollowes of the matrix, from whence there issued as well by
the neither parts as by the place so opened above seven pounds of filthy
matter, the one like unto the other, and to be the better assured of the
place, we did open the nether part with an instrument where we did see the
greatness of the matricall ulcer, the which we cured in six months, since
which time she had a Daughter, this was in the year 1552. VILLENEVFVE seems
to desseine a conception, and the fruit wholly putrefied, and reduced into
this merueilous quantity of corruption, although that M. ROVSSET thinks it was
only an Impostume in the matrixe. The same VILLENEVFVE reports in an other
letter to the said ROVSSET, that he had caused the like cauterisation to be
made upon that which is upon the belly of a woman married to BRISSET an
Apothicary at Mont-limar, in the year 1558. peercing it even into the inward
part of the matrix, so as the corruption sprung out to the beds feet, and at
the same instant a great quantity of the like filth came forth by the lower
parts. She was cured in 3. months, and soon after conceived, and since
she has had three Sons and one Daughter. In the same treaty.

M. MATHIAS CORNAX Philosopher and Physician to the Emperor at Vienna in
Austria reports (in a Treaty written in Latin, and often printed,) some
admirable and memorable Histories, like unto the former. I will ommit many
circumstances of places, years and days, personages and witnesses produced to
avoid tediousness: the sum is this. MARGV^RITE wife to the host of the red
Creuise at Vienna about 25. year old, who before had had some Children, she
was conceived for the third or forth time, in the year 1545. having felt (as
of custom) the Child to stir, and the time of her delivery come, she
could bring forth nothing: so as for the space of four whole years she
carried her Child dead, the same being past (as it appeered) from the
hollownes of the Matrix being rotten, through the body, vlcered therewith
toward the bowels, and there causing a great swelling, an opening was made
by the advice of CORNAX in the midst of that which is upon the belly to
void the corruption. The Physicians and Surgions could not think there was
any Child, considering the lapse of time, during the which the poor woman
had been afflicted with very strange pains. Yet a Child was drawn from her
which was not so rotten, (the which was admirable) but it might well be
discerned for a male. There happened an other wonderful strange thing, that
this honest young woman which had lived with death for so many years, was in
a manner miraculously drawn out of the grave, and recovered her perfect health.
Let us add a third marvel: at a years end she conceived, and bare an
other Son his full time. The time of her delivery being come, being in
some great difficulty, and almost without any possible means to be delivered
like unto other women. CORNAX was called the second time, who advised the
Mother and other women there present, that they should suffer her to be
opened, as at the former time: giving very many reasons for his Counsel
whereunto the young woman yielded. But the Mother and the other women that were
there opposed mightily against it, saying that they must refer all to the
almighty GOD, and let nature work, in easing her by some other means less
dangerous. CORNAX being thus gain said, retired with the Surgion who had
made the former section. But presently after the young woman dyed and could not
be delivered. Soon after they called them back, and being dead there was drawn
from her by section a goodly boy, likely to have lived if he had been helped
with his Mother, as this learned Physician did pretend.

In the same work there is a letter written to the same CORNAX by M. ACHILLES
GASSAR a learned Physician of Ausbourg, containing the like history in the same
circumstances of a woman, to whom a year being past that she could not be
delivered of a Child at the due time, the Child (like unto that of the woman of
Vienna) was gone from the hollownes of the Matrix being vlcered, toward the
kidneis, as it did appear plainly, for that it had made a show of an
Impostume in the belly, and principally on the left side, the Surgion drew
from her boane, after boane, who being cured had a Child since.

He reports in the same book the History sent unto him by Master GILLES
HERTOGE a famous Physician at Bruxelles, of a woman, who not able to be
delivered of her Child, the flesh and soft parts of the Child being voided
below in rotten corruption, they did feel the bones to grate together, and
did mark them with the hand under that which couers the belly and yet this
accident which was so strangely troublesome and insupportable to a fine and
delicate woman, did not much hinder the actions of this courragious woman: who
carried this Cross thirteen whole years. This could not be without peercing
of the Matrix, the which notwithstanding was cured, as needs it must, for that
no filth nor corruption distilled down by the lower parts, 'as else it would
have done. More-ouer she had her terms orderly: and desired nothing so much,
as to find Physicians and Chirurgions that would undertake to make a
convenient section, to draw forth those cracking bones.

Master FRANCIS ROVSSET, (representing in his Treaty of the Caesariens
delivery (the third History above mentioned by CORNAX) confirms them by
another very admirable of ALBVCASIS a Physician and Surgeon, the which I
will discribe here, although it be ancient, hoping that this digression shall
not be unpleasing. I have seen said he (in the second book of his Surgerie)
a woman (in whose womb a Child being dead) conceived of another, the which
also dyed there: long after there did rise a swelling at her Navel, the which
was opened, and yielded corrupt matter. I was called, and did look to her
long, yet could I not strengthen it, although I did apply strong attractiues,
and many bones came forth, one after another: the which did amaze me, knowing
that there are no bones in the belly: Making therefore a search of all, I
found they were the little bones of a dead Child, so as after I had drawn
forth many, I cured her, yet the Ulcer did always sweat forth something.
ALEXANDER BENOIST a Physician of our time, in his practice, in the Treaty of
the difficulty of Childbearing, reports the like History to that of
ALEVCASIS.

In the Suburbs of Sully upon Loire, MARGVERITE PREVOST, wife to PETER DORET a
Milner, being apparently with Child, and come to her time, not able to be
delivered, not-with-standing any help of her women, she grew by little and
little so extremely sick, and so great, by reason of the Child and other
things that were putrefied, that besides the general swelling of all the
belly, about the eight or ninth month, she had a particular swelling about
her Navel, seeming to be a soft Impostume, red and ready to break, the which
Master ITIER GALLEMENT a Surgion did open with an actual Corosiue, on
New-yeares day, in the year 1550. The next day at her second dressing, being
desirous to know the reason of certain hairs which showed them selves at the
Orifice; I found that it was the head of a Child rotting, which he drew out
at the opening, with the rest of the body, which was known to be a female.
She was soon cured, and after the death of the said DORET, she married
again, and lived helth-fully 27. years after and then died of a flux in the
year 1577. She had no Children neither before nor after. FR* ROVSSET in his
Treaty of the Caesarien section.

M. I. HOVLIER, in the end of the first Tome of his Book entitled. Of inward
diseases, says that a woman at Paris had a Child, who for fifteen days
before that it was borne, had an arm sticking out at her Navel, and yet she
remained alive and so did the Child, she did not set down how she was
delivered nor by what part, neither whether she had any Child afterward, the
which would have deserved a relation; as well for the theorike as the practice.
Without doubt it could not be without some great ulcer in the matrix, although
the Child were not afterward drawn forth below. On the otherside it is a
very strange thing, that a Child could be so lively in that estate, having
made such work in the matrix, and in that which wrapped him in, the which he
had past through above with his arm: for otherwise it could not be. In the
same treaty. I have learned of Mounsieur BVNOT, a learned Physician to the
most famous Princes, ANTOINETTE of Bourbon Douager of Guise, that she had
often told him, that some time before her marriage, being twenty years of
age, and yet bred up under her Mother, she did see, (being in a Church at la
Fere in Picardie) that they presented unto her Mother a young sick creature,
pale, weak, swelled, and so strangely tormented with pain, as they knew not
what to say to it, nor what to hope of it. The Princess having caused her to
be visited by certain Midwiues, descouered what it was: that this greeuious
sick creature, whom they held to be a very pure Virgin, had a Child
conceived in her, and she being great, it had been long dead and rotten in
her body, whereof not withstanding she was soon cured, and lived very long
after in good and perfect health. In the same Treaty.

BARBARA FHIRER remaining at Zupfring in the Bayle-wike of Bremgarten in
Suisserland, being conceived of her third Child, and ready to be delivered,
was in labor eight days together with great grief and pain, and not
delivered. In the end, not able to endure any more, she remained altogether
in her bed. then there appeered unto her upon her belly, above the Navel a
bladder, of the bigness of a hazell nut, the which had put her to exceeding
great pain for three days together, and in the end at her instant request,
it was peerced and opened by a certain neighbor of hers, using an aule to
that end. The bladder being opened and grown large by reason of the swelling
of the belly, presently that which enclosed the Child appeered. They called
JOHN BOVRGOIS a Surgion, who having consulted with the Midwiues, with their
common consents, made such an incision with his rasor, as one of the Childs
elboes came forth and showed it self: the Surgion takes hold of it with
pincers for the nonce, and draws the Child out whole by this breach, but dead
and half rotten. The Mother having suffered no greater harm, then some light
fayntings during the operation. The wound being cured, according to the
precepts of Surgerie, so that within three-weekes she was set on foot, not
without great discommodity, for that she was forced to use a great roll
continually, and not able to stand up but with meruelious great pain, so as
after two years she died. GASPAR BAVHIN in the addition to the History of the
Caesarien delivery.

A Country woman being with Child, and come to the 8. month, being upon the
way to go to the market at Sancerre, was cast by her horse and fell against a
stone: of this fall she continued 24. hours without speaking or moving. The
next day she had a sharp fever accompanied with very violent accidents, as
ordynary faynting, vomyting and idleness of the brain. They did purge her,
let her blood, and applied what they could to temper the heat of this great
fever. After a month she had a swelling neeere unto the Navel, as big as
ones fist. That being opened there came forth a great quantity of corruption,
and then prittie big pieces of rotten flesh, and in the end the bones of the
Infant which she bare. Having had this wound ten months, in the end she was
cured, but yet she continued barren. Some think that if she had been helped
by a dissection in the belly, the Child might have been saved. N. NAVRICE in
the comment upon the 1. book of Hippocrates of women's diseases Text. 3.

A fleming having her Child dead in her body, could not be delivered, so as
it did rotte within her, notwithstanding any remedies that were applied to make
her void the pieces. In the end she her self borrowed a Surgions instrument,
called a Cranes Bill, with the which she her self pulled out the bones of
this Child being rotten. Then having eased herself by Lotions, Fomentations,
Bathes, and other fit helps, she recovered her perfect health. R. SOLENANDRE
in the 5. book of his Counsels. Chap. 15. art 40.

Children miraculously preserved.
THe year 1546. in the Town of Misnia in Saxony a servant of THOMAS le FEVREs
having a little Child in her arms, and looking out at a window three stories
high, by mischance let it fall into the street, whence it was taken up, not
being hurt nor bruzed in any part of the body. GEORGE la FEVRE in his Annals
of Misnia. lib. 3. page 200.

In the month of June 1552. a girl of PETER PELICES, a Cook in the same
Town and the same street, fell out of the garret window of a house, and had
no harm. The same Author page 207.

The Son of SIMON CRAMES a Councellor of the same Town, and dwelling in the
same street, fell from an high window down on the pauement, which was of hard
stone, and yet not hurt in any part of his body, it happened in the year 1559.
In the same Book. page 214. Of these three deliverances, GEORGE le FEVRE makes
mention in these verses:

Hoc vidit v^bs, quae nobili,
Prouincia nomen dedit:
Vna in platea, tres tribus
Vicibus cadentes, Angelo
Custode, vitam ducere-
In the month of September, the year 1566. a Maid of SIMON RICHTERS, a
Citizen of Misna, dwelling by Wolfgang Ber, let a little Boy (which she held
in her arms) fall from a very high window. He lighted first on the end of a
Wagon, and then on the pauement, but was not any way hurt. In the same Book,
page 227. 228. The year 1568. in the month of June- ERASMUS the son of
WOLFGANG BEME, being but four years old, fell out of a window of his fathers
house into the street, and had no harm. In the same pa. 229

In a Village hard by Cygne, a certain Countri-woman willed a little boy she
had to go and fetch home their Oxen that were feeding by a woods side. Whilst
the child was away, there fell so much Snow, that upon a sudden all the
ways were covered, and the night came on so fast, that the boy was enclosed in
the mountains, and could not get out. The father and mother taking more care
for their child then Oxen, rose betimes in the morning to go seek him: but the
snow was so great that they knew not where to look him. The next day they
traced the forest to find the body, which they were verily persuaded was
void of life, but at last they found him sitting on a bank, which the Snow
had neither covered nor touched. They asked him, why he came not home all that
while: The child answered (having felt no cold nor harm at all) that he
stayed till it was evening. Then they asked him whether he had eaten any thing
or no. A man that I knew not, said he, came hither and gave me Bread and
Cheese: whereat exceeding joyful, they carried him home. I. MANLIVS in the
first book of his Collections.

The year 1565. about the end of September, a maid in the town of Misna,
that was an Idiot, lead a little girl of three years old out of the Town
(unperceived of any) and having carried her to a river called Trebisa, which
was risen somewhat high with rain that was fallen, stripped the girl, and
took her upon her shoulder, and waded over the river, then returned and made
the child ready again: but being weary of her carriage, she left the poor
infant in the wind and the rain, which was then very sharp and bleake. The
girl remained all the whole night, and half the next day on the bare ground,
where she was found (as GOD would) by a Country wench, who took her up in her
arms, and carried her to a farm there by. From whence she was conveyed to her
Father and Mother, that were in great perplexity for the loss of their child.
GEORGE FEVRE in the 3. book of his Annals of Misna.

The year 1558. there fell such an horrible rain and tempest in Thuringe,
that in an instant it ouer-threw diverse houses, and the torrent was so furious,
that it carried away a great number of persons of all ages. Amongst the rest a
vyolent inundation of waters overwhelmed a poor laborers house of Burcktonne,
where his wife lay newly delivered of a Son, and swallowing up the wretched
Mother, carried away the young infant, that a little before had been laid in
a Trough made like a kneeding-tub, which was stayed by the bough of an
Apple Tree, where the child remained, and was found safe and sound after the
rage of the waters was alayed: every one acknowledging the truth of this
notable sentence: that GODS assistance does appear, when man's does fail. PH.
LONICER in the Theater of Examples, page 196. H. HVSANVS a Lawyer, describes in
excellent Latin verse, such a like miracle, which happened about that time, in
a certain place of the same Country, on the behalf of a little Child lying
in a Cradle, which was carried away very far by the fury of the waters, and
then laid gently in a safe shore, where it was found alive.

ANDREW MERCKTER recites in a certain funeral Oration by him written,
touching afflictions, that being a little boy, he had been miraculously
preserved from waters, and from manifest danger of drowning three several
times: first at Sechouse, next at Wittenberg, and lastly at Perleberg, where
this which ensues happened unto him. As he was standing on the bridge of that
place which was very high, certain Roysters, thronging along in great number
and have, pushed him over the bridge into the midst of the stream. It was in
Winter, and the Ice covered him, so that carried from the top of the water
under the Ice, he was driven to a Mill that stood in the river, where the
water not being frosen, by reason of the continual motion which the wheels of
the Mill made, he was taken up and saved. PH. LONICER in the same Theater, in
the examples of the third commandent, page 198.

In a Village called Zum Heni^hen, hard by Friberg in Misna, a little Boy,
son to a certain Weauer, playing about the house fide, fell into a great
channel of water that served to drive a Mill, and was suddenly carried by the
stream which ran very stiff under his fathers house, standing over the
channel, and then under a bridge, so far that it was enough to have drowned
him a dosen times, without the protection of Heaven, which would have the
child carried to the Mill, where he took hold with his little hands on the
bar which served to shut the watergate, and cried out as loud as he could.
An old woman heard him, who ran thither, and called the Miller, so that the Boy
was taken up safe out of the furious waters. The same.

In the year 1565. the 10. day of March, about seven of the clock in the
morning the Treasurer of Rofenbourg, a town situate on the river Sala, going
from the town to the Castle, went (as of necessity he was to do) over the
bridge, followed by a pretty little boy his son, who gazing on the swiftnes
of the stream, and going to take away some dirt that stuck on his shoes, slid
in such manner in an open slippery place of the bridge, that he fell into the
bottom of the river. A fisherman being in a garden not far of, hearing the
noise of his fall, ran thither, and with great danger of his life leaped in
after the poor child, whom the waves had carried all along the Castle walls.
He took hold on a piece of his coat, which tearing, the body fell again into
the water, he caught him the second time by one of his feet, and carried him to
his mother, that almost dead with fear staid for him on the bank: within two
hours after he came to himlsefe, and two days after that, was as well as ever
he was, to the no little joy of all his friends that praised GOD for his
miraculous assistance. The same.

On Easter eve the same year, about evening, a furious inundation of waters
rushing on the town of Islebe in Saxony, did especially and as it were with
an agreement made between the waters, beat upon the house of an honest
Citizen named BARTHOLMEVV VOGT. Incontinently the forepart of the house, and a
piece of the Stoue fell down, within the Stoue was a little child in a
Cradle. The Father and Mother astonished with so sudden a visitation, and
hearing the noise of the cradle tossed with the waves, got out the child, and
carried it to one MICHAEL FEARS a neighbor of theirs. There remained four
other children lying in an high chamber of the house. The Father more careful
for their lives then his own, entered again into present death, and having
past many dangers, got into the Chamber and took up two of those children in
his arms. Thereupon the floor sanke underneath his feet, so that he fell
into the water, which carried him to a great stacke of wood, whereon he caught
hold, and with much pain stayed himself by it some half an hour, laden with
his two sons, and crying out for help. But no body could get to him by
reason of the wonderful furye of the raging waters. Seeing himself destitute
of all humane assistance and as it were dispairing of his own life and his
childrens, he humbly commended both himself and them to the mercy of GOD,
calling the Prophet JONAS to mind, that was preserved amidst the seas, and in
the belly of a Fish. As he was praying unto the Lord, a great beam, driven
along by the waves, carried away one of his sons: another greater then that,
coming upon him with great violence, made him let go the stake by the which he
had held so long, and whether he would or no carried him with his other son
into a garden behind his house. Being there with their heads scarce above
water, and remembering his other son, he began to call him: the child answered
him from a beam, whereon the father espied him sitting astride. Thither he
swam, and setting them both on his shoulders, he got to a great pile of wood,
and clammering up on it, there rested himself with his two sons some five
hours. The next morning betimes, the waters being fallen, he carried them to
Feures Stoue, where they began to come to themselves. As for the other two
children lying a bed in the high chamber, the goodness of GOD preserved them
after a marvelous manner. The Father because he could not go to them by the
accustomed stairs, got his neighbor to break open a way through the wall
that parted their houses, and entering into the chamber found them in their bed
fast a sleep, the divine providence having with his hand held up that part of
the chamber, as it were in the air, all the rest of the house being over
whelmed and carried away by the waters: as soon as ever he was returned again
through the wall with his children, the chamber and the bed fell presently
down. Thus were these five children miraculously preserved, contrary to all
hope or expectation. The same.

Children in grateful and perverse.
A Certain man become rich, seeing his father beg, was somewhat ashamed at
it, and took him into his house. One day having an exquisite dishe of meat
brought to his table, and hearing his father coming into the room, he made it
to be locked up: but when his father was gone, having willed it to be brought
in again, the servant found the dish full of Snakes: wherewith having
acquainted his Master, he would needs go and see what it was. And approaching
near unto them, one of the greatest of those Snakes leaped in his face,
joining his mouth in such sort to the man's, that he could never eat any meat
after but the Snake had his part of it: and he continued in that estate all
the rest of his life. MANLIVS in his Collections: PH. LONICER in his Theater of
examples, page 283.

A certain father being old and poor, went and desired his son to relieve
him. The son thinking it a great dishonor for him to acknowledge such a
Father, made as though he knew him not, and having rayled at him, bad him get
him away. The poor father with tears in his eyes departed: but his back was
scarce turned, when the ungrateful son fell mad, and dyed in that
miserable estate. MANLIVS in his Collections. PH. LONICER in his Theater, page
283.

The year 1550. in the capital City of the Duchy of Prussia, called
Conisprug, a Lock-smith being a very lewd fellow, killed his father and mother
with an Iron Pestle, in hope to have their money. Presently whereupon he went
to a Shoomakers shop, and bought him a new pair of shoes, leaving his old
behind him, which the Shoomakers son threw under a bench. Two or three hours
after, the fathers shop having been opened by the commandment of the
Magistrate, who had understood that the neighbors had heard some great stir
in it, they found the two old folks murdered, wherewith the Son seemed to
be so exceeding grieved, that no man ever mistrusted him to be the author of
so execrable a deed. Now it fortuned that the shoemaker looking for some what
else under his bench, found the old shoes which the young smith had left behind
him all be sprinkled with blood. And it was also noted by others that the
wretch had his purse better lined then it was wont to be, which being
reported to the Magistrate, he was straightway aapprehended. Whereupon
without any torture he confessed the fact, and was executed as he deserved.
They say that the pestle which was set up over the judgment place does
continually shake yet. PH. LONICER in his Theater, page. 284. Upon the report
of one of the greatest Diuynes of our time.

The year 1560* a wicked wretch in the Town of Basil poysened his own
Father, being a wealthy man and of an honest conversation. Which being
afterward discovered and proved against him, he was first of all laid stark
naked on a bare planke, and so drawn through the chiefest streets of the
town, then he had his flesh plucked away in four principal places of his
body with hot burning pincers, lastly he had his bones broken, and was left so
a live on a cart wheel, where having languished in grievous torments the space
of nine hours, with great acknowledgement and detestation of his damnable
fact, he gave up the ghost. GASPAR HEDIO in the 4. part of his Chronicles.

On Sattarday the last saving one of September 1565. it happened that JOHN GVY
the Son of EME GVY, an Haberdasher of hattes and cappes in the Town of
Chastillon upon Loire, being a very lewd and unruly youth, stayed forth
according to his custom, and came not home till it was very late in the night.
Whereat his Father being much offended, told him that if he continued in those
fashions, he should be constrained to turn him out of doors. Whereunto the
Son answered very sawcily, that it should not need, for he would go of
himself, and that forthwith if he might have his clothes. Thereupon the
Father went to his Chamber, and being a bed was feign to threaten his Son
for to make him hold his peace, he was so lusty with his tongue. At length,
seeing he, but lost his labor, and not able any longer to endure his proud
and saucy answers he rose in an anger out of his bed for to go and Chastise
the arrogancy and disobedience of this unruly youth: who seeing his Father
coming to beat him, caught a sword which hunge in his Chamber and rebelling
against his Father ran him quite through the body. Wherewithal he fell
presently down, crying out he was slain. The neighbors flighted with his cry
came running in, and found the poor Father, lying all along on the floor
ready to give up the Ghost, as within a little while after he did: and his
Son standing by him with the sword all bloody in his hands: who
notwithstanding that his Father moved with compassion and forgetting his
unnatural cruelty toward him had willed him to save himself, and that his
Mother had also persuaded him thereunto, yet had not the power to stir a
foot. So that apprehended and examined, at first he excused himself; saying
that his Father ran upon the sword himself. But his excuses found frivolous,
he was condemned to have his right hand cut of, then to have his flesh plucked
away in four places of his body with burning pincers, and finally to be
hanged by the feet on a gibbet, and there strangled with a stone of a hundredth
and twenty pounds weight which should be tied about his neck. All which
(having confessed his fault) he patiently endured, calling upon GOD for mercy
even to the very last gasp. In the History of our time.

A friend of mine a man of a great spirit and worthy of credit, being one
night at Naples with a kins-man of his, heard the voice of a man crying out for
help in the street. Whereat he arose, lighted a candle, and ran out to see
what it was, and coming into the street he saw an horrible fantosme of a
dreadful and furious aspect, which would have carried away a young youth, that
cried out and struggled with him as well as he could: but seeing him coming,
he ran suddenly unto him, and caught him fast about the middle, and after
his fear was somewhat past, he began to call upon GOD, whereat the
fantosme vanished presently away. My friend carried this young man to his
lodging, and after he had comforted him, he would have sent him home: but he
could not get him to go by any means, for the youth was so frighted that he
shaked every joint of him through the apprehension of so hideous an encounter.
At last being somewhat come to himself, he confessed that till then he had
lead a very wicked life, that he had been a contemner of GOD, and disobedient
to his Father and Mother, whom he had so intollerably misused that they had
cursed him. Whereupon he went forth of doors and was presently encountered by
that fiend. ALEXANDER of Alexandria, in the 4. book of his geniall days.
Chap. 19.

A young man borne at Gabies, not far from Rome, being of a wild and unruly
nature, and very lewdly given, having abused his Father diverse and sundry
ways, got him in a rage out of doors, and went toward Rome, entending to
plot some new villainy there against his said Father. Upon the way he met the
Devil, in the likeness of a desperate ruffian, with long hair, and ragged
apparel, who coming to him, demanded the cause of his discontent. The young
man answered that he had been at some words with his Father, and determined
to be meet with him some way or other. Whereunto the Devil replied that such
an inconvenient had befallen him, and therefore desired him they might keep
company together, for to devise some means to be revenged of the wrongs they
had sustained. Night approaching they went into an Inn, and lay together in one
bed. But the wicked fiend, when the young man was a sleep caught him by the
throat, and had strangled him, if he had not awaked and called to GOD for
help. Whereupon the Devil vanished away, and in his departure so shaked the
Chamber, that both the roof and walls cracked in sunder. Whereat this young
man was greeuiously terrified with such a soddaine spectacle, and almost dead
with fear, repented him of his wicked life, and guided from thence forward by
a better spirit, became an enemy to vice, past the rest of his life far from
the rumors of people, and served for a good example to his neighbors. In the
same book and Chapter.

Children brought up among Wolves.
GOD repented that he had made man, says MOSES, Genesis 6. And Philosophers
Books are full of complaints touching the malice of man's heart. PLATO in the
7. Book of his laws, says, That a child is the wildest beast, the vnruliest
and hardest to be tamed of all other: and that it cannot be too nearly looked
unto. ARISTOTLE also in the first Books of his Politickes confirms the same.
Lions, Bears, and other savage beasts are intractable: but yet not so much as
children left to themselves, and destitute of good direction. It is reported,
that a child of a village in the Landgrauiat of Hesse, was lost through the
rechlesnesse of his Father and Mother, who sought him a long time after, but
could not find him. This Village was full of Trees and Gardens, hard by a
Forests side wherein were a great number of Wolves. Certain years after,
there was perceived among the Wolves which came into the Gardens to seek their
prey, a creature not altogether like a Wolf, nor nothing so nimble as they:
which seen many and sundry times with great marvel, by the Country-folkes,
and thinking it was a beast of some other kind, they went and reported it to
the Governor of the place, who therewith acquainted the Landgraue. He having
commanded that it should be hunted, and by some way or other taken alive: the
Countrymen used such means that they caught it, and lead it to the Landgraues
Court, going on four feet like a beast, and of a grim and terrible look.
Being in the Princes hall, it went and hid it under a bench, where it
began to houle and cry like a Wolf. But some lyniaments (though disfigured)
of a humane face being discovered in it, the Prince commanded it to be
brought up among men: until such time as it might be more exactly known what
it was. Those which had it in charge so diligently employed themselves that the
creature began to grow tame, to stand upright, and to go like other men,
finally to speak distinctly: and then (as far forth as ever his memory would
permit him) he declared that he had lived in a Cave among Wolves, which used
him very gently, and always gave him the better part of their prey. M.
DRESSERVS, in his book of new and ancient discipline.

Diverse French Gentlemen can testify that they have seen a man, which was
taken in the forest of Compiegne, and brought to the late King, CHARLES the 9.
Who went upon four feet like a beast, and ran swifter then any horse. He
could not stand upright, had a very hard skin, was heary almost all over,
and in stead of speech used a feare-full cry accompanied with so hiddeous a
look and countenance, that there is no beast so ill-fauored to see-to as that
poor creature was, which had lived amongst the ravenous Wolves, and learned
of them to howl. Moreover with his teeth he strangled Dogs, and dealt no
better with men whenever he met them. I could never know what become of him
afterward. EXTRACTED out of the Memorialls of our time.

Touching the first History extracted out of DRESSERVS, I know not whither it
be the same, which is presented by the D. PHILIP CAMERARIVS in his excellent
Historical meditations, Chap. 75.

The repeticion being but short will not be offensive, I hope. It is a
meruaylous thing (says he) if true, which is read in the additions to the
History of LAMBERT of SCHAFNABOVRG* as follows. The year 1544. a Child was
taken in the Country of Hesse, who (as he himself has since declared and was
so verified) being but three years old was carried away and brought up by
Wolves. When they got any prey, they always brought the better part of it to
the Child which fed upon it. In winter when it was cold, they scraped a hole,
which they trimmed with grass and leaves of trees, whereon they laid the
Child, and compassing him about, defended him from the injury of the time:
afterward they made him go upon his hands and feet, and run along with
them whither soever they went, so that at length and through use he could
leap and run as well as they. Being taken, he was taught by little and little
to go only upon his feet. He oftentimes said, that if it had been in his
choice, he would rather have lived among Wolves, then men. He was brought to
the Court of HENRY LANDGRAVE of Hesse for to be seen. In the same year befell
the like case in the farm of Echtzel: for a Child of twelve years old,
running amongst the Wolves in the Forest adjoining, was taken in the winter
time by certain Gentlemen that hunted the Wolves.

Children supposed or practiced.
THis Invention has been found out by some barren women (some drawn
thereunto of their own motion, to please their husbands, and to bring an heir
into the house under their charge, to the prejudice of the right heir: others
(consenting to the Impostures of their own husbands, pretending to advance
their estates by such Devilish practices) have stuffed up their bellies with
cloth and little cushions, but in such sort as they swelling should grow by
degrees, counterfetting themselves to be distasted, way-ward, melancholy and
heavy: and at the end of 9. months to suppose some Child, brought secretly
from the house of some poor neighbor, or for want of one, from the hospital.
Som-times bought for money, or supposed by the husband, having had it of some
Concubine. This is not all, for as some that have been barren have used the
means of such suppositions: so others have made use of it, when as they had a
great desire to have a Son, for the greater contentment of their husbands,
they see that GOD had sent them a Daughter.

It is well known that about fifty years since, a Lady of Daulphine seeing
her self in disgrace with her husband, for that she had brought him none but
Daughters, forged such a trick to give him satisfaction; she corrupted a
woman of base condition in the beginning of this woman's conception, and drew a
promise from her to give her her Child presently upon her delivery. After
which practice, the Lady having counterfetted all the signs of a woman with
Child, in the end to play the last and chief part, as soon as ever she
herd that the poor woman was in labor, and that she was delivered of a
Son, she goes to her bed, feyning to be in the same pain, expecting the
little Boy that was promised her. The which was done and brought her so
secretly by certain Midwiues, as it was received of the husband, as issued
from his Wives womb: and so generally reputed. Wherein I will not ommit a
notable example of the almighty GODS just judgment: for this Lady, who could
not be induced by nature to bear any love, nor to give any countenance in the
house to this Child (although that by means of the said supposition, he had
been left heir by him who thought himself to be his Father) disdayning him
daily more and more, in the end she forced him to bandie himself against
her, and to have recourse unto Justice, challenging his rights as Son and
heir, and offering to force her to an account, Ths which did so incense the
said Lady, as she conspired his death: at the least it was supposed that the
murder committed upon him, was by her soliciting. Book first of the
conference of ancient wonders with modern.

A Child of Stone.
A Woman of the Town of Sens in Bourgondie, called COLOMBE CHATRY, married to
LEWIS CHARITY a Tailor, having lived long with him without any children, in
the end she conceived: and during the time of her being great, she had all the
accidents of a woman with child. But the time of lying in being come, all the
endeavors of poor COLOMBE, and the help of Midwiues were in vain, so as her
fruit died, and she lay three whole years languishing in her bed. In the end
being somewhat eased, she lived in pain 25. years more, carrying this dead
fruit in her body, whereof in the end she dyed, having carried it 28. whole
years in her belly. Her Husband caused her to be opened, and the child was
found converted into a hard stone, then drawn out of her womb, and kept for a
great merueyle, as many have seen it well fashioned, as if some excellent
worke-man had cut it in this Cave, having the members whole and
proportionable, like unto a child of nine months old, being opened, they
found the heart, the liver, the brain, and other parts, very hard, but not
like unto the exterior parts. It is a female: the body is not subject to
rottenness, nor to rust, no more then one of the hardest stones, which the
best Statuaries can work in. Master IHON d' ALIBOVX, and SIMON of
Prouuancheres, learned Physicians of our time, which have seen this Child of
Stone, and have had this wonder in their hands, have written the History at
large, and published an ample discourse thereon.

I will add here unto an other memorable History, written by Master IHON
SCHENCK of Grasenberg, a Physician at Fribourg in Brisgart, from whom I have
drawn a great part of the reports of the wonderful accidents of man's body;
mentioned in his Collection of the Histories of our times. CLAVDE of Saint
MAVRICE, a famous Physician and professor at Dole, did write unto Monsieur
QVENZ, Senator and the chief Physician at Fribourg, that the 25. day of
January 1595. causing a woman that was dead to be opened, of the age of 37.
years, they found her womb to be of stone, waying seven pounds, the Liver
with one only griesly lump, the substance of which was round, the bladder of
stone, the skin that couers the bowels so hard, as the Surgions Razor could
hardly enter it. These things (said he) did amaze us much, how the spirits were
carried throughout all the body: and how it was possible for this woman to live
so long without some apparent disease. I caused this womb of Stone to be
opened, hoping to find some fruit of the same sort, like to that of the women
of Sens in Bourgongne, but I found that it was only stone within, as without.

Of the Caesarien delivery or Section.
THE Caesarien delivery is an extraction artificially made of the child by the
mothers side, who could not otherwise be delivered but by a sufficient
incision, as well of that which is on the belly, or exterior part of the belly,
as of the matricall body: without preiudicing not-with* standing, the life of
the one or the other (so as there happens no other accident) or hindering the
Mother from bearing of more Children. The which is to be understood of the
Child that is alive yet in the Mothers womb. Under this also is comprehended
an other like extraction of a Child dead in the Mothers womb, when as by some
other help of the Midwife, Physician or Chiru^gion, that is more easy, more
safe, and more common, there is no means to have it, and that else they find
the Mother must dye with it: as it does daily happen in women of all sorts,
after that they have been miserably broken.

It is not long that I sufficiently discovered (by the report of certain
ancient grave men of Milly in Gastenois) that it is true, whereof they make no
doubt in that place, that the wife of one named GODART, remaining then at
Mesnill a Parish of Milly, had some certain years before had six Children,
after this manner, that is to say: The Child having been drawn by an
incision made in the Mothers side, and never other-wise, the Children still
living. The workman was NICHOLAS GVILLET a Barber at Milly, after whose death,
for want of her accustomed help, this woman dyed, not being by any means able
to be delivered as she was in times past. A probable Argument that it was a
deep Physome, or a natural straightness, capable to receive the Instruments
of generation or procreation, but not to deliver forth the Child. FRANCIS
ROVSSET in his Treaty of the Caesarian delivery.

I have understood for certain by Master AMEROS le NOIR, a very expert
Surgion of Pithuiers, and by GILLES le BRVN, that they together had at diverse
times drawn by the side three living Children from a poor woman near to
Merenuille in Beausse, and meaning to lead me to her, to see the place of the
Incision, I understood that she was dead a little before of the plague, which
was then very violent in that Country, I have a learned Epistle of Mounsier
ALIBOVS Physician of Sens, setting down orderly and at large, how that IHON de
MARAIS, a Surgeon at La Chastre in Berry, son to LEWIS de MARAIS,
ordinary Surgeon to the Arch* bishop of Sens, drew from his own wives side,
a Son called SIMON de MARAIS, afterward Surgeon and Grome of the Chamber
to the Queen Mother. After the which she was brought in bed again well and
orderly of a Daughter called RENEE. Of that SIMON (whom they surnamed without
a Mother) and of ROSE GALLARDEL, came CLAVDE married to Master FRANCIS ARTVS
of Yssondun: and FRANCIS married to OLIVER GARINER: both sufficient witnesses
of their fathers birthe, as well by the common report, as by their fathers
often telling* The same Author.

Monsieur PELION a famous Physician at Angers, having heretofore reported to
Master LAVRENCE COLLOT a Surgeon of Paris, a like work in Aniou, has
since confirmed it by a Letter which he gave me, testifying that it was done by
MATHVRIN DEBONAIRE Surgeon.

Master DENIS ARMENANT a Physician at Gien, and my self have seen a little
before the troubles, in the Hospital of Chastillon upon Loire, a woman being
sick of a continual fever, having a great swelling on the left side of her
belly, and therein a long Cicatrise, with apparent signs of needless points,
remaining of the opening of the said parts that were sowed up, by the which
both her self and her husband did witness that a while before there had been
a Son drawn, the which was some seven years before we speak unto them, and
could not be borne otherwise. This was done in Bourgundy by an old Barber of
the same Village, very expert as they said in such operations. The woman did
not conceive nor bear any child after that time, although they were both young.
The same Author.

BERNARDE ARNOVT the Wife of STEPHEN MASICAVLE of Nangeuille, betwixt Estampes,
Puiseaux and Pithuires, after an extreme and fruitless labor of four days,
sending her husband unto me, despayring in a manner of all help, she had the
heart (against the will of her said husband) to have her body by my advice
opened, yea, she did so hasten it, after that she had heard my resolution, as
she would not stay for Master AMBROS LE NOIR above mentioned, whom I
promised to send her, as a Man experienced in such operations, for that I could
not be there present, being then very sick: but she employed the first she
could find which was JOHN LVCAS, a young Barber, remaining then at Bunou, a
little Village thereby who performed this work (which was new to him) very
artificially, in the presence of many: some of them with himself, are yet
living to witness this act. This was on Easter Day 1556. The Incision began
on the right side of the belly, a finger lower then the Nauill, and above four
fingers distant from it, and so descending directly unto the privy parts,
without touching the Muscles on the right side, from the which it was distant
above, about three fingers, and beneath somewhat less.

The incision being made without much bleeding, the womb appeared plainly,
the which he also cut somewhat largely, that the wound might be sufficient to
draw forth the child (being yet alive) with his skin that wrapped him in the
womb more easilye. Then he stitcth it up after the usual manner of wounds,
not the Matrix, but the Muscles and the skin over the bowels with five
stitches, as I did well observe, going thither to visit her presently after my
recovery. The which I have oftentimes noted in her since, to cure a rupture
which she has had ever since, either for that it was not well stitcth up, or
for that she did rise so soon. And you must note, that this Barber was
ignorant both of the Muscles and skin that covers the bowels. Proceeding in
this action as if he had launced an Impostume, or cut out some piece of flesh
with a sharp knife, as May. MAVRICE CORD does observe in his Commentary
upon Hipocrates, treating of women's diseases, lib. 1. text 11. About a year
and a half after, her husband being dead, and she married again to PETER
CHANCLOV, she conceived, and was delivered of a daughter naturally, living now
at Nangeuille, where there are yet many witnesses of this strange Spectacle.
The same Author.

At Vri in Biere, near unto Fontainbleau, two leagues from Nemours. COLLETTE
BERANGER, wife to SI^ON (...) GUARD, passing the 10. month after her
conception, and carrying her fruit long in her body dead, the lower parts
never opening to deliver it forth, in the end she sent for VINCENT VALLEAVA
Surgion of Nemours, who having no other apparent means to help her, in the
end of January he cut her, in the year 1542. not on the right side, but on
the left, a little higher then the woman of Nangeuille, first cutting the
Abdomen or outward part of the belly, and then the Matrix, from whence he drew
the dead child, swelled and stinking, with the skin that wrapped him already
rotten. Then without sowing the Matrix, by chance or catelesly, he gave five
stitches in the skin, and some small part of the Muscles, as it appeared
plainly long after, having nothing but a very skin cicatrized upon her belly.
Her lying in was but a month and a half. Two years after the which time she
had a daughter naturally, and two years after that a son called PETER DE LA
GUARD, afterward a Smith by his profession. She became afterward a Midwife
at Vri serving other women and receiving their children. The same.

AGNES BOYER, wife to JOHN COMPAN a Laborer at Villereau nere unto Neufuille in
Beause, after she had been for the space of four days broken with the
importunity of Mid-wiues, and nothing eased, she was opened on the right side,
by PHILIP MIGNEAV a Barber of Neufuille, in the year 1544, and then the
Muscles and the skin were grossly sticht up, as he could. Of which incision
she was soon cured: but the contusions which the Mid-wiues made in the privy
parts, troubled the Surgion above seven months to cure them; she had also a
fair Daughter, which lived healthfully above seven months: but on the eight
she fell sick being at nurse in the same Village, whereof she died. A while
after she grew great and big again, carrying the child hanging always
toward the rupture which remained as in others but without any pain. But she
could not be delivered no more then before, for one of the above named causes,
as it is to be presumed. And therefore she did voluntarily desire to have an
incision made as before, the which she could not obtain (by any entreaty) of
two young Surgions sent thither expressly from Neuffuille, whereas they kept,
after PHILIP, who died of the plague: which was the cause that both she and her
fruit dyed pitifully together through their faintness, if the weakness of
the Woman or some other pitiful accident, did not stay them from doing it.
The same.

In the year 1576, the 22, of July at Ambedoye nere to S. Brisson, in the
territory of Gien, ANTO INETTE ANDRE, Wife to LEWIS GARNIER a Handi-crafts
man, was also opened by Master ADAM AVBRY borne at Pithuiers, a Surgion
remaining at Aubigny, who made the report unto me. Afterward having
conceived again, she was naturally delivered of an other live child. The same.

And of latter days in the year 1578. the first of February, IONE MICHEL,
borne at Argent, Wife to GEORGE RENAVLD, living in the sub-vrbes of Aubigny,
having been big with child above ten months, she carried her fruit along
time dead, not leaving notwithstanding to follow her business, till in the
end she was forced to betake her self to her bed, where after she had been
long tormented in vain by Mid-wiues, in the end she sent for the above named
ADAM AVBRY and for WILLIAM COLLAS a learned Surgion, who having cut of the
child's arm being al black and dead, which came forth long before by the
Mothers nature, but not able to take hold of the rest of the body, they made an
incision on the right side, something bending and with a small Orifice, to
spare the mother, which caused her to feel great pains in the extraction of
the child, for that the Matrix could not deliver the child for the straitness
of the ouerture, which pains notwithstanding ceased presently when as the
child and that which follows were delivered. So after the ordinary discharges
of a woman in childbed (which came as well as if she had bin naturally brought
in bed) within a while after she did rise, and had her terms accustomed at
the end of five weeks: and presently after she conceived again in the end
of May, being somewhat troubled with the fresh remembrance of that was past,
taking care what might happen of her being now with child; at which time she
was delivered naturally. And although the child did at the first present but
one of the legs, (which was a bad beginning) yet the same being put back by
the Midwife, all succeeded happily. Since which time being with child again,
she had a happy delivery, and was afterward very healthful. The same.

About the year 1582. JOHN IAOOT a Surgion dwelling in a Village near to
Auxerre, called Tirouaille meeting with Master JOHN ALIBOVX a Physician of
Sens going to practice, desired him to turn a little out of his way, to a nere
village called Marry, to ease a poor woman, from whom some few hours before
he had drawn a child by section of the Bellye, ALIBOVX amazed at the boldness
of this Surgion, called the Seigneor of Vaux Bailiffe of Auxerre and his wife
to visit this woman lying in Childbed, their Castle being near the Village;
they found the child in the cradle crying and calling for meat, but the poor
Mother (being oppressed with pain, a Fever and with watching) neither thought
of her self nor of her little one. The Physician lays open the woman, sees
the section grossly sowed up with ten or twelve stitches: and provided so well
for the mother and child, as both lived long after. Extract out of May. d'
AL^EOVX letter written the 20. of December. 1585,

About the year 1550. ELIZABETH ALESPACHIN wife to JAMES NVFER, a Surgion
remaining in a Village called Sigers in Suisserland, being great of her first
child, at the time of her delivery being pressed with extreme pains she called
many Mid-wiues and Surgions to help her, but all was in vain. The husband
seeing his wife in that extremity, tells her his mind in her care. She
allows it, he goes to the Baylife of Frauvenfele, acquaints him with the
estate of his family, and his resolution to ease his wife, and craves leave to
execute what he had determined. In the end the Bayliffe knowing his Industry,
and the love he bare unto his Wife, grants his request. He returns speedily
to his house, speaks to the Mid-wiues, exhortes the most courageous to assist
him, and entreats the most fearful to depart, least they should faint and
trouble the company: for that he did undertake a thing which indeed was
dangerous, but he hoped for a happy issue, with the favorable assistance of
Almighty GOD. These women amazed at his resolution, went out all except two
which remained with the Surgions to assist the Patient. Her Husband having
first called upon GOD with an earnest prayer, and shut the Stoue carefully
he takes his Wife and lays her upon a Table, and with a sharp Rasor makes an
Incission in her belly, so happily, as presently the Child was taken forth,
without hurt to the Mother or to the little one. The Mid-wiues which did
hearken at the door, hearing the Child cry did knock to enter but they
forced them to stay, until the little one was cleansed and dressed, and the wound
stitcht up, the which was closed in few days, without any fever or any
troublesome accident to the mother, who afterward had two Sons at a
burden, one of the which was called JOHN NVFVR, he lived in the year 1583.
threescore years old, Provost of Sigers-Hausem. She was brought in bed
afterward of four other Children. As for the Son which was cut out of her
belly he lived unto the year 1577. They do yet at this day in those Quarters
see the children of this Woman unto the third and fourth generation. GASPAR.
BAV^IN a learned Physician at Basil, in his histories of the Caesarian
delivery.

I did think to find in other histories which I have among my papers, that
which I promised you of a Caesarian delivery, but it is among my other
remembrances at my house in France, I will cause it to be brought to
Montbelliard, where I now am, to send it unto you. I remember the Name of the
place and of the Surgion, and the year and month when it happened: but I have
forgotten the names both of the Father and Mother. The Village is in the Duchye
of Bourgundy, called Marsillie, near unto Mont S. John. The Surgion, ANTONIE
ROBIN, borne at Beaune and living at Renele Duke, a man very expert in his
profession. It was in April in the year of our Lord GOD 1582. The Woman being
young and strong, had been in sore travel two whole days together, and yet
did courageously endure an incision, the which succeeded happily. The Child
lived not long. The mother recovered, and continued long after, The same.

Seditious Commotions, caused by Exactions.
IN the year 1548. the Commons of Guyenne, Santonge, and Angoulemois fell into
a rebellion by reason of the extorsions of the Customers and Farmers of Salt;
In a few weeks they grew to the number of fortye thousand men, armed with
clubbes and staves, joining with the Ilanders. By a general consent they ran
upon the Customers and Farmers of salt (although the King of Navarre sought to
appease them) executing their deseigne with extreme furye against all that
they could take: The Commons of Gascoigne rise in diverse places (the killing of
certain Officers of the Kings that had abused their places being the cause.)
The Mayor, Iurates and others that bare office in Bourdeaux, and the Lord of
Monneins (in place of the Kings Lieutenant there) instead of remedying these
tumults at the beginning temporised to much, especially the L. of Monneins, for
that he gave way to the insolence of one of the chief of these Rebels called
La VERGNE, who grew so bold that shortly after he raised all the common
people by the Tocsaine, (or larum bell) Being shut up in the Castle of Ha, now
and then he sent forth certain Harguebuziers to make the people affraide. But
this devise took not effect for such issuings did so heat the Citizens that
having found la VERGNE, ESTONNAC, MAQVANAN and others (men according to their
desire) they presently to arms, the Customers or Exactors being they they
sought for, under which color (pretending they sought for the Exactors) many
honorable houses were spoiled: upon this the Commons being received into the
Town they rung the Alarm Bell, no man daring to be seen but armed and in
company of some of these rebels, for otherwise they killed all they met. The
Counselors of the Court of Parliament were constrained to leave their Gowns,
and betake them to their Dublet and hose, and Capt after the fashion of
Mariners to carry a pike and march amongst the rude multitude. They
constrained the Lords of Saulx brethren, the one Captain of the Town the
other of the Castle called Trompette to be chief and assist at the spoil of
certain of their fellow Citizens and friends houses, massacring the^ before
their faces. The Towne-house furnished with an innumerable quantity of arms
was spoiled. MONEINS Lieutenant for the King very unadvisedly left his forte
to come and make an oration to this enraged multitude, where he was by them
slain, and the Carmelites in danger to have their house spoiled for that they
had buried him in their Church: shortly after these spoilers being charged
began to retier and the Parliament began to take courage executing some of
the principal of this commotion and amongst the rest La VERGNE who was drawn
in pieces by four horses. The King advertised of this disorder writ to the
Commons assuring them with speed he would provide for their greeuance.
Commanding them to cease their arms, by means whereof every one retired. L'
ESTONNAC was happily chaced out of the Castle called Trompette: During this,
FRANCIS of Lorraine Earl of Aumale followed by four thousand Suisses and the
force of the French horse entered into Saintonges pacifying it without
resistance or punnishment. ANNE of Mommoran^ie heigh Constable of France with
all the forces of both armies joined together in one, entered by an
vnaccustommed way into Bourdeaux, and being possessed of all without blow
stricken, took from the Citizens (by virtue of his commission) all there
tittles, records and documents of their rightes and privileges: deprived them
of all their honors, burnt all their priueleges, caused the Court Parliament
to cease, disarmed all the Inhabitants, took down their Belles, deprived
them of all their Immunities and Freedoms, constrayning the principalls of the
Town to the number of a hundred and forty, to go seek the Body of the Lord
of Monneins at the Carmelites, and to remove it with mourning to Saint
Andrews, where it is Interred, having first with a wax Candle lighted in their
hands asked mercy of almighty GOD, the King and Justice, before the lodging
of the Constable: L'ESTONNAC, the two Brothers of SAVLX, and others had their
heads cut off; The Marshalles Provost with a strong troop ran through the
Country of Burdelois, BAZADOIS and AGENOIS, executing them that had caused the
larum Bell to be rung. In the end the two Colonells of the commons called
TAILEMAIGNE and GALAFFRE were taken, who were broken upon the wheel, being
first crowned with a Crown of burning Iron, as a punnishment of the souerainty
they had usurped: Certain months after Bordeaux was established in her former
estate, and after the leauying some sums of money the exactio^s that were
cause of these troubles were abolished. History and Annals of France under
HENRY the second.

Diverse remarkable commotions happened with in this hundred years in diverse
parts of the world you shall read (GOD willing) in the following volumes; for
this time we present you with the precedent History as an essay of the rest.

Prodigious spirits.
IT is not long since there died one CONSTANTIA who counterfeited most sorts of
voices, sometimes he would singe like an Nightingale who cold not chant
division better then he, some-time brey like an Ass, sometimes grumble and
bark like three or four Dogs fighting together, counterfecting him that
being bitten by the other went crying away; with a Comb in his mouth he
would counterfeit the winding of a Cornet; all these things he did so
excellent well as neither the Ass, nor the Dogs, nor the Man that winded the
Cornet had any advantage of him: I have seen and spoken with such a one
oftentimes at my own house, but above all that which is most admirable is,
that he would speak sometimes with a voice, as it were enclosed in his
stomach without opening his lips or very little at all, in such manner as if
he were near you and called, you would have thought the voice had come from a
far, and so as diverse of my friends have been often deceived by him. Master
PASQVIER in the fifth book of his Recherches of France.

There is also there recited two other examples of prodigeous Spirits which I
will add to the other: The first is of one MOVLINET an ancient French Poet,
who reports that he has seen a man that sunge both the note and ditty of a
song very readily at one time. The other is of a young man that came to Paris
in the year 1445. Not above twenty years old who knew (these are the
words of a Notary of that time.) all the seven liberal Arts, by the
Testimony of all the learned Clerks of the University of Paris, and could
play on all kind of Instruments, singe and set better then any other;
exceeding all in Paris and there abouts in painting and limming, a very expert
Soldier, playing with a two hand sword so wonderfully as none might compare
with him, for when he perceived his enemy coming he would leap twenty or
four and twenty footes upon him. He was also a Master in Arts, a Doctor in
Physic, a Doctor of the Civil and Cannon Law, a Doctor in Divinity: And for
certain he has disputed with us of the College of Nauar, being fifty in
number of the best Scholars in Paris, and with more then three thousand other
Scholars, to all which questions asked him he has answered so boldly, as it
is a wonder for them that have not seen him to believe it. He spoke Latin,
Greek, Hebrewe, Caldey, Arabique, and many other tongues. He was a Knight at
arms; and verily if it were possible for a man to live an hundredth years,
without eating, drinking, or sleeping, and continually studying, yet should he
not attain to that knowledge that he had done, certainly it was a great
astonishment to us, for he knew more then in human reason might be
comprehended. He understood the four Doctors of the Church, and to conclude,
not to be parareld in the world for wisdom. Behold then this prodigious
spirit with some others that we have seen in our Time, amongst whom was JOHN
PICVS, and JOHN FRANCIS PICVS his Nephew, Princes of Mirandola. JULIUS CAESAR
SCALIGER, and others for the most part dead, and some other yet living, whom I
will forbear to name.

Sparkles of Fire.
IT has happened in my time to a Carmelite Friar, that always, and as often as
he put back his hood, one might see certain sparkles of fire come from the
hair of his head, which continued in him for the space of thirteen years
together.

Madam of Caumont if she combed her hair in the dark, seemed to cast forth
certain sparkles of fire from her head: SCALIGER in his excersitations against
CARDAN.

It happened upon a time to a certain Preacher in Spain, that from the crown
of his head, down to his shoulders, one might see a flame of fire issue, which
was held for a great miracle. HERMOLAVS BAREARVS, in the fourth Book of his
Phisickes. Chap. 5.

Fantastiques.
THere are some Nations, that when they are eating, they cover themselves. I
know a Lady (yea one of the greatest) who is of opinion, that to chew is an
unseemly thing, which much impaireth their grace and beauty, and therefore by
her will she never comes abroad with an appetite. And a man that cannot endure
one should see him eat, and shunneth all company, more when he fills then
when he emptieth. In the Turkish Empire there are many, who to excel the rest,
will not be seen when they are a feeding, and who make but one meal in a
week; who mangle their faces, and cut their limbs: and who never speak to
any body; who think to honor their nature, by disnaturing themselves. O
fanaticall people! that prize them selves by their contempt, and mend by their
empayring; what monstrous beast is this that makes himself a horror to
himself? whom his delights displease, who ties himself unto misfortune.
MONTAIGNE in his third book of Essays. Chap. 5.

I cannot keep any Register of my actions; Fortune has set them so low: I
keep them in my fantasy: I have seen a Gentleman, that did not communicate
his life but by the operation of his belly. One might see by him at his rising
a roe of close stools, to serve for seven or eight days. The same MONTAIGNE.

Women that have become Men.
IN a place called Esquirie, nine leagues from Coymbra in Portugal, dwelt a
Knight, the Father of a Damsel called MARY PACHECO, who being come to the age
that Maidens are accustomed to have their Flowers, instead of them issued a
virill member, which had lain hidden within until then, so as of a woman she
became a man, went apparreld like a man, changing name as well as Sex, and was
called EMANVEL PACHECO. This new man went into the East Indies, and returned
very rich with the reputation of a brave Caualiero, marrying afterward a Noble
Dame.

That which I have read in HYPOCRATES in his sixth Book of the popular diseases
of PITHVLIA the wife of PYTHEVS, (and in PLYNIE 7. Book. 4. Chap.) has
imbouldned me to set before you a History that I would never tell any body of,
thinking it had been a tale made for pleasure. A friend of mine (of good
authority, and worthy of belief) has told me, that in a certain place of
Spain, a young woman being married to a poor labourer, entered into some
difference with him, either through jealousy, or some other cause. This
division grew so hot, that the wife finding one night the clothes of a young
man that lay there, apparrelled her self in them, and away she went to get
her living as a man. In this case, whether it were the powerful working of
Nature in her, or the burning and excessive imagination, she had to see her
self so well and orderly fitted like a man, was the cause of this effect, but
she became a man and married another wife, keeping it secret, until it chanced
that a certain man that before had known her, coming to the place where she
was, and comparing the resemblance of this man with the woman he had known
before: He said unto her; Am not I your brother? Then this woman made man,
putting her trust in him, discovered unto him what had happened, praying him to
keep it secret.

IOVIANVS PONTANVS writes of a woman of Gaiette in the kingdom of Naples, who
after that she had lived forty years married to a poor Fisherman, was
changed into a man, who because he was mocked with it, entered into a Monastery
of Monks (where he reports to have known him) and dying, he was buried at
Rome, in the Church of our Lady called Minerua: He adds moreover, that
another called AEMELY, having been married to one called ANTHONY SPENSE for
the space of 12 years, was in the end changed into a man, and married a wife,
having first by the commandment of FERDINAND King of Scicilia, restored her
dowry. In our time there has been one seen at Bruxels in Brabant called
PETER, that before was called ELIZABETH, for that before she had been a woman.
The French forces passing at Vitry, I saw a man, whom the Bishop of Soysons at
confirmation called GERMAN, whom all the Inhabitants had known to have bin a
woman for 22. years space, and was called MARY; making (says he) some
extraordinary leap, the virill members came forth: and there is yet a Song in
use among the Maidens of that place, that warns them that they make no
extraordinary leapes, least they become boys, as MARY GERMAN did: MONTAIGNE
in the first book of his Essays.

Bodily strength.
THere has been in our time, in the kingdom of Galitia one called, the
Marshall PETER PARDO of Ribabadineira, who was at deadly enmity with a certain
Bishop, the reason could not be known, yet at the mediation of certain
friends, who sought to take up the matter, and make them friends, he consented
to an enter-view: As they drew near together, this Marshall feigning that he
had forgot all that was past, and that he would be friends with the Bishop
hereafter, ran to embrace him: But it was a deadly embrace to the Bishop, for
it was so rude locking him so fast in his arms, as he bruised his sides,
crushed his Heart and Intrailes, so as he left him dead in the place: I have
seen a man in the Town of Ast, who in the presence of the Marquis of P^scara
handed a Pillar of Marble three foot long, and one foot in Diameter, the
which he cast high into the air, then received it again in his arms, then
lasht it up again, sometime after one fashion, some time after another, as
easilye as if he had been playing with a Ball, or some such little thing. He
brought from the Shambles certain Ox feet newly cut off, set a Knife upon
one of them, and with a blow of his fist cut it a cross in two pecces: he
took another Oxe-foote, and brake it against his forehead, as if it had been
against a piece of Marble, without hurting himself at all. In my presence he
took another, and with his fist broke it into diverse small pieces. There was
at Mantoa one named RODAMAS, a man of a little stature, but so strong, as he
wreathed and broke with his hands a Horse-shooe, and a Cable as big as a man's
arm, as easily as if they had been small twine threads: mounted upon a great
horse, and leading another by the bridle, he would run a full Carire, and
stop in midst of his course, or when it liked him best. SIMON MAIOLVS an
Italian Bishop, in his Canicular days. Col. 4.

In the year 1582. in the months of May and June, at a solemn feast of the
circumcision of MAHVMETT, the son of AMVRATH Emperor of the Turks, was seen
amongst many other active men, one among the rest most memorable: a lusty man,
and wonderful strong, worthy to be compared with that most famous MILO of
Crotonne, who for proof of his prodigious strength, lifted up a piece of wood
that twelve men had much a do to raise from the earth, which he took and put
upon his shoulders, where he carried it without any help of his hands: and
afterward lying down flat, his shoulder and his thigh tied together, he bore
upon his breast a great and weighty stone, that ten men had rolled thither,
making but a jest of it. And which is a thing yet more wonderful, four men
stood leaping with long pieces of wood upon his belly: Besides this he brake
with his teeth and hands a Horse-shoe, with such force, that one part remained
between his teeth, and the rest in two pieces, in either hand one. At the
third blow with his fist, he brake a Plow-share: he lickt the Plow-share with
his tongue, being taken red hot out of the fire: he was covered with a great
pile of stones, but he never sturd one jot, but remained firm and inviolable,
as if he had been planted there. The same man, with his teeth only, sadled,
bridled, and harnest a Horse, with many other wonders, which got him much
money, and praise of all, by reason of his extraordinary force. GEORGE LEBELSKI
a Polander, in his Description of things done at Constantinople, at the
Circumsition of the Son of AMVRATH, 1582.

Amongst the Germans of our time, there are two recorded for strength: GEORGE
Baron of Fronsberg, and JOHN Baron of Schuartzbourg: they easily broke
horsshooes with their hands: Fronsperg never found man so strong, but he would
remove him out of his place with the little finger of his right hand, he would
stay a Horse (how strong so ever) in his swiftest course with one hand. And
would remove with his shoulder a Cannon whether he list: Schuartzbourg would
wreath Horseshooes, as if he had been some pliable substance. POTOCOVA,
Captain of the Casiques of Poland (beheaded by the commandment of the late
King STERVEN) would break Horse-shooes, as easily as a man would tear a piece
of Paper.

GEORGE le FEVRE (a learned German) writes, that in his time, in the year
1529. lived at Misnia in Thuringe, one called NICHOLAS KLVNHER, Provost of the
great Church, that was so strong, as without Cable or Pully, or any other
help, he fetched up out of a Cellar a Pipe of Wine, carried it out of doors,
and laid it upon a Cart. A Chanoin of the same Church called ERNEST, of the
house of the Earls of Mansfelt, a strong and tall man, would needs one day
wrestle with him: NICOLAS took him up and lifted him into the air, and
afterward cast him against a door, with such force, that he broke it,
not-with-standing that it was fast locked.

King CHARLES the ninth taking pleasure in exercises of the body, being at
Blois, caused a Breton (a man of little stature, but well set) to be sent for
to the Court, to wrestle body to body against all comers, many both great and
small tried their strength with him, but he foyld them all, casting one over
his head, another into the air, with his heels upwards, some a if they had
bin Feathers, others like little stones he cast into the air, and so against
the ground, it being impossible for any to cast him to the ground: Sometimes
he would lie flatt upon the ground, but who so-euer came near him, was forced
to make one leap or other, to the great contentment of the beholders. To
conclude, another brave wrestler, would needs buckle with him, but in the end
the Breton having his adversary upon his knee, first lift him up into the air,
and afterward locked him so fast in his arms, as he crushed him sore: and to
end his conquest, he cast him with such violence against the earth, as he was
lifted up, and carried half dead to his lodging, whereof he dyed shortly after.
In the Histories of our Times.

Thunder and Lightning.
IN the year 1562, being in Champatgne, and passing by a little Village
called Villeneufe, not far off from Sens the Arch-bishopricke: certain
Gentlemen and honorable personages, told me a strange chance that happened
to two young Priests by Thunder, who in Harvest time coming from singing of
mass for a rich man dead, after dinner retiring themselves, were incountred
with a torment of the air accompanied with thunder and strange lightning.
These two young men, recovering a little wood sat them down together under the
Trees: But they were killed by thunder, where the next day after dilligent search
for them, their kins-folkes found them. They thought at first they had but
slept, but it proved a perpetual sleep: stripping and searching them they
could find neither hurt nor mark on their bodies but either of their hatts a
little singed and in the midst their was a spot of the bigness of a Carolus
which is about the breadth of a groate: Their poor bodies stunck so
wonderfully that none could endure about them. M. D. BEAVLIEV in his treatise
of thunder and lightning.

About the year 1536. upon a Sunday in summer was kept an excessive and
dissolute marriage in a village half a days journey from Poitiers the which
has but one straight and long street. In this day and place about noone
happened a strange and fearful thunder, a Globe of fire of the greatness of
a bowl fell in one of the corners of the Town, and ran along the street
without hurting any body, to Saint Georges Church, where it being entered it
made a strange spoil taking away the Tombs of the dead, ran to the grear
Altar and spoiled a fair Image of our Lady holding her little Child in her
arms, besides it tore away the pauement in diverse places of this Church, and
brake a chain of iron that held up the Crucifix, cast it down and brake one
arm of it; and afterward grazing along the walls on the left hand, without
hurting them that were tolling the bells, (more then for fear to run away)
it mounted up into the Steeple (a very fair building) the which it burnt in
such sort that all the Belles both great and small were melted, the metal
falling upon the pauement of the Church. The same.

Traualing through Italy not far from Eugubio, I saw thunder light upon two
peasants, riding upon Asses, killing both men and beasts upon the place: they
had a third man in their company who had the bones of one of his arms so
broken, as one could not see whether their were any bone at all, this blow,
caused such pitiful greefes in this poor man and did so torment him as he
desired not to live.

I have seen two men, (the Father and the Son) have their bodies so amazed
and deaded with thunder, that I thought verily they had been fallen into an
Apoplexy: They remained seven days together without eating, drinking,
speaking or moving: In the end I caused them to be let blood, giving them
sharp glisters, rubbing and norishing their bodies, so as in short time they
recovered their former healths. Certain months before the death of HIPOLITO of
Este, Cardinal of Ferrara thunder fell upon his Palace and entered into my
Chamber, light upon one of my servants swords hanging at the bedde-side melted
the point of it making a little bullet of it, and neither broke nor hurt the
sheath: MVRETVS in his Annotations upon the 31. Chap. of the 2. book, of
Senecas natural questions.

About the year 1560. Near to Beneuida a Town of Spain, as two men walked
together in the open fildes, a strange tempest arose, to the great astonishment
of them both, they seeking by flight to get some covert, and perceiving the
tempest to increase cast themselves flat to the ground; where they felt the
tempest ready to lift them from the ground. In the end one of them perceiuyng
the noise to cease, lifted himself up, the whirl-winde having much amazed him,
those which perceived him coming, and the other lying still, went toward him,
but him they found dead having his bones so broken, as one might have writhed
his arms and legs like a glove, all his Body seeming nothing but flesh:
likewise his tongue was taken away and could not be found, notwithstanding
that they made dilligent search for it: Their were diverse Judgments upon this
accident, one said he was an ordinary swearer and blasphemer of the holy name
of GOD, and therefore was perticularlie chasticed in that part that had most
dishonored his creator: By such a fore named whirl-winde a Town of Spain
called Algadefie was wholly ruined, the houses and buildings being laid flat
with the ground. The five and twenty of May 1566. about three a clock in the
afternoon, a clap fell upon the Castle of Misnia, burnt a floor of a Chamber,
melted kettles and Pannes spoiling all the Chambers, entering and going out at
the windows, then down into the cellars to the great amazement of all, but
hurt not any person: Three years after, the nineteeneth of Iulie the thunder
having rored from eight a clock in the morning till four in the afternoon
the boult about one a clock light upon the College Church of the Towne-house.
Much Cattle, and some men were found dead in the ficildes: amongst other
memorable accidents, the lightning ceized upon a Country fellow, who burnt all
his Body over three days after, and then died.

The Mother of JEROME FRACASTORIVS, an excellent Philosopher, admirable Poet
and happy Physician of our time, having him in her arms giving him suck was
struck with a thunderclap and killed without any touch or hutt to the little
Child: which was a presage of the glory that this excellent personage (who
lived long after and then died of an Apoplexy) should be crowned with.

Horrible fury.
IN the memory of our Ancestors a Carpentar of Wilsmarse (a famous town in
Saxony) sometimes possessed with a Frenzy, traueling one day with some of his
own condition, with out saying a word took his hatchet and went toward his
house, where being entered he cloue in two two of his Children, his Wife (being
great with child) hearing the noise ran to save the third, which he left
falling upon his Wife and cut her and the fruit she bare in pieces. And so
being covered with blood he returned to his companions and being asked how he
came so, he came to his senses. And then remembering what he had done, he went
again to his house snatched a knife and gave himself a blow on the breast, and
fell down dead upon the ground. CRANTZIVS in his 10. book of Vandalia.

Of Giants.
IN the year 1511. the Emperor M^XIMILIAN 1. being at Aus^ourg, at an Assembly
of the States, they presented a man unto him, of an unreasonable height and
greatness, who at a few month-fulls and without any stay did eat a whole
Sheep or a Calfe, not caring whether it were roast or raw: saying that it did
but sharpen his appetite. SVRIVS in his Commentary of the memorable things of
our time.

IOACHIM the 2. of that name Elector of Brandebourg, had a peasant in his Court
called Little MICHEL by ANTIPHRASIS, for he was eight foot high, which is a
great stature of a man in our time, but little and small in comparison of great
men in old time, namely of Goliath and others about Judea. MATTHEW HORST in his
collection of the combat betwixt DAVID and GOLIATH.

I have seen a young maiden of a Giant-like stature, whom they did carry from
Town to Town, to show her as a prodigious thing for the sight of whom every
man gave some thing, wherewith her Mother that conducted her and she were
entertained. She was in a hired Chamber by her self, and there suffered her
self to be seen with admiration. Going as others did, I inquired carefully of
every point, and did learn both from herself and her Mother (who was a woman
of a mean stature) that the maidens Father was not tall, that in all their
stock, there was not any one that exceeded the height of other persons: that
her Daughter until she was twelve years old was very little, but falling at
the same time into a quarten ague, which had held her some months, coming to
leave her, she began then to grow, all her members being proportionable to
that height: so as when I did see her she was about five and twenty years
old, neither could I note from the head unto the sole of the foot any
disproportion in any of her members: but a fit measure in every one of them. At
this age of 25. years, she had not yet had her monthly Terms: nature
seeming to have required and restrained this excrementall blood, for the
norrishment and preservation of so great a body. She was helth-full, ill
faced, black, simple and gross writted, and heavy of all her Body, for the
vital virtue infused at the beginning into this body, according unto the
measure due to the greatness of an ordinary person, dispersed afterward into
so great a Mass, could not with equal power show the efficacy of his work,
as in a mean body: and experience does show that virtue restrained shows it
self more vigorous then when it is two much dispersed, for the regard of
natural causes of this extraordinary greatness, by the means of the quarten
ague; we will leave the decision unto Physicians, and will not dispute with
them: but in a word, if a person that is about the age of twelve or twenty
years comes to grow through a sickness, so as in proportion of Body she
comes to be twice as heigh as any other, we must confess that this force of
nature is extraordinary and admirable.

We have drawn this History out of MARCELLVS DONATVS a learned Physician.
Lib. 3. Chap. 14. Whereas he treats amply of the causes of the Giant-like
height, as his profession did require.

After the victory which King LEWIS the twelfth obtained at the Battle of
Lode, being gone to Milan, I found a young man in the hospital, so great as
he could not stand right up, having not suffycient norrishment of nature, for
the thickness of his Body, and the proportion of his forces. He was
therefore laid upon two beds, the one joined long ways unto the other, the
which he did fill with his length.

The Samogitiens which inhabit betwixt Prusia and Liuonia, are very talle,
and yet sometimes they engender Children which (come to age) are of a very
small stature, and sometimes others which grow wonderful great. SCALIGER in
the 63. exercitation against CARDAN.

There was in our time in Bourdelois, a man of an unmeasurable height and
greatness, by reason whereof he was called the Giant of Bourdeaux. King
FRANCIS amazed to see so long a body, commanded he should be one of his
Guarde. He was a peasant of a gross spirit, so as not able to apply himself
to a Courtiers life, after some days, he gave over his Halbard, and returned
to his Village. An honorable person who had seen him Archer of the Guarde,
did assure me, that he was of such a height, as any other man of an ordinary
stature might go right up betwixt his legs, when he did stride. I.
CHASSAGNON in his Treatise of Giants. Chap. 6.

In the year 1571 there was a Giant seen at Paris, whom every man did run
to see. He kept himself very close in an Inn, and no man could have the
sight of him, but in paying to see him. Entering into the Chamber where he was
kept, they did see with admiration, a man of a strange height, sitting in a
Chair: but their wondering increased when as they did see him rising from his
Chair, for then he touched the plancher of the Chamber with his head, the which
was very high, after the manner of the French floores. They said he was a
Polonian or a Transiluanian. This Giant had a Wife of a wonderful large body,
and very fat with-all, but very low in comparison of him: of whom they had
a young Son borne, who was in show to prove one day almost as tall as his
Father. At the West Indies (descouered some hundred years since) many Giants
have been seen, as they witness that have written their Histories. Near
unto the Antartike Pole, there are some found, of ten or twelve foot of
height: as also in the Island of Sumatra (or Taprobane) which is toward the
East Indies. The same Author.

MELCHIOR NVNEZ in his letters where he discourses of the affairs of CHINA,
reports that in the chief City called Paguin, the Porters are fiueteene
foot heigh. In other letters written in the year 1555. he does auerre that
the King of CHINA, entertaines and feeds five hundred such men for Archers of
his guard. SIMON MAIOLVS in his Canicular days, Col. 2.

LODOVICVS VIVES a learned Spaniard, in his Annotations upon the 15. book of
S. AVGVSTIN de Ciuitate DEI. Chap. 9. Says that he had seen in the great
Temple at Valencia, a man's eye-tooth bigger then his fist. JOSEPH ACOSTA in his
History of the Indies, says that he had seen one bigger, and the rest
answerable unto it. But for that it is to be presumed, that such teeth were of
Men that had been dead many ages before, we will not insist any more upon
them. In our time we have seen among the Archers of the deceased King of
Navarre, a Biarnois of so tall a stature, as he did equal his Master being
mounted upon a great horse, so as he did exceed the tallest men in all the
Country by the head and the shoulders. He was a goodly man, active and
pleasant. And contrarie-wise there was seen at Paris, one called the great
Smithe, a man of an ill fashion, but exceeding tal, in comparison of many of
mean stature.

ANTONIE PIGAFET a great traveler in his time, affirms that he had seen
toward the Antarticke pole, so tall a giant, as other tall men did not reach
with their heads above his nauill: and others beyond the straight of Magellan,
which had their necks a cubit long, and the rest of their bodies answerable.

An extraordinary Cure.
A Certain Italian having had a quarrel with another, fell so grievously
sick, as they did not hope for life of him. His enemy hearing thereof, came
to his lodging, and inquires of his servant, where his master was. The servant
answered him, he is at the point of death, and will not escape this day. The
other grumbling to himself, replied, he shall die by my hands: whereupon he
enters into the sick man's chamber, gives him certain stabbes with his dagger,
and then flies. They bind up this poor sick man's wounds, who by the means
of so great a loss of blood, recovered his health. So he recovered his health
and life by his means who sought his death. R. SOLENANDER, lib. 5. of his
Counsels. 15. Cons. 9. sect.

He makes mention in the same place of a woman which did commonly purge her
self of her terms, by the nose, for thirteen months together: during the
which, being let blood in the Saphena vain, and purged, she was cured. And
of a man who in the space of twenty and four hours, voyded at the mouth
twenty and six pounds of blood, congealed, and very black, and was cured by
diet, rest, and glisters, without any inward medicines. A peasant falling into
a burning fever, was carried to the hospital, and being carefully tended,
fell into extremity. The Physician being a learned man, said unto him, what
will thou have my friend? how did thou govern thy self here to-fore? I
was not accust^med answered the sick man, to eat and drink as I do now
here; I knew not what sirrops, drugges nor Physic meant, I cannot sleep
upon feathers. It is almost twenty years since I did lie in a bed: my feeding
is Onions, hard Cheese, and such like delicates, my bed was upon Straw at the
sign of the Star, and covered with my clothes, that is to say, lying in
them. The Physician suffered him to lie one night upon the Straw, and gave him
Onions, Salt, and cold water: holding it good to please him in this
extremity. But the next day he found his sick man half cured, warming
himself against the fire. We have observed (says the same SOLINANDER) some
sick men, who having ease in their torments, have chewed and swallowed the
receipts written by their Physicians, and have been cared by that means. A
certain man having the Dropsy, and little looked unto, by the benefit of
nature, had an ouerture in his body under the pappe, betwixt the Peritoyne and
the Muscles of the belly, by the which we drue above 200. bladders like unto
Hens Eggs, the which were soft and full of stinking water. In the 15. Council
of the 5. book.

A man lame of the Gout preserved.
IN the year 1589. WILLIAM de MICHES an ancient man, being crooked and lame of
the Gout, had a desire to go and visit an Abbay of Monks, above Lions, called
L' Isle Barbe, where there was company that day. In the morning he takes a
boat, with his Daughter, his son in law, and some neighbors. Having
visited the Abbay, done his devotion, and made good cheer, he and his
company imbarke again. The woman that guided the Boat, having drunk more
wine then water, when they should pass under the bridge of Sarne, instead of
governing her boat under the Arche (the which was great and large) she ran
against a pyle, so as the Boat was ouer-whelmed, and all within it drowned,
except the poor man that was lame of the Gowt, who not able to stir, was
carried by the stream unto the shore, where he was taken up and carried to his
house, and after lived some years. Memoires of Lion.

A Man before Age.
I Have known a man in Spain, who after some years, became a Friar of the
order of Saint FRANCIS, and remained in the Covent of our Lady of Val, then in
that of Soto, and afterward in the City zamore, he is so little of stature,
as without wronging him, one may call him Dwarffe: though otherwise he be of
a good fashion, and has a well proportioned body. Every man knows it, and
many Monks of his order have assured me for certain, that he was borne in a
Village called Saint Tiso, and that coming into the world he had all his
Teeth, which he had at the age of five and twenty years, and has had ever
since without changing them, or any falling out, and he sucked a very little
while. Coming out of his Mothers womb, he had his privy parts as hairie,
as a man that is come to his perfect age, at seven years old: his chinne was
covered with a beard, and at ten years he begot a son: having at that age
all the natural and vital faculties, as perfect as a man at thirty years,
TORQVEMADO in the first journey of his Hexameron.

I have seen in a town in Italy, called Prato, about two leagues and a half
from Florence, a child newborn, which had the face covered with thick hair,
half a foot long, very white, soft and fine as flax: being two months
old, this beard fell off, as if the face had pield by some disease. The same.

A certain man went throughout all Spain, showing a son of his for money.
The child being ten or eleven years old, had so much hair of his face (which
was long, thick, and curled) as they could not see any thing but his eyes and
mouth. The same.

A young boy being but nine years old, got a nurce with child. So says JOHN
FOXIVS. L. DANEVS. lib. 2. of his morrall Philosophy Chap. 14.

A horrible Jealousy.
ABout the year 1517. a young Citizen of Modena, very rich and not married,
called FRANCIS TOTTE, abandoning himself to the pleasures of the world, began
to frequent the house of a Gentlewoman that was married, who was named CALORE,
she kept open house, through her husbands suffrance, for dancing, playing at
cards and dise, and other entertaynments for all comers, from whom she still
drew some commodity, being of her self alluring, and stately in apparel,
stuff, feasts and all that belongs thereto. This young Modenois, who had good
means, began to frequent this entry to hell, and within a while was so drunk
with the intising baits of this Curtizan, as he did not cease to pursue her in
that sort, as from that time they concluded a mutual and cordial love betwixt
them. They lived in this estate about three years, that the Modenois did
enjoy, and was enjoyed of this CALORE, to whom he gave his person and his
goods, more freely then he would have done to a lawful wife. She did handle
him cunningly, but one day as she played at Chesse with a certain gentleman,
it chanced that smiling, she took this gamester by the hand, and griped it,
like unto a woman of her trade. FRANCISCO grows jealous at this countenance,
and from that time seemed discontented. CALORE a licentious woman, and not
accustomed to be restrained, began to contest and to brave him. In the end,
disdain grows thorough words, so as she having told him that she cared not
for his humors, nor choler: this wretched man did shut himself into a
chamber, where having made some notes containing a disposition of his goods,
and that he would not have any one accused for his death, but himself, he
did put them in his shoes, in such sort as they must presently see them: then
with his girdle and his garters he made a kind of halter, and leaping from a
great coffer, he strangled himself presently. It was in the very house of
CALORE, who afterward lived more retired. At that time FRANCIS GVICHARDINE, an
excellent Historian of our age, was Governor of Modena for the Pope. The
History of Italy.

About the year 1528. there chanced at Rimini a town in Romagnia, a notable
History. A certain young gentlewoman, married to an old gentleman,
forgetting her honor, did prostitute her self villanously to a young
gentleman of the place, caled PANDOLPHO, continuing their infamous course by
the means of a chambermaid that was their bawd, for the space of two years.
There was in the chamber of this wretched woman, a great coffer, where she did
put some part of her jewels and money, in the which her adulterer did hide
himself, if at any time he were in danger to be surprised, and could not
escape. This coffer had a vent for air in a secret place, so as PANDOLFO
continued sometimes long there. It happened at the end of this time, that GODS
divine justice began to call this Adulteress to an account, by a grievous and
incurable sickness, who finding her self abandoned of the Physicians, was yet
more in regard of her soul. Her husband coming about midnight unlooked for,
PANDOLFO casts himself into the coffer, shutting it easily of himself. Then
this woman transported with some horrible spirit, began (after some speech) to
make an humble request unto her husband, making him to promise with an oath,
that he should not refuse her. Which was, that he should put into her tomb in
the cave, near unto her coffin, that coffer which she showed him, without
looking himself, or suffering any one to look into it, having certain stuff
in it, which she would not have any one to use after her. The which request
the husband did grant her. Miserable PANDOLFO understood these terrible words,
which made him to curse his own wickedness a thousand times, and his
adulteress withal, who within two hours after died, without repentance or
confession of her wicked sins, being desirous to draw him with her unto
death, that had been the companion of her wicked life.

After her death, as they gave order for her Interment, some servants and
kinsfolks would have him leave this coffer in the house, or at the least, that
they should open and visit it. But the husband holding the solemn promise made
by him, hindered the opening thereof, and caused it to be carried out shut,
the which after the Obsequies were made, was let down with the coffin into the
Cave, and a great Tombe-stone laid upon it without mortar, for that it was now
night, and that they meant to finish all the next day. Miserable PANDOLFO,
hearing them sing in Saint Cataldes Church, made his account then to die in the
coffer, and in tumbling up and down, he felt certain bags full of jewels,
but having no mind of gold nor silver, he disposed himself to other
thoughts, when as GOD would give him new respight, to have a better care of
his conscience and life than he had formerly had.

A young man of the house who knew that the deceassed had good stuff in the
Coffer, and being covetous of such a booty found means to enter about ten or
eleven a clock at night into Saint Cataldes Temple, whereas the Cave and
Sepulcher of the deceassed was. With the help of two of his companions, he
lifts up the stone and begins to get open the Coffer, pretending to carry
away a good prey. PANDOLFO (taking a sudden resolution in so strange an
accident) does rise, and gets out of the coffer, with such a noise, as the rest
thinking it had been some Devil, fled away speedily. PANDOLFO being come to
himself, lights a Torche, and visiting the Cofer, lodes himself with Jewels,
and money which he found there: and going out of the Church, past by the
Covent gardens unto his own house. I leave it to the Reader to judge, if he
had not reason to think of GODS help, and to amend his life. Hist of Italy.

Impiety punnished.
IN the year 1505. a certain Curat of one of the Parishes of Misnia in
Thuring, looking one day over the bridge of Elbe (which is a large and a deep
river) how the boats did pass: no man touching him, nor his brain any way
altered, but by a secret Judgment of GOD, he fell of the bridge into the
water, and was presently drowned. He was accustomed (whenever they did
present any women Children unto him to be baptized, after that he had
administered Baptism unto them, in contempt of the feminine sex, and without
any regard to the dignity of Christian souls) to say, that they should not
carry them back unto the house, but cast them into the river. GEORGE le FEVRE.
Lib. 3. of his Annals of Misnia.

A Printer of Transiluania, having been so miserable as to presume to print
Books and execrable pictures, made by certain Heretics, enemies of the holy
Trynitie, died desperate and made. JOSIAS SIMLER in the preface of his Books
touching the eternal Son of GOD. The new Arriens Samosateniens and
Tritheites of our Time, as MICHEL SERVET, VALENTIN GENTIL and their disciples
in Poland, Transiluania and there aboutes, have al perished miserably, first
in regard of their souls, and most of them in regard of their bodies. SERVET
was burnt alive, and would never acknowledge JESUS CHRIST to be the Son of the
eternal GOD: VALENTIN was beheaded, the rest died mad and desperate, either
slain by their own hands, or executed by Justice, without abiuration or
detestation of their detestable Impieties, the which we must bury with the
names of their Authors.

About the year 1550. a certain Companion, who had long made profession to
mock at all relligion, and at devout persons, entered into a Church where there
was a Sermon then made by the Minister of the place. This wretch doing
contrary to all those that were there present, began to gromble, and to
show by diverse countenances that he was a profane man: to whom the Pastor
(being attentive to his preaching) spoke not a word, but only sigthed,
praying unto GOD, that this mocker might be suppressed: who seeing that the
Preacher did not contest against him, but contemned his unworthy behavior,
he goes out of the Church, but presently a tile fell from the house upon his
head, and slew him upon the place. This happened in Denmark, as I do assure.
N. HEMMING, a learned Divine in his exposition upon the 1. Chap. of Saint JOHN'S
Gospel.

CHRISTOPHER TVRC a Councellor of State to a great Nobleman in Germany, going
one day to horse, and mocking at an excellent Prince who was then prisoner in
his enemies hands, began to say, what is became of those gallants which song so
much one with an other. When any one does wrong us, GOD is our succor and
desence. But he had scarce ended his words, when as a sudden gree^e took
him, so as he was forced to alight from his horse and to be carried to bed,
where in steed of singing, he died in despair, drawing forth his tongue as
black as a coal, and hanging out of his mouth, the ninth of June 1547. At the
same time certain other skorners, preparing themselves for a great feast, when
as they should have trembled under the mighty hand of GOD, who did strike all
Germany: being assembled in troop, they were scattered and dispersed with
strange thunder and lightning, so as they were forced to be quiet. MARTIN
LIDIVS a learned Divine in his book entitled Celebratio Dextrae Excelsae etc.

Imagination.
FERNELIVS, a very learned Physician of our time, derides their opinion that
say, there are three distinct ventricles in the brain: one for the Imagination
an other for the understanding, and the third for the memory: and he thinks
that these common functions of the spirit, namely the Imaginatiue, the
Indicative and the memoratiue are co^fused in it, each of them working their
operations by turns accordingly, as each of us does bend the powers of his
spirit either to the imagination, judgment or memory. In few words he meant
to say that our spirit laboreth no where else but there whereas our heart is
fixed. I will speak of it as a blind man does of colors: but if you permit
me to comment this great personage: believe that if his opinion be not good,
yet is it assisted with three great pretexts: for if there be three separated
ventricles in the brain there ought to be as many distinct Celles in the
imaginatiue, as there be diverse effects. We have seen one TVLENVS full of
learning and knowledge, who failed in no part of his imagination, but only in
two points: that is to say in the love of a great Princess, which was deceased
long before, and in the opinion that he was Bishop of Cambray. In all other
things full of Doctrine and sound judgment. But as soon as he fell into one of
these two points, you should have seen him range quite beside himself. In
such sort that he was persuaded the first Gentlewoman he met withal was she
for whom he had endured so much. And before him, under the reign of the great
K. FRANCIS, we had one VILLEMANOCHE, who never erred in any function of his
understanding, but when he entered into the hopes of his marriage: thinking
there was no Princess how great soever, but was in love with him. E. PASQVIER
in the 6. book. des Recherches de la France, Chap. 8. A Jew returning home by
night out of the Country fell a sleep on the Ass that carried him. The beast
that knew the way went over a broad deep ditch upon a very narrow bridge. The
next day this Jew thoroughly imagining the danger he had past, and by the force
of his imagination, representing it to his eyes, was stricken with such horror
that he died of it. L. VIVES in the 3. book of the soul, speaking of the
fear, proceeding from too excessive an imagination. An Apothecary, servant to
my late Father, told me how he had known a merchant of Toulouse a long time,
that was sickely and subject to the stone who had oftentimes need of glisters,
and had them diversely ordained by all the Physicians, according to the
occurrence of his pain. When they were brought there was nothing ommitted of
the accusomed form: and many times he felt whether they were not too hot: then
was he laid along on his belly, and all other things performed, saving there
was no iniection made. The Apothecary being gone after this ceremony, and the
patient accommodated as if he had taken the glister, he felt the like effect
of it as those that take it indeed. And if the Physician found not the
operation sufficient, he gave him two or three more, after the same manner. My
witness swore, that to save Charges (for he paid for them as well as if he had
taken them) this merchants wife having diverse times caused them to be made of
nothing but of warm water, the effect discovered the deceit, and because they
found those unprofitable, they were feign to have recourse again to the
former. The Lord of Montaigne in the 1. book of his Essays, Chapter 21.

Not long ago, a certain woman thinking she had swallowed a pin in her
meat, cried and tormented herself, as having an intolerable pain in her
throat, where she thought she felt it stick: but because no swelling nor
alteration appeared on the outside, a witty fellow judging that it was but
fantasy and opynion, taken from some morcell that had pricked her throat in
going down, made her vomit, and privily threw a crooked pin into that she
vomited. This woman thinking she had cast it up, felt her self presently rid
of her pain. The same.

I knew a gentleman that having feasted a sort of his friends, bragged three
or four days after in ieasting manner (for it was nothing so) that he had
made them eat a cat baked in a pie: whereat a gentlewoman of the company
conceived such horror, that thereby falling into a weakness of the stomach
and a fever, it was impossible to save her. The same.

I do not think that ever I have read a more admyrable matter in any history
then that which is written by that learned personage, LEWIS VIVES. Commentary
on the 25. Chap. of the 12. book of the City of GOD.

The books of Naturalistes (says he) are full, how things seen in
conceiving, have great efficacy in the woman with Child and in her fruit. By
reason whereof they command women to have fair images and pourtraytures about
their beds.

There is a town in Fland^rs, called BOSLEDVC, where every year, as in other
places of those Countries, on the day of the dedication of the great Church of
their town, they set forth diverse plays and pageants, disguysing themselves
some like Angels, and other some like Devils. One of them inflamed with the
regard of a certain young gentlewoman, went leaping and dancing home, where
meeting his wife, all disfigured and masked as he was, he threw her down on a
pallet, saying he would make a little Devil in her. By this approach the woman
conceived: but as soon as she was delivered began to skip and dance like one
of these same painted Devils. MARGARET of AVSTRICH the Daughter of MAXIMILIAN,
and Aunt to CHARLES after-ward Emperor, the fifth of that name recounted this
History to JOHN LAMVS Ambassador for FERDINAND King of Romans. M. MARTIN
WEINRICH Physician in his Commentary treating of Monsters, Chapter 17.

AMBROSE PARE, an expert and famous Surgeon, reports how a certain woman of
Beausse, had a live Frog tied in the paulme of her hand, where she held it till
such time as it was stif^ed, and that for to help her of a certain fever.
The night following this woman conceived by her husband, and at length was
delivered of a Child, which had a face like the muzzell of a Frog. In the same
Commentary and Chap.

A learned Divine declares in a certain Commentary of his upon Genesis, how
he had seen a woman, honest, fair and chaste, that was delivered of a Bat.
Which happened through one of the neighbors, that having caught a Bat tied a
little bell about him, to the end he should fray away others. This woman with
Child meeting the Bat conceived such fear, that her fruit received the whole
form of it, through a strange and exceeding vehement imagination. He relates
also how he had seen a man well stricken in years at Witteberg, who had a face
like death: because his mother being with Child of him, was afraid of a
deaths head, and through her imagination had imprinted the form of it in her
Child. The same.

We have seen a woman in the town of Breslaw in Silesia, that beholding a
Child newely borne without an hole in the fu^dament, not long after was
delivered of the like. Likewise a Cuntry-woman with Child, who returning home
alone from the City, did eat a snake in steed of an eele, which her husband
when he came home was so ill-aduised to tell her of, where at she conceived
such horror, that suddenly she died of it. There have bin many imprisoned for
offenses, and apprehending the loss of their lives, as in one night of black
or yellow which they were (as in the flower of their age) have become all white
like old men. It is reported that a certain man being in doubt that one laid
wait for his life, although this apprehensio^ was false, yet chancing to meet
the party, and the other stabbing him in jest on the stomach with a great
turnep, imagined that it was a stab with a poygnard, and fell down dead in the
place. The like is said of a Ieaster who being condemned only in show to be
beeheaded, for putting a great Prince his Master in danger of his life, as
things were in a readiness for his execution instead of striking him with the
axe, the hang man threw a bole of cold water on his neck: but coming to
unbind him, he found him stark dead, in such sort as if his head had been
clean cut off from his shoulders. The same. Not long since one of our Princes
whose natural beauty and lively disposition the gout had very much impaired:
suffered himself to be so carried away by the report that went of the
marvelous operations of a Priest, who with certain words, healed all
disseases, that he undertook a long journey for to find him out, and by the
power of his apprehe^sion so persuaded his legs for certain hours together,
that he drew the service from the^, which they had forgot to do him a long
time before. There was so much simplicity, and so little art found afterward in
the architect of such works, that he was thought unworthy of any punishment.
MONTAIGNE in the 3. book of his Essays.

About 25. years ago, a gentleman in Bassigni having bin at a great feast
among other honorable company, within 3. weeks after meeting some of the
guess, one of them said merrily, how at that feast instead of a quarter of
Kid, they had bin served with the leg of a Dog very well seasoned and dressed,
and that she, as well as the l^st, had eaten her part of it. Whether it were
true or no I know not, but immediately this Gentlewoman conceived such horror
at it, that rising from table she fell into swounings, continual vomytings,
sincopes and so vyolent a fever, that it was impossible to save her. Extracted
out of mine own notes.

Notable Impostures.
IN the town of Artigules, part of the dioces of Rieux, and under the
jurisdiction of the Parliament of Toulouse, it happened that one MARTIN GVERRE,
having been married the space of ten or eleauen years to BERTRAND ROSLI,
afterward upon what discontent I know not between him and his Father,
for-sooke his house, and went and served under the Emperor CHARES the fifth,
and King PHILIP his Son, where he continued some dosen years, till at the
taking of the town of Saint Quintins he lost a leg.

Now his wife having heard no tidings of him in eight years before, one named
ARNOLD TYLLIER some call him ARNOLD of TILL) borne in the Country of FOIX, who
as many think was brought up in magic, took upon him to play the person of
MARTIN GVERRE, furthered therein, as well with his long absence, as also that in
the lineaments of his face he somewhat resembled him. Presenting himself
unto the woman, at the first she would not acknowledge him for her hus-band:
but besides the conformity of body, he discovered so many secretts unto her
that had past between them two, especially in the night after their marriage,
yea even to the very apparel he had left behind him in a Chest, at the time
of his departure: Things which could not be known but by the right husband:
that at length not only she, but the most part of his kins-folkes and friends
acknowledged him for MARTIN GVERRE: and in this opinion 4. years past without
any contradiction. At the end whereof a soldier traveling that way told that
MARTIN GVERRE had lost a leg. Not long before this woman was entered into some
suspicion of her supposed husband: by means whereof she took witness under
hand before two Notaries of the soldiers report. Which to say truly, was but
only upon hearsay: nevertheless it was the first foundation of this wretched
TILLIERS misfortune. For as it is hard for a lier not to vary, so the woman
gathered diverse speeches from him, that made her to misdoubt him: and indeed
solly cited by PETER GVERRE, MARTINS Uncle, she not only abandoned him, but
sued him extraordinarily before the Seneschall of Rieux, where he was
condemned to death by sentence, from the which he appealed to the Parliament of
Toulouse, which was infinitely trobled about the strangeness of the case. For
on the one side, TILLIER discovered all the particularities from point to point
that had past between him and BERTRAND before his going away, and the talk
they had had the first night they lay together. As also how after they had
been married some 7. or 8. years going into the Country to one of their
kins-folkes wedding, because they lacked room, and that therefore his wife was
to lie with another woman, it was devised between them, that when the rest
were a sleep, he should come and lie with his wife. likewise how they had had
a Child, naming the Priest that baptized it, and the Godfathers that were
(...) to it at the Font: all with such a resolution and boldness that the
woman could not tell what to say: adding the motives of his departure, and the
trauells he had sustained both in Spain and France. Which perticularities were
found afterward to be true, by the report of MARTIN GVERRE himself. That which
makes this History more meruaylous, was that this supposed hus-band had never
conuersed with the other. The presumptions that yet made for him were a double
tooth, a nail growing into the flesh on the right hand, certain moles, and a
red spot in one eye, even as MARTIN GVERRE had and further in that he somewhat
resembled his sisters, who were so besotted, that they avouched him for their
brother. On the other side that which made against him was that a soldier
having called him ARNOLD by his name, he prayed him in his ear not to call him
so but MARTIN GVERRE. Besides the which she brought proof of an Uncle of his,
who seeing him in the way of perdition, came lamenting unto him, desiring him
not to cast himself utterly away. But these proofs were not sufficient to
disannull the former, for to all objections that were made against him, he
answered confidently, laying all the cause and plotting of his troble on PETER
GVERRE his Uncle, who^ he had threatened a little before, to make him yield an
account of the gardianship that he had sometimes had of him. And for to give
some color to his saying, he desired that his wife might be sworn, to see
whither she would acknowledge him for her right husband or no: declaring that
he would put his life or death upon her oath. Which so amazed her that she would
not accept it. These circumstances so moved the Judges that they committed the
Uncle and the Niepce to several prisons, to the end one should not prompt the
other. Thinking the woman was drawn to make this accusation by the Uncle, who
was in danger of his person.

As the Judges were in this suspense, it fortuned that the right MARTIN GVERRE
came home; where at the first sight al his neighbors knew him, and therewithal
being advertised of the pranke the other had played him he went directly to
Tholousa, where he made petition to be admitted as a party in the cause. Then
were the Judges more amazed then before: because that ARNOLD with an impudent
boldness maintained that this was a Co^nicatching knave suborned by his
adversaries. In this difference, the Judges, for to be assured of the truth,
sent for the Uncle out of prison, and set MAR. GVERRE among a great many
others apparelled in the same apparel as the counterfeit was, to see whither he
would know him or no: but presently he went and picked him out from the rest
and with great tokens of joy and gladness welcomed him home. The like did
BERTRAN, craving pardon for the wrong she had unwittingly done him. Nevertheless
her husband not taking her words in good payment, with a frouning countenance
began to accuse her. How is it possible (said he) that thou should lend
consent to this abuse? for in mine Uncle, and sisters, there may be some
excuse. But none in the priuity that is between the man and his wife. And in
this anger he perseuered a long time, notwithstanding any persuasion could be
used to the contrary. Which drew the Judges to think that it was a very
pregnant presu^ption to approve him for the right husband. But yet that which
held the^ in some doubt, was that they of the court examyning MAR. GVERRE,
whither ever he had received the Sacrament of Confirmation, he answered that he
had, in the town of Pamieres, and named the time, the Bishop, his Godfathers
and Godmothers. Whereunto ARNOLD seperately made the like answer.
Notwithstanding the which at last, by sentence in the month of September 1560.
he was declared, attainted and convicted of the matter whereof he was was
accused, and therefore condemned to do penance in his shirte with a torch in his
hand, first in open Court, and afterward before the door of the chiefest Church
in Artiguls, and lastly to be hanged, and then his body to be burned til it
were consumed to ashes. This Judgment was given at Toulouse in the midst of
September, and afterward executed: this wretched man having before he died
acknowledged the truth of this history, which was written since and published
by M. JOHN CORRAS, a great lawier, with certain Commentaries for to adorn and
beautify it with points of Law. E. PASQVIER in the 5. book, des Recherches
de la France, Chap. 19.

The year 1560. M AVRIAN TVRNE^VS, then Greek reader at Paris, Impostor a
Comedy of ARISTOPHANES, entitled the Waspes, where mention is made of Euricles
a notable engastrinyth he affirmed in one of his public lectures (where my 2.
Sons THEODOR the Lawier and HENRY Doctor of Physic were present) that once in
Paris he had seen such another impostor as EVRYCLES, who was called PETER the
BRABANCON. This fellow when he listed spoke out of his belly, holding his mouth
open, but never wagged his lips: and by such dexterity, or the working of the
Diuil he connicatched diverse folks. He fell in love with a fair young Parisian,
whose Father was dead: and not able to induce the Mother to let him have her.
As they were in talk together about it, he began to send forth a voice out of
his body, as if the deceased husband complained that he was tomented in
Purgatory, because his widow did not give her Daughter to Brabanson, who had so
often demanded her, and was so honest a man. The woman terrified with such
complaynts, and having compassion of her husband, consented to this
Connicatchers desire, who together with the maid sought also for a certain
great sum of money that was left her by her Fathers will, as it appeared
shortly after. For within half a year after he was married to her, and that
he had spent all her portion, he left her with his Mother in law, and ran
away to Lions. There he learnt that a rich Banker died not long before, who in
his life time had had a very bad name by reason of his usury and extortions.
Whereupon he went and found out this Bankers only Son and heir, that was
walking in a gallery fast by the Churchyard, and told him he was sent unto him,
to acquaint him with a matter of great importance which very much co^cerned
him. There-withall as he was exhorting him, to have more regard to his late
Fathers credit and soul, then to his death, suddenly was heard a voice
cou^terfetting the Father, which BRABANCON sent out of his belly, and in the
mean time with a singular dexterity made as though he were wonderfully amazed
at it. By this voice the Son was admonyshed of the estate whereunto the
Father was reduced by his wickedness, and with what pain he was tormented in
the fire of purgatory, as well for himself as for his Son whom he had left
heir of all his goods gotten with an evil conscience: declaring that he
could not be delivered, unless his Son made dew satisfaction, bestowing
alms on those that were then in most need of them: which were the Christians
prisoners with the Turk: and that therefore he should rely on him that talked
with him, who was sent to Constantinople by diverse other good folks: and was
also very opportunely directed by GOD unto him for the same effect. The Son,
who was none of the wisest in the world, although he suspected no deceit, yet
not very well digesting this word of furnishing money, answered he would think
upon it, and appointed BRABANCON to meet him again the next day in the same
place. In the mean while he was in a marvelous perplexity, mistrusting the
place where he had heard the voice, because it was close, and fit for knavery.
Wherefore the next day he carried BRABANON into an open place, where was
neither bush nor any other Covert. Notwithstanding talking together the Son
heard the old song with this new addission, that without any delay he should
give BRABANON 6000. franks and should cause 3. Masses to be sung every day for
the salvation of his Fathers soul, who otherwise was damned for ever. The Son
being conscionable, and astonished, without any more deliberation (il-gotten
goods having wings) delivered the Impostor the sum of 200. pound never taking
any receipt, or witness of matters how they past: the father came no more to
importune his Son, but remained quiet. As for the Son, after he had bid
BRABANON adieu (and got him out of Lions with his prey) showing himself some
what merier then he had used to be, and the other Bankers wondering at it, he
told them the occasion, whereupon they laughed him to skorn, for that he had so
foolishly suffered himself, to be Connicatched, and discovered the imposture
unto him: which so strock him to the heart that within a little after he died
with grief, and went to his Father for to know the truth of the matter. I.
WIER in his 2. book of Witches, Chap. 14. In the reign of King CHARLES the 9.
a certain fellow, got him to Geneua, naming himself JOHN ALLARD, being but
little known, because he lived by the trade of a gardener. Having endured
much, by reason of the small profit and great labor of so poor a vocation, he
went after a while into Almaigne, finally into Sweath-land, where heevsed such
means that he came to be the Kings gardener. By his devises he advanced
himself by little and little, so far forth that he cu^ningly obtained to be
agent for the King to the Seignory of Venice, where remaining, he made a
voyage to Milan visited the Duke of Sessa, who commanded there for the King of
Spain, and played his part so well, that the Duke lent him sum eight thousand
Crowns. Not content with this purchase, he labored to make another, and
returning to Venice, he propounded a certain sale of artillery unto the Lords,
and sung so sweet a note, that he drew from them in way of a lone the sum
of fourteen thousand Crowns. Hereupon he dislodged, for to return (said he
unto some of his friends) into Sweath-land. And passing by Milan he went to do
his duty to the Duke, and paid him his 8000. Crowns. Being at table in his
lodging, and his head somewhat intoxicated, he spoke so rudely of the Pope and
his Ceremonies, that he was arrested prisoner and from Milan co^ueied to
Naples. Pope GREGORY the 13. understanding that a prisoner qualifing himself
Ambassador for the King of Sweath-land, was in the hands of the Inquisition
commanded him to be brought from Naples to Rome. Where being arrived he would
needs see and hear him, whence sprung at length so great a familiarity
between them, that the Pope promised him a certain kins-woma^ of his to wife.
The^ he set him at liberty, and appointing him lodging gave him leave to visit
his Mistres, who like-wise went often to see him: whereupon ensued such
priuitie between them, that her belly began to swell: which was covered with
a report of indisposition, that required the Signora should change the air.

ALLARD foreseeing that he should be called in question for this pranke of
his, practiced in such sort with an Englishman (servant to a certain French
Cardinal soiouring for that time at Rome) that by his means he was carried
along the river of Tyber, and so escaped away; then he got him with all speed
into Prouence, where being arrived at the Port of Antibo, he went to the
Baron of Alemagne, and there continued a certain time with his Englishman. The
Baron dispatched his hands of them, and sent them with two or three servants of
their retiniew to the Lords of Dediguieres in Daulphine. He desiring to do some
service to the King of Navarre, as also to avoid the charge that ALLARD and
his put him to, advertised the King, that beside the quality of Ambassador,
ALLARD maintained he had assured means to come by five millions of gold and
upward.

ALLARD being come before the King of Navarre, and having presented him with
letters from the Lord of Dediguieres, and confirmed the contents thereof by word
of mouth, he was reasonable well accounted of for a time. In the mean while the
King of Navarre going to Rochell, and ALLARD in his train, certain ships of
Sweath land chanced to arrive in the Haven at Rochell. The Capitaines,
merchants and Masters whereof hearing of ALLARD, with whom they had spoken,
told some of their acquaintance that ALLARD was a Co^nicatching knave which had
seduced the king of Sweath-la^d, and with a companion of his a Gascoigne borne,
was cause of the division that happened between the King of Sweathland and his
brother: which had set all the realm on an vproare. The impostor perceiving he
was discovered got him presently away with his followers to the late King HENRY
the 3: and to the Queen mother, unto whom he declared at large what means he
had to serve them, by putting them in possession of those five millions of gold
before mentioned, and a far greater sum. As also how having been very much
urged by the King of Navarre, to show him the place where such great treasures
lay, and the means to come by them, because he would not be constrained so to
do, he had retired himself as it were even out of the closet of the Court and
service of the said King of Navarre. The King and his Mother glad of such news
gave good entertainme^t to ALLARD, whose coming being published in the Court,
amongst many others he insinuated himself into the company of Monsieur de
CLERVAN, and gave him to understand that he had papers of great importance at
Rome, which he could not well come by but by means of the Suissers, who if
they would but write unto the Pope about them, he should be sure to have them
restored again for their sakes. Wherefore he promised if they would procure him
those papers, to give the^ 60000. Dollers which the town of Nuremberg ought
him with the interest of it for twelues years, after 5. in the hundredth by the
year, so that in all it amou^ted to the sum of 96. thousand Dollars. CLERVAN
thereupon went to his Baronny of Coppet, where having taken order for certain
private affairs of his own, he rode to Berne, some two days journey and an
half from thence: there he acquainted diverse Lords of that Canton with the
whole matter, desiring the^ that they would take upon them to write unto the
Pope for to have those papers again, and draw that profit into their Cofers.
They answered it was to be feared least ALLARD were some Cunnicatcher and that
having access unto the Queen Mother, who was greatly favored of the Pope,
that loved not them, he needed not to employ any other but her in the matter.
Or if ALLARD desired any other course, that he should repair to the five small
Cantons their allies.

Here-with CLERVAN returned to Coppet which was fast by Geneua, where he
talked with a great Merchant called JOHN TERNAVLT, about the matter, and
requested him to communicate it to Coronell PSIFFER of Lucerne: AMMAN LVCY of
Vnderwald, and other Lords of the 5* Cantons, being at that instant in those
quarters: which was executed, and they harkned unto it, reserving the
conclusion until such time as they bad conferred in person with ALLARD and
CLERVAN, who being advertised that these Switzer Lords were come into France
(which was about November and December 1582.) they went unto them to Paris,
where having made some entry into the matter, it was resolved they should meet
at St. James his Hospital to conclude this affair. All was agreed, on
condition that ALLARD should forthwith assign over the lords of Nurembergs
specialties, touching the principal and interest a^ore said, amou^ting to the
sum of 96000. Dollors, whereof the Lords of the five Cantons should have three
fifth parts, amounting to 57600. And CLERVAN and TERNAVLT the rest equally
divided betwixt the^, which was 19200. Dollars to each of them. Besides ALLARD
was to furnish 6500. Crowns in ready money, for the voyage to Rome, wherein
TERNAVLT was to be employed.

In these agreements PSIFFER a man of ^ound judgment, stood stiff in his
first opinion, that ALLARD was a notorious Impostor. Nevertheless he so oiled
his tongue, having the French, Dutch, and Italian naturally, that in a new
assembly with these Lords, he declared unto the^ after a demure and grave
manner, as his custom was, that he was about to contract with the King, unto
whom he was to lend 2. millions of gold* 15. days after the agreement made;
that is to say, 160000. crowns in ready money, and 400000 crowns to be raised
on the late Lord Constables goods, whose Bill he said he had; and had promised
to deliver it unto the King; who was there withal well pleased, as ALLARD
affirmed. Only he had stood upon security for so notable a sum of money, and
that therefore the Council promised to assure him the Salt * pits of Brouage,
and the reuene w^thereof* where with ALLARD said he was contented, only he
feared lest such assurance would be revoked. Wherefore he entreated the
Ambassadors of the Canton of Lucern that they would deal in such sort with
their Lords, that he might be received into the number of their Burgesses:
offering in (...) compence of such favor, the sum of 20000. crowns to the
Seignorie of Lucern, and to each of those Ambassadors 2500. crowns a piece.
Thereupon he posted to Lucerne, took his oath, and returned into France with
12. Switzers for his guard: never furnishing a penny all this while, but
l^lling the world asleep with his golden promises, and plucking round sums of
money both from great and small in every place, whereby he maintained himself in
his practices. All of the^ were cousened by him, except the Caronel Ps^ffer,
who being rich, regarded no promises, and laughed at their credulity.

As affairs past in this manner, my Lady had intelligence of the speech.
ALLARD had used, touching the late L. Constables Bill: whereupon she wrote
that they should take heed of this pratler; affirming her Lord was not so bad
an husband, as to be indebted in such a sum to a stranger, who at length
would prove to be a Cunnycatching k^aue. There came a Rocheller also that
warned diverse to beware of ALLARD, which moved TARNAVLT to write by a trusty
messenger to Monsieur GARGOVILAR, the Mayor of Rochell, who returned answer
that ALLARD was a notable deceiuer. The Suizter Ambassadors having sworn the
league with the King, left TERNAVLT in the Court for the expedition of certain
affairs they had there: going to take horse, ALLARD accompanied with
honorable personages, participants in the business: promised them, that at
TERNAVLTS departure he would send a couple of men along with him, with the
6500. crowns appointed for the voyage to Rome* when TERNAVLT was ready to set
forth on his journey his men were not: but promised to be at Lions as soon as
he: offering notwithstanding to deliver him this sum of 6500. Crowns, if he
would stand to the venture, which he refused to doesince ALLARD and his
associates were to send after him.

Not long after the Suitzers departure, the Pope advertised of ALLARDS being in
the Court of France, complained to the King of him, who committed him to
prison, where he found a certain Gentleman naming himself the Earl of
Sanssy, a man of a quick spirit, and father to three or four sons, whereof
one had been brought up with the Elector Palatine, as also to one Daughter,
whom during this imprisonment he promised to one DV VAL by ALLARDS means, that
said he was DV VALS Uncle, and promised to give him two hundredth thousand
crowns to his marriage. But all this practice remained unperfected, by reason
of this which ensues. Within a while after was enlarged, whereupon he desired
TERNAVLT by letters to come to him to Paris* wherein TERNAVLT excused himself,
certifying the other, that if he would come into Switzerland, Sau^y, or to
Lausanne, Geper, Morges, and other places adjoining, TERNAVLT would meet him.

Upon these letters, ALLARD set forth, accompanied with two of the Earls
sons, and his train, and came into the country of Burg^ngny, where he
intruded himself into the acquaintaince of a gentleman of the country, whom
with great promises he carried along with him to Morges, and there lodged at
the sign of the white Cross. From thence he sent to Geneua for TERNAVLT, who
being arrived, ALLARD would have induced him to have lent him a thousand
crowns; adding that he desired that TERNAVLT would take the pains to go into
Sweathland, to receive eighteen hundred thousand dollars for him, and he
should have an hundred thousand of them for his labor. And further, he
promised a very great gift to an honest gentleman, brother in law to the said
TERNAVLT, who refusing to meddle in the matter, all contracts were broken off,
except it were touching three thousand crowns, which ALLARD was to pay him out
of hand: but they are yet to pay.

This promiser renewed another practice with the Bay liffe of Lausanne and
Morges, who conducted him to Berne, where he contracted with certain Lords,
unto whom (among other things) he promised to deliver an Obligation of the
sum of five hundred thousand crowns to him due by EMANVEL PHILIBERT Duke of
Sauoy, which Obligation he said he had left at Paris. Departing from Berne
with promise to be honored and recompensed, he drew toward Neuf-chastel. In
the mean time his impostures were discovered on every hand. It was known that
the Duke of Sauoyes Obligation, was of the same nature as the Constables Bill,
and that all the negotiation with the Ambassadors of the small Cantons was but
mere knavery on ALLARDS part. Therefore order was given that he should be
attached at Neufchastel: where fearing it would not be long ere he should have
terrible articles framed against him, and gathering by some questions which had
bin asked him, that part of his impostures were discovered, his train being
vanished away even in an instant, he resolved with himself to invent all the
ways possibly he could to escape. But meeting with no certain mean, one
night going to let himself down at an high window of the prison, where he was
enclosed, that which held him chancing to break, his fall was so high, that he
dashed himself all to pieces, so giving an end to his life and impostures both
at once.

The Burguignian gentleman whom he had carried with him to Morges, was laid up
in prison and compelled to sell his land for to satisfy the Host of the white
cross for ALLARDS expenses whilst he lay there. Infinite were the tricks
wherewith this M. GARDYNER cunnicatched all sorts of persons wheresoever he
came. It shall suffice for a conclusion, to note the knauish pranke he played
the Host of the Stork at Basil, where he had lien a long time, and was deeply
run in arrereages. When he was going away, in stead of paying, he borrowed a
new sum of money of this honest Switzer, and for a pawn left him a
Portmanteau made fast with three locks and strong chains, affirming it was
full of gold, jewels of exceeding value, and papers of great importance,
promising if it were well kept till his return, to give his said Host thirty
thousand Dollars besides his due. The news of his death coming to Bafil, the
poor Host in a marvelous pitteous taking, went with the leave of the
Magistrate, and got this Portmanteau to be opened, which was found full of
nothing but brickes and stones finely packed up together. I had this Discourse
from Monsieur TERNAVLT, in whose hands I have seen diverse contracts, acts and
writings, approouing some part of the History of this notable Impostor.

Imprecations profane and blasphemous speeches.
WHen we would obtain any thing that we greatly desire, we care not what we
promise, and many in this case happen to make imprecations, either against
themselves, or others, the fruit whereof, they oftentimes reap to their own
destruction. We have a notable example of it in CHARLES Duke of Burbon; who as
it is recited by BELLAY in his 8. Book, and FR. GVICHARD IN in his 17. Book
of the wars of Italy, laboring to draw some money from the Millanois for to
pay his soldiers: and because he could not get so great a sum as he
required, by reason of the exceeding charge the City was at during the war;
he promised them, that if they would but furnish him with so much money for
that once, he would never do them the least extortion in the world again, if
he did, he prared GOD that at the first skirmish or assault he were in, he
might be shot through and killed. Or as GVICHARDIN says, If the City of
Millan would furnish him with thirty thousand Ducats for a months pay, that
the army should depart out of Milan, and lodge some other where: assuring them
that though at other times they had been deceived with the like promises, they
should not be so then, because he would never go against his word and faith, on
which they might safely rely: adding, that he prayed GOD, if he brake his
promise with them, his head might be taken from his shoulders with the first
shot of the enemies artillery. Upon this promise the Millanois strained
themselves, and paid him the sum. But they were so oppressed afterward, that
many through despair hung themselves, others threw themselves down headlong
from the tops of their houses, and brake their own necks. Shortly wher-vpon,
the Duke of Bourbon marched forth with his army, and drew toward Rome for to
surprise it, but he was slain with an Harguebuse shot in the assault, which
many (says BELLAY) attribute to the divine vengeance, because he kept not the
promise which he made with such an imprecation to the Millanois. His death
^ell on the 6. of May 1527.

To this purpose I will add another History, though it be ancient, reported
by ALBERT CRANT in his 6. Book of the affairs of Saxony, Chap. 45. where he
writes that the Emperor FREDERICK the first, being in Saint PETER'S Monastery at
Erford, the floor whereon he went, suddenly sanke under him, and if he had
not caught hold on an Iron bar of a window, he had fallen into the Iakes of
the Monastery: wherein certain Gentlemen fell and were drowned, amongst the
which was HENRY Earl of Schuartzbourg, who carried the presage of his death in
an usual imprecation, If I do this or that: I would (said he) I might be
drowned in the Iakes.

But omitting other ancient Histories, it being no part of our purpose to touch
them in these collections, but reserving them for some other hand and work. I
will present the examples of our time, concerning imprecations and despightfull
speeches either against GOD or our neighbors. A Soldiar traveling through the
Marquisate of Brandebourg, feeling himself not well, stayed in an Inn, and
gave his (...) his money to keep. Not long after, being recovered, he asked it
again of the woman, who had agreed before with her husband to detain it.
Wherefore she denied that she had any of him, and rayled at him, as if he had
done her wrong to ask it: whereat the traveler was so enraged, that he
accused her of disloyalty and theft: which the Host hearing, he took his
wives part, and thrust the other out of doors, who justly incensed with such
dealing, drew his sword and ran against the gate. The Host began to cry out
that he went about to break into his house and rob him. For which cause the
Soldier was apprehended, carried to prison, and arraigned before the
Magistrate, ready to be condemned to death. The day came wherein sentence was
to be given and executed, the Diuill entered into the prison, and told the
prisoner that he should be condemned to dye: nevertheless he promised him if
so be he would give himself unto him, to keep him from all harm. The
prisoner answered, that he would rather dye innocent as he was, then be
delivered by such means. The Diuil having showed him again the danger wherein
he stood, and receiving the repulse, promised not-withstanding, to help him
for nothing, and work in such sort that he should be revenged on his enemies.
He councelled him then when he should be brought to his trial, to maintain
that he was innocent: and to desire the Judge to let him have him for his
advocate, whom he should see standing there in a blew Cap, which should plead
for him. The prisoner accepted the offer: and the next day being brought to the
Bar; hearing his adversaries accusation, and the Judges opinion, required
(according to the custom of the place) that he might have an Advocate to plead
his cause: which was granted him. This craftye Lawyer stood forth, and very
subtly began to defend his client, alleging that he was falselie accused,
and by consequence wrongfully condemned: for the Host kept away his money, and
had misused him besides: Thereupon he up and told how the whole matter had
past, and declared the place where the money was locked up. The Host on the
other side defended himself, and the more impudently denied it, giving
himself to the Diuill both body and soul, if so be he had it. Whereupon this
Lawyer in the blew Cappe, leaving his cause, laid hold on the Host, carried
him out of the hall, and hoysted him up so high in the air, that it was never
known what became of him afterward. I. WIER in his 4. book of Devilish
devises, Chap. 20. PAVL EITZEN in the 6. Book of his Morales, Chap. 18. says,
that this happened in the year 1541. and that this Soldier came out of
Hungary.

In the Town of Rutlingen, a certain traveler coming into an Inn, gave his
Host a budget to keep, wherein there was a great sum of money. At his
departure asking it again, the Host denied he had any, and rayled at him for
charging him with it. The traveler sued him in the law, and because there was
no witness of the matter, he was going to put the Host to his oath, who was
ready and most desirous to take it, and gave himself to the diuill, if ever he
received or kept away the Budget that was in question. The plaintiff required
some respite, to take advise whether he should put the defender to his oath or
no: and going out of the Court, he met two men, that asked him the occaston of
his coming thither.

He up and told them the matter. Well (said they) will thou be contented that
we shall help thee in the cause. He answred them I, not knowing what they
were. Ther-vpon they returned all three into the Court, where the two that came
last, began to maintain against the Host, that the Budget was delivered unto
him, and that he received it, and locked it up in such a place, which they
named. The perjured wretch could not tell what to reply: and as the Judge was
about to send him to prison, the two witnesses began to say, it shall not need,
for we are sent to punish his wickedness. Saying so, they caught him up into
the air, where he vanished away with the^, and was never seen more. JOHN le
GAST of Brisae, in the 2. volume of his Table-talke, page 131. GILBERT COVSIN
of Nosereth, in his Narrations.

PETER ALVARADO a Spanish Captain, making war on the Indians of Peru,
received a grievous hurt in a skirmish, whereof he dyed two days after. Lying
in his deathbed, and being asked where he felt his pain? In my soul (said
he) it torments me: when the news of his death came to his wife BEATRICE, a
very proud woman, then resident at Guattimall, she began to rage, to make
imprecations, and to fall out with GOD, even to say; That he could not deal
worse with her then to take away her husband. There-vpon she hung all her
house with black, and began to mourn in such sort that she could not be
drawn to receive any sustenance or comfort. She did nothing but weep, lie
along on the ground tear her hair, and demean her-selfe like a mad woman.
Amidst her husbands pompous obsequies (of whom GOMARA writes, that he married
two sisters and was a long time polluted with foul incest) and all this
despightfull mourning, she forgot not to assemble the chiefest of the town
together, and there to make them declare her for Gouernesse of the Country, and
to swear fealty and obedience unto her. But now let us here what came to
pass upon these imprecations and despightfull speeches. The 8. of September
1541. it rained so mightily for 24. hours together, that the next day about
nine or ten of the clock at night, two Indians came, and advertised the Bishop
of Guattimall, how they had heard a marvelous strange noise at the foot of
the Mountain adjoining to the City. The Bishop sent them away, and told them
it was nothing but illusions. But an hour after midnight, an inundation of
waters began to rush out at the bottom of the mountain and to disgorge it
self on the plain with such fury: that it carried away whole rocks of an
incredible thickness. These waters rouling along, cast down all that they
encountered. Amidst the which nothing was heard but fearful cries in the air:
and there were some that marked a black Cow among the waves, which went in and
out doing much mischief. The first house ouer-whelmed by this deluge was
ALVARADOES, where perished BEATRICE his widow, with all such as accompanied
her in an Oratory, where she was at her devotions* Instantly after the Town
was buried in the waters. Some six score persons men and women were drowned.
They which got away at the beginning of the noise escaped. When the waters
were fallen, the Spaniards were found having their arms and legs all cut and
mangled. I will add this one word, How a little girl which ALVARADO had
begotten on an Indian, carried away with the rest by the flood, was found a
good way from the Town, safe and vn-hurt in any part of her body. I. BENZO in
his History of the new world, Book. 2. Chap. 17.

For to return again into Europe, it is not long ago (says Doct. PHILIP
CAMERARIVS) that my brother called IOACHIM coming out of Hesse, told me this
which ensues. I saw a Boy, said he, in the Landgraue WILLIAMS Court, that was
both dumb and deaf, but so witty, that I could not marvel sufficiently at
his dexteri^ie, to perform all that he was willed to do: for by the only
twinkling of an eye, he understood what-so-euer the Prince and others meant:
the Landgraue seeing me to wonder so at it, said unto me: See you this dumb
boy? all that ever happens either here in my Court, or in the Town, if he can
come to have never so little inckling of it, he presently acquaints me very
cunningly with it by his signs. But I will tell you further for a notable
History of GODS justice. His Mother accused of theft, seeing no other mean to
escape had recourse to imprecations: and because she was then big with this
child, for to add more credit to her words, she made this imprecation; That
if the matter were true which she was charged with, she prayed GOD that the
Child where-with-all she went, might never speak, but continue dumb as long
as it lived. Her imprecations discovered her, having joined perjury to theft.
PH. CAMERARIVS in the 86. Chap. of his Historical meditations.

Not long since it happened, that a certain Gentleman our neighbor, vexing
his poor tenants with imprecations and curses, constrained them to build his
Castle. In driving them to work, he ordinarily called them his Dogs. Before
the building was finished, he fell sick: and continuing his imprecations and
curses, GOD so repressed him, that he became speechless: and when I wrote this
History, he could not pronounce any one word distinctly, but barked like a
Dog. The same.

Another example no less memorable, happened not long ago in a Princes Court
here-by, where a certain Gentleman being charged with many injurious words
spoken at randon: for to cover the matter, and to persuade that the accusation
was false, he began to protest and swear: adding that he desired of GOD if
he had used any such speeches, to show some token on him, even at that very
instant: or if GOD would not, that then the Diuill would. Presently upon these
words, and other such like imprecations, he fell down flat on his face,
being so grievously taken with the falling sickness (which he had never felt
before) that after he had* tormented and beaten himself against the ground,
where he lay foming at the mouth like one half dead, he was carried to a
Chamber, and there continued very sick, in the year 1591. when I collected
this History, being justly punished for his rashness and impious imprecation.
The same.

JOHN WIER, in his works of the Devils impostures, recites a memorable
History, which happened at Guclders about the year 1575. A Captain bearing
Arms for the King of Spain, being married to an honest Gentlewoman, whom he
entreated most unworthily, understanding that she was with child, began to make
imprecations against her, and to say, I will stab this little Devil which thou
have in thy belly* Not long after, she was delivered of a Son, which from
the hipps downward was very well shaped, but the upper part was all covered
over with read and black spots, the eyes stood in the forehead, it had a
round and black hideous mouth, and long ears like a bloud-hound, with two
little crooked horns on the crown of the head, which became as red as
blood, as soon as they were touched. PLATO writes in his 7. Book of Laws,
that there is nothing more to be feared then the Fathers cursses against the
Child. The contrary is to be wished of all good children. It is a singular
testimony of GODS favor to such, as lawfully desire and purchase their Father
and Mothers ^sing. The same.

Master ANDREW HONSDORF in his Theater of examples, on the 4. commandment,
propounds certain Histories to the purpose, whereof we entreat, which I will
briefly touch. Another dwelling in the Duchy of Saxony, carried a Daughter of
hers that was possessed of the Devil to Wittenberg, for to receive some
relief, and to commend her to the prayers of the Church. She confessed that
this affliction came upon her Daughter one day, when being in an anger, she had
made an imprecation, wishing the Devil would possess her: as incontinently he
did. Being carried on a time into the Church, as the congregation were in prayer
for her, a learned personage hearing certain fu^ies of the evil spirit, said
unto him. O Satan the Lord rebuke thee. The spirit imediatly answered, let him
rebuke me, let him rebuke me: and then held his peace.

At Friburg in Misnia it fortuned that a Father being in a mighty rage with a
Son he had, that dispatched not something so soon as he would have had him,
began to say, would to GOD thou might never stir from the place where thou
art. It was no sooner said, then done: for suddenly the Son remained, as it
were fastened and nailed to the place where as he stood, and could not be
removed by any strength or devise whatsoever. And because he could neither
bow nor bend his body for to sit, they set a stay behind his back, to ease
him. Having continued in this estate three whole years together, GOD hearing
the prayers which were made for this poor Child, permitted that he could sit
and stoop, and th^n rise again. In this manner he continued four other
years more, lean of face, eating very little, and speaking but seldom. Being
asked at any time how he felt himself, his usual answer was, that GOD did
chastise him, and that his mercy knew what issue his afflictions should have,
which nothing hindered the assurance that he had of his eternal salvation
through JESUS CHRIST. At 7. years end, he died peaceably full of the spirit of
repentance, faith and hope in the grace of his Savior, on the eleventh day of
September, in the year a thousand, five hundredth, fifty and two.

Not long ago says M. ANDREW HONDSDORFE, we saw an Almaigne very poor and
sickly, and as wretched and miserable as might be, by reason of the
imprecations which his Father had made against him a little before his death:
wyshing that all kind of misfortune might accompany him, as long as he lived.

A Mother having a very disobedient Son, fell down* on her knees, and prayed
GOD that her wicked Child might be burnt with a secret fire. This imprecation
fell not to the ground: for the Son being suddenly seized with that fire
over all his body, began to cry, Mother, Mother, your prayers are heard, and
languished three days in unspeakable torments he was consumed therewith.

A disobedient Son in the City of Milan, mocked his mother and made mouths
at her. The Mother justly ince^sed with so vyllanous a pranke, said: would thou
might make such mouths at the gallows. It fell out not long after, that
this rogue being apprehended for theeuing was condemned to be hanged: and
being on the ladder at the place of execution ready to be turned of by the
hangman every one saw him make such mouths as he had made before to his
Mother. These Histories and infinite others such like warn Parents to shun
such speeches and to reclaim their Children with good admonitions or
convenient corrections. They likewise exhort Children to show themselves
humble, tractable and obedient, to the end they be not confounded by the just
judgment of GOD, maintayning the rights of those which are his lively images
upon earth.

In Silesia happened two memorable Histories, which show the dangerous fruit
of imprecations, and the favor of GOD assisting us by the ministry of his
Holy Angels, against the fury of evil spirits. A gentleman having inuyted
certa^ne of his friends, and prepared a sumptuous feast, seeing his expectation
frustrated by their excuses, entered into some cholor, and said, since none of
them will vouchsafe to come would all the Diuills in hell were here. Thereupon
he got him forth of doors, and went to Church, where the minister was
preaching, unto who^ he gave very dilligent ear: and continuing so, behold
certain men came riding into his yard, of tall stature, and all in black,
which willed the gentleman's man to go and tell his master, that his guests
were come. They fellow exceedingly affraied ran to Church and advertised his Mr
of it, who very much dismayed asked Counsel of the minister what he should do.
He having finished his sermon willed that every body should void the house. It
was no sooner commanded then performed: but with have that they made to get
out, they left a little Child behind them sleeping in the Cradle. Those
guess, that is to say the Diuils began to fling the tables and other things
about the house, to roar, and to look out at the windows in the likeness of
Bears, Wolves, Cats, and terrible men, holding glasses of wine, and dishes of
meat in their paws. As the gentleman to gither with the minister and
neighbors were in great fear beholding such a sight, the poor Father began to
cry, alas, where is my Child? Scarce was the word out of his mouth when one of
those black guests brought the Child to the window in his arms, and showed it
to all that were in the street. The gentleman almost beside himself, said to
one of his men whom he made most account of, alack what shall I do? Sir answered
his servant, I will commend my life unto GOD, in whose name I will enter the
house, and through his favor and assistance bring you your Child. Will thou,
said his Mr, GOD be with thee and strengthen thee. The fellow having received
the Ministers blessing, went into the house, and coming to the Stoue where
those dreadful guests were, he fell down on his knees, commended himself to
GOD, then opened the door, and saw the Diuills in horrible forms, some
sitting, some standing, others walking, some ramping against the walls, but al
of the^ as soon as they beheld him ran unto him, crying, Hoh Hoh, what make
thou here? The servant sweating with fear, and yet strengthened by GOD, went to
the fiend that held the Child, and said unto him, Come, give me this Child. No
marry will I not answered the other: he is mine. Go bid thy Master come and
fetch him. The fellow insisting said, I will execute the charge which GOD has
committed unto me, for I know that all that I do according thereunto is
acceptable unto him. Therefore, in regard of mine office, and in the name,
assistance and virtue of JESUS CHRIST, I will take this Child from thee* and
carry it to the father. Saying so, he caught hold on the Child, and held it
fast in his arms. The black guests returned no answer, but roared and cried
out, Hoh sir let alone the Child, or we will tear thee all to pieces. But he
not respecting their menaces went safely away, and presently restored the Child
to the gentleman his Master. Certain days after all those guests vanished
away, and the gentleman become wiser and a better Christian, returned to his
house. JOHN GEORGE GODELMAN, Doctor of Law at Rostoch, in his treatise of
Witches and Witchcraft book 1. Chap. 1.

Another gentleman using to give himself unto the Devil, traveling by night
but with one man, was set upon by a company of fiendes, which would have
carried him away. The servant being desirous to save his Master held him fast
about the middle. The Diuills began to cry, Sir let go your hold* but the
fellow persisting in his determination, his Master escaped. The same.

In Saxony a young maid that was very rich, promised marriage to a proper young
man, but poor. He foreseeing that wealth and inconstancy of sex might easily
alter this maidens resolution, freely opened his mind unto her about it.
Whereupon she made a thou^and imprecations to the contrary, and amongst others,
this which ensues. If ever I marry any other, let the Diuill take me and carry
me away on the wedding day. What followed there-vpon? A certain time after,
the fickle wenche was betrothed to another, having utterly forgot the former,
who gently admonished her more then once of her promise and horrible
imprecation. She nothing regarding him, made her ready to be married to the
second: but the wedding day come, when every body else was merry, the bride
being wakened by her conscience, seemed sadder then she used to be.
Whereupon two men on Horse back, came and lighted at the house where the feast
was kept, who were presently carried up, and after dinner, when they fell to
dancing, one of them (as the manner of the Country is to honor strangers which
happen to be at such feast*) was desired to lead the Bride a dance. He took
her by the hand, and walked her a turn or two: then in the presence of all her
kinsfolks and friends, he caught her up, crying out for help and went out at
the gate, where he hoysed her up in the air, and vanished away with his
companion and their Horses. Her sorrowful friends having sought her all that
day, and continuing so the next morning, hoping to find her where she was
fallen some where or other, to the end they might have buried her body; met the
two Cheualliers which restored them the maidens wedding apparel, and al her
Jewels: saying that GOD had given them pour over her, but not over her
apparel: and so vanished away. The same.

Rash Judgments.
THE year 1550. it happened that a certain merchant in the Duchy of Saxony
ryding forth of Town, left his Wife with one Daughter and a maid at home.
Hard by him dwelt the hangman of the place, who having espied this
opportunity, found means to get into the house and hid himself in the
Cellar, where when the maid came at night to draw wine he cut her throat.
The Daughter being sent to call the maid was also killed. Finally the Mother
going to see why they both stayed so long received the like entertainment:
which done he threw their bodies into a Chest, ryfled the house, and went his
way. Not long after the merchant returning home, and the author of such an
execrable fact unknown, the hangman accused the poor merchant to the Judges,
and deposed that the day before his departure he had been at great debate
with his wife. The merchant was apprehended and tortured in such sort, that he
confessed (although he were innocent) that he had committed those three
murders, and therefore was condemned and put to death. But shortly after the
murderer discovered himself by a silver bole which he offered to a goldsmiths
to sell, who knowing the merchants mark, gave him money for it, and after he
was gone, carried it to the Magistrate, unto whom he declared whose mark it
had, and of whom he had bought it. Presently the hangman was apprehended and
being examined denied it at the first, but at length confessed the whole
matter. Thus was the merchants innocence approved though too late before men,
and the damnable murderer executed with such punnishments as his horrible
wickedness deserved. PAVL EITZEN in the 3. book of his Morales, Chap. 15. M.
ANDREW HONSDORFF in his theater of examples. In another town of Saxony it
fortuned that at a certain wedding a thief stole a silver goblet, and being
narrowly pursewed by some of the watch, he went and hid it in a fellows bosom
that had ouer-drunke himself and was laid a sleep in the way as he ran
along. The watch having wakened this sleeper, found the goblet about him, and
carried him to prison, where by tortures he confessed the theft, whereupon
ensued sentence of death and execution. Within a while after the thief
apprehended for another robbery, confessed this former, and was hanged. PAVL
EITZEN in the same book and Chapter.

Two thieves in the town of Erford went and hid themselves in a widows
house with intent to cut her throat and carry away that she had. For to draw
her out of her Chamber where she lay, they got into the stable, and began to
pinch a kidde which they found there, to the end they might make the maid
come down: as indeed she did. For going to see what the kidde ailed, they
caught her by the throat and killed her. The widdowe (which had no other maid
but that one) hearing the kidde cry and the wench not returning went down out
of her Chamber and had her throat cut by these murderers, who rifled the
house, and went their ways before day. The next morning, the neighbors
hearing a little Dog bark in the house, and seeing neither mistres nor made
styrring abroad, at the length brake open the doors, and found those two
persons murdered. Immediately they began to charge and accuse a certain man,
that had the keeping of a Church thereby, because he had used much to the said
widows house. The Magistrates buylding on reports and conjectures, commanded
the man to be apprehended, and so extremely tortured, that he confessed he
had committed that which never came in his thought. Wher-vpon followed his
condemnation and execution. The thieves not long after being taken and
imprisoned for other offenses, confessed this murder of the mistres and maid:
and were executed according to their merits. M. ANDREW HONSDORFF in his
theater of examples. A certain man in the town of Basil fell out upon some
occasion with his Wife, who unable any longer to endure his hard usage, left
her house and went to some of her friends in the Country, and desired them to
be a mean of reconciliation between her husband and her. It chanced that
about the time of her departure, another woman having drowned her self in the
Rhine was cast up on the shore. All the town ran to see her, and because
she was apparelled like the absent Wife, and that her face was so disfigured as
no man could not discern her, in continently the people (there gathered
together) began to cry out and say that this cruel husband had killed his
Wife, and then cast her so into the water. The Magistrates giving more credit
to this report then they should, committed the husband to prison, where he was
put to such torture as he confessed that which was not: namely that he had
killed his Wife, and then thrown her body into the Rhine: upon which
confession he was condemned and put to death, like a parracide. Three da^es
after, his fugitive Wife returned for to reconcile herself to her husband: but
hearing the piteous news of his death, melting into tears, and running like a
mad woman to the Towne-house, she presented her self before the Lords,
proved her husbands innocence, and accused them of injustice. They hanging
down their heads and condemning their rash judgment, took as good order as
possibly they could for the poor Widdowe. The same.

A woman dwelling in a certain Castle of the Archbishopric of Breme, with her
Son that was married, suffered herself to be abused by one of her men. Which
discovered by the Son, and not able to bear it, he besought his Mother to
abstain from such wickedness. One day having been abroad, and coming home,
the fellow that was with the Mother in her Chamber espying him a far off
ran away. The Son followed after him, and with a wand that he had in his
hand struck of his hat. This servant got away and went into the service of a
new master, some two days journey from thence. His friends sought for him and
demanded him of the Son, who told them how matters had past, adding that he
had his hat, but knew not what was become of him, they taking this answer in
evil part, accused the young man for killing their kins-man. Pre sently the
Judge committed the innocent Son to prison, where the intolerable torment of
the torture made him confess that he had killed the servant and thrown his
body into a river thereby. Whereupon he was condemned to loose his head. Being
lead to the place of execution, he was admonished to tell the truth: he
answered, I am innocent: but will it avail me to tell the truth? I have killed
him. To conclude, he was executed and yielded up the ghost in the invocation of
the name of GOD. Shortly after, the servant and the widow were found out where
they were, and being apprehended, suffered such punishment as they rightly
merited. I GEORGE GODELMAN in the Treatise of Witches and witchcrafts. Book. 3.
Chapter 10.

Two young Artificers dwelling in a town of Germany, went out together for to
travel the Country, shortly after, one of them returned again in his
companions apparel, with whom he had changed clothes. The others friends
coniecturing by this change of apparel, that he had made away their kinsman,
accused him of murder to the Judge of the place, who immediately committed him
to prison: where denying the fact, and put to torture, by force of torment he
confessed, that he had murdered his companion, and got on his apparel, having
eaten out his own in an Alehouse. Whereupon he was condemned to death, and
executed, dying like a good Christian. Not long after, his companion returned
safe and well. In perpetual remembrance of this proceeding and unjust sentence
pronounced against this innocent, in the Church of the place is the figure of a
man laid upon a wheel cut out in stone. For indeed one ought not proceed unto
torture, if the party accused be not charged with many likely signs, and (as
V^PIAN says,) li. 1.. 2. l. 18. sect. 1. l. 20. l. fin. D. de quaestio. almost
convinced by evident testimonies: for in criminal processes it is requisite,
that proofs should be apparent and cleerer then the day. L. Sciant cuncti.
25. C. de proba. The same.

LADISLAVS King of Hungary, having established, JOHN CAPISTRAN Lord Marshall of
his house: it happened that a certain Count was accused of treason, and being
laid on the Rack, confessed that where-withall he was charged: insomuch that
CAPISTRAN condemned the Count to be beheaded, together with his son: but
under a secret reseruatio^, that the father only should be executed first, and
the son spared, if it were never so so little perceived that he were
innocent: but yet commanded that he should be lead to the place of ^xecution.
The son seeing his father loose his head, and being fully persuaded that his
should be chopped off too, stricken with a vehement fear, he fell down
stark dead where he stood. CAPISTRAN very much troubled with such an accident,
gave over his estate, and became a Friar. ANDREW HONSDORFF in his Theater of
examples.

BAPTIST FVLGOSA reports, that HERMOLAVS DONAT, one of the ten Lords at Venice,
a personage of great authority, having in charge to examine a certain young
man, accused of an infamous crime, caused him diverse times to be tortured, for
to draw out the truth of him: which not able to do, a co^federate of the
prisoners, desiring to be revenged on him for it, and to procure some ease to
the other, watched him one night as he was returning homeward very late from
the Palace, accompanied but with one man, carrying a Torche, which suddenly
put out, HERMOLAVS received a stab with a Poinard and fell down dead in the
place. The Lords of Venice meruailouslie incensed and offended with the
haynousnesse of the fact, and not able to discover the murderer, purposed to
search out diligently all circumstances that might serve thereunto. They
called to mind, how before-times there had been great variance between
HERMOLAVS and IACQVES son to FRANCISCO FOSCATI Duke of Venice: Imagining
there-vpon that IACQVES relying on the dignity of his father, might well have
enterprised this murder, they committed him to prison, and tortured him
extremely. But he would never confess that where-of he was guiltless,
not-withstanding they confined him into Candy, where he dyed. The murderer
urged by his conscience, became a Monk, and certain years after in his
deathbed, opened this murder to his Confessor: which after his decease was
signified to the Seignorie. In the 8. Book of his Examples, Chap. 4.

Famous and remarkable Judgments.
AN Italian Gentleman very rich, and well favored of ALEXANDER de MEDICIS the
first Duke of Florence, falling in love with a very honest and fair young
maid, but very poor, and of base parentage, (being a Milners daughter, who
lived in the Country not far from Florence,) tried many means to corrupt
her, but all in vain, the Virgin having her honor in great recommendation. In
the end transported with this violent passion, and followed by men which did
second him in his humor, he goes in the night toward this Mill, takes the
Maid violently from her father, and carries her to a house of his in the
Country, where she was ravished. This poor father goes to Florence, and
attends the Duke at his return from Mass, makes his complaint unto him, and
demands Justice. The Duke concealing his thoughts, sends him back to his
house, promising to take order for it. Presently after dinner, he goes to
horse, making a show he would go Hunte, and goes toward this Gentleman's
house, staying thereby in a place of pleasure. The Gentleman advertised that
the Duke was so near, and drunk with his passion, thinking the Milner would
not have presumed to complain of him, and trusting in his own credit, he
shuts the Maid up in a secret place of his house, out of the way, and then
goes to do his duty unto the Duke, offering him his Palace for his lodging,
the which the Duke does accept, and seems to take great delight in the
building of this house of pleasure: he does visit and view every part, member,
and corner thereof, very curiously, with their ornaments, and causes all the
chambers and Cabynes to be opened: finally he enters into a fair and long
gallerie, at the end where-of was a close door, but painted and enriched with
rare devises. The Duke seems to have more delight in that, then in all the
rest, and smiling, he said, That he thought that it was the Storehouse of
all his Evidences, Treasure, and most precious Jewels. It was the prison of
this honest Maiden, that had been ravished. And for that the Gentleman made
some delay to open it, the Duke did presently doubt, that what he sought was
there, and therefore he commands them to open it: but the Gentleman pretended,
that a servant of his was gone to Florence, and had carried the Keye with him.
But finding the Duke (at these words) to be the more earnest to enter, he
came to him, and after a great reverence, he told him softly in his ear, that
there was a wench within, the which he was loath to have seen, unless it were
his Highness pleasure to see her I, I, answered the Duke, it is that I look
for. The gentleman thinking it would prove but a jest (for that the Duke
himself was much given to such excess, the which was afterward the cause of
his death) he opened the door. Then the poor maid with her hair about her
ears, weeping, and undressed, does prostrate her self at the Dukes feet, and
demands justice for the wrong which had been done her. Hereupon the Duke does
send presently for the Milner, and does greatly blame the gentleman, and two of
his chief confederates. He propounds two conditions to the gentleman, either
death without remission, or to marry the maid whom he had ravished. The
gentleman who did not think to escape, seeing his Lord in such choler,
accepts of the marriage: and by the Dukes sentence is condemned to give unto
his wife, three thousand Ducats for her dowry. Which being done in the
presence of the Duke, of his train, and of the Milner, the maid being
honorably attired, he married her, held her for his lawful wife, and she was
so esteemed, beloved of him, and reverenced throughout all Tuscanie, and the
Duke was much honored of all men, for so good an act of justice. Histo. of
Florence.

There was a citizen of Como kept prisoner by a Spanish Captain, and accused
to have committed a murder, for the which he was in great danger of his life,
in the year 1547. The wife of this prisoner being fair and of a good grace,
but chaste, and very careful for her husbands delivery, went and came
soliciting for him, by all the means she could devise. Presenting her self
upon her knees, she beseeched him to save his prisoners life. This wretch
taking her apart, said unto her, there is one means to preserve your husbands
life, without the which he must needs die. After some speeches thereupon, he
discouers in the end his villainous heart, soliciting her to yield unto him,
with promise that soon after he would restore her that which she so much
desired. The poor woman being fallen into a new affliction, after a long
conflict in her thoughts, and an extreme grief of heart, she declares unto
her husband the cruel and villainous desire of the Captain. The husband
desirous to save his life, persuades his wife to yield unto the Spaniards
brutish appetite: who having enjoyed the body of this desolate woman, would
also have her satisfy his coueteousnesse, paying him two hundred crowns. He
added to these two horrible crimes, a third, which was most detestable; for
having caused the husband to be drawn out of prison, as it were to send him
home to his house, and to deliver him to his wife, who hoped for no less. This
disloyal Captain made the poor man to be presently carried back into
prison, and afterward caused his head to be cut off. The woman oppressed with
grief, reports all this history unto her friends, and by their advise
complains to the Duke of Ferrara, who being extremely moved at these crimes,
sends presently for the Captain, who being examined and found guilty, he
demands pardon: he is first condemned to restore presently the two hundred
ducats, and to add seven hundred more. Secondly, he causes a Priest to
come, and forces the Captain to marry the widow in presence of them all.
Thirdly, and at the same instant, instead of a nuptial bed, going out of the
Church, he caused a Gybbet to be set up, whereas the Spanish Captain was
hanged, and the widow honorably sent home to her house. History of Italy.

Judges no Judges, but most unjust and detestable.
IN a certain place of Germany, which I name not for some considerations. It
happened in the year 1537. for Judges to apprehend a certain soldier in
passing, who had committed some insolency that was punishable, but not
corporally, being but a light offense. Some say, that having a good purse, it
made them condemn him to die. When as they pronounced this sentence against
him, he said unto them with an assured countenance, You are unjust Judges,
who to please your Sovereigns, or to have my purse, send me to execution: but
if you be so greedy of silver, take all that I have, and let me go; I neither
can, nor would if I might, revenge me of the wrong you have done me, and do
promise you never to set my foot more in this place. Beware how you shed
innocent blood, to please two or three: fear that Judge from whom nothing is
hidden, who will reward every man according to his merits, be they good or
evil. But prevailing nothing with all his complaints and admonitions, he
added, Seeing that you stop your cares to my cries, I adiourne you before the
Judgment seat of the Almighty GOD, you are most wicked Judges, and corrupted
for money. But he was executed. Before the year was expyred, four of these
unjust Judges did perish miserably. One was slain with lightning, another
stabd at a Banquet; the third was hanged for theft, and the fourth being
tormented with a burning fever, and other grievous pains, died in despair,
and before he gave up the ghost, he cried out saying; Satan why do thou
stay? why do thou not tear out, and carry my soul out of this body. I have
served thee till now, I am therefore thine. I will not appear before GOD with
the Soldier. IHON le GAST of Brissac, in the 2. volume of his Table-talke,
page 125.

The following History is yet more strange. A Son does so much forget the
name and duty of a Son, as he accuses his own Father to have had carnal
knowledge with a Beast. The Father is imprisoned and put to the rack, where he
confesses that he had committed the act. Being from the rack, he denies it,
and then confesses it again, being brought unto it, his body being so weak,
as it was not possible for him to endure such torments saying, that he had
rather dye then be so pulled in pieces. Being brought before the Judges, and
demanded again according to the custom: if he had not done this foul fact?
he denies it constantly, and adds that the rack had forced from him that
confession. That he never had any thought to pollute himself so villanously,
much less committed the Act. He is confronted with seven witnesses, who
maintain that they had heard him confess the fact in prison: whereupon he
is condemned to be burned alive. As they lead him to execution, he still cried
out unto the people which looked on him as he past, that he was innocent of
this accusation which had been practiced against him by his own Son, who
sought his death to be master of his goods to waste them. He was burnt alive,
died constantly, and his soul went peaceably unto GOD. But within one month
the Judges and the witnesses did all perish miserably, and this execrable
Parricide, falling into despair hanged himself. The same Author, vol. 2. page
126.

These Histories of some Judges, not Judges, but Judged before GOD, before
themselves, and before men, as most unjust and detestable Judges, are not
produced to favor in any sort the furies of some fantastical and humerous
persons, who for the faults of some few private men, have dared to condemn the
lawful calling of them that administer justice. Let the unjust learn of them
that love true honor, the peace of their consciences, the glory of GOD, and
the preservation of every man's right, to discharge themselves honorably and
faithfully of their charges. I continue to touch the unjust carriage of some,
which may serve the reader as a pattern to put him in mind of many other
examples. In our time they have not been content to take presents of meat and
drink, for the dispatch of men's suits: they have not been contented to see
rich stuffes brought in for Mounsieur and my Lady, nor to suffer my Lady and
her Daughter, to have Bracelets, Chains or Jewels given them, without seeming
to know what it is, or to see any thing: they have not been content to ask
and take by their household servants, by their friends and Brokers cunningly
set on: They have not been content to traffic Justice with all kinds of
trades, to draw all necessary implements into their houses: finding nothing
too whotte, too heavy, nor too base: To conclude, they have sold Orphelins,
Innocents, widows, and poor persons, for boots, shoes, and hats, etc. But
they are come now to say, What will you give me? and presently to hold forth
the hand: yea (without offense to the Proverb, which forbids to look a given
horse in the mouth) they are now come to handle it, sometimes behind the
back, seeming to walk with the Merchant, then to look on it, to sound it,
and to peize it, before they once will say, Well, assure your self of me. And
yet they have not bin contented with all this; ^ay they have caused the poor
Plaintiff to give his Vine-ground of ten acres, to do him justice of five or
six acres of Vine: to demand a Horse of a hundred crowns, to get fifty: to
cause himself and his wife to be apparrelled from top to toe, to give a
favorable voice in a bad cause. And oftentimes if he that has the right, has
given less than the other that is in the wrong, it proves unprofitable. And
as one said, the four horses behind, draw back the Coach which the first
come had given. Nay they have exceeded farther, asking that, which neither by
GODS laws nor man's can be lent, sold, nor engaged: the loss whereof is
greater, and no less irreparable then life. They would have them buy justice
with a paiement, which is not only contrary to all honesty and justice, but
whose infamy redounds upon them that are yet unborn. And to speak in plainer
terms, in our time there was a President which died an Abbot, who said unto
an honorable gentlewoman, that if she would lend him her forepart, he would
give her audience.

They report a History of one who did yet worse. It was the Provost la Vouste,
who played a wicked part with a certain honest woman. She coming unto him to
make sure for her husband, whom this Provost kept in prison, was required to
grant him one nights pleasure, and he would yield to whatsoever she her self
demanded.

This woman finding her self much perplexed, looking on the one side to her
breach of faith plighted to her husband, and on the other side, his life which
she should save, she was very desirous to acquaint her husband therewith; who
having dispensed there-withall, she then yields unto the Prouosts brutish
desire, resting assured that he would certainly keep promise with her,
concerning her husband. But in the morning this most vilde wretch, (after he
had caused her husband to be hanged) said thus unto her, I did promise indeed
to restore you your husband, I keep him not, but I yield him unto you.

The same Provost being ready to have one hanged, the man being upon the
ladder, one came and told him in his ear, that if he would deliver him, and
set him free, he should have a hundred crowns. Where at he taking some taste,
made a sign to the hangman to stay; then studying of some devise or trick to
make him escape, he drew near, and cried out alowde in his language: Behold
my masters, into what danger this wretch had brought me, for he has a crown
(he did equivocate upon that word, which signifies a crown of gold, and the
crown of such as begin to be in Sacris (as they speak) and in the first
degree to be a Priest) and never told me of it. But come down with a
vengeance, thou shall be led before the Official thy Judge.

Another Provost being desirous to save a thiefes life, which had fallen into
his hands, upon condition that he should have a share in the booty, as they
had agreed. But considering on the other side, that the murmr would be great
if he did not justice, and that he should bring himself into great danger,
he used this means. He caused a poor honest man to be taken, to whom he
said, that he had been long sought for, and that he had committed such and
such an act. The man denies it confidently, as having his conscience clear
from any such crime. But this Provost being resolute, let him understand that
he should get more by confessing it, seeing that howsoever, he must loose his
life: and if he did confess it, the Provost did bind himself by oath, to
cause so many Masses to be sung for him, as he should go directly into
Paradise: whereas not confessing it, he should be hanged notwithstanding, and
go to the devil; for that there was not any man would sing a Mass for him.
This poor man, hearing him talk of death and hell, desired rather to be
hanged, and so go into Paradise. So as in the end he came to say, that he
did not remember that he had done that wherewith they charged him, yet if
they did remember it better than he, and were assured thereof, he would take
his death in good part: but he entreated them to keep promise with him,
touching the Masses. He had no sooner spoken the word, but they led him in to
the others place that had deserved death. But when he was at the ladder, he
entered into some speech, whereby he gave them to understand, that he repented
him, notwithstanding all that which they had promised him: for the preventing
whereof, the Provost made a sign unto the hangman to dispatch him: and so he
was. Lib. 1. Of the conference of Ancient Wonders with Modern.

A Liuetenant for Civil causes, desirous to gratify some one, whereas he
should have showed himself a severe Protector of Justice, was not content to
have engaged his own conscience, but he used such Rethorike to many others,
as he persuaded them to undo them selves, as he had done, for he was so
earnest in the pursuit of a cause against the Countess of Surrigan (whom they
did falsely accuse to have caused the Duke of Arscot to escape, being prisoner
at Bois de Vincennes) as he suborned many witnesses against her, using in this
practice, a Comissary called Bouvot, but either of them escaped good cheap,
being condemned of false-hood, committed in the instruction of the process
against the Countess: they did open penance, the^ standing on the pillory at
the Haules, they were banished. In the history of France under HENRY the 2.

GVY of Seruilles terming himself Lieutenant to the Provost of Marshalls in
the Seneshalcie of Xaintonge, having apprehended two young men, he caused them
to be hanged upon a Sunday, without finishing of their process, by the which
they were found in a manner innocent. He is made a party, as they are
accustomed to do against Judges which proceed Ex officio, without any party
playntiue that does accuse; for in that case they hold the place of an accuser.
After view of the process, he is committed to prison, by a decree of the
Court, and carried to the Concergery or prison at Bourdeaux: there he was
examined, and by his answers mayntaines that the said yong-men had deserved
death, for many causes which he objects, whereupon the Court at Bourdeaux
were in some doubt, whether they should admit him to make his proofs. Some
great Lawiers holding, that a Judge after execution may at need justify his
Judgment by proofs and productions, especially against vagabondes and picking
rouges, of whom the Provost Marshalls do judge definitiuely: Besides a Judge
may interpret, declare and maintain his sentence. The Negative is more common;
for all that is above spoken has place where imminent danger is, and in time
of War: else no man ought without reason to strive so much from Law and
Justice: and a Judge is not to be admitted to the justification of his
Judgment by other means, then these which are in the process, and which are
written before him, for he that is condemned might have defended and justified
himself, or else have reproched the witnesses, so as al might have proved his
innocence. But the means of all this was taken from him with his life, which
ought not to be. Yet notwithstanding by a decree made at Bourdeaux; Seruille
was allowed to make his proofs by acts or witnesses of these crimes wherewith
he charged the deceased. And for that afterward he did nothing, and the two
young men were found innocent by an other sentence given the 14. of August 1528.
he was condemned and executed. I. PAPON ltb. 4. of his collection of sentences
given in Sovereign. arrest 5.

One terming him falsely Provost of Marshalls in the Seneshalsie of Lands,
having caused seven women to be executed, being falsely accused and without
proof, of witchcraft, was beheadded by a sentence given at Bourdeaux the 3. of
January 1525. He had committed three offenses. The one of Jurisdiction, the
fact being not to betried before the Provost. The second that they were not
found guilty: the third, that falsely he termed himself a Provost, and under
color of a public charge had committed so many murders. The same PAPON, in
the same book arrest 7. The Consul of a Town in Suisserland. (I will spare
his name for the present) a rich man, caused a stately house to be built, in
the year 1559. Among other excellent workmen which he sought for, he caused a
rare cutter and Architect called JOHN, to come from Trente, who for some just
reasons refused to come. In the end having received a promise of all safety and
good usage, he came and wrought long for the other. About the end of the work,
the Architect coming to demand his wages, they fell to some words. Whereof the
end was, that by the Consulls commandment, JOHN was put in prison, and by the
same Consul (against his faith and promise) accused to have spoken against
some Ceremonies. The Consul being Judge and party, pursued his purpose so
furiously, as JOHN was condemned to loose his head. As they led him to
execution, he marched with a cheerful countenance, and died very constantly.
Ad ding thereunto, after a long speech testyfiyng his constancy and sincere
affection, that the Consul (who was the Author of his death) should die also
within 3. days, and appear before the Judicial seat of GOD, to give an
Account of his sentence. It happened as this man had foretold: for the Consul
(although he were in the flower of his age, and very helthfull) began the same
day to be tormented; sometimes, with a violent heat, sometimes with a vehement
cold: to conclude he was stricken with a new disease, so as the third day he
went to answer to the Innocent against whom he had been a most unjust
party, and accuser and a Judge, being cast out of the Land of the living by a
t^rriblle Judgment of GOD. M. JOSIAS SIMLERVS of zurich in the life of HENRY
BVLLING^R.

Wonderful Fasting.
HENRY of Hasfeld being gone out of the Low Countries to Berg in Norwaie,
where he did traffic, lived there unmarried without blame, he was very
charitable unto the poor, whom he did clothe liberally, employing some of
his clothes to that use: One day having heard a certain Preacher speaking
(indiscreetly) of myraculous fastes, as if it were no more in the power of GOD
to maintain any one living without the help of meat and drink, and
displeased that this preacher was a dissolute man, which poluted holy things,
he tried to fast, and to abstain altogether from eating and drinking. Having
absteyned three days, he began to be very hungry. He therefore took a bitte
of bread, meaning to swallowe it with a glass of beer. But all that stuck so
in his throat, as he remained forty days and forty nights without eating or
drinking. At the end of this time, he cast out at his mouth the bread and
drink which had remained in his throat. This long abstinence made him so
weak, as they were feign to restore him with milk. The Governor of the
Country hearing of this wonder, calls for HENRY, and enquiers the truth of
him: who giving no credit to HENRYES confession, would see a new trial
thereof. He therefore caused him to be shut up, and carefully watched and kept
in a Chamber for the space of forty days and forty nights, without any thing
to norrish him. The which he did endure without any noise, and with less
difficulty then the first, attributing nothing unto himself, but all to the
power and honor of GOD. By reason of so rare and supernatural an Abstinence,
and for that his life was without reproach, he was surnamed of many, the Saint
of Norway. A while after, being come about his business to Bruxelles in
Brabant, a debtor of his (having neither good money to pay him, nor any good
conscience,) accused him of heresy, so as he was imprisoned, where he remained
many days without eating or drinking: in the end he was condemned to be
burned alive, without making the people acquainted with his process, who did
see him go to execution with his accustomed countenance. He was tied to a
great stake with a long chain, and they did fire many fagots round about him,
a pretty distance off, supposing that he would run about this stake, even
unto the last gasp. But contrariwise falling upon his knees and lifting up his
eyes to Heaven, he made a fervent prayer unto GOD* then rising up, he went
courageously o the fire, enters into the flames, and sits down so quietly, as
no man could see him move hand or leg, or any other part of his body, but
without any stir or tormenting of himself, he ended his life in the fire.
They could not find any piece of his bones: and many since passing by the
place where he had been burnt, held it for a place of devotion. This happened
about the year 1545. the which I have learned from the mouth of many men,
worthy of credit, good friends to this man, with whom they had conuersed
familiarly. JOHN WIER in his Treatise of extraordinary abstinence.

It is not long since that a Chanoine of Leege, desirous to try his force in
fasting, having continued unto the seventeenth day, he found himself so faint
and weak, as if he had not been suddenly helped with good restoratiues, he had
dyed. The same Author.

A young Maid of Buchold in the territory of Munster in Westphalia, being
oppress with melancholy, and keeping the house, was for that cause beaten by
her Mother. The which did so increase her grief, as taking no rest, she was
four months without eating or drinking, unless that some times she did
chewe a piece of a roasted apple, and washed her mouth with a little Tisane. She
grew exceeding lean, but in the end GOD restored her, living long after very
modestly, and endued with singular piety. The same.

In October in the year 1600. Monsieur RAPIN, whom I name with respect,
being a man worthy of credit, did assure me that he had seen (as many
others had done) at Conflent in Poitou, about the end of August before, the
Daughter of JOHN BALAN a Smith called IOANE, of fourteen years of age, who
had then lived eighteen months without eating or drinking any thing
what-so-euer. Her tongue was much shronke, and her teeth white and clean, her
belly was shronke, and she was a little fleshie behind. When she rises in
the morning, she opens the window and stands looking into the a^er, spending
the rest of her time in doing some little work about the house. Drawn out of
our Memorialls.

Justice.
IHON de MARESTS having been murdered by the Scignior of TALLART, of a great
and ancient house, and a Gentleman well suported by many great allyances,
namely by Cardinal IHON of BELLAY, who made it his own fact, it seemed that
the execution of Justice was not so speedy as the cause required. The
Grandmother of the deceased, having her only refuge unto King FRANCIS the
first, cast her self upon her knees, weeping before him at Fontainbleau:
whereat the King being amazed, asked what she would have of him? Justice
(answered she) if it shall please your Maiestic. At which word he commands her
to rise speedily, and turning to all that did attend him, he said: By the
faith of a Gentleman, it is no reason that this Gentlewoman should prostrate
her-selfe before me, demanding a thing which for the due of my estate I owe
her, but it is their duties that importune me for remissions and pardons, the
which I owe them not but of my especial grace and royal prerogative. And
after that he had given her a long audience upon the discourse of her request,
which which was only to have speedy Justice, and having promised it unto her,
he showed that the word of such a King was fully accomplished, by the event
which followed. So as not able to be moved by any suit of his favorites, nor of
foreign Ambassadors, he would have punishment inflicted, as the greatness of
the offense required. And so TALLART was beheaded at the Hales at Paris, in the
year 1546. Master E. PASQVIER in the 5. book of his Collections of France,
Chap. 7.

A notable Thief.
ABout the year 1503. there lived at Geneua a notable thief called MORTAC,
and in French MORTEL. He did inchant men in such sort, as no man could prevent
his theeuing, nor punish him after the deed. Every one knew he was a thief,
and were as wary of him as they could. It was a common watchword in all the
houses of the Town, when as night came, for Masters and Mistresses to warn
their servants to shut the doors for fear of MORTAC, which grew to be an
ordinary Proverb, when as they doubted any one that had filching fingers. But
there was neither door, lock, nor bar, that could keep him out, where he
had a will to enter: yet he went not to all places, but only to those that
looked sowerly on him, and seemed to distrust him, for he took a delight to
steal, to be admired for his ability and cunning: neither did he care to
gather much together, but contented himself with a little, taking no more then
would serve him for some 40. or 50. meals, with some companions which he
carried up and down, feasting them at his charge. And there was no means to
prevent his will: for he did so inchant them of the house, as they lost their
speech, and all means to resist him, making them like immovable stocks, when
he entered into their houses. Before he would seize upon that which he
pretended, he would first feed himself at his ^ase. The first thing he ever
did was to light a candle, the^ to take the keys of the house yea from under
the master and mistresses pillow, although they were awake: not that he wanted
keys, for his fingers served him for his Pick-locks: but in thus proceeding he
would show his theeuish authority. Then would he open the Larder and the
Seller, from whence he fetched meat and wine, covered the Table, and eat and
drunk at his leisure and pleasure, and yet not any one of the house did
stir, either to hinder him, or to accompany him, neither to cry out, nor yet
to speak unto him, either good or bad. This done, he went and opened the
goodmans cofers, and took what money he thought good, to make good cheer
with his Mignions, for 3. weeks or a months space in some Tavern. The next
day he and his band would camp where was best wine: and the Tavern keepers
entertained this rabble very graciously. For this MORTAC did no harm in those
places where he usually frequented, and where the masters did make much of
him. After they had made many good meals, when they came to reckon, he never
brought any money but said unto the Host: Go and fetch thy due in the corner
of such a Chamber of thy house, the which perchance had not been frequented a
month before. The which the Host doing, he found the just sum, and not a
farthing more or less. It was very strange, that the Judges did not punish
him. He was often put in prison, but the Judges durst not exceed the law, the
which did forbid them to condemn any one accused, before he had confessed the
fact. And this MORTAC was so constant in denying the truth, as it was
impossible to draw any thing from his own mouth, whether it were that he felt
no torments, or that he did contemn them. for he apprehended no more to be
strained with a cord, then to dance, If they gave him a sharp strapadoe, he
seemed to endure much, and would cry out: Let me down, and I will tell the
truth. Being let down and untied, he would say unto the Governors, what will
you have me say? There-vpon they asked him, who has done this, or that: and
he mocking them, would repeat this question, saying: Do thou know who has
done this or that? and then he would add in scoffing manner, give me once more
the Strappadoe, for the love of the Ladies, so as they were forced to let him
alone. He committed infinite thefts, after the manner before mentioned: but he
dyed not so shamefully as he deserved, yet most cruelly, for the plague having
so seized upon his throat, as he could not speak, his Mother (who tended him)
fearing he would escape and be hanged afterward, buried him alive. And so lived
and dyed MORTAC* Extracted out of the Annals of Geneua.

Liberality.
THE Emperor MAXIMILIAN the first, committed the managing of a great sum of
money to a Gentleman that was exceeding prodigal, and a very bad husband:
whereof being advertised, he called for him, and demanded an account of a
remainder, amounting to 2000. crowns and upward. The other required some
respite to make perfect his account, which was granted him. Having considered
thoroughly of the matter, the next day he went and presented himself unto the
Emperor, who wondering at his sudden return, referred him to the time
prefixed the day before. Sacred Majesty (then said the Gentleman) I will
briefly show you the truth of the case, to the end you may not be troubled
long about it. You are good to all men I confess I have employed the most part
of your money, in the entertainment of whores, buying of Horses, gaming and
bankets: and without farther excusing of my self: I have done ill: I have
deserved to be punished by the law: But I besecch you to bear with my youth,
and for my friends sake to pardon me: if it may please your Majesty to use me,
I will be wiser here after. The Emperor hearing this free and open confession,
began to smile, and presently commanded his Barber to be sent for, to whom he
said, cut me this Gentleman's hair, and with thy Rasor make him a fair large
crown on the top of his head, for I will presently make an Abbot of him. At
the same instant the Emperor was advertised of the vacancie of an Abbey, by the
death of the Abbot, and they were devising in MAXIMILIANS presence, upon whom
it should be conferred? marry upon him yonder, quoth the Emperor, pointing to
the Gentleman that was in the Barbars hands. Then calling him unto him, he
said: I give thee such an Abbey; If thou continuest as thou have begun, thou will consume both Monks and Covent. The Gentleman unto whom good fortune came
sleeping (like unto a C^anoine of LEWIS the 11.) having accepted this
Collation with great reverence and thanks, he took possession of the Abbey,
became a good husband, and governed his Monks to their content. I. le GAST of
Frissac. Tom. 2. of his Table-talke.

GEORGE of Amboise, Cardinal, a chief Councellor to the good King LEWIS the
twelfth, did enjoy Gaillion, depending of his Arche-bishopricke of Rouan, the
which he did in-large and beautify all he could, as a house of pleasure, to
delight him after his serious occupations. There was a gentleman, a neighbor of
his somewhat distressed; who to free himself, spoke to one of the Cardinals
followers, to be a means unto his Master to buy his land, the which lay very
conveniently for Gaillion. As the disposition of all Courtiars is ready for
such negotiations, he presently advertised his Master, persuading him that he
might buie this Land good cheap. To whom the Cardinal answered, with a
smyling and cheere-full countenance, that he desired nothing more then to
confer with the gentleman, about that purchase: commanding him to inuit him
to dinner. This commandment was presently put in practice by the Courtiar.
Some few days after the gentleman having dyned with the Cardinal the table
being taken up and every one retired to give them place for their private
talk. The Cardinal began to fall into discourse upon this Land, aduising him
as a neighbor and a friend not to sell that place which was his ancient
inheritance: the other insisted to the Contrary, alleging for his reasons,
that he did hope to reap three commodities by this sale: the one was in
getting his favor by this means: the other was that with a part of the money
he should marry a Daughter of his: and the last that he should employ the rest
of his money in rentes, which should profit him as much as the revenues of his
whole Lands: And therefore my Lord (said he) for that it lies more conveniently
for you then any other, I have addressed my self unto you, to make you what
price you please. But neighbor (answered the Cardinal) if you might borrowe
money to marry your Daughter well, would you not be much better pleased to
keep your Land? whereunto the gentleman replied, that it would be an other
difficulty to pay the money at the prefixed day. But if you might have such a
time given you (said the Lord) as without strayning of your self, you might
free your debt, what would you say? O my Lord replied the other, you say well,
but where are such lenders? And so being fallen into a still discourse of
selling and lending, in the end this good Legate said, truly I will be the Man,
and no other, that will perform what I have said. The which he did, for he
lent him money for so long a Term, as this gentleman married his Daughter to
his own mind, and yet saved his Land. As all Courtiers are careful of their
Masters profit, though it be to an others hurt: coming from their secret
conference, this Mediator comes, who demandes in private of his Master, if he
had agreed upon the price. I said he, and I think I have gained more then you
will believe. For insteede of the Lordshippe, whereof you did speak. I have
purchased a friend, desiring rather to have a good neighbor then all the Lands
in the world. The poor Courtier being confounded, did no more dream of any
such bargains. I would to GOD that all Noblemen would consider well of this
History. And yet this Cardinal dying, did Lament with tears the time which
he had spent rather in following of a Kings Court then in teaching of his
flock. M. E. PASQVIER liber 5. de ses recerches. Chapter 5.

Magnanimity.
Captain BAYARD in the time of King FRANCIS the first feeling himself very
sore wounded to the death with a shot, being advised to retier himself out of
the fight, he answered, that he would not beginue in his latter days to
turn his back to the enemy: and having fought as long as his his force would
give him leave, finding himself to faint and ready to fall from his horse, he
commanded his Steward to lay him at the foot of a tree, but in such sort, as
he might die with his face to the enemy, as he did. MONTAIGNE in his Essaies
Chapter 3.

Many other examples shall be seen in the following volumes.

Secret and vne qual marriages unfortunate.
A Nobleman of Spain, falling in Love with a maid exceeding fair, whose
Father had been a Goldsmiths in the City of Valencia, having sought by many
means the use of her, was still rejected. Being vanquished by his affections,
he demanded her for his Wife, he marries her in a Chamber, in the presence of
her Mother and Brethren. Having entertained her about a year and a half,
under this pretext, in the end transported with a new desire, he marries a
Lady of a great house publickely. The maid whom he had so wretchedly
seduced, finds means by Letters and messages to draw him again unto her,
and she persuades him that she is content he shall use her as his Concubine,
coming twice a week unto her house. She flatters him in such sort; as he
promises to come to her the next day: where he is received with kind
imbracings, and spends the day in sundry discourses. Night being come, he
lies with her, who finds so many excuses, as this Nobleman is put of till
after his first sleep. Being soundly a sleep, this maid transported with
grief and fury, and assisted by a bondwoman of hers, who had made provision
of two great sharp knives, and of a strong cord tied to one of the
bedde-postes, she strains this cord over his body being a sleep, then
suddenly she takes one of these knives, and strikes him in the throat with all
her force. He startes, but with little life. But on the other side the slave
drew the cord with all her strength, wherewith his arms and body were so
entangled, that before he could free himself, she had given him many stabbes
in the body, taking from him at one instant both his speech and life. The
candle being light, this maid transported with her greeuious fury, proceeding
from a just disdain, pulles out the dead man's eyes, cutts out his tongue, and
then his heart, the which she tears in pieces, and mangles him in diverse parts
of his body, the which with the help of her slave she casts out at a window
into a street that was much frequented. Day being come every man runs to
behold this bloody spectacle. They speak diversely of the fact, for that they
could not know the body being so much disfigured, having nothing on but a
bloody shirt torn with blows. As every man gave his Censure, the maid comes
down in the street and delivers the whole fact, with a constant and an
assured countenance, the which is verefied (besides her confession) by the
deposition of this Noblemans servant, of the Priest that had married them and
of the Mother and Brethren that had assisted. As Soon as the body was cast into
the street, the Maid gives unto her slave a good sum of money, aduising her
to save her self, the which she did in the morning. As for the Maid being
satisfied with so extraordinary a revenge, she does freely and often aduow
before the Judges all that she had done, and being condemned to loose her
head, she went constantly and cheerfully to execution, suffering death
willingly, to the great amazement of all the Inhabitants of Valencia. History
of Spain,

A while after the Battle of Rauenna, given in the year 1512. a Neopolitaine
Gentleman called ANTHONY BOLOGNE, having been Steward to FREDERIC of Arragon
King of Naples, who being despoyled of his estate, retired into France, was
called by the Duchess of Malfy, a great Lady, issued from the house of
Arragon, sister to a Cardinal, one of the greatest in his time, widow to a
great Nobleman, and Mother to one only Son, to be her Steward. The which he
having accepted, a while after this widow being young and fair, having
regarded him with a lascivious eye, she desired him: but to cover her fault,
she sought the color of marriage: and after many vain discourses in her
thoughts, instead of flying to the council and good advise of her Brethren,
and honorable Kinsfolks, (whereof she had many) and to accept a party fit
for her quality, the which might easily have been found near or far off:
transported with her desire, she discouers her thoughts unto this Gentleman,
who drunk with his own conceit, and forgetting the respect which he ought
unto his Lady and to her house, neither yet remembering his own mean estate,
would not excuse himself, nor give her such Council as he ought in this
occurrent, but being presumptuous and lust-full, he yielded to join (under the
veil of a secret marriage) with her who had long before cast unchaste looks at
him, and with whom he had rashly and against all duty fallen in love. These
two unadvised creatures then lying together, in the presence of a Chamber-maide
only, under the color of marriage, so behaved themselves, as after some
months the Duchess was with Child, and brought in bed of a Son, the
which was conuaied secretly into the Country. This first delyuerie remained
secret: but being again with Child and delivered of a Daughter, the news
were presently spread over all, and came to the ears of the Cardynall, and of
an other Brother at Rome, Being about to inquier who it might be that had
been so famyliar with their sister, BOLOGNE seeing that it was generally
noted, took his leave of her, she being with Child, meaning to retier to
Naples, and then to Ancona, there to attend some other event of their affairs.
Having carried his two Children with him, and hired a convenient house, the
Duchess sent her richest stuff thither, and soon after under color of a
Pilgrimage to Lauretto, at her return she goes to Ancona with all her trame,
where the next day after her arrival, having called all her gentlemen and
hous-hold servants, she gave them to understand that BOLOGNE was her hus-band,
and that she was resolved to continue with him, suffering them that would go and
serve the young Duke her Son to depart, and promising good recompenses to them
that should remain with her, showing them their two Children. Her servants
amazed at this discourse left the Duchess and BOLOGNE: and being parted from
her presence, they sent one among them to Rome, to advertise the Cardinal and
the Prince, of all their Sisters fact. The first attempt of these two Brethren
against BOLOGNE and his pretended Wife, was to have them chased out of Ancona,
by the credit which they had with SIGISMOND of Gonzague the Popes Legate in that
place. They retired speedely then to Sienna, but they must needs depart from
thence, being expelled by ALPHONSO CASTRACIO Cardinal of Sienna, and by the
Justice of Sienna. After diverse consultations, they resolved to retier to
Venise, and to that end to take the way of Romagnia; but being upon the
territory of Furlie they descouer a far off a troop of horses galloping
toward them. The Duchess was presently of an opynion that BOLOGNE should save
himself with his Son, who was now grown big, the which they did, being
both well mounted, and retired to Milan. These Horsemen, having failed of part
of their preye, spoke graciously unto the Duchess, and conducted her with her
other two Children into the Realm of Naples, into one of the Castells of the
young Duke her Son, where she was presently imprisoned, with the two
Children she had by BOLOGNE, and her Chamber-maide. Some few days after,
three of them which had taken her in the plain of Furli, came into her
Chamber, and denounce her death unto her, suffering her to recommende her self
unto GOD, then they tied a cord about her neck and strangled her, which done,
they lay hold on the Chamber maid, who cried out with open throat, and
strangle her also, and in the end they seize upon the two young Children, and
send them after the Mother and the maid.

The two Brethren contynuing their course caused BOLOGNES goods at Naples to
be confisked, and having descouered that he was at Milan they suborne
certain men to feed him with hope that in time they will make his peace,
making him believe that his Wife and Children were yet alive, who although he
were advertised by a gentleman of Milan of the Duchess death, and of an ambush
that was laid for him, yet would he not believe any thing, nor retier himself
out of Milan, where there were murderers suborned to kill him: of which number
there was a certain Lombard a Captain of a company of foot: so as soon
after, BOLOGNE going out of the Friars where he had been to hear Mass he
was compassed about by a troop of Soldiars, and their Captain, who slew him
presently being about two years after the Duchess death. As for his Son
who was not then with him, he was forced to sly out of Milan, to change his
name, and to retier himself far off, where he died unknown. History of
Italy.

At what time Pope IVLIO the second, made war in Italy all the Towns in a
manner being troubled with the factions, a young Roman Gentleman called
FABIO fell in Love with a Gentlwoman named AEMILIA, Daughter to one of his
Fathers mortal enemies. She being inflamed with the like affection, by the
means of her Gouernesse, they did write Letters one unto an other, and then
spoke together, and in the end they made a mutual promise of marriage, upon a
vain hope that it should be a means to unite their houses that were enemies.
The worst was, they did consumate this marriage. After some days FABIOS Father
feeling himself old, commanded his Son to take a party, and to tell him
what maiden he desired to have to Wife. FABIO having delayed to give him any
answer, in the end he names AEMILIA whereof he was with great chollour
refused by his Father, to whose will in the end he yielded, abandoning AEMILIA
after that he had excused himself as well as he could unto her. This
sorrowful Virgin grown mad to see her-self so abused, seemed to digest
this pill quietly, entreating her Gouernesse to obtain so much of FABIO that
he would be pleased to come sometimes in the week to see and comfort her,
and so by little and little to bury their passed friendship. FABIO yielding to
that passion came to see her. She gave him kind well-come, devising very
familiarly all the evening together, and then to lie with her, as he had done
before. But having entreated him in any case not to touch her, but to stay
until the morning, pretending her fore-passed grief, as soon as this
miserable wretch was fallen a sleep, she takes his dagger and killes him,
then having called her gouernesse, she stabbes her self in her presence with
the same poynard, and died presently. The next day this pitiful accident did
much amaze and afflict the two Fathers and their families, for that remedy was
past. History of Italy.

Detestable Cursings.
THere was a certain learned and reverent man in Spain had two Sons: the
one being thirteen years old or there aboutes did some malicious act,
wher-with the Mother was so incensed with choler, as she began to curse him,
and to give him to the Devil, wishing that he might carry him away. This was
about ten of the clock at night, and when as the Mother continued her cursing,
the child being amazed, went down into the Court, where he vanished away, so
as it was impossible to find him, not-with-standing any search they could
make. All were troubled at this accident, seeing there was no door nor window
open, whereby he might get out. After two hours, the Father and the Mother
being much discomforted, they heard a great noise in a chamber over theirs and
the child which groned pitifully. They go up, and opening the chamber door
with the key, they find this child in so poor estate as it was a pity to
behold him: for besides that his garments were all torn, he had his face,
hands and almost all his body so bruised and scratched as it were with thorns,
and so disfigured, as all the night he could scarce come to himself. The
Father and the Mother did all they could devise to ease him, and then the next
day seeing that he was come something to himself, they inquired of him the
reason of his adventure the night past. He answered that being in the Court,
certain men wonderfully great, vggly and fearful, approaching near unto him,
without speaking any word, had lifted him up into the air, with an incredible
swiftness, then setting him down in certain Mountains full of thorns had
drawn him through them, and left him in the same estate, they had now found
him in. That finally they had slain him, if he had not reco^mended himself
unto GOD: these executioners then brought him back again, and made him to
enter by a little window of the Chamber, and so vanished away. The boy remained
deaf and in very bad case by this Visitation, being ashamed and grieved if
any one did question with him or put him in mind of it A. TORQVEMADOE in the
thirdiourney of his Hexameron.

Melancholic, Madd, Frantic, Furious and enraged persons.
I Meddle not with the controversies of learned Physicians touching the
differences of these diseases, according to the humor most predominant, either
in the brain, or in the Hypocondres, or throughout all the body: neither will
I enter into consideration of the remedies which they bring. And without
subiecting my self to any exact order for this beginning, I will endeavor to
quicken the readers spirits, by this variety, to dispose him to higher
considerations, and upon every history draw him to the reverence of almighty
GOD, who is just and merciful.

As for those sick persons that are struck with a Melancholic humor,
whereof I represent many histories in this section, we have seen and heard
spoke of diverse kinds. All being hurt, especially in the imaginatiue
faculty, have strong and very strange apprehensions. Some imagining that they
are become pots of Earth or of Glass through-out all their bodies, or part of
it, fly all company for fear of breaking. Others thinking that they are
become Woolues or Cocks, howling and crowing, and beating their arms, as if
they had wings. Some have feared infinitely least the ground under them should
open; others that have represented unto themselves nothing but hideous
fantasies and death. Some that have imagined themselves dead, and would no
more eat nor drink. Some have thought they have had Stagges-hornes on their
heads. Some have cast themselves into Pondes and Rivers, where they have
perished, or else have been found in extreme danger, and have been drawn
out happily for them.

There was an Italian Monk, possessed with such a melancholic humor, as he
cast himself into the Gulf of Venice, and there was lost. An other confessed
that the Euill-spirits had often awaked him in the night, and persuaded him to
cast himself headlong into a Well, They do all in a manner fear things of
nothing, and do not apprehend those that are hurtful. They are afraid of a
Foxes tail wherewith they would whippe them, of straw wherewith they would
shakle them: and if you tie them by the legs but with a rush unto a bed post,
they will move no more then Images: and contrariwise they will sometimes break
Cords and Chains of Iron wherewith you shall think to hold them. Sometimes
they sing and talk incessantly, other times they weep and are mute. the
humor coming to alter more, the furye increases, and they fall into
despair, and perpetual desire of death; the seek for nothing but for Knives
to murder themselves, for windows to cast themselves down headlong, for
doors to fly out at, and commit some excess, that they might avoid this
fear which does torment them.

And therefore we do always see them sad, amazed terrified like unto little
children which go in the dark, the fume of this black and melancholic
humor, marvelously troubling the seat of the understanding, whence proceeds
this amazement. So wise men do hold, that the humors of the body do alter
our complexion, whence after does proceed the change of the actions of the
mind: so as the faculties of the mind, do follow the disposition of the body.
There has been found a melancholic man which has supposed himself to be
without a head; to cure him whereof, they have charged his head with a hat of
lead which was such a continual burden unto him, as in the end he was helped
of that imagination. He that thought himself to be all of Glass, was
recovered by the approach of a friend of his, who said that he was yet more
brittle, and jesting politikely with him, freede him from his Imagination with
good words. Some have been seen who imagining themselves condemned to die,
could not be diuerted from that apprehension, but in seeing of a Pardon
counterfetted to that end, taking the pains to read it himself for his
better assurance. An other saying that he was dead and in his grave, was
retired from that humor, by the dexterity of his Companion who shut himself
up with him and eating, persuaded him to eat, saying that it was usual among
the dead.

Some hold their eyes still fixed upon the ground, and are wonderfully offended
to hear any one laugh, find nothing that is good, fair nor well done, be it
near or far of, imagining still, that they will put them into prison, beat
or kill them: they cry him mercy whom they first met, they kneel down for
fear to an Infant, or to a little Dog: they seek holes and obscure places:
they make Men believe that they are bewitched, inchaunted and poisoned. To
conclude, this disease is a Tree, whereof we cannot number the branches nor the
leaves. I had forgotten to say that there are some which fear and hate their
most familier and greatest friends: others that cannot endure any man, and
fear nothing so much as to be seen. Some have fear of all creatures
whatsoever; or of some in particucular: those which have been bitten by
madde-Dogges are wonderfully afraid of Water. To conclude how many particular
fantasies and diseases soever there be of melancholicke humors, so many sorts
of frensies there be. But it is a general thing almost in all persons, touched
with any melancholic humor, troubling the brain simply moved with strange
fumes, which proceed from this venomous humor, or augmented by some new
accident as the biting of madde-Dogges, by extraordinary illusions, or
otherwise, to grow fearful, especially of things which are in no sort to
befeared.

Now it remains, that we produce some notable Histories of our Times,
touching these passions. My intention in the report of them, is to show how
much we ought to fear our own miseries, to remember ourvanities, and to
think that GOD needs not to seek far for any rods to scourge us, seeing that
we carry them in our own bowels, that death is in this vessel of our bodies
and that our souls are in miserable captivity, if the light of grace and
heavenly truth does not shine incessantly upon them.

In our time a Gentleman fell into such an humor of melancholy, as it was not
possible in the extremity of his sickness to change an opinion he had, that
he was dead: so as if his friends and servants came to flatter, entreat or
press him to take some nourishment or physic, he rejected all, ^aying that
the dead had no need of such things. Six days past without receiving of any
food, and the seventh being come (which is mortal to hungry bodies) his
friends devised a policy to free him of this fantasy. His Chamber being
artificially made dark, they caused certain men to enter into it, being
masked and clothed in white sheets, tied up like unto them that are buried.

The table was covered with meat; wher-with these masked Men began to fill
themselves, making little noise but with their chappes and drinking hard. The
sick man seeing this sport, demanded what they were, and what they did there?
They answered him that they were dead-men, which made good cheer. How then
says the sick Man, do dead men eat? I, said they and with a good stomach.
If you will be of the company, you shall see that we speak the truth.
Presently the sick man shakes his ears, leapes out of his bed, and begins to
feed with these dead-men with a good stomach. Having drunk well sleep takes
him, with the help of a drink which they had prepared for him and given him
in this banquet of dead men. This was the means to purge him of his
Melancholy. LEVINVS LEMNINVS. cap. 6. lib. 2. of the complexions of man's body.
The like Historye is read in IOVIANVS PONTANVS, lib. 4. cap. 2. Of Wisdom.

Another supposing that he had a nose not only a foot but many feet, yea many
fadome long, and that he carried an Elephants trounke, the which was very
heavy, and hindered him much as he said, believing constantly that his nose
touched the Sauce and Dishes that came to the Table: a Wiseman being called to
assist him, and fitting himself unto his humor, he cunningly held a gut of
blood to the Patients nose and laying hold of his nose with-all, he cut this
gu^te with a rasor, then suddenly giving a sleeping drink unto the sick man,
when he awaked he made him believe that this great increase of his nose had bin
cut off, and having prescribed him a good rule for his diet, he cured him of
his melancholy. LEVIN. LEM. in the same book and chapter.

An other troubled with an Hypocondriacke Melancholy, persuaded thimselfe that
Toades and Frogs did eat his belly: and there was no means to take from him
this opinion. In the end his Physician said unto him, that he did verily
believe, that there was some such vermin in his body. There-vpon he gives him
a purgation: and causes some Frogs and to ades to be cunningly conveyed
into his close stool, The Physic having wrought they presently show the
Patient his excrements, and these little beasts swimming above it, the which
purged the Melancholy, that did possess him. LEVINVS LEMNIVS in the above
named Treatise.

An other supposing that his buttocks were of Glass, could not be persuaded
to sit down for any business whatsoever, fearing that if he did sit
down upon any Chair or stool, his buttockes would break, and that the
pieces would fly here and there. In the same Treatise.

I have seen a Melancholic Man, which did imagine that all the superficies of
the world was very fine glass, that the part under it was all full of
Serpents, and that his bed was as it were in an Island, from whence if he did
stir, he should break the glass and fall among the serpents: and therefore
it was not possible to draw him from thence. JOHN BAPTISTA MONTANVS in his
Counsels of Physic.

A Bourguignon being sick of a burning fever at Paris, did affirm that he
was dead, and then his fantasy coming to change, he entreated the Physicians
not to hinder his soul (which was in Purgatory) from flying into paradise.
Sometimes he did counterfeit one that was dying and giving up the ghost: then he
would say, look how I die: then afterward he was surprised with despair,
and with a wonderful strange fear. They caused him to have the Emoroydes and
with other fit remedies they recovered him his health. Comment: upon the 17.
chap. of the 2. book of M. I. HOVLIER, of inward diseases.

It is an ordinary thing in melancholic men and such as are troubled in the
brain, not to sleep and to continue in that estate many days and nights: as
it happened to one, who was 14. whole months without sleep. FERNELIVS. lib. 5.
of his Panthologia. cap. 2.

Two Italian Gentlemen, tormented with a melancholic humor, and sometimes
with a falling sickness, so as they could not rest, the one for some days,
the other for six months together, always crying, and without any fever,
were soon cured by me in eight days, by sleeping lotions, distilled upon the
head, and drink made of Crisolite, beaten to powder and infused in wine, that
afterward they were never troubled with these infirmities. CARDAN in his book
of admirable Cures. Cure the 3.

A melancholic man running in the night through the streets, was by chance
hurt in the thigh, and having lost much of his blood, was eased and cured by
that means, HOVLIER in his Commentary upon the 6. book of HIPOCRATES
Aphorisms. Apho. 21.

A Goldsmiths widow at Lions oppressed with extreme melancholy, by reason of
sundry griefs after her husbands death, did trouble them much to keep her in
her sickness. And yet they could not watch her so narrowly, but one day in the
turning of a hand she cast her self out of a high Chamber window upon the
pauement in the street Rasin, where she was sore hurt in the head, so as she
lost great abundance of blood, and by this means recovered her right wits,
and within few days was cured of this fall. The which happened within these
five and twenty or thirty years. Extracted out of my memorialls.

A German remaining at Paris in the street of Noyers, seized with a
melancholic humor and transported with madness, in the night he cut his
own throat with a knife, and stabbed himself in many places of the breast and
belly, whereof some entered, and the other were but superficial. The next day
some of his companions going to see him in the house of a Banker called PEROT
where he was in pension, they found him thus dressed, with a great abundance of
blood lying about him. Seeing this spectacle, they thought his servant had thus
hurt him, for that he lay in his Chamber. He is taken and carried prisoner to
the Chastelet, charging him to have thus murdered his Master I was sent for
to visit and to dress him, and seeing the winde-pipe and the mouth of the
stomach cut, with many other wounds I had no hope of his life. And therefore I
advised them to send for STEPHEN RIVIERE, the Kings ordinary Surgion, and
GERMAIN CHEVAL a sworn Surgion at Paris, where we concluded amongst us, to
sow up the wound of his throat, the which being done and bound up, the
German began presently to speak confessing that he himself had committed
that excess and discharging his poor servant of the fact in our presence, and
of many others, especially of twoe Notaries, and a Comissarie of the Chastelet:
by this means the servant was set at liberty and freely discharged by his
masters confession, who lived four days, but could never swalloe any
sustenance, being somewhat norrished by nutritive glisters, and oderiferous
things that did norrish, as the cromes of a whot loaf steept in wine, and
others like. M. AM^. PARE. lib. 9. Cap. 31.

A maker of Serges called STEPHEN, a quiet man and a good workman in his
trade, having suffered a melancholic humor to ceaze upon him, breeding fear
and distrust in him, in the day time he gave himself certain thursts in the
belly with a knife, going to that end to a garden of his Being thus hurt, he
returned to his chamber causinge himself to be laid in his bed and thinking
of his conscience he humbles himself before God, craves pardon for all his
sins, but especially for that, preseuers in his repentance and confession, in
the presence of many, which did visit him for some days that he did Languishe
I was one of them, and did see him wonder-fully moved with the words that were
used unto him, as well in regard of his sins as of Gods mercies, in the
apprehension whereof he did quietly yield up his soul, in a Town where he
had long continued and remained. Drawn out off my Memorialls.

JOHN CRAVEQVIN an Advocate in the Presidiall Court at Bourges, a man of a good
spirit and a great practitioner, but very ignorant of the written Law, and of
all good learning, having in the year 1533. been employed in the pursuit of
some causes to please the appetite of a most wicked man, which abused him, he
fell sick of a Melancholic humor, and a wonderful strange Frenzy,
imagining all that was brought unto him to be crawling Serpents: so as after
they had tried all remedies in vain, and brought Witches and Sorcerers unto
him, in the end he became stark mad and dyed in that estate. Histories of
our Time under FRANCIS the 1.

An other learned man, making profession of the Civil Law, having done some
act unworthy of his learning and judgment, was so possessed with a Melancholic
humor and with a frenzy, that being fallen sick, without any great
affliction in his body, for his nourishment he did eat his own excrements,
and having languished in this misery some time, he died without any
repentance. Histories of our Times.

A Gentleman very aged and temperate fell into a continual fever, in the month
of July, 1574. and the^ into a fre^zy, casting himself ou^ of a window of the
second Story of his house, and fell upon the neck of Mons. VATERRE ordinary
physician to the Duke of Alen^on and then to the ground, where he hurt his
^ibs, and made a great con^usion upon the bone Ischion: Being carried back
unto his bed he recovered his right wits, by a transport of the matter which
caused the frenzy, Even so of late a Gascon beesicke of a burning Fever fell
into a frenzy being lodged in the street called Pauee at Paris, in the night
he cast himself out at a windoe into the street, and was hurt in many places
of his body, to whom I was called to dress him, soddenly being laid in his
bed, he began to talk sensibly, and to loose his mad fits, so as within a
while after he was quite cured. Mons. d'Ortoman a Doctor and the Kings
professor in the university of Mont pellier did assuer me that a Miller
remaining of Broquiers in Albigeois grown frantic, threw himself out at a
windo into the water, from whence being drawn, he presently lost his frenzy.
Master AMB. PARE, the last Chapter, of his introduction to Surgerie.

ANNE, Nurse to PETER, Son to Master FRANCIS BIORD, Lieutenaxnt to the Provost
of Air, a young woeman of a whot and dry constitution, being touched in the
sharpest time of winter with a frenzy on the left side, and a sharp fever,
her breath being short having stiches in her side, and spitting nothing, almost
but blood, fell into a madness the seventh day, whereupon she rises out of
her bed, opens her cofer, where by mischance there was sum Mercury, and
swaloes down a bout half a dram, and then she gives her self many wounds
with a knife in the belly and the thighs. The same day about midnight, she
runs all naked unto a windoe and cast her self down into a Court paued with
very hard stone: and there remains with out any feeling, with out speech, and
with out Pulce, stiff with cold (for it was in the winter time) until that
the servants of the house, desirous to know what she did, came unto her bed,
where finding her not they cried out; In the end they found her in that
miserable estate, the carry her into her chamber and call for me* for that I
then dwelt near. I ran thither with her mistress, a virtuous gentlewoman,
who entreats me to do what possibly I could. Although I had little hope yet
more to make a trial then otherwise, I used all diligence and applied diverse
remedies, so as she came again to her self and by little and little I got
heat in her: I provided both outwardly and inwardly for the Sublymate, the
which had vlcered both her mouth and her throat* and to stay a flux which
this poisone had caused, finally at the end of 6. weeks she was wholly cured of
al her grief by the special favor of GOD, and was after wards more
helthfull then ever she had been before. FR. VALLERIOLA in the eight
observation of the first book.

A Roman woman grown melancolike for that she had been married against her
will to one whom she loved not, and smothering her fury with a sad silence,
M. ANTHONY BRASAVOLE a Ferrarois, an excellent Physician of our time, tried to
divert this humor by many remedies, which prevailed nothing. And therefore he
advised himself of a physical policy, whereof he gave notice unto the
husband, who yielded unto it, her parents and kinsfolks coming to visit her on
a festival day, BRVSAVOLE enters into the Chamber salutes her lovingly as if
she had been his wife and approaches to kiss her, she being young and strong
thrusts him back: he contynues it with vehemency, and she pulls of his
Cappe, and all that BRASAVOLE carried on his head, fitting for his age and the
fashion of that time and casts it to the ground. All the company breaks out
into a great Laughter at this spectacle. The young woman thinking that this
Physician (being an old man,) had been drunk, began also to laugh with open
throat. After which time her melancholy began to leave her. THOMAS ZVINGER in
the seventh volume of his theater. li. 2. A man of some worth about forty
years old, haunted with a spirit, felt it coming, the blood be ginning to
boil in his breast, his sight grew dim and presently a dizines took him,
then would he begine to cry out, and to beat and torment himself, so as they
had great trouble to hold him. Although they had let him blood on the right
arm, and drawn much blood from him, yet this frenzy decreased not. He
repeated many verses by heart, song, cried out amain, danced, and sought to
cast himself down head*long: so as they were constrained to tie him fast,
and to keep a good guard over him. Having given him fit and convenient physic
in the end he recovered his health. But after some weeks he fell into the
same disease, finally for that the thick fumes of blood did not ascend any
more in quantity to the head, the frenzy ceased: but he fell to spitt blood
with a vehement ^oughe, and then to spit out his lungs: so as his first disease
ended with a consumption, whereof he died. M. RREM^ERT DO^ONEVS in his
Physical observations. obser. 10.

I was called to visit a young man a Jew, called RAPHAEL, about the evening.
He was covered with swellings or kinds of Anthracs in diverse parts of his
body: among others he had a great one in his neck, the which grew presently
little again, and then RAPHAEL begane to laugh, and would open a vein to them
of the Company, with a keye which he held in his hand, but this folly turned
suddenly into fury: for he would have beaten us all, running up and down, and
tearing all that came in his hands, being so strong in this fit, as six able
and lusty men could hardly hold him: having applied some remedies, I retired my
self and came the next day to visit him, being the last of April. 1538. I
found him reasonable quiet: but after dinner he had so great a desire to
sleep, that such as did assist him could by no means keep him from it. First
the whot matter caused the frenzy, and then the cold had his turn. Being
freed from this sound sleep, he hegan by fits to beat his sides, and
continued four hours in an ecstasy, running like one that were possessed with
an evil spirit.

During this time he counterfetted the voices of birds and of foure-footed
beasts, he spoke betwixt his teeth and had extraordinary motions* so as it
rather seemed a miracle, then any thing proceeding of a natural cause. He was
thus tormented twice a day, and the entry of this motion came from the flanks,
his grief ^aking him at the failing of the body; which past, you would have
said, that the young man had suffered no pain. He would not use any more
Physic, his servants saying that he had been bewitched, and causing him to
use preservatives against witch craft, the which did him no good. Then they
changed their opinions, giving it out that he had the Devil in his body,
causing him to be exercised, but in vain: for it was a disease, which is
expelled by good remedies, or through continuance of time. As it happened, that
after eight months he recovered his health, and so has continued since.
BRASAVOLE in his coment upon the 65. Aphorism of the 5. book of HIPPOCRATES.

I did lately see a man who might serve for a pattern to any one that would
paint Melancholy it self. Having married about the beginning of July a lusty
young Woman, he abandoned himself with such vehemence to the act of Venerie,
as after some days he fell mad. I caused him to be chayned, using many
lotions for his head to refresh his brain and to provoke him to sleep, and
with the help of a good diet, I restored him but not in such sort, as I would
have trusted him much, for his heavy eyes presaged nothing but furye. IACCHIN
in his Coment upon the ninth Book of Rasis cap. 15.

There are three kinds of sharp rauings: the one is when as in the extremity
of a Fever the sick person does rave, and speak strange things. The other
called frenzy, is always accompanied with folly: for although the sick body,
has respites less troublesome at one time then at any other, yet he has
always his understanding carried away by fantasies. The third is more
dangerous, when as the folly has no respittes: but does all things furiously
and with violence. A young Gentlewoman being fallen into this third kind of
rauing, I was called about midnight to visit her, and found her in that same
fury, so as she leaped violently sometimes of one side, sometimes of another,
and all that she could lay hold of, she pulled in pieces, or tare it with
her teeth: were it the hair, the arms or hands of her self, or of any other,
or what-soeuer she laid hold on she carried away the piece, so as they were
feign to chain her, that she might do no more harm to her self, nor to any
other. After some hours, this tempest being somewhat appeased, she fell into
a sound sleep. In the end through diverse remedies, the which she did take
with great difficulty, she recovered her former health. But after the manner
of women (especially of Gentlewomen) not caring to follow those directions that
were prescribed her, for the preservation of her health, but living at
pleasure, a month after she fell into the same disease, and within 24. hours
after dyed, not-with-standing any means that could be used. BENIVENIVS chap.
99. of his book Entitled, The hidden causes of things.

A man being somewhat above thirty years old, in the day time was very well,
having his understanding good, and his Judgment perfect: but night being come,
if he went to bed and slept, presently he entered into a frenzy, sometimes
he cried out with all the force he could, he flourished with his arms and his
legs, sometimes he did rise, leap, and run up and down the house, if he
were not stayed. Being awake, and day come, he returned to his perfect sense,
managed his affairs discreetly: of a settled spirit, hating solitariness, and
loving to discourse with his friends and familiers. DODONEVS in his
observations.

DANIEL FREDERICK a maker of Kettles, dwelling at Fribourg in Brisgaw, of the
age of 27. years, was dangerously possessed, being carried over tops of houses,
where he did clime up and run without any apprehension of the hazard of his
life. They were forced to tie him with chains. After some months, GOD did
ease him mercifully, by the help of the great veins, which did appear in his
thighs, the which being wonderfully swelled, and in the end opened, he was
eased. And since every year unto the 50. of his age, which was in the year
1581. using a fit incision in the said veins, he has peuented a relapse,
without the which remedy he could not have con^inued in health. SCHEN^IVS in
the 240. observation of the first book of his learned and diligent Annotations.

To the former Histories, we will join some, touching the Licanthropes and
madmen, the which we will consider of two sorts. For there be Licanthropes in
whom the melancholic humor does so rule, as they imagine themselves to be
transformed into Wolves. This disease as AETIVS does witness lib. 6. Chap. 11.
and PAVLVS lib. 3. Chap. 16 with other late writers, is a kind of melancholic,
but very black and vehement: for such as are touched therewith, go out of
their houses in February, counterfeit Wolves in a manner in all things, and all
night do nothing but run into Church-yardes, and about graves, so as you
shall presently discover in them a wonderful alteration of the brain,
especially in the imagination and thought, which is miserably corrupted, in
such sort, as the memory has some force: as I have observed in one of these
melancholic Licanthropes, whom we call Wolves: for he that knew me well,
being one day troubled with his disease, and meeting me, I r^tired my self a
part, fearing that he should hurt me. Having eyed me a little, he passed on,
being followed by a troop of people. He carried then upon his shoulders the
whole thigh and the leg of a dead man. Being carefully looked unto, he was
cured of this disease. Meeting me another time, he asked me if I had not
been afeard, when as he incountred me in such a place, which makes me to
think that his memory was not hurt nor impaired, in the vehemency of his
disease, although his imagination were much. DONAT de HAVTEMER, Chap. 9. of his
Treatise of the cure of Diseases.

WILLIAM of BRABANT writes in his History, that a man of a settled judgment,
was sometimes so tormented with an evil spirit, that at a certain season of
the year, he imagined himself to be a ravening Wolf, running up and down
the Woods, Caves and Deserts, especially after young Children. More-ouer he
says, that this man was often found running in the Deserts, like a man out of
his wits, and that in the end by the grace of GOD, he came to himself
again, and was cured.

There was also as JOB FINCEL reports, in his 2. Book of Miracles, a
Countri-man near unto Pauia, in the year 1541. who thought himself to be a
Wolf, setting upon diverse men in the fields, and slew some. In the end being
with great difficulty taken, he did constantlye affirm that he was a Wolf,
and that there was no other difference, but that Wolves were commonly hayrie
without, and he was betwixt the skin and the flesh. Some (too barbarous and
cruel Wolves in effect) desiring to try the truth thereof, gave him many
wounds upon the arms and legs: but knowing their own error, and the
innocence of the poor melancholy man, they committed him to the Surgions to
cure, in whose hands he dyed within few days after. Such as are afflicted
with that disease, are pale, their eyes are hollow, and they see ill, their
tongue is dry, they are much altered, and are without much spittle in the
mouth. PLINY and others write, that the brain of a Bear prouokes brutish
imaginations. And he says, that in our time some made a Spanish Gentleman eat
thereof, whose fantasy was so troubled, as he imagined that he was
transformed it to a Bear, flying into the Mountains and deserts. I. WIER,
lib. 4. Chap. 13. Of Devilish devises.

As for those Licanthropes, which have the imagination so impaired and hurt,
that besides by some particular power of Satan, they seem Wolves and not Men,
to them that see them run, doing great spoil. BODIN disputes very amply in
his Demonomania. lib. 2. Chap. 3. where he maintains, that the Devil may
change the figure of one body into another, considering the great power which
GOD has given him in this elementarie world. He maintains that there be
Licanthropes transformed really from Men into Wolves, alleging diverse examples
and Histories to that purpose. In the end, after many arguments, he maintains
the one and the other sort of Licanthropia. And as for this represented in the
end of this Chapter, the conclusion of his discourse was, that men are
sometimes changed into Beasts, the human reason remaining: whether it be
done by the power of GOD immediately, or that this power is given to Satan, the
executioner of his will, or rather of his fearful judgments* And if we
confess (says he) the truth of the holy writ in DANIEL, touching the
transformation of NABVCHODONOSER, and of the History of LOTS wife, changed
into an immouable Pillar, it is certain, that the change of a Man into an Ox,
or into a Stone is possible, and by consequence possible into all other
creatures. But for that BODIN cites PEVCER touching the transformation of the
Pilappiens, and does not relate plainly that which he does observe worthy of
consideration upon that subject, I will transcribe it as it is contained in his
learned work, entitled. A Commentary of the principal sorts of diuinations.
lib. 4. Cap. 9. according to the French edition. In the rank and number of
Ecstatiques, are put those which they call Licaons and Licanthropes, which
imagine themselves to be changed into Wolves, and in their form run up and
down the fields, falling upon troops of great and small Cattle, tear in
pieces what they encounter, and go roaring up and down Church-yardes and
Sepulchers. In the forth book of HERODOTVS, there is a passage touching the
Neuriens, a people of Scythia, who transformed themselves into Wolves, the
which he says, he could not believe, not with-standing any report that was
made unto him. For my part, I have held it fabulous and rediculous, that which
has been often reported of this transformation of men into Wolves. But I have
learned by certain and tried signs, and by witnesses worthy of credit, that
they be not things altogether invented, and incredible, which are spoken of
such transformations, which happen every year twelve days after Christmas in
Liuonia and the Countries thereabout: as they have learned by their confessions
which have been imprisoned and tormented for such crimes. Behold how they
report it to be done. Presently after that Christmas day is past, a lame Boy
goes through the Country, and calls the Devils slaves together, being in
great numbers, and inioynes them to follow him. If they stay any thing, then
presently comes a great man, holding a whippe made of little chains of Iron,
wherewith he makes them to advance, and sometimes he handles these wretches
so roughly, as the marks of his whippe stick long by them, and puts them that
have been beaten to great pain. Being upon the way, behold they are all (as
it seems to them) changed and transformed into Wolves. They are thousands of
them together, having for their conductor and guide this Whippe-carrier, after
whom they march, imagining that they are become Wolves. Being in the open
champian Countries, they fall upon such troops of Cattle as they find,
tear them in pieces, and carrye away what they can, committing many other
spoils: but they are not suffered to touch nor to hurt any reasonable
creature. When they approach near unto any River, their guide, (say they)
deuides the water with his whippe, so as they seem to open, and to leave a
dry path betwixt both to pass through. At the end of twelve days, all the
troop is dispersed, and every one returns unto his house, having laid away
his Wolves form, and taken that of Man again. This transformation (say they)
is done after this manner. Those which are transformed fall suddenly to the
ground, like unto them that have the Falling Sickness, and remain like dead
men, void of all feeling. They stir not from thence, neither go into any
other place, neither are they transformed into Wolves, but are like unto dead
carcasses: for although you shake them and roll them up and down, yet they
make no show of life. From thence is sprung an opinion, that the souls taken
out the bodies, enter into these fantosmes or visions, running with the shapes
of Wolves: then when the work enterprized by the Devil is finished, they
return into their bodies which then recover life. The Licanthropes themselves
confirm this opinion, confessing that the bodies do not leave their human
form, neither yet receive that of a Wolf: but only that the souls are
thrust out of their prisons, and fly into Wolves bodies, by whom they are
carried for a time. Others have maintained, that lying in Yrons in a Dungeon,
they have taken the form of a Wolf, and have gone to find out their
companions many days journey off. Being examined how they could get out off
a strong and close prison? Why they have returned, and how they could pass
over Rivers that were large and deep? They answered, that no Yrons, walls,
nor doors, could hinder their getting out: that they returned by constraint,
and that they did fly over Rivers, and run by land.

Hitherto I have set down the words of Doctor PEVCER, the which show, that
this transformation of Licanthropes, nor that of Sorcerers mentioned by BODIN,
have no affinity with the transmutation of the King of Babylon, nor with that
of LOTS wife: and that in this Licanthropia, there are manifest illusions of
Satan, the which ought not to be confounded with apparent testimonies of GODS
visitation upon some persons: as the Divines which have expounded these
Histories, do show more at large. Moreover, JOHN WIER is of a contrary
opinion unto BODIN touching the Licanthropes whereof we speak, and disputes
at large thereof, in the sixth Book of Devilish Devises, Chapter thirteenth and
foureteenth: where he manifestly denies BODINS real transformation, and does
maintain that it is only in the fantasy troubled by the indisposition of the
person, and by the ill^sion of Satan. But we will leave their controversy to
such as will look into it, and will propound some examples touching madmen.
There are two kinds. Some grow so by the poison of the melancholic humor,
as well throughout all the body, as principally in the brain, the which
being not redrest in time, simple melancholy becomes frenzy, that fu^y, and
in the end rage, which is fearful and not to be cured, whereof M. PHTER
SALIVS and MARCELLVS DONATVS learned Physicians do entreat, and propound some
histories. Let us speak after them, and serve them as an Interpreter to our
Frenchmen. It is a question if the venomous humor called Rage, the which
breeds in so many sorts of creatures, which impart it unto man, as we know,
may begin by man himself, and have inward beginnings, without any
accidental contagion without. Reason makes us to yield to this opinion, seeing
that by the consent of all men, mortal poisons may be engendered within man:
that rage should not be excluded out of this rank, man differing from a
Serpent, which spitts poison, no more then from other beasts, which are
subject unto madness. But for that the Ancients for the most part have held,
that no man could grow mad, if he had not been touched without by some
other person or Beast that was mad it seems we should not lightly stray
from their opinions, notwithstanding seeing that experience may resolve this
difficulty, I will relate what mine eyes have seen. A woman six and thirty
years old, troubled with a continual fever, called me to help her. I found
her seized of a pestilent ague, I gave her Physic, so as eleauen days after
she was cured. Eleauen days after that she was troubled with a greeuious
flixe and an ague. I was called, and began to encounter this disease, the which
I surmounted within seven days after. There remained yet some relikes of a
fever, the which seeking to take away, this woman fell so to abhor all
Liquors, as not only she lothed all Physical potions and all drinks for
her refection, but she could not endure that any one should drink in her
presence. I knew by this accident alone that she was touched with rage, the
which did so increase as she could not endure they should bring any light into
her Chamber: in regard of her feeding, detesting all drinks and all liquid
Physic. And for that her fever and the tediousness of her disease, would not
suffer her to maintain her self well with solid meats she became exceeding
feeble; but she languished seven days after that she had begun to reject
all drink and Liquide notrishment. I found in her no other cause of defect,
but only this disdain of drinking and taking that which was Liquid. Neither
did she complain of any thing, but when they presented it unto her; then
should you see her move her self, after a strange manner. Except this, it was
a very quiet infirmity: and asking her if she had ever been touched with the
teeth of any mad Dog, her answer was, that no Dog had ever touched her,
having had none in her house, nor been in company where any was. Having
enquired of her Mother, if never Dog had touched her Daughter at any time in
all her life: she assured me no. This made me to doubt, whether one by
internal principles, and of their own corruption) might not become mad. For
having in this infirmity no conjecture of Contagion without, and this fear of
drink and liquide things, being not conjoined with the accidents which are
accustomed to accompany them that are bitten with mad Beasts: I did
conjecture that this disease grew from some internal cause, which was not so
violent, coming not by the outward parts, through the biting of some enraged
Beast: if we will not say that the force thereof was quenched by the
counterpoysons that were given her in the cure of her pestilent fever: and by
reason of her apparent and great euacuation of badde humors in the Dissenterie
or flux. Besides this experience, I was confirmed by the authority of CAELIVS
AVRELIANVS, writing that sometimes one grows mad with out any apparent
cause: and by the History which SORANVS reports, saying that he had seen an
Infant which did abhor the Nurces breasts, without any precedent Contagion.
PETRVS SALIVS in his Book of particular diseases.

It happened in the year 1573. In September, that GABRIEL NOVARE, a man of
fifty years of age and a widower, living in the Duke of Mantouas Country,
being at dinner, he felt something, he knew not what to grate his
winde-pipe. He began to take the glass to ^ase him of this pain, but he
could by no means possible swallowe that which troubled him within. Being
angry with himself, he runs to a paile of Water to drink with his hand;
but approaching to it with his mouth he fell back-ward: he rises speedely,
goes his way, and does not suppe that night. The next day, both at dinner and
at supper, he feels the like accident. The third day he came to me on
horse back; and by the way as he rode he did eat some store of grapes at
his pleasure. Having understood all from him, to know his grief exactly, I
offer to his mouth at two or three several times, a glass full of Water. I
call my friends to see and behold this spectacle; at every time his heart
pantes and swells, he trembles, he faintes, and seems like one that were
strangled. When I draw back the glass, he recouers his spirrites,
understands and discourses: shows himself vigorous: has no fever: is
without pain, all his functions are whole and perfect: only he cannot
drink. I prescribed him counterpoysons; but within three days he dies, I
search, I sound, I consider all, yet find no apparent cause of this Accident.
MARCELLVS DONATVS lib. 6. Chap. 1. of the admirable Histories in Physic.

In the year 1574. in the month of May, the Wife of BLAIS^ de VOLD, named
MAGDELEINE, felt one day a pain in her neck, and then in her right arm. The
next day she kept her bed, for that her arm besides the pain did begin to
shake. This pain ceased the third day, but she fell to have a shaking over
all the parts of her body, then she had a desire to vomit without any effect,
she sweat and seemed as if she had been smothered. When they presented unto
her any Wine, Water or any Coullis, then she had Convulsions and fayntings:
she would eat eggs and bread well. Her alteration was great; her principal
faculties were whole and very perfect, and so were her exterior senses: her
spirit was calm, and her speech mild. You would have said she had had no
fever at all. The Surgion of the place made many diuulsions, yet she dyed the
fifth day. The same Author.

In February 1575. DOMINIQVE PANCAVLD, a young maiden of 16. years of age,
having seen some with their swords drawn ready to fight, was terrified, so as
in the night she fell into a vyolent fever: presently she had blisters about
her lips. Twelve hours after her fi^, she grew amazed, and twelve hours
after that it seemed unto her that her fever was gone. She did rise, being
lame of her left arm: when any one did touch her, she felt a pain in her
side, as if one had stabd her to the heart with a Poynard, so as she would
faint away. There was nothing omitted to ease her. The fourth day, a shaking
does force her to go to bed: her pain increases, she has a desire to cast,
she turns on every side without stay, she fomes at the mouth, she can
endure no light, she weeps, cries out, is amazed, and drives away all them of
the house. They offer her drink, she pulls her head back, she abhorres drink,
falls into soundings, and yet sometimes she talks sensibly, then afterward
she begins to make a noise with her teeth, fails of her speech, and gives up
the ghost the 5. day. The same Author.

In the year 1576. in June, DOMINIKE BERET, a Countryman, married, and a
lusty able man 37 years old, felt for eight days together a pain in his
arm, not knowing how this grief came, yet he did not forbeate to work,
having no fever. A day after (being the ninth) being desirous to have a mess
of Pottage to his supper, a shaking seized on him, so as he went to bed
without any supper, about midnight a fear seized on him, so as he could not
contain himself, but amazed and starting up, he cried out, and began to
entreat them that were about him to hold him, and he for his part thought
himself glued unto them. Early in the morning they go for Council to a
Physician that was neereby; who prescribed him to take a decoction of wild
Chichoree the which he vomited up soon after that he had taken it, with some
cloddes of blood as they said: coming to see him after dinner, I drew them of
the house apart, the Curate of the place, and others that were there assembled.
I said unto them, you shall presently see strange things; which is, that this
patient will not drink although you press him, and if he tries to do it, he
shall fall into a swone, and die presently. They brought him a glass and
offered him drink; the which he refused with horror, and offering to force him,
his heart fainted: whereat all were wonderfully amazed, and much more, when as
they did see him four hours after giving up the Ghost, after that he had
been disquieted with an unequal and inconstant trembling, having cried
without ceasing, been much distempered, and sweat all over great drops but
on the extremities which were cold, moreover in a strange rauing, accompanied
with diuilish apparitions, as he said. The same Author.

The eight of April 1579. JAMES PIVE Laborer, a young man married, sound and
strong, coming out of the field to his house, without any apparent cause
going before, began to sweat at night, and felt his heart, as it were pincht
and full of pain. In the night he did shake and tremble by fi^ts, casting
himself out of his bed, crying out continually and sweating. The Surgion of
the place gave him early in the morning a counterpoyson. Being called at
night to see him, I knew that it was a sharp disease, and again I did
advertise them which did assist him, that he would abhor^e all kind of
drink, and that undoubtedly he would soon die. The which was soon verified,
for having drink offered him, he began to torment himself and to faint
away: the drink being carried away, he presently came again to himself. He
couldnot endure any one to touch him, and if any one approached near him, he
would cry out. They durst not (how softly soever) wipe his face that sweat.
Night being come he would make his will, but the sweates and Convulsions which
increased, hindered him. Some hours after he died in good sense. The same
Author.

There is an other kind of rage proceeding of an external cause, that is to
say, of the biting of mad Beasts, whereof we must speak some thing, and
produce Histories according to our intention: to descouer our miseries more and
more, and to induce us to fly devoutly to the merciful protection of
almighty GOD. Behold what learned FERNELIVS says, namely in respect of
madde-dogges which bite men; a maddedogge in biting does cast forth some
spittle or venomous humor, the which peercing by the part that is touched, does
suddenly corrupt the spirits, the blood and the humors, then does it slide by
little and little into the principal parts, but so slowely as the disease is
not descouered till three weeks after, sometimes after a year, and that but
doubtfully. During this respite of time, the patient feels no fever, nor any
pain, he fears not death at all, the which he carries in his bowels. But
when the vennom by succession of time is come unto the heart, all the other
Noble parts are as is were tickled; the sick man grows way-ward, he can
neither stand nor sit; he behaues himself like a madde-man* scratcheth his
face, and bytes every man, the foame comes out at his mouth, he looks wildly,
is tormented with a great fever, he is extremely altered and dry, yet he
does so abhor Water and all other Liquor, as he had rather die then drink
or be plonged in any River. These miseries in the end oppress him, and
dep^iue him of life. Book the 2 of the hidden causes of things.

This vennom is extremely hot in the forth degree, as experience does
witness: for having one day caused the body of a certain man to be opened,
being dead of such an accident, they found three remarkeble things. First
there was no moisture at all in the mouth of the stomach to refresh the heart
with all, but it had been all consumed by this burning poison. Secondly the
ventricles of the heart were dry and without blood. Thirdly they did observe,
that a piece of the mouth of the stomach was almost burnt and reduced to
poulder. IEROSME CAPIVACCIVS lib. 7. of his practice Chap. 12.

I have seen a young Child, which never felt the hurt, nor complained till
eight months after the biting, but as soon as it descouered it self the
Child died. FRACASTOR. lib. 2. of contagious diseases Chap. 10. Sometimes the
biting is so sharp and violent, together with the apprehension of the parties
offended, as death follows soon after, as I have seen in many, namely in a
Mint-man, called MARTIN BVTIN, and a scholemaster named ROBERT. On a winter day
about ten years since, going early in the morning from their houses, the one
to work at the Minte, the other to teach certain scholars, they were one
after an other bitten by a mad Dog, and had much ado to free themselves
from him. The same day they went to their bedds, and died within a while after
in good sense, having had many trouble-some and pitiful fitts. The one was my
Neighbor, and I did often visit him: he took delight to hear talk of his
Salvation, and died most Christian-like, and so did the other. But my Neighbor
at my coming in unto him cried out that I should not come near him, if I
would not have him bite me. Once not thinking of it, for the compassion I had
of his torment, (for sometimes he did houle like unto a Dog,) approaching
nearer unto him then I was accustomed, he suddenly reached out to get hold of
mine arm with his teeth: whereof he failed, for that his motion was not so
quick as mine. Hepresently acknowledged his error, and asked me forgiveness,
imputing it to the vehemency of his pain. As often as I think of that which
I did see in the sickness of these two good men, so often does my Soul
tremble, crying out. Lord thou have been our refuge from one generation to
another. etc.

And that which follows in the 91. Psalm, not meaning notwithstanding to
condemn those, whom the wisdom of GOD (who is just and merciful) will
visit thus in this world, for with what rods soever he means to chastise
those that belong unto his Son, his eternal grace fayles them not, but they
enter by all gates, (how hideous soever they seem to human sense) into the
Palace of happy life and assured glory. Extracted out of my Memorials. I was
called early in a morning in the year 1543. to go see a Gentleman called
ALEXANDER BRASQVE, with some other Physicians. He would by no means drink:
and as we did enquire of the cause of his sickness, those which did tend him
did confess, that he had kissed a certain Dog of his, which he loved very
well, before he sent him to be drowned, for that he was mad. He dyed the
next day, as I had foretold. CARDAN in the first Treatise, lib. 2. contradict.
9.

A Peasant become mad, and hearing that he had not long to live in the
world, made great instance to them that kept him, and held him straightly bound
(for he had some quiet seasons, during the which he spoke sencibly) that he
might be suffered once to kiss his children for his last farewell. This
being granted him, he kissed his children, and so dyed: but the seventh day
following, his children became mad, and after sundry torments, they dyed as
their Father had done. Master PAVMIER in his Treatise of contagious diseases,
page 266. I have seen yet more Horses, Oxen, Sheep, and other Cattle, have
become mad and dyed so, having eaten a little Straw, whereon mad Swine had
line. In the same Treatise, 267.

ADAM SCHVEIDTLIN a Surgion, did assure me for certain, that about thirty
year since, at Hassuelsel in Bauaria, a Knight going to Horseback was bitten
by the foot by a mad Dog, whereof he made no accoumpt, but a year and a
half after he began to grow mad: so as he bitte the flesh of his own
arms, and was not apparently sick but two days. ^OHN BAVHIN Doctor of
Physic at Basil, in his learned History of mad Wolves running about
Montbeliard, in the year 1590.

In the year 1535. a certain Host in the Duchy of Wirtemberg, served his
guests at the Table with Swines flesh, the which a mad Dog had bitten* after
they had eaten of this flesh, they all fell mad. History of Germany. Certain
Hunts-men having slain a Wolf, made sundry dishes of meat of the flesh, but
all that did eat of it became mad, and dyed miserably. FERNEL lib. 2. Of the
hidden causes of things. Chap. 14. I have observed that the biting of mad
Wolves causes Beasts to die presently, that are touched with their teeth,
Master PAVMIER in his Treatise of Contagious Diseases. Many have noted that
Wolves although they be not mad, yet (by reason of their fury and ordynarie
vyolence, which appears by their sparkling eyes, and their insatiable
devouring) they make the flesh of Beasts, which they bite or kill, to be very
dangerous, if it be kept any time* A famous Prince did swear unto me, that
one of his Pages having found at a certain Gentleman's house, a Rapier hidden
under a bed, wherewith some years before they had slain a mad Dog, he
entreated him to give it him: which done, going about to make it clean, and to
scowre it, being rustie in diverse places, by mischance he hurt himself a
little in one of his fingers, where-of he fell mad, and dyed before they
could foresee and prevent the danger. ESAYE MEICHNER Physician, in his
Observations. There was seen in Portugal a Man bitten with a mad Dog, the
which lay hidden three years, at the end whereof it appeared, and he dyed
thereof. AMATVS A Portugal Physician in his seventh Centurie, Cure. 41. BALDVS
a famous Lawyer playing with a little Dog of his that was mad, not knowing
it, was slightly bitten on the lip, the which he regarded not. But after
four months, he dyed furious and mad, and there was no means to help
him, for that he dyed, not seeking to prevent it in time. Master AMBROSE PARE
lib. 20. Chap. 21.

In the same place he propounds diverse remedies against the biting of a mad
Dog, the which he thinks available, if any one of them be used presently:
and he says, that he has cured many that have been so bitten. Among
others, he specifieth this example following. One of the Daughters of Mistress
GRONBORNE at Paris, was bitten with a mad Dog, in the midst of her right
leg, where the Dog set his teeth very deep into the flesh, the which was
cured. Among all remedies, Treacle (says he) is singular, causing it to be
dissolved in Aqua-vite, or in Wine, and then rubbing the place therewith hard,
until it bleed: then you must leave within it Linte dipte in the said mixture,
and upon the wound apply Garlike or Onions, stamped or beaten with ordinary
Honey and Turpentine. This remedy is excellent above all those that I have
seen by experience: and I used it in the cur^ of the above named Maid.

ANDREW BACCIVS, in his Preface to the Book of Poisons and Counter-poysons,
describes the Epitaphe of a Roman which dyed mad, for that she was not
presently and speedily helped, being bitten in the finger by a Catte, which
she pulled by the tail. FRANCIS VALLERIOLA in his Commentary upon the Book of
HYPPOCRATES of the substance of the Art of Physic, Chapter 20. makes mention
of a Moyle of his that was mad. And MATHIOLVS upon the 36. Chapter of the
sixth Book of Discordes, says; That he had seen a mad Horse, the which
having broken all that held him, he did run violently a certain way, where
finding an old woman, he took her up with his teeth by her head-geare, and
carried her above ten paces, hanging in the air, without making of any
wound. In the same Chapter he recites the History of BALDVS the Lawyer above
mentioned. A Portugal Merchant and four of his household, were hurt in one day
with the Teeth and claws of a Catte that was mad, Whereof there followed
terrible and pitiful accidents, and in the end death. AMATVS a Portugal,
Centur. 7. ^ur. 65.

These years past, an Italian Gardener, was at unawares set upon by an old
Cock of his, having a sharp Bill, and his Feathers reddish, the which did
strike him so hard upon the left hand, as there came forth certain drops of
blood. The same day I was called to see him, and coming to him, I found him
writhing of his mouth, there was not any help by Scarrifications, Incisions,
Corseys, or Applications, within or without, that could serve: All the
neighbors about him were amazed to see this poor man in his bed, having his
face read, and his eyes sparkling and inflamed like unto a Cock, that is
hot in fight, so as the third day of his hurt, the patient dyed. This made
me to think that the Basiliscke, so famous among the Ancient, is our Cock,
the which gave me occasion, and many others, to make diverse Epigrammes, the
sense whereof is comprehended in these two verses.

Another Basiliske is not this angry Cock,
That biting killed his Master with that stroke?
ANDREW BACIVS in the Preface of the Book of Poisons and Counter-poisons.

A young man an Italian, happened to be bitten with a mad Dog, whereof he
made no account: but after four months, he began to grow amazed, and to be
wonderfully afraid of all meat and drink, though otherwise he had his
wits perfect: so as after some days he dyed of hunger and thirst. VIDIVS in
the 2. part of his Physic, Sect. 2. Chap. 6. There are many witnesses worthy
of credit, which do test fie, that they have seen in the Urine of men, that
have been bitten with mad Dogs, representations of Dogs, and as it were
gobbets of Dogges-flesh. THOMAS (...) VIEGA, in his Commentary upon the 84.
Chap. of the Art of Physic* MATHIOLVS, upon the sixth book of DIOSCORIDES,
Chap. 36. writes these words. AVICENNE says, that it happens sometimes, that
those which are bitten by mad Dogs, void with their Urine gobbits of flesh,
not without great pain, the which are like unto little Dogs: the which I
have also heard of some of late, yea of them that said they pist of these
little Dogs: the which is not likely, etc. yet he that will understand the
reasons, and the witnesses that do affirm it, let him read GENTILIS coment.
upon AVICENNE, and PETER d' APONE in the 179. Difference. There shall he
understand how that sometimes such things do happen against the course of
nature. The same Author says; that he had seen a neighbor of his a
Cloth-worker, who having bin preserved from the biting of a mad Dog: for that
he had beaten his woll with rods of a Tree called a Ceruice tree, he grew
mad, and died. This Tree has some sympathi^ in his wood with madness, by
the report of many Physicians. There remains yet many Histories of men
afflicted with this strange scourge, and of the wonderful accidents of their
infirmities, the which we will reserve for another volume: this pitiful
Chapter of the miseries of man, being but too long, and by consequence
troublesome to the reader.

Excellency of Memory.
Master THEODORE ZVINGER in the ^. book of the ^. volume of his great Theater
of man's life-hath gathered together the names of many, both of ancient times,
and of ours, which have had excellent memories. Among others we must not
forget a young Scholar, borne in the Isle of Corsica, who repeated readily
thirty six thousand words of diverse sorts, of diverse languages, and of diverse
affairs, strangely intermixed and confounded, presently, or a while after he
had heard them pronounced, and did say them as easily backward, or by the
midst, as by the beginning, without stopping or studdying, with a cheerful
countenance, and as little moved as if he had read in a Book. He said that
he had learned it of a Frenchman his Schoole-maister, and in few days he
made FRANCIS de MOVLIN a Venetian Gentleman, to learn his skill, who before
had the weakest memory that might be found.

The Author of the life of CHRISTOPHER LONGVEIL, an eloquent man in our time,
reports that he had so firm and ample a memory, that no time could deface that
which he had read or heard. When he was demanded by many, of diverse things,
whereof he had not read any thing many years before, yet he answered directly
to every thing, as if at that instant he had read the words and sentences in a
Book. If at any time they spoke unto him of the same thing: but handled by
diverse Authors, he spoke plainly, but in such sort as he did propound
distinctly, and word by word, all that the Greek and Latin Authors,
Philosophers, Orators, Poets, and Historians do say, without equiuocating,
coating the Books, passages, Chapters and Sections of every one, to the great
amazement of all them that heard him.

SABELLICVS lib. 10. of his Examples. Chap. 9. makes mention of one ANTHONY of
Rauenna, who approached near unto the above named Corscican. CVSPINIAN says,
that the Emperor MAXIMILIAN the first, had ^o excellent a memory, as if a man
had once talked unto him, seeing him again after many years, he would know
him, and remember what he had said unto him. IHON FRANCISCO reports of his
Uncle IHON PICVS Prince of Mirandola, that if he heard a great number of Verses
pronounced, without any more repetition, he would say them forward and
backward, as they pleased. There are at this day many learned men, Divines,
Physicians, Lawyers, Philosophers, Mathematicians, Professors in Eloquence, and
in the Liberal and Human Sciences, whom I could name in great numbers, which
are not wanting or ignorant of any thing that is in light, who discourse so
readily of ancient Authors, as you would say they have an infinite number of
books, lying open before them, to whom we cannot say nor cite any thing that
is new or strange unto them. I know one whom I do not name, for great
considerations: who besides the admirable knowledge he has of diverse
Languages and sciences, remembers the meanest things that he has seen in
diverse Countries, even the names of Men, Cities, Towns, Villages and Hamlets,
marking the circumstances of infinite things: so as if any one did put him into
discourse of any Town, where he had not been these five and twenty or
thirty years, he will speak of all the particularities thereof more
exactlie, then he that had continued there for the space of fifty years
together, and never come forth. I will not speak of many great and excellent
memories in France, Italy and else where, contenting my self with this for
the present, whereof some other time will show other admirable observations.

Memory lost and recovered again.
A Siennois named ANTHONY, being recovered of a great sickness, found his
memory to fail him in such sort, as he could not remember any thing. Being at
Florence he thought himself to be at Sienna, neither could he discern his
friends from his enemies. Being abandoned of the Physicians as a madde-man
after three weeks he had a great fl^x, whereby he purged himself of strange
humors, the infectious vapors whereof had touched the faculties of the spirit.
By means of which euacuation, he recovered his understanding and memory, so
as he remembered not what had chanced unto him, nor what he had done during
those three weeks. A. BENIVENIVS Chapter 47.

I have seen a Friar, who cured of a violent ague which had tormented him,
lost his memory; so as he who before was a great Divine, did not now know A
nor B. Having continued four months in this estate, he went to the Childrens
Schole, learning to know his letters. This began to apply diverse remedies
unto him, by the help whereof, he suddenly recovered his memory, so as he
showed himself as learned as before his sickness. CHRISTOPHER de VEGA Book
3. of the art of Physic. Chap. 10.

FRANCISQVO BARBARO, a learned Venetian, did in his old age forget the Greek
tongue, in the which he was very learned: yet notwithstanding his Judgment
was good, and his spirit perfect to write or dictate. BASSIAN LANDVS lib. 1. of
the History of man.

The same man being to make an oration before the Duke of Milan, was at a
nonplus, having for-gotten what he intended to say. RAPHAEL VOLATERRANVS Book.
21. of his Anthropologia.

GEORGE TRAPEZONCE a very learned Greek, being grown old, he forgot all
that he had known before. The same Author.

Monsieur RONDELET a learned Physician in our time, did report that a young man
studying at Montpellier, going throught the streets in the night, met with
disordred fellows which lived by spoil, who thrust with a rapier at his
body, and hurt him very sore in the eye. By the care of the Physicians and
Surgions he was cured but he fell into so great a forgetfullnesse of arts and
sciences, and especially of the faculty of Physic, in the which he was well
advanced, as he remembered not any thing whatsoever, so as they were feign to
use him like a Child of seven years old, setting him again to his A B C.
THOMAS IOVRDAN Chap. 2. of the 2. treatise of Signs of the plague.

I have known an ancient man in France, which spoke good French and Latin,
played excellently well of the Lute, and that was very active at all exercises
of the body, and handled his weapon well, through a sickness he was so
deprived of all these things, as he did not remember the names of them,
neither yet had any ability in him, no more then a young Child, and so were
they feign to use him, and to set him to Schole again, as one that knew
nothing. T. DAMIAN Chap. 13. of his Theorie of Physic.

GONSALVE GILLES of Bourgos, a learned Divine a Spaniard, had in his time one
of the happiest memories in the world, the which notwithstanding he lost
wholly by a greeuious sickness, into the which he fell at his return from
Paris into Spain. ALVAR. GOMECIO Book 4. of the History of Cardinal
XIMINES. A certain man being sore hurt in the head, and with some difficulty
cured at the end of three months, lost the remembrance of all that had
happened unto him. FERNELIVS Book 2. of his Panthologia Chap. 5.

Father fertile in his offspring.
IN the memory of our Fathers there was seen a village in Spain of about a
hundred houses, whereof all the Inhabitants were issued from one certain old
man, which then did live, when as that village was so peopled: so as the name
of consanguinitie (ascending and descending, as well in the direct as the
collateral line) failed to show and distinguish how the little Children
should call him. L. VIVES in his comentarie upon the 8. Chap. of the 15. Book
of the City of GOD.

Mothers fertile in Lignage issued from them.
IN Saint Innocents Churchyard in the City of Paris, is to be seen the
Epitaph of YOLAND BALLY, widdowe to M. DENIS CAPEL, a Proctor at the Chastelet,
which does show that she had lived four score and eight years, and might
have seen, 288. of her Children and Childrens Children, she dyed the 17. of
April 1514. Imagine how much she had been troubled, to call them by a proper
denomynation that were distant from her in the fourth, and fifth degree. E.
PASQVIER Book 6. of his Recerches of France Chap. 46.

In our time there was a Lady of the noble family of the DALBOVRGS, who saw of
her race even to the 6. degree. The Germains have made a Latin Distichon of it,
thus.

1. Matter ait.
2. Natae Dic.
3. Nata filia.
4. Natam Vt moneat.
5. Natae plangere.
6. ^iliolam.
That is to say. The Mother said to her Daughter, Daughter bid thy Daughter,
tell her Daughter, that her Daughters Daughter cries.

This is recited and written by Master THEODORE ZVINGGER a Physician at Basil,
in the 3. volume of his Theater of Man's life. lib. 11.

Vigorous Mothers.
A Woman having had a continual vomiting of blood for the space of seven
whole months, conceived not-withstanding, and was delivered of a goodly Boy
and a lusty. A certain other woman being with Child, had her Terms orderly
and in greater abundance then before her conception: they continued until her
lying in, and yet they were no hinderance to her happy delivery. More-ouer, I
have seen one near unto GREVENBROVCH, who being near to her delivery, had
her Terms extraordinarilye, voyding congealed blood, in great cloddes; yet
she escaped well with her fruit. R. SOLENANDER lib. 5. of his Counsels.
Chap. 15. art. 36. 38. 39.

Mother and Children preserved from death.
IN the year 1564. about ten or twelve days after Easter, diverse persons of
the Town of Ast did cross the River which passes along the Town in a boat,
the Water being very deep and broad: the boat being in the midst of the
River, it began to lean on the one side and sunk: so as both ferie-men and
passengers were all drowned. There was among them a poor woman, who had put
her self into the boat to go to gather wood, and so to relieve both her
self, and her two little Children, the one she held with her left hand to the
breast, and the other with the right hand being three years old. She was
carried safe upon the Water with her two Children to the bank. Without any
help of her arms being otherwise occupied, and all the rest in the boat
perished but only these three. She having more care of her little-ones, then
of her self, was thus miraculouslie preserved with them. SIMON MAYOLVS an
Italian Bishop in the 13. Devise of his Canicular days.

Contempt of Pain.
Approaching near unto Buda, the BASSA sent to meet us by some of his
hous-hold, with many Heralds and Officers: but among the rest a goodly troop
of young men on horseback, remarkable by reason of the Novelty of their
equipage. They had their heads bare and shaven, upon the which they had made a
long incision that was bloody, and in the wound they had stuck diverse feathers,
so as the blood ran forth, but insteede of any show of smarting, they
marched with a cheerful countenance, and their heads a loft. Before me went
certain footmen, whereof one had his arms and his sides bare, either of
which arms under the elboe was peerced through with a knife which stuck
there: And other was naked from the head unto the navel, having the skin of
his back cut in two places right down, through which they had put a battle
axe, the which he carried as we do a sword in a scarf. I did see an other
which had a horse-showe fastened to the crown of his head with many nails,
the which had continued so long as the nails had taken such hold in the flesh,
as they moved not. We entered into Buda with this pomp, and were conducted to
the BASSAS lodging with whom I treated of my affairs. All these young men
being little careful of their hurts, remained in the Base Court of the
lodging; and I was actentiue to behold them, the BASSA asked me what I thought
of it? All well, said I, but that I think these men have less care of their
skins then I would have of my gown for I would labor to keep it whole. The
BASSA laughed, and so dismissed us. GISLENIVS BVS^EQVIVS in the discourse of his
Embassage into Turquie Epist. 4.

Murders discovered by strange means, and punnished.
Master EMERY BIGOT the Kings Attorney in the Parliament of Roan, recounted
the history following unto me, with the names and sur-nmes of the persons,
which I have altogether forgotten, only the substance of the matter remains in
my head. There was a Lucquois merchant, who having lien in England a long time,
and desiring to end his days amongst his friends, requested them by letters to
provide him a house, for that he meant to see them within six months at the
farthest. About the same time he parts from England, followed by a servant of
his a Frenchman, with all his papers and obligations, and comes to the City of
Roan, where after he had made a little stay, he takes his way for Paris: but
being on the mountain near to Argentueil, his man, favored by the rain and
foul weather that was at that time, murdered him, and threw his body into
the vignes. As this was a doing, a blind man came by, led by his dog, and
hearing one groan, asked who it was? whereunto the murderer answered, that it
was a sick man going to ease himself. The blind man went his way and the
servant with his Masters money and papers gets him to Paris where he takes up
a good round sum upon his Masters bills and obligations: this merchant is
expected at Luca a whole year together, and seeing that he came not, a fellow
was dispatched away expressly to seek him out; coming to London he understood
the time of his departure, and that he was bound for Roan; there also in one of
the Innes he was told that about 6. months before a Lucquois merchant had
lien there, and was gone to Paris. After that what enquiry soever he made, he
was never the nearer, nor by any means could hear any tidings of that he
sought. Wherepon he complained to the Court of Parliament at Roan, which began
to embrace this affair, commanding the Lieutenant cryminall to make diligent
search within the City and Monsieur BIGOT without. The first thing the Justice
did, was to will one of his officers to enquire up and down the town whither
there were any man that within 7. or 8. months before had set up a new shop.
The fellow fails not in his charg, but returning says he met with one, of
who^ having learned the name, the justice supposes an obligation, whereby this
new mercha^t binds himself body and goods to pay the sum of 200. crowns within
a certain time, and by virtue thereof, being wild to pay the money, he
answered that the bond was forged, for he owed no such debt. The Sergeant
taking this answer for a refusal, arrested him. and as they went along
together, the merchant happened to tell him that he would answer this well
enough: but is there no other matter said he? The Sergeant goes and reports
how all had past to the Justice, who taking hold of those words, whither there
were no other matter, commanded the prisoner to be brought before him: being
come, he made the room to be voided, and with gentle speech told him, that he
had sent away the rest, because he meant to deal kindly with him: that in
truth he had caused him to be arrested upon a supposed obligation, but that
there was another matter in the wind. For he knew for certain, that the
murder of the Luequois was committed by him, and thereof good proof was to
be made, how-be-it he desired not to take any rigorous course: that the dead
man was a stranger, altogether without friends, and therefore it was an easy
matter to bury all things in oblivion, so that the prisoner would be wise, and
do that which was fitting for himself. All this was spoken in such a fashion,
as if the Justice had gone about to draw money from him. Herewith the prisoner
solicited partly by the remorse of his conscience, partly by the hope he had to
clear himself by a bride, answered the Judge, that herein appeared the very
hand of GOD, seeing there was no other witness but himself, and yet the
matter was come to light, and that upon the promise which had been made him, he
would freely confess the truth. Thervpo^ the Judge thinking he had got his
desire, sent one for the Register. In the mean time the prisoner perceiving he
had played the fool, when the Judge would have had him confess the murder, he
began to change his copy, and maintain that all this proceeding was full of
slander and falsehood. The Justice being som-what frustrated of his hope, sends
the Merchant to prison, in expectation of more ample proof. But having had
conference with other prisoners, who are craft masters in such affairs, he
appeals from his imprisonment, and s^es both the Sargiant and the Justice. I
leave you to think whether the cause were without appearance of reason. Forgery
is objected against the obligation, and there needs no proof, for it is
confessed. And indeed the Justice went directly to the Parliament, where he
discoursed at large how all things had been carried. The Court being well
assured of the honesty of the Justice, suspended the course of this suit for a
time. In the mean space Monsieur BIGOT had incharge, to make inquiry all the
way between Rouan and Paris, to see if he could come by any notice of the
matter: which he executed with all diligence. At length passing by Argentueil,
the Bayliffe told him, how not long before, they had found a dead carcass in
the Vines, half eaten with Dogs and Crows. Ther-withall came the blind man a
begging to the Inn where BIGOT lay, and understanding the perplexity they
were in, told them all that he had heard about the same time on the Mountain.
BIGOT asked him, whither he could know the voice again? The other answered
him, that he thought he should. Whereupon he set him up on an horse behind
another, and rode away with him to Rouan, where being alighted, and having
given an account of his commission, the Court determined to hear what the
blind man could say, and after to confront him with the prisoner. He having
then discoursed at full all that past in his hearing on the Mountain, and the
answer that was returned him, being demanded, whether he could know the voice
again? he replied that he did not think but he could. Therewith they showed
him a far of to the prisoner, and asked him, when the blind man was gone,
whither he could take any exception against him. GOD knows what a case he was
in then. For he said, that there had never bin such devises practiced to
impeach the innocence of an honest man, as there had bin against him. First the
Justice by virtue of a false obligation to lay him in prison: then to make him
believe how he had confessed that which never did: and last of all, to bring
in a blind man for a witness against him, why it was pastal rules of common
sense.

Notwithstanding that, the Court seeing he had nothing else to say against him,
caused 20. men and above to speak one after another, and still as they spoke,
the blind man was asked whither he knew their voices, whereunto he replied that
it was none of them. At last when the prisoner had spoken, the blind man said,
that that was he which answered him on the Mountain. The same confusion of
voices having been two or three times reiterated, the blind man hit always on
the right, and never missed. Take all the accidents of this process severally,
and you shall find many that make for the prisoner. But when you have
thoroughly considered the contrary, there are a number of circumstances which
make against him: a new Cittize^ which had set up a new shop a little after the
Lucquois disapearing, the honesty of the Lieutenant known to all men, the
deposition by him and the Sergeant made: but especially the miraculous
encounter of the blind man, who was both at the murder, as afterward in the
Inn where BIGOT lay: and finally that without any fraud he had discerned the
murderers voice from many others. All these things duly weighed, were cause
of the wretched man's condemnation: who before he was executed, confessed all,
to the discharge of the Judges consciences. E. PASQVIER in 5. book des
Recerches of France. Chap. 20.

On Christmas eve 1551. a certain fellow brained a young woman with an Hammer,
hard by Saint Oportunes Church in Paris, as she was going to midnight Mass,
and took away her rings. The Hammer was stolen the same evening from a poor
Smith there-by, who therefore suspected of the murder, was very cruelly
handled, and put to an extraordinary kind of torture, by reason of the violent
presumptions that made against him. In such sort that he was quite lamed, and
deprived of the means to get his living, where-by reduced into extreme
poverty, he made a miserable end. The murderer remained almost 20. years
unknown, and the memory of the murder seemed to be buried with the poor
woman in her grave. Now mark how it came out at length, though it were long
first. JOHN FLAMENG Sergeant of the subsidies at Paris, that was afterward
chief Usher in the Court of Aids, being one day in the Summer at Saint Leups,
a village by Montmorency, whether he was sent to sit upon a Commission, chanced
among other talk at supper, to say before certain of the place, how he had
left his wife at home sick, and no body with her but a little boy. There was
an old man then present named MOVSTIER, and a son in-law of his: who
immediately upon this speech went away that night, with each of them a basket
of Cherries, and a green Goose, and came about ten of the clock the next
morning to FLAMENGS house: where knocking, the woman looked out at the window,
and asked who it was. They answered that her husband had sent her a green
Goose, and a basket or two of Cherries, whereupon the door being opened to them
by the boy, they clapped it too again, and cut his throat. The poor child
struggling with them, the woman heard the noise, and stepped out into a gallery
joining to her Chamber, to see what it was, where perceiving a stream of blood
in the yard, one of them told her that it was the blood of the Goose: In the
mean time the other ran up the stayres thinking to surprise her. She
mistrusting the truth of the matter, got back again into her Chamber, bolted
the door within and cried out of the windoe for help saying there were
thieves in her house. The two wretches, seeing they had failed of there
purpose, would have got away, but going to vnclocke the gate, they brake the
key in the lock. So that having no means to escape, they went to hide them
selves. The youngest climbed up into the funnell of a chimney, the old man
co^ueied himself into the bottom of a celler. Therewith the neighbors came
running to the house, and breaking open the door, found the boy lying dead in
the yard, whereupon they sought up and down every corner for the murderers;
he in the chimney was taken first, and the other after long search was found in
the well of the cellar with nothing but his nose above water. They were
straight way carried to prison, and shortly after arraigned and condemned to
death. Being on the scaffold at the place of execution, the old man desired to
speak with the Smiths widdowe, of whom mention was made at the beginning. When
she came he asked her forgiveness, and told her it was he that killed the young
woman by S. Oportunes Church. This confession of his being committed to record,
they were executed as they deserved. E. PASQVIER in the same book and Chapter.

Eleven or twelve Danysh gentlemen being in talk together one evening in a
stoue, fell to some hot words among themselves, which at length grew to such
terms, that the candles sudenly were put out, and one of the^ was stabbed with
a poygnard and killed. Amongst those gentlemen was a Pursiuant of the Kings.
Now the murderer was unknown, by reason of the number, although the gentlemen
accused the pursiuant for it, but the King would not believe them, saying they
had conspyred against his servant. In this perplexity the King caused them to
come altogether into the stoue, and standing round about the dead corpse, he
commanded that they should one after another lay there right hand on the slain
gentleman's naked breast, swearing they had not killed him. The Gentlemen did
so, and no sign apeared to witness against them. The Pursiuant only remained
who condemned before in his own conscience, went first of all and kissed the
dead Man's feet: but as soon as he laid his hand on his breast the blood gushed
forth in great abundance, both out of his wound and nosthrills: so that urged
by this evident accusation, he confessed the murder, and by the Kings own
sentence was incontinently beheadded. HENRY RANSOVIVS Liuetenant for the King
of Denmark in the duchy of Holsace makes this relation in a letter of his that
is now in print: and farther adds, that the King his master reported this
history to him, and to VLRIC his son in law Duke of MECKELEOVRG with these
words: Some of the gentlemen accused of this murder are still living, this
first day of July. 1591. And how that ever since the execution of the
Pursiuant, King CHRISTIERNVS 2. Permitted that over al his Kingdom unknown
murders should be sought out after that manner.

I will ad another example (says he) in the same letter written to DAVID
CHYTREVS which happened at ITZEHOVV in Demnarke in my Fathers time. A Traveler
was murdered by the high way side and be-cause the Murderer could not be
found out, the magistrates of Itzehow made the body to be taken up, and an hand
to be cut of, which was carried into the prison of the town, and hung up by a
string in one of the chambers. About ten years after, the murderer coming
upon some occasion into the prison, the hand which had been a long time dry
began to drop blood on the table that stood underneath it. The laylor
beholding so extradinary a thing stayed the fellow, and aduerty sed the
magistrates of it, who examining him in the presence of my Father, the
murderer giving glory to God, confessed the murder which he had committed so
many years before, and submitted himself to the rigor of the law which was
inflicted on him as he well deserved.

HIEROME MAGIVS a learned Philosopher, disputing of such accidents in. 3. of
his Complaints. Chap. 6. after he has quoted the ancyent and modern authors
which have handled this subject, and propounded all that he thought was
requisite for this disputation, finally concludes, that such discoueryes of
murders are miraculous. The Authors he alleges are HOMER in the 17. book of
his ILIAD^S, speaking of the dead body of EVPHORBAS in the presence of MENELARS
which had killed him: The Poet LVCRECIVS in the book. 4. in these verses.
Nanque homines ploerunque cadunt in vulnus. etc. THADDVS the Florentine in his
explications on IOANNITIVS ISAGOGE, HENRY de GAND in his Quodlibets: Giles of
Rome in the qaest. 25 of 5. quodlibet. JOHN MVIIOR upon the. 4. book of
Sentences, did. 25. quaest. 14. The author of the book intitu^ed Peregrinarum
quaestionum, in the quae. 6 of the. 3. decade: MARSILIVS FICIN in the. 16.
book of the immortalatie of souls, Chap. 5. GALE OF MARTIVS in the. 22. chap.
of his book De doctrina promiscua: JOHN LANGIVS Physician in his 40. Epistle;
and LEVIN LEMNIVS in the 2. book of the miracles of Nature, chap. 7. GAVDENCE
ME^VLA in the 4. books of Memorable things, chap. 18. PARIS DE PVTEO, in the
treatise of Judges, upon the word Tortura: HIPPOLITO MARSILLO in his practice,
in the paragraffe Diligenter, number. 81. MARK ANTHONY BLANC in the Commentary
on the Law, FYNAL number. 408. F. de questionibus: LVDOVIC CARERA in the beginning
of his practice, number. 140. and FRANCIS JASON, in the treatise of Judgments and
tortures.

In the town o^ Tubingue, a certain traveler coming into an Inn, and talking
at table of the journey he had to go, asked the Host of the house if he knew
of any that went his way, because he was affrayd he should not hit it:
whereupon another ghest that sat at table with him, said, how he was going to
the place he spoke of, and knew all the ways of the forest through which they
were to pass. Travailing together in the wood the latter thinking to make some
great purchase fell upon the other and killed him. But finding little about
him, he returned heavy and sighing to the same Inn from whence they parted.
Presently after, the bruit went of a man that was found murdered in the
Forest. And because the Murderer discovered himself sufficiently by his
sighs, he was apprehended and being examined, confessed the fact, for the
which he was put to death. PH. LONICER in his ^heater of Examples.

A Murderer that had killed diverse men and certain women with child, going on
Easter-Eue to the Town of Winshein in Almaigne, bought three calves heads of a
Butcher in the shambles, which he put into a net made like a bag, and laying
them on his shoulder went his way home-ward. Whereupon it seemed to all that
met him in the street that they were men's heads which he carried in the net,
so that diverse ran and advertised the Magistrates of it, who straight way
sent some of their Sergeants, and commanded them to apprehend him and bring him
before them. Be^ing come and examined where he had those men's heads? he
answered that he had bought them of a Butcher in the open Shambles. The
Butcher was sent for, who affirmed that those which he sold him were Calves
heads and no other. The Magistrates amazed with this prodegie sent the buyer to
prison: where going to be tortured, he confessed his murders: which was no
sooner done but presently the three heads taken out of the net returned to
their former shape, and the murderer was executed according to his demerits.
The same.

A learned Divine of our time recytes such another History as that of IBICVS.
For he says that an Almaign traveling a journey fell among Thieves, who going
to cut his throat, the poor man espied a flight of Crows and said, O Crows I
take you for witnesses and reuengers of my death. He had no sooner said so but
he was murdered by the thieves; who drinking two or three days after in an
Inn, a company of Crows came and lighted on the top of the house. Whereupon
the thieves began to laugh and say one to an other, look yonder are they that
must revenge his death whom we dispatched the other day. The Tapster
ouer-hearing them told his Master, who reported it to the Magistrate. He
presently commanded them to be apprehended, and upon their disagreeing in
speeches and contrary answers urged them so far that the confessed the truth,
whereupon ensued their execution. In the collection of the memorable speeches
of this divine.

A Gentleman of Chalence in Fossigry b^ing in h^ Duke of Sauoyes arm^e in
September the (...) 158^. and g^eeuing to behold the cruelties which were (...)
(...) the poor inhabitants of the Bayliwicke of Ge^, resolved to depart from
the said army. Now because there was no safer nor nearer way for him then to
cross the lake to Bonne, which might very well be performed in three hours
at the most (whereas he should have been a day and a half going by the bridge
of Chancy and that with danger) he went to one of his acquaintance named JOHN
VILLAIN of the Village of Thaney in the Bayliwicke of Nyon, hard by the town
of Coppet, and desired him to help him to some that would carry him over the
lake. VILLAIN went along with him to Coppet, where one of the best of the Town
had the Gentleman to a Tavern, and there it was agreed that two watermen of
the place, which were present, should carry him over. Wher-vpon he went back to
Thaney for his horse, apparel and other things. Being returned and in the boat
crossing the lake, the said watermen, whereof the cheifest was called MARTIN
BOVRRY, fell upon him and cut his throat. VILLAIN understanding it and
co^plaining of so cruel a treachery, was answered, that it was an enemy who^
they had dispatched. The murderer fearing to be called in question about it,
to prevent the matter made a present of the Gentlema^s horse which was of great
value to a certain Master and kept the rest to himself. insomuch that the
murder was never spoken afterward, neither durst VILLAIN use many words about
it, for fear of him-self. But God would not leave it so unpunished. For about
the 15. of July 1591. this BOVRRY going with diverse others of Coppet to shoot
for a wager, as he was charging the harguebuze which he had robbed the
Gentleman of when he murdered him, it suddenly discharged of it self and shot
the murderer through the heart, so that he fell down stark dead, and never
stirred nor spoke a word. This relation I received from VILLAINS own mouth.

In the first troubles a Gentleman of the troops which beseeged Moulins in
Burbonnois was taken sick in such sort that he could not follow his company
when they dislodged: and lying at a Bakers house called JOHN MON which
professed much friendship and kindness unto him, he put such confidence in him,
that he stayed behind the rest, having showed his host the money that he had,
who promised to defend him from all men, together with a little brother of his
some 13. or 14. years old. But so far was this wretch from keeping his
promise, that contrarily as soon as it was night, he trained them forth of
doors, and most wickedly murdered them. Now mark how God revenged it: it
happened not long after that the murderer being in sentinel, one of his
fellows not thinking of it, shot him through the arm with an Harguebuze
whereof he languished the space of 3. months, and the^ died stark mad. History
of France under CHARLES the 9.

The town of Bourges being yielded by Mons. d'Tuoy during the first troubles,
those that held it before were inhibited from talking together either within or
without the town, or from being above two together at a time. Amongst them
that took pleasure (under color of this ordinance) to murder such as they
met talking together, there was one named GARGET captain of the Bourbonne
quarter, which made a common practice of it, who shortly after taken with a
burning fever ran up and down the streets, blaspheming the name of God,
calling upon the Devil, and crying out, if any one would go along with him to
hell, he would pay his charges, and so dyed in desperate and frantike manner.
In the same History.

PETER MARTIN, one of the Queries of the Kings stable, and Post-maister at a
place called Liege in the way toward Poictou, upon a slight accusation,
without either form or manner of process was condemned by a Lord to be
drowned. This Lord commanded one of his Faulconers to go and execute this
sentence upon pain to be drowned himself. Whereupon he performed it: but
GOD deferred not the revenge thereof long, for within three days after, this
Falconer and a Lackey falling out about the good man's apparel went into the
field and slew one another. Which being reported to the Lord (a most
unrighteous judge) it compelled him to have some remorse, and to say openly,
that he would it had cost him five hundred crowns, the poor Querie had not
been drowned. But it was too little, for to value the life of an innocent man
at. In the same history, book. 7.

Certain troops of Peasants of Colors, Ceresiers, and other places in
Champagne, having committed many murders and spoils in sundry places, were
here and there defeated and came very near al of them to violent ends during
the first troubles. I will note two notable particularities here touching two
of those troops One going to set fire on an house, fell down stark dead,
being killed with the shot of an Harguebuze unadvisedly discharged by one of
his fellows. Another dragging a poor Man and his Wife to a post for to have
them shot to death, received also a shot from an Harguebuze which took away
his life and so his prisoners escaped. In the same book. It has been
observed in the history of France since the year of our Lord GOD 1560. Till
the last peace, that of a thousand murderers which remained unpunished in
regard of men, not ten of them escaped the hands of GOD, but made most
wretched ends: as shall be seen in the books following.

Persons that lived a long time without eating or drinking.
Master GERARD de BVCOLD Physician to FERDINAND afterward Emperor, testifies
in a book imprinted both in Latin and Dutch, that the year 1539. in a village
by Spyre there was one namaed MARGARET the Daughter of SOFREY VVEIS and BARBARA
his wife, which at 18. years of age being taken about the end of September
with a little pain in her head and belly, began to lose all appetite to meat,
wherein she continued till the end of the year: when having recovered some
stomach, she made a meal or two: but ever after ceased altogether from eating,
and drunk very little. After Easter the year following she refused to drink,
insomuch that in the greatest heat of summer she never drank: whereupon it
ensued that she neither voided urine nor other excrement. FERDINAND then King
of Romans desired to see her, and to prevent all fraud made her to be
carefully kept and looked unto by the said de BVCOLD, who has made this
relation confirmed by diverse other witnesses. A Nun of Saint BARBARAS covent
at Delft, falling sick of the yellow Iaundise, the year 1562. kept her bed
six weeks together without eating or drinking. All that time she never touched
any sustenance what-soeuer, unless it were a few kernells of a limond, which
she held in her mouth and now and then sucked them a little. The confessor of
the Covent, carried me thither, not to give her any Physic but to see her as a
miracle, by reason of so long an abstinence. The day after I had seen her, she
departed this world. Now this which I will ad is worthy of greater marvel. In
the same Town of Delft about May 1566. being accompanied with a Surgeon, I
visited a certain sick maid, of 27. years of age or thereabout. She had kept
her bed ever since she was sixteen years old, eating nothing all that time as
her keeper affirmed, but once a day a little morcell of dry Cheese: Neither
was it possible to make her take any kind of drink, and yet she made Water
reasonable well, although she went to the stool but once in eight days.
Moreover she was borne blind, and at 20. years of age had the dropsy, but
that Water vanishing away, instead thereof, she had a noise in her belly like
the croaking of a number of live Frogs, accompanied with a wonderful heauing
and setting of her belly, insomuch that do what I could, my hand laid upon it
was lifted up a good height. This motion increased with grievous pains at the
full of the moon and flowing of the sea: but at the wane of the moon and
ebbing of the sea she felt some ease: and so it continued with her 7. years,
having her sickness every tenth week as her keeper confessed. P. FOREST
Physician in the 18. book of his Observations, Obser. 8.

A gentleman, that has worthily acquitted himself in sundry charges, said in a
place where I was, that he had gone from Madril to Lisbon, in the hottest of
su^mer, without drinking. He bears himself passing well for one of his age,
and has nothing extraordinary in the usage of his life, but this, to be 2. or
3. months, nay a year, as he has told me, without drink. He feels
thirst, but lets it pass, and he thinks it is an appetite that easily goes
away of it self and drinks more for company, then necessity or pleasure.
MICHAEL de MONTAGNE, in the 3. book of his Essaies, the last Chap. As Much is
reported of a great Lord in France, who has gone Ambassador to Rome, and is
still living in other honorable emploiments. There have been many persons both
before and in our time which have fasted very long: but having no example more
remarkable amongst many others then that which by and by I purpose to
propound, we will leave the Reader to the remembrance of such as he has either
seen or heard it of himself. In the mean time we will present this which
ensues. On Tuesday the 24 day of November 1584. by the commandment of the
most illustrious Prince JOHN CASIMIR County Palatine of Rine, the governor and
superintendant of Caiserlanter, accompanied with HENRY SMETIVS and JOHN JAMES
Theodore, Doctors of Physic, made enquiry in the village of Schinidweiler in
the jurisdiction of Colberberg, touching the Maid whose history we relate.

KVN TONNELIER borne at Spisheim, an honest husbandman, being examined by those
co^missaries, among other articles affirmed that KATHERINE, at that instant
some 27. years of age, Daughter to him and to his Wife likewise named KATHERIN,
having always had her health, til such time as she began to have her monthly
purgatio^s, at her return from a certain wedding caught an ague, which took
away all appetite from her to hot meats for the space of five years together,
during which time she felt her self well and lusty, did her work, was very
obedient to her parents, devout in prayer unto GOD, well affected to the
hearing of his word and thoroughly instructed therein. Now to bring her to hot
meats again, her father and mother (besides other ordinary medicines) put her
into the hands of an Empyrike, who in steed of helping her with a certain
drink, quite took away her stomach from al meats both hot and cold: insomuch
that till then, namely for the full term of seven years, no meat nor drink
whatsoever went down the throat of this maid: who for six months after the
disgust only sucked the Juice of a few pears and apples. But not able to use
this remedy any longer, she washed her mouth with aqua-uitae, but could not
swollow a drop of it. This lauing somewhat refreshed her: but being to sharp,
she allaied it with a little fair Water. Her father added, that all this time
he could never perceive any euacuation of urine or other excrement in the said
maid, or sweet, or vermin in any part of her body: but always found her
bed clean, and her body without spot or speck of filth: unless it were that
sometimes she seemed to be troubled with a distillation of the brain, which
now and then made her to spit a little. And many times a certain vapor rose
in her side which fumed up to the heart, and caused a pain in her head, that
made her very faint for the time, but it lasted not long, and that only
against foul weather. The sight or savor of meats never offended her, though
she had no appetite nor desire at all to them. If at any time she chanced to
faint, she rubbed her temples and stomach with a little sweet Water: which
very much comforted her. The deposition of the mother and neighbors agreed in
all points heere-with.

The same KATHERINE visited by the Princes four Commissaries, was found fair
of face, well colloured, full of life and good disposition, her eyes clear,
and quick sighted, like one in perfect health, save that they were somewhat
sunk into her head, and that underneath them some times rose a tumor which
continued not long. Neither had she any defect in her senses of smelling,
hearing, and tasting. Her speech was sweet, significant and intelligible. Only
her mouth was grown so straight by reason of her cheeks which very much
pained her (as she said her self) that she could not put so much as her little
finger into it: but yet without appearance of swelling. Her hair was all fallen
off of her head and began to come again. In this sickness or infirmity, she
had scarce had any speech or sense for three years together. But the Thursday
before Easter 1583. she recovered her speech and senses, much better then ever
she had had them at any time in her health before, and that after an admirable
manner, as follows.

Her Father being gone about that time to a Forest hard by the village for to
fell Timber, and her Mother having shut all the doors for to go to him, and
left their Daughter in the house alone by her self: a Man in the habit of a
Minister, entered into the Stoue, went to the beds side, took the Maid by the
left arm, lifted her up, and staying her, made her walk a turn or two: and
then asked her if she could pray. KATHERINE somewhat amazed with this demand,
could not answer him, being speachlesse. He began then to rehearse the ten
commandments in the vulgar tongue, the Articles of our faith, the Lords
Prayer, the institution of Baptism, and of the holy Supper: exhorting her
besides to patience, comforting and assuring her, that her speech should
shortly be restored to her again. Whereupon he suddenly departed from her* and
immediately her speech came to her again, so that her Mother being returned
home, the Maid talked plainly and intelligibly with her, and afterward with
her Father, whereat they were both merueilously abashed. After that time, her
speech and senses never failed her.

The report of the Physicians yet farther contains this ensuing, which I add
for the content of the Reader. Touching that which concerns her breast or
stomach, she has a very sweet breath, her pulce is temperate, and as it
should be, but before and behind her arme-pits, both above and below, she is
somewhat faint. Her breasts are longer, softer, and hanging down more then
commonly Maidens do. She many times feels a pain in both her sides, which
brings her into such a case, that she can hardly fetch her breath, but it is
quickly gone by the application of a little water. One cannot touch the pit of
her stomach, but it greeues her. As for her belly it hangs some* what lanke
like an empty body: but on the outside it is in pretty good plight, and is
reasonable fat and fleshy: she is never troubled with any wind or colic, nor
feels any hickock, stitch, or other pain in her stomach. And although she
has oftentimes of her own accord, without constraint or necessity,
endeavored to take and swallow down meat, yet could she never do it, albeit
she can abide the sent of meats, and endure that one should eat and drink by
her, but more at sometimes then at other-some. For she has been and still is,
as if her throatboll were quite closed up, and altogether stopped she goes not
to the stool, nor has urine or monthly purgations, which she has had for a
certain time together perfectly and duly before her infirmity, but now they
are clean gone. In like manner, she is never a thirst, yet sometimes she
takes a little fair water and Aqua vitae mingled together, for to wash her
mouth, and spets it out again presently. The which she was wont to do with
Aqua vitae alone, but now she cannot endure it, being too sharp and strong in
her mouth which is very tender, and this she does only for the recreation and
comfort of her head and heart. Touching her arms and legs, her arms are sound
and fleshy: especially her left arm is nimble and in good case, without any
defect. But as for her right arm, it is lame from the elbow to the fingers
ends, whereby her hand is grown crooked, so that she cannot stir it.
Not-withstanding she can move the said right arm a little up toward the
shoulder, but cannot lift it to her head, nor put it from one side to the
other, without help. Her legs and thighs are somewhat full and fleshy,
but are so shrunk, that she cannot stretch them forth at length, and yet she
can move her toes and her feet a little. Her said arm became lame so, and her
legs crooked by lying in her bed three years together, without eating any
thing. Throughout all her body is a temperate and kindly heat. The nails of
her feet and hands are well formed, long, and in good disposition, like one in
perfect health.

The Physicians having made this report, and every thing well examined and
considered: the Commissaries were of opinion for diverse reasons, that 4. women
of good discretion, and fit for such a business, should be chosen and sent to
Schimdweiler to keep this Maid by turns, two by day, and two by night, for
the space of a fortnight, to the end no meat nor drink what-so-euer might be
ministered to her by any person: and that the bed whereon she lay, should be
changed, and another put in the place of it, and that diligent search should
be made over all the Stoue. The Maid her-selfe had declared, that diverse men
and women had resorted to her out of the Bishopric of Treues, and questioned
her about revelations and predictions. More-ouer there were letters found
written to her, as it had been to an holy Virgin, the intent of the writers
being to make an Idol of her, and to erect a pilgrimage unto her. Wherefore
the Commissaries made report of all before mentioned, to the Governor of
Neustad and the Princes Council, who shortly after gave Commission to the
Governor of Caiserlauter, to take order for this affair, whereunto he obeyed
with all diligence, and thereof made his report, which I copied over being
translated out of Dutch, in the terms ensuing.

Following your Commission of the 24. of December 1584. directed unto us,
touching the affairs of the Maiden of the village of Schmidweiler, we have
made diligent inquisition for four honest women, and it was a long time ere
we could find any that would employ themselves in such an affair, until at
length we have thereunto induced and persuaded ANNE BRENNING, the widow of
ANDREW ZILS late of this town, other-wise called the old ioyner: ANASTASIA
widow to JOHN EBERARD, in his life time Minister of Walhalben. AGNES the
Ministers wife of Steinwerden: and MARGARET the widow of JOHN GAVFFEN whilst
he lived Burgess of this Town. And after they were thoroughly instructed and
informed of their charge, according to the tenor of the advice which at the
beginning was sent to his Highness, and that they had all four taken their
oath, we sent them on the 16. day of January last past, to the said place of
Schimdweiler, with Master LOLEMAN the superintendant, where they remained with
the said Maid until the 8. day of the same month: being returned back
again, the next day they discoursed at large unto us, all that they had
learned, discovered and experimented touching this affair as follows.

The said Superintendant being arrived about evening the first day, with the
four women before mentioned at Kolberberg, there they rested that night, and
the next day went by Wagon to Schimdwailer, where going to the Father and
Mother, they gave them to understand, how by the commandment of the Governors
they were come thither, with charge to keep their Daughter for a fortnight
together. And that to no other end, but to stop the mouths of such as on every
side spoke ill of their Daughter, and of the Prince likewise, because he gave
credit to their said Daughters speeches, to wit, that in so long a time she had
neither eaten nor drunk* briefly it was to no other purpose, but that once for
all, the world might be assured of the truth. Thereunto the Father and Mother
gladly submitted themselves, and with kind entertain carried the^ to their
Daughters chamber, where the Superintendant spoke in the same manner to the
Maid, as they had done before to her Father and Mother, and showed her at
large the occasion of their coming. Whereupon the Maid began to complain
and demand for what cause they would molest and trouble her so. Especially she
seemed to be very much grieved, for that her Father and her Mother should not
lie in her Chamber by her as they had accustomed to do: but incontinently
after the departure of the Superintendant, ANNE BRENNING dealt in such sort
with the said Maid, that she willingly agreed to what-soeuer they would, and
not only permitted them to carry away the bed where upon her Father and Mother
lay: but also suffered them to visit her own bed, nay to take it quite away,
and make her another in a little Stoue, where was no room for her Father and
Mother to lie. And when in the day time they entered into the Chamber, they came
not near their Daughter, nor talked with her in secret. Now during this
fortnight, the four women understood of them how this Maids sickness first
began, and how many years she had p^st without eating or drinking, which
agreed in all points with that which had been declared before to the
Commissa^ies. Likewise the said women found that the said Maid is at
sometimes weaker and fainter then at other some, and they have always watched
with her, two by day, and two by night. And for a more exact assurance of the
truth, one of the four lay every night with the said Maid in her bed, so that
by no means any fraud could happen, where unto they always took very
diligent heed, and watched very carefully both day and night, but never could
find any other thing, then as the said Maid had still before very truly
affirmed of her self. Furthermore, all the said four women, especially ANNE
BRENNING, have confessed before us, and sollemnly affirmed and assured upon the
salvation of their souls, and therein will dye, that the said Maid has not
eaten nor drunk, either morcell or drop of any thing what-soeuer. Neither has
vo^ded any Urine or other execrement, nor slept a whit in all that time. And
that who-so-euer makes any doubt of these things, does the Maiden great wrong.

This report was sent to Caiserlauter the 19. of February 1585. signed by the
Go ^ernor and his Secretary, to the Princes Council at Neusted. And within a
while after, the History of it was Printed in Dutch, then turned into French,
and published the year 1587. The Translator, a man of quality, having added to
the end of his Book, Dedicated to the Baron of Pardaillan, then Ambassador for
the King of Nau^r in Germany, these words ensuing. The Readers shall be
advertised that the said KATHERINE is still living in the same estate and
disposition as this relation imports: and has continued and lived so without
eating, drinking and sleeping, the space of nine years fully complete and
ended, and lives yet miraculously, through a singular and incomprehensible
grace of Almighty GOD. Extracted out of the whole History o^ this matter,
Imprinted at Francfor^, by JOHN WECHE^, the year 1587.

I understand that at this present there is a man at Auignon of 60. years of
age, that eats very sildome, as once in five, six, ten weeke^ or more.
Here-with agrees that which ALBERT writes, how there was a woman which
sometimes went 20. nay many times 30. days together without eating. He says
likewise, that he had seen a melancholy man which lived seven weeks without
eating or drinking any thing, but every other day a little water. It is
reported by grave and reverent persons, that a Maid was seen in Spain, which
never eat any thing, and entertained her life only with drinking water, being
two and twenty years old. Diverse have seen a girl in Languedo^ which
continued three years together without eating. And we know by that which
certain good and learned personages have written of it, that there was another
at Spyre in Germany which lived as many years without any other meat or
drink then the air. WILLIAM RONDOLETIVS affirms the like, and says, that he
has seen another which in the same manner attained to the age of ten years:
who afterward was married and had Children. JOHN BOCCACE writes of a
Dutch-woman that lived thirty years without meat. PETER ALBANO tells of a
Norman, that eat nothing in eighteen years, and of another that went six
and thirty years without meat. It is held for certain that a Priest at Rome
lived forty years with the only inspiration of the air: it being well
observed under the custody of LEO the tenth, and of diverse Princes, and
faithfully testified by HERMALAO BARBARO. ALLEXANDER BENIVENIVS reports of an
Italian, that he fasted forty days together in the City of Venice. L. IOVBERT
in the 2. paradoxe of his first Decade: and in the 2. book of his popular
errors about the end. Where he adds a notable discourse which I thought
good to offer unto the Reader.

I well foresee (says he) that two sorts of people may be moved, either with
the only subject of these discourses (touching such as have lived without
eating) or of the proofs thereof. The one is ignorant of natural Philosophy
and Physic, persons to be reverenced for their simplicity and piety, as the
common people, and al those that apply not their study to examine the causes
of each thing. The other is diabolical, persecuting that with most impudent
stander which they know to be well spoken. I will not stand upon these,
because they attend not the explication of my speech but with their poison
infect and deprave all that is received by their impure thoughts: As for the
rest, me thinks it is convenient I should satisfy them with all sincerity. I
see then this objection ready to be urged against me.

The fasts of forty days, which JESUS CHRIST, ELIAS, and MOSES have
sustained, as the holy Scriptures do testify, should no longer be held for
miracles, if by any natural reason one could endure to fast many months and
years together. Certainly it were true if we did not acknowledge that it was
so given against the Laws of nature to men in perfect health, through a
certain privilege, as we religiously believe. For exemption from the
infirmity of the flesh was Divinely granted to them for a time: insomuch that
their condition at this time was other then the condition of mankind. But
those which as we learn out of profane Histories have lived certain years
without eating, if their report be true, it must needs be that those persons
were all unhealthy and full of much cold iuce, wherewith the body might be
nourished a long time. For by that which daily happens we see that many sick
folks have no appetite, by reason their ventricle is stuffed with evil humors,
and they receive less meat in a week, then they did in a day when they were
well. But when a man of a sound body can but pass one or two days without
meat: and not be an hungered, that exceedes the rules of nature, and is a
Divine miracle. How much more admirable is it, that such a man should fast
forty days together in such manner that he feels no hunger, has no need
to resist the desire of eating, nor has any more appetite to meat or drink,
then an Angel? We believe that JESUS CHRIST had a body exceeding temperate
and pure, though he were subject to our infirmities according to the condition
of his human nature, sin excepted. We acknowledge like-wise that MOSES
and ELIAS, when they abstayned, forty da^e together, from meat and drink,
were in perfect health at that time, and by a certain prerogative exempted
from the common life of men. Whereupon it ensues that they are justly esteemed
for excellent miracles, whereby the authority of those Prophets and of JESUS
CHRIST were established. Now it is no nouelty that the like effects should
happen by the order of things which our most good and mighty GOD has
prescribed to nature, and by an evident miracle against the laws of the same
nature. For feauers and diverse other disseases, which the Saints have healed,
the Physicians do also cure. But the means which they use, make great
difference in the case. For the Saints by their word or touch alone, through
the grace of GOD, took away the causes of such effects with the necessity
imposed upon nature. The Physicians do nothing but oppose unto natural things
other like wise natural, whereby if the virtue of the remedies given by the
Creator be of greatest strength, and that it be his will it should not be in
vain at that time, the cause which does offend is defaced. JESUS CHRIST
thoroughly healed the inueterate course of menstruall blood with the only touch
of the hem^e of his garment, and said he felt that virtue was gone out of him
for that effect: but the woman touched that in faith which presented it self
to her hand, embracing the power of our Savior in her thought. We by the art
of Physic (whereof he himself, a merciful Father, having pity on man's
condition is the true author and institutor) help our s^lues in the like
disseasses with certain medicines. So no question may an abundant phlegmatique
humor naturally induce fasting, as appeared in those before named which felt
themselves well through the good pleasure of GOD. But besides these there are
infi^ite miracles, that exceed our understanding, which neither humane Art nor
Nature it self can any way immitate. Such is the curing of natural
blindness: expelling of unclean spirits out of human bodies; raising of the
dead half rotten, and such like, which confirm the authority of the Almighty
GOD. By this I think it appears, that things which are said to happen by a
certain Law of nature (although but seldom) reprove not true miracles, nor
dimynish their credit: and that he no way contradicts the Chistian faith
which diligently examineth the causes of such euentes. But rather is not the
verity of unfeigned miracles thereby confirmed the better, in taking away the
occasion of impostures therewithal, to the end they should not easily abuse
the unexperienced people? For if any of those which live without eating, by
reason of their cold intemperature, and abundance of phlegm, should counterfeit
the Prophet inspired of the ever living GOD, how many thousands might he
draw headlong into error and destruction? Verily he is impio^s and ignorant
of true (nay dyuine) Philosophy which thinking of these things, and considering
them, shall affirm it to be wicked and irreligious to go about to
distinguish with unpainted reasons between the works (and as we use to say)
the miracles of nature and the miracles of GOD* Which all good and Godly
persons will freely confess do belong to an honest religious, and charitable
man. These are Doctor IOVBERTS own words whose book was Printed at Paris the
year 1579.

It has been told me of a certainty, that there was a Chanon at Salamanca,
which went to Toledo, and back again, having remained there fifteen or
twenty days, without drinking any drop of Wine or Water, from the time of his
setting forth, till his return. But that which puts me into a greater
marvel, is that written by PONTANVS in his Book of Meteors. Of a man, that
in all his life never drunk a drop of any thing: which LADISLAVS King of
Naples understanding, made him drink a little Water, that greatly pained him
at his stomach. I have also heard of diverse credible persons, that in the Town
of Mansill, not far from the City of Leon, was a man living, that used to
be two or three months without drinking* and never felt any harm or
displeasure by it. A. de TORQVEMADO in the first day of his Hexameron,
Imprinted the year 1582.

Singular Modesty, yielding to a severe Censure.
THere are few men to be found, especially among them that are called learned,
which do not highly esteem their own works, and endure reprehensions
impatiently. If there be any such found, they deserve to be admired and
imitated. MARCILLIVS FICINVS a most learned Philosopher, and renowned Desciple
of PLATO in our time, having undertaken PLATOES works to Translate them out of
Greek into Latin, cartyed his Translation unto a very learned Man called
MARCUS MVSVRVS CANDIOT, to have hi^ advise. MVSVRVS seeing that this
translation was done hastily, and that it would not satesfie the expectation of
many, which did greatly affect it. Being loath to have his friend derided, and
to discharge himself of his promise, he takes a sponge and puts it into an
Inck pot, and so blots out all the first page of FICINVS translation, then
turning toward him (he said) thou see how I have corrected the first page:
if thou will I will do as much to the rest. FICINVS without any choler,
answered him. It is no reason that PLATO should be disgraced through my fault:
then he retired himself, and having his second conceptions better refined, he
made a new translation worthy both of the master and the disciple. ZVINGER
in the 1. tome of his Theater.

A Mocker mocked.
A Certain man remaining at Onzain near to Amboisse being persuaded by an
hostess (who committed the infamous crime of Adultery with him) to make show
(for the freeing of her husband of all future Jealousy) that he would be gelt
by one called M. PETER des SERPENS Surgion at Villantrois in Berry: he sent for
his kins-folks, and after that he had told them that he never durst discover
his grief unto them he was in the end brought to that extremity, as he was
forced to take that course whereupon he made his will. And to make the better
show of it, after that he had said unto M. PETER (to whom he had given a
watchword, that he should but seem to do it, and to that end had given him
four Crowns) that he pardoned him his death, if he should chance to die, he
put himself into his hands, and suffered him self to be bound and trimmed,
like unto one that should be cut indeed. But you must know that as the
Adulterer had given Mr. PETER a watchword to make but a show of doing it, so
the husband after that he had notice of this ^est, had hired him to do it
indeed promising to give him the doble of that which he had received of the
Adulterer. So as being persuaded by the husband, and having the Adulterer in
his power being well and surely bound, he did execute his Office really: then
he paid him with this reason, that he was not accustomed to dally with his
trade. Behold how the Adulterer was dressed through the Invention of his unchaste
Adulteress: and whereas with this pollecie he sought to circumuent the
husband more then before, he himself was over reached with a deceit much more
prejudicial to his own person. Conformity of ancient wonders with the
modern.

A Wollen-draper in one of the chief frontier towns of France, having
forgotten GOD, his honor, and the respect of his honest and virtuous Wife,
seeking to corrupt a servant of hers, being fi^nced, and niece to his said
Wife; devising of some means to cover his shame, he inuen^ed one that was
very dishonest and infamous. He had a young man to his servant, that was
twenty years old, very bashe-full, who as yet knew no folly. The Master
having promised him recompense for his (...): and (...), persuaded him to go
and take his (...) (...) his bed, when his wife should be a sleep, (...)
(...) she should begin to slumber, he (...) (...) (...) to bid her softly
goodnight, laying his hand upon her breast, and then turning his back to her,
he should approach no more. He in the mean time goes unto his maid a little
before her marriage. The young man much amazed at his Commission which was given
him, obeyed notwithstanding the dishonest will of his Master, and observed
dilligently what he had commanded. But the wife thinking it had been her
husband, embraced him, and moved him in such sort, as that night he knew her
often, and yet she knew not him. Early in the morning the Master and the
servant retier themselves. The Wife casting out some jest unto her husband of
his last nights sport, thinking that he and none other had come there, he
descouered, but too late, his own misfortune. Wherewith incensed against the
young man, he enforced him through his ill usage to fly, and to descouer what
had happened: yea he procured that sarre and near his shame was known, and
he disgraced. The woman hearing the wicked part her husband had played her, in
the end dies for grief. The miserable husband was a skorne to all the world,
yea to the basest, having lost all reputation and respect with good men.
Memorialls of our time.

A death worthy observation.
WILLIAM NESENVS a man excellent in the knowledge and fear of GOD, going into a
fisher-boate, in the Summertime for to Cross the river of Elba, which passes
from Witteberg to Saxony, as it was many times his manner to row over himself
for his pleasure, ran against the body of a tree lying under Water, which
over whelmed the boat, and NESENVS in it, who could not swim and three was
drowned. This happened in the evening. The same day a little after dinner being
a sleep, him thought he entered into a fisher-boate, and fell over boorde into
the Water. Thereupon came PHILIP MELANCHTHON, his very familiar friend, unto
whom laughing he declared his dream, accounting it but as a toy. A great
personage, seeing him lie dead on the shore, cried out with tears in his
eyes, ONESENVS, if I had the gift of miracles, how willingly would I raise
thee. He was infinitely bewailed both of great and small. MELANCHTHON and
CAMERARIVs talking together of this dream and heavy accident called to mind
that which had befallen them and NESENVS not many days before. They three
ryding together into Hesse, and having lien all night at a little town called
Trese, in the morning they past through a brook for to Water their houses.
Being in the Water, NESENVS espied three Crows sit beating their wings and
croaking on a little hill hard-by: Whereupon he asked of MELANCHTHON what he
thought of it: MELANCHTHON presently answered that it signified one of them
three should die ere long. CAMERARIVS confesses that this answer touched him
to the quick, and very much troubled him: NESENVS did nothing but nod^e his
head, and went merrily on his way. CAMERARIVS adds that he was about to ask
MELANCHTHON the reason of his Conjecture: and that within a while after
MELANCHTHON told him, that feeling himself weak and sickly, he was persuaded
he should not live very long. I do not rehearse these things (says he) as if I
attributed any virtue to the flight and motion of Birds, nor do I make any
science of conjectures which would be grounded there-vpon: no more did
MELANCTHON I am sure. But I have declared them, to show that diverse times we
see merueilous things happen, which after the events drive many thoughts into
their heads, that either behold them, or hear them spoken of. JOHN CAMERARIVS
in the life of PHILIP MELANCTHON. And ABRAHAM BVCOLCERVS in his Chronicall
Index of the year 1524.

This History shall make me step one step back, for to propound another no
less marvelous of the age before this: in hope that this digression will be
no offense to the Readers. AMBROSE GRIMANI a Genowaie, lying in garrison in the
I Will and City of Chio, the year 1431. where he carried himself very
faithfully and valiantly, and being sound a sleep, one night had this vision
following. He thought that an exceeding huge and mighty Serpent with fiery
eyes and open throat to devour him. Being terrified with this spectacle, he
awaked suddenly, and with great trouble of mind he examined his dream, whereof
the next day he makes report to some, who advised him not to go any more to
any skirmishes, and to give over the wars: thinking that that was the Monster
which threatened him with a vyolent end. Whereupon he resolved to be ruled by
them. Not long after, the Soldiers and Inhabitants of the place, provoked by
the enemy, made a sallie. GRIMANI remembering his vision, followed them fair
and softly aloof off, only to behold the fight, and because he would not be
in any danger, he hid himself behind a thick wall. But hearing the cries of
the combatants, he could not choose but lift up his head, and look through a
creuise of the wall. At which very instant a Cannon shot lighted just on that
place, and took GRIMANIES head clean from his shoulders, the body sincking
down where he stood. P. BIZERRE* in the History and Annals of the
Commonwealth of Gen^way, page 787. 788.

Nature changed.
IT chanced in our time at Breslaw in Silesia, that a certain young Maid,
having been present with many others at the execution of a Thief, which was
beheaded, she was so troubled therewith, as she fell to have the falling
sickness. They applied many remedies which did her no good. A certain Gossip,
(according to the usual custom) gave her advise, saying; If they gave this
Maid Cattes blood to drink, the pain would cease. Those which governed her,
following this foolish council, made her to swallow some. But soon after the
poor Maid changed her natural disposition, and sometimes took upon her the
nature of a Catte, wauling, leaping, and running, as those Beasts do, and
watching softly for Rattes and Mise, in every corner of the house: trying by
all means to catch them. She continued in these Cattish exercises, until the
vehemency of her fit was past. Master MARTIN VEINRICH, in his Commentary
of the beginning of Monsters.

Wonderful Natures.
THere was a certain Gentle man that could not endure an old woman should
look upon him: and as it happened once, that at a banquet there were certain
that had been invited, unknown to him, the which could not but look upon
him, his apprehension was so great, as he dyed suddenly. In the same
Commentary of Monsters.

Cattes offend many with looking on them: so as some hearing or seeing a Catte,
tremble, and are much afraid: the which I believe does not proceed alone from
the venom of Cattes, but also from their disposition that do see or hear
them, for they have by Nature this influence from Heaven, the which is never
moved to do her proper action, unless the contrary object present it self.
I have seen many of this mind and disposition in Germany, and some remaining
in Goritzia. If this proceeds only of a natural quallitie which is in few,
they that are subject unto it, show it plainly: For being in Germany, and
supping in the Winter time in a Stoue) with very good company, one of the
troop was much subject unto that humor. The Hostess knowing the disposition
of the Man, shut a little Kitlin which she had bred up, into a Cofer with-in
the Stoue, least this man seeing it should be offended. But although he did
neither see it nor hear it, yet a while after, having smelt the air of a
Catte, his disposition (enemy unto Cats) being stirred, he began to sweat,
grow pale, and trembling to cry out, not without amazement to all the
company, that there was a Catte hidden in some corner of the Stoue. MATHIOLVS
upon the 6. Book of DIOSCORIDES, Chap. 25.

I have known a Princess, adorned with all virtues of the mind and body,
that could not endure the sight of a Catte, being other-wise of an active
spirit, and armed against all the difficulties of the world. She imputed the
cause of this fear, to that which happened to her Mother, being with Child
with her: for on a time a Catte did so terrify her, as she sounded, and was
long sick of this accident. Cattes did not fear her before that time, when as
she did see them: but this falling suddenly, as it were in her lap, she was
much amazed. THOMAS ERASTVS in his Disputations. HIPPOLITVS LANZON, a Mantouan
Gentleman, did so abhor to see a Hedgehog, as if he were not suddenly drawn
away, he would sweat and faint. MARCELLVS D^NATVS in his Admiral Physical
Histories, lib. 6. Chap. 4.

I have known a Peasant in Normandy, that had never eat Bread, Flesh, Fish,
nor Cheese: Eggs were his only food and cheifest nourishment. BRVGEMIN in
his first Book of Meat, Chapt. 24. We have also seen IHON de la CHESMAYE a
Parrisien, Secretary to King FRANCIS the first, who did so detest and abhor
the smell of fruit or Apples: as he was forced to rise from the Table, when
any one was brought. And if they came but near unto his nose, he presently
bled. If he did see any by chance, and could not retire himself, he suddenly
stopped his nostrils with pieces of bread. We have heard that many, issued out
of the noble family of CANDALES in Guienne, have bin of that disposition, not
to endure the smell of Apples. The same Author.

JAMES of FARLI an excellent Physician in his time, does testify of himself,
that it troubled him as much the eating of Garlike, as if he had drunk poison,
and he added, that the same fittes which appeared in them that had drunk
poison, came unto him having eating Garlike. Some learned men hold, that this
hatred proceeds of an opinion which we have conceived, that those things which
we detest are bad, either to all in general, or to us in particular. The same.

There was at Chauny in Picardie, a Maid of an honest house, about sixteen
years old, the which unto that age had never fed of any thing but of Milk.
She could not endure the sent of bread, and if they had cast never so little of
the crumme into her Milk, she smelt it a far off, the which I have seen
with mine eyes, and carefully observed. The same BRVGERIN lib. 2. chap. 6. I
have known a man hating Cheese so much, as if they did put never so little in
his meat, he presently smelt it, and did cast up his gorge after a strange
manner. MARCELLVS DONATVS li^er 4. of his Physical observations.

There was an Italian Earl had a foote-man, who if he had eaten an Egg, his
lips began presently to swell, his face looked of a purple hew, marked with
black spots in diverse places, foming at the mouth, as if he had taken
poison. The same Author.

An Italian Lady, fair and virtuous, named FRANCISQVINE, wife to Count MATTHEW
FRANGEPAN, a Nobleman, of great power and worth, was fourteen years old,
before she could ever be drawn to eat any flesh. A certain Cardinal did
abhor the smell of Roses. Late Physicians say, that there was a whole family
at Milan, to whom the use of Cassia was so contrary, as if any one of them
took it, he dyed. The number of those that cannot taste, nor drink any kind
of Wine, without offense, is infinite. I have a Son which does abhor
Colewortes. I my self, if I see Pourslaine I loathe it. Every man has some
particular affection. SCALIGER in the 153. Exercitation against Cardan. Sect.
10.

I have known an old woman that did fly the use of Melons, in a whote
Country, hosding that meat very agreeable to others of the same place, but
for them of her age the worst in the world. My Father could never swallow any
part of a Hare, nor of any Foul. Not long since a Nobleman of accoumpt dyed,
who could never eat nor swallow any meat, if it were not somewhat Salted.
MARANTA, lib. 3. of the Method to know Simples.

The youngest Daughter to FREDERIKE King of Naples, a worthy Princess, whom I
had sometimes in cure for that cause, that she could not eat any flesh, no
not taste it. If she did but put any into her mouth, she fell into most
strange fits, howling and making horrible cries, falling to the ground, and
beating her self most pitifully. The which fittes continued half an hour,
and then she came to her self. BRASAVOL. in his Comment. 34. upon the 2. Book
of Hippocrates, how to live in sharp diseases.

We have known many, that could not by any means eat any flesh. Others that
had rather have tasted of poison, then to have put any Cheese in their mouth. I
remember a Spaniard, that had never eaten in all his life before, any Fish
what-so-euer. Being one day invited to Supper by a friend of his, they
presented a Dishe of Eggs, in the which there was a little Fish cunningly
minced. But he felt it presentlye, and had such a pain at his heart, as he
presently fell to cast, and to have a Flux so vehemently, as all thought he
would have dyed. AMATVS a Portugal in his first Centurie. Cure. 36.

I have seen a Man in my time, that could not abide neither to eat, see, nor
smell Ecles, and if he by chance came into any place, where as any were hidden
alive, he could not possibly abide to be there, but was presently in
exceeding great pain and grief. Master WEINRICH in his Commentary of
Monsters, Chapter. 8. Master AMBROSE PARE makes mention of a Nobleman in
France, which d^d sound as he was sitting at the Table, seeing an Ecle brought
in.

A Learned man a very friend of mine did assare me, that he had seen in the
City of Andwerp a certain man which did fall into extreme fittes, if at any
place where he was invited either to Dinner or Supper, they had brought in a
Pigge stufte: if he discovered it a far off, he presently changed
countenance, and his heart began to faint. JAMES HOSTVIS in his annotations
upon LEVINVS LEMNIVS.

A great Lady being at dinner with an Earl, having eaten a piece of a
Cowes-vdder (a meat which is very delicate to many) her lips began
presently to swell, and to grow wonderfully great: She confessed that she
loved that meat, but presently after she had tasted it, her lips did swell
in that manner, whereof she knew no reason. The same Author. I have observed
the Earl of Arnstad, who did so much abhor sallet oil, as they were forced
to carry all meat out of the Chamber that was in any sort dressed with it, else
he fell suddenly into very dangerous fits. The same Author. Many of our time
have not eaten any bread being loth-some unto them. I know a fam^lie, whereof
the Sons can eat no cheese, and the Daughters will eat it with a good
appetite. Their Father did not eat any, but hated it, and their Mother did
eat it. P. FOREST in the annotations upon 5. observation of the 4. books
where he treates of feauers.

A Peasant of a certain village near unto Al^mar in Holland, never received
any meat not drink what-soeuer, but only Cowes milk, and yet was as lusty
and helthfull as any man in those parts. The same Author.

CONRAD HVOER, a Country man in Suisserland of the village of Tornac in Turgou,
a good plaier of the fife as most in his time, from his infancy unto the age of
threescore years that he died, never took any other norrishment, but porrige
made with flower, milk and Water. And if to try him, they did mingle the
least crumme of bread with it unknown to him, or any other thing whatsoever,
he did presently vomit up all again: neither could he swallowe any raw
milk. As for other meats he could not endure the smell of them, yet he
could not possibly taste of them. And for wine he did sometimes taste of it,
yet seldom and very little. ZVINGER in the 6. book of the 2. volume of his
Theater.

There have been many that could not endure the smell of Roses. Being at
Rome, I did see the Cardinal CARAFFA, a famous man in his time, who every
year in the time of Roses, was forced to retier himself, and to live privately
in a Palace of his out of the way, whereas he caused the gates to be shut, and
gards to keep them, to give warning that his friends, servants and others that
came to visit him and to receive his commandments, should not unadvisedly
carry any Roses in their hands. Among the Roman Gentlemen there was one
called PETER MELIN, both learned and wise, who was much impaired of his health
by the smell of Roses. PIERIVS VALERIANVS liber 8. of Hierogliphiques, treating
of the Snayle. I have known a lacobine monk, of a Noble house in the City of
Venise, who smelling a Rose, or seeing one a far of, felt presently a
fainting at his heart, and would fall down in a sown, where he remained as
one dead. And therefore the Physicians advised him not to go out of his house
in time of Roses, for the preservation of his health. AMATVS a Portugal,
Centurie 2. cure. 36.

Don HENRY de CARDONA, Cardinal, fell into a fever when as any one presented
Roses unto him. PHILIP INGRASSE a Pysition upon the question of the di^t. And
in our time there was a Princess which could not by any means endure the
smell of a Rose, but did sound alwaie if any were brought into her Chamber.
MARTIN CROMER liber 8. of the History of Poland does witness, that a Bishop of
Bres^awe named LAVRENCE, was smothered with the smell of Roses. Doctor JOHN
ECHT a Physician, at the least smell of any sweet parfume, felt a great
alteration at the heart, and as soon as ever he did smell a read Rose, he did
neeze wonderfully. CRONENBOVRG lib. 10. of the method of Physic.

A certain man having felt an alteration at his heart seeing the juice drawn
out of a stick of Cassia, being sick he entreated his Physician not to
mingle the juice in any Physic for him. The Physician having forgotten this
advertisement, prescribed him a potion, in the which there was some of this
Cassia. The sick man having taken it began to cry out, I am a dead man, the
Cassia has killed me ALEXANDER BENEDICT. in the preface of his book of
pestilent fevers.

There is a whole famelie in the Town where I dwell, of the which neither Man
nor Woman, great nor small can endure any Diaphinicon in their Physic, but all
do cast it up again as I have seen by experience oftentimes. MARCELLIVS
DONATVS in his book of Mechoacan.

BERNARD BONY of the Noble famelie of Ragouses, a young gentleman of twenty
years of age, and of a collericke constitution, coming unto me to have me
see his urine, and to be helped by my a duice, if I found any Indisposition in
his body: I found him to have a pain in the reins of his back and a
beginning of the french-poxe. I therefore began to write, and to prescribe
him some Sirops to send for to the Apothecarie. But he willed me that I should
make no have, for that he did abhor all sweet things, as I did find
afterward: as honey, sugar, or any thing that was compounded therewith, all
which was poison unto him, and would soon kill him, if he did but taste of it.
He could eat no grapes, figs, pears, plummes, quinces, poungranets or
apples, saying that they were sweet: but he could well digest, nuts, almonds
and pignors. Vinegar was his sauce and he tasted salt things well. He could
drink no white wine nor malmsey. His drink was water. This disposition
considered, I prescribed remedies fit for his disease, wherewith he was eased.
AMATVS a Portugal, in the 6. Centur. cure 6.

There are some bodies, whom mild and gentle Physic does as much offend as
that which is violent: the which the Physicians have often observed in a great
Lady in our time, giving her a little Manna to purge her gently: for after
that she had taken it, she complained of her belly, she had a desire to
cast, cried out and grew weak, she sweat after an extraordynarie manner, and
was tormented with sundry other Accidents: and yet she has been often
purged with other stronger potions without any offenses. A Nephewe of hers, a
Nobleman that was warlike, and learned in all sciences, of a choleric
constitution, could never be purged by Manna: so as this family seemed to have
that peculiar, that Manna was contrary to their dispositions. MARANTA Book 3.
of the method to know simples. Chap. 4.

A doleful Marriage.
ANTHONY PERILLE a Neapolitaine, a rich young man, but wanting council,
having spent almost all his estate, at Cards and Dyce, suddenly he fell in love
with the Daughter of a notable Merchant, and having sounded her mind, he
demanded her in Marriage. The Father called PETER MINIO, refused him by reason
of his ill husbandry, so generally known. PERILLVS stong with shame and love,
began to revive himself, and gathering together the remainder, he resolved to
make a voyage to Alexandria in Egypt, to begin some traffic. To this end he
imbarkes with certain Merchants, but having past a good part of the way, they
are surprised with a great storm, and after three days the ship which carried
him was taken by a Pirate. Being a Captive and in great misery, MINIO a rich
Merchant and charitable, (a custom which he had long used) sent certain
factors of his upon the Coast of Barbary to redeem ten Neapolitain
prisoners out of the hands of the Turkish Pirates: of whom (if they had any
goods in their Country) he would seek satisfaction in time. And as for the
poor he did gratefie them with their ransom. PERILLVS was of the number of
these ten, and at his return to Naples having conferred secretly with MINIOS.
Daughter, who promised him marriage, he found means to pay his ransom, and
to make a new voyage into the East, where he made a happy traffic, so as in
short time he found himself in better estate th^n his Father had left him:
carrying himself moreover so virtuously, as he purchased the love of al men,
especially of MINIO, of whom having the second time demanded his Daughter in
marriage, she was granted him, to the great content of all his kins-folkes
and friends. The marriage was celebrated in June with great joy* and as these
two young copple were in bed devising of strange things that were past,
behold a violent storm arises, with strange thunder and terrible lightning,
and in the end there came a clappe, which slew them both, embracing one an
other, ending the pleasure of their marriage sollemnized that day, with the
grief and sigthes of their life. They were very honorably interred both
together, being followed by all the City with great pomp. History of Italy.

Adulterers punnished.
WHen as LEWIS the 12. made war against the Venetians, and that all Italy
was sore shaken by the fury of this long war: a certain gentleman of Milan
being tired with so many miseries, retired himself to a (...) of his, to live
there more privately. He was a Widower, about threescore years old, having
one Son of twenty years of age, and an other much younger. His age, the
misery of the time, and his quality should have retained him in the way of
honor: but forgetting the duty of a gentleman, he fell in love with a poor
farmers Daughter of his, whom he bought for ready money of the execrable
Father, who sold her and delivered her. This strumpet being full of lust and
desperately impudent, having served for a time the Fathers villenie, fell
strangely in love with the eldest Son, whom having sought with diverse
tricks and devises, in the end, on a certain day, (taking a Cousin of^ers
that was her Ba^de to help her) she comes unto him, and after the accustomed
prefaces of such impudent Creatures, she discouers her breast and her heart
unto him, seeking with tears and sig^hes to draw him to commit Incest. The
honest young man amazed at this speech, is so fortefied by GOD, as not content
with a modest and simple repulse he did sharply apprehend both her that
tempted him, and the other that did second her, threatening them with big words.

The furious lust of this bitch was presently turned into horrible hatred,
which makes her to take the way of confusion. As soon as the Father was
returned, this strumpet complains unto him, saying, that his Son had sought
three or four times to corrupt her: and in the end would have forced her, if
her servant had not come to help her. He giving credit to this wicked report,
confirmed by the Baude, began to murmr to himself* wher-vpon his Son
comes in, against whom, (without speaking any other words, but ha wicked
Traitor, it is against me that thou dare presume to play these parts) he
goes with his sword drawn. The young Gentleman turning away to avoid the
blow, and not remembering that he was upon a strait not supported, which
answered unto two lodgings, he fell backward down to the ground and was all
bruzed, so as having fallen upon a stone in the botome of the ditch, he died
presently. The Parricide (thinking that he had leapt down of his own accord)
did run after him, using new threats. But being come down and seeing his
Son in that estate, after cries of ^urie and despair, with a detestation of
his former life and of the wickedness of his strumpet, he thrust himself
through with his sword, falling upon the body of his Son, which was yet hot
and trembling, and wallowing in their common blood, went the same way. As for
the strumpet hearing by the fearful cries of the servants what had happened,
thrust on by the revenging furies, or rather pursued by the fearful judgment
of almighty GOD, the revenger of innocent blood, she flies toward a well in
the house, and leapes into it; where she was drowned. The Justice of Milan,
being called to see this accident, apprehends the servant, and makes her
confess al upon the rack: whereupon she was hanged. Her body with the
strumpets and the old man's, were cast upon the dunghill, as a preie for Birds
and Wolves. But the young Gentleman was carried to the earth with great pomp,
and lamented of all men for his virtues as much as the others were and are yet
detested of posterity. History of Italy.

A Fleming borne at Gand, of so base a parentage, as it was not known, having
run through France and other Countries, learned to be hardy both in his
words and actions: being grown cunning, speaking diverse languages, and well
appointed, he came to Bruges, where he get to be admitted into the house of
a (...) honest and rich merchant, the Father of a very honest maid, of
sixteen years of age. This gallant makes them believe that he is of a very
good house in Germany, and for that he would not be forced to marry a maid
that was not pleasing unto him, he absented himself for a time from his
Fathers house. Hereupon he carries himself so cunningly, as under a promise
of marriage, he corrupts his hosts Daughter and gets her with Child. The
Mother after some weeks, having descouered this foul trade, takes her
Daughter a part, who in the presence of the Father confesses her fault. The
Father a man of courrage not able to endure this affront, lays hold of that
Cosener, and pursues him cryminally. Being straightly examined by the Judges,
he confesses that he knew not who was his Father, and his Mother had died
of poverty, having neither kindred nor any person that did avowe him at Gand,
where he thought he was borne, nor in any other place. The Judges seeing the
Impudency of this roage, who had so vnworthly polu ted an honorable house,
condemned him to be publicly executed. Histories of our time.

NICHOLAS Prince of Opolia in Silesia, was in his time strangely given to
corrupt Wives and Maidens, so as the cha^est were not assured near him, having
continued this wretched course for some time the Judgment of GOD laid hold of
him in the year 1498. as follows. He and Prince JOHN his Brother being at
Nisse at an Assembly of the States of Silesia, being called by CASIMIR Prince
and governor of the Country. It happened that in open assembly, one brought a
packet unto CASSIMIR, the which being opened, he gave the letters to the Bishop
of Nisse, being then present, to read them. NICHOLAS, a turbulent and violent
man, imagining it was some party made against him, to seize upon his person,
lays hold on his Dagger, and suddenly runns against CASSIMIR and the Bishop,
whom he hurt, but lightly, for that many Noblemen and Gentlemen, thrust them
selves presently betwixt them. NICHOLAS having failed of his attempts, saues
himself in the Sanctuary of the Temple, from whence he was drawn by the
Bishops commandment, who alleged, that in such cases they should not respect
the Ecclesiastical laws, and that he would easily consecrate the place
again. NICHOLAS being brought back unto the assembly, and greatly blamed, was
committed to prison, and the next day the 27. of June, by a sentence given by
the Magistrate, he was publicly beheaded. The custom of those times was, that
they wear no breeches when they came to that place: when as the body of
NICHOLAS fell, it was seen in that estate, that Nature so much corrupted by
him, seemed to reproach him with his former filthiness before all the world,
IOACH, CVREVS, in his Annals of Silesia, page 218.

Vehement Passions of Sorrow, Joy, Jealousy, Fear and Heaviness.
IN the time that CAESAR B^RGIA Duke of Valentinois, and son to Pope
ALEXANDER the sixth did rule in Rom^gnia, as FRANCIS GVIC^HARDINE does show in
his History of the wars of Italy, there was in the Town of CESENA, a young
man called LIVIO, who being in love with his neighbors Daughter, named CAMILLA,
and repulst at the first, fell so sick, as he was ever at deaths door. CAMILLA
hearing thereof, changed her opinion: and going to see LIVIOS Sister, who was
also grievously sick in a chamber near unto him, her voice being known by
LIVIO, he was surprised with so vehement a passion, as after some noise, his
speech and strength failed him. His Sister and CAMILLA running unto him, (for
there was none but a thin partition of wood,) CAMILLA not able to dissemble
any longer, began to join her face to his, so as he came again unto him
self, and heard her say, that if her Father would like of the marriage, she
would not contradict it. LIVIO being recovered, demands CAMILLA, according to
the accustomed course among Men of honor. The Father referres all to the
return of his eldest Son from Rome: CAMILLA expecting this return, grew so
familiar with LIVIO, as without any longer stay, they contract marriage, by a
present promise. This Brother named CLAVDIO, diuerted the Father from this
marriage, so as LIVIO was dismissed, and CAMILLA grew so sorrowful, that after
many faintings, she be-tooke her to her bed. LIVIO on the other side did
press her by Letters and secret messages, to the accomplishment of their
marriage. They find means to talk together, and appoint an hour (...) night
for their secret marriage. The which having performed and lie^ together, the
young man transpor^ with joy, and the violence of his desire, dyed, lying
(...) CAMILLA, who feeling him stark cold and with (...), gave also up the
ghost. The servant who had (...) (...) Instrument to carry messages, began to
cry (...)* (...) Brother came running and seeing this desaster, (...) her a
mortal wound: She declares all, and dies two days after. CLAVDIO had his
head cut off for this murder. History of Italy.

In the war which King FERDINAND made against the widow of IHON King of
Hungary, about Buda: a Man at Arms was especially noted, for that he carried
himself very valiantly in a certain charge* and being unknown, was
wonderfully commended and lamented, being slain there: but of none so much as
of RAISCIAT, a German Nobleman, who admired his rare virtue. The body being
brought back, and he approaching to see it, after a common curiosity: his
Arms being taken off, he descouered that it was his Son. This did move more
compassion in the assistants, but he alone, without speaking any word, or
shutting his eyes, but standing right up, and steadfastly beholding the body of
his Son, until that the violence of his grief, had so vanquished his vital
spirits, as he fell down dead to the ground. PAVL IOVIVS in his Histories.
MONTAIGNE, lib. 1. of his Essaies. Chap. 2.

In the year 1501. when as the French did conquer the realm of Naples the
second time, under the command of the Lord of Aubigny, Lieutenant to King
LEWIS the twelfth. One of the Sons of GILBERT Duke of Montpenzier, going to
Pouzzol to see his Fathers Tomb (being dead in the former wars of Italy,
and there interred) was so oppressed with griese, as after the shedding of many
tears, he fell doowne dead upon the Sepulcher. FRA. GVIC^HARDINE Lib. 5. of
the wars of Italy. Sect. 5.

About the end of the year 1505. the Cardinal HIPPOLTTO of Este, loving a
young Maid his kinswoman very vehementlye, and she affecting Don IVLIO the
Cardinals Bastard-Brother with no less good will, confessed freely unto the
Cardinal, that above all things that which made her so amyable, was the
beauty of Don IVLIOS eyes: the Cardinal full of fury, watching a time when
as IVLIO went out of Ferrara a Hunting, compassed him about in the field, and
taking him from his Horse, he caused certain Ruffians of his to pull out his
eyes, for that they were companions of his love: Having the heart to behold
this wicked act, the which was afterward the cause of great scandalls among
the Brethren. FRRNCIS GVICCHARDINE in the end of the sixth Book of the war
of Italy. FERDINAND Brother to ALPHONSO Duke of Ferrara, and of IVLIO above
named, whose eyes Cardinal HIPPOLITO of Este had caused to be pulled out, yet
by the speedy help of the Physicians, they were put in again, without loss
of his sight, conspired the Dukes death with the said IVLIO. FERDINAND, who was
second brother unto the Duke, was moved thereunto through covetousness, to
seize upon the Duchy, and IVLIO for that it seemed unto him that ALPHONSO did
not apprehend the wrong that had bin done him, being out of hope to be revenged
of the Cardinal by any other means. Count ALBERTVS BOSCHET, a Gentleman of
Modena, was acquainted with their councels and practice: and having wone and
corrupted some men of base condition, which were continually near to ALPHONSO,
to give him delight, they had oftentimes great means to kill him: but
restrained by a fatal fear, they always let slip the occasion, so as the
matter being discovered (as it happens almost always, when the execution of a
conspiracy is deferred) FERDINAND and his confederats were imprisoned, and
IVLIO, who (the conspiracy being discovered) was fled to Mantoua to his
sister: was by the Marquis decree sent prisoner to ALPHONSO, after a promise
made that he would not put him to death. Count ALBERTIN with his consederates
were quartered, and the two Brethren condemned to perpetual prison, in the
new Castle of Ferrara. GVICCHARDINE lib. 7. sect. 3.

The Cardinal of Pauia, the Popes Legate, being fled out of Bolonia, besieged
by the French in the year 1511. and was the cause of the loss of it, and of
many other great disorders which ensued, being accused by some of Infidelity,
and by others of cowardice and indiscretion. Being retired to Rauenna, to purge
himself of that which had happened, he gave notice of his coming to the
Pope, and demanded audience: whereof the Pope who loved him exceedingly, was
very joyful, and invited him to dine with him. But as he went, being
accompanied with GVY of Vain his Brother in law, and of his guard of
Horsemen. The Duke of Vrbin General of the Popes Army, an ancient enemy to
the Cardinal, being yet mad with disdain and despite, for that he had
said, that the rebellion and loss of Bolonia, had come through his fault, and
by that means the Army put to route, whereof he was General, he went
toward him, and being entered among the Horsemen of his guard, (who to do him
honor, made him place) he slew this Cardinal with his Poynard, it may* be
unworthy for the degree which he held, the which ought not to have any violence
nor outrage offered unto it, but otherwise most worthy of any cruel
punishment, for his infinite and odious vices. GVICCHARDINE lib. 9. sect. 18.

The Lord YVES of Alegre, Captain of a company of men at Arms, at the
Battle of Rauenna, in the year 1512. seeing a Bataylion of Italian foot to
make head against the Gascoyne, he gave them so furious a charge, as he
forced them to retire, but with more valor then good hap, in regard of the
success: for the Seigneor of Viuaraiz his own Son, having been slain
before his eyes, he being loath to survive so great an affliction, rides into
the thickest of his enemies, where he was slain, (after the death of many of
his enemies) fighting as it did become a valiant Captain. GVICCHARDINE, lib.
12. Sect. 14.

PHILIP Father to PETER STROSSH, chief of the banished men of Florence, against
Duke COSMO of Medicis, having been taken prisoner in fight, fearing to be put
to death by the hands of Justice, he resolved to kill himself: Whereupon a
Spaniard that kept him came unto him, and going out of the Chamber where-as
PHILIP was, he unadvisedly left his sword there. Being a little gone, PHILIP
bars the door unto him, and suddenly takes the sword, setting the point
against his throat, he falls on it with all his force* and so kills himself
upon the Table. They found upon the table a little note written with his own
hand, showing, that seeing he could not live as his estate required: he had
shortened his days, for that he would no longer remain in the world. P. IOVIVS
in his Histories: Supplement of Sabellic.

ANTHONY VRIE, surnamed CODRVS, a learned man in our time, as his written
works do witness, had his Chamber and his Study behind the Palace of
FORLI, but so dark from day light, until nine of the clock as of necessity
he was enforced to have a Candle. He used a Lamp of earth, very fair and
artificially made, on the top whereof was graven a devise in Latin, containing,
That those studies which smelt of the Lamp, smelt well. Having left it light
in his Chamber, going one morning into the Town about his business. In his
absence (no man knows how) fire took hold of his Papers, and in a short time
of all the corners of his study, where as all was consumed, both Papers,
Books, and moueables. Among other writings of his hand, there was a Book
burnt, entitled, Pastor, with all the rest of his estate, in regard of
worldly goods. They say, that at the first brute of this fire, he entered into
such a rage against himself, as crying out like a madman, and running up and
down the streets toward the Palace, being near unto his Chamber, where-at
he durst not enter for fear of the fire: he began to say, addressing his
speech to the Son of GOD: What have I done to thee, O CHRIST? or how have I
offended thine, that thou should strike me, and displaye upon me a
testimony of thine inexpiable hatred. Then turning to an Image of the Virgin
MARY. Hearken Virgin what I say unto thee with a settled Judgment, and as I
believe. If happily at the hour of my death I recommend my self unto thee,
hear me not, neither accept me in the number of thine, for I make accoumpt
to be damned. His friends there present did what they could to temper this
fury: but the boiling choler, causing a fire in this miserable man's heart,
more flaming and violent then any worldly fire, would not suffer him to hear
any thing that might comfort him. He was so oppressed with his passion, as
having threatened all his friends, if they continued to follow him, he went out
of the Town, and not able to be stayed, he got into a thick Forest near
unto Forly: where as he past all that day in terrible discourses, and
agitations of the mind, as every one may conjecture. Returning late, and
finding the doors shut, he lay upon a dunghill until daie-light. In the
morning he enters, goes and hides himself in a Carpenters house, where he
continued six whole months. Without any books, or conference with any man.
He lived a good while after, quite changed from what he was, careless of the
true or false religion, and died miserably. BARTHELM^VVE of Bolognia in his
life.

In the year 1552. ALDANA a Spaniard Lieutenant to King FERDINAND in the war
of Hongarie, going to the seege of Segedin, he committed FIGVEROA a Spanish
Captain to the gards of boats at the passage of a River named Tisse, who
having news of ALDANAS shameful flight upon a vain fear, did as his
Commander, and having left the passage, he studied how to make his retreat.
Soon afterward being in rage against himself, for his error, he resolved
to kill himself, the which his rider did hinder all he could: but FIGVEROA
being determined to do the deed, he entreated his ryder to stay for him
under a tree, whilst that he went to untruss a point. His man who had taken
his arms from him, obeyed him in the rest. But being at his ease under the
tree, he fell a sleep, attending his Master; FIGVEROA, approaching softly
unto him, stool away a pistol, wherewith he slew himself upon the place.
ASCANIVS CENTVRIVS Book 4. of his Hi^torie of the war of Transiluania.

The Venetians having been defeated at Guiaraddade by King LEWIS the twelfth
the fourteen day of May 1509 and then spoiled of most of that which they
held upon the maine land, being amazed at their Losses, and fearing least the
King should proceed with his victories, their affairs in their own opinions
being reduced to the extremity: the fear which they had conceived was so
violent, as without any good consideration of themselves or advice, their
companies being retired to a place called Mestre, living at discretion, without
any military discipline: they resolved to quit the Seigneurie of the firm
Land, that they might have no more the Emperor, King, nor Pope for their
enemies, as before they had: as also to take all occasion from the King of
approaching to Venise. They feared some tumult also in the City by the people,
or by the great multitude of Strangers that did inhabit there: these for the
desire of spoil, and those because* they would not endure, seeing they were
borne in the same C^ttie, and many of the same blood and famely, to see
themselves deprived of honors and public charges, and to be in a manner
subject to the Gentlemen in all things. To increase their despaier and want of
courrage, this reason was yet alleged in the Senate, that if they did willingly
abandon and quit the Seigneury, to fly the present dangers, good fortune
returning they should recover it the more easily: for that the people which had
bin voluntarily separated from them, would make no so great resistance not to
return under the obedience of their ancient Lords, as if they had been
divided by a manifest rebellion. By these reasons, the Venetian generositie was
laid under foot, with the greatness of that glorious Commonweal, being
content to retain only the salt Waters, they sent Commissions to their
Magistrates and officers that were in Padoua, Verona and other Towns,
appointed by the atticles of the League, to the Emperor MAXIMILIAN; commanding
them to depart presently, and to leave them in the peoples power. Moreover, to
the end they might obtain a peace of MAXIMILIAN, at what price and with what
conditions soever: they sent unto him with great speed ANTHONY JUSTINIAN for
Ambassador, who having a public audience, he made a pitiful oration, and
with great submission: but it was in vain, for the Emperor refused to make any
accord without the King with whom the Venetians would not by any means
treat. This Oration you may read at large in GVICIHARDIN, the which does
show (as appeeres by the Annotations in the margent) the baseness of
mankind, which adversity does lay open, and show what it is, that is to
say wretched in every sort: and that when as man's eloquence is amazed, his
discouses are Childish, and full of importunate and insupportable fllaterie. To
conclude, in all the Venetians submissions, who yielded themselves as it were
with halters about their necks, to one that could not greatly relieve them,
we see daiely the fruits of fear, which subjects all polliticke States as
well as private persons, to base actions, and the soueraig^e Judge abating the
power of their seats, and confounding the greatest and wisest wits of this
world. FR. GVICHIARDIN Book 8. Sect. 7. 8. 9.

In that famous Battle of Pauia, in the year 1524. JOHN DIESPACH, Colonel
of the Suisses, seeing his Battay lion charged and put to route, by the Marquis
of Guast, general of the Imperial foot, having made no fight, and that
neither with words, nor with his sword he could make their enseignes turn
again he was so oppressed with grief, as he resolved to have no share in this
infamous retreat. Whereupon he runs desperately among the enemies, and
their fighting valiantly, dyed like a worthy Commander in the War. P.
IOVIVS in the life of the Marquis of Pescara liber 16.

POMPERANT, a French Gentleman, seeing Auerse taken by the troops of the
Emperor CHARLES the 5. being amazed at this inconvenience, lifting up his eyes
to Heaven, and oppressed with extreme sorrow, he fell down to the Earth, and
so died with his eyes open, notwithstanding any remedies that could be applied
unto him. P. IOVIVS lib* 26. of his Histories.

ZEANGER Son to SVLTAN SOLOMON, seeing upon the ground, the body of his
Brother MVSTAPHA who had been strangled with a bowe-string, by the Fathers
commandment: in the presence of this Parricide, ^ee pulled out his poynard,
and after some reproaches, slew himself. ASCANIVS CENTORIVS Book 6. of the
wars of Transiluania. ALPHONSO ALBVGVERGVE, Lieutenant for the King of
Portugal at the East Indies, having about the year 1514. settled Governors in
Malaca, to administer Justice to merchants, being two noblemen of the Country,
the one called NINACHETVEN, the other VTERIMVTA^AIA; a while after he changed
his opinion, and entreated NINACHETVEN to resign his dignity, to give it to an
other Nobleman, that was King of Campar, which is a little kingdom in those
Countries toward the South. NINACHETVEN understanding that they were gone
tofetch this petty King, to install him in his place, resolved with himself
not to endure to be so degraded. He therefore caused a high Scaffold to be
built, supported by certain Pillars, hung with Tapistry, and beautified with
Flowers, and store of Persumes. This done, he put on a roabe of cloth of gold,
all covered with precious Stones* being thus appointed, he came into the
street, and went up the stairs unto the Scaffold. There was below a pile of
sweet Wood, orderly laid and kindled. This extraordinary pomp of
NINACHETVEN, caused all men to open their eyes and ears, being ignorant what
this preparation meant. Then began NINACHETVEN to make a pitiful speech, and
first of all he remembered the services which he had done to the Portugals
before the taking of Malaca: what he had done since in favor of their King:
and how constant and faithful he had showed himself in his duty, with what
resolution he had hazarded his life in many places, for proof of his
loyalty. That for recompense of so many good services, the Portugals would
defame his old age in that sort, as it was impossible to find a man that had
his honor in any recommendation, that could digest such a disgrace: for they
dispoyled him of the change which they themselves had given him: they degraded
him of his honors, making so small an account of him, as to have him end his
days ignominiously, and to be a fable and scorn to all the world. That for
his part he had ever valued his life less then his honor, and had resolved to
dye, to preserve his reputation: and therefore at that instant he did willingly
change his life with death, rather then to endure the aff^ont which they meant
to do him. Ending his speech, he cast himself into the fire, where he ended
his life. Eu^ry one lamented and wept for this man thus dead, considering what
he had done for the Portugals, his fidelity in all Accidents, and the
pitiful end of his age: so as many were much amazed at this spectacle.
OSORIVS lib. 9. of his History of Portugal Chap. 27.

A rich merchant falling in love with a certain maid yielded so much unto his
passion, as he was transported beyond the bounds of reason, so as he became
mad, and seized with a strange melancho like humor, so as he was tormented
with horrible visions both by day and night: some times crying out and
storming, sometimes laughing with open throat: He swear that his best
beeloued was continually before his eyes, he flattred and made much of her: as
if she had been present: then suddenly he would blame her, and outrage her in
every sort, for that she refused to love him. He spoke not but of her, all the
day he did nothing but sigth and complain: the night he had his eyes still
open with sorrowing, and had often killed himself, if his kins-folkes and
friends had not kept him. Having continued seven months in this estate, I
was called to help him, and with great difficulties by the grace of GOD, I did
Physic him so happily, as he recovered his former wits again FR.
VALERIOLA in his Pysicall observations book 2. Obserua. 7.

A Councellor of the Parliament at Grenoble being taken with the love of a
Gentlewoman, was so wonderfully passioned, as he left his place and all
honesty, to follow her where-soeuershee went. Being contemned by her, he
grew so careless of his own person, as he was full of Lice, which got such
an habit in him, as he could never be freed of them, for they grew upon him,
and came out of all parts of his body, as we see worms come out of rotten
Carrion. Finally some days before his death, seeing himself touched with the
hand of GOD, he began to despaier of his mercies* and to shorten his days, he
resolved to star^e himself: besides the Lice had taken such hold upon his
throat, as if they would choke him. They that saw this pitiful spectacle
were much amazed, and for pity concluded to force him to eat: and to make him
take some coulisses, and for that he resisted the^ with all his force, they
bound his arms, and kept his mouth open with a staff, whilst they put in the
meat. Being thus used, he died like a mad beast, through the aboudance of
Lice, which entered into his throat. This happened in the year 1559. The second
History of France.

Pope LEO the 10. being advertised of the taking of Milan, which he had
extremely desired, fell into such an excess of joy, as a fever took him and
he died. MONTAIGNE liher 1. of his Essaies. Chap. 2. PAVL. IOVIVS in the life
of LEO the tenth. lib. 4. SINAN general of the Turks Galleies, having
recovered his only Son, whom he held to be lost, died suddenly for joy
of. IOVIVS in his Histories. Some woman have died for joy, sorrow and other
violent passions. But we will speak thereof in an other Book. At the battle
of Serisoles, Mounsieur D' ANGVIEN offered once or twice to kill himself,
despayring of the day, for that it was not succesfull whereas he did fight,
thinking by his rashness to deprive himself of the Glory of so goodly a
victory. The Isle of Gaza being forced by the Turks some years since, a
Sicilian that had two fair Daughters ready to marry, slew them with his own
hand, and their Mother who came running to their death. This done he went into
the street with a Cros-bowe and a Harguebuze, and with two shot slew two of
the first Turks that approached near his door and taking his sword in his
hand, he went furiously among them, where he was suddenly cut in pieces, and
so he freede himself from bondage, after that he had delivered his
Children. MONTAIGNE Book 2. of his Essaies Chap. 3.

It was told me that a prisoner of qualetie, being in the Concergerie at Paris,
his friends being advertised that he should be undoubtedly condemned; to
avoid the infamy of such a death, they suborned a Priest to tell him, that
the Souueraigne means for his delivery, was to recommend himself to a
certain Saint with such a vow, and that he should remain eight days
without taking of any norrishment, notwithstanding any weakness or faynting
that he should feel. He believed him, and by this means was the cause of
his own death, without thinking of it. The same Author.

Some years since, two Leagues from my house there was a Country man, who
lived long since, having his head long troubled, with jealousy of his Wife,
coming one day from his work, and she welcomming him home with her
accustomed cries, he entered into such fury, as presently with his hook which
he held in his hand, he cut off those pieces which put him into this great
fever, and threw them suddenly at her face. And it is said, that a young
Gentleman of our own Nation, having by his importunity seduced a Gentlewoman:
growing desperate that being ready to enjoy her, he could not perform any
thing, he presently cut of his own privy parts in his Lodging, and sent
this cruel and bloody sacrifice, for a purgation of his offense. MONTAIGNE
liber 2. of his Essaies Chap. 29.

ANDREW CONTAREN a Venetian Gentleman, being sickly and by reason of his
Indisposition somewhat weak of brain, made suit to have some charge of
importance. Being refused in open Council, and coming soon after into the
company of diverse young Gentlemen. Who thinking to jest with him said that
FRANCIS FOSCARIN Duke of Venise had been the cause of his repulse, and that
during his life, CONTAREN must never hope to be advanced. Being possessed with a
violent passion of choler and despite, he watched a time when as the Duke
came down into the golden Chapel to hear Mass. He stays upon the
stairs, makes show to have some business of importance to impart unto him.
Those did accompany the Duke went aside, that CONTAREN might have the more
liberty to speak unto him. Then he drew forth a poinard from under his
cloak with the which he had slain the Duke, if the Ambassador of Sienna had
not stayed CONTARENOS arm, so as insteede of striking him into the body, he
did hit him in the cheek near the nose. Presently many Senators run
thither, they save the Duke and seize upon CONTAREN who sought by all means
for to save himself. Afterward he had his hand cut off upon the same
staiers, and then was hanged in the accustomed place. Such was the reward of
his violent passion. SABELLICVS Book 1. of his 3. Decade.

The violence of despair was strange in LAVRENCE LEVRENTINIAN a learned
Physician at Florence. Having bought a house, and paid a third part of the
price; with a condition, that if he paid not the rest with*in six months, it
should be lost: The time being come, having no money to satisfy, he was so
troubled, as without any further advice he cast himself headlong into a deep
Well, at what time PETER SODERIN, great Gonfalonier of Florence, governed the
Commonweal before the Rule of the Medicis. P. IOVIVS in the Life of famous
men.

I have seen a man which grew fearful and amazed of himself, crying out
sometimes like a Child; though otherwise he had as much Force and courage as
any man could have. It is reported also of a Nobleman of Spain, that he was
so full of fear, that if they did but shut any door of the house where-in
he was at a certain hour in the night, he conceived such a fear and was so
troubled, as oftentimes he would cast himself out at the Windows. ANT.
TORQVEMADO in the third journey of his discourses.

I have seen a woman my near K^ns-woman trobled with a certain Melancholic
humor, which some term Mirrachie, (the which does sometimes cause frenzy
and madness in them that are touched with it) so to help her self with
discretion and reason as it could never vanquish her. It was strange to see the
combat betwixt Reason and Melancholy in this Woman, which cast her-selfe
groueling upon the ground in the extremity of her fit, tare her clothes,
cast stones at them that looked on her, fought with them that met her, and
committed many such other follies: but through reason she continued so
constant, as in the end this humor left her, remaining as sound and perfect of
judgment as before. In the same Author.

In the year 1558. the Curate of Curpre in Scotland, seeing that his
Parishoners (to the contempt of the authority which he thought to have over
them) were in despite of him entered into his Parish Church, and beaten down
all the Images, he fell into such a choler, melancholy, and despair, by
reason of this act, as he slew himself with his own hands. BVCHANAN, liber
6. of his History of Scotland. A certain man did so abhor all Physic, as
the very smell of a potion did so move him, as he was forced to go seven
times to the stool instantly, whereas he that had taken the same po^ion
should go but thrice. Master AMBROSE PARE in his Introduction to Surgerie.
Chap. 22.

A Groom of the Lord of Lansacs Chamber reported, that a French Gentleman
being in Poland, had a quarten Ague, and walking along the River of Vistula,
in the beginning of his fit, he was thrust by a friend of his in jest into
the River: wherewith he was so terrified, that although he could swim very
well, and the other also that thrust him, yet he never after had any fever.
The same Author. Chap. 23. At the Camp at Amiens, King HENRY the second
commanded me to go to Dourlan, to dress many Captains and Souldiars which
had been hurt by the Spaniards at a sallie. Captain Saint AVEIN, lying near
to Amiens, as valiant a Gentleman, as any was in his time in France, although
he had when the Alarm was given a fit of a quarten Ague, risse out of his
bed and went to Horse, to command a part of his company, where he was shot
through the neck with a Harguebuze, the which made him to apprehend death so
much, as he presently lost his Ague, and was afterward cured of his wound,
and lived long after. The same Author.

FRANCIS VALLERIOLA a most famous Physician at Arles, writes in the 4.
observation of the 2. book of his observations, of an Inhabitant of the said
Town of Arles, called JOHN BERLE, who had line many years bed-ridde, by
reason of a palsy. It happened that the chamber whereas he did lie was on
fire, burning the bordes and some stuff near unto his Bed. He seeing him
self in danger to be burnt, with much pain got unto a Window, out at the
which he cast himself, and began presently to walk, and was cured of his
palsy. The same VALERIOLA writes in the same Observation, a strange History of
a Kins-man of his called IO^N SOBIRAT, who lay at Auignon, lame of both his
Legs, having had his Hammes shronke up with a Convulsion about six years.
One day he grew into so great a choler against his servant, as reaching at
him to strike him, the Sinews stretched forth presently and grew supple, so as
his Legs recovered their strength, and he went right up, and so continued
ever after, The same Author.

The Archbishop of Bourges, a very old Man, who had not gone of four years
before, hearing that a certain troop of horse (which the Earl of Montgommery
had brought from Orleans) had surprised Bourges; and knowing how much he had
wronged and offended them that were then at that instant the strongest, carried
away with this apprehension, he found his legs so well, as he went on foot
from his Chamber into the street, and so to the great Tower causing all his
money and plate to be carried with him. The History of the first troubles of
France under CHARLES the 9. lib. 7.

At the same time near to Issoudun in Berry, the Seigneor of Condray (whose
Castle was beseeged by the Lord of Yuoys troops) having a little before taken
certain poor men, and delivered them to the Seigneor of Sarzay, then
commanding in Yssoudun, who had commanded them to be hanged: he fearing to
be taken saved himself in a farm house of his, called Roueziers, where he
dyed of Fear. In the same History, and in the same book.

In a Town in Italy called Eugubio, there was a Man much tormented with
Jealousy, who seeing that he could not descouer if his Wife abandoned her
self to any other, having threatened to do her a shrewd turn, he gelded
himself, that if afterward she should happen to be with child, she should
presently be found guilty of Adultery. Lib. 1. Of the conference of Ancient
wonders with modern.

I have seen with mine eyes, a Gentleman sitting by a Gentlewoman, an honest
Widow, whom he sought to marrye, as afterward he did. Discoursing with her
one day at Dinner, a Vein of the Temple near unto his Ear, opened of it
self from the which there issued and came very much blood, the which he
thought to stop with his Hand-kercher. I was sitting at the table with them
in a Castle whether I was called to cure a Gentleman that was sick. MAT.
CORNAX, lib. 1. Of his consultations of Physic. chap. 3.

A young maiden being kept from marriage grew so sad as she wept continually,
and would admit no comfort, whereof followed an extreme pain in her head,
which bread a falling sickness whereof soon after she died. The same Author.

A certain Knight an Albanois, having after great su^e obtained an honest
Italian Widow to his wife, being one of the fairest women of her time, after
some months he grew jealous of her without any cause, with a wonderful strange
passion. For he had no opinion of her that she either had or would wrong her
honor: but only he was trobled what should become of her after his death,
fearing least any other should enjoy so rare a beauty. Upon this passion which
did torment him continually he takes a furious resolution. One night which was
the last, having showed all the love he could devise unto his wife, who loved
him sincerely: in the end he drew a naked Dagger from under his beds head, and
embracing his wife with the one hand, he stabbed her with the other. Which
done he strikes himself to the heart, and dies presently. The wife not quite
dead, reports the whole history to such as came running ^n at the cry of her
chamber-maide, and that the Knight had discovered his strange and cruel
Jealousy, a little before he struck her, and then she died quietly. Hist. of
Italy.

A young Gentleman in the Emperor CHARLES the fifth his Court, being in love
with a Gentlewoman wrought so, as partly by love, partly by force he had her
maidenhead, the which being known, and having committed this act in the
Emperors Court, he was committed to prison and condemned to loose his head: and
having notice given him over night, that the next day should end his life,
that night was so terrible unto him, and wrought such an impression, as the
next day coming out off prison, to go before the seat of Justice, and hear
the sentence of death, no man did know him, no not the Emperor himself. For
fear had so changed him, that whereas the day before he had a Vermillion
hew, of a flaxen hair, and of a pleasing aspect: he was now like unto a
body taken out off the Grave, having the hair of his head and beard, like to
one of seuentye years old, and he had the resemblance more of one that had
been hanged, then of a living man.

The Emperor thinking there had bin some fraud used, and that some other
offender had been foysted into this Gentleman's place, who was not yet 28.
years old, he caused a search to be made, whence this wonderful and sudden
change should come. and then beholding wistly this poor offender thus
terrefied, the desire of just vengeance was converted and turned into mercy:
and as it were revived out of a deep amazement, he said unto him. I pardon
thy offense; commanding that they should let him go, adding withal that he
had been punished sufficiently for his fault, without the loss of his head.
LEVINVS LEMNIVS lib. 2. chap. 2. Of the complexion of man's body. Whereunto he
does add certain reasons of this strange alteration. The which I here set
down adding some words for the better explaning thereof.

Being demanded of a great personage the cause of this prodigious change; I
answered that we must impute it to the deep apprehension and attentive
thought of approaching death, peercing through the heart: for the affection and
passion of the mind, being amazed was so violent and so bitter to the young
Gentleman, as the vital spirits were almost quenched and suffocated in him, all
the parts of the body loosing their lively and pleasing color, did wither and
fade suddenly; so as the roots of the hair, nourished and watered by the
fuming vapor that is betwivt the skin and the flesh, as the herbs in the
ground, that are touched with a cold and dry quality, they did wither, and
presently loose their natural beautye: for even as the leaves of Trees and
Vines in the heat of Summer grow some times y^alow and pale, by any excess
of heat, hayle, rain or a cold Northerly wind: even so the vigor of the
body, the color, the outward show, the hair which is no part, but simply a
dependence of the body, takes the color of gray or white, because that which
did maintain them is quenched. The which we do see happen to most men that
have been in dangers in the Wars, or in hazard at Sea, or that have been
touched with dangerous diseases: for then they think but of one thing, which
is, that Death has taken them by the throat, if not perchance (through long
custom, solid instruction and good resolution by the precepts of true
Philosophy, and by the assistance of more then a humane spirit) they be not
accustomed nor used to fear so much. The which we see is ordinary and common
in many old Souldiars and Martiners in regard of their long and continual
practice.

When as the horror of Death surpriseth any one, or that the imagination
thereof, more bitter then death it self is framed in the thought, they die
sometimes before they are dying, as it has happened unto many, or else the
Senses are dulled and mortefied, so as the offenders feel not the strokes, as
we have seen in many that have been be-headed, and broken upon the Wheel,
resembling men that have Apoplexies, Lethargies, falling-Sicknes, Sowndings; or
like to others which open their eyes, yet neither see nor know any man. The
dangers incident to Sea and Land, whereas the Image of Death appears before
their eyes, and does fix it self more strongely in the thought, make them
that are in them to tremble and look pale: the blood retires it self and
flies from all parts toward the fortress of the heart: all the parts of the
body in an instant want their norishment, not any one does discharge his due
function, but the feet stagger, the sight grows dymme, the force fayles, the
understanding becomes blunt, the spirit dull, the cheeks lean and withered,
the tongue fumbling, and the teeth shaking in the head. To conclude there is no
man, how strong and confident so ever, that is not amazed when any mortal
danger surpriseth him suddenly.

True it is that a Christian fixing his hope in the grace of GOD, recouers his
spirits by little and little, shakes of fear, assures himself, and becomes
invincible, opposing himself with a cheereful and undaunted courrage to any
danger that he sees inevitable: except that that for death is horrible and
fearful to al Nature which has breathing of life: for that it destroys this
nature. We see some that are dull, some furious and mad, and others that are
altered by decrepit age, by bodily indisposition, by erroneous precepts and
doctrine, by violent and disordered passions more then fear, which apprehend
nothing, but perish in danger and are extinct before they doubt any thing.

An other young Gentleman a Spaniard, called JAMES OSCRIO, borne of a Noble
family, grown in love with a Gentlewoman of the Court, having made an
appointment with her, he climes up into a thick tree in the Kings Garden, and
hid himself there, expecting his opportunity. Thereupon a little Dog comes,
who by his baying discouers him whom they cause to come down, to commit to
prison, that he might answer with the hazard of his head, this crime which was
held capital in those places, for diverse reasons. Sentence of death being
given against him, he was so terrified as the next day he was grown all white,
like a man of fower-score years old, and was no more known then the other. In
like sort the King of Spain Grand father to CHARLES the fifth, gave him his
pardon. HADR. JUNIUS in his Comentarie of the hair of the head. ca. 10. LO:
VIVES in his preface upon SCIPIOS dream.

Reason does teach and examples do confirm that black hair or any other
color grow white through fear, If that which nourishes the hair fayles,
we grow bald: if it be corrupted, they grow white, for that an unkind and an
unnatural humor succeedes that which is grown could, we have a history in
our time under FRANCIS GONZAGVE: he having suspected one that was allied unto
him of treason, caused him to be imprisoned in a strong Tower, resolving to
give him the rack, and to put him to death. The next day morning his keeper
came to tell him that the prisoner was grown all white. This accident did
mollefie the Princes heart, causing him to pardon and give the prisoner his
life. JULIUS CAESAR SCALIGER in the 312. exercitation against CARDAN.

A Falconer seeking on the top of a high Rock for an Eyrie of
Sparrow-hawkes, feeling the Rope, which he went down by to break, conceived
such a fear, as suddenly his hair grew white. CAEL. RHODIGINVS, lib. 13.
chap. 27. Of his ancient lessons. I have known some, which being escaped
beyond all hope from ship-wrake, have in a moment grown all graie. HADR.
JUNIUS in his Comentary of the hair of the head, chap. 10.

I am no good Naturalist (as they term them) neither do I know well how Fear
does work in us; but undoubtedly it is a strange passion, and the Physicians
say, that there is not any one does sooner trans-port the judgment out off
her due place. I have seen many that have grown mad through fear, and it
is certain in them that are most settled, whilst the fit continues, it does
cause terrible amazements. I leave to speak of the vulger sort, to whom it
does some times represent their great Grandfather coming out of the Grave in
a sheet, sometimes wild-Woolues, Hobgoblins, and Bug-beares. But even among
Warriors themselves, where it should find least place, how often has it
changed a flock of Sheep into a squadron of Corseletts? Reeds and Canes, for
Men at Arms and Lances: our Friends for our Enemies? and a White Cross for a Red? When as the Duke of Bourbon took Rome, an Ancient that was in guard in
Saint PETER'S Bourg, was so amazed at the first Alarm, as he went out at a hole
in the Wall made with a great shot, with his Colors in his hand out off the
Town, going directly toward the enemy, thinking that he had retired into
the Cittye: but seeing Monsieur de Bourbons Troops prepare themselves to
encounter him, supposing it had been a Salley which they of the Town had
made, he came to himself, and turning head re-entered by the same hole,
having gonne three hundred paces before the Company.

The Ancient to Captain IVILLE was not so fortunate, when as S. POL was taken
from us, by the Earl of Bure and Monsteur de Reu. For being so transported
with fear, as he cast himself with his Colors out off the Town, by a
Canonier he was taken and cut in pieces by the Assaylants. And at the same
seege the Fear of a Gentleman was Admirable and Memorable, the which did so
nippe and congeale his Heart, as he fell stark dead at the breach, without
any wound. M. MONTAIGNE. lib. 1. Of his Essays. chap. 18.

Pope PAVLVS the third, having in the year of our LORD GOD 1536. exhorted the
Emperor CHARLES the 5. and the great King FRANCIS to parle together at Nice,
the Emperors Fleet came to anchor in the port of Ville franche, where they
stayed a day. About Noone, as some Imperiallists, did walk beholding the Sea
and the high Alps, they discovered a thick cloud, which did rise like the
smoke of a Palace standing on the side of a Hill not far from them. And for
that this Cloud did increase and grow by little and little, some began to
maintain and say, that it was a mournful sign, and that BARBAROSSA General
of the Turks fleet did approach, to surprise both the Pope and the Emperor.
Upon this fear they give an Alarm. All the whole Fleet is so terified, as
the Marquis of Guast Colonel of the foot, persuaded the Emperor to get to
the top of the Appenin hills, and ANDREW DORIA who commanded as Admiral,
caused them to weigh their Anchors and to turn their Galleyes, yet the Emperor
would not stir, saying it was a false brute. as it appeared soon after, that
a contri-man fanning beans in the open Air to draw them from their chafe,
had caused much dust, and at six and thirty several times had raised this
smoke, which many did hold to be six and thirty Galleys, yet some Matriners
did affirm that it was the Turkish Fleet. But the deceit being discovered,
this fear (which had made most of them to look pale and tremble) was now
turned into mirth and laughing. P. IOVIVS. lib. 17. of his Histories. I do not
here make mention of the fear the Armies were in, in the Realm of Naples, and
at the battle of Montlhery; in the one of them they took a Heard of Srags, and
Hindes for a troop of men at arms; and in the other Thistles for a squadron
of Pike-men: as IOVIANVS PONTANVS lib. 2. of the war of Naples. PHI. COMINES
in the History of LEWIS the 9. and PAVL AEMELIVS. lib. 10. make mention: for
that I do chiefly busy my self about Histories that are lately past.

In the third Ciuill-warre of France under CHARLES the ninth in the year 1568.
the Armies being in Poitou, near unto Iasenueil, it happened that the Prince
of Conde having fa^led of an Enterprise, and retyring in the night, all the
baggage of his foote-men stayed by a wood side, in the Reere of his Men at
Arms: where the Gun-carts and servants made all things ready thinking they
should have camped there, making above 4000 Fyres, not seeing the Prince retire
by reason of the night. Some of the Duke of Anious Army, set to encounter the
Prince, seeing this great number of fires, thought certainly that it was the
Princes Army, and that they should have battle the next day: which made them
the more careful to fortefie their Camp, Captain GARIES offered to go and
descouer what it was: but they would not hazard any thing against these brave
soldiers, who talked, song, and made great cheer about their Fires, without
any apprehension at all: they left fear to the others, who imagined that which
was not. History of our Time.

About six and twenty years since there was a false brute of the coming of
the Turks Army to invade Austria: so as both Citizens and Country men
(without knowing the Author) took a strange alarm, saying one unto another
that the Turk approached with so many thousand men, and had no more to do, but
to enter into the Country. The fear was so great as all abandoning their
Houses, Villages and Towns, began to dislodge in great troops, with their
Wives and children, some on horseback, others in Carts, and the most part on
foot running as fast as the could to Towns and places of strength, in such
great have, as many children falling to the ground were there miserably slain
under the Horse feet, and the Cart-wheeles running with all speed. The
Barronesse of Rosestin, an honorable Lady and of singular piety, has told
me, that her husband being then at Lints, the Captain of the Castle of
Schallenbourg, seated upon the side of a rock where as she then was,
advertised her that many troops of Men, Women and Children came running
thither ward. She putting her head out at a window, and seeing these poor
people run like scattered sheep, sent one of her servants on horseback
unto them, to know the cause of this amazement. Being returned he said that
all these poor people did assure him that the Turkish squadrons were very
near at their heels. Upon this report, the Baroness received all them that
fled: so as the Castle, the base Court and the ditches were all very full
with them. This sudden fear did run from Vienna unto Lints, which is about
some thirty hours journey. The trumpet of Lints that stood in a watch Tower,
which descouered a far of, gave the Alarm, as if the Turks had been hard
even at hand so as all they of the Town ran presently unto their arms. But
being soon after known that it was a troop of Hungarian Oxen, which had
raised a great dust, every man retired: and those that had fled being
dispersed in diverse places recovering their spirits by little and little,
returned home to their houses. M. JAMES HOST a Physician, in his History of the
golden tooth of a Child in Silesia.

In the year 1592. an other fear did shake all the City of Labac, the
chee^e City of Carnia, some one having reported that a mighty Turkish army
approached so near as without any word speaking, all both young and old,
great and small, began to take an alarume, and to trusse up their baggage:
making up their packes, and lading of Carts with the best stuff they had, the
poorer sort carried what they could upon their shoulders, and Women bare their
young children in their arms, and the bigger they led in their hands. The
streets did echo again with sighs, lamentations and miserable cries,
mingled with a strange confused noise through-out all the Cittye: To conclude
it was a pitiful spectacle. So as the news continuing and remaining still
that the Turks approached and drew nere, there was nothing to be expected but
a horrible flight of all in general, with such blind disorder and tumultuous
violence, as in the press of the people, of Horses and Carts, many Children
and some Women lost their lives, being smothered, this fear continued 3.
days being impossible to assure and bring back them that fled, who in the end
otherwise persuaded by diverse Aduertisements and Messages, returned to their
howses. The same Author.

ALDANA a Spanish Captain, Lieutenant to King FERDINAND in Transiluania,
fearing least MAHOMET BASSA of BVDA, should come and beseege him in Lip, was
so surprised with this Fear, as he resolved to ruin both the Town and the
Castle. Two Men at Arms being sent to descouer, having heard noe news of the
BASSA, coming near the place, began to run their Horses, to g^ue him notice
that there was no cause of Fear. They were followed by a great Troop of
Cattle.

ALDANA imagining and thinking that it was the Turkish Army, before the which
the two Men at Arms did fly, having not the patience to attend and stay for
their coming, transported with great fear he set fire to a train of
Gunpowder which did overthrow the Castle, the Towers, and brake the Cannon,
to the great grief of his souldiars, condemning his baseness: which done he
fled into Transiluania. The BASSA seized presently upon the ruins, and of a
Castle that was inexpugnable, called Soliman, abandoned by these amazed
Christians, whom he followed with such speed, as he ouertooke them and cut
them in pieces. Then having seized upon Transiluania, he made it subject to
the yoke. ALDANA being imprisoned, and convicted of base cowardice, was
condemned to loose his head, but by the intercession of MARY Queen of Bohemia
Daughter to CHARLES the 5. and wife to MAXIMILIAN the 2. his life was saved.
ASCANIVS CENTORIVS lib. 5. and 6. of his Commentary of the Wars of
Transiluania.

SOLIMAN the Turk having beseeged Vienna in Austria, the 26, day of September
in the year 1529. the beseeged made a salley of 8000. Men the sixth of October,
with an intent to chase the Enemy out of the sub-urbes, and to blow up their
Mines. They chased away the Turks that were toward the Castle-gate, and cut
many in pieces that were near the Tower of Carinthia. Being ready to proceed
further, advancing courageously, one cried with a loud voice that the should
retire and put themselves in battle. This cry did put the soldiers into such
a sudden fear, as they began to leave their ranks and to fly toward the
City, in such disorder as some thrust violently by the rest, fell into the
Ditches and Trenches, where-as many were hurt and slain with their own Arms.
Captain WOLFGANG HAG, seeking to rally his Soldiers again together, and put
them in mind of the valor of the ancient Germans, was compassed in by the
Turks, and abandoned by his own men, died fighting. History of the siege of
Vienna.

AVSVN, a Gentleman of Gaseonie, valiant and of great experience in War, of
whom they had made such esteem in Piedmont, as his prowess was commended of
all men, being at the Battle of Dreux, in the first civil Wars, in the
year 1561. was so terrified at the first charge, as for fear he was chased
even unto Paris, where remembering himself of his error, he dyed for grief.
History of France under CHARLES the uinth.

JOHN DESGORRIS, a learned Physician of our time, as his Book of Physical
definitions does testify, having been called by the Bishop of Melun, to cure
him of a certain disease: to the end that he might return safely to Paris,
where he dwelt, and that they of the City, being then in Arms (for it was
during the first troubles) should do him no harm by reason of his religion,
the Bishop put him into his Coache, and caused him to be carried close.
Certain Merchants, to whom the Bishop was much indebted, yet would not pay
them any thing: having some intelligence of the coming of this Coache, caused
it to be arrested by Sargeants, with an intent to seize upon all the goods
that might be in it. This seazure did so trouble DESGORRIS, and put him into
such a fit, thinking that he had been fallen into the hands of
cut-throates, as for a time his brains were troubled, and had much ado to
recover himself. THOMAS ZVINGER, lib. 1. of his first volume, by the report
of HVBERT LANGVET.

CHARLES du MOVLIN, a learned Lawyer, borne at Paris, being in the University
of Tubingue, to read a law Lecture, at the Duke of Wirtembergs charge, he was
lodged as it were by force in the house of a certain German borne there, who
taking no pleasure to have such a guest, whom he called a stranger, to molest
him, he sought out many Rattes and Mice, and let them go in every corner of
his house. The which Du MOVLIN seeing (who hated such Beasts wonderfully,)
being much amazed, he dislodged instantly, and went to seek an other aboade.
THOMAS ZVINGER in the same Book.

A Spaniard surnamed VILLADARE, being in the presence of Cardinal XIMINES,
among others that aspired to be graduates in Divinity, and seeing that they
had named five or six before him, he fell into such a rage and trouble of
mind, seeing himself set behind others, as he was surprised with a
conuulsion, so as his members did tremble, and being the eight man that was
called, rising from the place where he was to go and sit among the
Graduates, this place was seen all wette with his Urine, which had gone from
him in this extremity. ALVARES GOMES lib. 4. of the History of Cardinal
XIMINES.

In the year 1536. NICHOLAS GROVPE, being in the Town of Anneberg, where he
had long expected the first good Prebend that should be void, which the
Bishop of Misne had promised him, having received Letters from him, by the
which he made him his Suffragan and Vicar general, he was so transported and
overcome with joy, that before he could finish the reading of the Letter,
he gave up the ghost. G. le F^VRE liber 3. of his Annals of Misne.

In our time, the Judges Wife of Vi^-fezensac in the County of Armaignac,
about threescore years old, being told (to draw her out of company) that
her Daughter was dying, being arrived, and so finding her merry and well, she
dyed suddenly. IOVBERT lib. 1. of Laughter, Chap. 11.

After the Battle of Montconter, an honest Gentlewoman thinking her self to
have lost her husband, a brave Gentleman, to whom it was reported that he had
been slain, seeing him return unlooked for, after some months, she was
seized with such joy, as she dyed suddenly in his arms. In the History of
our time.

During the League, an other Gentlewoman having after much care, suit, charge,
and trouble, retired her husband, a learned Man, who had been prisoner many
months among cruel people, where he had been as it were wonderfully and
miraculouslye preserved, like unto DANIELL in the Lions den, seeing him
return safe and well, she was ravished and overcome with such content, as
presently after his arrival, she yielded her soul to GOD. The History of
our time.

An Honorable Woman, thinking that her husband had been slain at Paris, the
four and twentieth of August 1572. for that he came not home at his prefixed
time, which was in the beginning of September, staying three weeks longer, and
coming home safe to his own house, seeing him, she lost her speech, and
could not speak one word to him, but only did behold him, like one that had
lost her right senses. Having powered forth many bitter tears, she recovered
her former speech a little, as coming to her self out of a trance, for
fifteen nights after she could not possibly sleep above, three quarters of
an hour in a night, sometimes touching her husband when he slept, and in the
day time looking on him with admiration, as if she did not believe her senses.
In the end she recovered her self, confessing unto me above ten years
after, that this passion had wonderfully troubled her. Yea I have heard her say
for certain, that being with Child above eleven years after this accident,
she had felt a new charge in her fantasy, of that which had happened unto
her, believing confidently, that her fruit should feel of it hereafter:
where-in she was not deceived. But the respect I bear to that family, makes
me forbear to tell the rest. The former belonging to my purpose, to show the
vehemency of passions. Drawn out of my memorials. I have heard some credible
speak of a young man, whom two Maidens in tickling had moved to laughe so
much, as he never laughed more, nor spoke more words. They thought he had
been in a sown, but they were mukh amazed and sore afraid, when they see him
dead. IOVBERT liber 1. of Laughter, Chap. 27.

Mounsier BOISSONNADE Physician of Again, a very learned expert, careful and
honest man, has witnessed unto me, that the Mistress of the Tennis Court in
Again, an ancient Woman, dyed with extreme laughing, hearing a strange and
ridiculous tale. lib. 3. Chap. 16. In the same third Book, Chap. 14. Doctor
IOVBERT reports three pleasant Histories of certain sick folks, that were
abandoned of the Physicians, and cured strangely by extreme laughing, seeing
some pleasant tricks of certain Apes playing in their Chambers, these means
stirring up and reviving nature, which was oppressed, and as it were choakt with
their infirmities.

Of a wonderful Turkish Pilgrim.
I Will report wonders of a Turkish Pilgrim. He went attyred in a long
Cassacke and a white Cloak down to his heels, with a long Beard: as our
Painters do represent unto us most of the Apostles, under a grave show he hid
a crafty spirit. The Turks did admire him, and honor him as a Saint, and a
doer of miracles: persuading my Interpreters to lead me unto him, that I might
see him. He dined at my Table soberly and modestly. Then going down into the
Court, he returned soon again: having taken up a great Stone, he struck him
self such blows upon the naked breast, as they had been able to have killed
an Ox. This done, he laid hold upon a piece of Iron, which they had express^e
put into the fire, so as it was red whotte, he put it into his mouth, and
turned it up and down, the Spittle hissing as water does, when as a Smith
quenches a fier^e hot Iron in it. This Iron was reasonably long, and great,
and square at the end, the which entered so whotte into his mouth, as it was
like unto a burning coal. This done, he puts the Iron again into the fire,
then having made an obeisance unto me, and received a reward, he departed. My
servants being amazed at this sight, one of them thinking himself more
sufficient then his companions, began to say unto them. Poor fools why do
you wonder? do you think that this counterfeit has put the fire in his mouth
indeed? They be Impostures and iugling tricks. And in saying so, he laid
hold of the Iron by the very end which was out of the fire, to show that it
might be handled without any hurt or burning. But he had no sooner gript it in
his hand, but he shakt it off as speedily: but not with such ease: for the
space of many days, he had the palm of his hand and fingers so pitifully
burnt with the fire, as he had much pain to heal it.

His companions could not contain themselves from laughing, asking him, if
he did not believe that a flaming fire was whotte? adding, That he might if
he pleased, make a second trial to confound them whom he had so mocked: But
he would no more meddle with it. At dinner, this Turk who said he was a
Monk, reported unto me, that his Abbot, a holy and famous man for his
miracles, was accustomed to cast his cloak upon a Lake near unto the Covent,
and then did sit upon it, and did sport himself as easily upon the water in
this sort, as if he had been rowing in a fair and calm day in a Boat. That
when as they did flea a Sheep, the manner was to sow up this Abbot in the
skin, so as the fore-feete were fitted to his arms, and the hinder to his
thighs: and in this equipage they did cast him into a burning Oven, where he
remained until the Sheep was roasted, then they drew him out of the Furnaise
whole and sound, to eat his part of the Mutton merely with his Monks. If you
will say unto me, that such miracles of Satan, are Impostures whereunto you
give no credit, no more do I. I tell you but what the Monk reported: but as
for the burning Iron, I did see it with mine own eyes: the which is not so
admirable, as you would think at the first: for I doubt not but this
counterfeit worker of miracles, going to seek a stone in the Courtyard to
beat his breast withal, might anoint his mouth with something that was fit
to resist the violence of the fire, as you know there is. I remember to have
seen in Saint Marks at Venice a Montebancke, which did willingly handle
molten Lead, and washed his hands therewith, without any burning. The Seignior
of Busbeque Ambassador to FERDINAND and MAXIMILIAN Emperors, in his discourse
of his voyage into Turkey, Epist. 4.

Perjury punished.
IN the Town of Rutlinquen, a certain passenger came into an Inn, and gave a
Budget to keep unto his Host, in the which there was a great sum of money.
Asking it again at his departure, the host denies it, gives him injurious
words and mockes him. The passenger calls him in question before the Judge,
and for that all was done without witnesses he was ready to offer his Host
an oath, who desired nothing more, giving himself unto the Devil, if he had
received or concealed the Bouget of money that was in question. The Plaintiue
demanded respight to consider if he should offer him this oath, and going out of
of the pleading place, he meets with two men, who inquire the cause of his
coming thither. He reports the whole fact unto them. Well say they, will thou
that we shall help thee in this cause. He yielded not knowing what they were.
Thereupon they return all three before the Judge: where the two last come,
begin to iustefie unto the host, (who was not yet gone) that the bouget had
been delivered him; that he had received it and hidden it in such a place.
This perjured wretch knew not what to answer. And as the Judge resolved to
send him to prison, the two witnesses began to say: you shall not need: We
are sent to punnish his wickedness: Saying so, they took and lift him up in
the aier, where he vanished with them, and was never after found. I. le GAST de
BRISAC in the 2. volume of his table talk. GILLYBERT COVSI^ in his narrations.

Prodigious rain and hail.
IN the year 1502. the 22. of June all the Country about Berne, Soleurre and
Biennie, of a great compass, was beaten with a thick hayle, the stones being
as big as Hens eggs. Seven days after, an other greater storm of hayle
spoiled all the Country of zurich, slew many peasants and others that went
into the fields, with much Cattle, foul and wild Beasts.

Eight years after, in the year 1510. in Lombardie there fell from Heaven
above twelve hundred stones, among the which as CARDAN reports in his Book
Dererum Varietate, was found one of sixe-score pounds weight, and an other of
threescore; many were brought to diverse French Noblemen, commanding then in
those places for the King. These stones were of a rustie color, very hard and
smelt of sulphur. Two hours before this shower, the Heavens seemed all on
fire: what the miserable estate of Milan and the Neighbor Countries were
afterward. GVICHARDIN does show in his History of the wars of Italy.

The 19. of July 1528. the Country lying about Ausbourg, was wonderfully
spoiled with hayle stones, greater then a big man's fiste, falling from Heaven
for the space of some hours. Three years after there fell such a violent
hayle about Basil, as all the vignes were spoiled. At Lisbonne in Portugal it
rayned blood in great abundance. In the year 1542. it rayned blood in the
Diocese of Munster, about Sassenbourg, not far from Warendorfe.

In the year 1544. there fell great store of hail about Silesia, the stones
whereof were as big as Estriges eggs, and in them there appeered plainly
the figures of long party colloured breeches after the Lansquenet fashion. And
in many of them being broken, there were found stones made like unto Turkish
Turbans. In the upper Alsacia, about Colmar an Imperial Town, there fell from
heaven a great shower of Froggs and Toades in the year 1549. The peasants were
troubled for some days to kill this Vermin with staves: and then least the
air should be infected, the Magistrate caused them to be gathered together
upon heaps, and then filled great ditches with them. In the year 1550. some
dates before Easter in the month of March, two hours together there f^ll from
Heaven about Clagenfurt and Villa^ Towns of Carinthia, good wheat in great
abundance, which the Inhabitants of those places did gather together, and
made good bread a long time of it.

A year after, which was 1551. it rayned blood over Lisbonne in Portugal; the
same year a little before Whitsontide, the clouds opening, there fell such
streams of Water about Kittengen in Franconia, as the floods upon the Land
drowned many men, and much Cattle almost in an instant. A great farm
consisting of many houses, was overthrown and almost all that dwelt in it
drowned. The Bridge at Kittengen was beaten down and carried away; and if
they had not suddenly given passage to the Waters, percing the Town walls, all
had been lost. There were five houses quite overthrown* five others in a
village, called Rotolsee: and five in an other place: fiueteene men were
drowned at Speckfurt, and many houses beaten quite down to the grownd, as
also at Pabemberg, whereas the vignes and corne-ground was spoiled after a very
strange manner. At the same-time betwixt Gethe and Ise^ac in Turinge, the
continual rain did make the Rivers to rise and swell in such sort, as in the
village of Theutlebe five houses were carried away with a Farmer, and his five
Children.

In an other village the Waters did drown the Cattle that were in the field,
and the young boys that kept them. Toward SchlakenVuals, where the mines
are, these deluges did inestymable harm. The River of Elbe being rissen with
the rain Water, did much harm in the Country, and so did other Rivers at the
same-time. The fourteen of August 1552. a great tempest rising in the air
over Holland, there fell abundance of hayle, every stone waying above one
pound, being all of diverse forms. Some were very like the Son, others were
like unto a Crown of thorn, some resembled Wheels, and other things. The
Son having caused them to melt, there came forth a stinking smoke, the which
infected the air, whereof followed a great mortality of Cattle. Some months
before, the Rivers of Sal and Mein, famous in Germany, did ouerflowe and
ruined many buildings, and drown many Men and much Cattle. It rayned blood
in France. And near unto Marpurg there was a poole seen many times bloody.

Budissine a Town seated at the foot of the mountains (which PTOLOME^ calls
Suderes) at the entry of the upper Lusatia, a League from the spring of the
River Sueuue, did feel the thirteeneth of August in the same year 1552. the
misery which follows. At night a thick cloud breaking and falling violently
in the vallees, where there are many pooles, the same being full and the
causies broken, the Water finding a passage, it began to run toward this
River which was near, and made it swell heigher then ever had been seen,
having of it self a swift and sudden course, falling from the mountains.
Being then accompanied with these violent Waters, it did break, overthrow and
pull up all the foundations of bridges, gardines and buildings that were a mile
about, so as there were no signs of them to be seen.

This violent flood did drown two and thirty persons, which could not recover
the Town in time. Many without saved themselves in the near Mountains. It
was thought that in this deluge there were above a hundred persons drowned.

In the year 1553. the extraordinary rain made the river of Rhine to swell
and ouer-flowe, the which was the spoil of a great Country near unto the
banks. The Town of Ruffach among others, was in danger to be drowned by this
flood, the which was run out in a short time, leaving in recompense of the
spoil it had made, great abundance of Fish upon the land, in the Meadows and
Marshes, yea even in the Town vautes. At Erford it rained blood, the fifth of
June the same year: and at Lipsic the 8. of July. In the same month some
days before the Batraile between MAVRICE Elector of Saxony, and ALBERT
Marquis of Brandebourg toward Held^sheim, there were many Trees and Herbs
seen covered with blood, which had fallen from Heaven. In the year 1554. the
26. of May, it rained blood, near to Dunke a Town in Germany. The year
following, it did also rain blood at Fribourg in Misnia. And on the sixth of
June there was seen in the Castle Di^che of Vinaire in Saxony, a Fountain
of blood. There was an other betwixt Erford and Vinaire, and a third at Erford,
which before was clear and fair water. In the year 1556. about the twelfe
and thirteenth of May, there fell a dew from Heaven about Bresle and near to
Don, in the Canton of Bearne, the which had a taste sweeter then Honey. Two
days after it reigned blood near to Schafouze. The second of September the
rain fell in such abundance at Locarne, as the town was almost spoiled and
in danger to be ruined. These Histories are gathered out of the Collection of
Prodigies made by L. LYCOSTHENES.

In June in the year 1586. there did rise over the City of Constantinople, a
dark cloud the which being dispersed, there followed a shower of
Grasse-hoppers, which did nippe the fruits and the Leaves of Trees. The year
following in December there happened a thing no less strange on the frontiers
of Croatia near to Vithitz, a Castle belonging unto CHARLES Archduke of
Austria. They did see ^ cloud of Ducks and Geese by thousands, which falling
into a lake near by: the night following they made so furious a fight, as all
the neighbor Countries heard it* In the morning the Soldiars and Countrymen
ran^e thither, where they found a great number of Ducks and Geese that had
killed one an other whereof they gathered great numbers: some a hundred, some
two hundred, they dressed them after their manner, and lived thereof a long time.
Those which remained of this great army of Combatants, being seen in a medowe
they took their flight and went else where. I. LEONCLAVIVS, in the supplement
of the Annals of Turki^.

Prediction.
THE tenth of September in the year 1513. JAMES the 4. King of Scotland,
having embraced the party of France, took arms against England, and grew so
vehement in the quarrel, as there was a battle given, whereas King JAMES, and
all the flower of the S^cotish Nobility were slain in the field. At that time
there was a Scottish Gentleman very straightly imprisoned at London, who said
openly, in the hearing of many, some hours before the Battle. If the two
armies, English and Scot^ish) fight this day, I know for certain that the
King my Master will be to weak: for I do observe in this conflict of winds in
the air, that the winds are very opposite unto Scotland. This speech was
neither without reason nor without event: for it is most certain that the
Angels, be the preseruers of public States, and of the holy order appointed
by the almighty GOD, fight constantly against wicked and evil spirits which
take pleasure in murders and the overthrow of all good order, which the Lord
allows, as we read in the History of Persia, whereas the Angel tells the
Prophit DANIEL that for a long time he had suppressed the evil spirit the which
did move the Greeks to ruin the Persian Monarchy. IOACHIM CV^ABVS a learned
Philosopher and Physician of our time, in his Annals of Silesia.

Some years before, the Emperor MAXIMILIAN the first had made War against
the Suisses, and having been defeated in diverse Incounters certain
Astrologiens and D^uines advised him to assail that nation by some other way,
and with new troops, alleging that a certain star which favored the
Suisses was now set, and that other stars favorable to Princes and Monarkes
did appear. It succeeded ill with him, for that he believed these Diuiners:
for at the very first Encounter not far from Basil, the Suisses were
victors, and won all his baggage. H. MVTIVS Book 30. of his Chronicle of
Germany.

In the following Books we will propounde many other Histories of
Predictions.

A Prisoner freede.
A Gentleman of Lombardie, named P^CCHIO, valiant and wise, but full of the
gout, being in disgrace with a great Nobleman, going one day unadvisedly
upon his moyle some few Leagues from his house: he was pursued and set upon
by this Nobleman, who was followed by some Soldiars, and then carried prisoner
to a strong Castle out of the way and shut up in an heigh Tower, and
committed to one of his confident servants to keep. He was fed with bread
and water, like a crimynall person condemned to perpetual prison, and no man
knew who he was. In the mean time they sought up and down for PECCHIO, but
hearing no news, of him, the Justice of that place where he dwelt, thought
that he had been slain: for they had found his moile and some drops of
blood upon him. They make dilligent information, and two men are charged, with
whom in times past he had had a quarrel, upon this presumption, they are
miserably imprisoned and greeuiously tortured in such sort as they were forced
to confess that they had slain PECCHIO so as the one was hanged and the other
beheaded. But PECCHIO was in prison, where he continued nyneteene whole
years, never changing nor putting of the clothes he had. When they took him:
yet full of hope that GOD would one day deliver him. His Sons, according to
the custom, made his funeral, and the divided his goods. He was taken in the
year 1540. and was delivered in the year 1559. in this manner. The Lord who
used him in that sort, being dead they entreated PECCHIO after his accustomed
manner, neither did any one ever see him, or speak to him in all this time.
It chanced that this Lords heir had an humor to build near unto this Tower,
and as they pulled down the Walls which did compass in PECCHIO who had no
light but by a narrow clifte, by the which he received his meat and drink,
they spied this man with his clothes tottered, his beard long to his knees, and
his hair hanging upon his shoulders. Every man runs to this new sight. Some
persons well advised did wish that he should not be brought too suddenly into
the light, least it should dazell him, and that to much air should make him
fainte. By little and little he recovered his sight and strength. Then he
lettes them understand what he was, and of all his adventure: in the end he
was known, reenters into his goods that were sold by his Sons, and being
clearly cured of his gout he lived the remainder of his days helthfully. The
which I have heard from his own mouth in Milan, where I entreated him to set
me down this discourse, the which he did at large in the year 1566. SIMON
MAYOL an Italian Bishop in his Canicular days. Disc. 4.

A Process ended by an extraordinary means.
DVring the time that GREGORY the 13. was Pope, there was a quarrel and suit
for matter of religion, against IHON CASIER, great Master of Malta. The Judges
appointed; the Registers, Proctors, and witnesses had done all at Malta that
might concern this fact. ROMEGAS a Knight of Malta was his principal accuser,
and as it were a party. All were adiorned to appear before Pope GREGORY at
Rome in the year 1591. where I was, and did see ROMEGAS, and the great Master
arrive in November. In December following ROMEGAS died, and presently after the
great Master, and they were both interred in the Trinity Church. As for the
Judges, Registers, Proctors, and witnesses, being all embarked in one ship,
with the Informations and proceedings of the Process, they perished all upon
the Sea in the same month, and there remained not any leaf of the whole
proceeding, whereby they might ground any sentence. SIMON MAYOL an Italian
Bishop in his Canicular days, Colloq. 4.

Dangerous Prognostications.
FRANCIS Marquis of Salusses, Lieutenant to King FRANCIS in his army beyond
the Alps, wonderfully favored in our Court, and bound to the King even for
his Marquisate, which had been forfeited by his Brother: having no occasion
offered him, and his affection contradicting it, suffered himself to be so
surprised with fear (as it has been justified) by the goodly
Prognostications which were then spread abroad, to the benefit of the Emperor
CHARLES the 5. and to our disadvantage (even in Italy whereas these foolish
predictions had so great credit, as at Rome great sums of money were
delivered out by exchange upon our ruin) that after he had often lamented with
his private friends, the miseries which he did see ineuitably prepared for the
Crown of France, and for his private friends, he revolted and changed his
party: to his great prejudice, not-with-standing all predictions. But he
carried himself like a man encountered with diverse passions; for having both
Towns and forces in his power, the enemies Army under ANTHONY de LEVA hard
by him, and we without any jealousy of him, it was in him to have done worse
then he did, for by his treason we lost neither man, nor Town, but only
Fossan, and that after it had held out long. MONTAIGNE lib. 1. of his Essaies.
Cha. 11.

A wonderful Ransom.
THE Spanish Histories write at large of the ransom which ATABALIPA King of
Peru, paid, to be delivered out of the bands of PIZARRE, valued at many
Millions of gold: yet not-withstanding the Spaniards put him to death and
spoiled infinite treasures, part where of was brought into Europe, where it was
wretchedly wasted, and part with those robbers and their ships, was lost in the
botom of the Sea. But in the war made in our time by the Vaiuod of Valachia
against the Turks, in the year 1574. certain Polonian Horsemen having
defeated a great supply, and taken their Commander prisoner, who was a man of a
tall and goodly stature, and so rich, as he offered almost an incredible
ransom: although many did affirm that he had means to give more. He offered
unto the Polonians if they would save his life, and not carry him unto the
Vaiuod, to pay them twice as much gold, thrice as much silver, and once as much
in Pearl, as he should way. This sum was sufficient to win the hearts of men
of higher qualities: yet these Polonians (men which live by carrying of arms,
and seek most commonly entertainment of them which will give most,) chose
rather to keep the promise faithfully made by them unto the Vaiuod, to bring
unto him all the prisoners they should take, then to lade themselves with
Gold, Silver, or Pearls. They therefore carried him unto the Vaiuod, who
without demanding or accepting of any ransom, caused him to be cut in pieces
with other prisoners: and soon after he himself was slain by a Turkish
Bassa, and the Polonians saved themselves. LEONARD GORET in his History of the
war of IVONIE VAIVODE of Valachia.

A miserable Rape.
AT such time as the French made war in Italy, under the reign of LEWIS the
twelfth, a rich Merchant of Milan, (having one only Son called GALEAS,
about ten year old) dyed, leaving his heir a very great estate, whom the
Mother (an honorable and virtuous Gentlewoman) caused to be carefully brought
up, and instructed in all honest and decent exercises. Being come to the age of
eighteen years, he began on the one part; to understand the estate of his
affairs, for that his Mother would not marry any more: and on the other, he
was persuaded by sundry exhortations to contain himself in the way of
virtue. There-vpon it happened, that there was a question for the recovery of
a great sum of money due by a Gentleman of Venice, who trafficked much into
the leuant Seas. GALEAS who had not gone far from his own house, entreated
his Mother to give him leave to make his voyage to Venice, to take some order
for this business, having a ready wit fit for any thing. The Mother
consented, and after many goodly admonitions, having given him a servant to
accompany him, she suffered him to depart. Being come to Venice, the Gentleman
that was his debtor, entertained him courteously, and after some days,
conducted him to Padoua, where his family was, that he might provide for the
payment of his debt.

The Venetian had a Daughter called LVCRETIA, about sixteen years old, of
whom at the first sight GALEAS fell in love. The night following, he had a
fearful dream. It seemed unto him that a Man unknown opened his breast and
LVCRETIAS, and then fed upon their hearts. Awaking suddenly all amazed, and
crying out, he tells unto his servant his passion, where-on he had after-wards
this dream. The servant who was a cunning Bawd, made him an exposition of
this dream, such as he knew to be fit for his Masters humor, and wrought
so cunningly, that soon after the young Man and the young Maid talked
secretly together, GALEAS promising LVCRETIA to take her away, and carry her to
Milan, where when as they should come to riper age, they would marry. Their
disordred desires did so blind and transport them, as contemning all honest
and lawful means, which were easy, they ran headlong into the miseries
which followed. GALEAS using diverse treacherous practices, fained to send his
servant back to Milan, with diverse Letters of affairs, and he himself
returned to Venice with the Gentleman, where he received money, and took
order for all that for the which he had been sent by his Mother. After three
days, news were brought unto this poor Gentleman of Venice, that they knew
not what was become of his Daughter LVCRETIA. But GALEAS servant lurking at
Milan, had stolen her away, and carried her to Milan, where he had hired a
house, and left her in the guarde of an old woman, who was sometimes GALEAS
Nurce, who seemed to weep with the VENETIAN: who understanding that his Wise
remaining at Padoua, grew desperate for the loss of her Daughter, went thither
to comfort her: leaving GALEAS, who presently takes another way, saying, that
he went to his Mother, who had called him home.

Being come to Milan, after that he had given an accoumpt of their common
affairs, he goes to LVCRECR whom he entertaines in his house so cunninglye,
as for three years together nothing was discovered. In the end GALEAS had two
cross incounters. The one by LVCRETIA, who desired the performance of his
promise, and the other by his Mother, who did solicit him to marry. He was
wholly inclined to keep his word, and to marry LVCRETIA, but yet they were
much troubled to discover it unto his Mother, who seeing a great alteration in
him since his return from Venice, did long muse upon her Sons excuses: who
being grown strong, rich, and in the flower of his age, was desired of the
best families of Milan, who would not have disdained his alliance. In the end
she wrought so, as she blew up this Mine, and discovered that her Son
entertained a very fair young Maid, in that lodging, where his Nurce had
been placed: but where-as she should have proceeded freely, she took a
wrong course, which brought forth terrible effects, GODS Justice using such
means for the execution of his fearful decrees. Watching a fit
opportunity, she sent certain men disguised into the house where-as LVCRETIA
was: they put a gagge in her mouth, and threaten her with death, if she cried
out, and then they carry her secretly into a Monastery of women, where she is
committed to safe keeping. GALEAS returning late to this lodging, and not
finding her: understood from his Nurse what had chanced: wherewith he entered
into a strange fury, and continued all the next day without eating any thing.
His Mother advertised thereof, went unto him; and seeing him in the way to
despair, she began to assure him that LVCRETIA was whereas she would give a
good account of her, wishing him to take courage and be of good cheer.
There-vpon he came somewhat to himself, having a promise that they would
restore LVCRETIA again unto him that night. In the mean time he imagines,
that these disguised men had abused her: with other strange furies wherewith
choler had possessed him: so as toward night LVCRETIA being restored unto him,
he gave her but a cold reception, then coming nearer unto her, he said, there
is no reason they should separate us any more, but that we should concur
together in one death: at which words he drew out his Poynard, and stabbes
her in such sort, as she fell down dead at his feet: with the same Poynard
smoking with LVCRETIAS blood, he strikes himself unto the heart, and after
some words he dyed. The same night they were both interred, upon a brute that
they were dead of the plague, whom the contagion had presently chokt. History
of Italy.

Execrable Rauishers punished by a valiant hand.
THE City of Genoa being taken by the Army of the Emperor CHARLES the 5. the
streets, places, and houses, were full of the pitiful Lamentations of Wives
and Maids, crying out for mercy and help. More-ouer it was a strange and
horrible noise which the Soldiers made, breaking doors and windows, and
spoiling the rich palaces with a strange violence, others rauishing of Maids
and Wives, which they found in the houses. In this horrible confusion, ALFONSO
d' AVALOS Marquis of Pescara, Colonel of the Imperial footmen, running up
and down the streets to prevent the wrong which they went about to offer to
the honor of Women. A Gentleman of Genoa, taking him for some Captain, began
to entreat him to suppress the insolency of two Spanish soldiars that would
ravish his Wife, a virtuous and honorable Gentlewoma^, which cried for help.
Suddenly the Marquis lights from his horse goes up to the Chamber, and thrusts
through one of these wretches who held the poor Gentlewoman by the hair, and
striued to overthrow her. One being slain he follows the other, who fled
down the stairs, and gave him such a blow, as he cleft his head in two. Then
having caused their dead bodies to be cast out at the Chamber window into the
street, he made a proclamation upon pain of death, that no man should
presume to wrong (either in word or deed) any honest maid or Wife. This
execution restrained the looseness of the Soldiars, and the Maquis for this
worthy act, was honored of all good men. P. IOVIVS Book 3. of his History of
our time.

Recompenses of nature.
THE providence and care which the Creator of all things has given to nature
is admirable: for by a daily custom she does furnish creatures with such
force and dexterity, which have the members crooked, defective or weak, or
that have none at all, or having, do more then is prescribed them: as we may
well say, that the perfection of a Creature consists, not in the distinction of
members, but in the continual use thereof. I have often considered thereon.
When we were at Cobourg, in the Lodging of ERASMUS NEVSTETER, a wise and
virtuous Gentleman of Germany: having given us the best entertainment he
could devise, he sent to a certain place not far of for a young man about
thirty years old, the which was borne without arms, who could do as much
with his feet as a very able man could do with his hands, so as he himself
did afferme, that nature had recompensed one gift with an other. Being set
upon a seat equalling the height of the table whereon they set the meat, he
took a knife with his feet, and began to cut both bread and meat, carrying
it unto his mouth, and a goblet also, as easily with his feet as an other
does with his hands. After dinner he began to write both Italien hand and
Dutch, so right and so well, as every one of us desired to have of it, to
keep for a singularity. At my request he took a penknife and made good
pens to write, and presented them to me and to others. Being thus busied, I
did carefully consider the fashion of his feet and did find this toes were
sum-thing long, fit to lay hold of anything, and a far off, they resembled
the fingers of a man's hand: as for his legs he kept them covered with his
cloak. PH. CAMERARIVS a German Lawier, in his learned Historical
Meditations. Chap. 37.

I have seen at my house a little man borne at Nantes, without arms, who has
so well fashioned his feet to the service which his hands do owe him, as in
truth they have half forgotten their own natural duty. Finally he calls
them his hands, he cuttes, he charge a pistol, and discharges it, he
threads a needle, he sowes, he writes, he pulles of his hat, he combs his
head, he plays at Cards and Dice, and shakes them with as great dexterity
as any other, the money which I gave him, he carried away in his foot, as we
do in our hand. I did see an other when I was a Child, who handled a two-hand
sword, and a halberd, helping him. self with the bending of his neck for want
of hands, he would cast them up in the air and catch them again, throw a
dagger, and make a whippe lash as well as any Carter in France. MONTAIGNE liber
1. of his Essaies. Chap. 22.

Of this last in my opinion, or of an other no less admirable, Master AMB.
PARE makes mention in these terms. Not long since there was a man seen at
Paris, without arms, being forty years old, strong and lusty, who did in
a manner all the actions that an other might do with his hands: with the
stumpe of his shoulder and his head, he would strike a hatchet as strongely,
as an other man could do with his arms. More-ouer he would lash a Carters
whippe, and did many other actions with his feet: he did eat, drink,
played at cards and dice: in the end he was a thief and a murderer, and
was put to death in Gelderland. Book 24. treating of monsters. Chap. 8.

Of late days we have seen at Paris a woman without arms which did cut,
sow, and do many other actions. The same Author. I have oftentimes spoken
with the Brother of one, called N. MADAME, who having both hands eaten of with
hogs, lying in the Cradle, being but a year and half old, or there
aboutes did help her self as well with the stumpes being grown great, as
we do with our fingers. She did work excellently well in tapistrie, did
thread her needle very arteficially, and did sow well in lynnen. Memorials of
our time.

We have at Nuremberg a young man and a young maid borne of one Father and
Mother, of a honest house, which are dombe and deaf by nature, yet both of
them Read very well, Write, Cifer, and cast an account. The young man
conceiues at the first by the signs that are made him, what they demand of
him, and if he wants a pen, by his countenance he delivers his thoughts,
being the cunningest player at all games of cards and d^ce, that is to be
found among the Germans. His Sister exceedes all other maids in working with
the needle, in all works of Linen, Tapistry, imbroydrie etc. But amongst the
wonderful recompenses of Nature, this is remarkable, that commonly seeing
any to move their lips, they seem to understand what is said. They do
very often assist at Sermons, and you would say, that they understand with
their eyes what the Preacher says, as others are accustomed to do by hearing:
for as often as they will, and without any teaching, or examples, they write
the Lords prayer and other Holy prayers: they can repeat the Texts of the
Gospells that are Preached on Hollie days, and write them readelie. When as the
Preacher in his Sermon makes mention of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, the young man
before any other puts his hand to his hat, and bends his knee with great
reverence. Inthetime of our Fathers, there was seen in Flanders, JOHN
FERDINAND who was borne stark blind and poor, surmounting these two
difficulties which are great enemies to learned men in such sort, as he became
a learned Poet and Philosopher, as besides he was so good a musitien, as he
played very excelentlie well of diverse sorts of Instruments, to the great
content of them that heard him: and besides did set songs of four or five
parts. Not much above a 100. years since, there were wonders seen in NICASIVS
de VVERDE borne at Maklin in Brabant. Being fallen blind before he was three
years old, yet he proficed so in all Divinity and humanity (although he had
never learned A. nor B.) as all men did admire him. He was Master of Art at
Louaine. Regent of the Schools at Maklyn, afterward created Licentiate in
Divinity, and read the Gospels publicly. After-wards being made Doctor in the
University of Colen, of the Civil and Canon law, he read publicly in the
Schools, in the one and the other law, rehearsing the Texts by heart, and
continuing a long time in this profession. PH. CAMERARIVS in his Historical
Meditations. Chap. 37.

Not long since was LEWIS GROTTO in Italy, commonly called the blind man of
Hadria, who being blind from his birthe, showed in his Ora^ions and Poesies
that are in Print, a spirit as active and quick, as if he had turned over all
the learned writings of ancient and modern Authors. I have read in his
Poesies, Epigrames as sharp and as witty, as any what-so-euer. In France also
we have seen blind ROMIGLEVS, who in our time was a great Philosopher, a
learned Gramarien, a subtle disputer, an excellent Preacher, of a quick
judgment, and a ready memory, I have spoke twice unto him, and have profited
by his grave discourses. Drawn out of my Memorialls.

A wonderful flowing.
THE Rhosne is one of the swiftest floods in Europ, and yet by a wonderful
secret, we have seen it mount up in such sort as the bed of it has lien
dry, whereof I will produce two Histories. Coming out of the Country of
Valais, it enters very full into the long spacious Lake Leman, from Villeneufue
where it remains mingled the space of twelve hours easy sailing unto Geneua,
where leaving the Lake, it runs with a swift course by Lions. A quarter of a
league from Geneua, the river of Arua (which is deep) coming from Forsignie
runs into the Rosne. I have heard from men of credit (so sa^eth master
NICHOLAS de Gallars in his comentarie upon the 14. chapter of Exodus) that in
our time some 70. years sense, that at the same place whereas the river of
Rhosne goes out of the Lake of Geneua, to enter into her own channel, it was
so driven backward through the violence of a South Wind as the waters going
together upon an heap in the Lake, the channel remained dry for the space of
an hour* and was so seen of many, which have lived longafter. In the year
1600. there was an other of the same River at 3. or 4. reprises, beginning
early in the morning, and continuing until eleauen of the clock, having
great thundering going before. The boats lay dry. That which seemed
admirable, was, that this flowing was but one side of the chanel, toward the
town, in the beginning of winter, and underneath a part of the great bridge,
whereas the Cutlers servants went to gather up nails and old iron. It is one
of the arms of Rhosne, being then above five foot deep. The other greater
arm toward the mountains retired half the water. This flowing lasted
little; if it had continued but a quarter of an hour, it would have drowned
Saint Geruais Bourg. This aduertisment did amaze some and soon after the
French King did seize upon Bresse and all Sauoie, without striking any
stroke: but he restored Sauoie again to the Duke by the Treaty of Peace.
Memoires of our time.

A Generous and memorable Resolution.
LADISLAVS King of Hungary, having been defeated and slain by the Turks at
the battle of Varne, amongst other prisoners led to Constantinople, there
were twelve young Polonian gentlemen, who were put a part, to be circumcised and
to serve SVLTAN AMVRATH his infamous abomination, to whose Serrail they were
conducted for that horrible effect. They being resolved never to endure so
foul an indignity, conspired generously together, to kill this vilanous
Tirant. But their intent being descouered by a certain Traitor, they purposing
to free themselves once for all, of the Turkish brutality and cruelty, having
shut the doors of their Serrail fast upon them, they took their rapiers and
daggers and slew one an other, in fencing: so as afterward the doors being
broken open, coming in, they found them lying here and and there sta^ke dead
upon the plancher, one excepted, who yet breathed, but having reported all
above written, he died soon after ^oyfully and content. CROMER liber 21. of
the History of Poland. IOACHIN CVRAEVS in the Annals of Siles^a.

Resemblance.
LVDOVICVS VIVES, a learned Spaniard, reports that he had seen in Maklin,
two young Children Brethren, the one called PETER, the other JOHN, Sons to a
Councellor of the Town, fair and well proportioned but so like one an other
as not only strangers, but even the Father and the Mother were commonly
mistaken, taking JOHN for PETER, and PETER for JOHN. In his annotations Book
21. Chap. 3. in the Cit^y of GOD.

Don RODRIGVE GIRON, and the Earl of Vruegue were so like, as even they which
did serve them and converse daily with them, could not distinguish them, but
by their apparel and carriage of their persons. A. TORQVEMADE in his
Hexameron Journey 1.

The Earl of Beneuent had a foote-man, to whom a certain man came, saying
that he was his Brother, and that being young, he had left his parents. They
were so like, as no man could well descerne them, but that he which came last,
seemed to be somewhat elder then the other. And although the foote-man were
called by him to go and receive his part of a certain inheritance, yet he
said always to the other, I know you not, I am not of your Country: swearing
that he was nothing a kin to him. Yet the other continued to love him as his
Brother: so as in the end the Earl commanded them to go together to a
certain ancient Woman who said she was their mother. The footeman went
thither, being there, notwithstanding any thing that he could allege, he
could not put it out of this Woman's head, but he was her own Son. More-ouer
to move him the more, she said unto him, if you be my Son, you should have
a mark on such a foot, and in such a place, which was burnt when you were
young. The foote-man wondering thereat, confessed it to be true. Yet he denied
it still that he was her Son: protesting that he had never been in that
place, as it was true: for it was iustefied that he differed in nature from
those people, and it was certainly known who were his parents. The same
Author.

Being a boy, I did see an other strange thing in a place near unto Segouia,
having stayed four or five days in a man's house, whose Wife lived also. There
were two Daughters so like, as turning but the eye you could not distinguish
the one from the other. These young maidens were thirteen or fourteen years
old: and having demanded of the Mother which of them was the elder, she showed
me the one, saying that she was half an hour elder then the other, for that
they were both of one birth, and that with them there came a Son also into the
world, who lived with an uncle of his in SEGOVIA. And as I wondered at her
speech, she said unto me. The Brother is so like to his two Sisters, as
coming to see us and to be merry at Easter last, one day he and his eldest
Sister changed their apparel, and deceived both Father and me all the day
long, making great sport that we did not know them, and that we took the one
for the other, until night, that they made themselves known, and yet we
could hardlye believe it. In the same Author.

In our time there were in Auignon two Gentlemen Brethren, one resembling an
other, both borne at one birth, sons to an Audienc^er of the Popes Court.
They lived long, well limbd and strong, flaxen haired, both short sighted, of a
sweet speech, gentle spirits, and pleasing aspects. They were both learned,
affecting to follow great men, and to deal in affairs. They playde both of
the Lute, Song their parts, and did write one like unto another, the sound of
their voice, words gesture, going and all their actions were so like, as their
Father, Mother, and Brethren were deceived to show the difference. IHON
WILLEMIN, a learned man, has confessed unto me, that living usually with these
two Brethren, and talking in a manner hourly unto them, yet he could not
distinguish them, so as thinking to impart some secret unto the one, he found
afterward that it was the other: so as it was a reviving of SOSIAS in PLAVTVS
AMPHITRIO. More-ouer, these two Brethren have been surprised at one instant,
and separated one from another, they have been touched with one desire, and
thought upon the like desseine. Besides one being sick, the other did likewise
feel the apprehension, and did suffer some part of his Brothers grief.
More-ouer, the one not knowing any thing of the other, being both affected to
one great woman, she made them the like answers, but severally, and at diverse
hours, unknown one unto an other, to whom the Gentlewoman answered,
sometimes to the one, thinking it had been the other, then to the second,
whom she made much of, under this veil which deceived her by the report of
his countenance with his Brothers. To conclude, the difference could never be
known but by themselves: the one having a certain mark on his neck, which
he brought from his Mothers womb, by the impression whereof Nature would make
some difference, thereby to take away that perfect resemblance, and to hold
her propriety, which is to rejoice in the diversity of things; In the 2. Tome
of Prodigious Histories, part. 2. hist. 1.

In the time of FRANCIS SFORZA Duke of Milan, there was a B^uffon or Iester in
his Court called MARQVESIN, who in face, iesture, and countenance, did so
resemble SIGISMOND MALATESTE, Lord of Riminy, who had married SFORZAS Daughter,
as if MALATESTE came to Milan, SFORZA knowing that it did offend him to have a
Bouffon taken for him of every man, was forced to send MARQVESIN to some other
place, whilst that SIGISMOND stayed at Milan. B. FVLGOSE, in his Examples.
lib. 9*

Gold and Silver contemned.
IHON REVLHIN, being sent by EVERARD Duke of Wirtemberg, in Embassage to the
Emperor, after he had faithfully executed his Commission: The Emperor giving to
every one rich presents. REVCLIN refused all that was offered him: beseeching
the Emperor, (seeing there was no reason to refuse any thing from the
liberality of so great a Prince) that he would be pleased to give him a
certain coppie of an Hebrew Bible, written with the hand many ages before, the
which he obtained. JOHN BRASSICAN in his Preface upon SALVIAN, Of the
Providence of GOD.

A Pitiful Ruin.
IN the year 1540. three Bourguignon Gentlemen, of the first houses in France,
the Baron of Sen^se, the Baron of Corberon: and the Baron of Sarry, all three
young, great Noblemen, Frenchmen, and good friends, came together to Lions to
buie Jewels, and Silks for those whom they should marry: They lodged in an
Inn called the Hogg, in Flanders street, a famous lodging, but an old
building, and very ruinous. For the love that was betwixt them, they would
lodge in one Chamber, and after they had spent the day together merrily, they
would lie together, that they might have the more commodity to talk. It
happened as they were in bed, the one reading on a Book, and the other two
striving who should be in the midst, suddenly the upper plancher of the
Chamber fell upon them, so as all three were smothered under the burden of
this ruin. They were much lamented: and upon this pitiful and fearful
accident, were made these verses following. Memorials of Lions.

Within a wondrous Lions body wide,
A perilous Bore, but without tuske descride,
Slew three ADONIS, and yet did not bite,
Who rather were interd, then slain outright.
Strange Ruins.
I Give this Title to the following History, which is every way admirable,
written by a Merchant of the Low Countries, in a discourse of his Voyage to
Muscouia, not yet Printed that I know, the which I will set down as briefly
as possibly I can. Moscow the chief City of all the Duke of Muscouies
Countries, is a great City, but ill compact, being three G^rmaine Leagues
and a half in compass, comprehending the Suburbs, as much inhabited as the
City, the which has not above a good French League about. The Streets and
Causeys are planted with great Trees, set very near togethe^, and boarded
along the houses; being so durtie there in time of rain, as it is impossible
to go through the City but on Horseback, according to the custom of the
Country, where-as Horses are very cheap, and of small charge, being unshod,
how long so ever the journey be, but when the Y^e lies. The Houses are but of
one story, or two at the most, all built of Wood, placed one upon another.
There are in the City, Suburbs and Castle, five thousand five hundred
Temples, all in a manner like unto Chapels: many being made with great Trees,
one laid upon the top of another. And they had high Towers without either
Iron or Stone, very fine and artificially made. The great Dukes lodging is also
of Wood: the which he holds far more healthful, then if it were of hard
Stone. The Castle is reasonably strong of Walls and deep Ditches. It
contains as much ground as the rest of the City. On the one side of it
remain the Sins, on the other side the Oprissins, which are as it were
ouetseers of the great Dukes treasure. These dispatch all Merchant strange^s,
and as soon as you arrive there, you must deliver into one of their hands all
your goods. Being gone from the Narue, about the 10. of July 1570. I arrived at
Moscow about the beginning of August, where I found the great Duke and his
people busied to search out some 30. persons, all which dyed by the Hangmans
Sword, only one was cast alive into boiling water, for that they had received
presents and money. Most of them were great Noblemen, and very familiar with
the Duke. The rest were Merchants of Nowgart, with their Wives, Children and
Families, being accused of treason in favor of the King of Poland. Within
few days after, a horrible plague entered the City of Moscow, and the
Country about it, with such vyolence, as in less then four months there
dyed above two hundred and fifty thousand persons. And it was particularly
observed, that in eight days, from the tenth to the eighteenth of August,
there dyed 2703. Priests, and this Plague continued so strangely, as in the
end every man did wonder, if he met with any one of his acquaintance as
then alive.

This extreme misery was followed the year after with a strange ruin, the
15. of May. The occasion was, that the Emperor of the Tartares being
malcontent, that the Muscouite paid him no more a certain annual Tribute, and
hearing on the other-side, that the great Duke by his tyrannies and murders,
had so wasted his Countries, as they could make no great resistance on that
side, he did sommon him to pay his Tribute. But the great Duke answered him
with reprochefull speeches and scorns. Whereupon the Tartar left his Country
about the end of February, having an Army of a hundred thousand Horse, who in
two months and a half, marched almost five hundred German Leagues. Being
within two days journey of the Dukes frontiers, he resolved to meet them,
giving them Battle, but he lost it, with a horrible route and slaughter of
his men. The Duke knowing that the Tartar would seek after him, fled with
great speed as far off as he could. He was but nine Leagues from Moscow,
when as the Tartares came to inuest the Town, thinking him to be there. They
fiered all the Villages about, and seeing that the War would prove too long
for them, they resolved to burn this great City, or at the least the
Suburbs thereof. Having to that end disposed of their troops round about,
they set fire of all parts, so as it seemed a circle on fire. Then did there
rise so vyolent a wind, as in an instant the Town was fired. This fire was so
sudden, as no man had any leisure to save himself, but where he was at that
very instant. The number of them that were burnt in this fire, came to above
two hundred thousand: the which happened for that their Houses were all of
Wood, and the pauementin the Streets was of great Sappin Trees, the which
being Oily, made the fire the more violent, so as in four hours space, the
Town and Suburbs were quite consumed. I and a young man of Rochell, my
Interpretor, were in the midst of the fire, in a warehouse all vaulted of
Stone, wonderfully strong, the Walls being three foot and a half thick,
and had vent but of two sides: one by the which they went in and out, the which
was a good long entry, and had three Iron doors, distant some six foot one
from an other. On the other side, there was a window, having three Iron doors
one half a foot from an other, which vents we did stop on the inside, as
well as we could * yet there came in so great a smoke, as it had been
sufficient to have smothered us, if we had not had a little Beer, wherewith
we did sometimes refresh our selves. Many Noblemen and Gentlemen were
smothered in Caves, whether they retired themselves, for their houses being
made of great Trees, coming to sincke suddenly, smothered them all. Others
being consumed to Ashes, stopped all vent: so as for want of air, those that
were shut in perished. The poor Countrymen twentye miles about, who had
saved themselves there with their Cattle, seeing the fire, retired
themselves into a great void place in the City, which was not paued with
Wood as the rest were, yet they were all so roasted there, as one of the
tallest men seemed but a Child, the heat of the fire had so shrunk them up:
and that by reason of great houses that were about it. They were the most
hideous and fearful things to see that could be imagined. In many parts of
that place, men lay upon heaps above half a Pike thick: the which did
wonderfully amaze me, not being able to comprehend how they should be heapt
so one upon an other.

This horrible fire made most part of the battlements of the walls to fall,
and splitted all the ordinance that lay upon the walls, which were made of
Brick after the Anticke fashion, without any Rampars or Ditche about it. Many
having saved themselves about the walls, were notwithstanding roasted among
others; there were many Italiens and Wallons of my acquaintance. Whilst the
fire continued, it seemed to us that a Million of Cannons thundered together,
and we drempt of nothing but of death, thinking that the fire would continue
some days: by reason of the great circuit of the City, Cas^ell and Suburbs:
But all this was consumed in less then four hours: at the end whereof the
noise ceasing, we had a desire to see if the Tartares were entered, of whom
we had no less fear then of the fire. They be people made for the War,
and yet they eat nothing but roots or some such substance, and drink nothing
but water; and the greatest Lords among them live upon no thing but upon flesh
that is sodden betwixt the horseback and the saddle wherein he rides; yet
they are strong men, apt to endure pain and so are their horses, which run
wonderful swiftly, and go more ground in one day feeding but upon grass,
then ours will do in three, though they have store of oats. And therefore the
Tartares come easily from far to assail the Muscouits. but they come only
in Summer, for the commodity of their horses. Their Country is temperate,
from whence they depart in the end of February to be in Moscouie in the
beginning of June, and they return in the end of it into their Country,
least they should be surprised with Winter in Russia: the which happening,
they should all die of hunger, by reason of the desartes containing above 300.
German Leagues not inhabited, and therefore without all relief of victuells,
and their horses also having no grass; so as they are forced to make this
voyage. Which is above 1200. German Leagues, in four or five months
withal their army, the which does commonly consist of a 150. or 200. thousand
horse: but their horsemen are ill armed, carrying no other arms but a shirt
of maile, with a Iauelin, and a bow and a^rowes: they know not what artillery
nor Harguebuzes means: having but two Cities whereas their Emperor keeps his
Court, without any other Towns, villages or houses: but they content
themselves to live in Tents which they remove from place to place.

To return to our misery, having listened a little, we might hear some
Muscouits running up and down through the smoke, who talked of muring up the
ports to keep out the Tartares, who stayed until the fire were al quenched. I
and my Interpreter, going out of the warehouse, found the ashes so hot, as we
durst scarce go, but necessity forcing us, we did run to the chief port,
where we found five and twenty or thirty men that had escaped the fire: with
whom in a short time we did mure up that port and the rest, and kept watch
all night with some hargubuzes that were preserved in the fire. In the morning
seeing that the City was not to be held by so few men as we were, we sought
some means to enter into the Castle, the entry whereof was then in a manner
inaccessible. He that commanded there was very glad to hear our Intention,
and called unto us that we should be very welcome. But there was great
difficulty to enter by reason of the Bridges that were burnt, so as we were
forced to climb over Walls, having heigh Sappin Trees for Ladders which they
had cast out unto us, in the which they had cut notches to keep us from
slyding, We did climb up with great difficulty, for besides the apparent
danger of those uneasy Ladders, we carried about us the sum of 4000.
Dallers, and some precious stones: the which did trouble us much to climb up
these trees, and that which did increase our fear was, that before our eyes
we did see some of our companions, (having nothing but their bodies to
preserve,) roll down from the top of these trees into the ditch full of
bodies that were burnt: and we could not go but upon dead bodies, the heaps
whereof were so thick in every place as we were forced to go over them, as if
they had been hills to mount upon: and that which did much trouble us, going
upon them, arms and legs did break, the members of these poor Creatures,
being calcined and dried up through the heat of fire. Sinking thus into these
miserable carcases, the blood and filth did bound upon us. The which caused
such a stench through out the whole City, as it was impossible to remain
there.

The 25. of May at night, as we did attend in great perplexity what the
Tartares would attempt against us, who were 400. or there abouts within the
Castle, the Tartares (whom we had saluted with our shot, and overthrown some
of them that had approached to near one of the Castle gates) began to turn
head the way by the which they came, with such speed as the next morning all
this storm was past for the which having praised GOD, and given order for our
affairs, as the present calamity would permit, we departed from this desolate
Country.

A wonderful drawing of blood.
I Was called to the suburbs of Saint German, to the house of JOHN MATIAV
dwelling at the sign of Saint Michell, to visit and dress a young man about
28. years old, of a sanguin complexion being servant to one of the Admiral
Birons Stewardes. He had fal^e forward with his head upon a stone, and had
hurt himself on the left side in the boane toward the fore* head, by means
of which blow it had made a contused or bruzed wound, without any fracture of
the boane, so the seventh day he fell into a continual fever with a rauing,
and a great inflammation, for that the hairy scalpe was hurt, and with all he
had a great swelling over all his head and neck, having his face wonderfully
disfigured being unable to see or speak, neither yet to swallowe any thing,
but that which was very Liquide. Seeing these accidents, although the day
before (which was the eight after his hurt) he had been let blood by GERMAIN
AGACE a Master Barber, who had drawn from him four pallettes of blood, and
seeing the Accidents so great, and the patient strong, I let him blood again,
and drew from him fourteen pallets of blood at that one time: then the next
day seeing that neither his fever, nor any of the other Accidents were any
whit assuaged, but rather increased, I did let him blood again, and drew
from him four pallets more. The next day following, these strange Accidents,
being nothing decreased, I was of an opinion to let him blood again, yet I
durst not doeit alone, considering the great quantity had been drawn from
him. I therefore entreated Monsier VIOLAINE, a Doctor of Physic, a learned
Man, and of a good judgment, to visit the patient. Having felt his pulce, and
finding it very strong, seeing also the great swelling, and the vehemency of
the inflammation, he was of opinion that he should be speedily let blood, and
being told that they had drawn 22. pallets from him, he said unto me,
although they had drawn more, yet must they let him blood again? seeing that
the two chief reasons that induce us to let him blood are apparent, that is,
the greatness of the disease, and the strength of the patient. Being glad to
hear his opinion, I drew from him three pallets more in his presence, and
would have drawn more, but he put it off until the afternoon, and then I
drew two pallets more, which in all made seven and twenty pallets (every pallet
of Paris containing three ounces and more) the which were drawn from the
patient in four days. The night following he rested very well, and the next
day I found him with out any fever, the swelling was greatly fallen, and his
inflammation almost gone, except his upper eyelids, and the soft grisle of his
ears, which places did impostume and cast forth great abondance of filthe: So
he was fully cured, with the help of GOD, by those remedies, the which
without his blessing had been invaine. Master AMBROSE PARE lib. 9. Chap. 14.

BABTISTA FVLGOSE, in the 1. Book of his Examples, Chap. 6. reports, that an
Italian Priest called GERMAIN, having been let blood, lost all remembrance of
Letters, and not of ordinary and common things: so as he could neither read
nor write, no more then if he had never learned it: and continued a whole
year in that estate. At the end of the year, at the same time, and in the
same place being let blood, he recovered his knowledge of reading and writing,
which he had before. TH. ZVINGER in the 1. volume of his Theater. Book. 1.

I have added this History, although it were of an age before ours, because it
shows of a strange letting of blood.

A desired Grave.
IN the time of a great plague afflicting that part of the Country where I
dwell, I did observe a wonderful resolution in all the simple people: and for
that all of one house died, in one month. Infants, young and old, they were
no more amazed, they wept no more. I did see some that were afraied to remain
behind, as in a horrible sollitarines: neither did I note any other care in
them but of their graves. They grieved to see dead carcases lying in the
fields, exposed to the mercy of wild beasts. A grave alone was held a great
happiness amongst them. Some made their own graves being in good health:
others lay down in them being yet a live. And a work man of mine with his
hands and his feet drew the earth upon him in dying. Was not this an
enterprise somewhat like unto the Roman soldiars, whom they found after the
battle of Cannas, with their heads thrust into the holes, which they had made
and filled up with their hands, in smothering of themselves. MONTAIGNE Book
3. of his Essaies. Chap. 12.

Sorceries, Impostures and strange illusions of Satan descouered.
THere are some Judges who to descouer Witches, and to make them confess upon
the rack, the horrible crimes which they have committed, are accustomed to
shave the hair in every part of their bodies, and to change their apparel,
with this persuasion that the will sooner confess. BODIN in his Demonomania,
seems to allow of this, above all other expedients. And so does SPRANGER.
About a hundred years since an Inquisitor called CVMAN, held this course with
one and forty Witches whom he caused to be burnt. The like has been
observed by Master IOSSE DAMHOVDERE, a learned Lawier in Flanders. Whoin his
cryminall practice. Chap. 36. number 21. Reports a memorable History to this
purpose. It is not indiscreetly done (says he) to shave all the hair of the
bodies of certain persons, and then to torture them; for by that means you
shall hinder the force of such remedies as they use to make themselves
impassible, and without feeling in their torments: the which they are
accustomed to practice by Magic Arts, Sorceries, Enchantments, and execrable
charms: as I my self have seen, during the time that I was a Councellor in
the City of Bruges: especially in an old woman, who in her carriage,
apparel, kind of life, manners (which in show were irreprehensible) did so
carry her self, as all did reverence, respect and esteem her, no less then
one of the Apostells of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, for that she did as it were
miraculously cure the Children of many honorable families, making crooke-backes
straight, setting legs and thighs that were broken suddenly, not by art nor
by any medycines: but by words, inioyning some particular devotion as a fast of
three days with bread and water: to say the Lords prayer thrice: to go in
pilgrimage to our Lady of Ardembourg, or to Saint ARNOVL of Audenbourg, or to
Saint IOSSE: or to Saint HVBERT in the Forest of Ardennes: or to cause a Mass
or two to be song every day, and to assist at them deuoute'y, or to cause
some prayers or small suffrages to be said at their charge. These devotions
duly performed, with in few days after the diseased were cured, through the
hope which they and their friends had in this woman. Her carriage and miracles
being published through the Country: the Counselors and Judges (whose
Judgments were perfect, and did see more clearly then the popular) caused
this woman to be apprehended in the night, and carried to prison, but not very
straightly kept, where the next day she was examined, how, by what means, by
virtue of what alliance, and with what co^fidency, she did those cuers? She
always answered confidently, that she had done all with a good intent and
devotion, for holy respects, and therefore they ought not to imprison her so
ignominiously. Yet the Council moved by certain and apparent presumptions,
appointed that she should be tortured: being brought unto the rack and mildly
exhorted to confess the truth; she persisted still in the negative, with an
assured countenance: mayntayning, that she had done nothing but by Lawefull
means, and without conference with any evil spirit. There was present at her
examination the Bourgomaster of Bruges, a man much afflicted with the gout, by
reason whereof during her examination, he did sometimes groone and cry out
like a man that had been rackt. The old woman turning to him, said, Master
Bourgomaster will you be quite freed from this torment of the gout. If you
please, I will cure you, and that soon. Is it possible (said the
Bourgomaster). I would willingly give two thousand Crowns to have ease, I will
give it thee if thou can perform what thou say. Then the Counselors and
Officers that were present said unto him. Sir beware what you say and promise.
Believe us (and sending this Witch into her Chamber) and hear quietly what we
will say unto you. The woman being carried away, they added. See into what
danger you are brought, through a vain persuasion, that this woman, like unto
the Apostles, can by Lawful means cure your gout. In outward show, all that
she does seems holy and divine, but if you look narrolie into her actions,
there is a great difference. Let her be called again, and demanded how she
pretends to cure you: if she promises to help you miraculously as the
Apostles did diseases in their time, and that she follows the course which
they did, we will not contradict her, knowing that GODS arm is not shortened.
If she uses unlawful means, and relies upon them, both she and all her
inventions ought rightly to be suspected. Being therefore called back again,
one of these Counselors asked her: If thou presumest to cure the Bourgomaster
of his gout, what means and remedies will thou apply, no other (says she)
but that the Bourgomaster believe for certain, that I have power to cure him:
he shall then be whole and sound of his feet. Having spoken these words, she
was sent back unto her Chamber. Then the Counselors with one voice and consent
said unto the Bourgomaister and to the Assistance. You may understand by the
answer of this Woman, that she does nothing but by the power of Satan, and
that she does undertake to cure the Bourgomaster by unlawful means: for in
her healing she does not imitate the holy Apostles, who did cure diseases by
faith and the power of GOD. saying unto the Lame; In the name of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST rise up and walk. And to the blind; In the name of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST receive thy sight: the one recovered his legs, and the other his
sight, not by any human help, but by the Divine power, in the name and faith
of JESUS CHRIST. But this Witch does brag to cure him, so as the patient trust
in her, and believe that she can do it. This faith (or misbeleefe) is directly
contrary to the Apostles faith. This answer duly waighed and considered of; the
Bourgomaister being sorry for that which he had said, would not commit himself
to the old Woman, but was ashamed of his lightness. To return unto the
Witch, for that she did persist in the negative of the offenses wherewith she
was charged with apparent presumptions of truth: it was decreed again, that
she should be put to the Rack: where being roughly handled, she made
confession of some light faults. As for Sorcerie and Witchcraft, she denied
it confidently. She was therefore let loose and shut into her Chamber. A
while after being charged again upon new presumptions, she was drawn to the
Rack, where she confessed certain light faults, as she had done before. But
feeling her self tormented, she began to cry out and say; Take me from
hence, else I shall poison you all with the stincke of my excrements, the which
I can no longer hold. There were hard by certain Vaultes or Priuies, whether
some of the assistance were of opinion they should suffer her to go. Others
that were better advised, would by no means have her let loose, least there
should fall out some new difficulty worse then the former. But by the
plurality of voices she was unbound, and led where she pretended to go,
where she stayed above half an hour, without returning, not-with standing
that she had been called twice or thrice: In the end she was forced to come
from thence, to be laid again upon the Rack, the which they began to
strain more then before. She without any lamenting or crying out as she did
before, began to laugh, and knocking with her fingers, she began at the
Justice, saying. You my Masters, and thou wicked Hangman, do what you will,
your cruelty cannot prevail against me. Most of the assistants thought that
the Devil had made her impassible. For that she would not aduowe any thing of
that wherewith she was charged by new informations: but being stretched out
upon the Rack, she did either laughe or sleep. So as being unbound, she
was carried again to her accustomed place. Afterward some other witnesses were
heard, and new proofs allowed: Whereupon it was ordained, that she should
be the third time tortured. But before she was laid upon the Rack, we
caused her to be powled, and all her hair to be shaven: then was she laid
vppn the Rack again, and tortured very sore. Continuing still thus
obstinate, some of the company remembered, that they had not shaven the hair
under her Arme-pittes, and in some other places which I name not. They called
certain Women, who laying hand on her, found little scrowles of Parchment
thrust into her privy parts, containing certain names of evil spirits, and
some Crosses betwixt both. These scrowles being delivered unto the Justice,
were the cause that she was stretched again upon the Rack, where-as then
she began to cry at the first pull, and to confess every point of that
wherewith she was charged by three Informations.

Being demanded the cause of her obstinate perseverance in her former
denialls, she said, that if they had not shaven away all her hair, and
deprived her of those breuets, the truth had never come out of her mouth, for
that the force of the evil spirit was such, as with the help of her hair,
and those billets she was impassible, as it appeared. Some condemned her to
be burnt alive, others for the most part to do a rigorous penance publicklye,
and then to be banished for ever, upon pain of burning. According to this
last advise and counsel, she was set upon a Scaffolde, and a false Periwigge
made for her, the which was taken from her head by the Hangman, and cast into
a great fire made to that end: and she was led by two Senators and the
Advocate of Bruges, out of the Territory. So she retired out of the Country
of Flanders into Zeland, remaining some certain weeks at Middelbourgh, where
she returned presentlye to her first trade. FLORENT DAM, Judge of the Town
was advertised presently by us, of all the cause that had past in the process
of this woman; and in favor of Justice, there was sent unto him a coppie of
the Informations, of her confession upon the Rack and of the sentence that was
given against her. By means whereof he had a watch over her, and discovering
by diverse apparent presumptions, that she did continue in her diuilish
sorceries, caused her to be apprehended and put in prison, who having
straightly examined her by her voluntary confession, and according to the
former Judgment, he condemned her to be burnt, the which was executed. Then he
sent Letters of advice to the Council of Bruges, of all that had past, and by
mouth made a large discourse to DAMHOVDERE, from whom we had this relation. I
GEORGE GODELMAN in his Treatise of Witches and Witchcraft. lib. 3. Chap. 10.
sect. 38.

About the year 1545. there was discovered at Cordoa, a very famous and
renowned Town in Andalousia in Spain, that which follows. A Child of a
poor familye called MAGDELINE de la Croix, of the age of five years, was put
by the Parents or Tutors into a Covent of Nuns. It is not known whether it
were for devotion or for poverty. Being thus young, and ignorant as yet what
evil was, they say not-withstanding (so inscrutable are the Judgments of GOD)
that the Devil appeared unto her, in the form of a black and hideous Moore.
Although at the first sight she were greatly terrified, yet this enemy did so
flatter her, and did promise her so many pretty works where-in Children take
delight, as she did accustom her self to talk familiarly with him, but
always inioyning her, that she (who was fearful) should discover nothing of
this association. In this time the child seemed to have a wonderful wit,
quick, and differing in disposition from others: so as she was much esteemed
of the ancient Nuns, and of other young Maids. Being come to the age of 12.
years or there-abouts, she was solicited by the Devil to marry her-selfe
unto him: and for her dowry he promised her to work so, as for thirty years
or there abouts, she should live in such opinion of Holiness through-out all
Spain, as there had never been the like. Whilst that MAGDELEINE (under the
opinion of this contract) spent the time in her Chamber with this unclean
spirit, who entertained her by his illusions: An other Devil took the form
and resemblance of MAGDELEINE, and was in the Church, in the Cloister, and in
all the assemblies of Nuns, with great show of devotion. Besides after that
he had done MAGDELEINS service in the Church, he let her understand all that
was done in the world, whereof giving aduertisment to those that had her
already in great reputation, she was esteemed to be a Holy Virgin, and began
to have the name of a Prophetess. By reason whereof, (although she were not
yet of full age) she was chosen Abbess by a general consent of the Monks and
all the Nuns. When as the Nuns received the Sacrament on days accustomed
among them, the Priest did always cry out, that they had taken away one of his
Ostes, the which was carried by the aboue-named Angel to MAGDELEINE, who was
in the midst of her Sisters, the which she put into her mouth, and showed as
a great miracle. They say moreover, that if by chance MAGDELINE was not present
when Mass was said, although there were a Wall betwixt them, yet when the
Priest did lift up the Corpus Domini, this Wall did riue in two, that MAGDELINE
might see it, and eat it afterward. It is also a notorious thing, that if in
any sollemne Feast Day, the Nuns did lead her in procession, to make the act
more reverent by some extraordinary wonder, she was raised from the ground in
the presence of them all, above three Cubittes high. Sometimes she carried a
little Image of JESUS CHRIST, newborn and naked, and in weeping (for she
could power out abundance of tears when she pleased) her hair grew down
to her heels, wherewith she covered the Image: then suddenly her hair
appeared in their first length. She did many such other illusions, especially
on sollemne days, to make all more admirable: These were her principal
miracles.

In the mean time, the Pope, the Emperor, and the great men of Spain did
write unto her: and by their Letters did beseech her, to have them and their
affairs in recommendation in her prayers: yea they asked her advise in matters
of very great importance: as it appeared by Letters that were found afterward
in her Closset. More-ouer, there were many Ladies and Gentlewomen which did not
swadle their Children newborn, before the Abbess MAGDELINE had with her
holy hands touched and blessed the swaddling bands: in like sort, all the Nuns
of Spain were wonderfully well pleased to have such a Mother, to whom they
did attribute a good part of the holiness of their Orders. In the end GOD
would have this fraud of Satan laid open. For MAGDELINE after that she had
spent about thirty years in this acquaintance with the Devil, and been
Abbess twelve years, she began to grow weary of her passed life.
There-fore after that she had detested these Diuilish Arts, and the horrible
society of Satan, she discovered freely (and when as they least dreamt of it)
this notable wickedness, unto the Visiters of the Order. Some Spaniards of
credit and very learned, have reported unto me, that MAGDELINE knowing that
the Nuns had discovered her fraud: and that (fearing to be accused,) she
had prevented them, confessing her offense first: for that the custom of
Spain is, that if any one did freely confess an offense, which deserved a
gr^euous punishment, he was pardoned. Every one was amazed at this confession,
the news thereof was so strange, and they were of opinion to inquire more
curiously of this matter. To proceed more lawfully therein, and with better
order: MAGDELINE was imprisoned in the Covent where she was Abbess: where
being examined, she confessed all: and yet the Moore continued his illusions
still, for whilst she was in prison watched narrowly by men that were at the
door of the prison, and that they did examine her cause: the Nuns being gone
into the Church at midnight to sing Mattins; MAGDELINES fantosme came and sat
in the Chair in the Quier, after the accustomed manner, and was seen upon
her knees, as it were praying, and attending the other Nuns: so as every one
thought verily it had been their Abbess, and that the Visiters had suffered
her to come unto the midnight Mattins, for the great testimonies she gave of
her repentance. But the next day following, the Nuns understanding that
MAGDELINE came not out of prison, reported unto the Visitors what they had
seen the night before. They having well examined the matter, found that
MAGDELINE went not out of prison. Her process was in the end sent to Rome,
and for that she had voluntarily confessed her offense, she was absolved.
CASSIODORE RENEY in his Relations: ZVINGER in the Theater of man's life. volum
5. lib. 4. BODIN lib. 2. of his Demonomania. Chap. 7.

I will tell you what I have seen, being at Calaris a Town in the Island of
Sardinia, whereas then they talked of the arraignment of certain Witches, who
(they said) had had conference with them of France and of Navarre, which had
been sought out and punnished not long before. A very fair Gentlewoman, about
seauenteene or eighteen years of age, being enticed by one of these Witches,
came to have conference with a Diuill, who came some-time to see her, in the
shape of a goodly man: by means whereof he deceived her, and had his pleasure
on her, she being fallen greatly in Love with him. Having entertained her
some-time, they descouer that she was a Witch: and although she were
convicted, yet could they not get her to confess her faults, but contynuing
obstinate, she believed confidently that the Diuill would save her, as he had
promised, and transported with the affection which she bare him, she spoke many
things which did terrefie them that heard her, To conclude, she suffered
her-selfe to be put alive into the fire, calling still upon this Diuill, and
so perished miserably. ANT de TORQVEMADO in the 3. journey of his Hexam.

An other Gentlewoman, rich, fair and of a very great quality, seeing a knight
her neighbor, who was rich and a goodly Gentleman, she fell in Love with him,
looking on him with great affection, but not descouering her passion. Some-time
after, the Diuill, espying this Gentlewoman, took upon him the shape of this
knight, and proceeds in such sort, as he winnes the Gentlewoman, upon
condition that he should marry with her. She who thought it had been her
knight, accepted of him, and received him many nights into her Chamber where
he late with her. In this sort they spent some months, during the which the
Diuill persuaded her not to send any message unto him* for that their business
must continue secret: and when he should see her, he would not seem to know
her: and therefore although she were sometimes before the true Knight, she
made no show of her affection, as also she imputed it to dissimulation that
he spoke not unto her, and gave no sign of that which concerned their
Alliance. Sometimes after, the Gentlewomans Mother gave her Daughter a
certain relick to wear about her. Whereat the feigned knight counter fetting
an amazement, came no more, and so some months were spent: during the which
the Gentlewoman knowing that the true Knight made Love to another, she grew
into an extreme jealousy: and not able to endure this distemperature in her
brain, she sent one day to entreat him to come and speak with her, having
something to say unto him. The Knight ignorant of the cause, but other-wise a
courteous Gentleman, went presently unto her, found her alone, and said that
he was come to hear and receive her commandments. The Gentlewoman seeing
him, and hearing him speak, like one that did scarce know her, she began
to complain of him, for that so longtime he had not cared to see her nor
speak to her. The Knight much amazed as one that did not conceive the meaning
of this woman, answered her in such sort as she thought he dissembled to much.
Growing therefore into choler, she began to chide him, saying, that seeing
he had enjoyed her so long, there were no reason he should now think to
for-sake her, but he must perform the promise which he had made to marry her:
and if he would do other-wise, besides that she would make her complaints to
almighty GOD and the world, she would force him to the execution of his
promise, seeing that he would not willingly perform it. The Knight grew more
amazed then before, and made her answer, that he understood nothing of her
Language, and that she mistook herself, for that he had never had any secret
conference with her: had promised her nothing, neither could she demand any
thing at his hands. The Gentlewoman mad with this answer, in replying said. Do
you not remember that you did this and this with me, repeating every thing
that had happened unto her with the Imposter in the Knights shape: adding
withal, you cannot avoid it to be my husband and I your wife. The Knight
being much amazed, began to protest that she was much deceived to think it
to be true, and contending thereon, the Gentlewoman did note unto him the day
of the promise, which was upon a sollemne feast day. Then the Knight swear
unto her that upon that day, nor three weeks before, nor three weeks after
he had not been in the Town, neither in his house, nor in hers: the which I
will prove unto you so plainly, as you shall rest satisfied, and if any one
has deceived you in my name, I am not to be blamed. But to the end you
should not doubt of the truth of my saying, I will presently verefie it. Then
(not departing from her,) he caused seven or eight of his household servants
and others to come, who unacquainted with the cause, did swear that the Knight
had spoken the truth, and that all that time he had been above fifty Leagues
from thence. The Gentlewoman much troubled with this deposition, began to
remember some particularities, and to apprehend that no mortal man could have
done them: but that they were Imposturs of Satan: so as soon after the
retreat of the true Knight, she began to find the cause of this abuse: and
detesting her foolish concupiscence, humbling her-selfe, she resolved not to
think any more of marriage, but ended the remainder of her days in a
Monastery. In the same Book.

A bloody sweat.
THE Plague being in the Town of Misnia in Saxony, there died a great number
of people, in the year 1542. in the month of July. It happened that an honest
woman (...) AGATHE ATERMAN fell sick, and for the space of four days sweet
great drops of blood at her for-head, so as, as soon as ever they had wipt
her, others came presently: she died about the twenteth of September. GEORGE
le FEVRE in the Annals of Misnia. Book 3.

A Miserable Rashness.
CLAVDE, Bastard Daughter to SINEBALD FIESQVE Earl of Lauagne, being married
to a Gentleman of Chiauari, near unto Genoa, called RAVASCHIER, was much
courted to her dishonor, by a Gentleman of the same place, named IHON de la
TOVR, who abusing the love RAVASCHIER did bear him, did seek to rob him of
his Wife. But this virtuous Gentlewoman having oftentimes rejected him, he
was so blind as to imagine that her denials were but allurements, and settling
this unworthy conceit in his brain, finding his friend to be one day absent,
he went and lay under the Gentle-womans bed, hoping that night being come, and
she lying alone, he might easily enjoy her. Being retired, and laid to her
rest, before her Chamber-maide went away into a near Closet, she commanded
her to look about if there were not any thing that might disquiet her rest in
the night. The (...) auing searched every where, in the end she cast down her
eyes, and spyed under her Mistress bed a black thing, She cried out, and both
fled out of that Chamber into another over it, where-as the Gentle-womans
Father in law was. LA TOVR seeing himself discovered, opens the Chamber
windows speedily, and casts himself into the street, where he was
pitifully broken and bruized, and by the help of a friend of his that came by
chance, he was carried home to his own house. Some hours after this Tragedy
is known, for that Chiauary is but a small place. The Father in law sends
letters to RAVASCHIER, and to LEWIS of Fiesque Brother to the Gentlewoman, who
sent CORNELIUS their Brother with RAVASCHIER and some Soldiars, who come
secretly in boats being strong and well guarded by the Geneuois, they presently
force JOHN de la TOVRS house, and finding him very lame in his bed of his
fall, they cut his throat, hew him in pieces, and then fly. Such was the
end of his rashness. History of Italy.

Treasors found spoiled, lost, sought for again vainly and dangerously.
ABout the year 1550. near unto Deue a Town in Transiluania, the rain and
ruins of water having been very great, and the we^her grown fair, some
peasants going forth to work, descouer by the reuerberation of the Sun, a
great Treasor which did shine, under a rotten tree which looked red through age.
There was first of a la serpent all of gold, the which after the death of a
Monk called GEORGE, (who had seized thereon, and was slain) came to the hands
of the Emperor FERDINAND. There was also found a great number of Medailles of
gold, of the weight of three Crowns a piece, having the figure of LYSIMACHVS
King of Thrace of the one side, and on the other side a victory. The peasants
had the value of twenty thousand Crowns for their shares. The rest was sent to
FERDINAND then King of Bohemia by JOHN BAPTISTA CASTALDE his Lieutenant, with
two Medailles of gold, of NINVS and SEMIRAMIS, given to the Emperor CHARLES the
5. This treasor was valued at above a hundred thousand Crowns. ACS. CENTORIVS.
Book 4. of the war of Transiluania.

A poor fisherman remaining at Bresse, called BARTLEMEVVE, Grandfather to
ANTHONY CODRE VRCE a learned Gramarien in our time, digging in the ground,
found a great vessel, full of silver, with the which he purchased land
sufficient to entertain his family (which was great) honestly: and moreover he
did set up a goodly shop of spices, and became one of the richest men in the
Country. BARTHE LMEVVE of Bologne in the life of ANTHONY CODRE VRCE.

The Marquis of Pescara having taken Tunis from BAREAROVSSE, and being brought
into the Citadel by the Christia^^ that were prisoners there, one of the^
being a Geneuois borne, descouered unto him a treasor that was put into sackes
and cast into a Cisterne, where they found above thirty thousand ducats in
gold, the which the Emperor CHARLES the 5. gave unto the Marquis. P. IOVIVS
Book 34. of his Histories of our time. The treasor of CHARLES Duke of
Bourgondy won by the Suisses, in the battles which they gave him near to
Gransoa and Morest amounted to great sums of gold and silver, both coined and
uncoined: the true value whereof was not justly known, for that at that time
the Suisses did more esteem the heads of their pikes, halberds and their
swords, then the gold or silver of foreign Princes. About the year 1520. a young
man simple in all his behauior called LEONARD LIRNIMAN, Son to a Tailer of
Basil, being entered (they knew not how) into a Grotte or Cave, which is not
far from the town, where he had past farther then any other, he told
wonders at his return. Having carried with him a great waxe-candle that was
blessed and light when as he entered. Going far into the Cave, he first past an
iron door: then he went on from Chamber to Chamber until he found green and
stately gardins. In the midest of it was a hall richely furnished: and in it a
very fair Maid, carrying on her head a Crown of gold, with her hair
hanging down, but from the Nauel downe-ward it was an horrible Serpent. She
took LEONARD by the hand, and led him to a Cofet of iron, about the which did
lie two great black dogs, which began to bark horribly against him. But
the Maid began to threaten them, and causing them to be still, she takes a
great bundell of keys which hunge about her neck, opens the Cofer and draws
forth all sorts of Medaills, of gold, silver and copper: most of the which
she presented to this young man, who showed them after-wards to many in
Basil. He added that this Maid said unto him, that she was issued from a
Royal stock: and that she had been monstrously transformed in that sort
long since by horrible Imprecations: neither did she hope for any delivery,
until that a chaste young man, who had been never poluted in any sort, had
kissed her thrice. Then she should recover her first form, and for a recompense
she would give unto the young man that should free her, the Treasure contained
in that Cofer. He did affirm, that there-vpon he came very near unto her,
and had kissed her twice, but at either of them she made such greeuious and
horrible faces, as he thought she would deuower him or tear him in a
thousand pieces. Being carried by some disordred people into a Tavern, he
could never afterward find the entry, nor the descent into the Cave: for the
which the poor wretch did often lament and weep bitterly. Every one may see
that this Maid was a Satanicall illusion. And on the other side the ancient
Roman Medayles which he brought out of this Cave, and sold to diverse
Bourgeses of Basil, show that there might be some hidden Treasure in that
Cave, kept by some covetous Companion of Satan: as in the mines of gold, the
worke-men do sometimes encounter with evil spirits which torment them
strangely. After this young man, an other borne at Basil, pressed with extreme
necessity in a dear year went into the Cave, hoping to find this Treasure
for the relief of his famelie. But having gonne but a little way, and found
nothing but dead men's boanes, he was so terrefied, as without looking behind
him, he speedely recovered the entry of the Cave, and returned all amazed to
his house being empty handed. STVMPFIVS in the History of Suisserland.

In the year 1530. the Diuill did show unto a Priest through a Cristall
glass, certain Treasures near unto the City of Nuremberg. But as the Priest
sought for them in a hollow place without the City, having taken a friend with
him to be a spectator, and beginning to see a Cofer in the bottom of the Cave
by the which there lay a black dog, he entered into it, where presently he
was smothred with the earth that fell on him and filled up all the Cave. I.
WIER, Book 2. of Impostures. Chap. 5. About eight Leagues and a half from the
City of Leon in new Spain, there is a mountain, in the top whereof there
is a wonderful great breach or mouth, from the which it does sometimes cast
such great flames of fire, as in the night it may be plainly seen 25. leagues
off. Many have imagined, that it was some vain of gold that was molten, and
entertained this fire. For this cause a IACOBIN would make trial of it:
causing a Chain of Iron to be forged, with an Iron Bucket at the end of it,
and went to the place with four other Spaniards. Being there, they let down
the Chain with the Bucket, the which was molten with some part of the Chain.
The Iacobin returned very angry to Leon, complains to the Smith that he had
made the Chain much slenderer then he had commanded. The Smith makes an other
much greater then the first. The same being done with a Bucket proportionable
unto it: the Iacobin goes the second time to the Mountain with his companions,
and lets down the Chain and Bucket as at the first: But it succeeded as
before, and almost worse: for suddenly there came out of this hollow place, a
Ball of fire so great, as the Iacobin and his companions thought to have dyed
there: at the least they were so amazed, as they had no more list to meddle
with that fire, but returned much terrified unto the Town, without ever
speaking more of the Mountain, or of the Treasure. I have known a Priest in
the same Town, who having acquaintance with a Spanish Treasurer, had
opportunity by his means to send a Letter to the King of Spain, in the which
he beseeched his Majesty to furnish him with 200. slaves to work in this
Mountain, promising to draw forth wonderful great Treasures. The King sent
him word, that he should work at his own charge if he would: as for him, he
had no slaves to send him. So the Mountain remained still in that place,
without stirring or any more visiting of the Priest, or of any other after
him. IEROSME BENZO a Milanois. lib. 2. of the History of the New found world.
Chap. 16.

ENCISO a Spaniard, having with his company defeated certain Indians which
kept him from forraging of their country, he entered into their chief Village,
and there found store of bread, fruits, roots, and other things to eat,
wherewith he refresht himself and his men. Then they went to search along
the banks of the river which was near, where they found great store of
stuff, Couerlets, and vessel of earth and wood, which they had hidden in the
Reeds, with about 120000. crowns in gold wrought, the which COMACCO Lord of the
Village had hidden there thinking to save it from the Spaniards hands. And if
certain Indians had not discovered this treasure unto them, they had never
found it, and yet they were feign to torture them, to make them confess where
it was. BENZO lib. 2. Chap. 2. But this treasure, and all others discovered
here or there in our time, are but a handful of silver in respect of those of
the Kings of Peru, as well in their stately Garden, where all was of gold, as
in their Cabinet, where every thing created or artificial, was to be seen of
pure gold. The ransom of ATABALIPPA, amounting to above sixty two Millions of
gold, and would have been above a hundred Millions. If PIZARRE had had the
patience and in the end the Treasures of the Temple of the Sun, the which
were greater, and were spoiled by the Spaniards, who afterward slew one
another, and spoiled the Land to enrich the Sea, as their own Histories do
confess.

When as the Emperor made war against the Princes of German, a rich
Gentleman turned the channel of a River which past by his Castle, and in a
deep ditch in the said channel, hid all that he had of any value, and then
brought the River to his accustomed course: yet the Spaniards discovered this
Treasure of themselves, they turned the water and found out all, then digging
farther, they found other goods, but almost all was consumed in process of
time. PHILIP CAMERARIVS. Chap. 63. of his Meditations.

King PHILIP the last deceased, being (after a peace made with HENRY the 2.
King of France) embarked in the low Countries with a great number of ships, to
be the sooner in Spain, and with him all the rich Jewels that the Emperor
CHARLES the 5. his Father, had gathered together in Italy and Germany, during
his prosperous victories, with the rich hangings, and other stately things made
with great charge in Flanders: even as he arrived in the Port of Saint James
in Galicia, there did ^ise so great a storm, that of all that stately
furniture, gathered together with so great toil and time, nothing came to a
safe port; but the Sea was heir to all this rich Treasure, in sight of the
Spaniards, who were in great heaviness. And as for King Philip, this torment
spared him as little, for he had scarce put his foot into an other bark, when
as the ship in which he went, sunk into the Sea, so great was the fury of the
winds. History of FRANCIS the 2.

The Treasures brought from the Indies, in gold, silver, Pearls, Precious
stones, and rich Merchandise, with-in these hundred years, are almost
innumerable. What the fruits have been, I refer my self unto the Reader.
It is a subject for a whole Book, where-of the conclusion shall be. All is
made vanity, and pernicious in many kinds.

Traitors punished.
AMong other strong places which the Turks have taken in Hungary from the
Christians, we may name Alba Iulia, the which was yielded up by that Traitor
LADISLAVS LEREZIN, who commanded there in the name of MAXIMILIAN the Emperor
in the beginning of June, in the year 1566. although he had been advertised,
that within two days he should be relieved. The place being yielded by
composition, first the Turks cut all the Soldiers throats, except some few
which saved themselves pollitikely. As for LADISLAVS, he was carried bound
hand and foot to SELIM, and accused that he had cruelly slain some Turkish
prisoners, for the which he was condemned by SELIM, and delivered to his
accusers, to use as they pleased. They therefore put him into a great Pipe,
stickt full of long Nails, and then rolled him down from a high Mountain, so
as the Nails ran through him, and he dyed in horrible Torments. His Son
partaker of his Treason dyed miserably, without means, and abandoned of all
men, having sold all his lands and his goods, and wickedly consumed what he
had. I. LEONCLAIVS, in the supply of the Annals of Turkey. SOLOMON father to
SELIM, did cruelly put to death the soldiers of the garrison of Buda, who had
forced their Captain to yield that impregnable Fort unto the Turks. As for
the Captain, he was preserved and honored. A traitor in the Town of Rhodes,
did many services unto SOLIMAN, upon a promise to have one of SOLIMANS
daughters in marriage. The Island and Town being wone, he presented him self to
SOLIMAN, who caused him to be fleid alive, saying, that he was a Christian, and
that he pretended to marry a Turkish wife, they must therefore take off his old
skin. Being thus flayed, they laid him upon a bed all covered with Salt,
where he dyed in unspeakable torments. CAMERARIVS in his Historical
Meditations, Chap. 7.

Earthquakes.
THE year one thousand five hundredth and eight, at two of the clock on a
wednesday morning, the earth began to quake in such manner at Constantinople,
that diverse Steeples fell down, the Chimneys tumbled to the ground, the walls
cracked in sunder, and many stately buildings were ouer-throwne, with the ruins
whereof a great number of persons were slain. No Man knew where to save
himself. The people running out of their houses, got into large void
places and Gardens, so to escape all danger. For the Earthquake lasted all
that morning, without intermission, and continued forty days after, in such
sort that one might easily feel and discern it every hour. Annals of
Turkey, published by I. LEONCLAIVS. Doctor GARCEVS in his Meteorologie, briefly
describes 163. Earthquakes, mentioned in Histories before and after the
coming of our Savior unto the year 1564. We will present that which he
speaks of those of our time, following the scope of this our collection of
Histories.

Upon the 14. day of September 1509. an horrible Earthquake so shook the
City of Constantinople, for the space of eighteen days, that all the walls
toward the Sea, and all the houses adjoining, were quite overthrown, and
Ditches filled up with the ruins. The Castle was thrown down where the Turk
lays his treasure, together with his five Towers, and the Palace where-as the
Lions are kept. In like manner all the conduits that convey water from Danubius
to Constantinople were shaken and spoiled. The straight of the Sea between the
City and the Town of Pera, moved in such manner, that the water flashed over
the walls on either side. The Custom House was clean ouer-turned into the
Water. Thirteen thousand persons were slain with ruins in Earthquake.

The year following, almost all Italy was shaken with diverse reiterated
Earthquakes. The year 1517. an Earthquake in Germany ouer-threwe two
thousand houses and Granges at Nordlingen and there-about. All Portugal was
shaken the year 1531. Fifteen hundredth fair great Houses were ouer-throwne
in the City of Lisbon: and almost all the Churches fell down. This
Earthquake endured eight days, and seven or eight times a day shook the
City exceedingly. Also the ground opened in many places, whence issued a
contagious air that engendered a Plague, which carried away an exceeding
multitude of people. Two years after, there was an Earthquake at Tergow in
Zwitzerland, which turned a pretty big River from his course, where-into it
entered not again, till it had vnder-mined and over thrown a little Hill that
hemmed it in. Presently there-vpon the Town of Basil was shaken very sore
with three several Earth quakes, in less then a month.

In the year 1537. the Country of Pouzol was so forely shaken with
Earthquakes, for the space of twenty months and above that not an edifice
remained whole and entire. But toward the end of September, in the year
following, this Earthquake began again with such vehemency, and without
discontinuing either night or day, that the Sea reculed two hundredth paces
back, whereupon ensued the taking of a huge quantity of Fish. The 30. day of
the same month, a great continent of land between the foot of the Mountain
called Barbaro, and the Sea by the Lake Auerna, seemed to rise up, and suddenly
to take the form of a Mountain. The next morning about two of the clock,
this Mountain of earth cleaving in sunder, began to vomit forth flames of
fire, with a wonderful noise. Amidest those flames it cast out Pumyce stones
and Flints, with such a company of stinking Ashes, that they covered all the
ruins of Pouzol, and the fields adjoining: the Trees were borne down, and the
Vines a quarter of a mile about were reduced to powder, The Fowls and Beasts
of the fields had their share of it. As for the inhabitants of Pouzel, they
saved themselves in Naples. These stinking Ashes blewe above eight miles
abroad, being very dry close to the ouer-ture, but sulpharous and moist a
far off. More-ouer, a great and mighty Mountain of those Pumyce-stones and
Flint-stones, and Ashes, grew up by the ouer-ture in one night, a thousand
paces high and more, having many events, whereof two continued a long time
after. The flames endured diverse months.

The twentieth day of January 1538. Basil was shaken again with an Earthquake,
and two years after in the month of December all Germany had experience of
it, with the ruins and spoils of many buildings. The year 1541. a valley in
Suisserland was shaken, and near to the Apenine a torrent of marvelous
stinking sulphur was seen running along the fields. The year 1551. upon the
28. day of January Lisbon in Portugal was shaken with a new earthquake,
which ouerthrewe two hundredth houses, and killed above a thousand persons. In
September the year following, there was another earthquake at Basil, as also
in diverse towns of Misnia, and sundry places thereabout, whereof ensued many
ruins, plagues and violent death. The next year after, about the month of
August, the Country all along the river of Elba in Saxony had a part of the
like visitation. GARCA^VS adds another strange earthquake in a quarter of
Germany, where certain towns and villages were swallowed up with a great
number of folks: and he says that this earthquake lasted 15. days. As Much
happened two moueths before to Cattaro a town of Sclauonia, belonging to the
Venetians, wherein perished a great multitude of people, swallowed up by an
ouerture of the earth. The year 1570. the City of Ferrara was shaken by an
earthquake for the space of many days together, with the ruin of diverse fair
places and other goodly buildings. The wars, plagues, famines, inundations of
seas and rivers, happening after such signs from heaven, are noted in the
histories of our time: as we also purpose to present the histories of them in
their fit place. On Su^day the first day of March 1584. in the Countries of
Lyonnois, Masconnois Dauphine, Sauoy, Piemont, Valais, Suisserland and
Bourgondy, between a 11. and 12. a clock at noone, the sky clear and bright
and the Sun shyning, happened a sudden earthquake, which lasted not above ten
or eleven minutes at that time. It was chiefly perceived by the crackling of
windows, clapping of doors, shaking of houses, beams, and trees together,
with a great noise and roaring in the air. Many chimneis fell down, diverse
walls cracked in sunder, and the foundations of certain houses shook, namely
about the lake of Lausanne, especially in the Countries of Vaut, Fossigny,
Chablais and places adjoining. Three or four chimneis, and the wall of an old
house fell down at Geneua, without any other harm. The next day, this
earthquake redoubled about the upper end of the Lake of Lausanne, and on
Tuesday both in the morning and at night it waxed greater with wind and
sleete, but on Wedensday between 9. and 10. of the clock in the morning this
which follows happened in a certain place of the Country being some two
hours journey from this upper end of the Lake, and four Harguebuze shot or
there about from the town of Aille, appertayning to the Canton of Berne. A
great quantity of earth tumbling from the top of the mountains (like an
impetuous flood of waters rushing down the rocks) lanched it self forth, as
some have affirmed, the length of a mile, not so much by it own natural
motion, which tended downe-ward, as pushed forward by winds and exhalations
mingled among. This earth ran so violently along, that in an instant it covered
the places which were next below it, upon the which it disgorged it self, and
carried all the ground that it met withal before it: which rouled along as
furiously as the first: and it was like to a rough sea, where one wave drives
on another. The plains were not only carried away, but the hills that
ouerlooked the bottoms were likewise removed. Now it is to be noted that the
place of this first motion of the earth was at the mouth of a strait caused by
diverse hillocks which are commonly sound in the nookes of mountains. At the
mouth and issue of this strait was Corberi a small village or hamlet of some
8. houses, and 10. or 11. granges with certain mills, that were driven by the
water of a little brook. The earth rushed so furiously on this village, that
suddenly it was al covered over, except one house, where it chanced that the
good man astonished with the noise he heard, told his wife that he was
persuaded the end of the world was come, and therefore willed her join with
him in prayer unto GOD, that it might please him to have mercy on them.
Whereupon falling on their knees in their house they reaped such fruit of their
prayers, that the earth which rouled along, past like a raging wave over their
house without any hurt, save the good man himself, that was a little hurt in
the head. As for the other houses and granges they were all cast down, and
almost quite covered over. Another notable thing happened in this very place,
namely a Child of 12. or 13. weeks old was found safe and sound in his Cradle,
having his poor mother dead by him, who laying her arms over the Cradle for
to save her Child had her brains beaten out with the fall of the house. The
like befell a little girl of a year old found safe and well under the ruins
of another house. As for the milles they were broken all to pieces. A
marvelous matter happened in one of the^. For standing in a low place the
beam of the wheel, and the wheel it self were found whole and entier on the
top of a little hill 500. paces higher then the situation of the Mill.
Moreover the further this deluge of earth ran downe-ward, the more the
desolation augmented. For shooting it self against the village of Yuorne,
which lay underneath Corberi, it buried an hundredth persons alive (some say
more) two hundredth and 40. milch-kine, and a number of Horse and Oxen. It
covered three score and nine houses, an hundeth and six granges, and 4. vaults,
with a great quantity of corn, wine, moueables and pasture. For in truth this
village was meruaylous well fitted with all things, and accounted one of the
best of all the Country of the Cantons. The situation of it was on the side of
a hill lying East and West, in so fertile a place, that they had continually 3.
crops in a year of one piece of ground. There was not any poor or beggar
amongst them, but every one even to the meanest lived honestly by that that he
had and his own labor, being simple people, industrious, and estranged from
the evil practices of usury and strifes in Law, according to the testimony of
al their neighbors. It is reported the ruin was so sudden, that no Canon can
sooner discharge a shot, the^ all this was executed. Diverse have testified that
a far off they saw some 20. persons the most part women and Children, that
running down the hill for to save themselves, were in a moment overtaken,
beaten down, and covered over with earth. There were some among them, but the
greater part women and children: because the men were most of them at work in
the field. Amidst this visitation, GOD used such mercy that there was not any
house wherein remained not some one man or child alive. Besides the terrible
noise which the earth made, rouling along with a mixture of hail and stones
flying in the air, a great sort of sparks of fire were seen, and a gross
thick Cloud, whence issued an exceeding filthy smell of sulphur. At last this
inundation of earth stayed it self against 2. houses that joined together,
which were covered up half way the walls, without any further harm, besides
the which there remains 7. or 8. other houses with as many Granges, and a few
barnes. Extractedout of the Annotations and Observations upon I. du CHESNES
great Mirror of the world.

On the fifth day of September being Saturday 1590. according to the ancient
computation, and an hour before Sun set, the earth began to shake in
Austria, Morauia, Bohemia, Misnia, Silesia and Lusatia. But a little after, to
wit, between twelve and one of the clock at midnight, this Earthquake began
again through all the Provinces aforesaid, with a marvelous shaking, and most
of all in Vienna, the capital City of the Archdutchy of Austria: where the
top of the great steeple of Saint Stephens Church, was so shaken that a
number of mighty huge stones fell down from it upon the roof of the Church:
and the whole frame of the said steeple was moved with such vehemency, that
they were feign to new repair it. Another steeple by it, wherein hangs one of
the greatest Bells in Europe, was like-wise shaken. Not far from the Scottish
gate, the Steeple of a Church was ouer-throwne, and the Church it self was so
cleft in sunder, that they were forced to take it down. It happened at the
same time, that a certain Butcher, which used to lie a nights in his stall
fast by that Scottish gate, upon a sudden felt his stall beaten down with
the stones that tumbled on it in very great abundance, without receiving any
hurt, or so much as once touched with those stones in any part of his body.
Contrarilye the Sun an Inn in the City, was dashed all to pieces with the
fall of a steeple that stood by it. And diverse persons were brained, namely the
Mistress of the house, her Daughter and Mother, two rich Merchants, that had
five thousand Crowns in gold found about them, the Post of Lintz and three
other men: whose bodies at length were drawn forth from under the ruins.
Besides this Saint Michels steeple, a Church of the Jesuits, and the pinacles
of Saint Laurence and Saint John's Churches fell down. There was neither
building, bulwark, Church nor house within the walls of Vienna which was not
shaken, crakt, broken, or in some sort damnified by this earthquake. All the
inhabitants got them out of the City with all speed, and went into gardens
and other void open places.

In a village not far from Vienna, called Hernalsi, the Church and diverse
houses fell down. As Much happened in the town of Oula, another village named
Siegeitzkirchen had the Church, the parsonage house, and the walls of the
Churchyard ouerthowen: Pixendorf, another village was quite and clean cast
down. In like manner Pfasfensted, and the Castle of Iudenow, new builded from
the ground but three years before: and another called Sitzberg were so shaken,
that no body durst dwell in them a long time after. In other places diverse
persons were hurt and killed with the ruins of houses. Two miles from Vienna,
a Mill that stood on the water, was hoisted up and thrown a good way of upon
the dry Land: and a great sort of fish were cast up on the banks of the same
river. A little beneath Vienna, the ground opened, whence issued such a
stinking pestilent vapor, that the inhabitants about it were not able to endure
it. The ouerture was four foot broad, very long, and so deep that it could
not be sounded. In Morauia, Bohemia, and other Countries adjoining this
earthquake continued many days, but not altogether so violent. I. HEDERY, in
his oration of the earthquake in Austria.

It is observed that this terrible earthquake, which killed well near all the
garrison in the Castle of Canisium in Hungary, fell upon the very same day
that Pope VREAN the seventh was elected, who held the Roman Sea but ten
days. D. CHYTREVS in his Chronicle of Saxony. page 872.

Of Valor.
THE number of valiant men in our time, and of their brave explots, is very
great. The following volumes shall ^urnish diverse examples, here we will note
some, with an intent not to forget the rest, for the present we offer a medley
of histories. A Portugal Lady, being embarked in the year 1520. with two of
her Brethren, called JOHN and ARIAS COCILLO, and a fisherman, named ANTHONY
GRIMALDI, conducted in a Caruel by certain mariners, being at sea they were
set upon by a fregat of Pirates, eight whereof (having grappeled with the
Caruell) leaped into them. But JOHN, ARIAS and ANTHONY, run and defend
themselves in such sort, as they kill four of the Assaylants, and force the
rest to retire with more speed then they had entered. In the mean time the
Mariners go on their course, and leave the fregate far behind them. The
Pirates understanding by them that were escaped, that there were but three
Combatants in the Caruell, and that the rest were but women and Marryners, they
began to row up withal their force and graple again with the Caruell, then
sixeteene of them well armed leap in by the prowe: the two Brethren make head
against them with great resolution. ANTHONY ioynes with them, having no other
arms, but a hatchet in his right hand, and a Mariners wasecoate about his
left arm. The encounter was very sharp, and had been greater if their number
had been equal. In the end the Pirates having lost most of their men retire
with the remainder into their frigate. Whilst they were thus in fight, some of
the Pirates leaped in by the Poupe: but they were repulsed by the Mariners.
ANTHONY ran unto the hatch of the Caruell, and took the coals and cenders
which he found there, and cast them into the F^igate, wher-with some were
burnt. He was wounded in diverse places, but not mortally. The Carauell arrived
safe at her pretended Port, in despite of the Pirates, who after this second
fight, durst no more approach. OSORIVS, lib. 12. Chap. 2. Of the History of
Portugal.

MANVEL PACHE CO, a Portugal Captain, being sent by the Governor of Malaca to
the East Indies, to annoye them of Pacem, who had slain 25. Portugals, freede
himself carefully of that charge. And being desirous to drink some fresh
water, he sent JOHN ALMEIDE, ANTHONY PAZEGNE, ANTHONY DEVERE, and FRANCIS
GAMAXE resolute soldiers in a skiffe, to land near unto Pacean, to dig for
fresh water. These soldiars being followed by a Portugal Surgion, a valient
man entered into the river with their Mariners and watered. But as they
returned toward their ship, behold the enemies came swarming down on either
bank, who with a shower of stones and arrows thought to beat down the
soldiars and to sink the boat. But the soldiars covered themselves so well
with their Targetts, and the Mariners did their duties so well in rowing, as
they got out of the river into the open Sea. But for that the flud cast them
back having no wind, three great vessels manned with all that was necessary
for the war, and which carried many Gentlemen of the Country, came to inuest
them. The Commander called ZVDAMEC, was of IAVA, who approached with a chief
bark, which carried a hundred and fifty men. As for the Portugalls, they
resolved to die, rather then to yield to become slaves: and after they had
recommended themselves to GOD, they prepared corragiously to the combat. The
Barber began, and laid hold of the prowe of their chief vessel with such
force, as his four Companions had means to enter into it, and he had means
to leap in after them. Then they fell upon their enemies with such fury as
many of them troubled with fear, cast themselves ouerborde. ZVDAMEC was
hehinde his men, whom he thrust on to the combat, holding his sword in his
hand, and threatening to kill him that should recoyle: but seeing that his words
prevailed nothing, he slew four: The rest knew not which way to turn them:
for those that made head against the Portugalls felt the weight of their arms:
and those which recoyled could expect nothing but death from their Captain.
Having fought sometime they were all ^laine or drowned, being so transported
with fear, as they cast themselves headlong into the Sea, namely ZVDAMEC, who
after that he had been wounded in many places, leaped into the waves. The
other two vessels, seeing what had happened, durst come no nearer, although
the five Portugalls were so tired, and wounded in so many places, as they could
not stir arm nor leg. The vessel taken from ZVDAMEC was drawn near unto
PACHECOS fleet, and then carried to Malaca, and there laid up and covered, to
serve for a memorial of that maraculous fight. The King of Pacem amazed at
this strange accident, demanded and bought a peace, which was granted him. In
the same book Chap. 4.

In the same year 1520. Captain VASQVES FERNAND CAESAR, running with a ship
of war along the straight of Gibraltar was invested by six foysts of Moors.
They desired nothing more, then this prey, and thinking it impossible for him
to escape them, they began to shoute for joy, then with their Arrows,
Harguebuzes and Muskets, they sought to oppress him. CAESAR played with his
Artillery, to keep them from bording him, avoiding their blows, with his
rowing, and still killing some one of them: by means whereof their choler was
somewhat cooled which he descouering, he ran upon three of these foysts
that were together, the wind having driven away the three others and kept them
aloof. The enemies came also to encounter him whereupon he set fire to a great
piece of Ordynance, so; as the boullet passing from prowe to poupe of one of
these three foysts, brake all the owers. The Moors drew this may med foyst
betwixt the two others, and repaired it as well as the time would give them
leave. Then they join again and charge CAESAR, who running up and down with
a brave resolution, and incorraging his soldiars with a loud voice, he did so
batter these foysts with his great shot, as the Assaylants found a harder
party then they expected, final'y a great shot carried away most of the slaves
in one of the foysts: so as the Moors having lost many soldiars slain with
the Cannon, seeing two of their foysts broken, and that the taking of CAESAR
would cost them dear, they left the fight. This Captain being always of a
valiant spirit, followed the foysts: but for that they went with oars and he
sailed, the wind being scant he could not ouer-take them: so as he put into
the Port of Malaga, to burye such men as had been slain, and to cure the
wounded. In the same Book, Chap. 2.

TRISTAN VASQVES de VEGA, a Portugal Captain, a Debaucht and dissolute man,
but so courageous as never any danger did amaze him: so as many held him to be
mad and desperate: seeing the Cittadell of Ormus in danger to be lost for
King EMANVELL, without any more question, he embarked himself in his ship of
war with thirty soldiers only, and directs his course to Ormus, where he
approaches, and seeing the passage shut up, he charge through the enemies
fleet, and fights so valiantly with their whole power, as in despite of their
Canon, Harguebuzes, wild fire, Darts and Arrows, after that he had done
wondrous acts, surpassing all human force, he past through, and came into
the Cittadell. This valiant exploite did greatly amaze the enemies, and filled
the besieged with great hope: the Commander of them entreated VEGA to return
and to join with Captain SOVSA, who had some vessels to indomage this fleet
the more easily: whereunto VEGA yielded, although he had a private quarrel
with SOVSA, and that he was hurt. He therefore with as great hazard as at the
first time, forced through the enemies fleet again, advertised SOVSA of the
estate of the besieged: and when it began to flow, they two with their
Soldiers entered fight with them, the which continued long, and was very
furious. The enemies lost ten vessels that were sunck, a great number slain,
and many hurt. Of the Portugals there was but one Soldier slain, and four
score hurt: but maugre all the resistance of the Ormusians. SOVSA and VEGA
arrived safe in the Port of the Cittadell. In the same Book Chap. 29.

GALEAS of Saint Seuerin* an Italian Lord, carrying arms for the King of
France at the Battle of Pauia, in the year 1524. did as much as valor could
perform, running among the thickest of the enemies, and doing goodly exploits
of arms. In the end fighting near the King, his Horse being slain under him,
and he overthrown, calling unto the Lord of Langey (who fought near him, and
would have succored him) he said unto him. My Son here it is that I must
dye, with my Arms in my hand: trouble your self no more for me, but go
speedily and succor the King our Lord and if you escape remember me, and that
I am dead in the bed of honor. P. IOVIVS, lib. 6. of the life of the Marquis
of PESCARA.

In the Battle of Varne, where as Ladi slaus King of Hungary was slain, and
his Army defeated, a French Gentleman, exceeding valiant, past through all the
Turkish squadrons, and charged into AMVRATHS gardes, against whom he coucht
his Lance, and struck at him with his Cimyter. But not able (by reason of many
thousands of enemies which stopped the passage) to return back, after that he
had slain a great number of Turks, he was beaten down upon the heaps of
them, where he dyed gloriously. CVSPINIAN in his Emperors. GALEAS BARDASSIN,
a Sicilian Knight, being one day at the seege of Plombin, somewhat far from
the Camp, to vewe the Town there went forth three horsemen to take him. He
marched toward them in steed o^ ^lying: and gave so great a blow with the
pomell of his sword unto the first that was armed, as he ouerthrewe him from
his Horse: he takes the second by both the arms, lifted him out of the sadle,
and threw him down, running after the other even unto the Town gates.
FVLGOSIVS Book 3. Chap. 2.

The Emperor MAXIMILIAN the first having assailed the Grisons, about the end
of the year 1499. in the first encounter which was near unto Vuerdenberg, a
Suisse of Glaris, called JOHN du VAL, in a straight made head against twenty
men at arms, and kept them from passing, with his pike in his hand, whereof he
ouerthrewe three. The enemies amazed at the valor of this brave Suisse,
promised him fair wars, and led him safe unto their Camp, from whence they
sent him without ransom, with an ample testimony of his valor. STVMPHIVS in
his History of Suisserland.

In the year 1552. SOLIMAN caused MAHVMET BASSA to beseege a strong place in
Transiluania called Themesuar, defended by the Earl of Losana for FERDINAND
King of Hungary, after-wards Emperor. This Earl seeing a mighty army round
about him, debarred of succors, and betrayed by two Spaniards which had
abandoned him, to yield unto the Turks, he began to parle, and obtained a
composition to depart with all his soldiars, with their lives and goods. The
Bassa against his promised faith, caused all the soldiars to be slain, and
cutts off the Earls head. A Spanish Knight called ALPHONSO PEREZ de SAIAVEDRE,
making way with his sword, and overthrowing them that would have stayed him,
he sought to save himself through the swiftness of his horse in the nearest
place of retreat, being pursued by five hundred Turkish horsemen, which could
not overtake him. Being almost out of danger, he fell into a Quagmire, where
both he and his horse perished. The Turks seeing him down, pursue, and cut
off the head of this valiant man, the which being carried to Mahumet, and
hearing that it was a Spaniard: I believe it said he, for he was valiant.
ASC. CENTORIVS lib. 4. Of the war of TRANSYLVANIA.

When as the Turks besieged Belgrade in Hungary, one of their soldiers
desirous to plant his ensign in an eminent place, went up into an high Tower.
He was presently followed by a Hungarian or a Bohemian, who seeing that he
could hardly dislodge him from thence, lays fast hold of him, and then casts
himself with him from the top of the Tower, where both were slain with the
fall. BONFIN, lib. 8. Decad. 3. DVBRAVIVS, lib. 29. says, that the Christian
cried out alowde to the Popes Legate, looking down from the Tower: If I cast
my self headlong with this Dog Turk, whether shall my soul go? And that
the Legate having assured him that it should be carried presently into
Paradise, he cast himself down with the Turk: and was the cause that the
place did yet hold good. An other Hungarian did the like at the siege of Iayza,
BONFIN, lib. 10. Decad. 3.

They say that when as the Spaniards surprised Constance, a frontier Town of
the Suisses, in the year 1548. one of the Inhabitants, seeing one of the
Commanders advance, and encourage the other Spaniards to pursue their point,
and that the Town was like to be lost; he suddenly went toward him, embraced
him, and cast himself with him of the bridge into the River, where both were
drowned. Memorials of our time.

FVLGOSIVS reports that at the first seege of Rhodes. the great Master named
PETER D'AVBVSSON, a French man, took upon him to defend the most dangerous
breach, being seconded by two of his Nephews and four other soldiers, who
fought so valiantly with him, as although they had slain at diverse charges the
Soldiers that came to relieve one another, and that he had been wounded in
five places, and his armor broken, yet the Turks could get no ground of him,
but were forced to raise the seege. In the same Book Chap. 2.

In the year 1501. the King of Fez being in field with mighty troops to
assail Tingi a strong Town upon the coast of Barbary, held by the
Portugalls, the Governor made a sallie upon the Moors: but finding them too
strong, he retired with great difficulty, into the town ditches. The fight
had continued two hours before he could get thither, in the which the
Governors son was slain, and eight valiant Horsemen: the Governor himself
being sore hurt in the face with a Iauelyn. The Moors follow their point
press the Portugalls, and do all they can to enter pel-mel with them into the
Town. The which the Governor seeing, he cares the Moors so furiously with a
troop of Horse, as in the meane-time the rest retire easily into the Town.
The last was called LOVP MARTIN, a valiant man who being entered, did shut
the gate but half and when as many cried unto him that he should shut and
make fast the gate; I will never do that dishonor said he, unto the
Portugalls in making the world to think that they are afraied. Adding that he
was ready to fight unto the last gasp, to keep any from entering by that
half gate. His words and deeds were all one: for the Moors running to
enter, he maintained the first shocke valiantly, until that many came to
succor him, so as the Moors were forced to retire unto their Camp. OSORIVS
Book 2. Chap. 12. of the History of Portugal.

The extraordinary valor of a Suisse in the time of our Ancestors, shall be
hereunto added, with the leave of the courteous reader, as most worthy to
be often remembered. The Suisses to the number of a 1800. or there-bouts
(having broken the great and mighty forces brought by the Daulphin of France
near unto Basil) were all slain upon the place, fighting with a wonderful
great force and valiant resolution, for the health of their own Country. It
happened after the Battle that a Monk a Suisse, called BVRCARD: who had made
a voyage into France with the Emperors consent, to bring in this army, going
forth on Horseback, as it were to triumph for this defeat of his
Countriemen, and marching with his Caske on, but his beuer was up, and his face
was uncovered, that he might with more ease behold the dead bodies, among the
which he marched, he began to cry out, O pleasant spectacle, what a goodly
thing it is to march in this meadow bedeckt with Roses: at those words a Suisse
lying upon the place, and breathing more for the liberty of his country, then
for his own life, being so near his death, he awakes, and rising as well as
he could upon his knees, with an extraordinary vigor, and taking up a stone,
he threw it with such dexterity and force at BVRCARD as he hit him in the
midest of the forehead, and ouerthrewe him from his horse, where he died,
receiving the reward of his cruel ingratitude and treason. STVMPHIVS in the
History of Suisserland.

In the year 1514. the Suisses going to succor MAXIMILIAN SFORZA Duke of
Milan, had the guard of Nouare, the which they defended with such resolution, as
notwithstanding that the French made a furious battery against the walls, yet
the Suisses showed to have so little fear of them, as they would never suffer
the Town gate, which looked into the camp to be shut. A breach being made,
they endured an assault courragiously, and repulst the Assaylants. And which is
more, the night following, being led by Captain MOTIN, they went (without
attending the succors that came unto them) to charge the French army, marching
directly to the Artillery, the which they won valiantly, being two and
twenty pieces, and carried them the next day in triumph to Nouare, having
slain a great part of the French army, and put the rest in rout: the which we
will describe more amply in the following discourse, where we will write of
great battles given in diverse parts of the world, since a hundred and
fifty years. FR. GVICHARDIN Book 2. Chap. 14. of his History of the wars
of Italy.

The valor of the same Suisses appeered in the year. 1515. at Saint Dona in
the Duchy of Milan, of whom GVICHARDIN yeeldes this testymonie. Although the
Suisses did fight still with great courrage and resolution, yet seeing
themselves charged in front and in flank, and that the Venetian army
approached to assault them behind, they despayred of victory (which they held
for certain the day before) so as it growing late, they did sound a retreat,
and taking their Artillery, upon their shoulders, they turned their squadrons,
and holding still their accustomed discipline, they marched softly toward
Milan, with such amazement to the French, as not any one of foot or
horseback durst follow them. There were only two Companies of theirs,
which being fled into a farm house, were burnt by the Venetian light horse
men. The rest of the army returned to Milan without disorder, showing the same
countenance and resolution: and some say they buried in the ground fiueteene
pieces of great ordinance, which they had gotten at the first Encounter, for
that they had no means to carry them away. All men say, that for a long time
there had not been seen a more furious and fearful battle in Italy.
TRIVVLCE (an ancient Captain which had seen much) said, that this battle
had been performed by Giants, not by men: and that eighteen battles in
which he had been, were but combats of little children in respect of that:
and some hold that without the Canon the Suisses had gotten the victory, who
being entered at the first charge into the fortifications of the French, and
having taken from them the most of their pieces, had always won ground.
GVICHARDIN. Book 12. Chap. 13.

About the year 1514. the French being beseeged in a fort called the lantern
of Genoa, beseeched King LEWIS the twelfth to succor them with vittells. A
Sclauonian Captain entertained by the King, carried himself so well, as in
despite of all the Galleis which stopped the passage, he entered with his
galleis laden with victuells, and relieved the place in sight of all the
Geneuois. Thereupon EMANVEL CAVAL, a Captain at se^ (very expert among those
of his time) having command of a galley with 300 young men, under ANDREW
DORIA, and going from the place where he was set in guard, he began to go
into the open sea, to have the more wind that he might use both his owers and
sails, and then he sails directly against the Sclauonians galley, not fearing
the Cannon which did shoot at him continually from the Lantern, he graples
with the said galley, and leapes first into it himself, then having cut the
cables wherewith the galley was tied unto the fort, commanding the City of
Genoa: in an instant he draws this galley after him, turning the prowe of his
own, and conducting it with such dexterity betwixt the shelfes and the
conquered galley, as mauger all letts he arrived safe, and was received with
applause of all the people, and honored with five hundred Crowns, for a
testymonie of his valor: the spoil of the conquered galley was divided
amongst the soldiars. As for the Selauonian Captain, he cast himself into the
sea, meaning to swim unto the shelfes near unto the fort, where he
pretended to save himself. But a young gentleman called JUSTINIAN, casting
himself into the sea, followed him so swiftly as he ouertooke him, and laying
hold of his hair, drew him to the shore. The Geneuois being Masters of the
Lantern (which kept them in great awe and subjection) did ruin it. P. IOVIVS
Book 12. of his History.

Vanity.
I Did see a man some years since (whose name I have in singular
recommendation) in the midest of our greatest miseries, when as neither Law,
Justice, nor Magistrate did Office, no more then at this instant, went and
published certain idle reformations upon Apparel, Diet and Law practice.
These are baits to deceive an ill governed people with: to say that they are
not wholly forgotten. They are of the same sort, which busy themselves to
for-bidde with all vehemence, talk, dancing and pla^es, to a people abandoned
to all kinds of execrable vices. MONTAIGNE Book 3. Chap 9. of his Essaies.

Vanity of the World represented in state.
PHILIP called the good Duke of Bourgondy, in the memory of our ancestors,
being at Brux^lls with his Court and walking one night after supper through the
streets, accompanied with some of his fauorits* he found lying upon the stones
a certain Artisan that was very drunk, and that slept soundly. It pleased the
Prince in this Artisan to make trial of the vanity of our life, whereof he had
before discoursed with his familiar friends. He therefore caused this sleeper
to be taken up and carried into his Palace: he commands him to be laid in
one of the richest beds, a rich Nightcap to be given him, his foul shirt to
be taken off, and to have an other put on him of fine Holland: when as this
Dronkard had disgested his Wine, and began to awake: behold there comes about
his bed, Pages and Grooms of the Dukes Chamber, who draw the Curteines, make
many courtesies, and being bare-headed, ask him if it please him to rise, and
what apparel it would please him to put on that day. They bring him rich
apparel. This new Monsieur amazed at such courtesy, and doubting whether he
dreampt or waked, suffered himself to be dressed, and led out of the Chamber.
There came Noblemen which saluted him with all honor, and conduct him to the
Mass, where with great ceremony they give him the Book of the Gospel, and
the Pixe to kiss, as they did usually unto the Duke* from the Mass they bring
him back unto the Palace: he washes his hands, and sittes down at the Table
well furnished. After dinner, the great Chamberlain commandes Cards, to be
brought with a great sum of money. This Duke in Imagination plays with the
chief of the Court. Then they carry him to walk in the Gardein, and to hunt
the Hare and to Hawke. They bring him back unto the Palace, where he sups in
state. Candles being light, the Musitions begin to play, and the Tables taken
away, the Gentlemen and Gentle-women fell to dancing, then they played a
pleasant Comedy, after which followed a Banquet, whereas they had presently
store of Ipocras and precious Wine, with all sorts of confitures, to this
Prince of the new Impression, so as he was drunk, and fell soundly a sleep.
Here-vpon the Duke commanded that he should be disrobed of all his rich
attire. He was put into his old rags and carried into the same place, where
he had been found, the night before, where he spent that night. Being awake
in the morning, he began to remember what had happened before, he knew not
whether it were true in deed, or a dream that had troubled his brain. But in
the end, after many discourses, he concluds that all was but a dream that had
happened unto him, and so entertained his wife, his Children and his neighbors,
without any other apprehension. This History put me in mind of that which
SENECA says in the end of his 59. letter to LVCILIVS. No man says he, can
rejoice and content himself, if he be not nobly minded, just and temperate.
What then? Are the wicked deprived of all joy? they are glad as the Lions that
have found their prey. Being full of wine and Luxury, having spent the night in
gourmandise, when as pleasures poored into this vessel of the body (being to
little to contain so much) began to foame out, these miserable wretches cry
with him of whom VIRGILL speaks.

Thou know, how in the midest of pastimes false and vain, Virg. Aen. l. 6.
Deiphebus.

We cast and past our latest night of pain*
The dissolute spend the night, yea the last night in false joys. O man, this
stately usage of the above named ARTISAN, is like unto a dream that passes.
And his goodly day, and the years of a wicked life differ nothing, but in more
and less. He slept four and twenty hours, other wicked men sometimes four
and twenty thousands of hours. It is a little or a great dream: and nothing
more.

A furious Vanity.
BERNARD SCARDEON in the 3. book of his History of Padoua, reports that two
Brethren of an honorable family, being one day in Summer at a certain
Country house of theirs: after supper they went down to the door of their
lodging, and devising of many things, they began to contemplate the shyning
stars, being then very many, as in a clear season. Then one of them began
to say merrely, I would I had as many Oxen as I see stars. The other answered
after the same manner, and I would have a Medowe as big as all the compass
of Heaven, then turning to his Brother he added, where would you then feed
your Oxen? In your Medowe replied the Brother: yea if I would answered the
other. I, in despite of you said he of the Oxen. In spite of me said the
other. I replied his Brother. So contesting together, their I est fell to
earnest, and from bitter words they fell to blows, and drawing their swords,
they thrust one an*other through, and fell down in the place. The servants who
had heard them loud in words, came running at the noise of their swords, and
carried them into the house, whereas they died presently. TH. ZVINGER Book 2.
of the first volume of his great Theater of man's life.

We have an other History of our time related by P. JUSTINIAN in the four
and twenty Book of his History of Venise, no less tragical then the former.
COSMO Duke of Florence, amongst other Children, had one, a Cardynall, called
JOHN, a Prince of great hope. Going one day a hunting with two other of his
Brethren. FERDINAND and GARTIA, being followed by some gentlemen, their
dogs start a Hare, the which they hunt in a Champian field and take. Hereupon
the Brothers fell to some debate, every one maintayning that his Dogs had
first found the Hare and then taken it. From words they fell to injurious
terms. The Cardynall not able to endure any word of disgrace gave GARCIA a
blow of the ear: who transported with choler, drew his sword, and wounded
the Cardynall so sore, as he died soon after. One of the Cardinals Servants
fell upon GARCIA, and hurt him so greeuiously, as he followed his Brother
within very few days after. So for a matter of little or nothing Duke COSMO
lost two of his Sons in few hours. CAMERARIVS in his Historical
meditations. Chap. 92.

Some turbulent Spirits, unworthy to be named, bread a quarrel betwixt GEORG
and ALBERT Marquises of Brandeberg, the which they did entertain so cunningly,
as these two Princes, Cousin-germains, became open enemies one unto an other,
and divided their estates, which before they had held in common, making
authentical contracts. GEORGE, the more ancient, having of long time observed,
that ALBERT suffered himself to be governed by men that in the end would thrust
him into great troubles, took a resolution such as choler did sugiest, for
hearing that ALBERT was come to Neubourg, without imparting it to any one, he
writ unto him with his own hand; that seeing ALBERT did both say and do him
many indignities he would not therefore make war against him, nor suffer
that their poor innocent subjects who were not acquainted with such quarrels,
should smart for it. That they must end this quarrel betwixt themselves. And
therefore although he were much elder, he presented the Combat to Marquis
Albert, wishing him (if he loved his honor) to come alone on horseback armed
like a Prince and Knight, in a certain place out of the way, the which he
appointed near unto a forest, whether he would come in the like equipage.
There they two without any witnesses, would end all their controversies. That
with his white beard he would encounter the red hair of ALBERT. He seals up
his letters, calls a Page of his, a Polonian borne, commands him expressly to
carry them to Marquis ALBERT, and not to deliver them to any other then to
himself. The Page desirous to execute his Princes command, prouides for his
departure. But as he would have gone to horseback, an other page playing
with him, and handling his Pistol, shot it of unadvisedly, and slew the
Polonian Page. He was sercht, and the letters which he had about him carried
back, by the which the Princes intention was descouered to his Councellers:
they let him understand what had happened, and the stay which it seemed GOD had
sent. Whereupon he changed his opynion, and followed other expedients,
pardoning the ill advised Page, who had killed the other unawares. This
happened in the year 1541. CAMERARIVS. Chap. 92. of his Historical
meditations.

Worms in man's body.
THE son of a Butcher called LAVVRENCE, seven years old, being sick of
Worms which tormented him, continued three days as one dead, receiving no
sustenance but drink made with Grass, Water with Vinegar and Sugar. The
fourth day they made him to take a potion of Aloes, Mirrhe, and Saffron, which
made him to void by the siege, an hundred fortye and eight Worms, which done,
he recovered his health. BENIVENIVS Chap. 85. Of hidden causes.

I have known a woman above forty years old, who who was often troubled with
great pain in her stomach, with-all, she had no appetite, but had a great
desire to cast; having used the confection called Hierapigra, she voided about
forty great Worms, DODONEVS in his Observations upon the 85. Chap. I had a
sick old man in cure, being about 82. years old, and not knowing at the first
sight his infirmity, coming near unto him, I found his breath to be very
unsavory, like unto young Children that are troubled with Worms. I resolved
therefore to Physic him, as one that was full of such filthe. Then he seemed
as one dead, and the Duke of Ferrarares Steward had commanded, that they should
prepare all that was necessary for the funerals of that man. I caused him to
take a drink fit for that disease, in the which there was Scordium, and Sea
Moss, by means whereof he discharged himself of above five hundred Worms,
and was cured. This was a casual cure: for I should never have thought that a
decrepit old man should have been touched with that disease. BRASAVOLE in his
Coment. upon the 26. Aphorism of the 3. Book of HIPPOCRATES.

A young Maid a Candiot, continued eight days without speaking, and her eyes
open, who having voided two and forty worms, with out any excrements, was
cured. ALEXANDER BENEDICTVS. In the year 1545. I did see a certain
Gentlewoman, who in few days put forth a thousand worms, and in the space of
four hours four hundred, some dead, some alive, after the which she was
well. P. PAVL PEREDA, in the 1. Book of the cure of diseases. Chap. 5. I have
seen a sick body, which at one time did void by the siege a hundred seventy
and seven Worms. GABVCIN Chap. 13. in his Commentary of the Lungs.

Doctor MANVEL BETVLEIVS had a little boy four years old, called SIXTVS, the
which was troubled with a great and extraordinary ^euer, with a pain in his
head, a cough, a great alteration, a shaking in his sleep, and a crying out,
which made me say, that he was full of Worms. So as having made him drink a
Decoction of Tanecete, three mornings together, he cast above a hundred Worms
a foot long a piece, and was suddenly cured of his fever, and all other
accidents, WECKER in his Observations. A young Maiden having cast a great round
Worm, her Father ripped it, and found it full of other Worms. The Maid being
full of this Vermin, dyed within few days. AMATVS a Portugal in the 5.
Centurie, Cure 46.

A young Boy four years old, much tormented with worms, after many
remedies, voyded by the seege a round bladder like a Ball. The Mother opening
it in the presence of others, found enclosed in it many thousands of little
worms. The Child being carefully looked unto, was soon after recovered. In
the 2. Centurie. Cure. 40. I have seen a Ball full of Worms, tied one unto
another, so as at the first sight you would have thought they had been but
one. The same.

It is wonderful what ERASMUS reports in a certain Oration of his, made in
the praise of Physic. He says, that he had seen an Italian, who had never
been in Germany, nor seen any Book or man of that Nation, or any one that
understood it, and yet he spoke the German tongue well, so as they thought
he had a spirit. Having been Phisicked by a learned Physician, and by the
means of a drink discharged of a great number of Worms, he was cured of his
infirmity, but he neither spoke nor understood any more the German tongue.
CARDAN liber 8. Chap. 43. Of the Diversity of Things.

I have seen Children so tormented with Worms, as they suffered strange
convulsions, and so violent, as they held them almost from the heel to the
head. TRINCAVEL. lib. 9. Chap. 11. Of the reason of curing the affected parts
of man's body IHON BAPTISTA CAVALAIRE, a learned Physician, has protested unto
me, that he had seen Worms come out of the Navel of a Child of three year
old. OMNIBONVS liber 4. Chap. 13. In the Treatise of the cure of children.
Master PETER BARQVE a Surgion of the French bands, and CLAVDE le GRANDE a
Surgion, remaining at Verdun, have assured me, that they had a woman in cure
called GRAS BONNET, dwelling in the same place, who had an Impostume in her
belly, out of the which there came with the matter a great number of Worms, as
biggeas a man's finger, with sharp heads, the which had eat her intrailes, so
as for many days she voyded f^cale matter by the ulcer, and in the end was
cured. Master AMB. PARH. lib. 19. Cap. 3.

A Woman of Delft, forty years old, being gone seven months with child,
fell into a Fever, with other troublesome accidents: so as in the end she had
an ouerture in her belly, out of the which there came, namely by her Nauill, a
yealow and stinking matter, like to the ordinary excrementes. In the end the
19 of September 1579. a Worm being a foot and a half long, came forth at her
Nauill. Two days after she cast forth another that was greater. Her Fever
increased the first of October: so as I feared she would be delivered before
her time. The third of the same month came forth a third Worm by the Nauill,
the which was less then the former. The 15. of October she was brought in
bed of a Son, and seven days after she voyded a fourth Worm at her
Nauill: and the 24 of October, a fi^t as great as the first. And for that she
was not carefully look^ unto by reason of her poverty and base condition, she
languished some months before she could recover her health. PETER FOREST,
liber 7. Observation Chap. 35.

Doctor HOVLIER, lib. 1. Chap. 54. of inward Diseases, writes, That others have
had Worms come forth of their bodies at their Nauils, and at their Groynes.
THOMAS VEGA in his Commentary upon the 5. Chapter of the 1. Book of GALEN,
of affected places, says, that he had seen two men tormented with worms,
which felt them in an instant come out by the groine, having pierced the
bowels, and the filme which couers them. The wound was closed up for the one,
but the other had it open all his life, by the which he voyded his excrements.
TRINCAVEL. lib. 19. Chap. 11. says. That he had seen a child five years old,
whose belly the worms had pierst, and came out at his Nauill. I have seen
come out of a man's body, a worm fifteen foot long, and of the breadth of a
Gourd seed. ALEX. BENEDICTVS in the preface of the 21. Book of his practice.
In the territory of Sienna, a certain woman having drunk the water of the
Bathes that are there, and continued it seven days, voyded Worms of that
length. They were so tied one to an other, as they were four Cubits long, and
seeing them a far off, you would have said it had been but one Worm.
BENIVENIVS, Chap. 87. I did cure an honest man, who did draw out by the siege
a Worm almost three yeards long: and after-wards although he seemed to be
somewhat better, yet he was full of Worms, which sometimes procured him a
wonderful appetite to eat, and other-whiles again, it gave me a wonderful
distaste. DODONEVS in his Annotations upon the 87. Chapt. I have seen such
large Worms, and almost of an incredible length, at Mirandola, to the
amazement of all those that were with me. MAINARD in the Epistle of the third
Book. An other Physician, famous among the Germans, called JAMES CORNARIVS,
says, that he had driven out of a certain man's body dwelling at Northuse, a
worm that was very broad, like unto those which the Greeks call Taeniae, for
that they are long and large like unto bands, the which was ten Cubits long,
and he thinks that it was but half a worm, the other half having been
pulled from him before.

A young child, two years and four months old, at Recine in Italy, in the
year 1538. voyded one of these broad Worms whole, of a prodigious length, to
the sight where-of almost all the Town came running: for this Worm being many
else long, was preserved alive almost a day in a Basin full of water, where it
did move like a Worm creeping upon the earth. GABVCIN Chap. 13. of his
Commentary of the Lungs. I have seen a Sclauonian Woman, which in coughing
did cast up one of these worms, fashioned like a Serpent, the which was four
Cubits long. AMATVS a Portugal. Century. 16. Cure. 74. We might produce a dozen
Histories of such other Worms, which were at the least an ell long: but for
that a great number of other remain to be observed, I will busy my self
about the principal. A Suisses wife of the Canton of zurich, young and
fertile, was sick three years together, by reason of one of these large and
long worms that was grown within her Bowels, she sent me a piece to zurich,
that I might see it, deliver my opinion, and ease her. This piece was above
five else long, without tail or head, covered with scales like a Serpent,
broad as ones little finger, and of the color of Ashes. In the year 1571.
when she dyed, she cast up an other of an incredible length: for it was above
twenty else, the which her servants had dried in the smoke, to preserve it.
During her infirmity, this Woman was conceived and delivered twice of Child.
Being fasting, these Worms did gnawe her cruelly: and when she had eaten and
drunk, she had some ease. This disease was accompanied and followed by other
gre^uous infirmities, as a Constipation, a Chollick and the Dropsy, whereof she
dyed. THEOD. DYNVS. Chap. 15. Of his mixtures of Physic.

I remember that I have caused diverse persons to void Worms being thirteen
Cubits long. C. G^SNER lib. 3. of his Epistles. page 90. A Suisses wife
brought me a Worm which she had voyded, rolled up of it self, as it had
been a bottom of thread, as big as an Egg, the which she had voyded at her
mouth. It stirred yet, and being stretched out in my presence, it was found to
be three else long, with scales of an Ashie color like a Serpent. A
Kins-woman of mine two and twenty years old, tormented with such Worms, fell
to have an insatiable hunger, and a stopping of her monthly courses. In the
end, Nature helping her, she drew forth with her hands by the lower parts,
piece after piece, a Worm many else long: and then she was soon cured. I.
SCHENKIVS in his Physical Observations, lib. 3. Sect. 208.

In the year 1561. the sixteenth of February, a Vinetrimmer of Arles, did
void such a large and long worm by pieces, whereof the one was twentye hand
bredths long, and another eight. It was like unto thin skins, wrinckled, of
the color of Ashes and soft. After that the Patient had been discharged of
such filthe, he sounded, and remained without strength or pulce, but in the
end he was recovered. VALERIOLA lib. 1. Obseru. 9. The long and large, or
fat Worms, lie sometimes along the Bowels, and are of a slimie substance,
with the which one named LVCAS FAREL, the Arche-Duke MATHIAS Cook, was
tormented every three months very sore, and did void such rotten filthe by
pieces, of six, twelve and fiueteene foot long. Thus says CAROLOVS CLVSIVS
in his Annotations upon the 3. Book of Monardus simples.

I have seen one which came forth of a woman, and was like unto a serpent,
above a fadome long. Where as we must not wonder seeing that the Ancients
write that they had seen some as long as the gutts, the which are seven times
as long as our body, for that the Bowels of every man are of that length: the
which I have seen and showed in the Physic schools at Paris, making the
dissection of an Anotomy. Moreover JOHN WIER a learned Physician to the Duke of
Cleues, writes in his work of the Imposture of Diuills, that a Countryman did
cast up a worm eight foot and a half long, the which had the throat almost
like unto a Duckes-bill. M. AMB. PARE. Book 19. Chap. 4.

There is a dangerous kind of worms, breeding of a melancholic humor, which
receive their norrishment of the remedies they use to kill worms. There has
been one seen in our time at ZVRICH, the which was about nineteen foot
long. BARTLEM^VVE CARRITCHTER in his Observations. Having given a purgation to
a certain German woman that was much troubled with the worms, she cast one
that was brought unto me of a prodigious length: for it was five and forty
foot long. Afterward she voided two others, which were nothing so long as the
first. JAMES OETHAEAV in his Observations. I have seen a young girl of four
years of age, void worms alive that were twenty else long. G. HAMBERGER
professor in Physic at Tubinge, in certain questions that were disputed of
in the year 1574. A young Countrie-Maide fourteen years old, being in good
health, voided a worm 14. foot long. WECKERVS in his Oberseruations. An other
Country-woman of the age of 35. years, being greatly troubled with worms,
voided one eighteen foot long. The same Author. A certain poor
Cou^try-maide voided a worm at twice, long and large, the which was near five
else long. GASPAR WOLF. in his Observations.

I have sometimes seen sick persons void of these large worms, that were
forty foot long, with such violence, as one would have thought, they would
cast up their gutts. These worms have no hollownes, but are compounded of a
kind of white skin, thick and slymie, marked with black spotts, and without
motion. They are like unto points or bands, and are engendered in the Bowels of
a rotten Juice. FELIX PLATER in his Observations. A Padouan Barber remaining at
Mantoua, about Automne in the year 1556, after some fitts of an Ague, did cast
off these worms a finger broad, and seven cubits long, such as Doctor PLATER
has described. MAR. DONATVS Book 4. of his Admirable Histories. Chap. 26.
Doctor SCHENCK and QVENTS in their observations note two Histories of the like
worms, of six, seven and eight Cubits long. FERNELIVS Book 6. Chap 10. of
his Pathologia, speaks of an other kind of worms, called ASCARIDES, which he
sa^es come out of the fundement, and then fasten themselves to the buttocks and
thighs. And Docter JOHN de IESSEN in his observations, affirms the same,
reporting that a little child of one of the chiese Counselors to the Emperor
RODOIPHVS the 2. being troubled with the falling sickness, many Physicians
being assembled together to consult of the causes of this violent and ordinary
Infirmity, they were much troubled to resolve. IRSSEN caused it to be vnswadled
and visited the fundeme^t, where he found Ascarides. Then with one common
consent they applied a Corsey, and the cause of the disease being taken away by
little and little the Child grew to perfect health. But we must yet propound
other Histories of monstrous worms, quite different from the common form:
that the reader may see more and more unto what miseries we are all subject
through sin: and by these relations learn to humble our selves before our
GOD and sovereign Judge. A Chanoin tormented with the chollicke, took of the
confection called HIERA PIGRA, and cast forth a worm like unto a Lizard, but
greater, hairy, having four feet, the which was kept alive in a violl of
glass. MONTVVS Book 4. Chap 19. In the memory of our Fathers a woman
with-child at Craco^ia in Poland, was delivered of one still borne, the which
had upon the back of it a great worm of the form of a serpent, the which did
g^awe this little creature. LICOSTHENES in his Histories of Prodigies.

A young maiden of Louvain in Brabant 15. years old, after that she had
endured much, she did void both from above and beneath strange things:
amongst others by the seege with the excrements a worm a foot and a half
long, greater then a man's Thombe very like unto an eele: the difference was
that the tail was very hairy. C. GEMMA Book 2. Chap. 2. A. BENIVENIVS 2
Physician of Florence, writes that a Carpenter called JOHN, 40. years of age,
was continually troubled with a pain at his heart without any ease, BENIVENIVS
having given him some potion, with a great quantity of matter which he voided,
he cast up a good long worm, having a red head, round, and of the bigness
of a great pease, having the body all covered with soft hair, a forked tail
like a half Moon, and four feet as a Lizard. AMB. PARE Book 19. Chap. 3.

A Spanish Gentlewoman returning from Peru, did assure that she had been sick
many years there and could find no help. In the end an Indian held for a
great herbalist came to see her, and made her drink the juice of Veruein well
purified, by means whereof soon after she cast up a worm (which she called a
snake) all hairy, a foot long besides the tail, which done she recovered her
health. MONARDVS Book 3. of the simples of the new found world, in the Chap.
of Verueine. ANTHONY CAPTAIN, a Physician of Mantoua, has often told me that
a gentleman of that place called LAVRENCE ZAFFARD, having bin trobled with a
melancholic ague and a loathing of meat, with a pain at his heart which made
him to shrike out, he did vomit up a worm, the which lived seven hours, it
was a foote-long, having horns on the head, and a 100. feet on either side,
with the which he crept strangly, it was of a reddish color and flat. MACEL
DONATVS Book 4. Chap. 26. of his Histories. BONIFACE COCK of Padoua had a
little Son, which remained in a trance as one dead for the space of six
hours. FALLOPIVS a learned Physician prescribed som-thing unto him, with the
help whereof he recovered his spirrits, and one hour after voided about
forty worms* amongst the which there was one black, hairy, with two heads a
Cubit long, which lived three days. SCHENCH Book 3. Observation 21. A young
girl about some nine years old, having taken the powlder of worms did cast
up, little Caterpillars a live. DODONEVS in his annotation upon the 58. Chapter
of BENIVENIVS.

Having an old woman that was sick of a Pluresie in cure, she cast forth a
black Snaile, having black feet, long and soft horns, marked, being full of
filthy matter, and two fingers long. GESNER lib. 3. of his Epistles. page 94.
I have seen a Worm which was no longer then the breadth of four fingers, but
having the back covered with a reddish hair. This Worm had tormented a
certain young man, so as there was no hope of life in him: but in the end by
means of a fit drink, he did vomit up the Worm, and so escaped. GABVCIN in
his Comentarie of the Lungs, Chap. 13.

A Tailor in Languedoc not far from Montpellier, being cured of a strange
Fever, in the end he did cast up a Worm three quarters long, the which was
round, thick and alive, and with it much melancholic and black matter. GASP.
WOLFIN in his observations. A Suisse of the Canton of zug, a strong man,
feeling commonly some thing that did prick him at the orifice of the stomach,
being eased by some potions, he did cast up a great number of Worms, of two
and three foot long. The same. A Maid of Briele in Holland, did vomit up a
great number of Worms, and which is more, a year after she voyded Snailes,
which her Mother did show me, assuring me that she had kept one which had
lived two days. P. FOREST, lib. 18. Obseruat. 19. In the year 1578. THIENETE
CARTIER, dwelling at Saint Maur, a widow-woman forty years old, did cast in
the beginning of her fit great abundance of choleric humor, with the which
she voyded three Worms, the which were wolley, and like in form, color,
length, and greatness to Catter-pillers, but that they were black, the which
afterward lay eight days and more without any norrishment. They were
brought by the Barber of Saint Maur to Mounsier MILOT Doctor and reader in the
Physic schools, who then had the said CHARTIER in cure, and showed them to me
and to many others. AMB. PARE Book 24. Chap. 16.

Let us add some Histories of worms, coming forth in diverse parts of man's
body, to shewevs more plainly our miserable vanity. Having a soldiar in cure
in Piedmont, who had been foote-man to Mounsier de Goulaines deceased, and had
been hurt with a sword upon the parietall boane, after some weeks dressing
him, I did see a number of worms come from under this rotten boane, by
certain hoales in the rottenes, which made me use the more speed to draw out
and raise the said boane, the which did shake long before: and upon the
Duramater I found where nature had engendered 3. hollow places in the flesh to
put in ones Thombe, full of moving and crawling worms, every one of the which
was about the bigness of a points tagge, having black heads. ^MB. PARE Book
9. Chap. 22.

Many learned Physicians of our time, and amongst the rest. I. HOVLIER in the
first book of inward diseases. Chap. 1. L. IOVBERT Cap. 9* in his treatise of
wounds in the head. MONTVVS and VEGA hold that many times worms are seen in
the brain of diverse men, as also in other parts of the body. BALTHAZAR
CONRADIN Chap. 10. Of his book of the Pestylent fever in Hungary writes, that
he had seen worms coming out of diverse parts of bodies, touched with the
said fever, and some of a good length which took their issue by the ears, the
which of necessity bred in the Ventricles of the brain. And therefore the
Hungarians in diverse places did term this fever the worm of the brain. COR.
GEMMA in the Apendix of his Cosmocritia, makes mention of a woman in the Low
Countries, who being dead of a pestilent Ague, they opened her head, where
there was found a great quantity of stinking matter about the substance of the
brain, with an incredible number of little worms and punaises. I. HOVLIER
writes in his practice that he had given Physic to an Italian that was
tormented with an extreme pain in his head, whereof he died. And having
caused him to be opened, there was found in the substance of the brain, a
beast like unto a Scorpion, the which (as HOVLIER thinks) was engendered for
that this Italian had continually carried and smelt of the herb called
Baselisk.

A young girl about eight years of age, being fallen into a very great
trance, remained seven days without speaking, feeling or with any moving,
breathing strongly, and taking no norrishment but some broth or decoction of
pourpie. The Mother seeing her Daughter so violently touched in the head, gave
her a suppositarie, which drew from her by the seege two and forty worms,
wrethed together like to a bowl, whereby the Child was cured. ALEX BENEDICT
Book 1. Chap. 26. of the cure of diseases.

A little Son of mine, three years old, called JOHN CONRARD, being fallen
into a very troublesome trance, and presently helped with Treacle and Vinager
applied to his mouth and nostrills, being a sleep and afterward awake, we
found in the sheet wherein he was wrapped a worm which had a sharp mussell
marked with read, hairie and crawling in the clothes. I. SCHENCK in his
Observation Book 1. section 242.

It happened to a young Child of three years old which was very well, this
wonderful and memorable alteration which follows. As she was playing by
certain women, there began suddenly to appear in the great corner of the eye
within it, the head of a worm, whose body almost covered the eye. The woman
being amazed, drew near, and one of them did gently draw out this worm,
which was alive, and long as an ordynarie point, and somewhat big, without
any hurt to the string, or that the coming of it forth had any way offended
the eye. AMATVS a Portugal Centur. 5. Cure. 63. I have seen come forth at a
young man's ears that was tormented with a violent fever, three worms like to
the kirnells of Pyne-aples and somewhat bigger. VELASQVE Book 4. Chap. 30.

FERNELIVS Book 5. Chap. 7. of his Pathologia writes of a soldiar, who was so
flat nozed, as he could not blow it: so as of the excrement which was
retained and putrefied, there engendered two worms, which were wolley and had
horns, of the bigness of half a finger, the which were the cause of his
death, after that he had been mad for the space of twenty days. AMB. PARE
Book 19. Chap. 3.

In the year 1561. the fifth of May, a young woman giving suck to her boy
but six months old, stooping to tie her shoe, she voided below a little
beast as big as a Caterpiller, and hideous to behold. It lived three days
being fed with milk. Being dead, it was found full of choleric matter,
green and venomous, especially about the head. The young woman felt no
discommodity after this voyding. The Son of one named JOHN MICHELLACH
dwelling at Metz did void at his fundement very hair. I did see one of
thirty and three years of age, Son to N. ROCKELFINGER, who in pissing
voyded little worms which did crawle, like unto those that breed in rotten
cheese, but they had black heads. I have seen others that had worms coming
out at their ears. A certain Gentleman named CAPELLE, having been so
wretched and wicked as to beat his Father, fell sick, and had worms come out
at his eyes. A woman of Dusseldorp, having been very sick for a long time, in
the end a certain Impostume growing upon her belly above her flank, it
brake by worms which were engendered therein, out of the which there came a
great number, black and reddish. R. SOLENANDER in the 5. section of his
Physical Counsels, in the 15. Council. art. 2. 3. 4. 24.

In burning fevers, especially in those that be contagious and pestilent, we
see that diseases cast forth worms by the tail, and other beasts of horrible
and strange shapes. Of late a poor woman a widow of Reinspourg, having been
long tormented with a cough, a shortness of breath and a pain at her heart
and head, in the end after diverse remedies, she took the quintessence of
Turbithe which I gave her, by means whereof after that she had been
discharged of certain vicious excrements, she voided by the seege a live
Lizard, and then she was cured. I do not speak of a number of frogs which
PAVL FISCHER studying in the College of the Abbaye of Saint Esmeran did void,
having been long tormented with strange pain at his stomach. But after this
discharge, he was very well. MARTIN RVLAND a Physician, in his opinion
touching the golden tooth of the Childin Silesia.

Sometimes there happens sharp and dangerous pains in the head, which cause a
dimnesse of the sight, a decay of understanding, a suppression of the voice, a
vomiting, and a want of natural heat through-out all the body. A friend of
mine named PHILIP, was troubled with all these infirmities, so as all men
expected his death the seventh day, no Physic helping him: in the end by the
help of Nature, which was strong in him, he cast forth a Worm at his right
nostrill, the length of four or five fingers breadth, where-by he was cured.
BENIVENIVS Chap. 100.

I did see one of the Seigneurs of Venice tormented with a fever, but much more
in the night then in the day, in the end he cast out at his nostrils a Grayish
Worm, about four fingers long, the which had feet proportioable to the body,
and being put into a Glass full of water, it did move swiftly. It came out at
the nose wrapped in the snot with thick and black blood. TRINCAVEL. lib. 9. Chap.
11. A young Maiden being sick at the sign of the Lantern at Saint James Port
in Paris, thrust forth at one of her nostrils a Worm that was big and large,
that was four fingers long, without any Coughe or Vomiting going before. This
was the 9. of April 1553. Annotations upon the first Book of Master HOVLIER
of inward diseases. Chap. 54. I have known a certain man having an Ulcer in
his nostrils, from whence did distill poisoned corruption. By my advice he
dropped in the Juice of Tobacco leaves. At the second time there came forth of
his nostrils a great number of Worms, and afterward less: in the end after
some days the Ulcer was cured. MONARDVS in his collection of Simples beyond
the Sea.

MONTVVS in his work of growing diseases, Chap. 4. reports after VELASQVES,
that there are Worms which breed under the tongue. I. SCHENCK in his
Observations. liber 1. Sect. 387. Many other learned Physicians agree and
maintain with AVICENNE and other Ancients, that Worms breed in the teeth, the
which they draw forth with diverse perfumes. ALEX. BENEDICTVS. lib. 6. Chap.
13. Of the cure of diseases. BENIVVENIVS Chap. 100. DO DONEVS in his Scholiast.
RONDELET in his History of Fishes, in his Chapter of Creuises. TH. de VEGA in
his Comentar* upon the ^. Book, Chap. 5. Of affected places of GALLEN. HOVLIER
in his Annotations upon the fifth Book of GALLEN, Of compounded Medicines.

I have made mention elsewhere, of a young Prince, after his death, being
opened, there was found a white Worm, fastened unto the heart, which had the
beak pointed and hard like unto that of a Chicken. Others in their Annotations
upon Mounsieur HOVLIENS work of inward diseases, observe upon the 29. Chapter
of the 1. Book, that some times it happens, that worms tickling not only the
orifice of the stomach, but also the heart it self, death does presently
ensue. I have also spoken of a Florentine, who being dead of an Apoplexy, was
opened, where there was a Worm found in the filme of the heart. RONDELET
speaking of the River Creuisse, in his History of Fishes, says, That he had
seen a Worm breeding in one of the breasts of an Honorable Gentlewoman.
BALDVVIN ROVSETVS a Physician of Holland, in the 10. Chapter of his
Miscellania, reports the like of another Woman. H. MONTVVS a learned
Physician, does maintain, that there are worms breed in the Veins of man's
body. PLINY does also write it, lib 26. Chap. 13. I. SCHENCK lib. 3. of his
Observations, Sect. 52.

One demanded council of a Spaniard by Letters, and help for one that was
troubled with gravel, who having voyded some stones, and much sand, did also
put forth at his yard two little Worms, having pointed beakes, two horns
upon the head, as a Snaile, the back and belly was as it were covered with
scales, black like a Tottoise, but under the belly, which was read.
Annotations upon the 50. Chapter of the 1. Book of Master HOVLIER Of inward
diseases.

I have wondered to see in mine own Urine, a great great number of Worms,
short and little, like to small Lice. CARDAN in his Coment. upon the 76.
Aphorism of the fourth Book of HIPPOCRATES. GILBERT GRIFEON an excellent
Physician, and sometimes my Schoole-maister, has sometimes showed me Worms
in Vrines as small as hairs, the which we could not see but in looking very
near. RONDELET in his History of Fishes, in the Chapter of the River Creuish.
I have seen in an Urine Worms as large as Gourd seeds, flat and aline.
MONTVVS liber 4. Chap. 19. ARGENTERIVS a most learned Physician, does affirm,
that he had seen the form of a winged Dragon coming forth with the Urine.
RONDELET in his Treatise of the Knowledge of Diseases. Mounsieur DVRET a
Physician has assured me, that he did void at his yard after a long and
grievous sickness, a little Beast alive, very strange and wonderful to
behold, which was of a reddish color. CHARLES Earl of Mansfield being very
sore sick of a continual Fever, cast forth at his yard a Worm, of the very
form of a black Pie. AMBROSE PARE. lib. 19. Chap. 3. I have seen in the
Vrines of diverse that have been sick of the great Pox, Worms like unto
Antes. LEMNIVS lib. 2. Chap. 40. Of the secret miracles of Nature. One being
troubled with difficulty of making water, voyded by his yard a little live
Scorpion. I. SCHENCK lib. 3. of his Observations, Sect. 312. In the Bladder of
some persons Worms do breed, and little Beasts like to Cockles of the Sea.
ALEX. BENEDICT. lib. 2. Chap. 22. of his Anotomie.

I attribute much credit in Physic and Surgerie, to experience applied to
reason. An honorable Woman did void by the neck of the Matrix, a great number
of Worms called Ascarides, and soon after recovered her health. GARSIAS LOPES
in his diverse Lessons of Physic, Chap. 13. Visiting one FREDERIC, servant to
FRANCIS BOVRSAT a Lawyer, being full of pain with an Impostume that was
grown at the end of his middle finger, the which being ripe, I caused to be
lansht, out of the which there came presently a white Worm, wolly, having a
black head, as big as those Maggots that are found in Cheeses, after the
which FREDERIC was cured. MARCELLVS DONATVS lib. 4. of his History, Chap. 26.

A certain Man having a swelling or Wenne on his neck as big as an Egg, by
chance being in a quarrel, he was wounded very sore in the same place, the
which was found to be full of quick Lice, and the patient was cured of his
hurt, of his Wenne, and of his Vermie. PETER FOREST in his Observations.
Master CORNELIUS HEYDIVS a Physician at Delft has told me, that practicing in
the Franche County, he had a Maid in cure, which had a crook back, who
feeling a great itching on that part, he thought it was some Impostume,
applying things fit to make it ripe. Being opened, there came out of it matter
as clear as water, with a great abundance of Lice. The same. I have seen an
Impostume in a Maidens flank, the which being opened by the Surgion, it was
found full of Worms. FALLOPIVS in the 4. Chap. of swellings that be not
Natural. Visiting the body of a Soldier of Modena, that was dead in the
Hospital of the Carmelites, I found it full of Impostumes both within and
without, all which were full of Worms like unto Lice. The same. A German
Gentlewoman troubled with diverse diseases, among others did vomit up at
diverse times, above twelve hundred little worms, not above six years since,
some as long as a Man's finger, others longer: whereof we will speak more amply
in another place. I. SCHENCK recites this History, in the last Section of the
seventh Book of his Observations.

It remains to speak a word of such Vermin as comes forth from betwixt the
skin and the flesh, a disease called Ptiriasis. Many both great and small,
ancient and modern, have been stricken with it, and carried out of the world.
In some they have only observed some natural indisposition, whereof the
Physicians yield pertinent reasons: in others, some special visitation of GOD.
I have before made mention of some whereunto I will add this that follows.
AMATVS a Portugal, in the 3. Century, cure. 58. says, that he had cured one
that had Ptiriasis ot the Lousie disease, with an Ointment, letting him blood,
and purging him well before. He writes also, that a Portugal of Lisbone
called TABORA, was so tormented with such Vermin, as two slaves of his being
Moors, did nothing but carry away Baskets full of this Vermin breeding in his
body, and emptied them in the Sea, which was near unto the sick man's
lodging. A young Painter being troubled with an itching, was advised to stand
naked near unto the fire, which caused Blisters to rise on his back, out of
the which there came abundance of Lyce. P. FOREST lib. 8. Obseru. 15.

As for those wretches whom the hand of GOD has touched in all ages, and which
have been devoured alive with Lice. I will leave the search and consideration
thereof unto the Reader. I could name some advanced to great dignities
according to the world, and rich, who within these five and twenty years,
namelye in our France, for that they were not punished by men according to
their merits, have not yet escaped the just vengeance of the Almighty. Some
have dyed without sense, others have felt some Worm in their conscience, but
destitute of the true knowledge of GOD, and of themselves, have dyed most
miserably. There is no Province in the realm, but may furnish store of
examples. Such punishments do put both great and small in mind of these two
verses.

To learn to do well careful be and seem,
And not in scorn of GOD to disesteeme.
Old Men.
Captain LAVDONNIERE chief of three Ships well appointed, sailed in the year
1564. toward Florida, where being arrived, the Seignior of Ottigny his
Lieutenant was lead by a Paraousty or Lord of the Country, to his Fathers
lodging, one of the oldest men that was then living upon the earth. The
Frenchmen respecting the age of this Floridien, began to gratify him by the
common term of friend, whereat the old man did seem to rejoice much. Then
they asked him of the course of his age: whereunto he made answer, showing
that from him were come five generations. More-ouer he showed them an other
old man set right against him, the which did exceed him much in age. It was
his Father, who did more resemble a carcass of boanes, then a living man: for
he had the sinews, the veins, the artiers, the boanes, and other parts
appearing so plainly above the skin, as you might number and distinguish one
from an other. And he was so old, as the poor man had lost his sight, and
could speak little and with very great pain. The Seignior of Ottigny having
seen so strange a thing, went to the young old man, entreated him to answer
unto that which he had demanded touching his age. Then the old Man called a
troop of Indiens: and striking twice upon his thigh, and laying his hand upon
two of them, he gave him to understand by signs and tokens, that these two
were his Children: then striking upon his thighs, he showed him others that
were not so old, which issued from the two first, the which he continued in
that manner unto the fifte generation. Although this old man had a Father, and
that both had white and exceeding long hair, yet it seemed by their natural
constitution they might live thirty or forty years longer: and yet the
youngest of them was not less then two hundred and fifty years old.
History of Florida by Mounsier BASANNIER a French Gentleman.

Age grown young again.
VELASQVES of Tarentum makes mentiion in his Filone of an Abbess that was in
the Monastery of Monuiedre, the which in his time was almost a hundred years
old, and as she seemed very old, nature which declined in her recovered so
great force and virtue, as her monthly courses which she had lost for many
years, began to come again as if she had been young: moreover all her
teeth came again, her hair began to show black, and to expel the white, so
as recovering her best estate, the wrinkles of her face ware away, her breasts
grew fat and plompe, and in the end she grew as fair and fresh as when she
was but thirty years old: so as many went to see her, as the most admirable
thing which they had ever seen. She hid her self and would not be seen,
being ashamed of this strange alteration, which she found in her self. And
although that VELASQVES did forget to note the number of years which she
lived afterward, yet it is to be presumed that they were reasonably long:
seeing that nature in the declyning, had showed so goodly and extraordinary a
work. A. TORQVEMADO in the first journey of his discourse.

Being at Rome about the year 1531. it was bruted throughout all Italy, that
at Tarentum there lived an old man who at the age of a hundred years was
grown young again, like unto the Abbess. He had changed his skin like
unto the snake, and had recovered a new, being grown so young and fresh, as
those which had seen him and known him before, could then scarce believe
their own eyes. Having continued above fifty years in this estate, he grew
to be so old, as he seemed to be made of barks of trees. The same.

The Admiral Don FADRIGVE, passing in his youth by a place called Rioya, he
see a man that was fifty years old in his opynion, who told him that he
had been foote-man to his grandfather. And when as the Admiral would not
believe it, for that it was long since his grandfather was dead: this man said
unto him that he had no reason to doubt thereof, for that he was a hundred
years old: and that being old he was grown young again: so as nature was
changed in him and had renewed all that which was the cause of age, the which
made him to seem younger then he was. The Admiral was desirous to know the
truth, and found that the was as it old man had said. The same Author.

That above written is not impossible (adds TORQVEMADO) seeing that in our
time we know a very admirable thing of a man mentioned by FERNAND LOPES of
Castagneda, Historiographer to the King of Portugal, in the eight book of his
Chronicle where he says that NONNIO de CVGNE being Viceroye at the Indies in
the year 1536. there was a man brought unto him as a thing worthy of
admiration: for that it was auerred by great proofs and sufficient testimony,
that he was three hundred and forty years old. He remembered that he had
seen that City wherein he dwelt unpeopled being then when he spoke one of
the chief of all the East Indies. He had grown young again fouretimes,
leaving his white hair and having new teeth. When the Viceroy did see him,
he had his hair and his beard black, although he had not much. And as by
chance there was a Physician present, the Viceroy would have him feel this
old man's pulce, the which he found as good and as strong, as a young man's in
the prime of his age. This man was borne in the Realm of Bengala, and did
affirm that he had at times near seven hundred wi^es, whereof some were
dead and some he had put away. The King of Portugal advertised of this
wonder, did often inquier, and had yearly news by the fleet which came. He
lived above three hundred and seauentie years. The same Castagnede adds, that
in the time of the same Viceroy, there was also found in the City of Bengala
an other man, a Moore or MAHVMETAN called. XEQVEPIR, borne in a Province named
XEQVE, who was three hundred years old as he said: all those which did know
him did also certefie it, for that they had great presumptions and testimonies.
This Moore was reputed amongst them for a holy man, by reason of his austernes
and abstinence. The Portugals did converse famyliarly with him* and besides
that the Histories of Portugal are faithfully collected and certefied by very
autenticall witnesses: there were in my time both in Portugal and in Castille
many witnesses which had seen these old men. The same.

ALEX. BENEDICTVS reports in his practice that he had seen a woman called
VICTORIA, who had lost all her teeth, and being grown bald other teeth came
again at the age of eighteen years. AMB. PARE Book 24. Chap. 17.

I have heard Mistress DESBECK say, that she had known a woman seauentie
years old, the which in certain months for some years, had her monthly
courses very orderly. In the end coming down into great abondance, she
died. She reported unto me an other memorable History, that she had seen
and known an honorable woman, being then a hundred and three years old, and
soon after died: who being a hundred and one had her monthly courses very
orderly, wherewith she felt her self wonderfully eased, and as it were
restored: the which continued from the hundred and one year until her death,
which was at the age of a hundred and three. The Marshalls wife of
Pleatenbourck a gentlewoman of the noble famelie of Ketlercks in Wesphalia,
having past seauentie years returned to have her monthly purgations very
orderly, and was as lusty as she had been long before. These orderly courses
continued four years, but in the end they came in greater abundance then
before: and yet she was helthfull until the age of eighty four. She lived
yet six years, and died in the ninety year of her age. R. SOLENANDER. Book
5. of his Physical Observations. Cons. 15. sect. 41. 42. 43.

Strange, Fearful, and horrible Visions.
IN the lives of DION and BRUTUS in PLVTARKE, we read of horrible apparitions
which appeared unto them a little before their deaths: and we read in the
Histories of Scotland, in the life of King ALEXANDER the third, a strange cause
of a fantosme which appeared unto him the day of his third marriage, presaging
his death the same year. But omitting ancient Histories, besides those that
we have represented in the first Book, we will add some in this.

There is a Noble and ancient family at Parma, called TORTELLES, having a
Castle, in the which there is a great Hall, under the Chimney wher-of there
does sometimes appear an ancient Woman, seeming to be a 100. years old. This
signifies that some one of the family shall dye soon after. I have heard
PAVLA BARBIANO a worthy Lady of that family report (supping one night together
at Belioyeuse) that a young Maid of that house being sick, the old Woman
appeared, which made all to think that the Maid should soon dye: but the
contrary happened: for the sick Maid escaped, but an other of the same
family which before was in very good health dyed suddenly. They say this old
woman whose shadow appears, was sometimes a rich Lady, who for her money was
slain by her Nephews, which cut her body in pieces, and cast it into the
Priuies. CARDAN liber. 16. Chap. 93. of the diversity of things.

ANTHONY (...) (of whose despaier I have spoken elsewhere) the lastnight of
his life, being laid, he imagined to see, a very tall man, whose head was
shaven, his beard hanging down to the earth, his eyes sparkling, and two
torches in his hands, whom ANTHONY demanded what art thou, who alone like a
fury do walk thus out of season when every one does rest? Tell me, what
seek thou? What do thou pretend? In saying so ANTHONY cast himself out
of his bed to hide himself from this vision, and died miserably the next
day. BARTLEMEVV of Bolonia in his life.

JAMES DONAT a rich gentleman of Venice, being in bed with his Wife, having
a wax candle light in the Chamber, and two nurses sleeping by in a pallet with
a little Child, he did see one open the Chamber door very softly, and an
unknown man putting his head in at the door. DONAT rises, takes his sword,
causes two great Lamps to be light, and goes with his Nurses into the hall,
where he finds all shut* whereupon he retiers back to his Chamber much
amazed. The next day this little Child not full a year old, and who then
was well, died. CARDAN in the same Book and Chapter.

Two Italian Merchants, being upon the way to pass out of Piedmont into
France, did encounter a man of a far heigher stature then any other, who
calling them unto him used this speech, return to my Brother LODOVVIK and give
him these letters which I send him: They being much amazed, ask, what are you?
I am, said he, GALEAS SFORZA, and so vanished suddenly. They turned head toward
Milan, and from thence to Vigeneue, where LODOVVIK was at that time. They
desire to speak with the Duke, saying that they had letters to deliver him
from his Brother. The Courtiers laugh at them, and for that they were still
importunate they were put in prison, and the rack was offered unto them: but
they did constantly maintain their first words. Thereupon the Dukes Council
was in doubt what they should do with these letters, not knowing what to
answer, they were so much amazed: one of them called the Viconte GALEAS, takes
these letters written in a paper folded like unto the breefes that come from
Rome, the contents whereof were, LODOVVIK, LODOVVIK look to thy self, the
Venetians, and the French will allie themselves together to ruin thee, and to
overthrow thine estate: but if thou do furnish me with three thousand
Crowns, I will give order that their hearts shall be mollefied, and that the
mischief which does threaten thee shall be avoided, hoping to prevail if thou will trust me. Happiness come to thee. And beneath: the spirit of thy Brother
GALEAS. Some were amazed at this strange accident, and others mocking at it:
yet many advised him to consigne three thousand Crowns as near as he could
to GALEAS intention. But GALEAS thinking they would laugh at him if he should
disburse the money, and deliver it into strangers hands, would not do any
thing, but sent the Merchantes every one home to their own houses. But a
little while after he was cast out from his Duchy of Milan, and carried away
prisoner. ARLVNO in the first section of the History of Milan.

A certain Italian having caused a friend of his that was dead, to be
honestly interred: and as he returned to Rome, being surprised by the night,
he was forced to stay in an Inn upon the way; where being weary of his
body and afflicted in mind he went to his bed to rest himself. Being
alone and awake, he thought that his dead friend, pale and without flesh
appeered unto him, as he was in his last sickness, and came near unto him,
who lifting up his head to behold him, and shaking with fear, he demanded of
him, what he was. The dead body answering nothing, undressed himself, goes to
bed, and approached near to him that was living as he imagined. The other
not knowing which way to turn him, lies closse to the beddes-side, and as the
dead man approached, still he thrust him back. Seeing himself thus repulst,
he frowned on him that was living, then he rises out of the bed, and
clothes himself, puttes on his shoes, and goes out of the Chamber and
appeeres no more. The living man was so affrighted with this courtesy as he
had almost dyed. He said that when the dead man approached near unto him in
the bed, he touched one of his feet the which he found so cold, as no Ice
was colder in comparison thereof. ALEXANDER of Alexandria Book 2. of his
Genial days. Chapter. 9.

TIRAQVELL in his Annotations upon this Chapter, puttes all such visions
amongst dreams. But I will neither maintain the one nor the other at this
present.

A friend of mine called GORDIAN, a man worthy of credit: has reported unto
me that going toward Arezzo with an other of his acquaintance, being
straied out of the way, they entered into a forest, where they did see nothing
but snow, inaccessible places, and a fearful sollitarinesse. The Son
being low, they set down upon the ground all tired. Hereupon they imagined
to hear a man's voice nere unto them. They approach and see under the earth
there lay three Giantlike and fearful figures of men, attired in long black
gowns like moorners, with long hair and beards, which did call them. As the
two passengers came nearer, the three visions showed far greater then at the
first, and one of them appeering naked danced and showed very dishonest motions
and countenances. These two being much amazed at this spectacle; began to
fly away as fast as they could, and having run over hills and dales, with
much toil they came to a Country-mans Cottage, where they spent the night. In
the same book and Chap. I will add that which I have of mine own knowledge,
and whereof I am well assured. Being sick at Rome, and in bed, where I lay
awake, there appeered unto me a vision of a fair woman, the which I did long
behold, being very pensive, and not speaking a word, discoursing with my self
whether I did dream or were awake. And knowing that all my sinces were in
their full vigor, and that this fantosme was still before me, I asked what
she was. She laughing repeated the same very words as it were in mocking
wise: and having long beheld me, she went her way. In the same Book and
Chapter.

A Monk called THOMAS, a man worthy of credit, and whose wisdom and
judgment I have tried in many affairs, has reported unto me for truth,
confirming it with an oath, that there had past some bitter words betwixt
certain other monks and him, and after they had one injured an other in
words, he went all boiling with choler from among them, and walking alone in
a great Wood, he met with an ill favored Man, and of a terrible aspect,
having a black beard and a long gown, THOMAS asked him whether he went? I
have lost answered he, my horse, and go to seek him in these near fields.
Here-vpon they go together to find this beast, and come near unto a little
River that was deep. The Monk begins to put off his hoase to wade through:
but the other does press him to hang upon his shoulders, promising to pass
him easily. THOMAS believes him, and being upon his back, he imbraceth him
about the neck: but casting down his eyes to see the passage, he found that
his Porter had strange and monsterous feet: wherewith being much amazed, he
began to call upon GOD for aid. At that voice, the enemy being confounded,
cast down his burden, and grombling after a horrible manner, vanished away,
with such a noise, and so extraordinary a violence, as he pulled up a great
Oak that was near, and brake all the bows, ALEXANDER of Alexandria. lib. 4.
Chap. 19.

The Lord of a little Town in the Principality of Sulmona in the Realm of
Naples, showed himself covetous and proud in his government: so as his poor
subjects could not subsist, but were strangely oppressed by him. An honest man,
but very poor and contemned, did for some occasion hurt a Hound belonging to
this Lord very sore: Who greatly moved for the death of his Dog, caused this
poor Man to be laid hold on, and imprisoned in a hoale. After some days,
the guard which kept all the doors carefully shut, coming to open them
according to their custom, to give him a little bread, they found not their
prisoner in his hoale. Having sought all places for him, and found no marks
nor show of his escape, in the end they acquainted their Lord with this wonder,
who at the first mocked and threatened them, but understanding the truth
after-wards, he was no less amazed then the rest. Three days after this
Alarm, all the doors of the prison and of the Dungeon being shut as
before, the same Prisoner without the knowledge of any, was found shut up
fast in the former Dungeon, having the face and countenance of a man
distracted: who required them that they should lead him presently unto their
Lord, to whom he had some-things of great and weighty importance to impart.
Being brought before him, he told him that he was come from Hell. The
occasion was, that being no longer able to endure the rigor of the prison,
vanquished with despair, fearing death, and void of good counsel, he had
called the Devil to his aid, that he would draw him out of that captivity.
That soon after the evil spirit had appeared unto him in the Dungeon, in a
hideous and terrible form, where they had made an agreement, according to the
which he had been drawn and carried from thence, not without grievous
torments, then cast headlong into places underground, that were wonderful
hollow, as in the bottom of the earth, where he had seen the prisons of the
wicked, their punishments, darkness, and horrible miseries, seats that were
stinking and fearful: Kings, Princes, and great men plunged in darkness,
where they burnt in flaming fire, with unspeakable torments; that he had seen
Popes, Cardinals and other Prelates attired in state, and other sorts of men in
diverse equipages, afflicted with distinct punishments in very deep gulphes,
where they were tormented incessantly. Adding, that he had known there many
of his acquaintance, namely one of his greatest friends, who knew him and
inquired of his estate: the prisoner having told him that their Country was in
the hands of a cruel Lord: he then enjoined him, that being returned, he
should command this rough Master to leave his tyranous usage: and to tell him,
that if he continued, his place was marked in a certain seat thereby, which
he showed unto the prisoner. And to the end (said this spirit unto the
prisoner) that the Lord of whom we speak, may give credit unto thy report:
bid him remember the secret counsel, and the speech we had together, when as
we carried arms together in a certain war, and under Commanders that he
named unto him. Then he told him in particular this secret, their accord, the
words and mutual promises: the which the prisoner delivered distinctly, one
after another in order, unto this Lord, who was wonderfully amazed at this
message, wondering how it could be, that things committed by him alone, the
which he had never discovered to any, should be decifred unto him so boldly
by a poor subject of his, who did represent them, as if he had read them in a
Book.

They add, that the prisoner having inquired of the other with whom he
devised in Hell, if it were possible and true, that so many Men whom he did
see stately apparrelled, should feel any torments: the other answered, that
they were burnt with continual fire, and tortured with grievous and
unspeakable punishments, and that all those ornaments of Gold and Scarlate,
were nothing else but burning fire so colored.

That being desirous to feel if it were so, he went near to touch this
Scarlate; which the other persuaded him to forbear: but the heat of the fire
had scorcht all the palm of his hand, the which he showed as it were roasted
in the embers of a great fire. The poor prisoner being set at liberty,
seemed to those that came unto him at his return to his house, as a man
distracted and grown dull, which does neither hear nor see, always pensive,
speaking little, and scarce answering the questions that were demanded him. His
face was become so hideous, and his countenance so foul and wild after this
voyage, as his Wife and Children did scarce know him: and when they knew him,
there was nothing but crying and weeping, seeing him so changed. He lived but
few days after his return, and could hardly settle his poor etate, he was
so transported and changed. AEEXANDER of Alexandria, liber 6. Chap. 21.

Near unto Torge in Saxony, a certain Gentleman walking in the fie^d, met
wi^h a Man which saluted him and offered him his service. He made him his
Horse-keeper. The Master was not very good, but the servant was wickedness it
self. One day the Master being to go forth, recommended his Horses unto
his servant, especially one above the rest, which was of some price: this
servant was so expert as he drew this horse up into a very high Tower. When
the Master returned, his Horse (which had his head at the window) knew him,
and began to neigh. The Master being amazed, demanded who had placed his Horse
in so high a Stable. This good servant answered, that it was with an intent to
keep him safe, that he might not be lost, and that he had carefully
executed his Masters commandment. They had much a do to shackle this poor
beast, and to let him down with Ropes from the top of the Tower. Soon after,
some whom this Gentleman had robbed, resolving to pursue him in Justice, his
Horse-keeper said unto him. Master save your self, showing him a Sack, out
of the which he drew many horse-shoes pulled by him from horse-feete to stay
their course in the voyage which they undertook against his Master, who in
the end being taken, and put in prison, inrreated his Horse-keeper to help
him. You are too fast bound there, answered the servant, I cannot free you. But
the Master making great instance, in the end his servant said: I will draw
you out of captivity, so as you make no sign with your hands thinking to save
your self. Which agreed upon, he takes him with his shackles and Bolttes,
and carries him through the air. This miserable Master being amazed to see
himself in such a strange field, began to cry out. Oh eternal GOD, whether
do they carrye me? Suddenly his servant (that is to say the Devil) let him
fall in a Marish: then coming home to the house, lettes the Gentlewoman his
Wife to understand, in what estate and where her Husband was, that they might
go and deliver him.

A rich man of Halberstad a famous Town in Germany, did usually keep a good
Table, giving unto himself all the pleasures in this world he could devise,
so little careful of his souls health, as one day he presumed to power forth
this blasphemy among his riotous companions, that if he might always spend
his days in delights, he would desire no other life. But after some days,
and beyond his expectation, he must needs dye.

After his death, there were daily seen at night in his house (which was
stately built) visions which appeared, so as the servants were forced to seek
an other aboade. This rich man appeared with a troop of other Banketmakers,
in a Hall, which in his lifetime served only to make seasts in. He was
compassed in by servants which held Torches in their hands, and served at a
Table that was covered with Cups and Goblets guilt, carrying many Dishes, and
then taking them away. More-ouer, they heard the noise of Flutes, Luthes,
Virginals, and other Instruments of Music. To conclude, all worldly pomp,
where-in this riche-man had taken delight in his life time. GOD did suffer
Satan to represent such illusions to the eyes of many, that he might root
out impiety from the hearts of Epicures. IO^* FINCEL. lib. 2. Of the wonders
of our Time.

In the year 1532. a German Gentleman, cruel to his subjects, commanded a
certain peasant to fetch him a great Oak out of the next forest, and to
bring it to his house, or else he should be cruelly entreated: the
Countryman holding it impossible, goes away sighing and weeping. Being entered
into the Forest, he meets a man (which was the Devil) who inquires of him
the cause of his heaviness: whom the Countryman having satisfied, the other
having commanded him to return, promises to give order the Gentle man should
have an Oak quickly. The peasant was scarce returned to the Village, but his
man in the Forest had cast athwart the Gentleman's door one of the greatest
Oaks that he could choose, with-all his bows, and branches. And which is
more, this Tree became hard as Iron, so as it was impossible to cut it in
pieces* and the Gentleman was constrained to his shame, trouble, and charge,
to piece his house on the other side, and to make new doors and windows. JOB.
FINCELI. lib. 2.

There is a Village in the Duchy of Brunswick, called Gehern, two Leagues
from Blommenaw. In the year 1555. a Countryman going out from that place in
the morning with his Carte and Horses to fetch Wood in the Forest, he
discovered at the entry thereof certain troops of Reisters wearing black
arms. Being amazed at this encounter, he returned to carry news unto the
Village. The most ancient of the place accompanied with their Curate or Pastor,
went presently into field, being followed by a hundred persons, as well men as
women, and they number foure-teene bands or distinct troops, the which in an
instant put themselves into two great Battaylons, one right against an other,
as it were ready to fight. Then afterward they did see coming out of either
squadron, a great man, of a fierce aspect, and verry terrible to behold. These
two of either side light from their Horses, seeming to make a careful and
diligent reuiew of their troops: which done, they go to Horse again.
Presently the troops began to advance themselves, and to run over a great
champian field, without any charge or shocke: the which held and continued
until it was dark night, in the view of all the Countrymen. At that present
time there was no speech in all the Duchy of Brunswike, nor there aboutes, of
any enterprise of war, nor of any levy of Reitres: which made them to think
that this vision was a prediction of the miseries which did afterward happen
by the just Judgments of GOD. JOB. FINCEL. Book 1.

In the year 1567. STEPHEN HVBENET remaining at Trautenaw, a Town in Bohemia,
did so prosper, in gathering of riches, and in stately buildings, as every one
did admire and respect him, as one of the greatest mignons of worldly felicity.
In the end he fell sick, died, and was carried to his grave with great pomp.
Soon after he appeered to be living again, and making much of many, he
imbruced some so strongly, as some died, others were greeuiously sick: all
affirming that rich HVBENET had so handled them: and that he was in the same
sort, as he was in his life time. The Magistrates of the place descouering that
it was a diuilish illusion, decreed that HVBENETS body should be taken up
again. Although he had been laid five months before in the ground, yet
was he not any thing touched with rotttennesse, but as fresh as before his
sickness, and as bodies that are lusty and in their perfect health. The
hangman d^aged it to the galloes, where they do execute malefactors, he cut
off his head, and the blood gusht out as if HVBENET had been alive, and from
out of his breast he drew a bloody heart. The head beeingset betwixt his
feet, was burnt with the whole dead body, in the presence of a great
multitude and number of people: after which time the power of Satan ceased.
The History of Bohemia.

ANTHONY COSTILLE a Spanish Gentleman, remaining at Fontaines of Ropell, went
one day from his house well mounted, for the dispatch of some affairs, some
Leagues of, the which done and night approaching, he resolved to return unto
his house. Going forth of the village where he had been, he found a little
Hermitage and Chapel with certain lattise windows of wood, and a Lamp
burning within it. Being alighted from his Horse, he did his devotion, then
casting his eye into the Hermitage, he did see to his thinking, coming from
under the ground three persons which came toward him with their heads
covered, and then to stand still. Having be held them a little, seeing their
hair shine and sparkle, although he were held to be very valiant, yet he
was affraied, and going to Horseback he began to fly. But lifting up his
eyes, he descouers these persons which went a little before him and seemed to
accompany him. Recommending himself continually unto almighty GOD, he
turned first one way then an other way, but this troop was always about
him. In the end he coucht a short Lance which he carried, and spurd
for-warde to strike them: but these visions went as fast as the Horse, so as
ANTHONY was forced to take them in his company, unto the gate of his lodging,
where there was a great Court.

Being alighted, he enters, and finds these fantosmes; he goes up to a
Chamber door where his Wife was, who opened it at his voice: and as he entered
the visions vanished away. But he seemed to be so amazed and troubled, as
his Wife thought that he had been very ill used by his enemies in that
voyage. Being demanded, and not able to draw any thing from him, she sent
for a very friend of his, a Learned man, who came presently: and finding him
as pale as a dead man, entreated him very earnestly to discover his adventure.
COSTILLE having made the who discourse unto him, this friend labored to resolve
him, then made him suppe, conducted him to his Chamber, left him upon his bead
with a candle light on the table, and departed to leave him to his rest. He was
scarce out of the Chamber, but COSTILLE began to cry out help, help,
succor me. Then all his servants entered into the Chamber, to whom he said
that the three visions were come to him being alone, and that having scracht
up the earth with their hands, they had cast it upon his eyes, so as he did
not see an^e thing. His servants therefore did never abandon him, but he was
still well accompanied: but their assistance and care could not keep him, but
that he died the seventh day after, without any other infirmity.
TORQVEMADO in the 3. journey of his Hexmeron.

JOHN VELASQVES de AYOLLA and two other young Spaniards going out of their
Country to study the Law at Bolognia the fat, not finding a convenient
lodging to live sparingly in: they were advertised that in the same street
where their Inn was, there was a house left desert and abandoned, by reason of
certain visions which appeered there, the which they might have to dwell in
without any rent, as long as they should please to stay in it.

They accept of the condition, fit themselves with stuff, and pass the time
merrily for a months space. At the end whereof, AYOLAS two companions going
to bed early, and he late in his study, hearing a great noise as it had
been of many iron chains, shaken together, he went out of his study, with
his sword, and in his other hand his candlelight, then he planted himself
in the midest of the Hall, without a waking his companions, expecting what
should beecome of this noise, the which in his opynion came from beneath the
stairs, answering to a great Court, right before the Hall. Being in this
expectation he descouers at the stairs door a very greeuious and fearful
vision, of a Carcass that had nothing at all but bare boanes, drawing about
his feet and the middle of his body, these chains which made such a noise.
This vision stayed, and AYOLA resuming courrage, began to conjure it, that
he should let him understand in some convenient manner what he would have.
The vision began to cross his arms, to hold down his head, and to becken
him with one hand to follow him down the stairs. AYOLA answered, go before
and I will follow thee: whereupon the vision begannne to go down softly,
like unto one that were ^ettered: being followed by AYOLA, whose candell went
out on the midest of the stairs.

This renewed his fear, yet incorraging himself again, he said unto the
vision, thou see that my candle is out, I will go and light it again: if
thou will tarry for me here in this same place, I will return presently
unto thee again. He ran to the harth where the fire was, and lighted his
candell, and came to the stairs, where he found the vision standing there and
then he followed it. Having crossed the Court of the lodging, they enter into a
great gardin, in the midest whereof was a well: the which made AYOLA think
that this vision would do him some harm: and therefore he stayed. But the
vision then made a sign unto him to go to another place in the Garden, and as
he went thither, the vision suddenly vanished away. AYOLA being alone, began to
call him, protesting that he would do any thing that was in his power, and
stayed there awhile: But the vision appeared no more, and the Spaniard returned
to his Chamber, and awaked his companions, who seeing him so pale, gave him a
little Wine and some comfitures, inquiring of his adventure, the which he
reported unto them. Soon after this accident being bruted throughout all the
City, the Governor inquired carefully of the manner of it, and understanding
all circumstances by the relation of AYOLA, he caused some to dig where-as
the vision vanished away. There they found a carcass in Chains as AYOLA had
seen it, in a deep Sepulcher, from whence being drawn and interred in an
other place with others, all the noise which had been before in this great
lodging ceased. The Spaniards returning into Spain, AYOLA was made a Judge,
and had a Son who was a President in a Town of Spain, in the time of
TORQVEMADO, who made this discourse in the third Journey of his Hexameron. The
which agrees with the relation which PLINIVS SECVNDVS makes of the Philosopher
ATHENODORVS, in his Epistle to SVRE. liber 7.

THEODORE GAZA, a learned man in our time, had obtained a certain Farm in
gift from the Pope. His Farmer digging on a time in a certain place, found a
vessel in the which were bones. Here-vpon a vision appeared unto him, and
commanded him to put that Vessel again into the earth, else his Son should
dye. And for that the Farmer made no accoumpt of it, soon after his Son was
slain. Some days after the vision returned, threatening the Famer to kill his
other Son, if he did not put the vessel and the boanes in the place where
he had found them. The Farmer bethink^ng himself, and seeing his other Son
fallen sick, reported all unto THEODORE, who going unto his farm, and in the
same place where the Farmer had drawn out the vessel, he caused a pit to be
made: where they did hide the vessel with the boanes: the which being done,
the Farmers Son did presently recover his health. MANLIVS in his common
places. LAVATER Book 1. Chap. 11 of the apparition of Spirits.

MELANCHON in his treatise of the Soul, writes that he himself had many
apparitions, and had known many credible persons, which did affirm that they
had talked with spirits. In his book entitled ordinary examinations, he says,
that he had an Aunte, his Fathers Sister, who being with-childe after her
Husbands death, being set nere the fite, two men entered into her house, one of
the^ was like unto her deceased husband, and so carried himself, the other of
a very tall stature was attired like a Friar. He that was like unto her
husband, came near unto the Chimney, salutes his Wife, and intreates her not
to be amazed* saying that he was come to charge her to do some thing.
Here-vpon he commaundes the Friar to retier into the Stoue. And having
discoursed long with his Wife, talking of Priests and Masses, beein ready to
depart, he said unto her, stretching forth his hand. Touch here: but for that
she was amazed, he did assure her she should have no harm. Where-vp on she
touched it: and although her hand grew not impotent yet it was so petiously
burnt as it was ever after black. LAVATER Book 1. Chapter 14. of the
apparition of Spirits.

PETER MAMER writes that at Constant upon Vienne there appeered above a 140.
years since, in the house of one named CAPLAND, an evil spirit, saying it was
the soul of a woman that was dead, the which did sigth and cry out,
complaining very much, admonishing them to make many prayers, and pilgrymages,
and revealing many things that were true. But some one saving unto it, if thou will have us believe thee say. LORD remember me according to thy great
mercies. His answer was, I can not. Then the assistants laughed at him, and he
fled with a noise. The like happened to NICHOLAS AVBERY of Veruin whereof (...)
BARTLEMEVVE FAY a Councellor of the Parliament has written the History, where
he says that Satan appeered unto her, praying unto her Fathers grave as if
he had come out of it, and said unto her that she must say many masses; and
certain pilgymages, to draw him out of Purgatory, yet after all this, he
did still torment this poor woman: and although in the beginning he said he
was her grandfather: yet in the end he said he was Beelzebub. There is a
later History, well known to the Parisiens, but not printed, the which
happened in Paris, in Saint Honores street, at the sign of the red Horse. A
Weauer of Lace had taken his Niece home to him being an Orphelin. One a time
the maid praying upon her Fathers grave where he was buried at Saint Geruais,
Satan presented himself unto her, in the shape of a tall black man: taking
her by the hand and saying, my friend fear nothing, thy Father and thy Mother
are well. But thou must say certain Masses, and go in pilgrymage to our
Lady of Vertus, and they shall goestraight into Paradise. The maid demandes
of this spirit, who was so careful of man's health, what he was? He answered
that he was Satan, and that she should not be amazed. The maid did what
was commanded her. Which done he said she must go in pilgrymage to Saint
James. She answered, I cannot go so far. After that Satan did not cease to
importune her, talking famyiiarly to her being alone, and doing her work,
saying these words unto her. Thou art cruel, thou will not put thy sizers in
thy bosom for my sake: the which she did to content him and to be rid of
him. But this done, he demanded some guifte of her, yea, some of her hair,
whereof she gave him a lock. Some days after he persuaded her to cast
her-selfe into the water, and sometimes to hang her-selfe, putting the rope of
a well about her neck: but she cried out in such sort as he did no more urge
her. And yet her Uncle seeking one day to be revenged of him, was so well
beaten, as he continued above fiueteene days sick in his bed. An other
time Satan would have forced her and known her carnally and for the
resistance which she made, she was beaten until she bled. Amongst many that
did see this maid, there was one called CHOININ. Secretary to the Bishop of
Valence, who told her that there was no better means to drive away this
evil spirit, then in answering nothing to that which he should say: although
he should command to pray unto GOD, the which he never did but in
balspheming, and joining him always with his Creatures in derision: Satan
seeing that the maid answered him nothing, nor did any thing for him, took
her and cast her against the ground, after which time she see him no more.
Mounsier ANNOT Bishop of Auxerra, nor the Curate where the Maiden dwelt, could
not help her. I. BODIN lib. 3. Chap. 6. of his Demonomania.

ANTHONY dela CVEVA, a Spanish Knight, for some reasons unknown to us, and by
the permission of GOD, was in his life time much troubled and tempted with
visions, so as through custom, he had in the end lost all fear, and yet he
had ever light in his Chamber where he did lie. One night being in his bed, and
reading in a Book, he heard a noise under his bed, as if it had been a Man,
and not knowing what it might be, he see come forth of one side of the bed, a
naked arm, as if it had been of a Moore, the which laying hold of the Candel,
threw it down with the Candle-stick, and put it out. Then the Knight felt this
Moore come up, and go to bed to him, having embraced one another, they began
to wrestle with all their force, making such a noise, as those of the house did
awake, and coming to see what it was, they found none but the Knight, who was
in a great heat, and was wet, as if he had come out of a Bathe. He told them
his adventure, and that this Moore hearing them come, had freed himself from
him, and he knew not what was become of him. The same Author.

Wonderful Visions in the air.
IN the year 1532. near unto Inspruke, these Images were seen in the air.
An Eagle upon the side of an hill, very wild, against the which came three
other Images, as it were to tear it in pieces. The first was a Camel
stretching forth his neck, and environed about with fire. The second was a
Wolse, casting fire out at his throat, and about him a circle of fire. The
third was a Lion, whose hair a man, armed at all parts, and standing up
right, at the entry of the mountains, did gently handle, and it seemed that
this Lion rejoiced at the man, holding forth his pawe to him, in sign of
salutation. GASPAR PEVCER Book 15. Chap. 5. of his Diuinations. Alittle before
the death of JOHN Elector and Duke of Saxony, there was seen in the air over
Isenac these visions following, first an old dry Tree overthrown. Secondly a
man on hors-back which carried the tree, but all the boughs pulled of: thirdly
there was seen a hound: Forthly a great black Cross, in a thick Cloud:
Fifthly the lightning was seen coming out of this Cloud, with so horrible and
violent a crack of thunder, and so full of sparks of fire, as they thought it
would have consumed a Village, over which it was likely to fall: and there was
a maid so terrefied, as with a violent cry to her Mother for help, she
entreated that she might be covered. Although I will not enter into the
exposition of this vision, yet I gather by that which has since followed, that
such Images have represented the changes which have happened in the house of
Saxony together with the calamities and ruins of Churches. The same Author.

At the same time when as the League in Germany was made, called of
SCHMALCAIDE, therewere seen shyning in the air Images, which did seem to
foretell the issue of all that assosiation. First were seen certain
horsemen, followed by peasantes that were armed with battes and leuers; then
there appeered a heigh Tower near unto a river and not far from that Tower,
a man which dug for water, after whom came a great dragon. The two first
figures vanished presently, but the two others continued, a good long time. The
same Author.

In the year 1534. the third of July after Noone, the sky being clear and
bright, the Inhabitants of a little Town called Scheswitz, did see in the
air Lions running from diverse parts to fight; and by them a man on horseback
armed, shaking of a Iauelin. Not far from this man lay a man's head, without
a body, wearing an Imperial diadem. Near unto it there was a wild boares
head with his tuskes, and two Dragons vomyting forth fire. Then there appeered
an Image of a good big Town alone, near unto a Lake, beseeged by Water and
Land, and over it a Cross of the color of blood, the which by little and
little grew black. An other horseman all flaming, and carrying on his head
an Emperors Crown, presented himself presently, being followed by a horse
without a guide: then in the midest of a spacious plain, there appeered two
Castles on fire, near unto a heigh Mountain, upon the which was a great
Eagle, hyding half his body beehinde the Mountain, and there appeered also
certain little Eagles, having white feathers and very bright, and with all a
Lions head Crowned, and a Cock pecking at this head, so long until it was
parted from the body, and so vanished away. There were other Lions and near
unto the wild Boars head, an Unicorn the which by little and little did change
into the form of a Dragon: with a great number other beasts of unaccustomed
forms and greatness. Moreover upon an heigh rock there appeered a fortress
enuitoned with two Camps, and all the Heavens seemed to be full of Towns,
Villages and Castells: but all was presently consumed by fire, and all the
ruins of this great circuit, seemed to be lightning, and to fall into a great
poole, nothing remaining but Towers whereas the great City had appeered, upon
the bank of the Lake, was seen a mighty Camel, seeming to stay therefore to
drink. The same.

In the year 1538. before the first expedition of the Landgraues war, the
Consul of the Town of Schmalcalde, a man of good worth did see in night as it
were before him, these following shapes. There was an old man at a table
sleeping, with his head hanging down, upon a form by, did lie a Lion. In the
same Chamber were many men in long robbes which seemed to consult about this
Lion, the which in the end did leap from the form, as it were to fly upon
them with his great paws. They joining close together oppose themselves
against the Lion, and give him many stabbes with a dagger, finally having
compassed him in, by the means of a Chaier which they cast upon him, they cut
of his tail: but soon after being gotten from under the Chair, he returns
to his place, and leapes upon the form. As these men had beegonne again to
go in and out, as it were to conspier the Lions death, he enters into a rage
and flies violently upon them, who began to cry out, and to hold open their
arms to the old man that slept, who awaking very sodenlie and lifting up his
head, shaking his right hand he threatened the Lion, who perceiving it,
retired himself, and looking sometimes upon the old man, he lept upon
the form, where he was transformed to JESUS CHRIST standing vp-right and
preaching, before whom these men falling prostrate, as it were to demand
pardon, and having obtained it, all these Images vanished. The same.

In the year 1545. the day after Whitsunday, there were seen in Silesia these
shapes. A Bear came from the East, leading an Army in good order: against
whom marched a Lion from the West with other troops. Betwixt the two Armies
did shine a very bright star. Presently they began a fierce charge, so as it
seemed the blood did gushe from those bodies that were wounded, and that many
fell down dead upon the place. During this Combat, an Eagle parting from a
certain high Rock, did houer over the Lions troops. After a long fight, and
when as it seemed to be ended, the Lion appeared again, shining in the
midst of his bands: but they could not discern the Bear, the body of his
Army being broken and dispersed: about the which there were many old men,
with white beards, and reverent countenauces. The fight being ended, the Lion
led back his Army toward the West, and being advanced a good way, one
mounted upon a brave White Horse, lest the Army, and came to the place of
Battle, mounting upon this Horse a young man that was all armed, who was
standing upright, and having accompanied him toward the East, all these
figures vanished. The same.

In the year 1549. some of the best Citizens of Brunswike, traueling by night
about some necessary business, they did see the Moon environed with a very
bright Circle, and near unto it two other Moons. This Circle went four times
about it: and near the two other Moons, there appeared a Lion all on fire: an
Eagle which pierst her breast: then the figure of the most famous Prince IHON
FREDERICK Duke of Saxony: and another figure of the Creation of EVE, drawn out
of ADAMS side: them GOD sitting, and at his knees ADAM and EVE, whom he
entreated lovingly, as the Father does oftentimes his Children. After that
there appeared a horrible sight of Towns all on fire, about the which there
was a Camel, the figure of JESUS CHRIST hanging upon the Cross, and about it
his Apostles. The last figure was most fearful of them all. There was a man
standing upright, of a cruel aspect, holding in his hand a naked sword, with
the which he made show to strike a young Maiden that was kneeling before him,
and who with tears in her eyes entreated him to spare her. Other shapes were
seen in some other places. The same.

Hereunto Doctor PEVCER adds that which follows. Although it has been
ever demanded, by what virtue such figures were fashioned in the air, seeing
that the regions of the air are never without exhalations: whether these
exhalations by encounter, or being scattered, after some distance, come to
join together, and to cause those figures, so as the light of heaven giving
them a color, some are white, others read and fiery, according to the
quality of vapors: or else, whether the natural intelligences, which
foresee things to come, do cause these figures, either by the help of
vapors and exhalations, or of some apparent brightness. For my part, I think
that most of these figures and sights are made and framed by the LORD GOD
himself, or by his holy Angels, who for the love of mankind, whom they see
beloved of GOD, set before our eyes by the means of these forms, a plain
representation and continuance of events: not that we should foresee that
which we cannot avoid: but being admonished by such aduertisements, we
should think of our sins: sound the depth of dangers, and remember in our
hearts the admonitions and consolations which are propounded unto us in the
holy Scriptures; so as in the midst of the darts which are cast against us,
when as there is no hope but of utter confusion, without rising, we may
prostrate our selves humbly at his feet, and never cease with clean hands and
pure conscienses, to pray and entreat him, that not respecting the merits of
the worlds iniquities, he will receive us into his protection, maintain and
defend us from the violence of the enemies of our salvation, and turn away all
the miseries that hang over our heads. It is also likely, that sometimes the
Devils are busied about such works. But to conclude, the wandering and
inconstant encounter of exhalations, cannot make such goodly signs and forms,
so well ordered, and of things subject to the providence of GOD, if we will not
foolishly and wickedly maintain with Epicures, that the world consists and is
managed and governed by hazard and fortune.

The end of the first Volume.

