The School of Abuse.
THE Syracusans used such variety of dishes in their banquets, that when they
were set, and their boordes furnished, they were many times in doubt, which
they should touch first, or taste last. And in my opinion the world gives
every writer so large a field to walk in, that before he setpenne to the
book, he shall find him self feasted at Syracusa, uncertain where to begin,
or when to end. This caused Pindarus too question with his Muse, whether he
were better with his art to discifer the life of ye Nimpe Melia, or Cadmus
encounter with the Dragon, or the wars of Hercules, at the walls of Thebes,
or Bacchus cups, or Venus iugling. He saw so many turninges laid open to
his feet, that he knew not which way to bend his pace.

Therefore as I cannot but commend his wisdom, which in banqueting feeds
most upon that, that does nourish best; so must I disprayse his method in
writing, which following the course of amarous Poets, dwells longest in those
points, that profit least; and like a wanton whelpe, leaves the game, to
run riot. The Scarabe flies ever many a sweet flower, and lights in a
comshard: It is the custom of the fly to leave the sound places of the Horse,
and suck at the Botch: The nature of Colloquintida, to draw the worst humors
too itself: The manner of swine, to forsake the fair fields, and wallow in
the mire: And the whole practice of Poets, either with fables to show their
abuses, or with plain terms to unfold their mischief, discover their shame,
discredit them selves, and disperse their poison thorugh all the world.
Virgill sweates in describyng his Gnat: Ovid hestirreth him to paintout his
Flea: the one shows his art in the lust of Dido, the other his cunning in the
inceste of Myrrha, and that trumpet of Baudrie, the Craft of love.

I must confess that Poets are the whetstones of wit, notwithstanding that wit
is dearly bonght: where honey and gall are mixed, it will be hard to sever the
one from the other. The deceitful Physician gives sweet Syrropes to make his
poison go down the smoother: The Juggler casts a mist to work the closer:
The Sirens song is the Sailors wrack: The Fowlers whistle, the birds death:
The wholesome bayte, the fishes bane: The Harpies have Uirgins faces, and
vultures Talentes: Hyena speaks like a friend, and deuoures like a Foe: The
calmest Seas hide dangerous Rocks: the Woolfiettes in Weathers felles: Many
good sentences are spoken by Dauus, to shadow his knavery: and written by
Poets, as ornaments to beautifye their works, and fette their trumperie too
sale without suspect.

But if you look well too Epaeus horse, you shall find in his bowels the
destruction of Troy: open the sepulcher of Semyramis, whose Title promises
such wealth to the Kings of Persia, you shall see nothing but dead bones:
Rippe up the golden Ball, that Nero consecrated to Jupiter Capitollinus, you
shall have it stuffed with the shauinges of his Beard: pull off the visard that
Poets mask in, you shall disclose their reproach, bewray their vanity, loath
their wantonness, lament their folly, and perceive their sharp sayings to be
placed as Pearls in Dunghils, fresh pictures on rotten walls, chaste Matrons
apparel on common Curtesans. These are the Cups of Circes, that turn
reasonable Creatures into brute Beasts; the balls of Hippomenes, that hinder
the course of Atalanta; and the blocks of the Devil that are cast in our ways,
to cut off the raze of toward wits. No marueyle though Plato shut them out of
his School, and banished them quite from his common wealth, as effeminate
writers, unprofitable members, and utter enemies to virtue.

The Romans were very desirous to imitate the Greeks, and pet very loath to
receive their Poets: insomuch that Cato layth it in the dishe of Marcus the
noble as a foul reproach, that in the time of his Consulshippe, he brought
Ennius the Poet into his province. Tullie accustomed to read them with great
diligence in his youth, but when he waxed grauer in study, elder in years,
riper in judgment, he accounted Tusc 1. 2.
them the fathers of lies, Pipes of vanity, and Schools of Abuse. Maximus
Tyrius takes upon him to defend the discipline of these Doctors under the
name of Homer, wresting the rashness of Ajax, to valor; the cowardice of
Ulysses, to Policy; the dotage of Nestor, to grave counsel; and the battle
of Troy, too the wonderful conflict of the four Elements: where Juno which
is counted the air, settes in her foot to take up the strife, and steps
boldly betwixt them to part the fray. It is a Pageant worth the sight, to
behold how he labors with Mountains to bring forth Mise; much like to some of
those Players, that come to the scaffold with Drum and Trumpet to profer
skirmishe, A desperate conflict.
and when they have sou^ded Alarm, off go the pieces to encounter a shadow,
or conquer a Paper monster. You will smile I am sure if you read it, to see
how this moral Philosopher toils too draw the Lions skin upon Aesops Ass.
Hercules shoes on a childs feet, a mplyfying that which the more it is
stirred, the more it stinkes; the less it is talked of, the better it is
liked; and as waywarde children, the more they be flatered, the worse they
are; or as cursed sores with often touching wax angry, and run the longer
without healing. He attributes the beginning of virtue to Minerua, of
friendship to Venus, and the root of all handy crafts to Vulcan; but if he had
broke his arm as well as his leg, when he fell out of heaven into Lemnos,
either Apollo must have played the Bonesetter, or every occupation been laid
a water. Plato when he saw the doctrine of these Teachers, neither for Poets
banished by Plato.
profit, necessary, nor to be wished for pleasure, gave them all Dru^mes
entertainment, not suffering the^ once to show their faces in a reformed common
wealth. And the same Tyrius that lays such a foundation for Poets, in the name
of Ho mer, cuerthrows his whole building in the person of Mithecus, which was
an excellent Cook among the Greeks, and as much honored for his confections,
as Phidias for his caruing. But when he came to Sparta, thinking there for his
running to be accounted a God, the good laws of Licurgus, and custom of the
country were to hot for his diet. The governors vanished him and his art, and
all the inhabitants following the steps of their Predecessors, used not with
dainties to provoke appetite, but with labor and travel too whette their
stomachs to their meat. I may well liken Homer to Mithecus, and Poets to
Cooks Poets and Cooks compared together.
the pleasures of the one winnes the body from labor, and conquereth the sense;
the allureme^t of the other draws the mind from virtue, and confounds wit.
As in every perfect common wealth there ought to be good laws established,
right maintained, wrong repressed, virtue rewarded, vice punished, and all
manner of abuses thoroughly purged: So ought there such schools for the
furtherance of the same to be advanced, that young men may be taught that in
green years, that becomes them to practice in gray hairs.

Anacharsis being demanded of Poetry in Scythia without vice, as the Phoenix
in Arabia, without a fellow.
a Greek, whether they had not instruments of Music, or Schools of Poetry
in Scythia, answered, yes, and that without vice, as though it were either
impossible, or incredible, that no abuse should be learned where such lesso^s
are taught, and such schools maintained.

Salust in describing the nurture of Sempronia, commends her wit in that
she could frame her self to all companies, too talk discretely with wise
men, and vaynely with wantons, taking a quip ere it came too ground, and
returning it back without a fault. She was taught (says he) both Greek and
Latin, she could versifie, sing, and dance, better then became an honest
woman. Sappho was skillful in Poetry Qualities allowed in women.
and sung well, but she was whorish. I set not this down too condemn the
gifts of versifying, daunsing, or singyng in women, so they be used with
mean, and exercised in due time. But to show you that as by Anacharsis report
the Scythians did it without offense: so one Swalowe bringes not Summer; nor
one particular example sufficient proof for a general precept. White silver,
draws a black line; Fire is as hurtful, as healthie; Water as dangerous, as
it is commodious; and these qualities as hard to be well used when we have
them, as they are to be learned before we get them. He that goes to Sea, must
sinel of the Ship; and that sails into Poets will savor of Pitch.

C. Marius in the assembly of the Salust.
whole Senate at Rome, in a solemn oration, gives an account of his bringing
up: he shows that he has been taught to lie on the ground, to suffer all
weathers, to lead men, to strike his foe, to fear nothing but an evil name:
and chalengeth praise unto him self, in that he never learned the Greek
tongue, neither meant to be instrucced in it hereafter, either that he thought
it too far a journey to fetch learning beyond the field, or because he
doubted the abuses of those Schools, where Poets were ever the head Masters.
Tiberius Poets thief Maistees in Greece.
the Emperor same somewhat, when he judged Scaurus to death for writing a
Tragidie: Augustus, when he banished Poets banished from Rome.
Ovid: And Nero when he charged Lucan, to put up his pipes, to stay his pen
and write no more. Burrus and Seneca the schoolemaisters of Nero are flowted
and hated of the people, for teaching their Scholar the song of Attis. For Dion
says, that the hearing Dion in vita Neronis.
thereof wroonge laughter and tears from most of those that were then about
him. Whereby I judge that they scorned the folly of the teachers, and lamented
the frenzy of the Scholar, who being Emperor of Rome, and bearing the weight
of the whole common wealth upon his shoulders, was easier to be drawn to
vanity by wanton Poets, then to good government by the fatherly counsel of
grave Senators. They were condemned to dye by the laws of the Heathens, which
inchaunted the grain in other men's grounds: and are not they accursed think
you by the mouth of God, which having the government of young Princes, with
Poetical fa^tasies draw them to the schools of their own abuses, bewitching
the grain in the green blade, that was sowed for the sustenance of many
thousauds, and poisoning the spring with their amorous lays, whence the whole
common wealth should fetch water? But to leave the scepter to Jupiter, and
instructing of Princes to Plutarch and Xenophon, I will bear a low sail, and
row near the shore, least I chance to be carried beyond my reach, or
run a ground in those Coasts which I never knew. My only endeavor shall be
to show you that in a rough cast, which I see in a cloud, laking through my
fingers.

And because I have been matriculated my self in the school, where so many
abuses flourish, I will imitate ye dogs of Egypt, which coming to the bancks of
Nylus too quench their thirste, syp and away, drink running, lest they be
snapte short for a pray too Crocodiles. I should tell tales out of the School,
and be Ferruled for my fault, or byssed at for a blab, if I laid all the
orders open before your eyes. You are no sooner entered, but liberty loses
the reins, and geues you head, placing you with Poetry in the lowest form:
when his skill is shown too make his Scholar as good as ever twangde, he
preferres you too Pyping, from Pyping to playing, from play to pleasure, from
pleasure to sloth, from sloth too sleep, from sleep too sin, from sin
to death, from death to the devil, if you take your learniug apace, and pass
through every form without reuolting. Look not too have me discourse these
at large, the Crocodile watches to take me tardie, which soever of them I
touch, is a byle: Trype and go, for I dare not tarry.

Heraclides accounts Amphyon the ringleader of Poets and Pypers: Delphus
Philammones penned the birth of Latona, Diana, and Apollo in verse; and taught
the people to Pype and Dance round about the Temple of Delphos, Hesiodus was
as cunning in Pyping, as in Poetry: so was Terpandrus, and after him Clonas.
Apollo which is honored of Poets as the God of their Art, had at the one side
of his Idol in Delos a Bow, and at the other, the three Graces with three
sundry instruments, of which one was a pype, and some writers affirm that he
pyped himself now and than.

Poetry and pyping, have allwaies been so united together, that til the time
Plutarch.
of Melanippides, Pipers were Poets hyerlings. But mark I pray you, how they
are now both abused.

The right use of ancient Poetry Old Poets,
was too have the notable exploytes of worthy Captains, the wholesome councels
of good fathers, and virtuous lives of predecessors set down in numbers, and
song to the Instrument at solemn feasts, that the sound of the one might dram
the hearers from kissing the cupp too often; the sense of the other put them in
mind of things past, and chaulk out the way to do the like. After this manner
were the Baeotians trained from rudeness to civility, The Lacedaemonians
instructed by Tyrteaeus verse, The Argiues by the melody of Telesilla, And the
Lesbians by Alcaeus Ddes.

To this end are instruments used in battle, not to tickle the ear, but ton
teach every soldier when to strike and when to stay. when to fly, and when to
follow. Chiron by singing to his instrument, Ilom^^.
quenches Achiles furye: Terpandrus with his notes, lays the tempest, and
pacifies the tumult at Lacedaemon: Homer with his Music cured the sick
Soldiers in the Grecians camp, and purged every man's Tent of the Plague.
Think you that those miracles could be wrought with playing of Daunces,
Dumpes, Pauins, Galiardes, Measures Fancyes, or new streynes? They never came
where this grew, nor knew what it meant.

Pythagoras bequeathes them a Clookebagge, and condemns them for fools, that
judge Music by sound and ear. If you will be good Scholars, and profit
well in the Art of Music, shut your Fidels in their cases, and look up to
heaven: the order of the Spheres, the infallible motion of the Planets, the
just course of the year, and variety of seasons, the concord of the
Elements and their qualyties, Fire, Water, Air, Earth, Heat, Cold, Moisture
and Drought concurring together to the constitution of earthly bodies and
sustenance of every creature.

The politic Laws, in well governed common wealths, that tread True Muficke.
down the proud, and uphold the meek, the love of the King and his
subjects, the Father and his child, the Lord and his Slave, the Master and
his Man, The Trophies and Triumphs of our ancestors, which pursued virtue
at the hardeheeles, and shunned vice as a rock for fear of shipwreck, are
excellent masters too show you that this is right Music, this perfect
harmony. Chiron when he appeased the wrath of Achilles, told him the duty
of a good soldier, repeated the virtues of his father Peleus, and sung the
famous euterprises of noble men. Terpandrus when he ended the brabbles at
Lacedaemon, neither pyped Rogero nor Turkelony, but reckoning up the
commodities of friendeship and fruits of debate, putting them in mind of
Lycurgus laws, taught them too tread a better measure. When Homers muu^cke
drove the pestilence from the Grecians camp, there was no such virtue in his
pen, nor in his pipe, but if I might be vmpier, in the sweet harmony of
diverse natures and wonderful concord of sundry medicines. For Apolloes cunning
excendeth it self as well to Physic, as music or Poetry. And Plutarch
reports that as Chiron was a wise man, a learned Poet, a skilful Musition, so
was he also a teacher of justice, by showing what Princes ought to do, and a
Reader of Physic, by opening the natures of many simples. If you enquire
how many such Poets and Pipers we have in our Age, I am persuaded that
every one of them may creep through a ring, or dance the wild Morice in a
Needles eye. We have infinite Poets, and Pipers, and such peeuishe cattle
among us in England, that live by merry begging, mainteyned by alms, and
privily encroch upon every man's purse. But if they that are in authority,
and have the sword in their hands to cut off abuses, should call an account
to see how many Chirons, Terpandri, and Homers are here, they might cast the
sum without pen, or counters, and sit down with Racha, to weep for her
Children, because they were not. He that compares our instruments, with those
that were used in ancient times, shall see them agree like Dogs and Cattes,
and meet as tump as Germans lips. Terpandrus and Olimpus used instruments of
7. strings. And Plutarch is of opinion that the instruments of 3. strings, with
were used before their time, passed all that have followed since. It was an old
law and long kept that no man should according to his own humor, add or
diminish, in matters concerning that Art, but walk in the paths of their
predecessors. But when newfangled Phrynis becam a fiddler, being somewhat curious
in carping, and searching for moats with a pair of blearde eyes, thought to amend
his masters, and marred al. Timotheus a bird of the same brood, and a right
hou^d of the same Hare, took the 7. stringed harp, that was altogether used in
Terpa^drus time, and increaced the number (...) these abuses in the compass of
that country: but like unto ill weeds in time spread so far, that they choked
the good grain in every place.

For as Poetry and Piping are Cosen germans: so piping, and playing are of
great affinity, and all three chayned in linkes of abuse.

Plutarch complains, that ignorant men, not knowing the majesty of ancient
music, abuse both the ears of the people, and the Art it self: with
bringing sweet consortes into Theaters, which rather effeminate the mind, as
pricks unto vice, then procure amendment of manners, as spurs to virtue.
Ovid the high martial of Venus field planteth his maine battle in public
assemblies, sends out his scoutes too Theaters to descry the enemy, and in
steed of vaunte Curriers, with instruments of music, playing, singing, and
dau^cing, geues the first charge. Maximus Tyrius holds it for a Maxim, that
the bringing of instruments to Theaters and plays, was the first cup that
poisoned the common weaith. They that are borne in Seriphos, and cockered
continually in those Illandes, where they see nothing but Foxes, and Hares, will
never be persuaded that there are huger beasts: They that never went out of
the cha^pions in Brabant, will hardly conceive what rocks are in Germany. And
they that never go out of their houses, for regard of their credit, nor step
from the university for love of knowledge, seeing but slender offenses and
small abuses within their own walls, will never believe yt such rocks are
abroad, nor such horrible monsters in playing places. But as (I speak the one
to my comfort, the other to my shame, and remember both with a forrowfull
heart) I was first instructed in the university, after drawn like a nouice to
these abuses: so will I show you what I see, and inform you what I read of
such affairs. Ovid says, that Romulus builte his Theater as a horse fair for
hores, made Triumphs, and set out plays to gather the fair women together,
that every one of his sonldiers might take where he liked, a snatch for his
share: whervppon the Amarous Scholemaister bursteth out in these words:

Romule, militibus solus dare praemia nosti:
Haec mihi si dederis co^moda, miles ero.
Thou Romulus alone know how thy soldiers to reward:
Grant me the like, my self will be attendant on thy guard.
It should seem that the abuse of such places was so great, that for any
chaste liver to haunt them was a black swan, and a white crow. Dion so
straightly forbids the ancient families of Rome and gentlewomen that tender
their name and honor, to come to Theaters, and rebuks the^ so sharply, when he
takes the^ napping, that if they be but once seen there, he judges it
sufficient cause to speak il of them and think worse. The shadow of a knave
hurts an honest man: the sent of the stews a sober matron: and the show of
Theaters a simple gaser. Clitomachus the wrestler given altogether to manly
exercise, if he had heard any talk of love, in what company soever he had
bin, would forsake his seat, and bid them adue.

Lacon when he saw the Atheniens study so much to set out Plays, said
they were mad. If men for good exercise, and women for their credit, ve shut
from Theaters, whom shall we suffer to go thither? Little children? Plutarch
with a caveat keeps them out, not so much as admitting the little crackhalter
that carries his masters pantouffles, to set foot within those doors: And
alleges this reason, that those wanton spectacles of light huswiues, drawing
gods from the heavens, and young men from them selves to shipwreck of
honesty, will hurt them more, the^ if at the Epicures table, they had nigh
burst their guts with over feeding. For if the body be ouercharged, it may be
help; but the surfite of the soul is hardly cured. Here I doubt not Objection.
but some Archplayer or other that has read alitle, or stumbled by chance upon
Plautus comedies, will cast me abone or ii. to pick, saying, yt whatsoever these
ancient writers have spoken against plays is to be applied too the abuses in
old Comedies, where Gods are brought in, as Prisoners too beauty, rauishers
of Uirgins, and servants by love, too earthly creatures. But the Comedies that
are exercised in our days are better sifted. They show no such branne: The
first smelte of Plautus, these taste of Mena^der; the lewdenes of Gods, is
altered and changed to the love of young men; force, to friendship; rapes,
too marriage; wooing allowed by assurance of wedding; privy meetinges of
bachelours and maidens on the stage, not as murderers that devour the good name
each of other in their minds, but as those that desire to be made one in
heart. Now are the abuses of the world revealed, every man in a play may see
his own faults, and learn by this glass, to amend his manners. Curculio
may chatte til his heart ache, ere any be offended with his gyrdes. Deformities
are checked in jest, and mated in earnest. The sweetness of music, and
pleasure of sportes, temper the bitterness of rebukes, and mittigate the
tartenesse of every taunt according to this.

Omne vafer vitiu^ ridenti Flaccus amico
Narrat, and admissus circu^ p^cordia ludit.
Flaccus among his friends, with fauning Muse
Does nip him necre, that fostreth foul abuse.
Therefore they are either so blind, that they cannot, or so blunt, that they
will not see why this exercise should ^^^^were.
not be suffered as a profitable recreation. For my part I am neither so fond
a Physician, nor so bad a Cook, but I can allow my patient a cup of wine to
meals, although it be hot; and pleasant sauces to drive down his meat, if
his stomach he queasie. Notwithstanding, if people will be instructed, (God
be thanked) we have Divines enough to discharge that, and more by a great many,
then are well harkened to: yet since these abuses are grown too head, and sin
so ripe, the number is less then I would it were.

Euripides holds not him only a fool, that being well at home, will gad
abroad, that has a Conduite within door, and fetches water without: but all
such beside, as have sufficient in them selves, to make them selves merry with
pleasant talk, tending too good, and mixed with (...) the Grecians glee, yet
will they seek when they need not, to be sported abroad at plays and
Pageauntes. Plutarch likeneth the recreation that is got by conference, too a
pleasant banquet; the sweet pappe of the one sustaineth the body, the sauery
doctrine of the other does nourish the mind: and as in banqueting, the wayter
stands ready too fill the Cup: So in all our recreations we should have an
instructor at our elbowes to feed the soul. If we gather Grapes among
thistles, or seek for this food at Theaters, we shall have a hard
pyttaunce, and come to short commons. I cannot think that City to be safe,
that strikes down her Percollices, rams up her gates, and suffers the
enemy to enter the posterne. Neither will I be persuaded, that he is any way
likely to conquer affection, which breaks his instruments, burns all his
Poets, abandons his haunt, mufleth his eyes as he passes the streate, and
resortes too Theaters too be assaulted. Cooks did never show more craft in
their iunckets to vanquish the taste, nor Painters in shadows to allure the
eye, then Poets in Theaters to wound the conscience.

There setchey abroche strange consortes of melody, to tickle the ear; costly
apparel, to flatter the sight; effeminate gesture, to ravish the sense; and
wanton speech, to whet desire too inordinate lust. Therefore of both
barrelles, I judge Cooks and Painters the better hearing, for the one
extends his art no farther then to the tongue, palate, and nose, the other
to the eye; and both are ended in outward sense, which is common too us with
brute beasts. But these by the privy entries of the ear, slip down into the
heart, and with gunshotte of affection gaul the mind, where reason and virtue
should rule the roste. These people in Rome were as pleasant as Nectar at the
first beginning, and cast out for lees, when their abuses were known. They
whom Caesar vpheld, were driven out by Octauian: whom Caligula reclaimed, were
cast of by Nero: whom Nerua exalted, were thrown down by Traian: whom Anthony
admitted, were expelled again, pestred in Galleys and sent into Hellespo^t by
Marcus Aurelius. But when the whole rabble of Poets, Pipers, Players, Jugglers,
Jesters, and dau^cers were received again, Rome was reported to be fuller of
fools then of wise men. Domitian suffered playing and dancing so long in
Theaters, that Paris led the Domitia was the first wife of Domitian, and
Messalina, the second.
shaking of sheets with Domitia, and Mnester the Trenchmour with Messalina.
Caligula made so much of Players and Dauncers, that he suffered them openly
to kiss his lyppes, Dion.
when the Senators might scarce have a lick at his feet: He gave Dauncers
great stipends for selling their hopps: and placed Apelles the player by his
own sweet side: Besides that you may see what excellent grave men were ever
about him, he loved Prasinus the Cochman so well, that for good will to the
master, he bid his horsetosupper, gave him wine to drink in cups of estate, set
barley grains of gold before him to eat, and swore by no bugs, that he would
make him a Consul: which thing (says Dion) had bin performed, had he not bin
prevented by sudden death. For as his life was abominable, so was his end
miserable: Coming from dancing and playing, he was slain by Chaerea, a just
reward, and a fit Catastrophe, I have heard some Players vaunt of the credit
they had in Rome, but they are as foolish in that, as Vibius Rufus which bosted
himself to be an Emperor because he had sit in Caesar's chair, and a perfect
Orator, because he was married to Tullies widow. Better might they say them
selves to be murderers, because they have represented the persons of Thyestes
and Atreus, Achilles and Hector: or perfect Limme lifters, for teaching the
tricks of every Strumpet. Such are the abuses that I read of in Rome: such
are the Caterpillars that have deuouted and blasted the fruit of Egypt: Such
are the Dragons that are hurtful in Affricke: Such are the Adders that sting
with pleasure, and kill with pain: and such are the Basiliskes of the world,
that poison, as well with the beam of their sight, as with the breath of
their mouth.

Consider with thy self (gentle Reader) the old discipline of England, mark
what we were before, and what we are now: Leave Rome a while, and cast thine
eye back to thy Predecessors, and tell me how woonderfully we have been
changed, since we were schooled with these abuses. Dion says, Matters of
England in old time,
that english men could suffer watching and labor, hunger and thirst, and bear
of al storms with head and shoulders, they used slender weapons, went naked, and
were good soldiers, they fed upon roots and barks of trees, they would
stand up to the chin many days in marshes without victualles: and they had a
kind of sustenaunce in time of need, of which if they had taken but the
quantity of a bean, or the weight of a pease, they did neither gape after
meat, nor long for the cup, a great while after. The men in valor not
yielding to Scithia, Old exercise of England.
the women in courage passing the Amazons. The exercise of both was shootyng
and darting, running and wrestling, and trying such maisteries, as either
consisted in swiftness of feet, agilitie of body, strength of arms, or
Martial discipline. But the exercise New England
that is now among us, is banqueting playing, pipyng, and dancing, and all
such delights as may win us to pleasure, or rock us a sleep.

Oh what a wonderful change is this? Our wreastling at arms, is turned to
wallowyng in Ladies laps, our courage, to cowardice, our running to riot, our
Bows into Bolles, and our Darts to Dishes. We have robbed Greece of
Gluttony, Italy of wantonness, Spain of pride, France of deceit, and
Dutchland of quaffing. Compare London to Rome, and England to Italy, you shall
find the Theaters of the one, the abuses of the other, to be rife among us.
Experto creed, I have seen somewhat, and therefore I think may say the more.
In Rome when Plays or Pageants are shown: Ovid charge his Pilgrims, to
crepe close to the Saints, whom they serve, and show their double diligence to
lift the Gentlewomens roabes from the ground, for soyling in the duste; to
sweep Moates from their Kirtles, to keep their fingers in ure; to lay their
hands at their backs for an east stay; to look upon those, whom they
behold; too praise that, which they commend; too like every thing, that
pleases them; to present them Pomegranates, to pick as they sit; and when
all is done, to wait on them mannerly too their houses. In our assemblies at
plays in London, you shall see such heauing, and shoouing, such ytching and
shouldring, too sit by women; Such care for their garments, that they be
not trod on: Such eyes to their lappes, that no chippes light in them: Such
pillowes to there backs, that they take no hurt: Such masking in their ears,
I know not what: Such giving them Pippins to pass the time: Such playing at
foot Saunt without Cards: Such ticking, such toying, such smiling, such
winking, and such ma^ning them home, when the sportes are ended, that it is a
right Comedy, to mark their behavior, to watch their conceits, as the
Catte for the Mouse, and as good as a course at the game it self, to dog
them a little, or follow aloof by the print of their feet, and so discover
by ^^^tte where the Dear takes soil. If this were as well noted, as ill
seen: or as openly punished, as secretly practiced: I have no doubt but the
cause would be seared to dry up the effect, and these pretty Rabbets very
cunningly ferretted from their borrowes. For they that lack Customers all the
week, either because their haunte is unknown, or the Constables and Officers
of their Parish, watch them so narrowly, that they dare not queatche; To
celebrate the Sabbath, flock to Theaters, and there keep a general Market of
Bawdrie: Not that any filthynesse in deed, is committed within the compass of
that ground, as was done in Rome, but that every wanton and his Paramour,
every man and his Mistress, every John and his Joan, every knave and his
queen, are there first acquainted and cheapen the Merchandise in that place,
which they-pay for elsewhere as they can agree. These worms when they dare not
nestle in the Pescod at home, find refuge abroad and are hid in the ears of
other men's Corn. Every Uawter in one blind Tavern or other, is Tenant at
will, to which she colleth resort, and plays the stale to utter their
victuals, and help them to empty their mustie raskes. There is she so
entreated with words, and received with curteste, that every back room in the
house is at her commandment. Some that have neither land to maintain them;
nor good occupation to get their bread, desirous to strowt it with the best,
yet disdayning too live by the sweat of their brows, have found out this cast
of Ledgerdemayne, to play fast and loose among their neighbors. If any part
of Music have suffered shipwreck, and arrived by fortune at their fingers ends,
with show of gentilitie they take up fair houses, receive lusty lasses at a
price for boorders, and pipe from morning to evening for wood and coal. By the
brothers, cosens, uncles, great grandsires, and such like acquaintance of
their ghestes, they drink of the best, they sit rent free, they have their
own Table spread to their hands, without wearing the strings of their
pursse, or any thing else, but household and honesty. When reforte so
increases that they grow in suspicion, and the pottes which are sent so often
too the Tavern, get such a knock before they come home, that they return
their Master a crack to his credit: Though he be called in question of his
life, he has shifts inoughe to avoid the blanke. If their houses be
searched, some instrumente of Music is laid in sight to dazell the eyes of
every Officer, and all that are lodged in the house by night, or frequente it
by day, come thither as pupilles to be well schoolde. Other there are which
being so known that they are the bywoorde of every man's mouth, and pointed at
commonly as they pass the streets, either couch them selves in Allies, or
blind Lanes, or take sanctuary in fryeries, or live a mile from the City like
Venus Nuns in a Cloister at Newington, Ratliffe, Islington, Hogsdon or some
such place, where like penitents, they deny the world, and spend their days
in double devotion. And when they are weery of contemplation to comfort
themselnes, and renew their acquaintance, they visit Theaters, where they make
full account of a pray before they depart. Solon made no law for Parricides,
because he feared that he should rather put men in mind to commit such
offenses, then by any strange punishment, give them a bitte to keep them
under. And I intend not to show you all that I see, nor half that I hear of
these abuses, lest you judge me more wilful to teach them, then willing to
forbid them.

I look still when Players should cast me their Gauntlets, and challenge a
combat for entering so far into their possessions, as though I made them Lords
of this misrule, or the very scholmaisters of these abuses: though the best
Clerks be of that opinion, they hear not me say so. There are more houses
theu Parish Churches, more maids then Maulkin, more ways to the wood then
one, and more causes in nature then Efficients. The Carpenter rayseth not his
frame without tools, nor the Devil his woork without instruments: were not
Players the mean, to make these assemblyes, such multitudes would hardly be
drawn in so narowe room. They seek not to hurt, but desire too please: they
have purged their Comedyes of wanton speeches, yet the Corn which they sell,
is full of Cockle: and the drink that they draw, ouercharged with dregs.
There is more in them then we perceive, the Devil stands at our elbowe when
we see not, speaks, when we hear him not, strikes when we feel not, and
wounds sore when he raseth no skin, nor rentes the flesh. In those
things, that we least mistrust, the greatest danger does often lurk. The
Countryeman is more affrayde of the Serpente that is hid in the grass, then
the wild beast that openly feeds upon the mountains: The Mariner is more
indaungered by privy shelues, then known Rocks; The Souldler is sooner
killed with a little Bullet, then a long Swoorde; There is more peril in
close Fistoloes, then outward sores; insecret ambushe, then maine battles; in
undermining, then plain assaulting; in friends then foes; in civil discord,
then foreign wars. Small are the abuses, and slight are the faults, that
now in Theaters escape the Poets pen: But call Cedars, from little graynes
shoot high: great Oaks, from slender roots spread wide: Large streams, from
narrow springes run far: One little spark, fyers a whole City: One
dram of Eleborus ransackes eueuery vain: The Fish Remora has a small body,
and great force too stay ships against wind and tide: Ichneumon a little
worm, ouercomes the Elephant: The Uiper slayes the Bull: The Weesell the
Cockatrice: And the weakest Waspe, stingeth the stoutest manne of war. The
height of Heaven, is taken by the staff: The bottom of the Sea, sounded with
lead: The farthest coast, discovered by Compass: the secrets of nature,
searched by wit: the Anatomy of man, set out by experience: But the abuses of
plays cannot be showen, because they pass the degrees of the instrument,
reach of the Plummet, sight of the mind, and for trial are never brought to
the touchstone. Therefore he that will avoid the open shame of pryuy sin,
the common plague of private offenses, the great wracks of little Rocks; the
sure disease of uncertain causes; must set hand to the stern, and eye to his
steps, to shun the occasion as near as he can: neither running to bushes
for renting his clothes, nor rent his clothes for imparing his thrift; nor
walk upon Yse, for taking a fall, nor take a fall for brusing him self; nor
go too Theaters for being allured, nor once be allured for fear of abuse.

Bunduica a notable woman and a Queen of England, that time that Nero was
Emperor of Rome, having some of the Romans in garrison here against her, in
an Oration which she made to her subjects, seemed utterly to contemn their
force, and laugh at their folly. For she accounted them vnwodrthy the name of
men, or title of Soldiers, because they were smoothly appareled, soft lodged,
daintely feasted, bathed in warm waters, rubbed with sweet ointments, strewed
with fine poulders, wine swillers, singers, Dauncers, and Players. God has now
blessed The Queens Majesty.
England with a Queen, in virtue excellent, in power mighty, in glory
renowned, in gouernmente politic, in possession rich, breaking her foes with
the bent of her brow, ruling her subjects with shaking her hand, removing
debate by diligent foresight, filling her chests with the fruits of peace,
ministering justice by order of law, reforming abuses with great regard: and
bearing her sword so even, that neither the poor are trod under foot, nor the
rich suffered to look too hye, nor Rome, nor France, nor Tyrant, nor Turk, dare
for their lives too enter the List. But we unworthy servants of so mild a
Mistress, unnatural children of so good a mother, unthankful subjects of so
loving a prince, wound her royal heart with abusing her lenity, and stir
Jupiter to anger to send us a Storke that shall devour us. Now often has her
Majesty with the grave advise of her honorable Council, set down the
limits of apparel to every degree, and how soon again has the pride of our
hearts ouerflowe^ the chanel? How many times has access to Theaters been
restrained, and how boldly again have we reentred? Ouerlashing in apparel is
so common a fault, that the very hyerlings ofsome of our Players, Players men.
which stand at reuersion of vi. s, by the week, iet under Gentlemen's noses in
suits of silk, exercising themselves too prating on the stage, and common
scoffing when they come abroad, wherethey look aska^ce over the shoulder at
every man, of whom the sunday before they begged an alms. I speak not this,
as though every one that professes the quality so abused him self, for it
is well known, that some of them are sober, discreets, properly learned honest
householders Some Players modest, if I be not deceined.
and Citizens well thonght on among their neighbors at home, though the pride
of their shadows (I mean those hangebyes whom they succor with stipend)
cause them to be somewhat il talked of abroad. And as some of the Players are
far from abuse: so some of their Plays are without rebuke: which are as
easily remembered as quickly reckoned. The two Some Plays tolerable at
sometime.
prose Books played at the Belsauage, where you shall find never a word
without wit, never a line without pith, never a letter placed in vain. The Jew
and Ptolome, shown at the Bull, the one representing the greediness of
worldly chusers, and bloody minds of Usurers: The other very lively discrybing
how seditious estates, with their own devises, false friends, with their
own swoordes, and rebellious commons in their own snares are overthrown:
neither with Amorous gesture wounding the eye: nor with slouenly talk hurting
the ears of the chaste hearers. The Black Smiths daughter, and Catilins
conspiracies usually brought in to the Theater: The first containing the
treachery of Turks, the honorable bountye of a noble mind, and the shining of
virtue in distress: The last, because it is known too be a Pig of mine own
Sow, I will speak the less of it; only giving you to understand, that the
whole mark which I shot at in that work, was too show the reward of
traitors in Catilin, and the necessary government of learned men, in the person
of Cicero, which forsees every danger that is likely to happen, and forstalles
it continually ere it take effect. Therefore I give these Plays the
commendation, that Maximus Tyrius gave too Homers works: (...).

These Plays are good plays and sweet plays, and of al plays the best
plays and most to be liked, worthy to be soung of the Muses, or set out with
the cunning of Roscius himself, yet ate they not fit for every man's diet:
neither ought they commonly to be shown. Plays are not to be made common.
Now if any man ask me why my self have penned Comedyes in time paste, and
inueigh so egerly against them here, let him know that Semelinsaniuimus omnes:
I have sinned, and am sorry for my fault: he runs far that never turns,
better late then never. I gave my self to that exercise in hope to thrive but I
burnt one candle to seek another, and lost both my time and my travel, when I
had done.

Thus since I have in my voyage suffered wrack with Ulysses, and wringingwet
scambledwith life to the shore, stand from me Nausicaa with all thy train,
till I wipe the blot from my forhead, and with sweet springs wash away the salt
froath that cleaues too my soul.

Mean time if Players be called to accounte for the abuses that grow by
their assemblyes, I would not have them to answer, as Pilades did for the
Theaters of Rome, when they were complained on, and Augustus waxed Dion in vita
Augusti.
angry: This resort O Caesar is good for thee, for here we keep thousands of
idle heds occupied, which elseperadue^ture would brue some mischief. A fit
Cloud co cover their abuse, and not unlike to the starting hole that Lucinius
found, who like a greedy surueiour, being sent into France to govern the
Country, robbed them and spoiled them of all their Treasure with unreasonable
taskes: at the last when his cruelty was so loudely cried out on, that every
man heard it; and all his packing Players compared to Lucinius.
did savor so strong, that Augustus smelt it; he brought the good Emperor
into his house, flapped him in the mouth with a smoth lie, and told him that
for his sake and the safety of Rome, he gathered those riches, the better to
impouerish the Country for rising in Arms, and so hold the poor
Frenchmennes Noses to the Grindstone for ever after.

A bad excuse is better, they say then none at all. He, because the Frenchmen
paid tribute every month, into xitti. Months divided the year: These because
they are allowed to play every Sunday, make iiii. or v. Sundays at least every
week, and all that is done is good for Augustus, to busy the wits of his
people, for running a wolgathering, and to empty their purses for thriuing to
fast. Though Lucinius had the cast to plaster up his credit with the loss
of his money: I trust that they which have the swoorde in their hands among us
to pare away this putryfied flesh, are sharper sighted, and will not so easily
be deluded.

Marcus Aurelius says, That players Epist. 12. ad Lambertum.
falling from just labor to vniusse idleness, do make more trewandes, and
ill husbands, then if open Schools of unthrifts and Uagabounds were kept. Who
soever reads his Epistle too Lambert the governor of Hellespont, when Players
were banished, shall find more against them in plainer terms, then I willl
utter.

This have I setdowne of the abuses of Poets, Pypers, and Players which bring
us too pleasure, sloth, sleep, sin, and without repentance to death and
the Devil: which I have not confirmed by authority of the Scriptures, because
they are not able to stand up in the sight of God: and since they dare not
abide the field, where the word of God does bid them battle, but run to
Antiquityes (though nothing be more ancient then holy Scriptures) Scriptures
too hoate for Players.
I have given them a volley of profane writers to begin the skirmishe, and
done my endeavor to beat them from their holds with their own weapons. The
Patient that will be cured, of his own accord, must seek the mean: if every
man desire to save one, and draw his own feet from Theaters, it shall
prevail as much against these abuses, as Homers Moly against Witchcraft, or
Plynies Peristerion against the biting of Dogs.

God has armed every creature against his enemy: The Lion with paws, the Bull
with horns, the Bore with tuskes, the Uulture with tallents, Hearts, Hindes,
Hares, and such like, with swiftnes of feet, because they are fearful, every
one of them putting his gift in practice; But man which is Lord of the whole
earth, for whose service herbs, trees, roots, plants, fish, soul and beasts
of the field were first made, is far worse then the brute beasts: for they
endewed but with sense, do Appetere salutaria, and declinare noxia, seek that
which helps them, and forsake that which hurtes them.

Man is enriched with reason and knowledge: with knowledge, to serve his maker
and govern himself; with reason to distinguish good and il, and chose the
best, neither referring the one to the glory of God, nor using the other to his
own profit. Fire and Air mount upwards, Corporanaturalia ad locum mouentur,
and in suis sedibus acquiaescunt.
Earth and Water sink down, and every insensible body else, never rests, til
it bring it self to his own home. But we which have both sense, reason, wit,
and understanding, are ever ouerlashing, passing our bounds, going beyond our
limits, never keeping our selves Man unmindful of his end.
within compass, nor once loking after the place from whence we came, and
whither we must in spighte of our hearts.

Aristotle thinks that in great Hi. Anima^.
winds, the Bees carry little stones in their mouths too peyse their bodies,
least they be carried away, or kept from their Hiues, unto which they desire
to return with the fruits of their labor. The Crane is said to rest upon one
leg, and holding up the other, keep a Pebble in her clawe, which as soon as
the senses are bound by approach of sleep, falls to the ground, and with the
noise of the knock against the Earth, makes her awake, whereby she is ever
ready to prevent her enemies. Geese are foolish birds, yet when they fly over
the mount Taurus, they show great wisdom in their own defense: for they stop
their pipes full of grauel to avoid gagling, and so by silence escape the
Eagles. Woodcocks, though they lack wit to save them selves, yet they want
not will to avoid hurt, when they thrust their heads in a Bushe, and think
their bodies out of danger. But we which are so brittle, that we break with
every fillop; so weak, that we are drawn with every threade; so light, that
we are blown away with every vlaste; so unsteady, that we slip in every
ground; neither peyse our bodies against the wind, nor stand upon one leg,
for sleeping too much: nor close up our lips for betraying our selves, nor
use any wit, to guard our own persons, nor show our selves willing too
shun our own harms, running most greedily to those places, where we are
soonest overthrown.

I cannot lyken our affection better than to an Arrowe, which getting liberty,
with wings is carried beyond our reach; kept in the Quiver, it is still at
commandment: Or to a Dog, let him slip, he is straight out of sight,
hold him in the Lease, he never stirs: Or to a Colte, give him the bridle,
he flinges about; rain him hard, and you may rule him: Or to a ship, hoyst
the sails it runs on head; let fall the Ancour, all is well: Or to Pandoraes
box, lift up the lidde, out flies the Devil; shut it up fast, it cannot
hurt us.

Let us but shut up our ears to Poets, Pypers and Players, pull our feet
back from resort to Theaters, and turn away our eyes from beholding of
vanity, the greatest storm of abuse will be ouerblowen, and a fair path
trodden to amendment of life. Were not we so foolish to taste every drugge, and
buy every trifle, Players would shut in their shoppes, and carry their trashe
to some other Country.

Themistocles in setting a piece of his ground to sale, among all the
commodyties which were reckoned up, straightly charged the Crier to
proclaim this, that he which bought it, should have a good neighbor. If
Players can promise in words, and perform it in deeds, proclaim it in their
Bills, and make it good in Theaters; that there is nothing there noisome too
the body, nor hurtful to the soul: and that every one which comes to buy
their Iestes, shall hane an honest neighbor, tagge and ragge, cut and long
tail, go thither and spare not, otherwise I advise you to keep you thence,
my self will begin too lead the dance.

I make just reckoning to be held for a Stoike, in dealing so hardely with
these people: but all the Keys hang not at one man's girdle, neither do these
open the locks to all abuses. There are oath which have a share with them in
their Schools, therefore ought they to dance the same Round: and be
partakers together of the same rebuke: Fencers, Dycers, Dauncers, Tumbles,
Carders, and Bowlers.

Dauncers and Tumblers, because they are dumb Players, and I have Dauncers and
Tumblers.
glaunced at them by the way, shall be let pass with this clause, that they
gather no assemblyes, and go not beyond the precincts which Peter Martyr in
his commentaryes upon the Judges has set them down: That is, if they will
exercise those qualyties, to do it priutlye, for the health and agilitie of
the body, referring all to the glory of God.

Dicers and Carders because their Dicers and Carders.
abuses are as commonly cried out on, as usually shown, have no need of a
needelesse discourse, for every manne sees them, and they stink almost in
euecy man's nose. Common Bowling Bowling Alleyes.
Allies, are privy Mothes, that eat up the credit of many idle Citizens:
whose gaynes at home, are not able too weighe down their losses abroad, whose
Shoppes are so far from maintaining their play, that their Wives and Children
cry out for bread, and go to bed supperlesse often in the year.

I would read you a Lecture of these abuses, but my School so increases,
that I cannot touch all, nor stand to amplyfie every point: one word of
Fencing, and so a Conge to all kind of Plays. The knowledge in weapons
Fencers.
may be gathered to be necessary in a common wealth, by the Senators of Rome,
who in the time of Catilins conspyracyes, caused Schools of Defense Salust.
to be erected in Capua, that teaching the people how to ward, and how to
lock, how to thrust, and how to strike, they might the more safelye coape
with their enemies. As the Art of Logique was first set down for a rule,
by which we might Confirmare nostra, and refutare aliena, confirm our own
reasons, and confute the allegations of our adversaries, the end being truth,
which once fished out by the hard encounter of eithers Arguments, like fire
by the knocking of Flintes together, both parts should be satisfied and
strive no more. And I judge that the craft of Defense was first devised to
save our selves harmless, and hold our enemies still at advantage, the end
being right, which once thoroughly tried out, at handye strokes, neither he
that offered injury should have his will, nor he that was threatened, take
any hurt, but both be contented and shake hands. Those days are now
changed, the skill of Logicians, is exercysed in caueling, the cunning of
Fencers applied to quarrelling: they, think themselves no Scholars, if they
be not able to find out a knotte in every rushe; these, no men, if for
stirring of a straw, they prove not their valor upon some bodies flesh.
Every Duns will be a Carper, every Dick Swash a common Cutter. But as they
bake, many times so they brue: Self do, self have, they whette their Swoords
against themselves, pull the house on their own heds, return home by weeping
Cross, and few of them come to an honest end. For the same water that drives
the Mill, decays it. The wood is eaten by the worm, that breeds within it:
The goodness of a knife cuts the owners finger, The Adders death, is her own
brood, the Fencers scath, his own knowledge. Whether their hearts be hardened,
which use that exercise, or God give them over I know not well: I have read of
none good that practiced it much. Commodus the Commodus a Fencer and exercised
in murder.
Emperor, so delighted in it, that often times he slew one or other at home,
to keep his fingers in ure. And one day he gathered all the sick, lame, and
impotent people of Rome into one place, where he hampred their feet with
strange devises, gave them soft spunges in their hands, to throw at him for
stones, and with a great clubbe knatched them all on the head, as they had bin
Giauntes. Epaminondas a famous Epaminondas ^^inde on his Buckler.
Captain, fore hurt in a battle, and carried out of the field, half
dead: When tydinges was brought him that his Soldiers got the day, asked
presently, what became of his Buckler: whereby it appears, that he lo^ed his
weapons, but I find it not said that he was a Fencer. Therefore I may liken
them which would not have men sent to war til they are taught fencinge, to
those superstitious wisemen, which would not take upon them to burye the
bodies of their friends, before they had been cast unto wild beasts. Fencing
is grown to such abuse, that I may well compare the Scholars of this School to
them that provide Statues for their own shoulders; that foster Snakes, in
their own bosoms; that trust Wolves, to guard their Sheep; And to the men of
Hyrcania, that keep Mastiffes, to woorrye them selves. Though I speak this
too the shame of common Fencers, I go not about the bushe with Soldiers,
Homer calls them Soldiers.
the Sons of Jupiter, the Images of GOD, and the very sheepeheards of the
people: being the Sons of Jupiter, they are bountiful too the meek; and
thunder out plagues to the proud in heart: being the Images of GOD, they are
the Welspringes of Justice which gives to every man his own; being
accoumpted the shepeheards of the people, they fight with the Woolfe for the
safety of their flock and keep of the enemy for the wealth of their
Country. How full are Poets works of Bucklers, Battails, Lances, Darts,
Bows, Quiuers, Spears, Iauelins, Swoordes, slaughters, Runners Wrestlers,
Chariots, Horse, and men at arms? Agamemnon beyond the name of a King has
this title, that he was a Soldier. Menelaus, because he loved his Kercher
better then a Burgonet, a soft bed then a hard field, the sound of
Instruments then neighing of Steedes, a fair stable then a foul way, is let
slip without praise. If Lycurgus before he make laws too Sparta, take
counsel of Apollo, whether it were good for him to teach the people thrift and
husbandry, he shall be charged to leave those precepts to the white liuered
Hylotes. The Spartans are all steel, fashioned out of tougher metal, free in
mind, valiant in heart, servile to none, accustoming their flesh to stripes,
their bodies to labor, their feet to hunting, their hands to fighting. In
Crete, Scythia, Persia, Thracia, all the Laws tended to the maintenance of
Martial disciplyne. Among the Scythians no man was permitted to drink of their
festival Cup, which had not manfully killed an enemy in fight. I could
wish it in England, that there were greater preferment for the valiant
Spartanes, then the sottishe Hylotes: That our Laws were directed to rewarding
of those, whose lives are the first, that must be hazarded to mayntaine the
liberty of the Laws. The gentlemen of Carthage, were not allow ed too wear,
any more linkes in their chains, then they had seen battayles. If our
Gallantes of England might carry no more linkes in their Chains nor ringss on
their fingers, then they have fought feeldes, their necks should not be very
often wreathed in Gold, nor their hands embrodered with precious stones. If
none but they might be suffered to drink out of plate, that have in skirmish
slain one of her majesty's enemies, many thousands should bring earthen pots
to the table. Let us learn by other men's harms too look to our selves, When
the Egyptians were most busy in their husbandry, the Scythians ouerran them:
when the Assyrians were looking to their thrift, the Persians were in arms and
ouercam the^: when the Trojans thought them selves safest, the Greeks were
nearest: when Rome was a sleep, the French men gave a sharp assault too the
Capitol: when the Jews were idle, their walls were rased, and the Romans
entered: when the Chaldees were sporting, Babylon was sacked: when the senators
were quiet, no garrisons in Italy, and Po^pey from home, wic ked Catiline began
his mischeuous enterprise. We are like those unthankful people, which puffed
up with prosperity forget the good turns they received in adversity. The
patient feeds his Physician with gold in time of sickness, and when he is well,
scarcely affoords him a cup of water. Some there are that make gods of soldiers
in open wars, and trusse them up like dogs in the time of peace. Take heed of
the foxefurd nightcap, I meene those schoolmen, that cry out upon Mars calling
him the bloody God, the angry God, the furious god, the mad God, (...) the
bloody God. These are but castes of their office and words of course. That is
a vain brag and a false alarm, that Tullie gives to soldiers.

Cedant arma togae, co^cedat laurea linguae. Let gunns to gouns, and bucklers
yield to books. If the enemy beseege us, cut off our victuals, prevent foreign
aid, girt in the city, and bring the Ra^me to ye walls, it is not Ciceroes
tongue that ca^ peerce their armor to wou^d the body, nor Archimedes pricks,
and lines, and circles, and triangles, and Rhombus, and rifferaffe, that has
any force to drive them back. Whilst the one chats, his throat is cut; whilst
the other syttes drawing Mathematical fictions, the enemy stands with a
sword at his breast. He that talks much, and does little, is like unto him
that sails with a side wind, and is borne with the tide to a wrong shore. If
they mean to do any good indeed, bid them follow Demosthenes, and join with
Phocion: when they have given us good counsel in words, make much of
Soldiers, that are ready to execute yt same with swords. Be not careless,
Plough with weapons by your sides, study with a book in one hand, a darte in
the other: enjoy peace, with provision for war: when you have left the sands
behind you, look well to the rocks that lie before you: Let not the over
coming one Tempest make you secure, but have an eye to the cloud that comes
from the South, and threateneth rain: the least oversight in dangerous Seas
may cast you away, the least discontinuaunce of Martial exercise give you the
foil. When Achilles loytered in his cent, giving ear too Music, his
soldiers were bid to a hot breakefast. Hannibals power received more hurt
in one days ease at Capua, then in all the conflicts they had at Cannas. It
were not good for us too flatter our selves with these golden days: high
floodes have low Ebbes: hot Fevers, could Crampes: Long days short
nights; Dry Summers moist Winters: There was never fort so strong, but it
might be battered, never ground so fruitful, but it might be barre^: never
country so populous, but it might be wast: never Monarch so mighty; but he
might be weakened: never Realm so large, but it might be lessened: never
kingdom so flourishing, but it might be decayed. Scipio before he levied his
force too the walls of Carhage, gave his soldiers the print of the City in a
cake to be devoured: our enemies with Scipio, have already eaten us with
bread, and licked up our blood in a cup of wine. They do but tarry the tide:
watch opportunity, and wait for the reckoning, that with the shot of our
lives, should pay for all. But that GOD, that neither stumbreth nor sleeps,
for the love of Israel, that stretches out his arms from morning to evening
to cover his children, (as the Hen does her chicken with the shadow of her
wings) with the breath of his mouth shall overthrow them, with their own snares
shall overtake them, and hang them up by the hair of their own devises.
Notwithstanding it behooves us in the mean season, not to stick in the mire,
and gape for succor, without using some ordinary way our selves: or to lie
wallowing like Lubbers in the Ship of the common wealth, crying Lord, Lord,
when Laborers.
we see the vessel coil, but soynely lay our hands and heads, and helps
together, to avoid the danger, and save that, which must be the surety of us
all. For as to the body, there are many members, serving to several uses, the
eye to see, the ear to hear, the nose to smell, the tongue to taste, the
hand to touch, the feet to bear the whole burden of the rest, and every one
discharges his duty without grudging; so should the whole body of the
common wealth consist of fellow laborers, all generally serving one head, and
particularly following their trade, without repining. From the head to the
foot, from the top to the coe, there should nothing be vain, no body idle.
Jupiter himself shall stand for example; who is ever in woork, still moving
and turning about the heavens, if he should pull his hand from the frame, it
were impossible for the world to endure. All would be day, or al night; All
spring, or all Autumn; all Summer, or all winter; All heat or all cold; all
moisture, or al brought; No time to til, no time to sow, no time to plant, no
time to reap, the earth barren, the rivers stopped, the Seas stayde, the seasons
changed, and the whole course of nature over throwe^. The mean must labor to
serve the mighty, the mighty must study to defend the mean. The subjects
must sweat in obedience to their Prince; the Prince must have a care over his
poor vassals. If it be the duty of every man in a common wealth, one way or
other to bestirre his Leyterers.
stumpes, I cannot but blame those lither co^templators very much, which sit
concluding of Sillogismes in a corner, which in a close study in the Uniuersity
coope themselves up forty years together studying all things, and profess
nothing. The Bell is known by his sound, the Bird by her voice, the Lion by
his rore, the Tree by the fruit, a man by his works. To continue so long
without moving, to read so much without teaching, what differs it from a
dumb Picture, or a dead body? No man is borne to seek private profit: part
for his country, part for his friends, part for himself. The fool that
comes into a fair Garden, likes the beawtie of flowers, and sticks them in
his Cap: the Physician considers their nature, and puttes them in the pot:
in the one they wither without profit; in the other they serve to the health
of the body: He that reads good writers, and pickes out their flowers for
his own nose, is like a fool; he that prefers their virtue before their
sweet smell is a good Physician. When Anacharsis traueled over all Greece, to
seek out wise men, he found none in Athens, though no doubt, there were many
good scholars there. But coming to Chenas a blind village, in comparison of
Athens Right Philosophy:
a Paltockes Time; he found one Miso, well governing his house, looking to his
ground, instructing his children, teaching his family, making of marriages
among his acquayntance, exhorting his neighbors to love, and friendeship, and
preaching in life, who^, the Philosopher for his scarcity of words plenty of
works, accounted the only wise man that ever he saw. I speak not this to
prefer Botley before Oxeford, a cottage of clownes, before a College of
Muses; Pans pipe, before Apollos harp. But to show you that poor Miso can
read you such a lecture of Philosophy, as Aristotle never dreamed on. You
must not thruste your heads in a tubbe, and say, Been vixit, qui been latuit:
He has lived well, that has loitred well: standing streams geather filth;
flowing rivers, are ever sweet. Come forth with your sicles, the Harvest is
great, the laborers few; pull up the sluices, let out your springs, give us
drink of your water, light of your torches, and season us a little with the
Salt of your knowledge. Let Phaenix and Achilles, Demosthenes and Phocion,
Pericles and Cimon, Laelius and Scipio, Nigidius and Cicero, the word and the
sword be knit together. Set your talents a work, lay not up your tresure for
takingrust, teach early and late, in time and out of time, sing with the swan,
to the last hour. Follow the dancing Chaplens of Gradiuus Mars, which chaunt
the praises of their god with voices, and tread out the time with their feet.
Play the good captains, exhort your soldiers with your tongues to fight, and
bring the first ladder to the wall your selves. Sound like bells, and shine like
Lanternes; Thunder in words, and glister in works; so shall you please God,
profit your country, honor yourprince, discharge your duty, give up a good
account of your stewardship, and leave no sin untouched, no abuse unrebuked,
no fault unpunished. Sundry are the abuses as well of Uniuersityes as of other
places, but they are such as neither become me to touch, nor ^arpers.
every idle head to understand. The Thurines made a Law that no common find
fault should meddle with any abuse but Adultery. Pythagoras bound (...), of
Pithago^^^.
all his Scholars to five years silence, that as soon as ever they crept from
the shel, they might not aspire to the house top. It is not good for every man
too travel to Corinth, nor lawful for all to talk what they list, or write
what they please, least their tongues run before their wites, or their pens
make hauock of their Paper. And so wading too far in other men's manners,
whilst they fill their Books with other men's faults, they make their volumes
no bettern then an Apothecarics Shop, of pestilent Drugges; a quackesaluers
Budget of filthy receites; and a huge Chaos of foul disorder. Cooks did never
long more for great markets, nor Fishers for large Pondes, nor greedy Dogs
for store of game, nor soaring hawks for plenty of foul, then Carpers do
now for copye of abuses, that they might ever be snarling, and have some Flies
or other in the way to snatch at. As I would that offenses should not be hid,
for going unpunished, nor escape without scourge for ill example. So I wish that
every rebuker should place a hatch before the door; keep his quil wtin
compass. He that holds not him self contented with the light of the Sun but
liftes up his eyes to measure the bigness, is made blind; he that bites every
weed to search out his nature, may light upon poison, and so kill himself: he
that loves to be lifting of every cloud, may be struck with a thunderbolte,
if it chance to rent; and he that takes upon him to show men their faules,
may wound his own credit, if he go too far. We are not angry with the
Clarke of the market, if he come to our stall, and reprove our balance when
they are faulty, or forfaite our weights, when they are false: nevertheless,
if he presume to enter our house, and rig every corner, searching wore then
belongs to his office: we lay hold on his locks, tnrne him away with his back
full of stripes, and his hands laden with his own amends. Therefore I will
content my self to show you no more abuses in my School, then my self have
seen, nor so many by hundreds, as I have heard off. Lions fold up their
natles, when they are in their dens for wearing them in the earth and need
not: Eagles draw in their tallants as they sit in their nestes, for blunting
the^ there among dross: And I will cast Ancor in these abuses, rest my Bark
in the simple road, for grating my wits upon needelesse shelues. And because I
accuse other for treading awry, which since I was borne never went right; bet
cause I find so many faults abroad, which have at home more spots in my body
then the Leopard; morestaines on my coat then the wicked Nessus; more holes in
my life then the open Sieve; more sins in my soul than hears on my bed; If I
have been tedious in my Lecture, or your selves be weary of your lessou,
harken no longet for the Clock, shut up the School, and get you home.

FINIS.
To the right honorable Sir Richard Pipe, Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and the right worshipful his brethren, continuance of health and
maintenance of civil government.
PERICLES was wont (Right honorable and worshipful) as often as he put on his
robes, to preach thus unto himself: Consider well Pericles, what thou do,
thou commaundest free men, the Greeks obey thee, and thou gouernest the
Citizens of Athens. If you say not so much to your selves, the gowns that you
wear, as the cognisances of authority; and the sword which is carried before
you, as the instrument of justice; are of sufficient force to pur you in mind,
that you are the masters of free men, that you govern the worshipful Citizens
of London, and that you are the very Stewards of her Majesty within your
liberties. Therefore since by mine own experience I have erected a School of
those abuses, which I have seen in London, I presume the more upon your
pardon, at the end of my Phamphlet to present a few lines to your honorable
reading.

Augustus the good Emperor of Rome, was never angry with accusers because he
thought it necessary (where many abuses flourish) for every man freely to
speak his mind. And I hope that Augustus (I mean such as are in authority)
will bear with me, because I touch that which is needful to be shown.
Wherein I go not about to instruct you how to rule, but to warn you what
danger hangs over your heads, that you may avoid it.

The Bird Trochilus with crashing of her bil awakes the Crocodile, and
delivers her from her enemies, that are ready too charge her in deadesleepe.
A little fish swimmeth continnally before the great Whale, to show him the
shelues, that he run not a ground: The Elephants, when any of their kind are
fallen into the pittes, that are made to catch them, thrust in stones and earth
to recover them: When the Lion is caught in a trap, Aesops Mouse by nibling the
cords sets him at liberty. It shall be enough form with Trochilus to have
wagged my bil; with the little Fish to have gone before you; with the Elephants
to have showed you the way to help your self; and with Aesops mouse to have
fretted the snares with a biting tooth for your own safety.

The Thracians when they must pass over frosen streams, send out their
Wolves, which laying their cares to the yse, listen for noise: If they hear
any thing, they gather that it mooues; if it move, it is not congealed; If it
be not congealed, it must be liquide; If it be liquide, then will it yield;
and if it yield, it is not good trusting it with the weight of their bodies,
lest they sincke. The world is so slippery, that you are often enforced to
pass over Yse. Therefore I humbly beseech you to try farther, and trust less;
not your Woolues, but many of your Citizens have alread sifted the danger of
your passage, and in sifting been swallowed to their discredit.

I would the abuses of my School were as well known of you, to reformation: as
they are fouud out by other to their own peril. But the fish Sepia can
trouble the water to shun the nets, that are shot to catch her: Torpedo has
craft enough at the first touch to inchant the hook, to conjure the line, to
bewitch the rod, and too benumme the hands of him that angleth. Whether our
Players be the Spawnes of such fishes, I know not well, yet I am sure that how
many nets soever there be laid to take the^, or hooks to choke them, they have
Ynke in their bowels to darken the water; and sleights in their budgets, to dry
up the arm of every Magistrate. If their letters of commendations were once
stayed, it were easy for you to overthrow them. Agesilaus was greatly
rebuked, because in matters of justice, he inclined to his friends and became
partial. Plutarch condemns this kind of writing, Niciam, si nihil admisit
noxae; exime; Si quid admisit; mihi exime; omnino autem hominem noxae exime. If
Nicias have not offended, meddle not with him: If he be guilty, forgive him
for my sake, What soever you do, I charge you acquit him. This inforceth
Magistrates like evil Poets to break the feet of their verse, and singe out
of tune, and with unskillful Carpenters, to use the Square and the compass, the
Rule and the Quadrant, not to build, but to overthrow.

Bona verba quaeso. Some say that it is not good jesting with edge toles: The
Atheniens will mince Phocion as small as flesh to the pot, if they bemad:
but kill Demades if they be sober: And I doubt not but the governors of
London will vex me for speaking my mind, when they are out of their wits,
and banishe their Players, when they are best advised.

In the mean time it behooves your Honor in your charge, too play the
Musition, streatch every string till he break, but set him in order. He
that will have the Lamp too burn clear, must as well power in Oil to nourish
the flame, as snuff the Week, to increase the light. If your Honor desire
too see the City well governed, you must as well set to your hand to thrust
out abuses, as show your self willing to have all amended. And (least I seem
one of those idle Mates, which having nothing to buy at home, and less too
sell in the market abroad, stand at a boothe, if it be but to gase; or wanting
work in mine own study, and having no wit to govern Cities, yet busye my
brains with your honorable office) I will here end, desiring pardon for my
fault, because I am rash; and redress of abuses, because they are naught.

Your Honors etc. to command. Stephan Gosson.

To the Gentlewomen Citizens of London, Flourishing days with regard of
Credit.
THE reverence that I owe you Gentlewomen, because you are Citizens; and the
pity wherewith I tender your case, because you are weak; has thrust out my
hand, at the breaking up of my School, to write a few lines to your sweet
selves. Not that I think you to be rebuked, as idle huswiues, but commended
and encouraged as virtuous Dames. The freest horse, at the wh: ske of a wand,
girdes forward: The swiftest Hound, when he is hallowed, strippes forth: The
kindest Mastife, when he is clapped on the back, fights best: The stoutest
Soldier, when the Trumpet sounds, strikes fiercest: The gallantest Runner,
when the people showte, gets ground: and the perfectest livers, when they
are praised, win greatest credit.

I have seen many of you which were wont to sport your selves at Theaters,
when you perceived the abuse of those places, school your selves, and of your
own accord abhor Plays. And since you have begun to withdraw your steps,
continue so still, if you be chary of your good name. For this is general, that
they which show themselves openly, desire to be seen. It is not a soft shoe
that heals the Gowte; nor a golden Ring that drives away the Crampe; nor a
crown of Pearl that cures the Meigrim; nor your sober countenance, that
defends your credit; nor your friends which accompany your person, that
excuse your folly; nor your modesty at home, that covers your lightness, if
you present your selves in open Theaters. Thought is free: you can forbidd no
man, that vieweth you, to noate you, and that noateth you, to judge you, for
entering to places of suspicion. Wild Coltes; when they see their kind begin
to bray; and lusty bloods at the show of fair women, give a wanton sigh, or a
wicked wish. Blasing marks are most shot at, glistring faces chiefly marked;
and what follows? Looking eyes, have lyking hearts, liking hearts may burn in
lust. We walk in the Sun many times for pledsure, but our faces are ta^ned
before we return: though you go to theaters to se sport, Cupid may catch you
ere you depart. The little God houereth about you, and fanneth you with his
wings to kindle fire: when you are set as fixed whites, Desire draws his
arrow to the head, and sticks it up to the feathers, and Fancy bestirreth
him too shed his poison through every vain. If you do but listen to the voice
of the Fouler, or join looks with an amorous Gazer, you have already made
your selves assaultable, and yielded your Cities to be sacked. A wanton eye is
the darte of Cephalus, where it leueleth, thereit lights; and where it hitts,
it wounds deep. If you give but a glance to your beholders, you have vayled
the bonnet in token of obedience: for the boulte is fallen ere the Air clap;
the Bullet paste, ere the Piece crack; the cold taken, ere the body shiuer;
and the match made, ere you strike hands.

To avoid this discommoditie, Cyrus refused to look upon Panthea, And
Alexander the great on Darius wife. The sick man that relesheth nothing, when
he sees some about him feed apace, and commend the taste of those dishes
which he refused, blames not the meat, but his own disease: And I fear you
will say, that it is no ripe judgment, but a raw humor in my self, which
makes me condemn the resorting to Plays; because there come many thither,
which in your opinion suck no poison, but feed heartily without hurt;
therefore I do very ill to reject that which other like, and complain still
of mine own malady.

In deed I must confess there comes to Plays of all sorts, old and young;
it is hard to say that all offend, yet I promise you, I will swear for none.
For the driest flax flameth soonest; and the greenest wood smoketh most; gray
heads have green thoughts; and young slippes are old twigges. Beware of those
places, which in sorrow cheer you, and beguile you in mirth. You must not cut
your bodies to your garments, but make your gowns fit to the proportion of
your bodies; nor fashion your selves, to open spectacles, but tie all your
sportes to the good disposition of a virtuous mind. At Diceplay, every one
wishes to cast well; at Bowls every one craves to kiss the master; at
running every one starteth to win the goal; At shoting every one strives to
hit the mark; and will not you in all your pastimes and recreations seek that
which shall yield you most profit and greatest credit? I will not say you are
made to toil, and I dare not grant that you should be idle. But if there be
peace in your houses, and plenty in your Coafers, let the good precept of
Xenopho^ be your exercise: in all your ease and prosperity, remember God, that
he may be mindeful of you, when your hearts groan, and succor you still in
the time of need. Be ever busied in godly meditations: seek not to pass over
the gulf with a tottering plank that will deceive you. When we cast off our best
clothes, we put on rags; when our good desires are once laid aside,
wantonwil begins to prick. Being pensive at home, if you go to Theaters to
drive away fancies, it is as good Physike, as for the ache of your head too
knock out your brains; or when you are stung with a Wasp, to rub the sore with
a Nettle. When you are grieved, pass the time with your neighbors in sober
conference, or if you can read, let Books be your comfort. Do not imitate
those foolish Patientes, which having sought all means of recovery, and are
never the near, run unto Witchcrafte. If your grief be such, that you may not
disclose it, and your sorrow so great, that you loath to utter it, look for no
salve at Plays ortheaters, lest that laboring to shun Sylla you light on
Charybdis; to for sake the deep you perish in sands; to ward a light stripe,
you take a deaths wound; and to leave Physic, you flee to inchaunting. You
need not go abroad to be tempted, you shall be intised at your own
windows. The best counsel that I can give you, is to keep home, and shun all
occasion of ill speech. The virgins of Vest a were shut up fast in stone walls
to the same end. You must keep your sweet faces from scorching in the sun,
chapping in the wind, and warping with the weather, which is best performed
by staying within. And if you perceive your selves in any danger at your own
doors, either allured by courtesy in the day, or assaulted with Musicks in the
night; Close up your eyes, stop your ears, tie up your tongues; when they
speak, aunsweare not; when they hallowe, stoop not; when they sighe, laugh at
them; when they sue, scorn them; Shun their company, never be seen where
they resort; so shall you neither set them proppes, when they seek to clime;
nor hold them the st^rrop, when they profer to mount.

These are hard lessons which I teach you; nevertheless, drink up the
potion, though it like not your taste, and you shall be eased; resist not the
Surgeon, though he strike in his knife, and you shall be cured. The Fig tree
is sower, but it yields sweet fruit; Thymus is bitter, but it gives Honny;
my School is tarte, but my co^^^^ is pleasant, if you embrace it. Shortly I
hope to send out the Ephemerides of P^^^^^ by whom if I see you accept this) I
will give you one dish for your own tooth. Farewell.

Yours to serve at Virtues call. Stephan ^osson.


