THE RETVRNE OF PRAYERS. A TREATISE WHEREIN this Case [How to discern Gods
answers to our prayers] is briefly resolved, WITH OTHER OBSERVATIONS UPON PSALM.
85. 8. concerning GODS speaking PEACE, etc.

BY THO: GOODWIN. B. D.

HAB. 2. 1. I will watch to see what he will say to me.

LONDON, Printed for R. Dawlman, and I. Fawn, at the sign of the Brazen
Serpent in Paul's Churchyard. 1636.

TO THE MUCH HONORED KNIGHT, SIR NATHANIEL RICH.
SIR,
GOd, who from all eternity has had an infinite Mass of grace and glory lying
by him, to bestow upon his Church: and did accordingly provide a treasury and
Magazin sufficient wherein to store up all, [the Bosom of his Son:] in whom
are hid, Ephesians. 3. 8.
riches so unsearchable, as cannot be told over, much less spent to all
eternity.

He has as richly shed his holy Sprit on us: (...) Tit. 3. 6.
that we, who could never have known of any thing bequeathed us, nor what to
pray for as we ought, might both, fully from him know all that God has given
us; and through him lay claim thereto, who makes intercession for us; and so
does furnish us with a privy key to all that Treasury, which otherwise, is fast
shut up to all the world.

Through which Spirit of of prayer, and supplications thus powered forth,
believers come to be at once anointed to the fellowship, and execution of
those three glorious Offices of Christ their head. Not only 1. of Priests; by
offering up their prayers, as spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to GOD, through
Jesus Christ: but 2. of Kings; to rule with God, Hos. 11. 12. Being hereby made
of Privy Council to the King of kings, Psa. 20. 4, 5
so as their Councels, and desires expressed in their Petitions, are said to be
fulfilled; and their decrees in their Prayers made, Job 22. 27, 28.
ratified, and established. Nay further, by virtue of this privilege, advanced
to such height of favor, Hos. 12. 3, 4
as by their strength in prayer alone, to have power with God himself; and not
only with him, but also over him; and in their wrestlings to prevail: Yea to
command: Himself has said it; Thus says the Lord, the holy One of Israel and
his Maker, ASK of me, of things to come, concerning my sons, and concerning
the work of my hands, COMMAND ye ME, Isai. 45. 11. which so transcendent
privilege of power, is likewise by the express words of this great Charter,
universally extended unto all transactions of this lower part of his dominions;
whether Ecclesiastical, which do concern his sons, that is, his Church: or
what ever other, the more ordinary works of his hands, that appertain to
common providence.

And for as much as these grand affairs of this his Kingdom, Mat. 6. 10.
as future, and to come, are commended to their prayers, as their most proper
subject, about which they are to treat, Ask of me of things to come: in this
respect, they do become as truly. 3. Prophets also: though not in so full and
complete, yet in some kind of true resemblance; not by foretelling, yet by
forespeaking in their prayers, things that come to pass. To demonstrate which,
God, who made and upholds this world, and all things in it, by the word of his
power, does likewise rule and govern it, by the Presidents, and prescript
rules, of the word of his will: exactly dispensing unto men, Psalm. 25. 10.
both rewards and punishments, according to the tenor of some or other, of his
promises and threatenings, and former like proceedings therein recorded: though
with such various liberty, in respect of the particulars, that his ways
remain unsearchable and past finding out: That look how he appointed in the
heavens, those ordinances of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, by their light,
heat, and motion, to rule the day and night, to divide, and cause the several
seasons of the year, and all the changes and alterations that do pass over
this animal, and natural world* in like manner has he stretched out that so
exceeding broad expanse of his word and law, Psalm. 119. 96.
(to which the Psalmist does assimulate it) over this rational world, Psalm.
19. 1, 2, 3, 4. compared with Romans 10. 18.
of Angels and Men; and therein set his Statutes, and his Judgments, that by
the light of Precepts, and their influences in rewards and punishments, they
might order and direct these his creatures reasonable, and all their actions;
also dispose, and set out all the issues of them. And seeing his Saints they
are a people in whose hearts is his Law; and their delight is to meditate
therein, both day and night, they daily calculating and observing the various
aspects, conjunctions, and mixed influences of those innumerable precepts,
promises, and threatenings, which themselves and others, Nations or Men, stand
under; and by a Judgment thence resulting, Ier. 8. 7.
so far as they have attained, endeavoring to frame their supplications and
petitions according to Gods will: Hence their prayers often, full happily
succeed, and aforehand do accord, to those issues and events, that afterward
fall out. That like as it sometimes falls out, that the earth comes to be just
under the Sun and Moon, in some of their conjunctions; so their desires and
prayers, sometimes in a direct line fall under, and subordinately concur with
Gods secret purposes, and some revealed promise met in conjunction, to produce
such and such effects. The Spirit also, herein helping their infirmities,
sometime so guiding and directing them, by a gracious preinstinct, though
unbeknowne to them, to pitch their requests upon such particulars, as God has
fully purposed to bring to pass; becoming thereby, as it were, the Spirit of
prophecy unto them; respectively, in some measure and degree.

Thus does that great King, employ his nearest servants, as his Underofficers,
and Sherifes to serve his Writs, and executions upon his Enemies; to execute
the Judgment written in his threatenings, Psalm. 149. 9. and to accomplish his
mercies written also; by putting all the promises in suit; to be as
man-midwives (as Hezekiahs allusion, when he sent a visiting to the Prophet
Esaias, Esaias 37. 2, 3, 4.
for his voice and suffrage, seems to import) to help and assist his promises
and decrees in their travel with mercies and deliverance, Zeph. 2. 2.
when these their children do come unto the birth, and there is no strength to
bring them forth.

In all which, they shall therefore have the honor to be accounted Co-workers
together with God, in his greatest works of wonder. And at the latter day, when
that great and last Edition, both of all Gods works, and likewise ours, then
complete and finished, shall be published to all the world, they shall find
their names put to them, together with his own; and the same by him
acknowledged, to be as truly the works of their hearts and prayers, as that
they are the sole work of his hands and power. Such honor have all his Saints.

And if all the works of GOD are so exceeding great, and his thoughts therein
so very deep, Psalm. 92. 5. that every Iota of them, does deserve our deepest
studies, and intentions; and thereunto require a proper skill and wisdom, to
read his hand, peculiar unto the Saints, ver. 6. whereunto there must be
adjoined the most diligent search, Psalm. 77. 6.
and attentive observation to find out his meaning in them; and withal a
special inclination, and delight to be conversant therein, Thy works are very
great, sought out of those that have pleasure in them, Psalm. 111. 2. And if, of
all the rest, those choiser pieces, his works of mercy may challenge our best
regard: in which his heart and delights are most; Mich. 7. 18.
on which his wisdom has laid on the richest workmanship, in the most
curious contrivements of his love: Then surely that selected volume of more
special mercies [His Epistles:] vouchsafed in answer to our prayers, is above
all other, most exactly to be studied, and most diligently to be perused by
us. Wherein God does unbosome himself, and lay open his heart, more sweetly,
more familiarly unto us; which are directed, and in a manner dedicated more
particularly unto our selves alone; Many of them written with his own hand, in
a more immediate manner discovered and appearing in them: and all of them come
sealed with the impresse of everlasting love, and down laden with the
enclosure of the most precious tokens of his special favor. Ps. 107. 43.
Who so is wise, will observe these things; and they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

Neither have such favors, only more of mercy in the things themselves
bestowed, but are further indeared to us, by being made our own mercies, by a
more peculiar title to them: by which the kindness in them is rendered double.
For therein we have that royal liberty to become our own choosers, and
contrivers of our own condition; having all the promises thrown down to us,
with blanks for us to write our names in which of them we please; which is the
greatest liberty. And We have withal his Spirit secretly directing, and
fixing the needle of our desires, to the same point, wherein his great
intentions toward us do meet with our best good: which is indeed the truest
liberty. And to be made our selves, whom we love so well, and therefore delight
to do good unto, the chiefest instruments under him of our own greatest
happiness, is a privilege, then which, the creature is not made capable of a
more transcendent royalty. And yet when the greatest love, thus rectified,
which possibly we can bear our selves, has opened its mouth widest, and
stretched our desires in praying, to their utmost compass; then will Gods
infinite vast love, not only fill them, but do for us above all that we are
able to ask, yea to think; exceeding abundantly above all; as far above, as
his thoughts are above our thoughts; which is far more then the heavens are
higher then the earth.

All which, when put together, (if well considered,) how would it provoke us to
call in all that precious stock of our time, thoughts, and intentions which we
cast away on trifles, to lay out the choicest portion of them in this thriving
trade of intercourse with God; the returns whereof, are better then the
merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof, then fine gold. It is the praying
Christian that alone imployes the riches of the promises, which we usually let
lie by us like dead stock unimproved: whilst he, like a wise and diligent
Merchant, looks abroad upon all the affairs of Jesus Christ, that are afloat
here in this world, and adventures in them all; is watchful to spy out all
advantages, and with an holy (...), intermedleth in every business that may
bring in glory unto God, good unto the Church, grace and comfort to his own
soul. And how infinitely rich must that man needs become, that puts even Gods
riches out to use, with the increase of ten Talents for one, yea an hundred
fold!

The due estimate whereof, would no less quicken us to as diligent an inquiry,
what becomes of all those goodly adventures, the prayers we make; to listen
what haven they arrive at, how, and when, and with what fraught they do
return.

In which great duty, and most necessary property of all true Merchants, yet
many of the best and greatest dealers, that are diligent enough in praying, are
still found failing and deficient; that omit no gainful opportunity of
adventure, but are careless and unobservant of their returns.

Some through ignorance (it may be) that this is at all a duty, or of any such
importance, are careful only how to lade in prayers enough, not expecting to
find any of this bread cast upon the waters, until that great and general
return of themselves, and all the world, with joy bringing their sheaves with
them. Others, though at present, many of their prayers come home after a few
days, and richly laden; yet through want of skill to read those Bills of
Exchange which God often writes in an obscurer character, they lie unregarded
by them. Many when voyages prove long, (though to their greater advantage, when
once they do return, yet in the mean time) through discouragement, they give
all for lost, as we do ships at Sea we cannot hear of. The most are commonly
complaining, that their adventures still miscary, and that little or nothing
comes of all their prayers. And All are negligent of keeping their books of
accounts, to cast up their commings in, and goings out, the one with the other.
By which they lose the chiefest portion of that comfort, which for the present,
God has here allotted us to live upon [the revenues of their prayers.] And God
also, is not only robbed of that Custom of his glory which should thence
accrue; but wronged also by standing still as debtor in their accounts to many
prayers, in the return of which he has been creditor long ago.

I have endeavored therefore in this small Treatise to convince believers of
the grand importance of this duty, which is so full of gain: To discover
likewise the causes of the neglect herein, and remove the temptations and
discouragements which do occasion it; and have briefly resolved such cases as
do more usually occur in the practice of it. But principally, my desire was
to give in some few experiments, and observations, which may help to teach the
weaker sort, though not perfectly to read, yet here and there to spell, (and
especially out of the impressions in their own hearts) Gods meaning toward
them in his answers. I have cast in some scattered calculations of broken
prayers cast up, which though they will not amount, to make general and perfect
Tables out of, yet may serve, as Instances and examples, for young beginners, to
direct them in the exercise of this most useful skill, and wisdom, how to
compute and balance their accounts by comparing their prayers and their
returns together.

This small and imperfect embryon, I have presumed to send forth into the
world; and directed it first of all to present its service unto you; and make
an honorable and thankful mention of your Name. Your worth deserves a more
costly, large, and lasting monument for this inscription. Your own abilities
of learning, eloquence, and depth of wisdom in humane affairs, would you be
persuaded to lay them out, as you are able, would erect such a remembrance and
sumptuous memorial of you, when you are gathered to your Fathers, as would
bear some proportion to your great worth. But that which emboldned me was the
near affinity which meditations of this nature do hold, with those other your
more retired thoughts you think to none but God and your own soul. You have
been long a frequent and constant dealer in this blessed way of intercourse
with God in private: Those that know you, know your strict observance of those
exchange hours you have devoted to meet with God, and enjoy communion with
Him. But above all, it was that personal obligation, under which a great and
special all favor from you long since brought me, upon which I devoted (with
my self) the first of my labors unto your service. And it became one great
relief unto my thoughts, weighing the many inconveniences of appearing thus in
public, that it gave so full occasion to pay my vows thus openly before all
the world; which having now done, God that is rich in mercy to all that call
upon him, fill you with all Grace, and grant all your petitions; so prays

Your Worships obliged to love and serve you THO: GOODWIN.

THE TABLE.
CHAP. 1. The maine observation: That Gods people are diligently to observe the
answers of their prayers. Page 5. The sinfulnes of the neglect hereof
demonstrated by seven reasons. 7 1* reas. An ordinance of God taken in vain
ibid. 2. reas. Gods attributes taken in vain. 12 3. reas. God in answering made
to speak in vain 16 4. reas. God provoked not to answer. 19 5. reas. We shall
not return thanks. 21 6. reas. We shall lose much experience. 23 1. Of Gods
faithfulness ibid 2. Of our own ways toward him. 25
7. reas. We shall lose much comfort. 28

CHAP. 2. Three Cases: The first concerning prayers for such promises as may
be accomplished in ages to come. 32 1 Such prayers the Church to come does
reap 33 2 Yet we at present may have an answer about them. 39 3 In heaven,
and at the last day we shall rejoice for their accomplishment. 40
CHAP. 3. Second Case: Concerning prayers made for others of our friends, etc.
How answered. p. 42 1 Such prayers often granted. 44 2 Yet not always in the
very thing prayed for. 46 Such promises but indefinite. 49 As all temporal
promises are 51 Our faith toward them not required to be assurance. 53 Unless
God give a special faith 58
3 Such prayers returned into our own bosoms. 61 4 God in the end casts some
out of our prayers 65 5 Those prayers answered in some others. 68
CHAP. 4. Third Case: How the influence of our own prayers, when others pray
also for the same thing with us, may be discerned. 72 1 If our hearts are
affected with the same holy affection 73 Vnbeknowne each to other. 75
2 By some special endeavor: as, 1 Some notable circumstance. 76 2 By joy in
the accomplishment. 79 3 By thankfulness for the accomplishment. 81
3. This less to be doubted when the thing prayed for by us does concern our
own particular. p. 82
CHAP. 5 Common directions helpful in all cases, and prayers: taken first from
observations from Before and In praying. p. 85 1 BEFORE: when God prepares the
heart. 86 Difference between Satan's motions to prayer and Gods. 89
2 IN prayer: Gods speakings in prayer are evidences of hearing: and discerned
by 4 things. 93 1 Giving a quietness by prayer about the thing prayed for. ibid
3 2 By revealing his love, in and upon such petitions. 99 A caution herein.
103 Reasons why God draws nigh when he grants not the thing 104
4 3 God sometimes gives a particular assurance. 107 A caution herein. 111
5 4 By giving a restless importunity to pray for a particular mercy. 117
CHAP. 6 Observations made upon the disposition of the heart AFTER prayer:
Until the ISSVE of the thing prayed for p. 119 1 When God gives an obedient
dependant heart. page 119 2 when God gives an heart waiting for and expecting
it. 123
CHAP. 7 Observations made AFTER prayer Upon the ISSVE: first If Accomplished:
whether as the fruit of prayer, or of common providence. 125 1 God sometimes
answers the prayer in the very thing and manner desired. 126 2 Directions to
discern that things thus obtained are in answer to prayers. 134 1 From the
manner of Gods performance. A more then ordinary hand discovered in things
accomplished by prayer, instanced in 5. particulars. ibid 1 By bringing it to
pass through difficulties. 135 2 By facilitating all means. 137 3 Effecting
it suddenly. 139 4 With addition of other mercies above what was desired. 141 5
By some special circumstance as a token of his hand in it. 142

3 2 From the Time, wherein it is accomplished. 146 As first when we were most
instant in prayer. 147 2 In the fittest time for us. Then, 150 1 When we have
most need. 151 2 When the heart was best prepared to receive it. 154

4 3 From the proportion which may be observed betwixt Gods dealings in the
accomplishment, and our prayers. 158
CHAP. 8. Seven observations more, from the Effects, which the accomplishment
of the mercy has upon the heart. 163 1 If it draw the heart nearer to God.
ibid 2 Enlarges the heart with thankfulness. 166 3 And encourages the heart
the more to pray, for other things. 169 4 If it makes more careful to perform
the vows made to obtain it. 170 5 If by faith a man sees and acknowledges
Gods sole hand in the accomplishment. 174 6 By an assurance which comes
sometimes with the mercy. 178 7 By the event: Things obtained by prayer prove
stable mercies. 179
CHAP. 9. Considerations, to quiet us, and to help to discern an acceptance
of the prayer, when the thing is Not Accomplished. 183 1 The thing not always
granted, when yet the prayer is heard. ibid. An objection answered. 186
2 Some blessings not absolutely promised, nor absolutely to be prayed for. 188
In which a denial is to be interpreted as best for us in Gods judgment. 190
3 There may be a reservation in the denial, for some greater mercy. ibid 4
There may be a transmutation into some other blessing of the same kind. 193 5
God when he denies, yet answers to the ground of our prayers. 196 6 And
yields far in it, to give satisfaction to his child. 203 7 We may know that
the prayer notwithstanding is accepted, by the effects upon the heart, which
are 4. 206 1 If we acknowledge God righteous in the denial. ibid. 2 If God
fills the heart with contentment in the denial. 207 3 If the heart be
thankful out of faith. 209 4 If not discouraged, but prays still. 210

CHAP. 10. Application: A reproof of them that pray, but look not after the
Returns of their prayers: The causes of this neglect: are 212 1 Temptations: 1
From want of assurance that our persons are accepted, 216 2 From the weakness of
our prayers: three answers to it. 221 3 From not obtaining what we formerly
prayed for, answered by 4. things. 227
2 More sinful discouragements as, 231 1 From slothfulness in praying. 232 2
Looking at prayer as a duty only, and not as a means to obtain. 236 3 Falling
into sin after prayers. 240

Six Observations more out of the Text. 1 Observe. That God does sometimes not
speak peace to his own people. 245 2 Obser. The cause thereof some folly. 251
3 Observe. God only can speak peace. 258 4 Observe. God easily can give peace.
267 5 Observe. God will certainly speak to his people. 278 6 Observe. After peace
spoken his people should return no more to folly. 283
The sin and folly of relapsing shown by 7. reasons. 29^ Temptations from
relapse into the same sin after peace spoken, answered By Scriptures. 32^ By
3 Examples. 33^ By 4 Reasons. 34^ 5 Cautions. 36^

FINIS.
THE RETVRNE OF PRAYERS.
PSALM. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak: for He will speak
peace unto His people, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to
folly. The Coherence of the words.
THis Psalm was penned, in the name and for the comfort of the whole Church of
the Jews, both as a Prophecy of, and a Prayer for their return out of the
Babylonish Captivity, and the flowing in again of that ancient glory, peace,
administration of Justice, liberty of Gods Ordinances, plenty and increase,
which formerly they enjoyed, but had now suffered an ebb of seventy years
continuance. And first he begins with Prayer, from the first verse to this
we have in hand, putting the Lord in mind of, and urging Him with His
graciour dealings in former times unto His Church: this is not the first time
(says he) that the Church has been in Captivity, and that thou have returned
it, (as out of Egypt, etc.) and therefore we hope that thou will do so
again; Thou have been favorable unto thy Land, etc. His Prayer being
finished and he having spoke, he now stands, and listens, as you use to do
when you expect an Echo, what Echo he should have, what answer would be
returned from Heaven, whither his Prayer had already come, I will hear what
the Lord will speak: or as some read it, I hear what the Lord does speak:
for sometimes there is a present Echo, a speedy answer returned to a man's
heart, even ere the Prayer is half finished, as unto Daniel, Dan. 9. 20. 21.
And in brief it is this, The Lord will speak peace unto His people: this
answer he finds written at the bottom of the petition, but with this clause
of admonition for time to come, added, But let them not return again to
folly: a good use to be made of so gracious an answer.

Chap. 1.
CHAP. I.
The maine observation and subject of this Discourse thence deduced: That Gods
people are diligently to observe the answers to their Prayers: The reasons of
it.

THese words being especially spoken in relation to the answer of God returned
to his Prayer made, therefore in that relation I mean principally to handle
them.

The observation is this; That when a man has put up Prayers to God, he is to
rest assured, that God will in mercy answer his Prayers, and to listen
diligently, and observe how his Prayers are answered: both are here to be
observed. I will hear what God will speak, that is, how He will accomplish
them: and withal he confidently expresses an assurance, that God will speak
peace. Thus does the Church, Mich. 7. 7, 8. I will look to the Lord, I will
wait, my God will hear me: She was both sure of gracious audience with Him,
my God will hear me: and she will wait till he answers her, and observe how
he does it, I will look to the Lord: and verse. 9. I will hear the
indignation of the Lord, till he plead my cause. So Habakkuk, he having made a
Prayer against the Tyranny of Nebuchadnezzar, in the first Chapter, having
ended it, he begins the second Chapter thus, I will stand upon my watch tower,
and see what he will answer me: The sinfulness of the neglect hereof
demonstrated by 7. reasons.
and in the end an answer comes verse. 2. and as he thus waited for a Vision
(for sometime their Prophecies were in answer to their prayers) so should we
for an answer unto ours.

1. Reason, Reas. 1. Hereby an Ordinance of God is taken in vain: which is
Gods Name.
because otherwise you take an Ordinance of God in vain in your hearts, which
is to take Gods Name (with whom in that Ordinance you deal) in vain: for it a
sign you think your prayer not an effectual means to attain that end it is
ordained for; and say secretly in your hearts, as they Job 21. 15. What profit
have we, if we pray to him? for if we use any means, and expect not the end,
it is a sign we think the means vain to accomplish that end. Whereas every
faithful prayer is ordained of God to be a means to obtain what we desire
and pray for, and is not put up in vain, but shall have answer: 1. Ioh. 5. 14,
15. This is the confidence that we have in Him, that if we ask any thing
according to His will, He hears us: it is true, God hears an enemy, but to
hear with favor, is the hearing there meant; and is so used in our ordinary
speech, as we say of a Favorite, that he has the Kings ear; and if a man be
obstinate to a man's counsel, we say, he would not hear, though he give the
hearing; so here, to hear is a word of gracious inclination to do the thing
required; and thus Gods ears are said to be open to their prayers; and so it
follows there, that if he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we
have the petitions that we desired of Him. As Soon as we have prayed, we are
said to have our petitions, that is, they are then granted, and we may be
confident they are assented unto by God; although in regard of outward
dispensation, the command for accomplishment is not yet come forth: even as a
petitioner is said to have his suit, when the word of the King is gone forth
that it shall be done, though it passes not the seal, or be not signed a
good while after. And like as when a wicked man sins, as soon as the act is
committed, so soon does sentence from God go forth against the sinner, but
the Execution overtakes him not (it may be) a good while after, according to
that of Solomon, Sentence against an evil doer is not presently executed,
Eccles 7. 11
it is presently sentenced, as the words imply, but not executed: so in like
manner falls it out, when a godly man prays, that as soon as the prayer
arrives in Heaven (which is in an instant) so soon is the petition granted,
(So Dan. 9. at the beginning of his prayer the Command came forth ver. 23.
though the Angel, who brought the answer, arrived not at him till toward the
end in the Evening, ver. 21.) but the real accomplishment of it may be
deferred. So as no prayer in respect of an answer to it is in vain; but where
God has given a heart to speak, He has an ear to hear, and love to
return answer: which not to regard, is to take an Ordinance in vain, which is
Gods Name.

And secondly, Reas. 2. We take the Attributes of God in vain.
not simply Gods name, as in an Ordinance made known, but also His name, that
is, His Attributes are taken in vain. For it is a sign you think of that God
you pray to, that either his ear is heavy, that he cannot hear: or his hand
shortened, that he cannot save: or his heart straightened, and his bowels
restrained, that he will not: And thus you rob him, and despoile him of one of
his most royal Titles, whereby he styles himself, Psalm. 65. 2.
a God that hears prayers; who is so regardfull of them, that in the first of
Kings 8. 59. they are said to be nigh the Lord day and night, they are all
before him, and he sets them in his view, as we do letters of friends which
we stick in our windows, that we may remember to answer them; or lay them not
out of our bosoms, that we might be sure not to forget the^: so the petitions
of his people, pass not out of his sight, till he sends an answer, which is
called speaking here; God speaking as well in his works as in his word. But
you, by your neglect herein, make an Idol God of him, such as were the
vanities of the heathen, as if he had ears and heard not, eyes and saw not
your need, etc. Such a God as Elias mocked, You must speak aloud, (says he) he
may be in a journey, etc. Even such a God do you make the God of heaven and
earth to be, whilst you put no more confidence in him, or make no more
reckoning of your prayers to him, then the heathens did of their sacrifices to
their Gods. Petitioners do not only put up their requests, but use to wait at
great men's doors, and enquire, and listen what answer is given unto them; and
it is part of an honor to great men that we do so: and for the same end are
we also to wait on God, As an acknowledgement of his greatness, and our
distance from him, and dependence upon him; as the eyes of the servants look
to the hand of their Masters, Psalm. 123. 2
so do we (says David) on thee, till thou have mercy on us. And Psalm. 130.
after he had prayed ver. 2. He says, he waited more then they that watch for
the morning, like those that having some great business to do on the morrow,
long for the day light, and look often out to spy the day, so he for a
glimmering, and dawning of an answer. The like we have Psalm. 5. 3. In the
morning will I direct my prayer to thee, and look, that is, for an answer.

Again, Reas. 3. If God give an answer we make him speak in vain.
3. If God does give you an answer, if you mind it not, you let God speak to
you in vain, when you do not listen to what he answers: if two men walk
together, and the one, when himself has said, and spoke what he would,
listens not, but is regardlesse of what the other answers, he exceedingly
slights the man: As non respondere pro convitio est, not to answer again is
contempt, so non attendere, not to attend to what one says: Now our speaking
to God by prayers, and his speaking to us by answers thereunto, and to study
out his dealings with us, by comparing our prayers and his answers together,
which are as Dialogues between us and him, is one great part of our walking
with God. It is said of Samuels prophecy, 1. Sam. 3. 19.
that not a word of it fell to the ground: and so it may be said of our
prayers; and so it ought to be of Gods answers, not a word of them should fall
to the ground: as there does, if you by your observation, and listening thereunto
catch them not (as Benhadads servants are said to do Ahabs words,) apprehend,
and observe them not: and by the same reason, that you are to observe the
fulfilling of Gods promises, you are of your prayers also: now, 1. Kings 8. 56.
it is said, not one word failed of all he promised, Solomon had observed this
by a particular survay, and register made of all that God had spoken and done
for them, and found not a promise unperformed: and there is the like reason
both of answers to prayers, (for prayers are but putting promises into suite;)
and for our observing of them: and therefore Solomon brings those words in
there, to this very purpose, to confirm firm their faith in this, that no
prayers made, would fail, being grounded on a promise, thereby o encourage
others, and his own heart to diligence herein, as also as a motive unto God to
hear him; for verse. 59. he inferres upon it, Let my words be nigh thee, etc.
Seeing thou always thus performest thy good word unto thy people.

4. Yea, Reas. 4. God may be provoked not to answer at all.
you will provoke the Lord not to answer at all, he will forbear to answer,
because he sees it will be thus in vain. When a man is talking to one that
listens not to him, he will cease to answer, and leave off speaking, and so
will God. So as that which the Apostle says of faith, Heb. 10. 36.
that it is not enough to believe, but when you have done the will of God, you
have need of patience to eke out faith, that you may inherit the promises, may
be also said, and is alike true of praying: it is not enough to pray, but
after you have prayed, you have need to listen for an answer, that you may
receive your prayers; God will not fulfill them else. As he said, the Sermon
was not done, when yet the Preacher had done, because it is not done, till
practiced: so our prayers are not done, when yet made, but you must further
wait for, and attend the accomplishment.

5. If you observe not his answers, Reas. 5. We shall not return thanks to God
for hearing us.
how shall you bless God, and return thanks to him for hearing your prayers:
Psalm. 116. 1, 2. I love the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my
supplication, and therefore he goes on to thank him, throughout the whole
Psalm. You are to watch unto prayer with thanksgiving: Col. 4. 2.
and therefore, as to watch, to observe, and recollect your own wants, which
you are to pray for, that you may have matter of requests to put up, so also to
observe Gods answers for matter of thankesgiving; and many fill that common
place head full of matter, to furnish them for petitioning, but as for this
other of thankesgiving, they watch not unto it against they come to pray, nor
study matter for that head also; and if any study will furnish you this way, it
is the studying out of Gods answers to your prayers: The reason you pray so
much, and give thanks so little, is, that you mind not Gods answers: you do
not study them. When we have put up a faithful prayer, God is made our debtor
by promise, and we are to take notice of his payment, and give him an
acknowledgement of the receipt of it, he loses of his glory else.

6. As God loses, Reas. 6. We lose much experience.
so your selves also the experience which you might get hereby. 1. Of Gods
faithfulness to us.
1. Both experience of GOD and his faithfulness, which will cause in you, hope
and confidence in God another time, when you have found him again and again
answering your prayers. It was a speech of one eminent in holiness, upon
occasion of the accomplishme^t of a great request made to God by him, That God
having never denied him any request, I have tried God often, now (says he)
henceforth I will trust him; if the hearing the prayers of another, will
encourage us to go to God, (as Psalm. 33. 5. For this cause shall every one
that is godly pray unto thee) much more when we observe, and have experience
that our own are heard: Therefore (says David) Psalm. 116. 1, 2. The Lord has
heard me, and I will call upon him as long as I live: as if he had said, Now
that God has heard me, now I know what to do: this experiment, if I had no
more, is enough to encourage me for ever to pray unto God: I have learned by it
to call upon him, as long as I live. And also 2. by observing Gods answers to
your prayers, 2. Of our own hearts and ways toward him.
you will gain much insight into your own hearts, and ways, and prayers; and
may thereby learn how to judge of them. So Psalm. 66. 18, 19. David's ansurance
that he did not regard iniquity in his heart, was strengthened by Gods having
heard his prayers: for thus he reasons, If I regard iniquity in my heart, God
will not hear me: But God has heard me. For 1. if God does not grant your
petitions, it will put you to study a reason of that his dealing: and so you
will come to search into your prayers, and the carriage of your hearts therein,
to see whether you did not pray amiss; according to that, Ye lust and have
not, because ye ask amiss, James 4. 3. As if you send to a friend, who is
punctual in that point of friendship of returning answers, and uses not to
fail, and you receive no answer from him, you will begin to think there is
something in it: And so also here, When a Petition is denied, you will be
jealous of your selves, and inquisitive, What should be the matter, and so by
that search come to see that in your prayers, which you will learn to mend the
next time. Or 2. if they be answered, yet because that therein usually God
deals in a proportion with you to your prayers, (as you might perceive if you
would observe his dealings with you) you would by this means come to have much
insight into Gods acceptance, and opinion of your ways: For you should see
His dealings with you, and yours with Him, to be exceeding parallel and
correspondent, and hold proportion each with other. So Psalm. 18. 6. In my
distress I called upon the Lord, and so verse 7, 8, etc. he goes on to
describe his deliverance which was the fruit of those prayers, and then at 20,
21. verses, etc. he adds his observation upon both, According to the
cleanness of my hands has he dealt with me, etc. For with the pure thou
shall show thy self pure.

7. You will lose much of your comfort: Reas. 7. We shall lose much comfort.
there is no greater joy than to see prayers answered, or to see souls
converted by us, John 16. 24. Ask and you shall receive, that your joy may be
full: the receiving answers makes joy to abound and overflow. Yea, even when we
pray for others, if our prayers be answered for them, our joies are exceeding
great; much more when in our own behalf: and therein, even in the smallest
things which a Christian does enjoy, does his comfort exceed another, that he
has them by virtue of prayers, and promises: he knows how he came by them;
If stolen waters be sweet, And bread eaten in secret, Pro. 9. 17.
etc. (as Solomon says) to wicked men; begged meat is much more sweet to godly
men: yea, in the very praying for outward mercies, there is more sweetness,
than they have in enjoying them. As it is joy to a good heart to see any one
converted, but much more to him that is the means of it. I have no greater joy
(says S. John) then that my children walk in truth: So to see God do good to
his Church, and hear others prayers is a comfort, but much more to see him do
it at a man's own prayers. Therefore when God restores comfort to a drooping
soul, he is said, Esaias 57. To restore comfort also to his mourners, that is,
to those that prayed and mourned for him, as well as unto that soul it self,
it being a comfort to them to see their prayers answered. Comfort it is many
ways: this subscription, Your loving Father, or, Your assured friend, it
satisfies abundantly: so also, God and we should be of one mind, and concur
in the desire of the same things; Mat. 18. 19.
not two in the earth only agree, but God who is in heaven and we to agree,
this rejoiceth the heart exceedingly. And thus it is when a man perceives his
prayer answered. Therefore you lose much of your comfort in blessings, when you
do not observe answers to your prayers.

Chap. 2.
CHAP. 2.
Three cases propounded: The first, concerning prayers for the Church, and for
the accomplishment of such promises as may fall out in ages to come.

NOw as for rules, and helps to find out Gods meaning toward you in your
prayers, and to spy out answers; and how to know when God does any thing in
answer to your prayers, this is the next thing to be handled: wherein first, I
will answer some cases, and queries which may fall out in several sorts of
prayers, about the answering of them*

1 As first, concerning prayers put up for the Church, for the accomplishment
of such things as fall out in Ages to come.

2 Concerning prayers made for others of your friends, kindred, etc.

3 Concerning those prayers, whether for your selves or others, wherein others
join with you.

For the first.. 1. The full answer to such prayers is to come.
First, there may be some prayers, which you must be content, never your
selves to see answered in this world; the accomplishment of them not falling
out in your time: such as are those you happily make for the calling of the Jews,
the utter downfall of Gods enemies, the flourishing of the Gospel, the full
purity and liberty of Gods Ordinances, the particular flourishing and good of
the society and place you live in: all you whose hearts are right, do treasure
up many such prayers as these, and sow much of such precious seed, which you
must be content to have the Church (it may be) in after Ages to reap: All
which prayers are not yet lost, but will have answers: for as God is an
eternal God, and Christ's righteousness an everlasting righteousness, and
therefore of eternal efficacy, Dan. 9. 24 Being offered up by the eternal
Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. So are prayers also, which are the work of the eternal
Spirit of Christ, made to that God in his Name, and in him are eternally
accepted, and of eternal force, and therefore may take place in after Ages. So
the prayer that S. Stephen made for his persecutors, took place in Saul when
S. Stephen was dead. So David's prayer against Judas, Psalm. 109. 8, 9. took
effect above a thousand years after, as appears, Acts 1. 20. So the prayers
of the Church for three hundred years in the Primitive times, That Kings might
come to the knowledge of the truth, and they lead peaceable and quiet lives in
all godliness and honesty, (which S. Paul in Nero's time exhorted unto, 1.
Tim. 2. 2.) were not answered, and accomplished till Constantines time, when
the Church brought forth a Man-child. Revel. 12 1*
So Esaias 58. after he had exhorted to, and given directions for fasting and
prayer in a right manner, he adjoyneth this promise: Thou shall raise up the
foundation of many generations; thou shall be called the repairer of the
breach, namely for this, because his fasting, and prayers might have influence
into many ages yet to come, in the accomplishment of what was prayed for. And
that which Christ says of the Apostles, reaping the fruit of S. John the
Baptists ministry, and the seed he had sown, is in like manner herein
verified; John 4. 37. One sows and another reapeth. And in this sense that
which the Papists say is true, that there is a common treasury of the Church,
not of their merits, but of their prayers: there are bottles of tears a
filling, Vials a filling to be powered out for the destruction of Gods enemies:
what a collection of prayers has there been these many Ages toward it? and
that may be one reason why God will do such great things toward the end of
the world, even because there has been so great a stock of prayers going, for
so many ages, which is now to be returned: and herein it falls out to us in our
prayers, as in their prophecies to the Prophets of old, 1. Pet. 1. 11*
The Spirit in them did signify the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that
should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us
they did minister the things that are now revealed: and thus is it in the
spirit of prayer, which is instead of the spirit of prophecy: for we pray
through the guidance of the Spirit (who teaches us what to ask) for many
things that come to pass in after ages.

Only at present,. 2. Yet they may have an answer at present, in assurance
both that they shall come to pass, and of the acceptance of our persons for
them.
it may be, in prayer thou have revealed unto thee by a secret impression made
on thy spirit, that these things shall come to pass, and so have thy faith
confirmed in them, and withal an evidence, that even for thy prayers, among
others, God will perform them; and that the contribution of thy prayers, does
help to make up the sum: and upon such prayers God usually for the present
also testifies the acceptance of a man's person, and reveals himself most to
him that he is his; as he did to Moses; he never revealed his love to Moses
more, then when he prayed most for Gods people. And happily thou have that as one
of thy best evidences of the uprightness of thy heart, that thou can pray
for the Churches good, though for a long time to come which thou may never
behold with thine eyes even as David also did, and rejoiced in it.. 3. And in
heaven we shall rejoice at the accomplishment of them: and at the day of
Judgment*


And when they are accomplished, and thou in heaven, thy joy will surely be
the more full for these thy prayers: as at the conversion of those thou have
prayed for, so at the ruin of the Churches enemies, etc. whom thou did pray
against; For if there be joy in heaven at the conversion of a sinner, (as at
the birth of a new Prince and Heir of heaven) then happily in a proportion he
shall rejoice most, whose prayers had most hand in it, and a special interest
therein. And so as thy other works, so thy prayers follow thee, and the fruit
of them, Ier. 17. 10.
as Jeremy speaks: and how ever, yet at the day of Judgment thou shall
rejoice, as well as they that enjoyed the fruit of thy prayers in their times,
thou having sown the seed of their happiness; both he that sowes, and he
that reapes shall then rejoice together, as Christ says, John 4. 36.

Chap. 3.
CHAP. III.
The second Case, concerning prayers made for others: of our friends, etc. How
they are answered?

THe second case is, concerning answers to our prayers for others, for
particular men, as friends, and kindred, etc. and likewise for temporal
blessings.

Pray for others you know we must: Pray for others we ought.
so the Elders of the Church for those that are sick, Iam. 5. 15, 16. Pray one
for another, says S. James: as in case a man is troubled with a lust, tell
some private friend of it, Confess your sins one to another; that when a man's
own prayers are not strong enough to cast it out, it may be done by the help
of another prayers joined with his. (So it follows, That ye may be healed,
ver. 16. For in that sense I understand healing, in ver. 16.) So also, 1. John
5. 16. If a man see his brother sin a sin, which is not unto death, that is not
against the Holy Ghost, he shall ask life for him, and God shall give him
life, that sins not unto death.

Concerning this case I give these considerations, how such prayers are
answered.

1. Consideration.. 1. Such prayers for others God often grants.
Such prayers God often hears; why else are any such promises made? as That
they shall be healed in their bodies, James 5. 15. Healed of their lusts, ver.
16. Converted to life, 1. Ioh. 5. 16. God has made these to encourage us to
pray, and to testify his abundant love to us; that it so overflowes and runs
over, that he will hear us, not only for our selves, but for others also:
which is a sign we are in extraordinary favor. So God intimates concerning
Abraham, to Abimelech, Genesis 20. 7. He is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee,
and thou shall live: and as he was a Prophet, so we are Priests; as for our
selves, so for others also, to God our Father: and it is a prerogative we have
through the fellowship we have, and communion of Christ's Priestly office,
Revel. 1. 6.
who has made us Kings and Priests, to prevail and intercede for others; and
a special token and pledge of extraordinary love. For if God hears a man's
prayers for others, much more for himself in his own behalf. So when Christ
healed the man sick of the palsy, it was, as it is said, For the faith of the
standers by, Matthew. 9. 2. He seeing their faith, said, Thy sins are forgiven
thee; the meaning is, not as if for their faith sake he forgave that man his
sins, Hab. 2. 4.
for, The just does live by his (own) faith: but to encourage them, who out of
faith brought that sick man to him; and us all in like manner to bring others,
and their plaints, by prayer, before him; he therefore then took occasion to
declare and pronounce forgiveness to that poor man;. 2.
he therefore then said, Yet always they do not prevail for the parties
prayer for.
Thy sins are forgiven thee.

2. Consideration: yet secondly, prayers for others may often also not obtain
the particular thing prayed for them. So Samuels prayer for Saul, 1. Sam. 15.
35. So David for his enemies, Psalm. ^7. 13.

For it is in this, The reason.
as it is ^n the use of other means and ordinances for the good of others; God
making such like kind of promises to our prayers herein, as he has made to
our endeavors to convert when we preach to men: that look as we preach to
many, and yet but few believe, Romans 10. 16.
for, Who has believed our report? even as many as are ordained to eternal
life; we become all to all, and win but some: So we pray for many, not
knowing who are ordained to eternal life, which whilst we know not, we are
yet to pray for them, 1. Tim. 2, 3, 4. Only as where God has set his
Ordinance of Preaching, it is more then a probable sign he has some to
convert, and usually the word takes among some, though often but a few: So when
he has stirred up our hearts to pray for others, it is a sign God will hear
us for some of those we pray for: yet so as we may be denied. For God does
require it as a duty on our parts, because it is an outward means ordained by
God, by which sometimes He uses to bring things to pass: but yet not as such
a certain, and infallible means, as he has tied himself universally unto,
to bring the thing to pass on his part.

And though indeed his promise to hear and accept the prayer is general and
universal: Such promises to hear us for others, being but indefinite, not
universal.
yet the promise to hear it, by granting the very thing it self prayed for,
is but an indefinite promise; such as he makes to other means of doing men
good, as to our admonitions and reproves, and to our preaching, etc. He makes
such promises, because sometimes he does hear and convert by them. For
instance, that promise, Iam. 5. 15. of healing the sick, cannot be universal:
for it might then be supposed as a truth implied in it, that sick men might
never die, when as it is appointed for all men once to die, Heb. 9. 27.
seeing it may be supposed that the Elders may at all such times of danger of
death still come and pray with them: but the meaning is, that it is an
Ordinance, which God has made a gracious promise unto, because he often does
restore the sick at their prayers: and therefore upon every such particular
occasion, we are to rely upon God for the performance of it, by an act of
recumbencie; though with an act of full assurance that we shall obtain it, we
cannot; the promise being not universal, out indefinite.

Of the like nature are all other promises of things temporal and outward,
Illustrated by the like tenor of all promises of things temporal.
(of which we herein speak) as when God promises to give long life to them
that honor their parents; riches and honors to them that fear Him; the
tenor and purport of which promises is not, as if absolutely, infallibly, and
universally God does always perform these to those that are yet truly
qualified with the conditions specified in those promises; The contrary both
Scripture, instances, and common experience shows: they are therefore
indefinitely meant, and so to be understood by us; for, because when ever God
does dispense any such mercies to any of his, he would do it by promise; All
his ways to His being truth, that is, the fulfilling of some truth promised;
and also God having purposed in his outward dispensation of things here in this
world, to bestow riches and honors upon some that fear him, (though not upon
al, for how then should all things fall alike to all? Eccles. 7. 2.
Poverty and cotempt upon them that fear God, even as well as those that fear
him not.) He has therefore indefinitely expressed His gracious dispensation
herein: The faith toward them required to be but an indefinite act of
recumbency not of assurance.
requiring answerably an act of says (which principle in us is suited to a
promise, as a faculty is to its proper object) suitable to that his meaning in
the promise; That as he intended not in such promises an absolute, infallible,
universal obligation of himself to the performance of them to all that fear
him: so the act of faith which a man is to put forth toward this promise, in
the application of it for his own particular, is not required to be an
absolute, infallible persuasion, and assurance that God will bestow these
outward things upon him, having these qualifications in him; but only an
indefinite act (as I may so call it) of recumbency and submission; casting and
adventuring our selves upon him for the performance of it to us, not knowing
but he may in his outward dispensations make it good to us, yet with submission
to His good pleasure, if otherwise He disposes it. Though of assurance to the
promise in general, yet not in the application of it.


It is true indeed, that that act of general assent, which faith is to give to
this promise in the general abstract truth of it, is to be an assured
certain persuasion and belief, that God has made this promise, and that He
certainly will, and does perform it unto some according to his purpose
expressed therein; which act of general assent, is that believing without
wavering, namely of the truth of the promise in general, which S. James calls
for in prayer, Iam. 1. 6. But yet that special act of application (as Divines
call it) required in this faith, whereby I am to rest upon it, for my own
particular, is not required to be such an undoubted persuasion, as to think
that I shall certainly have this particular promise in kind fulfilled to me;
for the truth, purpose, and intent of the promise, is not universal, but
indefinite. So as it is but an it may be (as God elsewhere expresses such
promises, as Zeph. ^. 1, 2.) That it shall be performed to me: and yet because
it may be God will perform it unto me, therefore my duty is to cast my self
upon God, and put in for it, with submission to His good pleasure for the
performance of it to me. So that so far as the truth and intent of it, is
revealed to be infallible and certain, so far a man is bound to have an
answerable act of faith, of certain and infallible persuasion toward it, as
to believe without wavering that God has made such a promise, and will perform
it according to His intent in making it, which is unto some: but yet withal
because the tenor of it is but indefinite, and in that respect, whether it
shall be performed to me or no, is not therein certainly revealed; Therefore
God requires not of me in the application of such a promise, an absolute full
persuasion that He will perform it to me in such or such a manner, etc. But
only an act of dependence and adherence with referring it to his wise and
righteous good pleasure toward me.

And yet again if God should at any time give a man such a special faith
concerning any such particular temporal blessing for himself or another, Yet
when God sometimes gives a special faith, then we are to be assured the thing
shall be done.
then he is bound to believe it thus in particular: as when He gave power to
any to work miracles, (as to his Apostles He did, with a Commission to work
them,) then they were bound to believe that such and such a miracle should
infallibly be wrought by them; as that the Devils should be cast out by them,
etc. And therefore in this case Christ rebukes His Disciples, for not believing
thus upon such particular occasions, Matthew. 17. 20. And then it is also true,
that if God give such a faith, He will infallibly perform it: and thus those
his words are to be understood, Matthew. 27. 22. Whatsoever ye ask in faith
believing, An objection prevented.
ye shall receive, he speaks it of the faith of miracles, for 21. ver. he
had said, If ye believe and doubt not, ye shall say to this Mountain, remoove
into the sea, and it shall be remooved: so that, when God works such a faith,
and we are called to it, we are bound to believe with a certain persuasion
that such a thing will be done, and it shall be done: but unto such a kind of
special faith in temporal promises for our selves or others, God does not now
always call us. If indeed at any time we did believe and doubted not, by
reason of a special faith wrought by God, that GOD would remove a mountain
into the Sea, or bestow any outward mercy, it should be done: for he that
stirred up such a faith, would accomplish the thing: but it is not that, which
God requires of believers, that they should without doubting thus believe
concerning outward things; the promises thereof being not universal, but
indefinite; and therefore answerably a man is not absolutely bound to believe
that God will certainly bestow such a temporal blessing on him, no not though
he should have the qualification, which the promise being not universal, made
^o all so qualified, but indefinite to some of such so qualified. The case is
the same of believing promises made to our praying for others, which is the
thing in hand.

. 3. Such prayers for others are often returned into our own bosom.
3. When the prayers ^re thus made out of concience of our duty for such, whom
yet God does not intend that mercy unto, then they are returned again into our
own bosoms to our advantage: even as S. Paul says, that his rejoicing that
others preached, though they lost their labor, should turn to his salvation,
Phil. 1. 20. So prayers for others, though to the parties themselves we prayed
for they prove in vain, yet they turn to our good So Psalm. 35. 12, 13. When
his enemies were sick, David he prayed and humbled himself; and my prayers
(says he) returned into my bosom David did by this his prayer in secret for
his enemies, testify the sincerity of his heart to God and his true
forgiveness of them (for it is the usual disposition of Gods children, to
pray for them that are the greatest enemies to them,) and this prayer though it
did not profit them, yet it turned to David's own good, it came back, and home
again to him, with blessings to himself; God delighting in, and rewarding
such a disposition in his child, as much as any other; The Reason.
because therein we resemble Christ so truly, and show that God is our Father,
and our selves to have his bowels in us; and God stirs up this praying
disposition in his children for their enemies, not always that he means to
hear them for them, but because he means to draw forth, and so have an
occasion to reward those holy dispositions, which are the noblest parts of his
image in them and wherewith he is so much delighted; and so their prayers
return into their own bosom, and it is taken, as if they had prayed for
themselves all that while. Thus in like manner, when Moses prayed so earnestly
for the people of Israel, God offered to return his prayer into his own
bosom, and do as much for him alone, as he had desired that God would do
for them. Exodus 32. 10.
I will make of thee a great Nation (says God to him) for whom I will do as
much for thy sake, as thou have prayed I should do for these. As in preaching
the Gospel, Christ told the Disciples, That if in any house they came to preach
peace, there were not a Son of peace, Luke 10. on whom the message might take
place, and their peace rest, Your peace (says he) shall return unto you
again. So is it, if your prayers take not place.

. 4. Good often in the end casts such out of our prayers he intends not to
hear us for.
4. If we have prayed long for those, whom God ^ntends not mercy unto, he will
in the end cast them out of our prayers and hearts, and take our hearts off
from praying for them. That which he did by a revelation from heaven to some
Prophets of old, as to Samuel and Jeremiah, the same he does by a more
undiscerned work; that is, by withdrawing assistance to pray for such; by
withdrawing the spirit of supplication from a man, for some men, and in some
businesses. Now thus he did with Samuel; Why do thou mourn for Saul? The
Reason.
1. Sam. 16. 1. So with Jeremiah, Jer. 7. 16. Pray not for this people: and
this he does, because he is loath when his people do pray but to hear them;
and would not that such precious breath as that of prayer is, should be
without its full and direct success, or be in vain: therefore when he means
not to hear, he lays the key of prayer out of the way, so desirous is he to
give answers to every prayer. It falls out in this case of praying for another,
as in reproving another. One whom God intends not good unto, God will lock up a
man's heart toward such a man, that he shall not be able to reprove him, when
toward another God does enlarge it as much, where he intends good; thus it is
sometimes in praying for another; so as in praying a man shall not be able to
pray for, as not to reprove such a man, though his heart was to do both: but
it fares with him as God threatens concerning Ezekiel toward that people,
that he makes his tongue cleave to the roof of his mouth. Ezekiel. 3. 26.


. 5. God sometimes answers those prayers in some others who^ we prayed not for.
5. God will hear those prayers for, and answer them in some others, in whom
we shall have as much comfort, as in those we prayed for: and so it often
proves and falls out. God, The reason.
to show he looks not as man looks, nor chooses as he chooses, lets our
hearts be set on work to pray for the conversion or good of one he intends not
mercy to; and then answers them in some other, whom He makes as dear unto us.
When God had cast off Saul, still Samuels heart lingered after him, and he
mourned for him: but God at the same time, when he bids him cease mourning for
Saul, 1. Sam. 16. to show that yet he accepted that his mourning as it came
from him; Go (says he) and anoint one of the sons of less, 1. Sam. 16. 1.
Samuel desired to see a good successor in that government, and he having been
their ruler, it was his special care; and he having anointed Saul, it
exceedingly grieved him, that he should prove so wicked; and God saw and
answered the ground of his desires; and therefore immediately upon his prayers,
sent him to anoint the best King that ever was upon that Throne, who was the
issue and Man-child of those his prayers. And again, when Samuel came to
anoint one of the sons of Iesse; when he saw Eliab, ver. 6. Surely (says he)
the Lords anointed is before me: If Samuel had been to choose, he would have
chosen him, and would have prayed for and desired him: but God sees not as man
sees, ver. 7. and chooses not as man chooses: but in David was his prayer
fully heard, and answered, and that better. So Abraham he had prayed for
Ishmael; and Oh let Ishmael, live in thy sight! Genesis 17. but GOD gave him Isaac
in stead of him. So perhaps thou prayest for one child more then for another,
out of thy natural affection, looking on his countenance and stature; as Samuel
did on Eliabs: but yet thy prayers being sincere in the ground of them, in that
thou desire a child of Promise, God therefore answers thee, though in
another, for whom yet happily, thy heart was not so much stirred; who yet when he
is converted, proves to thee as great a comfort; and it is as much as if that
other thou did most pray for, had bin wrought upon.

Chap. 4.
CHAP. IV.
The third Case, about such prayers wherein others join with us. How therein
to discern the influence of our own prayers.

THe third Case to be considered is, when a man prays for something with
others; or which others likewise pray for with him, so as he is not alone in
it; how then should he know, that his prayers have a hand in obtaining it, as
well as theirs? For in such cases Satan is apt to object; though the thing is
granted indeed; yet not for thy prayers, but for the prayers of those others
joined in it with thee.

. 1. If our hearts were affected in praying with the same holy affections
wherewith others that prayed with us were.
1. If thy heart did sympathize, and accord in the same holy affections with
those others in praying, then it is certain thy voice has helped to carry it;
If two agree on earth (says Christ) Matt. 18. 19. the word is (...), that is,
if they harmonially agree to play the same tune: for prayers are music in Gods
ears, and so called Melody to God, Ephesians. 5. 19 It is not simply their
agreeing in the thing prayed for, but in the affections: for it is the
affections that make the consort and the melody: now if the same holy
affections were touched, and struck by Gods spirit in thy heart, that in theirs,
then thou do help to make up the consort; and without thee it would have
been imperfect: yea, without thee the thing might not have been done; for God
stands sometimes upon such a number of voices, and one voice casts it; as when
he named ten righteous persons to save Sodom: when therefore the same holy
motives and affections acted thee in thy prayer, which did them in theirs, it
was the work of the same spirit, both in them and thee, and God has heard
thee.

Especially if God did stir up the same secret instinct in thee, Especially
when this sympathy is unbeknowne each to other.
to sympathize with another in praying for such a thing unbeknowne one to
another, as sometimes it falls out; then surely thy prayers are in it as well
as his. You shall observe sometimes a general instinct of the Spirit, put into
Gods peoples hearts, generally to pray for or against a thing, without each
others stirring up one another: even as Ezekiel by the river Chebar prophesied
the same things Jeremiah did at home at Jerusalem. Thus against the time that
Christ the Messiah came in the flesh, there was a great expectation raised up
in the hearts of the godly people, to look and pray for him, Luke 2. 27. and 38.

. 2. By some special evidence: as first, sometimes by some notable
circumstance.
2 God does usually, and often evidence to a man, that his prayers contributed,
and went among the rest toward the obtaining of it; as,

1 By some circumstance: as for example, sometimes by ordering it so, that that
man that prayed most for a thing of concernement, should have the first news
of it when it comes to be accomplished: which God does, as knowing it will be
most welcome news to him. God does herein, as we do with a friend, who we
know is cordial in, and wishes well to a business; he sends him the first
word of it, who was most hearty in it, and prayed most about it. Good old
Simeon, had surely been earnest in seeking the Lord, as well as the rest in
Jerusalem, to send the Messiah into the world, to restore and raise up the
ruins of Israel, for God did reveal to him, that he should see him before he
died: and therefore to evidence to him his respect to his prayers, God carried
the good old man into the Temple, just at the time when the Child was brought
into the Temple, for to be presented to the Lord, Luke 2. 27, 28. And in like
manner good Anna, who had served God with fasting and prayer, night and day:
God orders it so, that she must also come in at the same instant, Luke 2. 38.
By some such like peculiar circumstance or other, does God often use to
witness to a man's heart, that he has heard him in businesses, prayed for in
common with others.

Secondly, by the hearts being filled with much joy in the accomplishment.
2. By filling the heart with much joy in the accomplishment of what a man
prayed for: which is an evident argument that his prayers did move the Lord to
effect it, as well as the prayers of others. Thus that good old Simeon, seeing
his prayers now answered, he was even willing to die through joy; and thought
he could not die in a better time, Lord now let thy servant depart in peace.
For when the desires have vented and laid out much of themselves, then when the
return comes home, they have an answerable part and share in the comfort of it:
and as desires abounded in praying, so will joy and comfort also in the
accomplishment. As when a Ship comes home, not only the chief owners, but
every one that ventured shall have a share out of the return, in a proportion
to the adventure: so here, though some one whom it mainly concerns has
especial interest in the mercy obtained, yet thou shall have thy prayers out
in joy from God, that the thing is granted. S. Paul had planted a Church at
Thessalonica, but he could not stay to water it with his own preaching, yet
when absent, he waters those Plants which he had set, with prayers, night and
day; 1. These. 3. 10. Night and day praying exceedingly for you, says he: and
as his prayers were exceeding abundant for them, so was his joy as abundant in
them, when he had heard that they stood steadfast, and fell not back again;
Now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord, ver. 8. And what thanks can we
render to God for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes, before the
Lord? ver. 9.

3 By thankfulness for it when accomplished.
3. If God give you a heart thankful for a blessing vouchsafed to another,
prayed for by you with others, it is another sign your prayers have some hand
in it: S. Paul knew not what thanks to give for the answering of his prayers,
as in that forementioned place. Old Eli had put up but one short ejaculatory
petition that we read of, for Hannah, and that was The Lord grant thy
petition, 1 Samuel 1. 17. and for the return of that one prayer when Hannah
related how God had answered her, ver. 26, 27. he returned solemn thanks,
And he worshipped the Lord there. ver. 28.

3. Especially when the thing obtained co^cernes a man's own particular.
And lastly, in case the thing concerned thy self, which was prayed for by
others helping thee therein, what cause have thou but to think that it was
granted for thy own prayers, and not for theirs only? seeing God stirred up
their hearts to pray for thee, and gave thee a heart to pray for thy self, and
besides, gave thee the thing which thou desiredst: which argues thou art
beloved as well as they, and accepted as well as they. I know this shall turn to
my salvation through your prayers, says S. Paul, Phil. 1. 19. though their
prayers went to the business, yet had not S. Paul been accepted himself, the
prayers of all the men in the world, would have done him but little good. God
may hear the prayers of the godly, for wicked men, when they do not pray
themselves, in temporal things; so he did hear Moses for Pharaoh, Abraham
for Abimelech; and he may hear godly men the sooner for others prayers; so he
heard Aaron and Miriam the sooner, for Moses his sake, Numb. 12. 13: But if God
stirs up thy heart to pray for thy self, as well as others for thee; then God
that gave thee a heart to pray, has heard thy prayers also, and has had a
respect to them more in it then to theirs, because it concerned thy self, as a
more special mercy unto thee.

Chap. 5.
CHAP. V.
Common directions helpful in all cases and prayers. First, from such
observations as may be taken, from before, and in praying.

HAving premised these Cases, I come now to more general and common directions
to help you in discerning and observing the mind of God, and his answers to
you in your prayers. All which directions are such, as may be helpful in all
the forementioned cases, and in all sorts of prayers whatever. And they are
taken from observations, to be made upon your prayers, etc. Both before, in,
and after praying;

1. Before: when God prepares the heart to pray.
First, Before praying; when God bespeaks a prayer, (as I may so speak) that
is, when God secretly speaks to the heart to pray much about a thing; I
express it thus according to that phrase of David, Psalm. 27. 8. Thou said
seek my face: and I said, Thy face Lord will I seek: now God then speaks to
the heart to pray, when not only he puts upon the duty by saying to the
conscience, this thou ought to do: but Gods speaking to pray is such, as
his speech at first was, when he made the world, when he said, Let there be
light, and there was light: so he says, Let there be a prayer, and there is a
prayer, that is, he powers upon a man a spirit of grace and supplication, a
praying disposition; he puts in motives, suggests arguments and pleas to God;
all which you shall find come in readily, and of themselves; and that likewise
with a quickening heat, and enlargement of affections, and with a lingering, and
longing, and restlessenesse of spirit to be alone, to power out the soul to
God, and to vent and form those motions and suggestions into a prayer, till
you have laid them together, and made a prayer of them. And this is a speaking
to the heart: and observe such times when God does thus, and neglect them not;
then to strike, whilst the iron is hot; thou have then his ear, it is a
special opportunity for that business, such an one as thou may never have
the like. Suitors at Court observe mollissima fandi tempora, their times of
beging, when they have Kings in a good mood, which they will be sure to take
the advantage of; but especially if they should find that the King himself
should begin of himself to speak of the business which they would have of
him: and thus that phrase of Psalm. 10. 17. is understood by some, that God
prepares the heart, and causes the ear to hear; that is, he fashions it,
and composeth it into a praying frame. And sure it is a great sign that God
means to hear us, The difference between Satan's unseasonable urging us to
pray, and Gods moving us.
when himself shall thus indite the Petition.

And by the way let me give this note of difference, between these speakings
to the heart, and those whereby Satan puts us upon such duties at unseasonable
hours and times; as when we are otherwise necessarily to be employed in our
callings, to eat, or to sleep, etc. then to put upon praying, is a device of
his he uses, to tire out new converts with. The difference will appear in
this, the devil comes in a violent imperious manner upon the conscience, but
inlargeth not the heart a whit unto the duty: but whenever God at such
extraordinary by-times does call upon us, he fits and prepares the heart, and
fills the soul with holy suggestions, as materials for the duty; for
whatsoever he calls to, he gives abilities withal to the thing he calls for.

And thus usually, when he will have any great matters done and effected, he
sets men's hearts a work to pray, by a kind of gracious pre-instinct; he
stirs them up and touches the strings of their hearts, by his Spirit sent
down upon them: Thus against the return of the captivity he stirred up
Daniels heart, Dan. 9. 1. He knowing by books, the time to be near expiring
was stirred up to seek God: Dan. 9. 2.
and so he that made this Psalm, Salvation being then nigh, ver. 9. 10. then
God stirred him up to pray, and pen this prayer for their return: which God
had foretold he would do, Ier. 29. 10, 11, 12. For having promised ver. 10. I
will cause you to return after seventy years: Then (says he, ver. 12.) shall
ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto
you: he speaks it not only by way of command, what it was they ought to do;
but as prophesying also what they should do; for then he meant to stir up
their hearts; as then he did, as appears by those forementioned instances.
Therefore observe what things, God, thus by an instinct does enlarge thy heart
to pray for at times, and sometimes at extraordinary by-times, when happily thou
did not think to pray about any such thing, yet he then stirred thee up
most, it may be, as thou were walking, etc. and having spare time, he draws
thee into his presence and moves thee in that manner specified.

. 2. 2 In prayer: Gods speaking to the heart in prayer, an evidence of hearing:
which may be discerned.
Now secondly: as God thus speaks to the heart to pray, so also in praying; and
his speaking to the heart in prayer may be discerned by these particulars.

1 By giving a quiet rest of spirit about the thing prayed for, in and by
prayer.
1. When God quiets, and calmes, and contents the heart in prayer, which is done
by speaking something to the heart, though what is spoken, be not always
discerned: If you should see one, who was an earnest and importunate suitor and
exceeding anxious when he went in to a great man, but behold him after coming
out from him contented, and quieted, and cheerful in his spirit, you would
conceive that certainly something had been said to him, which gave him
encouragement, satisfaction and contentment in his suit; Thus when thou go
to God, and have been importunate in a business, (as suppose for Christ, Oh
give me Christ, or else I die!) and thy desires were exceedingly up for it; But
thou risest up with thy mind calmed and satisfied, and feel the
anxiousnesse, the solicitude of thy heart about the thing taken off, and
dispelled; This is a good sign that God has heard thy Prayer, and has spoken
something to thy heart, which makes it thus composed. When Hannah out of much
bitterness and with strong desires (which by a long delay had bin made more
violent, so as her heart was much disquieted (for, Prove. 13. 12. Hope, and by
the same reason, desire also deferred makes the soul sick) when out of the
abundance of her grief, she had poured her soul out before the Lord, 1. Sam.
1. 16. Eli the Priest joining in prayer also for her, The Lord grant thy
petition! after that prayer she found her heart so quieted, that she looked no
more sad, as the Text says there; She arose quieted, and calmed, and it was
that prayer, that did both fill Elies mouth, with that word of prophecy, and
her heart with quietness, and a secret word from God accompanying it, that did
still those waves: and accordingly God gave her a Son, a Son of her desires.
And the like God does now, by speaking (as I said) something to the heart: as
by dropping in some promise or other into the heart, or some like
consideration; saying as it were to the heart, even as Eli from God did to her,
The Lord grants thy petition; As to S. Paul, when he was earnest with God about
removing his buffetings by Satan (which whether they were the stirring up a
lust, or temptations of blasphemy, I do not now dispute) I besought God
thrice, that is, earnestly (says he,) that it might depart; and to this he
had an answer in the mean time given him, till it should be taken away;
enough to still and quiet him, so 2. Cor. 12. 8, 9. And he said, that is, in
prayer the Lord did put in this consideration and promise into his thoughts,
And he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee, and my power is made
perfect in weakness: This answer thus coming in, this promise thus seasonably
suggested stayed and quieted Paul's heart. In like manner thou have (it may be)
been long praying against poverty, or the like distress, and God lets fall
this or the like promise into thy heart, I will never leave thee, Heb. 13. 5.
nor forsake thee, which quiets and contents thy mind. This is an answer, and
observe such answers, for they are precious.

2 When God draws nigh and reveals His love in and upon such a petition.
2. If whilst thou art a praying, God does draw nigh to thy soul, and
reveals himself to it, in and upon such, or such a particular petition. As
in case thou did mainely intend when thou did begin to pray, to set thy
self to beg some temporal mercy at his hands, some great matter for the good
and prosperity of the Church (as Daniel, Chap. 9. did set himself to seek God
for the return of the Captivity:) and even before thou come to ask it, or
in asking it, God smiles upon thee, welcomes thee: falls about thy neck and
kisseth thee: This thou art to observe as a sign he hears thy prayer, and
accepts both thee and it; when there is such a strong sense of Gods favor,
and presence, whilst thou art upon such a suit and request, more then at other
times, or then in other passages of the same prayer, this is a token God hears
thee, in that particular, and thou art to observe this his speaking to thy
heart: When thus thou shall no sooner come into his presence to enquire of him,
but he says, Here I am, as the promise is, Esaias 58. 9. Therefore, Psalm. 69.
17, 18. Hear me speedily says David; and (that I may know thou hear me)
draw nigh to me: therefore when God draws nigh to thee, it is a sign he
hears thee. Daniel having fasted and prayed for three weeks together, Dan.
10. 2, 3: Then an Angel came, and one of the three Persons came and told him,
he was a man greatly beloved, ver. 11 and 19. when in like manner God by his
Spirit comes down, and meets thee, and tells thy heart in secret that thou art
His beloved, and He is thine, then thy prayers are certainly heard: for if he
accepts thy person, much more thy prayers, 1. John 5. 19, 20. Men, false men,
(false upon the balance, as David speaks, when they come to be tried and
weighed,) they will out of cunning use suitors most kindly then, when they
mean to put them off, and deny them their requests: But God who is truth and
faithfulness it self, does not use so to deal, but when he means to answer
the prayer, He withal sometimes reveals his free grace most, to the end they
may see and acknowledge the fountain of all, to be his everlasting love, and
so take the thing granted as a fruit of it, and thereby come to be the more
abundantly thankful.

Only let me add this Caution, A caution: That yet this is not always an
infallible sign the thing is granted, though that the prayer is accepted.
which may be of great use to you. That it is not always infallibly true,
that when God draws nigh to you in a particular request, that that request in
particular, shall be granted in that manner you desired, but it is a certain
evidence that thy prayer is heard, and that the thing thou ask is agreeable
to his will, and that he approves of thee and thy request exceedingly, and
thinks the better of thee for it, and he will give thee it, or something
that is better* There may be herein and sometimes is a mistake of Gods meaning,
to think that always, then the thing shall be granted, when God draws nigh
to a man: experience sometimes shows the contrary.



approving will of the thing prayed for. Now GOD approves many things, he
decrees not. The reasons why God sometimes draws nigh when he grants nor the
thing.
There is his approving will and his decreeing will. God may show his approving
will of the thing thou ask, (as suppose it be in view a matter which is of
great consequence for the Church;) which he does for thy encouragement: but
yet it follows not, that his decreeing will is for the accomplishment of that
very thing in particular.

2. God may accept the person and the prayer, when he does not grant the thing
prayed for; and by that drawing nigh witness his acceptance of thy person and
the prayer. Yea,

3. That revealing of himself is oftentimes all the answer he intended to such
a prayer, and it is answer enough too, to enjoy in the stead of a particular
mercy the assurance of Gods love. As suppose thou did pray against some evil
coming upon his Church, which he yet intends to bring; which he did set thy
heart a work to pray against, thereby to manifest the sincerity thereof; and
then he seeing thee thus sincere draws nigh to thee, and tells thee, however,
it shall go well with thee, and that thou art greatly beloved of Him: Thou art
sometime to take this for all the answer he means to give. And this he does
sometimes also to content the heart, and prepare it for a denial in the thing:
whereas, otherwise, the denial of what a Christian has been earnest in, might
occasion (as in many it does) a questioning and doubting of Gods love.

. 4. God some times stirs up a particular faith of assurance in some businesses.
3 When God stirs up in the heart a particular faith in a business: as
sometimes He does, and upholds the heart to wait for it, maugre all
discouragements. So he did in David, Psalm. 27. 3. David was then in great
hazards by reason of Saul or Absalom, and those such and so often, as that to
sense and outward probabilities he was like never to live quietly again at
Jerusalem and enjoy Gods Ordinances there in peace; but for this David had
prayed, and had made it as the grand request of his whole life (as every man
has some one great request of all other, even as He has some special grace
above all other, or gift, etc. so request to God next to His salvation, as
happily for his Ministry, or the like, therefore says David, verse 4. This one
thing have I desired) and accordingly God gave him a special faith in this
thing above all other, because it was his great request, In this will I be
confident* verse 3. And though an host of men should again and again
incompasseme, says he, yet in this I will be confident, that I shall still
escape, and see Jerusalem again, and enjoy the Ordinances and live in peace;
and though his faith failed him often (as in the persecution of Saul it did)
for he said he should one day perish by the hand of Saul: 1 Samuel 27. 1
yet at other times his faith was marvellously upheld, and he was confident in
this. He used not to be so, in other requests thus absolutely particularly and
distinctly, and therefore he says, In this, etc. As there is a witness of the
Holy Ghost immediate to the heart, sealing up adoption to a man's person, so in
some cases, there is the like testimony for the obtaining of some eminent thing
we have asked. Which particular special faith, does in a kind of similitude
answer to the faith of miracles of old, whereby a man had a particular
confidence, that God would do such a miracle by him: so in and by means of
prayer, in some things there may be a particular strengthening and assuring the
heart, that God will do such a thing for a man: which I confess is rare and
extraordinary, as also that immediate testimony concerning our persons is,
which many want that go to heaven. And happily this other concerning the
accomplishment of special mercies, is much more rare; and but in some
businesses; and is a thing which some men are not acquainted with, but yet may
be in some cases existent to some men's spirits, as it was to David's in the
thing mentioned.

And concerning this also I will also add a Caution, A caution, that herein a
conditional evidence be not taken for absolute.
as about the former. That it does not always fall out upon all such kind of
evidences made to a man's spirit, and that by God, that the thing prayed for
does come to pass. For these very persuasions stirred up by God, may be and
are often but conditional, though thus immediately made to a man's spirit, and
are so to be understood, and not peremptory and absolute. It cannot be
imagined that all these should always be of greater absoluteness and
peremptorinesse, than were many of those revelations made by God to the
Prophets, wherein He manifested his gracious purpose toward such a man or
people, either to vouchsafe them such a mercy, or bring such a judgment;
which forewarnings though they were particular and express, yet limited and
intended with a condition, according to the performance, or not performance of
which, it fell out, either the judgment expressly threatened was diverted, or
that good thing which was as directly and fully promised, was not bestowed: as
it was in the case of Jonas threatening the destruction of Nineveb; and so in
the promise concerning Ely's house, 1. Sam. 2. 30. I said indeed that thy
house, and the house of thy father should walk before me for ever, but now
the Lord says, it shall not be so: For they had broken the condition which
was implied in it; they had despised the Lord; and them that despise me, says
God there, I will despise. In like manner is Gods meaning, expressed toward us
in such like persuasions wrought in us by prayer, to be understood; as that
such mercies will surely come to pass, but still under a condition of
obedience, and performing of those vows, which a man joined with those his
petitions, to move the Lord to grant the things; which if a man fail in, or
cease to go on to believe, it may and does often come to pass, that things
fall out contrary to that persuasion, and then we are apt to question whether
it was from God or no; which it might be, and truly wrought by his Spirit and
yet not always absolutely meant (that was your mistake so to take it) but
conditionally only. For in such great requests of the soul unto God there use
to pass mutual covenants between God and us; and Indentures are drawn and
sealed unto by us, that is, we in prayer, offer and promise to do thus and
thus, if God will vouchsafe us such a mercy, and plead it to God to move him
to bestow it; and God, he thereupon (it may be) seals a covenant on his part
to grant the thing, and works such an undoubted persuasion; but if we in that
interim of waiting for that mercy, do deal falsely in that covenant which we
made; and this even whilst we are yet in dependence upon God for it; whereby
it appears that we would have done so much more after we should have received
it once, in this case God denies the thing, and yet notwithstanding, that
persuasion and evidence was from God that heard the prayer. He said indeed he
would do thus and thus for thee: (as he told David, I would have given thee
much more:) because thou said to him, thou would walk thus and thus, or
did vow this or that to him; thou failest in thy word, upon which God uttered
his; and thereupon says God as to Ely, Now it shall not be so, and yet God had
spoken it before, and not Satan, nor thine own heart only.

. 5. When God puts a restless importunity into the heart, to pray for a
particular mercy.
4. When God does put a restless importunity into the heart, maugre all
discouragements. So in that Psalm 27. 4. One thing I have desired, and I will
seek after it, that is, as I have sought it, so I will not leave seeking to God
for it: when God maintains this in the heart, it is a sign he hears, and
will answer: for you know the Parable, that the unjust Judge heard her for her
importunity; therefore when God puts an importunity into the heart, he means
to hear.

Only this likewise is to be added in this, A double importunity: one
accepted, not the other.
There is a double importunity: one out of such an inordinate desire to a
thing, as the heart knows not how to be without such a mercy, and so continues
to ask, but asks amiss, and so receives not, Iam. 5. But there is an
importunity joined with a subjection to Gods will; which when it runs along
with it, then God has stird it up, and then look for something to come;
otherwise you may be importunate, as they seek me daily, when yet God heard
not, Esaias 58. 2.

Chap. 6.
CHAP. VI.
Further Observations to be made, on the dispositions and carriage of our
hearts, after Prayer: until the issue of the thing prayed for.

NExt: after thou have prayed, observe, what God does toward thee.

1. When God gives an obedient dependant heart, in walking before him.
As first, how he does guide thy feet and heart after praying: there is much in
that: that which was the Spirit of supplication in a man when he prayed, rests
upon him as the spirit of obedience in his course; so as that dependence he
has upon God for the mercy he seeks for, is a special motive, and means to
keep him fearful of offending, and diligent in duty; to look to his paths to
walk and behave himself as becomes a suitor, as well as to come and pray as a
suitor. Thus David, he walked by this principle, Psalm. 66. 18. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, God will not hear me; that consideration still came in
as a curb unto sin; and without this a man provokes God, and so casts
himself behind-hand again, and by sinning loses what ground he had got by
praying. Therefore David, Psalm. 145. 8, 9, 10. when he was to pray, even as for
his life, (as then he did, it being a deliverance from his enemies he sought)
he specially prays God to direct him and keep him, that he might not sin
against him; for he knew by sinning he should enervate and spoil all his
prayers: not only hear me speedily (says he) but also Cause me to know the
way wherein I should walk; Teach me to do thy will; this he especially prays
for, and more then for deliverance, for else he knew God would not hear him.
Therefore when thou art in treaty with God for any mercy, observe, does God
still after praying keep thee in a more obedient frame of spirit? it is a sign
he intends to answer thee; as in like manner, when he keeps thee from using
ill means, etc. When he meant to give David the Kingdom, he kept him
innocent, and his heart tender, that it smote him but for cutting off the lap
of Saul's garment: he was not so tender after. Therefore in Psalm. 18. when he
was delivered from all his enemies, he says, God dealt with him according to
his uprightness: for I kept my self from mine iniquity. So also Psalm. 27. 11.

2 When God gives a heart to wait for and expect the mercy.
2 When God after prayer strengthens the heart to wait for the mercy. So Psalm.
27. ult. David having prayed, says to his soul, Wait on the Lord, be of good
courage, and he will strengthen thy heart. Honest men, when they nourish hopes
in one that is in dependence on them, who waits and is obsequious upon the
hopes he has of a suite, use not to deny him: it were dishonesty in the^ to
keep a man underhand, and then frustrate his expectations; Therefore when God
keeps thy soul after praying in such a dependant frame, look for some good
answer. And indeed when a man has prayed long, in the end he begins to wait
(as I may so say) rather tha^ pray (though he pray still) because now he looks
God should perform: before, and at first, he told the Lord he desired it, but
now he can with some boldness tell him, that he waits for it and expects it.
The hope of a godly man and his expectation should make him ashamed if it were
not answered, therefore in this case answers use to come.

Both these two last we have together joined Psa. 37. 34. Wait on the Lord, and
keep his ways, and he shall exalt thee.

Chap. 7.
CHAP. VII.
Observations to be made after prayer, upon the issue of what was prayed for:
and first, if accomplished, whether as the fruit of prayers, or out of common
providence; Helps herein.

WHen a man has thus waited, and kept his way, then let him observe the issue
and conclusion of what he sought for, how things are cast by God. Now of
necessity, one of these two must fall out, that either the thing desired is
accomplished, or not accomplished; and in either of these he may come to spy
out answers to his prayers; for prayer may be answered, though the thing be not
done.

I mean to insist severally on these.

. 1. God sometimes answers the prayer fully in the way and manner desired.
1 If the thing thou prayedst for does come to pass, then what needst thou
doubt of an answer, and whether God heard thee or no? For thou beholdest it
with thine eyes: and so often it falls out, that God does grant according to
the desires of a man's heart; and not only so, but also fulfils his counsel
therein, as it is, Psalm. 20. 4. that is, fulfils not only his desire, and aim
of his prayer, but in that very way, by that very means, which his judgment
and counsel pitched upon in his own thoughts. The desire of the heart may be
satisfied, when God gives some other thing, but the counsel of the heart is
then fulfilled, when a man is answered in that particular, which his own
judgment pitched upon as best for him. For counsel is an act of the
understanding, deliberating about means to an end, and directing to choose a
particular means tending to an end: so that as Eliphaz says to Job, 22. 27,
28. Thou shall make thy prayer to God, and he shall hear thee: and decree a
thing, and it shall be established to thee, that is, a man is guided to decree
and pitch upon such mercies in his prayers, as God makes good in particular:
he says what he would have, and God performs it: and this privilege thou
shall have (says Eliphaz there) if thou will turn to him, and be acquainted
with him, and receive the Law from his mouth: thou shall not err in praying;
but what thou set upon to pray for, shall be accordingly granted to thee*
such a man shall have the privilege, Fingere sibi fortunam in a right sense,
to be his own chooser, and carver of his own mercies; and as Christ said, Be
it according to thy faith, so God says sometimes, Be it according to thy
prayers; and Eliphaz speaks of it as of a special favor, that whereas other
men's prayers are answered obliquely, thine says he shall be answered
directly, which is more comfortable; as direct beams are, and have more heat
in them then collateral and oblique. Thus if a man will hear God and obey
him, God will hear him: for if a man be subject to Christ; Kingly Office, his
Prophetical Office shall guide him, and cause him not to err in his
Petitions; but by an unerring providence and preinstinct infused by his spirit,
God will so guide him, as to ask eve^ that very thing which GOD intends to
give; whereas of himself he knows not what, nor how to ask. So David asked
long life, and God gave it him, Psalm. 21. 2, 3, 4. God not only gave him his
hearts desire, but the request of his lips, v. 2. Hannah asked a son, and God
answered her in the very thing she desired, and therefore she called him
Samuel, 1 Samuel 1. 20. Because (says she) I asked him of the Lord: and Verse 27.
For this child I prayed, and the Lord (did not give another thing in stead of
it, but) has given me my Petition I asked of him. So, 1. Chro. 4. 10. labesh
called on God (it is said) and God granted him the thing he requested. And thus
God often deals with his children. And to this end has God given us his
Spirit; and made Christ Wisdom unto us, who knows what is good for us,
though we do not. And has therefore also commanded us to spy out mercies for
our selves, and then come to him for them: and to this end has made such
particular promises of particular mercies, which he would have us have an eye
unto in our prayers; all which is, because often he means to bestow the very
things we ask.

And yet because, Yet our hearts are often jealous, whether it be an answer to
prayer, or out of common providence.
although we have the very things we did ask and desire, such is the
jealousy and infidelity of our hearts, that we often discern not, nor
acknowledge that it was our prayers, that obtained them from God: but we are
apt, when once we have them, either to look but to things below, and the
second causes of them, though before we did earnestly seek them of God, or
else still distrustfully to question whether or no it was at our prayers that
he granted them, or out of common providence. Thus Job in his distemper, Job
9. 16* although I had called, and God had answered me, yet (says he) I would
not believe that he had hearkened to my voice, that is, not that he did it in
respect to my prayer and request, because he now deals so feverely with me,
For he breaks me with a tempest, Ver. 17. And thus do our distrustful
hearts, (which are apt to be unsatisfied with all the cleerest pledges of Gods
favor, and still to misconstrue and pervert them,) although God does answer us
upon our calling upon him, yet we will not believe that he hearkened to our
prayer in it. Therefore that you may be further enabled to discern, how, and
when things you prayed for, come in by prayer; I give you these further
directions.

. 2. Directions to help to discern this.
1. When God does a thing in answer to prayers, he often does it in such a
manner, that his hand may be in a more then ordinary manner seen in it. 1 From
the manner of Gods performance: God discovers a more then ordinnary hand of
providence in things accomplished by prayer: instanced and discovered in 5.
particulars.
There are few prayers, wherein a man has sought God much, but in the answers
of them God discovers himself much, and turns many great wheels in the
accomplishment of them, and manifests (as David desires, Psalm. 17. 7.) his
marvelous loving kindness; and indeed, when GOD hears prayers, that have
been a long while a making, He shows usually half a miracle one way or
other.

Now GOD discovers his immediate hand in the answers of prayers many ways.

1 By bringing it to pass through many difficulties.
1. When he carries a thing through many difficulties, when there were a great
many cross wards in a business prayed for, the least whereof would have kept
the key from turning: when GOD shall make (as it were) a key on purpose to
unlocke it; when God plots and contrives all the passages in a business thou
did pray for, and so accomplisheth it; This is a sign, it is a fruit of
prayer, and that prayer had been a making that key all that while: So in
bringing David to the Kingd me; Joseph out of prison; Mordecai to honor: and
likewise S. Peter out of prison, which was done at the prayers of the Church,
Act. 12. He was sleeping between two soldiers: if they had waked, he had
been discovered: and he was in chains, but they fall off, ver. 6. 7. And the
Keepers stood before the door, but they mind him not, ver. 6. and when one
watch is past, he passes quietly through another, ver. 10. and when both
those were past, an Iron gate flies open of its own accord, ver. 10. Now such
difficulties are there in many businesses, which yet in the end are
accomplished by prayer: Iron chains fall off, Iron gates, enemies hearts fly
open of their own accord; and though not in that miraculous manner, by the
means of an Angel, yet no less wonderfully.

Or secondly by facilitating all the means and causing them to conspire to
accomplish it.
Or secondly when God facilitates all means to accomplish the thing which was
prayed for, so as all means do in view conspire and combine in it, that thou
have wind and tide, and a fair day, and all the way paved; or as David says,
have thy way made plain before thee; and there falls out a great conjunction
and meeting of many circumstances together to effect it, which had influence
into it, whereof if any one had been wanting, happily the thing had not been
done, when the thing prayed for is thus granted, prayer then has done it.
Thus, when he delivered the people of Israel out of Egypt, which was the
accomplishment of their long desires and prayers, (their cry came up the Text
says) how were all things facilitated! they that detained them do themselves
come, and entreat them to go out, yea, are urgent, says the Text; and that
at midnight: nay, hire them to go out, with their eare-rings; and Pharaoh
himself then parts lovingly and fairly with them, and desires their prayers,
Exodus 12. 31, 33, 35. Ver. 32.
Bless me also: Yea, to show there was no resistance, the Text says, a Dog
did not move his tonguee: The brute Creatures did not disturb the^, though at
midnight, when those Creatures use to be most obstreperous through noises.

3 By bringing it to pass suddenly and unexpectedly.
3. When he does it suddenly, and accomplisheth the thing thou have long prayed
for, ere thou art aware of it: as the return of the Captivity of Babylon,
which was the conclusion of many prayers, was done in a trice, they were as men
in a dream, Psalm. 126. 1. they could scarce believe it was so, when it was
done, it was because they had sown many prayers which came up on the sudden,
ver. 5, 6. So Peter, he was fast asleep, and did not so much as dream of
deliverance. So Joseph's delivery out of prison, and advancement to be the
greatest man in the Kingdom, the suddenness of it showed it was Gods
remembering of him, and hearing his prayers.

4 By doing above what was desired with addition of other mercies.
4. When God grants the thing with an overplus, above what we did ask, and
casts many other mercies in together with that which we long prayed for; this
also may be a sign God did hear our prayers in it: for when he does hear
indeed, he uses to do above what we did ask or think, thereby the more to
overcome the heart. So David asked long life, and he gave him more then he
asked, Psalm. 21. 2, 3, 4, 5. So Solomon he asked but wisdom, and he gave him
more then he asked, Peace, Riches, Honor, and all with it, 1 Kin. 3. 12, 13.
Hannah she asked but one male child, 1 Samuel 1. 10. but God gave her three
sons more and two daughters, Chap. 2. 21. When prayers are answered, usually
mercies come thick, they come tumbling in; the thing we prayed for comes not
alone: as when sins are punished, then miseries also they come like armies in
troops upon us: as temptations likewise come together, and we fall into many of
them at once, Iam. 1. 2.
as S. James speaks: Thus do mercies also.

5 By adding some special circumstance as a token of Gods special hand in it.
5. When the thing is granted by prayers, there is often some particular
circumstance of providence concurrent with it, which is a token for good, and
seals to us that it is from God; such often as a man himself takes notice
of, and which others take notice of also. Show me a token for good, says
David, Psalm. 86. 17. that others may see it and be ashamed: and such tokens
does God often make small circumstances to be. Things small in themselves, may
be magna indicia, great signs and tokens: for example Moses and Aaron, and
the Israelites had long cried to GOD for the deliverance of his people, and
laid up many prayers; their cry came up, as was said; and when God does deliver
them, what tokens were there of good? and of GODS hand in it, and of his answer
to their prayers? The Text notes (as was observed before) that a dog did not
bark at their going out, Exodus 11. 7. which was a small circumstance, but it
was magnum indicium, and so intended by God; for the Text adds, That ye may
know that God puts a difference between the Israelites and the Egyptians. This
was a ^oken of Gods hand, to overruled the tongues of rude bruit creatures,
that use to stir at such unusual noises, and at travelers especially in the
night. So when Isaac and Abraham, and his servant also, had prayed for a Wife
for Isaac, see by what a token God showed he had heard their prayers; Rebekkah
was the first that came out to the servant sent to bring a wife for him: and if
she be the woman appointed for Isaac (says the servant) Let her offer me
drink, Gen 23. 13, 14.
and my Camels also: this was a small thing in appearance, but a great indicium
of Gods hand in it, and therefore the servant bowed at it, and worshipped: and
the sign in it self was such, as argued a good nature in her, and a kind
courteous disposition, which therefore (it may be) he singled out, as a token
of a meet wife, as a thing especially to be looked at in the marriage choice.

3. Observation from the time wherein the thing prayed for is accomplished, as,
Again, the consideration of the time, wherein the things we have asked* are
granted, may much help us to discern, whether it be in answer to our prayers.
For God who does all things in weight and measure, shows his wisdom and love,
as much in the season, as in giving the thing it self: GOD considers all
times of thy life, and still chosseth the best and fittest to answer thy
prayers in, In an acceptable time have I heard thee. So Esaias 49. 8. As David
(in like manner says) he prayed in an acceptable time, Psalm. 69. 13. So
accordingly God answers in the best and most acceptable time to us; for he
waits to be gracious, for he is a God of judgment, Esaias 30. 18. that is, He
is a wise God that knows the fittest times and seasons, wherein to show
kindnesses, and to deal forth his favors in.

1 Sometime the thing is accomplished about the time wherein we are most instant
in prayer.
As first, it may be, that at that very time when thou have been most instant
and earnest, yea even whilst thou art a praying or presently after, the thing
is done and accomplished. To this purpose is that of Esaias 65. 24. That as
sometimes he hears before they call (which argues much love to give mercies
unsought) so also whilst they are speaking, I will hear, and grant the thing,
which argues no less love; and he culs out that time on purpose, that they
might rest assured that it was in answer to their prayer. Thus to assure
Hezekiah his prayer was heard, God sent the Prophet in unto him whilst he was
a praying and weeping, with his head turned toward the wall. So Isaac going
out to pray in the field, meets his Rebekkah then a coming; Genesis 24 63
that blessing of a good Wife, being surely the great request temporal he was
then in Treaty with God for: this Rebekkah was the fruit of many prayers. So
when S. Peter was in prison, the Church being gathered together to pray for
him, S. Peter comes and knocks at the same hour, Acts 12. from the 12. ver. to
the 18. So as it often falls out herein, as to the Ruler in the Gospel, Job. 4.
52. who inquiring diligently, found that the same hour that Christ had said to
him, Thy son lives, his son recovered, and so he believed, and his whole
household: So also here, that sometimes the thing is done, or the news of it
comes the same hour or soon after, wherein a man was praying about it, and
happily then when the heart was most stirred about it, more then at any time
else: this is a sign it was an answer of prayers, and may help to confirm a
man's faith in it, as that also did his.

2 When granted in the fittest time.
Or secondly, when it is the most acceptable and every way the fittest time to
have the thing granted. At that time, 1. when thou had most need, and 2.
when thy heart was most fit for it. For in answering prayers, God aims
especially at two things: 1. To show his mercy, that a man might magnify and
exalt that: And 2. To have the heart satisfied and filled with joy and
contentment in his answer, and the thing made sweet, and a mercy indeed to him:
in brief, that his goodness might be delighted in, and his mercy exalted. The
fittest time known two ways.
And for these two purposes he culs out such times, when we have most need; and
also when our hearts are most subdued, and our lusts mortified. For then we are
fittest to relish his goodness alone, and not to be drawn away with the
carnal sweetness that is in the thing. The one you have expressed, Esaias 30. 18.
He waits to be gracious to have his mercy exalted. The second intimated James
5. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, to consume upon your lusts;
Such prayers, whilst the heart is in this temper, the Lord denies, or deferres
in mercy till the heart be weaned.

1 When we have most need.
For the first of these: As, suppose thou did pray long for assurance of
salvation, and joy in the Holy Ghost, and when thou had most need of it,
either when thy spirit would have failed without it, as Esaias 57. 16. Or against
some great affliction approaching, or some great encounter with the world for
the Name of Christ, then God filled thy heart with it, etc. that was the
fittest time: now has God heard thy prayer. As S. Peter he was in Prison, and
had been so for many days, as appears by the fourth and fifth verses, Acts
12. God could have delivered him at any time, while the Church prayed for him,
ver. 5. But God kept him in on purpose, till that very night, when in the next
morning Herod meant to bring him forth to execution, and then God delivered him
at the prayers of the Church; then was the most fit time; As the Psalmist
says, The full time to have mercy on him was come. Psalm. 102. 1^.
And then to receive an answer, is a sign God did it out of special love,
which love he would have exalted by thee, as Esaias 30. 18.

2. When the heart was best prepared to receive it, and most weaned from it.
If 2. when thy heart was most fit for the mercy, it was granted, then art thou
also heard in an acceptable time: for God does not with hold mercies from those
that are his, out of want of love; neither so much for what is past, as for the
present evil disposition of their hearts, whereby they are unfit to receive
them: and in this sense likewise may that be understood, that God prepares
the heart: and hears the prayer, Psalm. 10. 17.

As first, when thy heart is most weaned from that temporal mercy (supposing
it such) granted thee upon seeking of it: So David, when had he the Kingdom
in possession given him? then, when he was as a weaned child, and had his high
thoughts (which happily at the first news of it had risen in his mind) purged
out, Psalm. 131. 2. I have no high thoughts, etc. says he then; Thus, when thy
heart had let all carnal ends go, and had betaken it self alone to God, for
thy portion to be had alone out of him then the thing prayed for comes to
pass: this was the fittest season.



better then life, and therefore much better than that thing enjoyed; and
indeed the violence of the desire before, would have made it less sweet, for
the thing alone would not have filled and contented that desire, when it was an
inordinate lust, and so thou would have been vexed with it, rather than
satisfied, and found a greater vanity in it: but now when it is become a
subordinate desire unto God, that the desire is down, and the heart quieted
and contented with God in the thing: the heart says as she said, I have
enough. So 2. likewise thou may have an affliction thou prayedst long against
taken off then, when thy heart was most willing to accept thy punishment (as
Moses's phrase is, Lev. 26. 41
) and to submit to God in it.

4. A third sort of observations, from the answerable proportion between Gods
dealing in the acco^plishment of it, and our prayers.
A third thing you are to observe concerning the accomplishment of the thing
prayed for, whereby you may discern whether granted in answer to prayers, is,
when thou see God in his dealings with thee, and answering of thee, to deal
in a kind of proportion with thy manner of praying and seeking of him, and of
walking with him whilst thou were dependant on him, for such or such a mercy.
And as you may see a proportion between sins and punishments, which are the
rewards of them; that you can say, such a sin brought forth this affliction, it
is so like the Father: so you might see the like proportion, between your
prayers, and your walking with God, and Gods answers to you, and his dealings
with you. So did David, Psalm. 18. 24. According to the cleanness of my hands
has he recompensed me, etc. His speech notes some similitude or likeness: as
for example, The more by-ends or carnal desires you had in praying, and the
more you mingled of these with your holy desires, and the more want of zeal,
fervency, etc. were found in your prayers, the more you shall (it may be) find
of bitterness mingled with the mercy, when it is granted; and so much
imperfection, and want of comfort in it: so says David in the same Psalm. verse
25. 26. With the pure thou will show thy self pure. Pure prayers have pure
blessings; and e contra: With the foward thou will show thy self froward: and
again, as you in praying sometimes slackened and grew cold, so you might see
the business in like manner to cool, and cast backward: as when Moses hands
were down, Amalck prevailed; but when they were lifted up, Israel had the
better, Exodus 17. 12. God let him see a proportion, which argued his prayer was
the means of prevailing. A man finds in praying, that his suite sometimes
sticks, and goes not on as he expected, this is because he gives not so good a
fee as he was wont, and does not ply God, and solicit him; but on the
contrary, when he was stirred up to pray, then still he found things to go
well: by this a man may clearly see, that it was the prayer which God did
hear and regarded. Thus likewise when a man sees hills and dales in a
business, fair hopes often, and then all dashed again, and the thing in the
end brought to pass, let him look back upon his prayers: did not thou in
like manner just thus deal with God? When thou had prayed earnestly, and
thought thou had even carried it, then dash all again, by interposing some
sin, and thus again and again? Herein God would have you observe a
proportion; and it may help you to discern, how, and when they are answered,
and obtained by prayer; because God deals thus with you therein in such a
proportion to your prayers.

Chap. 8.
CHAP. VIII.
Seven Observations more, from the effects which the accomplishment of the
mercy has upon the heart, etc.

. 1. If the thing obtained draws the heart nearer to God, and to rejoice in
his favor in it, more than in the thing.
FOurthly, thou may discern whether they be in answer to thy prayers, by
the effects upon thy heart.

As 1. If the thing that is granted upon thy prayers, draw thy heart more near
unto God, it is then certain, that it was granted as an answer to thy prayers.
Things granted out of ordinary providence only, do increase our lusts, and
are snares to us; as Saul gave David his daughter Michol to be a snare to him:
Psalm. 69. 22.
So their full tables are made snares: so GOD gave the Israelites their will,
the things they desired, but withal gave them up to their lusts, Psalm. 106.
15. he gave them their requests, but sent leanness into their souls; the
Quails might fat some of their bodies that survived, yet their souls grew
lean: there was a curse upon their Spirits: this new delicate food made their
bodies more lustful, they did eat and drink, Exodus 32. 6
and rose up to play. But things obtained by prayer are sanctified to us, for
every thing is sanctified by prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 5
so as it shall not ensnare nor entangle our hearts: a thing obtained by
prayer; as it came from God; so a man will return it to God, and use it for
his glory: So Hannah having obtained Samuel by prayer, she returns him unto
God, 1. Sam. 1. 27 28. For this child I prayed, and God gave me my petition,
and therefore also I have lent him to the Lord as long as he lives. If
therefore thou find this his dealing with thee, in answering thee, to be a
kindly motive to cause thee to mourn for sin, and to be as a restraint
against sin, it is a sign it was the fruit of prayer: Thus it wrought with
David, Psalm. 6. 8. Away from me ye that work iniquity: God has heard the
voice of my weeping.

Also if thou rejoycest in God, more than in the thing obtained: so Hannah
begins her song when she blesses God for her child; My heart rejoices in the
Lord, etc. 1. Sam. 2. 1. She rejoices not so much in the gift as in the
giver; and his favor more in this that her prayer was answered, then in the
thing obtained: this is a sign of having obtained the mercy through prayers,
when it is thus sanctified unto a man's spirit.

. 2. Prayer answered enlarges the heart with thankfulness.
2 Prayers answered will enlarge thy heart with thankfulness, and thus usually
they do; self-love makes us more forward to pray, than to give thanks; for
nature is all of the craving and taking hand: but where grace is, there will be
no eminent mercy gotten with much struggling, but there will be a continued
particular thankful remembrance of it a long while after, with much
enlargement: and As prayers abounded, so will thanksgiving abound also. Hannah,
she makes a Song, 1. Sam. 1. 2. Great blessings that are won with prayer,
are worn with thankfulness: such a man will not ask new, but he will withal
give thanks for old. Thankfulness, of all duties, proceeds from pure grace,
therefore if the spirit stirs thee unto it, it is a sign he made the prayer;
What thanks shall I render to God, for the joy I have in you, says S. Paul,
1 Thessalonians. 3. 9, 10? So in all his other Epistles, all those he writes to, as
he prays for them, so he tells them, he gives thanks for them, and for their
graces which he had prayed for. And if answering prayers for others, makes S.
Paul so thankful, what when for himself? Prayer and thanks, are like the
double motion of the lungs, the air that is sucked in by prayer, is breathed
forth again by thanks: Is thy heart afresh enlarged, as to mourn for past
sins long since committed, so in like manner, to give thanks for past mercies
won with long prayers, and this for a long while after? it is a sign that
they were obtained by prayer.

. 3. If this encourages thee to go to God again.
3 If the mercy obtained does encourage thee to go to GOD another time, to pray
again the more confidently and fervently, it is a sign thou have got the
former that way: For the Holy Ghost having once showed thee this way of
procuring mercy, hence it is, thou art thus ready to take the same course
another time. Psalm. 116. 2. The Lord has heard me, and I will call on him as
long as I live. I know (says he) now what course to take, if I be in any
want, even to call upon him; and he calls upon others to do so too.

4. It makes a man careful to perform his vows made in prayer, to obtain it.
4 When God having heard thy prayers upon solemn vows made by thee, thy heart
is made careful to pay those vows, which thou did make in the time of thy
suing to GOD for that mercy, this may be an argument to thee, the thing being
granted, that thy prayer was heard. For first, it argues, that thy heart it
self does secretly make such an account, that upon them God did grant the
thing, and thou do therefore make conscience to return all again to God in
service, as the condition of thy Indentures made with him; and as an homage
due, and an acknowledgement for ever, that such a mercy was won by prayer; and
by this preservest the memory of the receipt of that mercy: vows being of the
nature of homage: and secondly, in this also it is an evidence, that the thing
was obtained by prayer, in that God calls for those vows from thee, by his
Spirit in thy heart, and stirs thee up to perform them; it argues that in
relation to thy prayers answered, He takes them as dues from thee, that having
dispatched thy suite, He now calls for what was agreed to be given him when it
should be performed. And thirdly, in that also he does accept the payment of
these thy vows of thee, he acknowledges that those vows and prayers were
heard: for as Manoah said in another case, If he meant to have destroyed us,
Judge. 13. 23
he would not have accepted a sacrifice: so in this case it may be said, if
God had not heard thy prayers, he would not have accepted thy vows after thy
praying. Thus David, Psalm. 66. 13, 14. I will pay thee my vows, which my lips
have uttered, and my mouth has spoken, when I was in my trouble; the reason
follows, v. 17, 19. because that Verily God has heard me, when I cried to him:
and so Eliphaz in Job does connect and hang these two together, Job 22. 27.
Thou shall make thy prayer to him, and he shall hear thee, and thou shall pay
thy vows: This which he speaks of paying his vows, was not only as it was
to be his duty, but also as a consequent that would follow the other, that when
his prayers should be heard, he thereupon would perform his vows: for his
scope is to move Job to turn to God, showing what benefit would accrue to him
by it, and amongst others this: The hearing his prayers, and performing his
vows.

5 If a man sees by faith, and acknowledges God^ sole han^ in the
accomplishment.
5 When thou art enabled by faith, to see clearly Gods hand showed forth in the
effecting of that mercy over and above the power of second causes, and to
acknowledge it to his glory: for the truth is, one maine cavilling reason in
our blind hearts, whereby we are usually hindered and put by from apprehending
our prayers to be answered, when yet the thing is done, we shall find to be,
that our eyes are terminated and bounded in second causes, and not raised to
see Gods hand in the thing: therefore on the contrary, when God inableth thee
to see that he has done thee this kindness, so as thy mind is clear in it,
this is a fruit of his hearing thy prayers: And this you will usually find to
be true, that so much faith and dependence as you had upon God in prayer for
the obtaining of a mercy, so much faith and acknowledgement you will have in
the accomplishment of it. Parallel with this rule is that other, which in
another case is usually given, that in performance of duties, so much as the
soul did go out of it self to God, for strength to perform them, so much,
when they are performed, will the heart acknowledge Gods assistance and be
humbled: And this is a sign of prayer being heard upon this ground, because
Gods end of hearing prayers is, that we might glorify him. So Psalm. 50. 15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Therefore when the heart has prayed much for a mercy, with
dependence before the obtaining of it, and then is enabled to exalt God when it
is obtained; it is a sign that God did it in relation to those prayers. For
there is that connection made between these, as between the cause and the
effect, I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me. David, when he was
delivered out of all his troubles, (as when he made that 18. Psalm. he was, as
appears by the title of it) then at the 6. verse, he relates how he had
prayed, and how he was heard; and see thereupon how his heart was enlarged to
acknowledge God alone to have done all, in the rest of that Psalm; so from the
27. and also from the 31. ver. When we see Angels from God, beyond the power
of second causes descending, it is a sign, that prayers, as Angels, first
ascended, and obtained that mercy. Thus also the Church Esaias 26. having
obtained those deliverances by prayer, ver. 17. (for which there she makes that
song by way of thankfulness) she ascribes all unto God, ver. 12. Thou have
wrought all our works for us, and ver. 18. Verily we have not wrought any
deliverance in the earth.

. 6. With the mercy, sometimes a special evidence comes in, that it is
obtained by prayer.
6 When with the mercy there comes the assurance of Gods love, and an evidence
of his favor, when GOD sends not a bare token only, but a letter also with it,
to bear witness of his love, in which the token is wrapped. I need not make
that a sign, for when this comes with a mercy, it carries its own evidence,
you will then know well enough that it is the fruit of prayer.

. 7. By the eve^t; things obtained by prayer, prove real and stable mercies.
7 Lastly, it will be evident by the event; things obtained by prayer have few
thorns in them, the curse is taken out, but what comes but by ordinary
providence, comes as it were up of it self alone, and like the earth untilled,
is full of thorns, and briars, and many vexations: The reason is, for what
comes in by prayer comes as a blessing, and so no sorrow is added to it; and
also because prayer kills those inordinate lusts, which is the cause of that
vanity and vexation which is in the things enjoyed. But when the blessing of
God makes rich, he adds no sorrow with it, Prove. 10. 22. Things long
deferred, at last obtained by prayer, prove most comfortable, and in a settled
manner such; they prove standing and stable blessings; and what trouble the
heart was put to in the deferring, it is recompensed by the more settled
constant immixt sweetness in the enjoying; prayer having long perfumed it, and
the thing being steeped therein, it proves exceeding pleasant. So Prove. 13. 12.
Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but when the desire comes, it is a tree of
life, and heales that sickness, and abundantly comforts the heart. Thus Isaac
found Rebekkah a great blessing, and a comfortable wife to him, Genesis 24. ult.
Such a comfort also was Isaac to Abraham, Genesis 17. 18, 19. A son indeed, a
son of laughter, as his name signifies: and such was Samuel to Hannah, she
had not only a son of him, but a good son, a blessed son, a Prophet, and the
Judge of the people of God: whereas Jacob getting the blessing, but without
prayer, how imbittered was it to him, (though a blessing to him in the event)
by twenty years banishment from his mothers house? When Israel themselves set
up a King, but not by me, as God says, what a punishment was he to them? given
in wrath, and taken away in anger: Hos. 13. 11.

Chap. 9
CHAP. IX.
Considerations to quiet the heart, and to help it to discern an answer to,
and acceptance of the prayer when the thing is not accomplished.

1. The thing prayed for is not always granted, when yet the prayer is heard.
BUt now the next and more difficult question is, When the thing is not granted,
how shall we then discern and know, that God does notwithstanding hear the
prayer?

Concerning which, I must premise this, that it is true, that always the very
thing it self desired is not granted, when yet the prayer is heard. Christ
prayed, the Cup might pass from him, which though some interpret the word
passing, for the short continuance of the brunt, and that therefore in that
respect he was heard directly in what he asked: yet if so, why was that clause
if it be possible, added? that argues his petition was for a total removal,
yet with subjection to Gods will; for he knew there was no great impossibility
in a short removal of it: nay, it was impossible but that it should pass,
Acts 2. 24. But howsoever, it is plain in Moses, about his going into Canaan:
Deuteronomy. 3. 26. I besought the Lord, says he, ver. 23. and he was angry with
me, and would not hear me. ver. 26. Likewise ere I come to resolve the case,
an objection is also to be removed, which is,

That if the Spirit of GOD does make every faithful prayer in us, as Romans 8.
26. it is said He does; we know not what to pray for, but the Spirit helps
our infirmities, etc. and he searches the deep things of God, as it is said, 1
Cor. 2. that therefore he knowing that GOD will not grant such a thing, you
may think that he should not stir up the heart to pray for that which God
means to deny, but always guide the heart aright, and not let us err or
miss in the things we pray for. To this, in brief by way of answer.

An objection answered:
1. The Spirit makes not prayers in us, always according to what Gods secret
will and foreknowledge is, That though the Spirit knows Gods mind, and teaches
us what to pray for; yet the thing prayed for may not be granted.
but according to his revealed will to us, both in his word, and in his
providence, as things therein are presented to us, and do lie before our view,
and so not always according to what he means to do, but according to what
it is our duty to pray most for: for he concurres to assist us to pray, as he
does in preaching or using other such like means and Ordinances, wherein
though the spirit knows whom God means to convert, whom not, yet he assists
us Ministers in our spirits oftentimes as much to preach to those he means
not to convert, as to those he means to convert: He dealing with us therein
according to what is our duty, not according to what is his decree.

Again, secondly, that phrase helps to answer this, when he is said to help
our infirmities, and therefore not according to his own vast knowledge, does
he frame our prayers, but so, as he applies his assistance to our infirm,
weak, and narrow apprehensions, and stirs up desires in us to such things,
as according to our knowledge we are in duty to conceive, and which by all we
can see, by what is before us revealed in his providence, we think to be most
for our good, and his glory; and God accepts such desires as from us, but yet
does for us according to the largenese of his own love.

. 2. A mistake to pray absolutely for such blessings as are not absolutely
promised.
And so now to come to the case propounded, and therein unto helps to pacify,
and direct the heart about those prayers at which the things are not granted.

And first, how did thou frame thy prayer for that thing which is denied
thee? Did thou pray for it absolutely, and peremptorily as simply best for
thee? thou must not then think much, if such a prayer be denied, for therein
thou wentest beyond thy commission: but if thou did pray for it
conditionally, and with an (if) as Christ did, if it be possible (which
instance is a strong ground for such kind of prayers) and not my will, but thy
will be done, so, as thou did refer it unto, and trust Gods judgment in
the thing, and not thine own, only did put him in mind as thy duty was, of
what was represented to thee as best for thee in view, and so left it to him to
cast, and did, refer it to His will and wisdom: In which when we are
denied we are to rest in Gods judgment as best for us and so interpret the
prayer answered.
Then thy prayer may be most fully answered and heard, and yet the thing
denied, and thou art to interpret, and God takes meaning and mind revealed in
the event in the best sense, which way soever it falls: for otherwise, CHRIST
had not been heard, when yet, the Text says, He was heard in all he feared,
Hebr. 5. 7.

3. There may be a reservation in the denial, for some greater mercy.
2. Observe, if there were not a reservation in that denial, for some greater
and further mercy, whereof that denial was the foundation. Thus 1 oftentimes
some great cross is prevented, by the denial of a thing, which we were urgent
for: if we had had many of our desires, we had been undone: So it was a mercy
to David, that his child was taken away, for whose life he was yet so earnest,
who would have been but a living monument of his shame. It was also a mercy to
David, that Absalom was taken away, (whom surely he prayed much for, for he
loved him much) who if he had lived, might have been the ruin of him and his
house. As a wicked man's deliverance and the granting his request lays a
foundation, and is a reservation of him to a worse Judgment: So, the denial
of a Godly man's prayer is for his greater good, and is laid as a foundation of
a greater mercy: 2 and again, oftentimes the very denial breaks a man's heart,
and brings him nearer to God, puts him upon searching into his ways, and
estate, and in his prayers to see what should be amiss therein, which alone is
a great mercy; and better then the thing, seeing by the loss of that one thing
he learns how to pray better, and so to obtain a hundred better things
afterward. Christ desired the Cup might pass, it did not; and that was the
foundation of our salvation, and the way to His glory: He being to pass
through that suffering into His glory: The woman that had the bloody issue,
though she used many means, and happily prayers among the rest, and all in
vain, yet none took effect; that in the end she might come to Christ, and
have both body and soul healed at once.

. 4. There may be a transmutation of the thing denied, into some other blessing
that is better of the same kind.
3 Observe if there be to a transmutation and a translation or turning of ^he
thing desired into some other greater bles^ing of the same kind: for God (all
whose ways are mercy and truth to His people) does improve, husband, and lay
out the precious stocks of their prayers, to the best advantage, in things,
whereby the greatest returns and gains may accrue: as old Jacob laid not his
Hand of blessing as Joseph would have guided them, but laid the right hand upon
the younger Son, whom Joseph did set at his left: So often does God take off
his hand of blessing from the thing we prayed for, and lays and discovers it
in another more for our good: and as God giving Isaac the power and privilege
to bless a son, though Isaac he intended it for Esau, yet God unbeknown to
him transmitted it to Jacob, yet so, as the blessing was not lost: Thus is it
in our prayers for blessings both upon our selves and others. There is often a
transmutation, never a frustration of them: which may as truly and directly
be called an answer to the prayer; As if a factor beyond Sea, when the owner
sends for such and such commodities, supposing them more vendible and
advantageous, but the Factor knowing the state of things, and the prices, sends
him ^ver in stead of them, such as shall sell better, and bring in more profit,
may be said to answer his letters, and that better, then if he had sent those
very commidities he writ for; Thus Abraham's prayers for Ishmael were turned for
Isaac: David's for the Child to Solomon.

. 1. God answers to the ground of our prayers.
4 Observe if in the end God does not answer thee still according to the ground
of thy prayer: that is, see if that holy end, intention, and affection, which
thou had in prayer, be not in the end fully satisfied, though not in the
thing thou did desire: for God answers, Secundum cardinem, according to the
hinge which the prayer turns upon. As when a General is sent out with an Army,
by a King or a State, who give him many particular directions, how to order and
dispose, and manage the war, although in many particulars that fall out,
wherein they could not foresee to give so punctual and particular directions,
he swerve from the directions, yet if he keeps to the intent of their
Commission, and does what is most advantageous for their ends, he may be said
to keep to his Commission. For as they say of the Law, Men's leg is est lex*
the mind of the Law is the Law, not the bare words it is printed in: so the
Meaning of the Spirit is the prayer, Romans 8. 27. and not simply the things
desired, wherein we express those our desires: and still the meaning, the
intent, the ground of our prayers shall be answered. To open this, the maine
ends, and meanings of our hearts in our requests are Gods glory, the Churches
good, and our own particular comfort and happiness: we can desire but
comfort, and a man looks out, and spieth out such a particular mercy, which
he thinks tends much to Gods glory, and his happiness, and yet that thing
is denied; yet notwithstanding God will answer him according to the meaning of
his prayers, his glory shall certainly be advanced, even for that prayer of
his, some other way, and his comfort made up, which is the common desire of all
mankind: and thou can have but comfort, let the thing be what it will that
conveighs it to thee; and God will take order that that comfort thy soul
desired, thou shall have come in one way or other, which when it does, thou
can not but say thy prayers are heard. For as God fulfils his promises, so
he hears prayers, there is the same reason of both: now God has promised,
He that leaves Father and Mother, shall have an hundred fold: not in specie,
as we say, in kind, this cannot always be fulfilled, for an hundred Fathers
he cannot have. God fulfills it not therefore always in the same kind, but in
some other things, which shall be more then a hundred Fathers would be.

Moses he prays he might go into Canaan, God answers the ground of his
prayer, though not in the matter in it expressed and desired, and that both for
Moses his comfort and his own glory; for he takes him up to heaven, the true
Canaan, whereof that Canaan was but a type, and he appoints Joshua a fresh and
a young man, coming on in the world, and one whom Moses himself had tutored
and brought up, and was his pupil, servant and attendant, Number. 6. 11, 28. and
this was more for Gods glory, for Joshua was therein to be he type of Christ
leading us to heaven, which the Law (of which Moses was the type) could not
bring us unto by reason of the weakness of it; and he being young did it
better: and it was not so much also for Gods glory, that one man should do
all; and whereas Moses desired to have the honor of it; in that his servant
that attended him, and had been brought up by him, and had all from him, that
he was the man should do it, was well nigh as great an honor to Moses, as if
he had been the leader himself. And so David when he desired to build the
Temple and an house to God, for the like reasons God denied it, but yet
honored him to prepare the materials, and to draw the pattern, as also in
that his Son did it, who was therein also the like type of Christ, being a
Prince of peace, but David a man of blood and war, and likewise God accepted
this of David, as if he had built it, and will recompense him as much.

. 6. God when he denies, yet sometimes yields far in it, to give satisfaction
to his child.
5. Observe, if in the thing which thou have prayed much about, though it be
denied thee, yet if God does not endeavor to give thee (as I may so speak)
all satisfaction that may be, even as if he were tender of denying thee, and
therefore does much in it for thy prayers sake, though the conclusion proves
otherwise, as being against some other purpose of his, for some other ends: As
when he denied Moses to go into the Land of Canaan, he did it with much
respect (as I may so speak with reverence) to Moses: he yielded as far as might
be, for he let him lead them, till he should come to the very borders; and
he let him see that good Land, carrying him up to an hill, and (as it is
thought) by a miracle enabled his sight to view the whole Land; and the man he
chose to perform this work, was his servant, which was a great honor to
Moses; that one brought up by him should succeed him. So when Abraham prayed
for Ishmael, Oh let Ismael live in thy sight, Genesis 17. 18. God went as far in
granting his request as might be; for, says he, ver. 20. I have heard thee,
and I have blessed him, and I will make him fruitful, and multiply him
exceedingly, and he shall beget twelve Princes; but my covenant I will
establish with Isaac. So likewise, when in casting that thing, thou did seek
at his hands, he shows an extraordinary hand in turning it; it is a sign he
had a respect to thee, that he would vouchsafe to discover his hand so much in
it; let the thing fall which way it will, if Gods hand appear much in it, thou
may comfortably conclude, that there is some great thing in it, and that
prayer wrought that miracle in it, to dispose it so; and that there is some
great reason why he denies thee, and a great respect had to thy prayers, in
that he is pleased to discover so extraordinary a providence about it.

. 7. Observe the effects that denials have upon the heart. As first, if a man
does acknowledge God righteous in it, etc.
Lastly, look into the effect of that denial upon thine own heart; as,

1 If thy heart be enlarged to acknowledge God, to be holy and righteous in his
dealings with thee, and thine own unworthiness the cause of his denying thee.
Thus we often find the Saints expressing themselves in their prayers: that
Psalm. 22. though typically made of Christ; yet as it was penned by David, and
as it may concern his person, it may serve for an instance for this, I cry in
the day time, but thou hear not: this might have made him jealous of God;
but says he, Thou art holy, etc. and dealest now with me in an holy manner,
and art just in it: Others have called on thee, and have been heard, though I
now for my unworthiness am denied: But I am a worm. It might have put a man
off, when he should think, others are heard, but not I, but it puts not him
off, but humbles him, I am a worm, etc. And Thou art holy.

Seco^^^y, if God fill the heart with a holy contentment in the denial.
2 If God fill thy heart with an holy contentme^t in the denial; if he speak to
thy heart, as he did to Moses, when he denied him, Deuteronomy. 3. Let it suffice
thee; if as to S. Paul, when he was so earnest about removing that buffeting,
if thou gettest but such an answer as that to him, My grace is sufficient; or
that some such like consideration is dropped in that stays thee: It was the
effect of David's seven days fasting, that he did so contentedly bear the
loss of the Child, which his servants thought would have overwhelmed him, 2.
Sam. 12. 19, 20, 21. But a consideration was dropped in, which was the fruit of
his prayer, That he should go to him, not he return hither; and his mind
was comforted thereby, in so much, as it is said, ver. 24. That he comforted
Bath sheba also.

Thirdly, if the heart be thankful out of faith, when denied.
3 If thou can be thankful to God out of faith, that God has cast and
ordered all for the best, though he has denied thee; and although thou see
no reason, but that the thing prayed for, would have been for the best, yet
art thankful upon the denial of it, out of faith resting in Gods judgment in
it: As David, in all those forementioned places was, Thou art holy, that
inhabitest the praises of Israel; he praises God for all this: David before he
did eat, after his seven days fasting for the child, arose, And went first
into the Temple and worshipped, 2. Sam. 12. 20. and of what kind of worship it
was, appears by his anointing himself and changing his raiment, which was in
token of rejoicing and thanksgiving, and it fell out to him according to his
faith, for presently after, Solomon was begotten, verse. 24.

. 4. If the heart be not discouraged, for continuing still to pray for other
things.
4 If thou can pray still and give not over, although thou stand for
mercies which thou missest; if when thou have mercies granted, thou fear
most, and when denied, love most, and art not discouraged, thy prayers are
heard, Psalm. 80. 4. Though God seemed angry with their prayers, yet they pray,
and expostulate with him, and give not over, for they made that Psalm as a
Prayer, And how long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people? So
Psalm. 44. 17. Though we are cast among Dragons, ye we have not been false
in thy Covenant. So say thou, I will pray still, though I never have an answer
in this life. It moves ingenuous natures to see men take repulses and denialls
well, which proud persons will not do: and so it moves God.

Chap. 10
CHAP. X.
Application: A reproof of those that pray, but look not after the return of
their prayers: The causes of this neglect.

THe use of all is, A reproof of those that pray, but look not after the
return of their prayers.
to reprove those, who put up prayers, and are earnest in begging, but look
not after them when they have done, no more than if they had not prayed: who
still venture, and have a great stock of prayers going, but look not after the
returns that are made, cast not up their commings in and gainings by prayers;
and when they have prayed, sit down discouraged, as not making account in
earnest that ever they shall hear of their prayers again, even as if they had
been but as words cast away: as beating the air; as bread cast upon the
waters, which they think sinks, or is carried away, and they shall find it no
more; but herein you despise Gods Ordinance, and err, not knowing the power of
prayers; and ye contemn the Lord But you will say as they in the Prophet said,
Wherein in do we contemn him? if you asked a man a question, and when you had
done, did turn your back upon him, as scoffing Pilate asked in scorn of
Christ, What is truth? but would not stay for an answer, did you not contemn
him? as not to answer when a question is asked you, is contempt, so not to
regard the answer made, when you have been earnest in begging, is no less
contempt also: if you had writ letters to a very friend about important
business, and had earnestly solicited him for an answer, and he were careful
in due time to send one, if you should make account to hear of him no more,
should you not wrong him in your thoughts? Or if he did write, if you should
not vouchsafe to read over his answer, were it not a contempt of him? so is it
here, when you have been earnest with God for blessings, and regard not the
answer: and because verily this is a fault among us, I will therefore endeavor
to discover to you the causes and discouragements, The causes of this neglect,
are of two sorts.
which though they keep you not from praying, yet from this earnest
expectation, and real, and true making account to hear of answers of your
prayers; only my scope is, not to show you so much the reasons, why God denies
you many requests, as why even in your own hearts you are discouraged after
you have prayed, as if they would not be answered, although God does answer
them. These discouragements are partly temptations, partly sinful impediments
wherein we are more faulty.

1 Temptations, want of assurance; as 1. That because your persons are not
accepted your prayers are not.
1 Because your assurance that your persons are accepted, is weak, therefore
your confidence that your prayers are heard, is weak also: For as God does
first accept the person, and then our prayers: so the belief, that God does
accept our person is that which also upholds our hearts in confidence that our
prayers shall be granted: this you may find in 1 John 5. 13, 14, 15. in the
13. verse. he says. These things have I written to you, that ye may know you
have eternal life: and upon that assurance this will follow, Verse. 14, 15. And
this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according
to his will, he hears us, etc. And if we know he hears us, we know we have
the petitions we desired of him. Mark how he links these three together, as
effects and consequences each of other. 1. These things I write unto you, that
you may be assured, that life and heaven is yours, as in 12. and 13. verses.
And upon that 2. this confidence will follow in your hearts, That God hears you,
that is, that you have his ears open to you, and his heart enlarged toward
you: and then 3. if you be assured that God hears you, then from this will
follow an assurance, that You shall have any thing granted you desire; yea, and
he makes this one of the maine and immediate effects of Assurance of
justification; therefore he says, this is the confidence that we have in him;
that is, this effect there is of this confidence, for whereas they might say,
what benefit will accrue to us by this assurance? why this says he, which is
one of the great and maine privileges of a Christian, even assurance that God
will hear him; and not only so, but grant him all his prayers. For when a man
is assured God has given him his Son, he will then easily be induced to
believe and expect, How shall he not with him give me all things? Romans 8. 32.
If once he looks upon God as a Father, he will then easily conceive that which
Christ says, If Fathers that are evil can give good things to their Children,
how much more shall not your Father give his spirit, and all good things to
them that ask them: and if he gave his Son, when we did not pray to him, how
much more shall he not with him give us all things we pray for? If a man
comes to sue to any man whose mind he knew not, whether he loved him or not,
he would have small hope or expectation of having his suite granted, though he
came again and again; but if he be assured he is in favor with him, according
to that degree of favor, he supposes himself to stand in with him, he is
assured and confident of obtaining his request.

2 Of the weakness of our prayers: which is answered by three things.
2 Discouragement is the weakness of their prayers: though a man thinks his
person is accepted, yet alas says he, my prayers are so poor and weak, as
surely God will never regard them. To remove which, let me first ask thee
this question: that thy might be weak in it self, and in thine own
apprehension such, yet because it is all the might which thou have, and which
grace has in thee, it shall be accepted. For God accepts according to what a
man has, and not according to that he has not. 2 Cor. 8. 12.

for his Names sake, and his Sons sake, and because thou art his child, as the
mother when her child cries (suppose it be a weak child) does not neglect to
hear and relieve it: but tenders it not because it does cry more loud, but
because it cries; and pities it the more the weaker it is.

of it, as produced by us may be weak, yet because its object is Christ,
therefore it justifies: so it is in prayer, it prevails, not because of the
performance it self, but because of the name, which it is put up in, even
Christ's name; and therefore as a weak faith justifies, so a weak prayer
prevails as well as a stronger; and both for the like reason in both, for
faith attributes all to God, and so does prayer; for as faith is merely a
receiving grace, so prayer a begging grace. And therefore do thou think thy
prayers are accepted at all, notwithstanding their weakness? if that they are
accepted, then they must be accepted as prayers, now if they be accepted as
prayers, then as effectual motives to prevail with God to grant the thing you
ask; for if he should not accept them to that end, for which they were
ordained, it is as if he accepted them not at all. As therefore when he
approves of any man's faith as true and sincere, he approves and accepts of it
to that purpose, for which it was ordained, which is to save and justify, and
to this end does as fully accept the weakest act of faith, as the strongest; so
is it with their prayers, which being ordained as a means to obtain mercies
from him, if he accepts them at all, it is with relation to the accomplishment
of them, which is their end.

4. Men are mistaken in judging of the weakness of their prayers, they judge of
the weakness of their prayers by their expressions, and gifts in performing
them, or by the stirring and overflow of affections, whereas the strength and
vigor of prayer should be estimated from the faith, the sincerity, the
obedience, the desires expressed in it. As it is not the lowdnesse of a Preachers
voice, but the weight and holiness of the matter, and spirit of the Preacher,
that moves a wise, and an intelligent hearer: so not gifts, but graces in
prayers are they that move the Lord. The strength of prayer lies not in words,
but in that it is fitted to prevail with God; one prayer is not more strong
then another, further then it is so framed as it has power with God more or
less; as of Jacob it is said, he had power with God, Hos. 12. Now prayers move
God, not as an Orator moves his hearers, but as a child moves his father: two
words of a child humbled, and crying at his fathers feet, will prevail more
then penned orations. Romans 8. It is the meanning of the spirit, that God looks
unto, more then the expressions: for the groans there are said to be
unutterable. Hezechiahs expressions were so rude and broken, that he says,
Esaias 38. 14. that he did but chatter, (he being then sick,) even as a crane,
yet God heard them.

3. So often failings of answers: answered by four things.
A third discouragement is faylings of answers; I have prayed often and long,
and I have been seldom or never answered, and therefore I make little account
of my prayers, that they are heard: others have the revenewes of their prayers
coming in, but I do miss whatsoever almost I stand for: Therefore say they
as those, Why have we fasted, and thou regardest it not? Isay 58. 3.

treasure up wrath, so do godly men mercy, and especially by their prayers;
and therefore mercies, and answers do often come thick together, even as
afflictions also do.

praying for thy self or others, yet thy reward is with the Lord. It is in
praying as in preaching, a man may preach faithfully many a year, and yet not
convert a soul, and yet a man is not to give over waiting, but to observe
after every Sermon what good is done, and whether God will give men repentance,
as it is, 2 Timothy 2. 25. And if none be converted, yet as Esaias 49. 4. A man's
reward is with the Lord. Every man shall receive his own reward according to
his own labor. 1 Cor. 3. 8. and not according to the success of his labor
only. So it is in praying, though thou missest again and again, and nothing
succeeds thou prayest for, yet be not discouraged, for thy reward is with the
Lord, which will come in one day.

David says, Psalm. 116. 1, 2. God has heard my prayer, therefore I will call
upon him as long as I live, that is nothing so much as to be able to say, Well,
I have prayed thus long, and for these many things, and never sped, and yet I
will call upon him whilst I live, though I find no answer in this life. To
find commings in, in a trade, and yet to hold out trading still, argues not so
much faithfulness in a man's calling, as when a man has losses, and castings
behind hand, and yet to follow it.

Luke 18. 8. The Elect cry day and night, but God stays so long, ver. 7. that
when he comes he finds not faith, they have done expecting, have forgot their
prayers, and then he does things, Isai. 64.
they looked not for.

2. A 2. cause, are sinful discouragements, which are three.
Other discouragements there are wherein we our selves are more faulty, and
which are our sins, more then our temptations, which yet weaken the expectation
of having our prayers answered: as,

1 Slothfulness in prayer.
1 Slothfulness in prayer, when we do not put to all our might in praying,
and then no wonder, we do not only not obtain, but that our own hearts
misgive us, that we look for little success and issue of such prayers, Qui
frigide rogat, docet negare; he that shows himself cold in a suite, teaches him
he sues to to deny him; if we see one seeking to us faintly, and slightly, we
are not then sollicitous to deny him, but think he will be easily put off,
and not think much; so accordingly when we shall observe so much by our
selves, and see our selves slothful in praying, and praying as if we prayed
not, no wonder if by reason of that consciousnesse, we look not after the
success of such prayers, which in the performance we slighted; when we pray,
as if we were willing to be denied, we knowing that the Scripture says,
that the fervent prayer only prevails, that prayer which is (...), that sets
all the faculties on work, James 5. 16. How should we then expect that God
should grant any good thing to us? For though God sels nothing to us for our
prayers, but gives freely, yet he would have his gifts accepted: now without
large desires, and longings they would not be accepted: and what is fervent
prayer, but the expression of such fervent desires? Jacob wrestled when he
obtained: many seek to enter, says Christ, but you must strive. Now when we
know these things, and yet are slothful, how can we expect any answers at
all? will not the consciousnesse of it quell all our expectations? and hence it
comes to pass that God proportioning his dealings with us to our prayers,
because we seem to pray, and yet pray not to purpose, therefore God he
sometimes seems like one asleep, and then sometimes to wake, and make fair
offers to help, and yet falls as it were asleep again, because we were thus
drowsy in our prayers; those prayers that awaken God, must awaken us: Those
prayers that stir God, must first stir us to lay hold on God as Isaiah
speaks: as obedience strengthens faith and assurance, so fervency in prayer
begets confidence of being heard. In all other things slothfulness does
discourage and weaken expectation: does any man expect that riches should come
upon him when he does his business negligently? for it is the diligent hand
that makes rich: does any man expect a crop and a harvest, if he takes not
pains to plow, and sow his Corn? no more if you do not take pains with your
hearts in Prayer, can you expect an answer, or indeed will you.

2 Discouragement: looking at prayer as a duty rather then as a means to
obtain blessings.
2 Cause: or sinful discouragement herein, is looking at prayer only as a duty
to be performed, and so performing it as a task, and not so much out of
desires stirred up after the things to be obtained, nor out of faith that we
shall obtain them; which is as if a Physician having a sick servant, to whom he
prescribes, and commands to take some physic to cure him, and his man
should take it indeed because it is commanded and prescribed by his master,
looking at it as an act of duty as he obeyes him in other businesses, but not
as looking at it as a medicine, or means, that will have any work upon him to
cure him, and therefore orders himself as if he had taken no such thing. Thus
do most in the world pray to God, take prayer as a prescription only, but not
as a means: they come to God daily, but as to a Master only in this
performance, not as to a Father, and thus doing, no wonder if they look for
little effect of prayers: for our expectation never exceeds or reaches further
then our end and intention, which we had in any business. If I perform any
Ordinance, but as a duty, then I rest therein, and expect no further: as if a
man preaches for filthy lucre only, he performs his duty and then looks for
his hire, but looks not after any other effect of his Sermons: so nor will men
do after their prayers for answers to them when they perform them as duties
only. Now to help you in this, you are to look to two things in prayer. A
direction. Two things to be looked at in praying. Aco^mand. A promise.
First to a command from God. Secondly to the promise of God: and so to
consider it in a double relation, first as a duty, in respect to the Command,
secondly as a means to obtain or procure blessings at Gods hand in relation to
his promise: therefore in prayer, first an act of obedience, secondly an act of
faith is to be exercised, ask in faith nothing wavering, Iam. 1. Now the most
in the world perform it as an act of obedience only, and so rest in the
present performance and acceptance of it, but if a man pray in faith, he will
pray with an eye to the promises; and look on prayer as a means for time to
come to obtain such or such a mercy at Gods hands; and if so, then he is not
satisfied till he has an answer of his prayers, and till then will wait, as
the Church says, She would wait till he did arise and plead her cause.

3 Discouragement; falling into sins again after praying.
A third sinful discouragement is returning to sins after prayers, when a man
has prayed for some mercy, and rises full of much confidence that his prayers
are heard, and so a while he walks, yet falling into a sin, that sin does dash
al his hopes, undoes his prayers, (as he thinks) and calls them back again,
meets as it were with the answer, which is Gods messenger, and causes it to
return to heaven again. How often when God had even granted a petition, and
the decree was a coming forth, and the grant newly written, and the seal a
setting to it, but an act of treason coming between, stops it in the seal,
and deferres it, blots and blurreth all, both prayer and grant when newly
written, and leaves a guilt in the mind, which quells our hopes, and then we
look no more after our prayers; and this especially if when we were a sinning,
such a thought came in, (as often it does to restrain us) are you not in
dependa^ce upon God for such a mercy, and have prayed for it, and are fair for
it, how then dare you do this, and sin against him? when in this case the
heart goes on, this blots all the prayer, and discourageth a man; for says the
conscience, will God hear sinners? (as he said.) And thus far it is true that
sinning thus between, interrupts and hinders the obtaining our petitions, that
answerably as we do thus dash and betray and undo our prayers, The answer to
it.
so in a proportion, we find in the way to our obtaining the thing we prayed
for, so many rubbes and difficulties do arise; for as we lay blocks in Gods
way coming toward us to do us good, so he in ours: therefore often when a
business goes prosperously on, and we think we shall carry it, comes some
accident between the cup and the lip, that casts all behind hand again,
because answerably we dealt with God. For when we had prayed, and were
encouraged and in good hopes, then by some sin or other we spoyld all, and
bereaved our selves of our expectation. But yet this you are to consider, that
as in the end praying uses to overcome sin in Gods Children, so also God in
the end overcomes difficulties, and brings the matter to pass: and know it is
not sins past so much that hinder the prayers of Gods people, as the present
unfitness and indisposition of their hearts for mercy.

TIDINGS OF PEACE TO BE SPOKEN to Consciences distressed.
Psalm. 85. ver. 8. -- God will speak peace unto his people, and to his Saints,
etc. --
THE maine thing intended to be insisted upon out of these words is dispatched,
yet that I may not leave so fair and fruitful a crop still standing upon the
ground unreaped, I will go on more briefly to have in the rest of that harvest
the Text affords.

This Psalm (as was said) was penned as a Prophecy of and prayer for the
return of Gods people out of the Captivity of Babylon, and the settling and
establishment of that Church and State upon its former Basis, yet so as therein
there is a further and more especial aim had to the peace and glory to be
brought in by Christ, till when this Prophecy otherwise had but a poor and
slender accomplishment, in regard of much outward glory or peace that that
Church enjoyed.

And therefore the peace here spoken of and promised for the present is to be
extended largelier then to outward prosperity, or an happy issue out of that
calamity, even to speaking peace to drooping and weather-beaten consciences:
and accordingly we find this kind of peace to have been specially promised
by the Prophet Isaiah to the people at their return out of the Captivity, both
in Isaiah 48. from 20. to the end, and Isaiah the 57. from the 14. to the end,
there being many broken hearts that had wanted the light of Gods countenance
long, having been during the Captivity, banished from the Ordinances of the
Temple, hanging up their harps mourning, whose thoughts were as if God had
meant to destroy them, as appears Ier. 29. 11. who afterward were refreshed
with in ward peace, at the restoration of those Ordinances, as well as with
outward, as by those places does appear. Therefore in relation to this kind of
peace only I will at this time handle the words.

In the words you have a discovery of Gods proceedings in treating of peace or
proclaiming war with his people and subjects.

that sometimes God does not seake peace to his own children. This was their
state for the present, when this Psalm was penned: He will speak peace,
therefore at present he did not; yea, it may incline us to think that God at
present spoke the contrary, for the Prophet speaks this by faith, as contrary
to sense, and present experience; he believes God intends to come again to a
treaty of peace, though now he seems to have nothing but anger, and blood,
and war in his looks, speeches, and actions; and to threaten and proclaim
war, and take up Arms against them. And thus God often deals with his own
Children, whether a people or a particular man: so with a nation, Esaias 63. 10.
They rebelled, and he fought against them: so with a particular man, God
frowned upon and rated his Child Ephraim, and spoke bitter things against him,
(it is the phrase used, Ier. 31. 20.) though yet Ephraim is my pleasant Child
says he: David had not a good word from him a long time, Psalm. 51. 8. Make me
to hear again of joy and gladness. And Psalm. 50 7. Hear oh my people, and I
will speak, but not against them they might hope, because he ownes them for
his people: Hear oh Israel, and I will testify against thee: and yet it
follows, I am the Lord thy God. Job (says, he did not speak only against
him, but also wrote bitter things, he wrote as it were books against: him,
Job 13. 26. he writing over in his Conscience the sins of his youth in
letters of blood and wrath and terrors for them.

they being his people, which is the second thing that is intimated, and may be
observed out of these words, namely, the reason, or moving cause provoking God
thus to interrupt the peace of his people: they had fallen into some gross
folly or other, some sinful inordinate dispositions had been indulged unto,
and nourished in them, which is usually, though not always, the cause of this
his dealing: this is evident by this, that the conclusion of their peace, when
it is made up again has this clause, as the only article of reconciliation
between them, that they return no more to folly, implying they had formerly
run out into some inordinacy, which to reduce them from, God had took up
arms against them, and thereby taught them wisdom to take heed of losing, and
then buying peace at so dear a rate again. And indeed all the quarrels, that
God has against a Nation, a particular place, or person, that belongs to him,
do begin there; They rebelled, and He fought against them, Esaias 63. 8. For
the iniquity of his covetousness I was wroth, Isa 57.

have a truce; so on the contrary, with his own, God may take up a quarrel,
yet He loves them, and remembers them with everlasting kindness.

The Uses of both are these.

is not simply the rising of lusts that war in our members against the Law of
the mind, that break the peace between God and us, unless they be approved
of, and consented unto, nourished and maintained with some presumption; whilst
we maintain, and take up a constant fight against Gods enemies in us, and
disavow the outrageous risings of our lusts, the peace may hold and often does;
for whilst we are not at peace with sin, God may be at peace with us and our
Spirits; but so much peace as we give them, so much war God takes up.

Use is: Does God take up quarrels against His own? then upon any breach
made, go forth to meet Him: It is Saint Paul's exhortation, not to let the
Sun go down upon thy wrath, but to reconcile thy self ere night, with thy
offended brother; but I turn the exhortation, Let not the Sun go down upon
Gods wrath toward thee; but every day make and renew thy peace with God, ere
thou sleep, that as David says, thou may lie down and sleep in peace,
Psalm. 4. 8.

Use: If the peace of Gods own people be thus often interrupted, who yet are
the Sons of peace: Luke 10. what wrath is reserved for the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2.
and open Rebels? that are children of wrath, because of disobedience. There
is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Esa. 57. God is a preparing against
thee, who ever thou art, that go on in sin, if thou turn not, Psalm. 7.
13. thou art pressed for hell, and art thither bound, to encounter with the wrath
of the great God, thither where no truce is to be had, there is no discharge
in that war, as Solomon says, Eccles. 8. 8. Think of this, you that sin,
and will sin; whose peace is not struck up between God and you, who never
yet so much as entered into any treaty of peace with God, who never apprehended
God and your selves at odds.

That when the Child of God wants peace, he can have no peace till God speak
it; God must speak peace, if ever his people have it: therefore says he here,
I will hear what God will speak: he speaks in opposition to the voice of man,
and the help of second causes, and of all means whatever, which in time of
distress, of themselves can do no good.

God is the King of all the world, the Sovereign Lord of all. Now treaties of
war and peace are the prerogative of Kings, and of them alone: they may consult
with their subjects about establishing good Laws, as they use to do, etc. but
the proclaiming War and Peace with foreign States, they have ever held in
their own hands; and so does God who is the King of Kings.

condemned man stands at the bar, let all the standers by say what they will,
bid him be of good comfort, and tell him that his cause will go well, yet till
he hear the Judge himself speak as much, he cannot be at rest in his mind:
the Judge only can acquit him and absolve him The King alone speaks pardons;
and so does God peace; all afflictions are his arrests; thou must therefore
make thy peace with him, if thou will be at peace.

created, for our hearts of themselves are full of nothing but turmoile; as the
raging sea, which cannot rest. I create the fruit of the lips, peace. Isaiah
57. 19. men may speak it, but I must create it; A word of power, such as went
forth when light was created, must go forth from God, or else there is no
peace; for otherwise our hearts are as the sea, that rests not.

Gods favor, not simply his wrath: for it is the glory of God, and his favor,
not self-love only that makes them seek him; therefore nothing gives peace,
but the restoring of his favor, and the light of his countenance; the same
dart that wounded, must heal again; Isay 57. I smote him, and I will heal
him: And as one that is sick with love, when love is the disease, no physic,
no persuasion of friends can cure it, nothing but only the love of the party
beloved; so when a soul is wounded for the loss of Gods love, not all the
things in the world can cure the heart, but one word from him, one good look,
one promise from him that we are his, stills all, and only can give peace.
Like to a poor child, that cries for its mother, let who will dandle it, and
play with it, and use it never so kindly, yet it will not be stilled till the
mother comes; so it is with a poor soul that cries after God day and night.

Use. In case thou art in distress, especially of spirit, and want of peace of
Conscience, wait upon GOD, in the use of means for peace; friends may come to
thee, and say, Why should thou be troubled? thou have no such cause to be
cast down; but all these are miserable comforters, (as Job said) unless God
speak peace: David heard by the Prophet Nathan that his sin was pardoned, but
yet his soul was not at quiet, til God would second it immediately by his
Spirit; therefore says he, when Nathan had been with him, Psalm. 51. 8. Make me
to hear of joy and gladness. Art thou baited with hellish blasphemies cast
into thy soul? God must speak peace, and rebuke Satan for thee, and take him
off thee; all thy friends, all the men in the world cannot do it; they can
only say as the Archangell said, The Lord rebuke thee. And he can as easily
do it, as he did rebuke Laban, and forbade him speaking roughly to Jacob, the
same charge he can give in an instant to Satan: therefore wait upon God, and
look up to him.

Oh let thy servant depart in peace! is the speech and desire of all; But who
is it, that must speak peace to you then? God only. At death you will send
for a good Minister, or a good friend, to give you some comfort, (as you call
it) but, if God will not speak it, how can they? if you could call all the
Angels out of Heaven, and all the Saints both in earth, and Heaven; and so
could have all that whole College of Physicians about you, and they, should
desire to comfort you with all their cordialls; yet if God will not speak it,
who is able to do it? Job 34. 29. If he hides his face, who can behold him?
None can show his face, as the opposition in the next words shows. False
daubers may come to you, and say, Peace, peace, as they in the Prophet said;
but listen what God will speak, he only must, and can do it; and be sure you
make sure of him before you come to die. Would any wise Prince deferr the
treaty of peace with his enemy, till he come into the field, and when the
battle is begun? how foolish then are those, who neglect seeking after God,
till the assault of death comes, and the King of fears with all his terrors,
has encompassed them round?

Observation is, that let Gods people be in never so great distress, yet it is
an easy thing for God to give peace to them; mark the expression used here, It
is but speaking peace, that is, it is as easy for him to give peace, as it is
for you to speak a word; it is no more to him: Then, our comfort is, that as
he only must do it; so he easily can do it, even with a word.

Reason 1. Because his speaking is creating: if he speaks, he makes things to
be, even with a word; as at first, he did but say, Let there be light, and
there was light; so still, if he but say, Let there be peace, there is peace:
he made all, and upholds all by the word of his power. As therefore when the
storm was at its height, and the waves most raging, yet at one word of
Christ's, they were all still: The sea and the winds obey him: so, when
tentations are most fierce, and the doubts of thine own heart most tumultuous,
and raging, a word from him, can still them.

If he give quietness, who can trouble? says he in Job 34. 29. No creature is
able to separate from his love, or the assurance of it.

1 It is a certain and infallible light, which God gives, when he speaks
peace; The anointing from above, which enlighteneth a man's eyes, is truth, and
is no lie, 1. Ioh. 2. 27. that is, in teaching a man (of which he there
speaks, not only what he is in himself, but what he is in teaching us) he
does it so, as a man is not deluded by it, and therefore it is added, None else
need teach him; for did the spirit, (when he did speak peace) speak so, as that
that man to whom it is spoken, did not infallibly apprehend it, he should
speak in vain: for so the Apostle reasons in case of unknown tongues, that if
a trumpet give an uncertain sound; or a man speaks so, as it shall not be
known what he speaks, he beats the air: 1. Cor. 14. 9. Now therefore
surely God, when he speaks peace, speaks it so infallibly, and distinctly,
that the soul knows the meaning of it; It is not a voice else; for, says the
Apostle there, ver. 10. The end of all voices is to signify, and therefore if
I know not the meaning of the voice, he shall be as a Barbarian, that speaks
to me: ver. 11. especially when the speaker undertakes to be a witness, as
the Holy Ghost in speaking peace is, 1. John 5. 6. Now to witness, is such a
testimony, as is taken for infallible, for the end of it is to put an end to
the controversy, and it ends the strife between man and man; now the Holy
Ghost when he speaks, speaks as a witness, and therefore puts an end to a
man's doubts: he speaks infallibly.

And therefore in the second place, it is a satisfying light also; it is such a
light, as dispells darkness, as answers all objections; and so speaks peace
home. As in a question, and Controversy in Divinity, or Logike, when some one
bottom truth is understood, a man has a light, which goes through all the
Objections, and answers them all; such a light does the Spirit give to a poor
distressed soul, about the great controversy of his own salvation, when he
does speak peace; he gives such a light, as satisfies the mind, as lets him
see that in Gods free grace, and in Christ, which does answer to all, he, or
all the devils can say against him, from what wants, or objections are in
himself. He opens, and no man, nor devil, is able to shut: And therefore
when he does speak peace, his testimony is taken and believed: If we receive
the witness of men, and rest in it: 1. John 5. 9. The witness of God is
greater, that is, of more power, and efficacy to persuade, and satisfy the
soul.

Use, is an Use of comfort to poor souls, that are in distress, and in such
distress sometimes, as they think, and say their case is desperate, and past
recovery, so far are their souls sometimes shot into despair. Consider, how
easy it is for you to have your condition altered, and changed, even in a
moment. I tell thee, though (it may be) thou have been cast down this twenty
years, and thy soul is battered, broken, hardened, settled, fixed in serious
thoughts of thy ruin, and reprobation, yet one good look, one good word from
God shall in an instant dispell all, alter thy conceit and apprehension clean;
God can and does often more with one word, in one moment, then Satan could do
in many years, with all the objections he could muster up. The truth of this,
in experience we often find and observe in our selves and others. Yea, and
sometimes when he does speak peace, he gives such satisfaction to a man's
soul in that particular, that he would be content to be as many years
more, in his spiritual conflicts, to enjoy but the like light, one half
hour. Thus easy is it, for God to speak peace. Though thou think thy
self never so far off from peace, yet he can speak peace to them, that are
afar off, as well as those who are near: as himself says, Esaias 57. 19.
for, says he, it is I that speak it. And when he does it, then all thy
doubts and distresses, will be forgotten, as the pains of a woman in travail
are when a man-child is borne.

Cyrus his heart, did set them in their own land again, so you have it
expressed, Esaias 44. 26, 27, 28. The God that says to Jerusalem, thou shall be
inhabited, and to the Cities of Judah, ye shall be built; you see his manner
of doing it, it is but with a word speaking; he says to Ierusale, be built;
and though there be never so great impediments in the way, he will say to the
deep, be dry, that his people may pass over; he dried up a whole Nation, a
sea of people, namely the Babylonians, to make way for this deliverance. And
when they are conquered, and Cyrus, a new King comes to have the sway of
things, God speaks to his heart also; That says of Cyrus, he is my shepherd,
and causes him to say to Jerusalem, Be thou built. Therefore go to him, and
trust in him in all the distresses of the Church, as the Church also did, Psalm.
44. 4. Thou art my king, command deliverances; A Mandamus from God does it, and
will do it at any time.

yet he will speak peace in the end to his people: you heard before, that if
we have peace, he only must give it; and then, that he could, and was able
with ease to do it: and now you shall hear, that he will certainly do it in
the end.

The Reasons the Text suggests are these:

I will hear what God the Lord will speak; he is the Lord, and therefore able
to speak what pleases him; he is peculiarly the God of peace, and therefore
willing to speak peace. Now, 1. when it is said, he is the God of peace, and
the God of comfort, the meaning is, he is full of it, infinitely full of it,
and out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks; thoughts of peace,
and love to his, do boil within him, as hatred, or malice does in a malicious
man toward his enemy; so as he cannot contain and forbear expressing it
toward him; that as David says, his thoughts did burn within him, and at
last, brake forth; so in God, I know the thoughts I think toward you (says
he to them of the captivity) Ier. 29. 11. They are thoughts of peace, and not
of evil. And 2. besides that these his thoughts of peace are taken up of
himself, his Son also has bespoken peace for us; and therefore God will
speak it, Even as Joseph, though he spoke roughly a while to his brethren, yet
could not in the end contain, Genesis 45. 1. so nor God.

are his people, as the text has it; and to them there is no question, but he
will speak peace; though he seems angry for a while. They are his people,
that is the reason given, 1. Sam. 12. 22. He will not cast off his people: as
also Easy 63. 8, 9. When they rebelled, he was wroth, yet he said, surely,
they are my people, so I was their Savior. They? why they are the sons of
peace, Luke 10. 6. ordained for peace, and therefore shall be sure to have it;
and although some differences may arise betwixt God and them, yet there is a
natural (...) in the Lord, that moves him to speak peace in the end to them:
as the dumb son of Craesus, when he saw his father like to be killed,
though he had never spoke before, yet then out of an impetus of spirit, the
strings of his tongue were unloosed, and he cried out to the murderer, Kill
not King Craesus; so, when the enemies of his Church are ready to devour his
people, and Satan is ready to swallow his child up in despair, then Gods
bowels work within him, and he can hold no longer, but cries, save my child,
save my Church. Is Ephraim my pleasant child, (says God) Ier. 31. 20? Well
says God, though I spoke against him, and took him up, and chid him soundly,
yet I cannot forget my child says he, nor my Fatherly affection to him, but my
bowels are stirred, and I will surely have mercy on him.

return to folly, which is the third thing in the text. For his end of
speaking peace, is that they might not return to folly, Psalm. 125. 3. The rod
of the wicked shall not always lie upon the righteous, least they put forth
their hand to iniquity, Therefore at the last verse, Peace shall be upon
Israel. As for this cause he speaks outward peace, so also inward, and suffers
not the rod of Satan, and of his own heavy displeasure to lie upon their
hearts: for else they would return to the pleasures of sin; for every
creature must have some delight; their spirits would fail, and be tired out
else, and wearied in good duties, if GOD should not in the end speak peace,
Esaias 57. The spirit would fail before me. When the child swounds in the
whipping, God lets fall the rod, and falls a kissing it, to fetch life into it
again. As it is a rule in Physic, still to maintain nature: and therefore
when that shall be in hazard to be destroyed, they leave giving purging
Physic, and give cordials: so does GOD with his people, though with purging
physic, he often brings their spirits very weak, and low, yet he will
uphold and maintain their spirits, so as they shall not fail, and be
extinguished, but then he will give cordials to raise them up again.

Use 3. What good heart that bears a child-like affection to God, would offend
such a God, that be thy distresses what they will be, will certainly speak
peace: then do not put him to it, spend not upon that precious stock of his
free grace and love. It Is true, he is married to thee, and therefore though thou
have gone a whoring after many lovers, Ier. 3. 1, 2, 14. still he says,
Return, for I am married to thee: as therefore when man and wife are fallen
out, they consider, we must live together, and therefore they reconcile
themselves again: so consider it must be between God and thee, and make it a
means and motive to recover thee, as Samuel did to the Israelites: 1. Sam. 12.
22. You have committed this great sin, yet turn not aside from following the
Lord, for God will not cast you off, you are his people. Go home to him
again, he will speak peace. Think thus, the time will come wherein God will
be friends again with me, he and I cannot be strange long; though I would, he
will not, Esaias 57. 18, 19. though he went on stubbornly, yet God healed him,
and would not lose his child, therefore I will return of my self.

THE FOLLY OF RELAPSING after Peace spoken.
Psalm. 85. ver. 8. -- But let them turn no more to folly.
THE sixth Observation is, That Peace being spoken to their hearts by GOD, they
should return no more to folly. See this Ezra 9. 13, 14. Thou having punished
us less then we deserve, and given us such a deliverance as this, should we
again break thy Commandments, would thou not be angry with us till thou
had consumed us?

sinning; It is made the aggravation of Solomon's sin, 1 Kings 11. 9. That God
had appeared to him twice: they were especial appearances and manifestations
of mercy; and though such do now cease, yet we read of such as are
analogicall to them, as John 14. 21. Christ promises to manifest himself,
which is by shedding abroad his love, and his Fathers love into the heart,
which is evident by the former words, he shall be loved of my Father, and I
will love him, and after he says, we will come to him, and make our abode
with him, ver. 23. and 27. My peace I will give unto you. Now such appearances
will be set upon the score of every sin, many years after, as they were upon
Solomon's. And the reason is, because nothing wounds an ingenuous loving Nature
more, then matter of unkindnesse: if it had been my enemy says David, I could
have borne it, Psalm. 55. 12, 14. but it was thou oh man, mine acquaintance, we
took sweet counsel together, a bosom friend to whom I had committed my
secrets, opened my heart: Thus when God has unbosomed himself as it were to a
man, and told him what was in his heart toward him, this goes nigh him, if he
lifts up the heel against him. And the reason of that further also is, 1
because of all things else, a man cannot endure to have his love abused, you
come nigh him when you do so, for his love is himself, and commands all in
him, so that abuse his love, and you strike at his heart; it is less to abuse
any excellency in a man, to reproach and extenuate his parts, learning, etc.
though these are dear to him, but his love is his bowels. And therefore, when
God has opened his heart to a man, and set his love upon him, and revealed it
to him, and he carries himself unworthily, it pains him at the heart.
Besides, 2. it is against the law of Nature and of Nations, to seek out for a
peace, and get it concluded, and then secretly to prepare for, and enter into a
war; nothing more hateful, or can exasperate two Nations one against another
more then this. It was the aggravation of Absaloms sin, that being newly
reconciled with his father, and taken into favor again, after two years
discountenance, he then began to rebel more closely.

folly, as if the Lord should have said, Set aside the unkindnesse and wrong
you do to me, yet therein you befoole your selves; you will have the worst of
it. And indeed, when God does afterward draw nigh to a man again, upon that
his recovery of his peace, it appears to be folly, even in that man's own
apprehension; when he has tasted how sweet God is, then come and ask him,
What, will ye return to sin again? he will then say, Ask me if I will
wound or cut my flesh: It is impossible, thinks he, I should any more be so
besotted; if there were no other motives, he thinks it the greatest folly in
the world. And therefore GOD on purpose chooses out that expression, and
places it here in this case, because it is indeed the greatest folly in Gods
sight; and is so apprehended by our selves, looking upon sin after peace is
spoken to us. It is folly to sin against GOD at any time, but especially then,
and that will appear by these particulars.

1. Because, before a man had that peace, he felt the bitterness of sin, for
GOD never speaks peace, till that be felt: now that is an argument even to
sense, never to return to it again; which a fool will be warned by; A burnt
Child dreads the fire; even as a Child will take heed being taught by sense.
When a man shall be in great distress, and his Conscience shall suggest to
him, as Ier. 4. 18. Thy ways and thy doings have procured these things to
thee, this is thy wickedness: a speech like that when you say to your Children,
when they have gotten any harm or cold, or sickness, this is your playing and
gadding and going in the Snow, and your eating of fruit, etc. so does GOD
speak there, to them when they were in distress, this is your wickedness,
for it is bitter, it reaches to the heart, it wounds the Conscience, the
wounding of which, of all else is the greatest misery. When once a man after
this has peace restored to him, and he comes newly out of such a distress,
ask him then how he likes turning to such a sin again, and he will tell you,
it is the greatest folly in the world: ask David if he will murder any more
after his bones have been broken, and set again.

2 Thou will easily acknowledge, it is folly to return to sin again, if thou
considerest the terms, upon which thou did obtain thy peace. Reckon what
pains it cost thee, to wash out the guilt and stain, which sin had made,
what vows and resolutions thou made, what bonds thou did seal unto, what
promises never to return, what prayers and tears, what rappes and knocks at
Heaven Gates, ere thou could get an answer, or God to speak one word, he
making as if he had not been within: why is it not folly now to lose that in
an instant, thou have been a getting so long, happily many years, and with so
much pains and cost? You use it as an excuse to prodigalls to say, things
lightly come by, are lightly gone; and yet you count them, and call them fools
for it, as not knowing what it is to earne a penny: how much more folly is it,
when a man having before morgaged his peace, and God restored it again after
much suite, and waiting many a term, then to come home, and venture to cast all
away at one throw at dice? such a fool art thou, when thou returnest to sin;
to drink that at one draught, which thou have been getting many a year, what
madness is it? when thou have taken much pains, to wash thy self, then to
wallow in the mire again, and make thy self new work, what folly is it? who
but Children and fools will do thus? That which the Church said in another
case, may well be alluded to in this, Cant. 5. 31. I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them?

3 Consider, what it is thou do hazard, to lose by returning to folly: thy
peace. David lost it, as appears, Psalm. 51. 12. therefore says he, restore to
me the joy of thy salvation; In losing of which, thou will be so much a loser,
that if the sin thou choosest* were able to give thee all the world, it could
not recompense thee; no not the loss of one hours communion with God, which
in a moment will bring thee in more sweetness, than all thy sins can do, to
eternity. If all the pleasures of sin were contracted, and the quintessence of
them strained into one cup, they would not afford so much, as one drop of true
peace with God does, being let fall into the heart. It is peace which passes
understanding. Few pleasures here do exceed the senses, nay, the senses are
capable of more than the things can give; but this passes understanding. Gods
loving kindness is better than life. If it were propounded to thee, thou must
lose thy life next moment, if thou should commit such a sin, would thou
venture, if thou did believe it? Now The loving kindness of God is better
than life, and will thou lose the enjoying of it, though but for a moment?

4. It is folly to return again, because the pleasures of sin will be much
less to thee after thou have had peace spoken. Take them at the best, when
they are freshest, and when thy palate was most in relish, and taste with them,
when thou were carnal, and ere thou knew what sweetness was in God, and
they then were but poor sorry pleasures: but now, they will prove far more
empty than before; they are empty vain pleasures even to him that has the^ in
their flower, and in his season of sinning; and therefore all wicked men are
weary, and do inwardly complain of their condition, only they cannot find
sweetness in God, and so are feign to keep themselves to their husks; but
alas, to thee they are far less worth than to another man, who knows not
God, and therefore thou art like to have a worse bargain of it; another man
can make more money of a sin, and get more pleasure out of it, than thou art
able to do.

For first, thy conscience having been scorched with sin, as scalt flesh
deares more, and is more sensible in coming to the fire, than other parts of
the body, is become of a quicker sense; whereas wicked men's is seared, and so
they commit all uncleanness with greediness: but thine is tender and galled
in the act, which allayes much of the pleasure of thy sin, and mingleth the
more bitterness with it.

And 2. besides this galling of conscience, which is common to thee with many
an unregenerate man, thou have a principle of grace, an inner man, which is
dead to such, pleasures, that tastes them not, that is like Barzillai, who
through age 2 Samuel 19. 35. could not taste either what he ate or drank, as
young men do; no more can that New man in thee, and therefore it can be but
half as pleasant to thee as to another man. If one side of a man be taken all
with a numbe palsy, what pleasure is it to that man, to exercise his limbs in
the actions of life? He is but half a man, and lives but half a life; so it
is with thee, when thou have grace in thy heart, but half thy heart can take
pleasure in sinning, that new man the other half, reluctates, grieves for it,
hates what thou do; and all this must needs strike off much of the pleasure.

But 3. If we add to this, that this new man in him having once tasted what
sweetness is in God, and How good the Lord is, is then like a man that has
eaten sweetmeats, other things are out of taste with him, and therefore also
it is folly to return. No man (says Christ, Luke 5 ult.) having drank old
wine desires new, for he says the old is better; a manused to high fare
cannot agree so well with thin diet: so the soul having been used to taste
of great pleasures in God, the impression and remembrance of them leaves his
soul less satisfied than another man's; a stomach that has been enlarged to
full diet, looks for it, and rises more hungry from a slender meal: now
communion with God inlarges the faculties, and widens them and makes them more
capable of greater joys, than other men have, and therefore the creature is
less able to fill them; still he remembers with much grief, whilst he is
eating his husks, what fare he had in his fathers house: and oh, Then it was
better with me, than now. Call me not Naomi, but call me Marah, as she said,
For I went out full, and am come home empty; so does he say, when he comes
from the act of sinning, he went with his heart full of peace, and meeting with
a bargain of sinning, thought to eke out his joy, and make it fuller, but he
comes home empty.

Father, and the guide of your mouth, and yet to fall to sin, this is to do
as evil as you can, you cannot do worse. Ier. 3 4, 5. So Ezra 9. After such
an escaping, should we again break thy Commandments, would thou not be
angry till thou had consumed us? In times of affliction it is the property of
a good child to love GOD most: in times of speaking peace, to fear God most
and his goodness, and to fear to offend him for his goodness sake. Did I
only say, that God is provoked most then, if you return to folly? Nay, I add
further, he is grieved, which is more then to be provoked; and therefore you
shall mark that expression and admonition not to grive Gods Spirit, then comes
in, when the Spirit has sealed us up to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30.
Then by sinning we are said more properly to grieve him then before, when he
has so far engaged himself to love a man, and expressed himself to him, and
set his seal upon him for his. God is angry with wicked men's sins, but he is
grieved for yours. To grieve him is more then to anger him. Mere anger is an
affection can ease it self by revenge, and by coming even again with the
party, and when we can or intend to do so, our minds are not so much
aggrieved, but please themselves rather to think of the revenge which we
mean to execute: so when wicked men sin whom GOD means to meet with, he is
said to be angry rather then grieved; and says, I will ease my self of mine
adversaries: Isay 1. 24. and avenge my self of mine enemies. But here, as when
a man's wife that lies in his bosom, or his child shall wrong him: so is it
when one sins, whom God has set himself to love, and done much for, and made
known his everlasting kindness unto, and sealed to the day of redemption:
this goes to his heart, grieves him rather then angers him, and such are the
truest and deepest griefs. What should he do with you in this case? if
afflict you, and by that means go about to turn you from your iniquity,
therein he shall but afflict himself as it were; for Though they rebelled, yet
when they were afflicted he was afflicted, Esaias 63. 9, 10. As when a Father
that is a Magistrate, or as one that maintains a Student in a College, if
either punishes a child, or pupil in his purse, he punishes himself, so
must God afflict himself to afflict you. Put not the Lord into these straits
if you have any love in you. And 2. as thou art therefore to fear God most
then, so thy self most, and to be more watchful over thy own heart; thou art
then apt to return to folly, if thou take not heed; as when a man has been
very hot, or sweat much, he is apt to take the greatest cold. Hezekiah, after
GOD sealed peace to him and answered his prayers, and renewed the lease of his
life, his heart got cold, he did return to folly. The reason is, because then
the heart is apt to grow less watchful, and to think it self fortified
enough against any tentation. As S. Peter having seen Christ transfigured in
the Mount, grew confident in his own strength. And know that the Devil
watches such an opportunity most, for he gets a great victory if he can foil
thee then, after he has been foiled himself, and when thou art most
triumphing over him; how many battles have been lost through security of
victory and recoyling of the enemy? and besides our corrupt nature so far as
unrenewed, is apt to gather heart to it self, to slight sin, as thinking its
pardon easily gotten.

Therefore when thou art tempted, labor often to renew those thoughts, which
thou had of thy sin at that time, when thou were suing for peace, before
thy peace was gotten; when thou would have given a world for Gods favor;
and also what thoughts thou had of it, when God spoke peace, how thou did
abhor it, yea, thy self, and look what sin was most bitter to thee and an
enemy to thy peace; as if uncleanness, Idleness, neglect of prayer, ill
company, etc. and preserve in thy heart those bitter apprehensions of it, and
say of it, thou have bin a bloody sin to me, as Moses wife said of her husband:
and though I have got peace, and my life saved, yet it was a bloody sin to
Christ, his blood was shed to purchase this my peace, and shall I return to it?

And when tempted to it again, have recourse to the kindness God showed thee in
pardoning, and say, how shall I do this, and sin against God? say as he said,
Is this thy kindness to thy friend? 2. Sam. 16. 16. and what, shall I
Absalom-like, now I am new reconciled to my Father, fall a plotting treason
again? what, shall I make more work for prayer, more work for God, break my
bones again, and lie roaring again? Think thus, I was burnt in the hand before,
I shall be racked surely now. Sin no more lest a worse thing befall thee.

Use 3. The doctrine of assurance (if not abused) and of Gods speaking peace to
men is no dangerous doctrine to make men secure and presumptuous in sinning:
when peace is preached in any man's heart, this use naturally flows from that
Doctrine, return no more to folly. The very scope of the whole Epistle of S
John is to help all believers to assurance, as appears by the 1. John 1. 4, 5.
and the 5. Chap. 13. These things I write to you, that ye might have communion
with God, and that your joy might be full. But this will open a way to all
licentiousness. No says S. John, Chap. 2. 1. These things I write unto you
that ye sin not; nothing guards the heart more against tentations, then the
peace of God: it is said to guard the heart, Phil. 4. 2. Yea and if you do
sin, the assurance of Gods love is the speediest way to recover you; so it
follows: If any one does sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, etc. And
he that has this hope in him, that is, to live with Christ, and knows what
manner of love the Father bears us, purifies himself as he is pure, 1. John
3. 1, 2, 3. If there were no more but self-love in a man, it were then no
wonder if he does abuse it. For self-love, where the love of God is wanting,
is unthankful and ungrateful, willing to take all the love and kindness
which is afforded, and abuse it, and work upon it for its own advantage; and
it is true also that because we have too much of this principle unmortified in
us, therefore God trusts so few with much assurance, because they would abuse
it. But where true love to God is seated, and much of it implanted, there the
love of God and the peace of God does as kindly and naturally enkindle and
inflame and set it awork, even as arguments suitable to self-love do work upon,
and stir that principle. For grace is more for GOD then for our selves, it
being the image of Gods holiness, whose holiness consists in this, to aim at
himself in all: and therefore when Gods free grace toward a man is revealed,
it raises him up to higher strains of love to God, and hatred of sin. And
therefore it is observable, Psa. 51. 12. that David when he prays for the
restoring of the joy of his salvation, he prays not simply for it, or alone,
but withal prays for a free spirit, Establish me with thy free spirit: that
is a spirit of ingenuity, which is kindly, sweetly and freely wrought upon:
therefore when we have a free spirit wrought in us, then that free love that is
in God toward us will work most kindly upon it, and constraines us to love
him that loved us first. The love of Christ constrains us, 2. Cor. 5. 14.
Because we thus judge, that if Christ died for all, then they which live should
not live unto themselves but unto him that died for them: S. Paul gives the
reason, why this love of Christ did thus constrain him, because he did thus
judge, that is, this consideration of Christ's love, he having a principle of
love in his heart to Christ, he found to be a powerful prevailing reason to
persuade him to live to Christ. Having a new judgment he saw force and
strength in the argument. And so shall we if we thus judge, and it will have
this natural consequence as naturally to follow upon it in our hearts, as any
reason in any other kind has, that is brought to enforce any other
conclusion. And therefore as the mind is constrained (as it were) to assent to
a truth proved by force of reason, that if you grant this, then this or that
will follow: so because we judge this reasonable by an argument drawn out of
loves Topics, that if Christ died for all, who otherwise must themselves have
died, that then they should live to him, this will constrain us to love him,
and live to him. Amor Dei est extaticus, nec se sinit esse sui luris.

THis Text and admonition here gives a ust occasion to consider a little of
that so often questioned case of Conscience concerning relapses of Gods
Children into the same sins and folly again, The case of relapsing into the
same sin after peace spoken, resolved.
and whether after peace spoken, Gods people may return again to folly. Some
have held, that a man after a second repentance could not fall into the same
sin again: others if he did, it excluded him from mercy for time to come. For
the comfort of some poor souls whose case and tentation this may be, I will
speak somewhat though sparingly and with caution.

1. The Scripture no where excludes those from the state of grace, or bars
mercy from those, that have relapsed into the same sin, especially so long as
in regard of the manner of their sinning it be but folly, not wickedness or
wilful sinning, that is, rather proceeding out of error of understanding, and
heat, and impetuousnesse of foolish affections, then obstinacy and malice in
the will, and with despite of the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10. 27.

Yea: 2. In Scripture we meet with such passages and promises, as may
undoubtedly uphold any soul, that has so fallen after peace received, into
the same sin, and preserve him from apprehending himself excluded therefore
from mercy and the state of grace: As Hosea 14. 4. I will heal their
backslidings, I will love them freely; unless they had fallen after repenting
and former healing, it could not have been called backsliding, and yet this he
promises to heal, and withal shows the ground that moved him to it, his
loving them freely: for if in any thing his free love is shown to any of his
children and drawn out, it is in healing again such a backsliding soul after
recovery and peace given. For the falling into the same sin, which has been
repented of and healed, provokes God more then a thousand other acts of sins
formerly committed though of the same kind. And therein also to show his free
love, that he can pardon even the abuse of love it self, he leaves some thus
to sin after his love shed abroad in their hearts. Some he shows his free
love unto, in keeping them from sinning, others in pardoning them, and giving
them repentance: they are but several ways of drawing it forth; so that if in
any thing, herein his free-love is shown, for if it were not free, it would
never endure it self to be abused. And likewise the sure mercies of David are
then shown, when God multiplies to pardon: so Esaias 55. 3. having mentioned the
promise of the sure mercies of David, He promises to multiply to pardon, as it
is in the Original verse 7: which are thus joined, both because the surenesse
of his Covenant, is therein shown, and because we might happily multiply to
sin; and at least it supposes the possibility of it again. God likewise
runs upon such a supposition in that expression of his, to his own people,
Iere. 3. 1, 2. They say if a man put away his wife, and she becomes another
man's, shall not the Land be greatly polluted? but thou have played the harlot
with many lovers, yet return again to me, says the Lord. He speaks to her
as to one, had been his Wife, who though she had not been put away by him, but
had put away her self and run away, not once but often, and that with many
lovers, and sometimes in the midst of her whoredoms, had come in and made
challenge of his former love and pleaded his former mercy to her, and yet
fallen back again verse 4. 5. (where he adds, Will thou not from this time
cry, My Father, and thou art the guide of my youth, that is, I know says God,
you will come now and cry as heretofore you have done and say, Oh thou art my
Father and my Husband, and confidently still claim an interest in me upon my
former kindness, and yet do as evil as you can, for you cannot do worse
then thus to abuse my love) yet for all this at the 12. verse, Return thou
backsliding Israel, says the Lord, for I am married to you, verse 14. That
which he does thus to a nation, he may do to a particular man who is his
child.

Again, 3. There are not altogether examples wanting for this.

Sampson a godly man (whom yet we would scarce have thought such but that we
find his name in the list of those Worthies, Heb. 11.) ensnared with a
Philistine woman against the counsel of his parents, Judge. 14. 3. who clearly
laid open his sin to him, and he was in the event reprooved for his folly,
for his wife deceived him, told his riddle to his enemies which he in the end
perceived, and further to reproove him, in the issue she was given away to
another, verse 16, 17, 20 from all which passages of reproof, an holy man that
had his eyes in his head, could not but see his error; and yet again a long
while after this, (twenty years after, Judge. 15. 20. (when certainly ere that
he had repented of this his sin, for which his parents before, and after,
God so clearly did rebuke him,) he went to Gaza, Judge. 16. verse 1. and saw a
harlot and went into her, and there escaped narrowly with his life at midnight,
And verse 4. After that also it came to pass he fell in love with another, as
bad as any of the former, Dalilah, who was his ruin. But his returning thus to
folly cost him dear, for in the end he was taken as a Captive to the
Philistims his enemies, and that through her false-hood, deprived of his
strength he had spent upon these women, had his eyes those betraying lights put
out, that had ensnared him, and himself made a fool of, to make his enemies
sport. So as no child of God can take any great encouragement thus to return
to folly, for the future, by his example, though comfort they may have
therefrom in case they have returned for the time past.

2. Another example may be that of Ieboshaphat who committed a great sin in
joining with Ahab that wicked King that sold himself to work wickedness, 2.
Chron. 18. 1, 2, 3. and he was foretold what would be the success of that
confederacy and journey by Michaiah before he went with him to battle, and
after in the battle it self, where he hardly escaped with his life, and by
an extraordinary providence at his prayer was delivered, verse 31, 32. and as
if that were not sufficient, God sends another Prophet to him, Chap. 19. 2. who
with open mouth reproves him and discovers to him his sin, Should thou
help the ungodlie, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon
thee from before the Lord: which message to so good a man doubtless was not in
vain, but humbled him for that his sin, and wrought repentance in him to avert
that wrath. And yet after that great and miraculous deliverance of him and his
people, Chap. 20. we find him relapsing into the same sin ver. 35. After this
did Iehoshaphat join himself with Ahaziah King of Israel who did very
wickedly, and he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish:
which another Prophet in like manner reprooveth, and likewise God himself
rebuked by the like ill success of that league to the former, the ships were
broken, verse 37.

3 Saint Peter a man, who seemed by other of his cariages, bold enough, was yet
three several times surprised with base fear: once when he tempted Christ,
not to hazard himself at Jerusalem, where Christ had told him, that he was to
suffer: Matthew. 16. 21, 22, 23. Master (says he) spare thy self: upon which
speech Christ calls him, Satan, rebukes him more sharply, then at any other
time, for which surely there was a more then ordinary cause. Saint Peter
thought that if his Master should suffer at Jerusalem, that himself, and the
rest should not be safe: That speech therefore proceeded from fear, and
therefore Christ does immediately thereupon call for self denial, and taking
up the Cross, verse 24. And this was immediately after peace spoken, verse 16,
17, 18. CHRIST had never more comfortably given testimony to Saint Peter, and
his faith, then there. Yet again, after this Christ had him up into the Mount
and transfigured himself, to hearten him against that trial to come, which
made him so confident; yet then he denied him, at his arraignment: when again
Christ immediately upon that looked back upon him with so sweet a look as broke
his heart for this his folly; and so he returned again, and it cost him many a
tear; and Christ after the Resurrection, owned him again, more then any of the
rest, bad them that first met him, Go tell Peter, He mentions him by name,
and in especial, go tell him the first news of it: and then also he asked
him, Peter, love thou me? and he said, Lord, thou know I love thee: as if
he had said, Though I have played the wretch, yet I love thee: upon this,
though he grew more bold, Acts 4. 13. yet Gal. 2. 11, 12. we find him falling
into the grudgings of the same disease, which cast him into another fit, he
dissembled, fearing them of the Circumcision: this was a spice of the former
sin, though not so gross; and though the outward acts in these sins were
diverse in their occasions, yet they were all acts and buds of the same root of
bitterness; and may as well be called sins of the same kind, as the
committing differing acts of uncleanness, are reckoned falling into the same
sin.

In the fourth place, if the Scriptures had been utterly silent in examples,
yet reason consonant to other principles, and grounds of Divinity, and of the
Scriptures might persuade the same.

is some disparity, which might make him more averse, and set him in some more
remoteness, from the same sin he has particularly repented of, then
another; which shall be considered in its place. Yet, the difference, cannot
be supposed such, as should make the one possible, and not the other: all true
repentance working the heart, to an abominating every sin, as well as any;
and therefore if it were true, it was for that particular sin, as sin; and
then it would work the like against all, and every sin, according to the
measure of the sinfulness; and though it may, and does work a more keen, and
special hatred against that particular sin, a man has been most stung with,
yet still, this is but so far, as this aggravation, (to fall into the same
sin again,) may cause such a relapse, to be more sinful then another
sin: and so far, and upon that ground he is, and may be more set and
strengthened against it, then against another sin. But then, if the
supposition fall upon another gross sin, never before committed, the sole
and single act of which, other circumstances make as heinous, even as this
reiterated act of a sin formerly committed, can be; then the one is equally
as possible as the other. But however yet still the difference, is but in
degrees; namely in that the heart is elongated a degree, or so, further from
that sin formerly committed, then any other: which will not therefore so vary
the case, (as magis and minus do not) that it should be made impossible to
fall into the one, and not into the other.

Reason: If he may fall into some gross sin, which at first conversion, he
did above all other humble himself for; and yet, that same initiall
repentance, did not put him into such an impossibility of falling into that
sin again: Why then should a renewed act of repentance for the same, or for
some other reiterated sin, be supposed to have such virtue in it, as to make
him shot-free for ever, from the same fiery dart again?

us against sin, but by restoring the decayed frame of Grace, to a better
constitution and greater degree of strength then before; and by raising it,
above a man's lusts, and above that lust, more then all other? as in David, when
he prayed, Create in me a clean heart, which, through his sin of
uncleanness, was in an especial manner, defiled with a pronenesse to that
sin: But yet withal remember, that, that new frame of heart, and strength
gotten by that renewed repentance, and that augmentation, and increase of
hatred against, and abominating that sin wrought by it, is all but a
creature; as grace, and every new degree of Grace is: and therefore for
preserving us, has in it self but the power, and force of a created habit,
which may be prevailed against, by the sin that is in us; and can no more, nay
much less put us into a state of confirmation against any particular sin, then
the grace of the Angels could of it self confirm them in a state against all
sin. And as for the impression of that bitterness, which in our repentance
for that sin fallen into, was made upon our hearts: that also can be supposed
to have but the like force upon our spirits, that the impression of joy
unspeakable and glorious, has upon the heart in those heavenly raptures, which
believers sometimes enjoy; yea and the latter of these will easily be supposed
to be of the greater efficacy of the two; and both but creatures: Now those
ravishing joys, are not yet such immortal and everlastingly quickening
cordialls, that put such spirits into a man, as to preserve him from swounds,
and faintings of spirit for ever: and though, whilst they abide and are present
to the heart, they do then raise it above all thing here below: yet when a man
has been a while off from that Mount, and has conversed a while with things
here again below; then that luster wears away, as the glory that shined in
Moses face did: and after a while, the sense and present taste of those joys
wears out; and when that is gone, the bare remembrance of the^ which is left,
has not in their absence, such an infallible, though a great efficacy to
preserve his mind in an everlasting disrelishing former delights; but that he
may, and often does fall in love again too too much with them: although indeed
whilst the present sense of them did abide upon the heart, it abstracted the
mind from all things here below. And hence a man is apt to fall from his first
love, Rev. 2. and from that high esteem of spiritual things; as the
Galathians, Gal. 4. 15. Where is the blessedness you spoke of, says Saint
Paul to them? therefore answerably the remembrance of the bitterness of any
sin felt in our deepest humiliations, is much less able to preserve a man, nor
is the impression and dint made so lasting, nor the scarres and wounds of
conscience continuing for ever so fresh, as everlastingly to preserve and
deter us from falling into the same sin again. For both are but creatures,
and at best but arguments drawn from sense, and experience within our selves,
and have but an humane created power which is not always efficacious;
especially seeing GOD has ordained us to live by says, more then by sense,
for faith is appointed by God to be our more constant keeper, 1. Pet. 1. 5. We
are kept through faith unto salvation, and by it more surely and more
constantly then by impressions of joy, or sorrow which are made to sense: and
yet we are not kept by it of it self, but by the power of God: so then, we
are kept by the power of God as the principal supporter, and guardian, through
faith as the isntrumental, and by it rather then by sense or any other grace
of sorrow or repentance; because faith caries the heart out of it self, and
commits it self wholly into the hands of God as a faithful Creator (who is
the strength of Israel, to keep a man from every evil work,) as not being
able to secure it self against any sin through the power of any fortification,
or strength that any other grace or degree of grace has built, no not for one
moment; and therefore is as dependant upon God after a fall, and a renewed
repentance out of it, yea and more then before he fell, and his own woeful
experience has reason to make him so. The like instance to illustrate the
truth of this we may draw from the assurance of faith it self. For even the
assurance of faith it self, (which is an act properly belonging to that grace,
called therefore the assurance of faith, Heb. 10. 22.) which does strengthen us
as much against doubting when it is joined with joy unspeakable and glorious,
as repentance can do against any other sin: and whilst it is upon us, in the
strength of it a believer is apt to think himself armed and strengthened, and
so established, as that he shall never question Gods love any more, or the
pardon of his sins: and yet, experience shows it, that the guilt of sin
prevails sometimes again, after this, and the same doubts arise, and prevail
as much as ever; neither will the remembrance of the former assurance be
always of force enough to resist them; for he may come to question that
assurance it self also; and so forget that he was purged from his old sins.
And if the guilt of sin prevail in the Conscience again, against such a
renewed and settled act of faith, why may not the power of a lust prevail in
the members, after a renewed act of repentance?

falling into that sin of all other for ever; without which no man in faith
can affirm it; and without which there is an it may be, and a supposition of
such a possibility, as sometime falls out, and is reduced to existence. GOD
indeed has said, that if we fall, he will put, under his hand, to break that
fall that it shall not ruin us; but not so to keep us in his hands, as we
shall be out of danger of falling again. A renewed act of repentance is
indeed an ordinance sanctified to preserve a man; yet, but in the same manner
that other ordinances are, as Prayer, and the word preached, and admonition,
etc. with which GOD does not always so infallibly cooperate, as efficaciously
to work always that which they serve to.

5. If there were not such a possibility, as might and does sometimes fall out;
then every regenerate man, after such a renewed act of repentance, might secure
himself against the committing that gross act again for ever; but so he can
never do against any particular act of sin, but that sin against the Holy
Ghost. Saint Paul therefore exhorts, when a brother is fallen into a sin, to
restore such an one with the spirit of meekness; upon this consideration,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted; and he lays the
exhortation upon those who are most spiritual; Ye that are spiritual, refore
such an one, considering thy self lest thou also be tempted, Gal. 6. 1. so as
he speaks of such, as have their hearts raised up to the best frame, through
the most deep, and serious repentance: and now we will suppose one, that has
formerly fallen himself into the same sin, which another is fallen into, but
not yet restored, but himself is returned by repentance out of it: (for
indeed, such a spiritual man, is of all other like to be the meekest
bonesetter of a man fallen,) and even such does Saint Paul exhort to consider,
that themselves may for the time to come, be also or in like manner tempted,
that is, fall as this man fell; and therefore so be tempted as to fall into
the same sin again, that he was fallen into. And if any man could be secure
from the like fall again, he had been out of the reach of this exhortation
to this duty upon that ground mentioned, as not capable of it. But the Holy
Ghost has else where, 1. Cor. 10. 13. told us, that there is no tentation
which is common to man, but is incident to befall any man, at any time; and
therefore verse 12, exhorts him that stands, to take heed lest be fall:
indeed, that temptation which is common to Devils with men, the sin of final
despair, and against the holy Ghost, etc. a regenerate man may through the
grace of Christ, secure himself against: but, all such sins as are common to
man, from these or any of them, no man in any state, can without an
extraordinary revelation, secure himself from the commission of.

Only I add these Cautions concerning this case.

two sorts of corruptions. First, more gross corruptions, which Saint Peter
calls, (...), the defilements of the world, 2. Pet. 2. 20. they being the
common mire, or kennell, wherein the unclean swine of this world wallow, and
which the Apostle calls such works of the flesh as are manifest, Gal. 5. 19.
even to the light of Nature; such as are adultery, fornication, drunkenness,
etc. and by those two expressions do they distinguish them from a sort of more
spiritual and refined lusts. For secondly, there are corruptions more
spiritual, as pride, secret love of the world. Now, for those gross
corruptions, which are contrary, even to common honesty, and (to use Jobs
phrase) are punished by the Judges, 31. Job 11. which profane men wallow in, a
godly man has more strength against them, so as it is not so ordinary for him
to be entangled again and again with these; for where but moral principles
are, these are abstained from, as we see in the Pharisee, I am no adulterer,
etc. therefore, where grace is, much more. And some sins are more opposite to
the spirit of holiness, and less compatible with grace, as uncleanesse, of
which Saint Paul says, God has not called us to uncleanesse, but to
holiness, 1 These. 4. 7. it is in an especial manner, there opposed to
holiness: and such as these are works of the flesh which are manifest, even to
Nature, to civil men: and therefore when they are often fallen into, they do
manifest, that the heart is but flesh. And although the limits, how seldom or
how often, cannot be set concerning relapses into these, or any sins; yet,
in an ordinary course it may be said, that few godly men fall into such sins
again and again: God keeps them from such in an ordinary providence, that
scandalls should not arise: they being sins which all the world takes notice
of. But those other sins of rash anger, and love of the world, and spiritual
pride, etc. these being less manifest, and sitting more close to our spirits,
godly men are more subject unto.

Yet secondly: we must again distinguish.

1. There are the inward lustings to those outward acts: now, though grace
weakeneth the very lustings within, yet, takes them not wholly away: The spirit
that is in us, (that is,) in us Saints, says S. James, lusts to envy: and as
to envy, so to all other sins.

And secondly, there are the outward gross acts of such sins; and there in the
weakness of sin in a regenerate man, and strength of grace shows it self
most in preferving from them: for, as to will is present with me says S. Paul
to will what is good, yet how to perform it I am not able, Romans 7. 18. So on
the contrary, to lust the heart may be ready, and lust may soon rise up in
rebellion, but when it should come to the act, there is a weakness discovered;
they come to the birth, and want strength often to bring forth; the contrary
lusting and prevailing of grace being then seen and discovering it self: that
it fares with a regenerate man in this case often as with a man that is deadly
wounded, who rises up to strike his enemy, and thinks to run him through,
but sinks down again, medio conatu, when his sword is at his enemies breast,
through a deficiency of spirits; or as a man in a Palsy, or the Gout, who
thinks he is able to walk, til he comes to try, and then he finds a weakness
which makes him fall back again: Thus, even when the whole forces of lusts
are mustred up, yet the weapons fall out of their hands. Humors in a
healthful constitution, may stir, and boake in the stomach, when yet they
come not up, nor prevail unto vomiting. In that place before named, Gal. 5. the
Apostle seems not to deny but that in the most regenerate, lustings may arise,
for the flesh (says he) lusts against the spirit, ver. 17. but yet, as for
outward acts, he tells them, verse 16. That if they walk in the spirit, that
is, in the prevalency of the spirit, keeping up a holy frame of heart above the
flesh, that then ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: for that frame
of heart so kept up, will hinder the outward fulfilling of the lust; which is
never done till flesh and corruption is actually raised above the spirit, and
gets more voices to carry it; till the spirit be under hatches, and the flesh
above, and so steeres the helm:otherwise the lusting of the spirit against the
flesh, will hinder the outward doing, and fulfilling of a lust. For the reason
he gives, verse 17. so as you cannot do what you would, implies, that not
only lustings, which arise without consent, may be in such a man but further,
much of the will may be won to consent to them, to like them; when yet there
is not strength enough to carry it on to the outward act; you cannot do what
you would. And what those works of the flesh are, which are manifest works of
the flesh, and which Christians whilst they walk in the Spirit fulfill not,
he mentions and reckons up in the following words. And this is the more
ordinary frame of a Christians heart; for verse 24. (says he) they that are
Christ's have crucified the affections and lusts, that is, so far, as not to
fulfill them.

3. He may more easily fall into a gross sin of another kind, then into the
same after special repentance for it, and peace spoken in the pardon of it.
Because true repentance especially fortifies the heart against that sin which a
man has most repented him of; and sincerity lies more in watching over that
sin then any other: so says David, Psalm. 18. I was upright, and kept my
self from mine iniquity, that especial sin which was eminently his sin. A
man's arm that has been broke, will, if well set, rather break in some other
place then where it was broke at the first. Hence sometimes it falls out, that
that which was a godly man's bosom sin before conversion, continues not to be
so after: but, another steps up in the room of it, by reason that he then
endeavors to wash out that great stain, most; and spends the most of the
Fullers soap, to purge himself from it; and so becomes, ever after, most
watchful over it; and sets in this his weakest place, the strongest garrison,
and a watch, to prevent the enemy. And, as an act of some presumptuous sin,
though it inclines the heart more to all sin, then before, yet, especially,
to commit that kind of sin again, rather then any other: so on the
contrary, is it in a sound and solemn repentance, for some especial sin;
and in the endeavoring, to mortify some especial member of the body of
sin: (to mortify which, not only in the bulk and general, but also
particularly and apart in the several members of it, the Holy Ghost exhorts,
Colos. 3. 5.) though thereby, the whole habit of the body of sin is purged
and weakened, yet that particular sin which we aim especially to have
mortified, is through Gods blessing more subdued then any other. We see
Idolatry, was the sin which the people of Israel relapsed into, again and
again; yet when they were once thoroughly humbled by the Captivity for it, they
never returned to it, of all sins else, not to this day: so as it may be
said, as was foretold, happily in an other case, Ezekiel. 16. 43. Thou shall not
commit this lewdness of all thy abominations: Jonah, though he would happily
never run away from God again, after his Jail delivery out of the Whales
belly; yet, immediately, after peace spoken to his heart he falls into a sin
of another kind; into a passion of extreme anger and peevishness, and
quarrelling against God. And the reason of this especial tenderness to fall
into the same sin, is, because the Conscience looks upon a relapse into that
sin, to be more heinous, then into any other sin of another kind; because
of that aggravation of it, which thereby would stain and die it: and although
a sin of another kind shows the variety of corruption more; yet, this is
more against the power and work of repentance it self, which was particularly
exercised about that sin: and also breaks, and dissolveth all bands of a man's
vows, covenants, prayers, etc. made against it in particular, and so is made
more grievous. And this we may see in Ezraes humbling himself for that great
sin of the people, in joining themselves in marriage with the people of the
land, when he did set himself to humble himself for them, together with
those that feared God, Chap. 9. 4. What an hideous apprehension of the
heinousness of that sin, if they should again fall into it, did that days
repentance raise his heart up unto? as appears v. 14. Should we again break
thy commandments, and join in affinity with them, would thou not destroy us,
till thou had consumed us, and till there was no escaping? Into which sin,
yet, the people did again fall, after they had repented of it, with a solemn
confession and promise of amendment, which is recorded, Chap. 10. v. 11, 12.
etc. yet they returned to it again the second time, as we find in Malachie,
who lived the last of the Prophets, and after this prayer of Ezra. For Chap. 2.
12. the Prophet says, An abomination is committed in Jerusalem, for Judah has
married the daughter of a strange god: and then follows the aggravation, v.
13. This ye have done again, that is, the second time, and in that respect are
challenged to deal treacherously; and that also in respect they had repented
of it the first time, covering the Altar with tears, with weeping, and crying
out, as Malachie there speaks: so as God regards not your offerings any
more. And therefore also Psalm. 78. 40. How often did they (says he, as
aggravating their sins) by murmuring provoke the Lord? and Numb. 14. 22. God
reckons up, and mentions the times of their sinning, how often they had thus
sinned, as an aggravation of them, They have tempted me these ten times.

Lot committed incest two nights together; but the orifice of his lust, was not
yet stopped by repentance; the wound was not closed, and so bled again afresh;
but when it is healed once, and the heart made perfect with God, and divorced
from that sin, and entered into Communion with God again; then though it may
fall out, yet a man more hardly returns. A woman that is gone from her husband
may play the whore a long while with him she ran away withal, till her husband
fetches her again: but to run often away, after receiving again, is
intolerable. That is not so ordinary in Gods child.

God, and repentings; and of Gods speaking peace.

1. Of their Repentings: some are more imperfect, and but as it were thawings
of the mind a little, by means of a little Sunshine of Gods love: some, are
more through and deep; that recover a man, and put him into a sound and
healthful estate. As for example, a man in an ague has well days, yet his
fits return, and it may be they leave him for a month or so; and yet they take
him again, as at Spring and Autumn; which is because all this while his body
is not thoroughly recovered to a state of health: so is it with a man's heart in
respect of his lusts; though he may have many well days, wherein he may eat
his meat, and receive sweetness in the word, and ordinances: yet at times his
distempers and aguish fits return, he being aguish still; but in the end,
after the peace of God has more thoroughly established his heart, he attaines
to some settled constant victory over it; and when it does not prevail to
victory, such aguish fits end usually in consumptions, in which long agues
often end: as in Temporaries, in whom, sin overcomming GODS striving with
them, it eats all good beginnings out; but if they belong to GOD, then usually
that aguish distemper, is in the end by a more thorough repentance, so healed,
as that they attain to more victory, and security against it then any other
sin; that as in those other kind of tentations, it often falls out, that,
that which a man doubted of most, he comes in the end to be most assured of,
and to doubt no more; so also here, a man becomes most freed from that sin,
he was long exercised with of all other. So also

2. For Gods dealings with his, there is much difference therein to be found:
there are some kinds of speaking peace by God, and meltings of the heart of his
people, which, yet are not of that force as to overcome, but wherein God does
but (as it were) strive with them; which strivings do ever and anon work
their hearts to a repentance, and that true, and serious: which yet is not so
deep, and thorough, nor so healing the heart at the bottom, as it should. For
GOD sometimes uses more imperfect kind of strivings, even with his own
children, about some particular sin they are to leave, which do not so
fully, at first prevail, and overcome in them; which God does, to let them see
the running issue of their natures, how grace would run out at it, Heb. 2. 1.
(as the Apostle speaks) and overcome grace in them, if he should let it
alone: and so, lets out upon his child after many years some lust, which had
been long down, which puts him to it exceedingly, so that he is in hazard to
be undone, and is put into fears of it; and yet God visits his spirit by
fits, and per intervalla at times strives with him; and though he falls, yet
he puts under his hand, and gives him well days, and some comfortable
visitations; yet such as are not deep enough to work him fully off from it.
For, as God strives with wicked men, so he sometimes strives with his own also;
which may seem to be the true meaning of that speech, Genesis 6. where, having
mentioned the sin of his own children, ver. 2. That the Sons of God took
to them wives of that wicked seed of Cain, he says, My Spirit shall not
always strive with man, for that [he also] is but flesh: He means not this,
of all mankind, for he says, [hee also] is but flesh: now, with what other
creatures, does he join them in this comparison, but with others of the
sons of men? so as the meaning is, I see my Children, that they also are
corrupt, and degenerate as well as the rest of mankind, and my Spirit has
striven with them. In which striving, GOD lets them see, how if he did not in
the end, show forth his free love to the full, in the rescuing of them, and
healing their backsliding, they would be undone: so as, in the end, through
his grace which is sufficient, they obtain the greatest conquest, over that
lust of any other; when the heart is once thoroughly awakened, and settled in a
through peace. And as, those doubts they were most troubled with once, (which
though they had at times some light against, yet by fits did still arise) are
yet in the end, so overcome, as they arise no more, but they enjoy the greatest
freedom from them: So is it often herein. And these strivings to not
overcomming, I resemble to the thawings of the Ice, in a great frost, as when
in the day time, the Sun shines, and in the Sunshine it thaweth a little: but
yet, so as at night, or in the shade it freezeth; when sometimes, the weather
also begins to change for a night, and yet falls a freeing again: so here,
there is not such a through shedding abroad the love of God in the heart, as
should make a through general thaw, to the purpose as we say; and so, when the
heat of that is withdrawn, it freezeth again: but in the end there comes a
more through and general thaw, and change that carries all away, melts the
heart, and so alters the temper and constitution of the weather, (as I may so
speak) as it freezeth no more. And such a thawing of his heart had David, when
Nathan came to him, and not before; though it may be he had those lesser
relentings often before.

But let those that are in such a case, take heed they be not hardened through
the deceitfulness of sin and of all the times, that pass over you, in your
lives, these are the most climactiericall, and critical, and most dangerous.
For God will not always strive, but if thou be his child, if such thawings
will not do it, he will use some great afflictions, in the end to divorce the
heart, and thy sin; his love will one way or other, overcome thee, and in the
end prevail. As when Israel went on stubbornely in the way of his heart,
(says God) I have seen his ways and will heal him and guide him, Esaias 57.
and the Lord may so heal thee, as those lusts of all other shall not in that
gross manner, break forth any more. And in those times, when God deals thus
with him, a man will after say, that in such passages of his life, he had more
free love spent on him, then in all his life time, before or after: and when he
is freed and healed, he will be more thankful, and fearful then ever before,
or then otherwise he would have been; and so get ground by his stumblings. If
any of you, being now in such a conflict as this, in such a vicissitude and
chance of war: If yet thou find a constant fight against thy sin; and that
those breakings, and meltings of thy heart by God, do win ground of it; and
that the comforts, and hope, which at times are vouchsafed, do strengthen, and
stablish thy heart in well doing: as 2 Thessalonians. 2. ult; and makes thee more
fearful, every time thou risest, then ever; so as to look upon another fit
if it should come, (which knowing the deceitfulness of the heart, thou
fear,) as the fit of some great sickness, lest it should return again:
esteeming it as the greatest cross that can befall thee; which thou would
buy off with thy blood; and bleedest most of all to think, that thou have so
unconstant a heart, which as it has abused Gods love formerly, so thou
fear, will do so again; if thus thou go on to fight it out, the love of
God will in the end overcome in thee; but if thou find that those
encouragements from God, do through thy corruption, (which turns Gods grace
into wantonness) nourish thy lusts, and make thee less fearful against the
next time; and thy heart harder, and secure, and to slight sin more, because
thou have been so often visited from on high, and pardoned: thy case is
dangerous, and may prove desperate.

6. Though he may return, yet not presently: Luke 5. last. He that has
tasted old wine, does not straightway drink, and desire new: not whilst the
love of God, and the taste, and relish of it is fresh in his mouth: when the
impression is worn out indeed, and begins to be forgotten, then happily he may
return.

sin, though we repent of it afterward: then, what folly is it in them that
utterly fall away? and after they have been enlightened, and tasted of the good
word of God, then fall again to the pleasures of sin and never repent of
them? as many do; that come, and try a little, what is in religion, and the
ways of God, and then return again to their vomits, and never return to
piety again. Foolish souls, who has bewitched you? are ye so foolish, that
having begun in the spirit, ye end in the flesh? as Gal. 3. 3. Folly indeed:
to spend the harvest of your time, in seeking God, and then to leave him, when
you are about to take leave of the pleasures of sin. Alas poor souls,
whither will ye go? do you ever think to have such a God again? Thou have
the words of eternal life, said the Disciples to Christ: and as Saul said to
his servants, to keep them from falling away unto David; Can the son of Iesse
give you vineyards, and make you Captains of thousands? 1. Sam. 22. 7: So, can
the world give you that peace, that I can give you, may Christ say to you; yea
and heaven besides hereafter? Is the devil, with all the wages of sin, you
post after, able to make you amends? you thereby dishonor God in returning to
sin, and bring an evil report upon the good land; and discredit your Master,
in changing your service; but withal you befoole your selves most: you return
to folly. For even that, which you think to gain, the worlds good word and
opinion by, even that you lose: for, though they make aspoile of you, and
triumph in such, and glory in their flesh a while: yet they never inwardly
think well of such a one; nor truly love him. A back-slider, is like
lukewarm water, having been once heated, which good men spue out, and evil
men regard not; for what use, can indeed be made of it? Like salt that has
lost its savor it is good for nothing, but the dunghill. Like one that has
been married, but lives divorced; she is undone for her marriage ever after.
Such is the condition of those that fall away and repent not: You who have but
turned unto folly and are not grown to a despising and despiting Gods ways,
Return, Oh Shulamite, return. And you that have peace and communion with God,
take heed you do not lose him, you will never have such a God again.

FINIS.

