THE DIGNITY Of CHIVALRIE; Set forth in A SERMON Preached before the ARTILLERY
Company of LONDON, June xiij. 1626. By WILLIAM GOVGE, B. of Divinity and
Preacher of Gods Word, in Black-frier's London.

EXODUS 15. 3.(...) The LORD is a Man of War. CHRYSOSTOM. ad Pop. Hom. 4.(...).
Antiquitus Deus Dux erat bellorum. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Ralph Mab, 1626.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, HVGH HAMMERSLY Esquire, One of the Aldermen and
Coronels of the Honorable City of LONDON, and President of the Martial
Company, exercising Arms in the Artillery Garden:
AND, To all the Captains and Gentlemen of the said Company, Such valor as
may make them victoriously stand against all sorts of Enemies.
Worthy President, Captains, and Gentlemen.
AS by a free Election of you all, I was called to preach that which is here
presented to you, so by the first motion and earnest solicitation of many of
you, I am enduced to publish it. How far mine own purpose was from any such
purpose, God is my witness How far your desire prevailed to alter that my
purpose, this evidence is an apparent evidence. Among other motives mentioned
by you that in the name of the rest were Solliciters in this business this,
which by some of you was alleged, most prevailed with me, that the more common
this Sermon was made, the more commodious it might be to your Company. How my
poor pains may add any advantage to your important employme^ts I know not.
This I know, and do openly acknowledge, and publicly profess, that my heart
is set upon your Artillery C^pany: I love it: I admire it: I honor it: I
praise God for it: I will continue to pray to the Lord of Hosts for his blessing
upon it: and to my poor power I will do, what I can for the advancement
thereof. As one though a very mean and weak proof thereof, I do here
dedicate to you in particular, that which by your means, and for your sake is
divulged to all in general. I confess, that as the matter thereof, so the
manner of handling it, is somewhat differing from my ordinary course. For I had
respect to the kind of Auditory before which I spoke. Among Soldiers I
endeavored to speak souldier-like. If offense be taken at matter or manner,
I shroud my self under your shields for defense Now that you have brought me
forth into the open field, and fet me up to be gazed on, and baited at by the
differing censures of diverse censors, leave me not to shift for my self. Be
not backward to patronize what you have been forward to produce. I may the
rather expect all just defense from you, because by appearing somewhat
otherwise in your Assembly then I use to do in my usual Auditory, I take you,
worthy President for my president, yea all you valiant Captains, and other
Gentlemen whom I make as one Patron, for my pattern herein. Me thinks, o
prudent President, when in a forenoone I see you sitting, and giving advice
among the wise Senators of our City, and in an afternoon marching before the
martial Gentlemen of your company, me thinks the same man is not the same man.
But of old, such has been the demeanor of those who have been gifted for the
one and the other place, to be both grave Senators and brave Soldiers. Such
were Brutus, Scipio the one and the other, Camillus, Marius, Pompoy, Caesar, and
many other who were both ^ogati and Armati, prudent Consulls, potent Captains.
The like I may say of all you Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden: You that are,
wheresoever you are, in your persons the same Persons, do with that decotum
observe the business which you are about, as in your ordinary vocation, and
Military profession, you seem to be other and other men. Hereby you manifest
your prudence and providence. Prudence, by sitting your selves to that which is
fit for the present. Providence, both by improuing the time of peace, and
making the best advantage thereof in the duties of your particular callings, and
also by preparing your selves against the time of War, and preventing the
damage which might otherwise thence ensue. So Nulli qui est deputatus ad
aliquod officium, li^^: id per quod s^o officio incongruu^ redditur. Vnde
clericis omnino non licet bella gerere etc. Aquin. 2. 2. quaest. 40. Artic. 2
well have I over approved this your course, as if my coat and calling had
been answerable, long ere this, I had endeavored to have been of your
Artillery Company. But for those whose education appertains to me, I verily
purpose, and openly profess, that if ever any Son of mine be a Citizen of
London, and of sufficient ability, I will endeavor to have him a member of
this your Company. Of which mind I would more persons and parents were. If
they were and their childrens mind, when they are of age, answerable thereto,
both City and Kingdom would be much more honored, and secured by this and
other like Societies. My desire is therefore, that this which is likely to come
to the view of many more then at first heard it, may prevail with those many,
to do as you do, and to add able men and available means to the
advancement of your company. As for you, the present President, Head and Chief
of this truly honored Society, who (if God, according to our desire and hope,
preserve you among us) within these two years and few months, is to be the
President, Head, and Chief, under the Kings Majesty, of this honorable City,
when you come to that high honor, have this your Company in remembrance and
let that See page 15.
double honor, which then you shall do thereto, be to posterity a monumem
that in such a year the President of the Artillery Society: was in such an
honorable place, and of such an honorable mind. To conclude, if any
advancement (O noble President, Captains and Gentlemen of the Artillery
Company) may any way by your desire to have that, which once your selves heard,
lie open to the view of all, be attained, the end of yielding to your desire is
obtained. For this end therefore, humble and hearty prayer is and shall be made
(to him that has power to move the minds of all men according to his own
mind) by him that promises to be Black-Freyers London. Iul. 10. 1026.


Your daily Orator, WILLIAM GOVGE.

THE DIGNITY OF CHIVALRY; Set forth in a Sermon preached before the Artillery
Company of London, 13. June 1626.
2 CHRONICLES. 8. 9. (...).

THEY were MEN of WAR.


THe Dignity of Chiualry The Sum of Text, and Sermon.
(a point very pertinent for this present appointment) is the Pearl that is
enclosed in the casket of my Text. Hereof that you may take the better view, I
will set open this casket in your sight. Be pleased therefore to take notice
of the general Scope whereat the holy Ghost aims in this Chapter: thereby
you may discern that the forenamed point, The dignity of Chiualry, is not
violently wrested, but properly arises out of my Text. The Sum of this
Chapter is A Declaration of the Magnificence of Solomon. Among other evidences
thereof this is one, that his native Subjects, Children of Israel, THEY were
MEN of WAR. The original expresses none but words of weight:
Circumstantiall words, which are as bonds to knit word to word, it leaves to
be understood. There are therefore three only words in the original, all
which set out the Dignity of Chiualry, and that by the Persons, their Property,
and Part whereunto they were put,

The first word (...) THEY notes The Parts of the Text.
out Singular Persons.

The second, (...) MEN, a Special Property.

The third, (...) WAR, a Select employment.

THEY were MEN of WAR. In the two verses before my Text, it is said, that
there were left of the 2 Chronicles. 8. 7, 8.
Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizites, and the Hiuits, and the
Iebusites, who were not of Israel: and that being left, they were so brought
under, as Solomon made them to pay tribute. They might therefore have been put
to any office or work that the King would: yet were not THEY MEN of WAR.
They were too mean and unmeet persons, for a function Who not fit for War.
so high and honorable. On the contrary, in the words immediately before my
Text, it is said, Of the children 2 Chronicles. 8. 9.
of Israel, did Solomon make no servants for his work. They being men of
better note and name, were reserved for a more honorable employment, which my
Text thus expresses, THEY were MEN of WAR: which words are inferred on the
former, by way of opposition, with this aduersatiue Particle BUT. They were no
servants for work: BUT THEY were MEN of WAR. As Who fit for War
the meaner and baser sort were made servants for Work, so the better and
excellenter sort were made Soldiers for War. THEY were MEN of WAR. Nor
Hittites, nor Amorites, nor Perizites, nor Hiuits, nor Iebusites, BUT
Israelites, THEY were MEN of WAR. No Slaves, no Captives, no Aliens, no
Forrainers, but Fre men, Free-borno, Native Subjects, Natural Citizens, THEY
were MEN of WAR. Thus this relative Particle (...) THEY, as here it is used,
is to be taken (...) with an excellency, as importing some eminency of the
Persons here meant. This choice then of Persons, makes much to the Dignity of
Chiualry.

2. As there was choice made of The property of men of War.
persons in regard of their outward privilege, Israelites, Natives, Citizens:
so also in regard of their inward property. For the second word of my Text,
(...) MEN, though it be often used for mortal men, subject to many miseries, yet
is it also put for (...) valourous men, and attributed to those choice men
which were taken out of the twelve several Tribes of Israel, Numb. 13. 2, 3.
and sent to spy the Land of Canaan. Yea, this very word is twice used in that
exhortation which the Philistims use to encourage one another, when they heard
that the Ark of the LORD was brought into the host of the Israelites: and it
is used to set out valor and courage in men. For thus, word for word, it may
be translated, 1 Samuel 19. (...) est^te viri. (...) Situ viri.
Be Men: some translate it thus, Play the MEN: Others thus, Quit you like MEN.
(...) by tra^spositio^ of a letter, are (...) Men of place and power,
Commanders, Captains. Thus the MEN here meant, may be distinguished from the
vulgar, common sort of men. The Hebrew put such a difference betwixt (...) and
(...) as the Grecians do betwixt (...) and (...), and the Latins betwixt Vir
and Homo. (...) imports such an one as has in him (...) Fire, Life, and
Spirit: but. (...) a man of the earth. Vir by the Latins is so called of
virtue and prowess: but homo ab humo, as (...) (...). Herod. in Poly^^.
of the earth. In Greek, they most properly are styled (...) who are (...),
virtuous, valorous, magnanimious: but all of all sorts (...). Our English is
herein penurious, it wants fit words to express this difference: we call
all, whether mighty or mean, Men: yet sometimes this word MEN in our tongue
has his Emphasis, as in these and such like phrases, They have played the MEN.
They have showed themselves MEN. They are MEN indeed. Thus in the english
translation of the Scripture it is used, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Quit you like MEN. And
2 Samuel 10. 12. Let us play the MEN. That the word here in my Text is so to be
taken, is evident by comparing this with like places. Those valiant men that
came out of 1. Chr. 12. 23.
sundry Tribes to David in Hebron, to turn the Kingdom of Saul to him, of
whose courage and prouesse much is spoken, are styled with the words here in my
Text, (...) Men of -- Ver. 38 Joel 2. 7.
War. The Prophet Joel applies these two phrases (...) Mighty men, and (...)
Men of War, -- 3. 9.
to the same persons. Where the magnificence of Iehosaphat is set out as
Salomons 2. Chr. 17. 13.
magnificence is here set out, in Jerusalem there are said to be (...) Men of
War, and by way of exposition, they are further styled (...) Mighty men of
valor. They were therefore choice Men of courage, Men of valor, that are here
meant in my Text: so as their Property does further setout the Dignity of
Chiualry, In that, though Natives only and Israelites were deputed to the
employment here mentioned, yet not all sorts of Natives and Israelites, but
such as were well reputed of for virtue and valor, and fit for their
employment.

3. These Natives of name, select Preparation for war under a Prince of peace.
Subjects, Men of mighty minds, to what employment were they appointed? Even to
War. They were Men of WAR. What need might there then be thought to be of
Men of War? Had all the Nations round about proclaimed War against Israel,
as in Ioshuahs time? Or was Ios. 5. 8.
War within their gates, as before Deborahs days? Or were their enemies
Judge. 5. 8.
Rulers over them, as when Judge. 15. 11
Sampson began to be a Judge in Israel? No such matter. What then? Was this the
time to take revenge of Isreal's enemies for former wrongs, to secure the Land
of them, and to bring them under subjection? Surely noe: All that was
sufficiently done by David, 2 Samuel 8. 1. etc.
that mighty man of War. Solomon now reigned. Solomon that Prince of Peace. His
name proported Peace. For Solomon had his denomination from (...) Peace. Peace
also was promised to be in his days. Both the forenamed Name of Peace, and
also the promise of Peace are expressly mentioned by God himself, where he thus
speaks to David, Behold a 1 Chronicles. 12. 9.
Son shall be borne to thee, who shall be a man of rest: and I will give him
rest from all his enemies round about: for his name shall be Solomon: and I
will give peace and quietness to Israel all his days. This Salomo^ was herein
an especial Type of the great Prince of Isa. 9. 6. Ephesians. 2. 14
Peace, Christ Jesus, who is Our Peace. In that then, where there was no fear
of danger, nor any instant, urgent necessity required, in a time and place of
Peace, under the reign of a Prince of Peace, They, of whom you heard before,
They were Men of WAR. Surely preparation for War, Exercises thereto,
Martial discipline, Artillery tacticks, and Military trainings are matters of
moment, commendable and honorable, not to be rejected or neglected, but duly
to be respected, and daily practiced, at all times, in all places whether of
peril or peace. This third and last branch therefore (as it is here set down)
even the Part which the forenamed Persons performed, amplifieth the Dignity of
Chiualry. For, They were Men of WAR.

Thus have I cleared the general scope of my Text, and laid open to your view
this promised Pearl, the Dignity of Chiualry: by showing how every word of my
Text eyeth that mark, and every part and particle thereof much aduanceth the
same. With your good patience I purpose to diue yet more deeply into the depth
of my Text. For the three Parts raised out of the three words thereof, as they
have been opened before you, (namely, 1. The singular Persons, THEY, 2. Their
special Property, MEN, 3. Their select Employment. WAR.
THEY were MEN of WAR)

These three points I say, afford to our heedfull consideration these three
useful Observations.

1. The three principal points of the Text. a C^ Phormio de Imperatoris essi
^o. and omni re militari sic dixisset, vt caeteri qui illum audirent vehementer
es sent dele^lati, Annibal inte^^gatus quid de illo Philosopho iudicaret,
respondit, ^^^oltos se deliros senes sape vidisse, sed qui magis quam Phormio
deliraret, vidisse neminem. Cic. de Orat. lib. 2.
The Artilery profession is an honorable function. 2. Military men must be of
mighty minds. 3. In peace to prepare for War, is a principal part of
prudence.
Of these in order: And first of the first.

The Artillery profession is an honorable function.

To treat much of the Artillery profession, before this Artilery Company would
be to act Phormio his part before so many Anniballs as are here present. You
all know that the Artilery Profession is a Military Discipline, whereby choice
persons are instructed and enabled well to manage weapons of War, orderly to
march in their due place, wisely to encampe, and skilfully to embattaile. That
to be trained up hereto, and well exercised herein, is an honorable function,
belongs to me, and to the matter in The soldiers profession, and honorable
function.
hand, to prove. How it appears by my Text to be an honorable function ye
have heard. Hittites, Amorites, Perizites, Hiuites, Iebusites, and such like
servile persons coming from a base offspring were counted unworthy hereof. In
Israel Israelites, Children of the ever renowned Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaak,
and Iaakob, Men of highest and greatest esteem, THEY were Men of War. That
function whereof base people were counted unworthy, and whereunto Men of best
account must be deputed, is (...) without contradiction an honorable function.
To like purpose it is noted that Abraham himself, that Prince of God (as he
is for excellency sake Genesis 23. 6. -- 14. 14.
styled) trained up in Artillery exercises, not bond slaves, bought with his
money, but such as were borne and brought up in his house, whom he had in high
esteem. THEY were Men of War. Where as old Ishai, an understanding and wise
man had eight sons, the three most honorable of 1 Samuel 17. 12, 13.
them all, even the three eldest, were trained up in an Artillery profession,
THEY were Men of War. And though David, being the youngest of all, were by
his Father deputed to be a shepherd, yet his brave mind affecting more
honorable employments, 1 Samuel 17. 32. etc.
whereunto also he was incited by divine instinct, he would needs prove to be
a man of War, and indeed proved to be an approved Man of War. Saul himself
though a King, Jonathan, that -18. 27 30. Who of old were men of War.
lovely Jonathan, the Kings Son and heir, other of his brethren, all Kings
Sons, THEY were Men of War. Of old, the best of a Nation, best in blood and
birth, as Kings, Princes, Nobles, their children and kindred: best in stature
and propernes of body, as the three talle, proper sons of Ishai: best in
courage, valor, and strength, as they whom Saul 1 Samuel 14. 52.
chose to follow him: best any other way, THEY were Men of War. What shall I
more say? For the time would fail me to speak in particular of Iosuah,
Gedeon, Iepthah, David, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, and otherlike worthies,
royal persons, that were trained up in the Artillery profession, and thereupon
waged many battles valiantly and victoriously. THEY were Men of War. We read
of few battails in Scripture, wherein Kings, or other chief Governors had not
their place and part. In Assyria, Persia, Greece and Rome the four great
Monarchies of the World, and the most famous States that ever were among the
Heathen. all that in any excellency surpassed others, and were chosen to high
and honorable places, for the most part, THEY were Men of War. The like may
be noted of other well disciplined and well governed polities. Most of our
Dignities and Titles of honor have risen from Artillery exercises, and
Military employments. Imperatores, Emperors were at first Generals of armies:
Duces Dukes, were Captains of Titles of honor most due to men of war.
bands: Comites Earls, were Lieftenants, or Prouosts-Marshalls: Milites,
Knights were choice Soldiers: Equites, Esquires were horsemen in War. These
and other like honorable titles were at first given to men, because THEY were
Men of War. The honor of Knighthood is known properly to belong to such as
have well deserved in War. Our Ancestors got their greatest renown Maiores
nostri summam rebus bellicis retulere glo ria. Amb. Offic. l. 1. c. 35.
by warlike affairs. Can any now deny the Artillery profession to have been
accounted an honorable function? Many honorable parts and endowments are
requisite to make a man expert in the Artillery profession, as Soundness of
judgment, Sharpness Things requisite to make men fit sro War.
of wit, Quickness of conceit, Stoutnesse and courage of mind, Vndantednesse
in danger, Discretion mixed with passion, Prudence, Patience, Ability and
Agility of body, and of the several parts thereof, with the like: all which
do demonstrate that the function whereunto they are required, is an honorable
function.

Matter both of Enducement and also of Encouragement does this first
observation afford.

Enducement to men of place, Double honor due to such as exercise Arms.
power, and parts, to Governors, to Nobles, to Rich men, to all that can any
way add any honor to this profession, to do what they can to the advancement
of that which is in it self so honorable as has been showed, and worthy of
all the honor that can be done unto it. The Apostle makes mention of a double
honor. 1 Timothy 517.
That double honor is Countenance and Maintenance: both which are most due to
this profession: and most meet it is that both be given thereto. Honos alit
arts. Cic. Tusc. quaest. lib. 1.
By this double honor have all professions in all ages been brought to that
perfection whereunto in any kind they have attained. The respect and reward
which of old has been afforded to valourous, and courageous, well exercised,
and well experienced Captains and Soldiers in the four forenamed Monarchies
made them so abound with Men of War, as the whole world was made to tremble
at the hearsay of them. When once a question was moved, why after Uirgils
time there were no more such excellent Poets as he was, such an answer as this
was made. Sint Me^anates non de^runt Flacce Marones: Virgiliumque tibi vel tua
rura dabunt. Martial l. 8. Epigr. 56.
Good Po^ts thrive where liberal Patrons live.
Their countries will another Virgil give.


An answer very pertinent to the point in hand: and fitly it may be applied to
Captains and Soldiers, who undoubtedly will abound in number, and grow very
expert in all warlike exercises where they are plentifully sustained, and
highly honored. Were Artillery Gardens, and Military Fields for Martial
discipline and warlike trainings, fostered and honored thorow-out this land,
as it is meet they should be, Greece could have no cause to boast before
England of her Achilles, Diomedes, Themistocles; Pericles, Pyrrhus, etc. nor
Rome of her Scipioes, Horatij, Fabij, Pompeis, or Caesar's. Means among us are
more wanting then Men, or Minds. Oh that this Enducement might prevail with
Men of Means to afford the honor of Regard, and honor of Reward to this
Artillery profession which is so worthy of double honor!

The Encouragement concerns Encouragement to Artillery Get.
you, the Commanders and other Members of this commendable and honorable
Company. Howsoever your Profession and practice be rejected or neglected by
such as ought most to respect it, yet it being honorable in it self, be
encouraged to go on therein. The practice of a good thing is then most
commendable, when, for the goodness of it, it is practiced. The puissant
Princess Deborah, that rose up a Mother in Israel, and a Judge therein, with
admiration said, of such as offered themselves willingly, My heart is on them.
Judge. 5. 9.
Had your Mother London, or your Grandmother England a tongue to express her
mind, she would with like approbation say to you, that show your selves not
only (...) willing, but all (...) forward to all Martial exercises, My heart
is on you: yea the heart of him that loves them that do good things
cheerfully and willingly, and can and will honor them that honor him, his
heart is on you. He accepts the good things which are done of the doers own
accord, without compulsion by others, or remuneration from others, he
accepts them as done for his own sake. For Compare Rom 13. 5 with 1 Pet. 2.
13. 2 Chronicles. 17 16.
that which is done for conscience sake, is done for the Lords sake. In this
respect it is said of Amasiah the son of Zichri a great Captain and
Commander of two hundred thousand mighty men of valor, under King Iehosaphat,
that he willingly offered himself unto the Lord: that is, he undertaking his
function willingly, he did it as to the Lord. Thus of you that are of the same
mind it may be said, ye offer your selves willingly to the Lord. And will
not the Lord graciously accept such? Abraham Quoniam sibi mercedem ab homine
non quaesiuit, a deo accepit, sicut legimus etc. Ambr. de Abr. Pat. l. 1. c. 3.
Motive to draw more to the Artillery Garden.
who in this kind nor expected nor accepted reward of man, heard God thus
speaking to him, Fear not, Abraham: I am thy shield, and thine exceeding great
reward.

Give me leave to extend this Encouragement, to such as are not yet of your
Fraternity, nor have yet given their names to be of your Society, I mean such
as are in the flower of their age, of sufficient stature and strength, well
able to afford time and means for Artillery exercises, to offer themselves
readily and cheerfully to this honorable service. The time which may be, and
usually is spared from your particular callings cannot be better spent,
(exceptis semper excipiendis, except duties of piety and charity, whereby all
other things are seasoned and sanctified) I say vacant hours cannot better be
spent then in the Artillery Garden, and in the practice of Martial discipline
there exercised, as shall Page 40.
afterward be more fully cleared.

But thus much of the first point, your honorable Function.

The next concerning your Ualourous Disposition, is this.

Military Men must be of mighty minds. They must be Men indeed, Valor
requisite for Soldiers.
and able to play the Men. The sign of difference betwixt such as were fit,
and unfit for War, that God caused Gedeon to observe for retaining some, and
dismissing others, tends to this purpose. The sign was this; They which
lapped water with their tongues were entertained: Judge. 7. 5. Expounded.
They which kneeled down to drink were cashiered. The Reason was this. They
that kneeled down to drink, manifested thereby a luskish, fluggish
disposition, and desire to soope up their bellies full. The other that took up
water in their hands, and lapped it with their tongues, showed that their mind
was so on their work which they had to do, as they would nor tarry to kneel
down; they would only lap and be gone, a little for present necessity, so
much as might somewhat slack their thirst, and refresh them, was sufficient.
Gods appointing such only to be retained for War, proves the point in
hand. Much more the express precepts which by God himself and his Ministers,
were given unto those that were set apart for War, to be valiant, and
courageous. When God deputed Ioshuah to be General over all Israel, he gave
him this express charge, Be Ios. 1. 6.
strong and of a good courage: which he further thus enforces, Have not I -- 9.
commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage: Be not afraid, neither be
thou dismated. The like charge did Moses in the name of the Lord give to all
Israel, that were deputed to War, in these words; Be strong and of a good
courage, fear not, nor be Deuteronomy 31. 7
afraid of them. Yea, God ordained it for a perpetual Law, that when his
people were to go to War, this Proclamation should be made, What Deuteronomy. 20. 8
man is there that is fearful and fainthearted, let him go and return unto
his house. This Law God commanded Gideon, to proclaim before his army. Judge.
7. 3.
The equity thereof was so clearly discerned by the very light of nature, as
many of the heathen put it in practice, by name Iphicrates the Athenian, and
Epaminondas the Theban. If such as are fearful and saint-hearted be not fit
for War, neither are they fit to be trained up in Martial exercises. Most
meet it is that Military Men be of mighty minds. It is usual with the holy
Ghost to set De Israelitarum virtute in bellis gerendis lege Aug. de Mirab. S.
Script. l. 2 c. 34.
out such men as were trained up and set apart to War, to set them out by
their power and prowess. Of those four hundred thousand men, that out of all
the Tribes of Israel were chosen to fight against Benjamin and Gibeah, of every
one of them it is said that he was (...) Judge 20. 17 (...)
Uir belli, a true Man of War, a valiant, a mighty man. Of those many hundred
thousands which Ioab numbered in David's time, it is said that they were valiant
men that drew swords, even every one of them (as the Hebrew phrase implies.)
And (...)
of those many hundred thousands also which out of Judah and Israel were
gathered together in two armies to fight one against another in Abijahs, and
Ieroboams time, it is said that they 2 Chronicles. 13. 3.
were The Hebrew is very emphaticall, (...) the emphasis whereof being observed
by the LXX. is thus expressed. (...) mighty in might. 2 Samuel 10. 17. 1. Sam.
14. 52.
valiant men of War, mighty men of valor: which commendation is also given
to those many troops of trained soldiers which Iehosaphat maintained in
Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 17. 13. When David purposed to take vengeance of Ammon for
the indignity and ignominy which was offered to his Ambassadors, he sent Ioah
and all the Host of the Mighty men against them. Before the good Spirit of God
left Saul, when he saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took him unto
him, namely to train him up in Martial discipline. Of David 2 Samuel 17. 10.
himself, and of such as followed him, it is said, that all Israel knew that
he was a mighty man, and they valiant men. And of those that came to him in
Ziklag it is said that they were 1 Chronicles. 12. 1. 2 8, 21
Mighty Men, mighty men of valor, that could use both the right hand and the
left: men of might; men of War; fit for the battle: that could handle shield
and buckler: whose faces were like the faces of Lions, etc. Does not this
frequent mention of the might, and valor of such as were for War, show that
they that take upon them to be Military men, must be of mighty minds: and
that timorous, weak, and feeble persons are not fit for the Artillery
profession? Where GOD first enacted the forenamed Law, that no fearful
persons should go to War, he rendereth this Reason, Lest his brethrens heart
feign like Deuteronomy. 20. 8.
his. Lamentable experience has given too great evidence of the truth Damage
of timorous Soldiers.
hereof. A few white-liuerd, fainthearted Soldiers have often been the ruin of
a great strong Army, which has been put to rout by reason of their fainting,
and yielding. So as such men are more fit to stoop down to a sithe then to
take up a sword, to lift a pitchforke then to toss a pick, to handle a
mattock then to hold a musket, and to carry a bush-bill rather then a
battle-axe. But on the other side, of such use are Numerauit 318. Vi scias non
qua^titatem numeri sed meritum electionis expressum. Ambr. de Abr. Pair. l. 1.
c. 3. 2 Samuel 23. 8, 9. etc. 1 Chronicles. 12. 14.
valiant men and valourous minds, as their courage may supply the want of
number: and though they be but few, not fear the face of many. It is noted
that Abraham armed three hundred and eighteen, to express not the number of
many, but the worth of choice ones. Well weigh the mighty and great exploits
that were achieved by David's Worthies, by reason of their valor and courage,
and you shall find, that a few courageous men to great armies of cowards are
as so many Lions to whole herds of dear: Five may chase an hundred, Leuit.
26. 8
and an hundred put ten thousand to slight. Is it not then most meet that
Military Men be of mighty minds (...)

In applying this point, I will give Who valerous who timorous.
you a divine direction for attaining to that which has been proved to be so
requisite, valor and courage. The direction is grounded on one of Salomons
Proverb, which is this, The Pro. 28. 1.
wicked sly when no man pursues: but the righteous are bold as a Lion.
Righteousness then makes men valorous, Quis tam sortis quam sanctus. Amb.
Offic. l. 1. c. 39. Who to be accounted righteous.
wickedness timorous. They who know who are righteous, who wicked, cannot but
acknowledge the truth of this proverb. A righteous man cannot be here thought
to be such an one as has in every part, point, and degree fulfilled the Law
of Psalm. 14. 3. Rom 3. 10 Impauidus profecto miles, and omni ex part securus,
qui vt corpus serro. sic animum fidei lorica induitur, vtriusque nimirum
indutus armis, nee dae moan timet. nec hominem. Bern sermon. ad Mil. Temp. c. 1.
righteousness according to the exact rule thereof. So there is none
righteous: no not one. But in Gospel-phrase he is accounted righteous, that by
true Faith applying to his soul the blood of Christ, for purging away all his
unrighteousness, and laying hold on Christ's righteousness to be justified
thereby, does his utter most endeavor to keep a clear conscience before God
and Man. This man of all others must needs be the most valourous, whose soul
is fenced with the breast plate of righteousness, and shield of Faith, as well
as his body with armor and weapons of steel. He fears nor Devil nor Man.
His conscience will make him fight in none but a good cause. His Faith will
make him courageous in that cause. If in his body he be wounded, he has Pro.
18. 14
a Spirit to sustain his infirmity. No passion can so supply the want of blood
and support a man, as this Spirit. Might of mind may overcome S Laurentius
(...) ignis natural. (...) Ossic. l 1 c. 41 Fisi hosts no^ perimant, ^ullum
tamen ad animas periculum migrat etc. Cries Hom. 7. in 1 Timothy c. 2. Sieve in
lecto, sieve in bello qu^ mo^^tur, preciosa e^t sine dubio in conspectu donum
mors sinctorum. Caterum in bello tanio profecto pretiosior quant^ gloriosior.
Bern Loc. citat.
the force of fire. But if the earthen vessel of his body be so broken as it
can no longer retain this spirit, then flies it upward to the place of rest
and triumph, passage being made for that righteous soul to ascend to the
society of the souls of just men made perfect: so as the supposed conquest
over such an one is the cause of his triumph, and makes him more then a
Conqueror. The death of his Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord. But in
War so much more precious it is, by how much more glorious. Get Faith
therefore and a good conscience, get them, and keep them, and they will keep
you from faint heartedness: they will put life, and spirit, and virtue, and
valor into you: they will make you fit for the Artillery profession: they will
make you Men indeed, true military men, of mighty minds.

On the contrary side, A wicked Who to be accounted wicked.
man must not every one be accounted, that has committed any sin, (for All
have sinned:) but such an one Rom 3 23.
as loves wickedness, and lives therein, and that without true repentance.
Faith which is accompanied with repentance, receives absolution from God.
Absolution from God makes sins to be as not committed. For the blood of
Christ, which 1 Job. 1. 7.
cleanses us from all sin, cleanses all that believe and repent. But
infidelity, and impenitency lay all sins open to the wrath and vengeance of
God. Knowledge and conscience thereof cannot but fill the soul with many
fears and terrors: whence it comes to pass that such wicked men fear and
fly, when none pursues them. Thus much is expressly threatened against such
wicked men. I will send, says God, a faintnes into their hearts, Leu. 16. 36
and the sound of a shaken lease shall chase them, and they shall fly as
flying from a sword, and they shall fall when none pursues, etc. It was the
speech of the valourous Earl of Essex, that D. Barlow in his Sermon preached
at Paul's Cross, March 1. 1600. being the next Sunday after the execution of
the late Earl of Essex.
Sometimes in the field encountering the enemy, the weight of his sins lying
heavy upon his conscience, being not reconciled to God, quelled his spirits,
and made him the most timorous and fearful man that might be. Take heed
therefore O ye Captains, Commanders, and other Members of the Artillery
Company, take heed, as you would have your inward disposition fit for your
outward profession, of suffering sin to lie upon your souls. Let your function
be a motive to make you try the truth of your conversion. Be ye righteous,
that you may be indeed courageous.

And to take occasion from your Courage against spiritual enemies.
external profession to put you in mind of your spiritual condition, which
is, to be Soldiers of Christ's bands, under his colors, whose Artillery Garden
is the Church Militant, where your Martial discipline in which you are daily
trained up, is not for recreation and pastime, but in very good earnest, to
conquer, unless you will be conquered, and that in a combat of great
consequence, wherein no earthly, but an heavenly inheritance is fought for, and
for attaining thereto not liberty of this world, but of the world to come, not
a temporal, but eternal life is in great hazard. If ye overcome, ye are free
for ever, and gain an inheritance incorruptible, 1 Pet. 1. 4
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in heaven. If ye be
overcome, ye are perpetual slaves to Satan, that malicious enemy, who will
hold you with everlasting chains under darkness in torture and torment
endless and ease-lesse, merci less and remediless. To put you in mind, I
say, of this your spiritual condition, know that if valor, and the
forementioned ground thereof be so requisite, as has been showed, against
bodily enemies, which are but flesh and blood, how much more against spiritual
enemies, which are not flesh and blood, but principalities and powers. These
especially, we ought to resist steadfast in the Faith. The chief spiritual
enemy of our souls, the Devil, from whom all our other spiritual enemies
receive their strength and courage, is like a Wolf, and that as in fiercenes,
so in fearfulness. A Wolf, if he be stoutly resisted, will fly away: but if
he be fearfully shunned or yielded unto, then he will the more fiercely Iam.
4. 7. Libentius te ins^^uitur aduersarius fugientem, qu^m sustineat
repugnantem: and auda^ius infi^^^ a tergo quam resistat in faciem. Bern. Epist.
1. ad Rob Nepot. suum. Ephesians. 6. 10 11.
assault, and more greedily devour. Even so the Devil: Resist the Devil and
he will sly from you. Give place, and yield, and he will the more eagerly
pursue, and the more easily prevail. Neither, if he prevail, will he any whit
the more spare thee for thy yielding to him, but rather the more proudly insult
over thee. Wherefore, my Brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might: Put on the whole armor of GOD, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil. Being thus armed, Watch ye, stand fast in the
Faith, quit you like 1 Cor. 16. 13.
men, and be strong: stand courageously and ye shall stand victoriously.

Hitherto ye have heard of the Honor of your profession, and of the Valor
required by virtue thereof. The last point notes the necessity and benefit
thereof, which is this,

In peace to prepare for War, is a principal part of prudence. War to be
prepared for in Peace.


The most prudent Prince that ever governed people, put in practice this point
of policy: even Solomon, to whom God said, I have given thee a wise and an
understanding heart, so that 1 King 3. 12.
there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like
thee. This Solomon enjoyed much peace, and had a promise to enjoy peace all his
days, and had no cause to fear any assaults or invasions of enemies, all the
nations round about being brought under by his Father David: Yet this Prince of
Peace built senced cities with walls, gates and bars, 2 Chronicles. 8 5, 6, 9.
and chariot-cities, and cities of horsemen, and had his trained men of War,
which are here noted in my Text; yea, to show his store of warlike provision,
it is expressly noted, that he had forty thousand stalles of horses for 1
King 4. 26. 2 Chronicles. 1. 14.
his chariots, a thousand four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horse
men. The first Father of that stock, wise Abraham, whose house was a Abraham's
Artillery Garden.
place of peace, (for the fear of God fell upon all nations round about him,
they honored and reverenced him, they accounted him a Prince of God) yet had
this Abraham his Artillery Garden, wherein were trained up and Genesis 14. 14 The
number by Patent granted to the Artillery Company of London, is ^00. which
number was not full at the time of preaching this Sermon.
fitted for War, such as were borne and brought up in his house: the number
of which Company, I suppose was greater then the number of your Company. For at
once on a sudden he armed and led to the War more then three hundred trained
men. And it is not likely that he left his house destitute of all defense. He
had questionless many more of that his Artillery Company. Now note the benefit
hereof. On a sudden, in a time of necessity, and case of extremity, he had
them ready to rescue five Kings, that were overthrown by their enemies. To
press this pattern yet further for the point in hand, the holy Ghost notes
that Melchizedeck, King of Salem, whose name declared him to be a King of
Righteousness, whose nation showed him to be a Prince of Peace, this
Melchizedeck King of Genesis 14. 18 19. 20. Heb 7. 1. 2 (...).
Salem* met Abraham with his sorenamed troops, blessed him and them, gave good
entertainment to them al, and congratulated their return, giving thereby an
evident demonstration of his approbation of Abraham's providence and prudence in
maintaining an Artillery garden for his house. The condition of Iehosaphats
Kingdom (who was the fourth Son that by lineall descent came from Solomon, and
sat on his Throne) was much like to Salomons. For the fear of the Lord was
upon all the kingdoms of the land 2 Chronicles. 17. 10, 11, 13 etc.
that were round about Judah, so that they made no War against Iehosaphat: But
in testimony of amity, they sent him year after year many presents: Yet he
placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the Land,
and had eleven hundred and threescore thousand Men of War, mighty men of
valor that waited on him, besides those whom he put in the fenced cities
through out all Judah. Admirable it is, and (but that the word of truth records
it) incredible, that in so small a Kingdom as Judah was, there should be so
many trained, expert, valiant men of War, as were in Iehosaphats time. When
Judah and all Israel were joined together, even all the twelve Tribes in one
Kingdom, that Kingdom was nothing so spacious as England is. For some of our
shires are larger then some of their Tribes were: and yet our shires are in
number above four times more then their Tribes were: For we have In England
39. ^n Wales 13.
above four times twelve shires. How far then do the three Kingdoms under
the Dominion of our Sovereign, England, Scotland and Ireland, how far do
they exceed in spatiousnesse, the Kingdom of Iehosaphat? Yet question may be
made, whether in these three Kingdoms, there be so many score thousands of
trained Soldiers, well disciplined men of War, mighty men of valor, as
there were hundred thousa^ds in Judah. We account twenty or thirty thousand a
great Army: fifty thousand a royal Army. What then an hundred thousand? What
an hundred thousand eleven times multiplied, and threescore thousand added
thereto? All these were under their Captains, by name, Ready f^r War,
Waiting on the King, to be sent forth at his command: and yet all the fenced
cities, which were very many, well replenished with Garrisons, over and above
those 1160000. Surely they counted it an honor and safety to their land to
have store of trained soldiers, men expert, and ready for War at all times.
Therefore frequent mention is made thereof. To omit other particulars, in
David's time, Ioah gave up the number and sum of fineteene hundred and
seventy thousand 1 Chronicles. 21. 5.
men of War, and yet left two Tribes unnumbered. Surely there must needs be
many Artillery Gardens, and they well replenished, Martial discipline must
needs be there much exercised, where were so many thousands, yea hundred
thousands trained up to War. If the wiseman might send men to the Ants to
learn of them to Pro. 6. 6. etc.
provide meat in the summer, and to gather food in the harvest, much better
may men be sent to such worthy patterns as were guided and approved by God, to
be always provided with expert Soldiers trained up to War, even in times of
peace. A maine difference is herein put betwixt wisemen and footes. We have a
prouer be that says, A foot will take his cloak in foul weather. But a
wiseman takes it with him at all times. He knows that a bright sunshine day
may be soon turned into a cloudy rainy day. Peace is not like the rumoue able
mountains, but rather like to the variable sky. Wisdom teaches men to
forecast the worst, that they may be provided against the word, yea and thereby
prevent the worst. It in an old and true Motto, Pax armis, Peace is procured,
prese^ued, se^ured by preparations and p^ouisions for War. Where are many
Antillery Gardens, and they much frequented, and Martial Benefits of Antillery
Gardens.
discipline therein daily and duly exercised, Amity with such Kingdoms will
be earnestly desired, and welcomely embraced: Kings of such Kingdoms will be
admired of their friends, and feared of their foes: Subjects of such Kingdoms
will find lust and kind entertainment in foreign parts: Natives and Allies
will be s^cured: All manner of callings freely exercised: Lands and
inheritances quietly enjoyed: Enemies dented: Invasions and insurrections
prevented: and many, many evils avoided. They who reverence nor God nor man,
where they see or hear of an ou^r-mastering power, will be kept within
compasset and though conscience do, not alter their inward disposition, yet
constraint will order their outward conversation. But on the contrary, by The
damage of neglecting Arms.
fearelesse, and careless security, by neglect of Artillery and Military
exercises, by want of men meet for War, whole Cities, and Kingdoms are often
made a booty and prey to their enemies, and suddenly ruinated. Instance Laish,
they were a people that were at Judge. 18. 27.
quiet and secure, and the Danites on a sudden smote them with the edge of the
sword, and burnt their Cities with fire. For a city and nation to be without
Artillery Gardens, is as dangerous as for a traveler to be without a sword.

If the forementioned patterns of prudent Princes, and wise Statesmen,
recorded and approved in Gods Word, for training up armies of men in warlike
exercises, and that in times and places of peace: If the many great benefits
which thereby arise and acrue to a Land and Kingdom, and the many great
mischiefs which are like to follow, upon a careless neglect thereof, be
motives of force, motives of force are not wanting to prove, that, In peace to
prepare for War, is a principal part of prudence.

The Application of this point, Justification of Artiller; exercises.
does as nearly concern this Artillery Company, as any of the former, both
for justification, and also for approbation and commendation thereof. Were our
days more halcyon, more quiet, and peaceable then they are, or were they more
free from fear of danger then they are, yet were your Artillery exercises
lawful, needful, useful. True it is, that they are not in pitched fields,
pede pes, and cuspide cuspis, face to face, foot to foot, spear to spear
against enemies. They are in a quiet City, in a time of peace among your
selves. They are like the Olympian games (instituted by potent and prudent
Hercules) and the Isthmian Plutarch. in Vita Thesei.
sports (ordained by Theseus in imitation of Hercules) as delightsome
preparations for War. They are like to the Pyrrick dancing which was invented
(...). Athen.
by Pyrrhus, called armed dancing, because it was performed by (...). Plat.
men clad in armor, and warlike dancing, because it was a representation of
sundry kinds of battles, and a means to make them well to weld their Armor
in War. They are like those Warre-like sports and pastimes Xenoph. de Cyri.
instit. lib. 1. Idem de Cyri min. Exped. l. 5.
which were practiced by Cyrus when he was a youth, and by his coequalls, and
play-fellowes. They are delightsome recreations. But what then? Are they
therefore not lawful? Or not needful? Or not useful? He is too severe and
censorious, and goes beyond the liberty of Gods Word, that condemns all
recreations, all delightsome pastimes. He is too improuident and imprudent,
that conceiueth nothing needful or useful, whereof there is not necessary use
in that present and instant time wherein it is used. Were your Artillery
exercises only for recreation, they are the best recreations that can be used.
Were there at this time no need or use of them, they may be hereafter of
absolute necessity. Delight in the things which men do, swalloweth up the
pains that is taken about them, makes men the more diligent and constant in
their exercises, and brings them to the greater experience and perfection
therein. Not only expert soldiers, but experienced Captains also are made by
Military recreations used in Artillery Gardens. So as if suddenly Armies were
to be raised of more men then all the Military Companies can afford, yeo might
sufficient store of Captains, and other Commanders and officers be taken out
of your companies to govern and guide, to instruct and encourage such as for
want of former exercising were altogether inexperienced. Of the fifty thousand
that out of Zabulen came to David in Hebron, by way of commendation, it is said
that they could set a battle in array, and lead an Army. This implies, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33 38.
that by their practicing of Artillery exercises, they were all able to lead,
and order armies, to set them in array, and go before them Besides the policy
of other nations and ages, our Ancestors well discerned the need, use, and
benefit of such recreations as might fit men for War: which moved them to
make such strict Statute Laws for the exercise of shooting, as they did: For,

1. Every Master of a Family (except 9. Statute ^^33. year of Hen 8.
spiritual men, and Justices of one Bench or other) was to exercise shooting
himself.

2. He was to keep bows and arrows continually in his house.

3. He was to bring up those that were in his house in the exercise of
shooting.

4. If he suffered any betwixt the age of seven and seventeen, son or
servant to abide in his house without bow or arrows a month together, for
every such default he was to pay forty shillings.

5. If a servant took wages, his Master might buy him bow, and arrows, and
deduct the price out of his wages.

6. If any man-seruant betwixt the years of seventeen and threescore, that
took wages, were a month without bow and arrows, for every such default he
forfeited six shillings and eight pence.

In those days gunnes (the sure and soar messengers of death) were not so in
use as now they are. Strength and skill in shooting was it that made our
english nation famous for War. Their exercise thereof in time of peace, and
that for recreation, made them so expert, as they were, therein, at times of
War. The Gen 48. 22. Ios. 24. 12. 1 King. 22. 34. 2 King. 6. 22. -- 9. 24. --
13 15. etc. 1 Chronicles. 5. 18. -- 8 40. -- 12. 2. -- 17. 17. -- 26. 14. -- 35. 13.
Psalm. 44. 6. -- 76. 3.
frequent mention of bows and arrows, in Scripture, as instruments of War,
shows that of ancient time they have been used to that purpose: and 1 Samuel
20 20.
Ionathans using his bow and arrows for recreation, shows that of old among
Gods people such recreations were used as might the better fit men to War. The
men of Gibeah without question from their youth were exercised in sport, to
sling stones at a mark, or else they could never have attained to such
extraordinary skill, as to Judge. 20. 16.
sling stones at an hairs breadth and not fail. The skill which the men of
Benjamin (of which Tribe those Gibeonites were) are after this noted to have in
slinging stones with the right and left hand, shows, 1 Chronicles. 12 2.
that this was an usual exercise of the youth and men of that Tribe.

Such recreations in peace as are preparations unto War, justly deserve to be
reckoned up among those necessary vocations whereby Polities are preserved:
and while you are exercising your selves therein, you are employed in your
calling, and you go on in that way, wherein God promises to give his Angels
charge over you, to Psalm. 91. 11 12.
bear you up in their hands, least you dash your feet against a stone.

When I duly weigh that little which has been said, and withal consider how
much more might be said of, and for the warrant, honor, need, use, and
benefit of your Artillery profession, I cannot s^fficiently wonder at the
blindness, carelessness, improuidence, and security of this our age, in
neglecting and disrespecting a matter of so great consequence, so nearely
concerning the glory, tranquillity, and safety of the whole land, and of all
the societies and several persons therein. Me thinks that it is more then
meet that every City and Corporation, if not every Town and Village
throughout the Land, should have an Artillery Garden: and that the great
populous Cities, especially LONDON, should have as many Artillery Gardens, as
it has Wards: and that public allowances should be afforded to such as
willingly offer themselves to these Military exercises. I have heard of
liberal legacies, and bountiful donations given for making Cawsies, mending
Highways, building Bridges, and other such like works, but little or nothing
for purchasing and maintaining Artillery Gardens, and the Warre-like exercises
appertaining thereto. I cannot therefore much wonder that there are no more
such Companies, as yours is, and no more of your company. But because every
rare thing is precious, I rejoice that you are of those, who, by Quiae omne
rarum pretiosum, gaudeo te de illis esse, qui quan^o rariores, tanto apparebu^t
gloriosiores. Bern. ep. 1. ad Rob. ^^p. suum.
how much the more rare they are, by so much the more glorious they appear to
be. By you it must be effected, if it be effected, that the ancient english
name and Renown for Martial discipline be preserved (if not repaired also)
and propagated to posterity. Be not therefore now slack in prosecuting that
which you have so well begun. Be diligent to keep your training days, and to
exercise your arms, that such as by much practice are well experienced may be
presidents and patterns to others: and those others by like constant practice
may attain to answerable experience. Let no discouragements dismay you. The
less encourageme^t you have from others, the greater is your praise, that so
willingly take such pains at your own cost to make your selves serviceable for
the defense, security, and safety of the Land and Kingdom where you live. In
you my Text is in our days and Land verified; for of you it may be truly
said, THEY were MEN of WAR.

FINIS.

