EIPNOINOnA.

THE PEACE OF THE COMMUNION OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.

OR, THE CONFORMITY of the Ceremonies of the Communion of the Church of
England, with the Ensamples and Doctrine of the holy Scriptures, and Pri mitiue
Church, established by the Apo stles of Christ, and the holy Martyrs, and
Bishops, their Successors.

By Io: GORDON, Doctor of Divinity, and Deane of Salisbury.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Nathaniell Butter, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Pide-Bull, near S. Austins Gate, 1612.

AD ANGLIAM.
ANGLIA ter foelix donis ditata supernis, Clara viris claris, vbere faetasoli:
Foelix pacis amans, dum Rex tua Sceptra gubernat, Dum te verafides
relligioqueregunt:
Gentibus externis sociata es foedere pacis, Legum scita sonant, armafurorque
silent:
His vere es foelix, eris at foelicior, alma Sinatos poteris iungere pace tuos:
Rebus at humanis nil omni exparte beatum, Nam Proli est discors men's,
animusquetuae.
Accipe pacis opus, pacata and percipe mente, Pax hinc visceribus
conciliandatuis:
Parua quidem meritis pro magnis donarependo Haec tibi, quae rebus portus, and
aura meis.
Angligenas iungunt, coelum, stirps, lingua, solumque His animosiungant, lex
pia, pacis amor:
O quam foelices, sua vere si bonanorint, Authoremque boni mente micante colant.
In te Rex, Lex, Grex, feriant rata foeder a pacis, Anglia, sic foelix, cum
Grege Regetuo.
IO: GORDONVS.

The Theses confirmed in this Book, by the authority of the holy Scriptures,
and the Primitive Church established by the holy Apostles.
The first THESE.
THe white Garment was in use in the Idolatrous Religion of the Egyptians,
during the time that the ^^^aelites were bondmen in Egypt, and did worship the
Egyptians Idols: but God giving the Law to Moses, converted that Idolatrous use
of the said white Garment to his Service: and in the first establishment of
Christ's Church in Jerusalem, the Priests which were by the Apostles converted
to the Faith, did use the white Garment in the service of Christian Religion;
the use whereof did continue from the Primitive Church to our days: and
therefore the reverend Bishops and Martyrs of Christ, who did reform the
Church of England, did lawfully retain the use of the white Garment, in the
Church Service, notwithstanding the abuse thereof in the Popish Idolatry.

The second THESE.
THe Jews and the Gentiles, in the time of the Nativity of Christ, were
accustomed to lie about a Table, set low, as well in their ordinary meals and
Suppers, as in their solemn feasts; and Christ finding this custom in use in
the feasts of the Easter Lamb, he retained it in the Institution and
celebration of the holy Communion, notwithstanding, that it was before his
Nativity used, in the solemn Feasts, in the Temples of Idols. Therefore,
seeing Christ did neither stand, sit, nor kneel, in this holy Action, but
followed the custom received, there is no necessity in any of these gestares,
but they are indifferent: so that every man should follow the received Custom
in the Church where he does live and dwell: And that although this gesture of
kneeling was, and is yet abused in the Popish Idolatry, it was lawfully
retained by the godly Reformers of the Church of England.

The third THESE.
THE Apostles, and Christ's Church founded by them, did use to celebrate a
public feast in their Assemblies, which was called Agape, or the Feast of
Charity: because in it the poor were relieved by the rich: after which, their
custom was to celebrate the Lords Supper, all lying on Carpets, Cushens, or
the like, as Christ did: which custom continued in many places, many hundred
years, but the Catholic Church did change this custom both of lying and
eating after Supper: which change is allowed of by those, who in our time have
brought in the gesture of sitting at table in receiving the Communion. And
therefore, there is no reason, but they should as well allow of the change of
lying into kneeling.

The fourth THESE.
ACcording to the Analogy of the Scriptures, kneeling is the most convenient
gesture that is to be used in our Inuocations, or Prayers, before, and in the
receiving of the holy Communion, in the which Prayers, the gesture of kneeling
was used in the old Mass, which was agreeable to our Communion, and was not an
Idolatrous Institution. And therefore the Reformers of the Church of England,
have done well to restore the kneeling to the original use again.

The first THESE.
THe white Garment was in use in the Idolatrous Religion of the Egyptians,
during the time that the Israelites were bondmen in Egypt, and did worship the
Egyptians Idols: but God giving the Law to Moses, converted that Idolatrous use
of the said white Garment to his Service: and in the first establishment of
Christ's Church in Jerusalem, the Priests which were by the Apostles converted
to the Faith, did use the white Garment in the service of Christian Religion;
the use whereof did continue from the Primative Church to our days: and
therefore the reverend Bishops and Martyrs of Christ, who did reform the
Church of England, did lawfully retain the use of the white Garment, in the
Church Service, notwithstanding the abuse thereof in the Popish Idolatry.

The illustration, and confirmation of the first part of the first THESIS.
ACcording to the Greek Historians, the Idol of Isis was the most ancient
that the Egyptians worshipped: of the which Herod. ibidem boues mares cosdemque
mundos ac vitulos vniuersi Egyptij immola^t: at faeminas eis immolare non
licet, vtpote Isidi consecratas, nam Isidis simulacrum muliebre est, Bubulis
praeditum cornibus, quemadmodum 10 Grae^i describunt. Bouesque faeminas omnes
itidem Egiptij venerantur ex omnibus pecudibus long plurimum.
Herodot says, that all the Egiptians did worship it under the form of a Cow,
and that they did worship above all beasts the Cow.

Diodorus Diod. Sic. lib. 1 rerum antiquaru^ de Iside scribit, illam fuisse
filiam Saturni, and Rheae Osiridis sororem atque vxore^ fuisse, and eandem cum
Cerete quae primum inuenerit Triticum and Hordenm, hominibus prius incognita.
Siculus, in his History of Antiquity, and many other Greek Writers,
testify, that Isis was the first inuenter of the sowing and reaping of Corns.

The said Diodorus related, that in a Colome or Pillar dedicated to this Idol,
was written these words; Ego Isis sum Egipti Regina, a Mercurio erudita, quae
ego legibus statui, nullus soluet; ego sum prima frugu^ inuentrix, etc.
I am Isis, the Queen of Egypt, taught by Mercurius, none shall dissolve the
laws which I have made, I am the first inuenter of corns.

And Plutar. (...).
Plutarch, in his Book of Isis and Osiris, relates, that there was an
Inscription in the floor of the Temple of Isis, in these words; I am all that
ever was, that is, and shall be, and no mortal man has ever detected my
Garment.

We observe by the way, that the name of Isis, in Hebrew is Iesch, Iesch, est,
est, which signifies, always existant, not subject to the course of time;
which is the essential name of GOD, mentioned in the third Chapter of Exodus,
verse 14. Eieh asher eieh, I am that I am, Thou shall say unto the children of
Israel, I am, sent me unto you. The which name does come from the Verb
substantive Haiah, signifying it was, and in the future time, eieh, which
signifies, I shall be, as S. John in his Revelation, Chap. 1. ver. 4. does
interpret the selfsame name of God, saying, from him that was, and is, and is
to come: so that it seems that the posterity of Mizram, son to Cham, son
of Noah, which did first inhabit Egypt, did retain the true name of God,
which they learned of Noah, but afterward it was converted to a fabulous Idol,
which they did call Is, Is: whereof the Greeks made corruptly Isis.

Always it is certain by the Scriptures, that the Egyptians did worship Idols
in the time of Moses, whose Priests were the Wisemen, Sorcerers; and Charmers,
that did imitate the miracle of the conversion of Moses Rod into a Serpent.
These Priests did wear linen Garments, and therefore were called linigeri, as
we read in Herodot. lib. 2 Enter. Sacerdotes tertio quoque die totum corpus
eradunt, ne quis pediculus Deos colentibus, aut alia sordes creetur.

Ibid. Vestem tantummodo lineam gestant.

Ovid. Nunc dea linigera colitur celeberrima turba.

Iuuenal. Qui Grege linigero circundatus.

Ovid. Inachis ante thoru^ pompa comitata Sacrorum, aut stetit, aut visa est,
inerant lunaria fronticornua cum spicis nitido fulgentibus auro.


Herodot, and in the Poets: yet notwithstanding, God commanded his Priests to
wear the white garment, although it was abused, before the Law, in the
Egyptian Idolatry.

Theodoretus Theodoretus lib. de curatione graecorum, sermon 7. ait, Israelem
longinquum tempus in Egipto versatum. (...). Prauisque moribus illius regionis
imbutum, ab Egypt ijsque perdoctum Idolis ac Daemonibus hostias immolare, lud
is praeterea, choreisque assuetum ac Musicis Organis obl^ctari, iamque in harum
rerum habitu constitutum, liberare Deus desiderans, sacrificare quidem
permisit, non tamen omnia, neque falsis Egiptiorum dijs, sed sibi soli ac vero
Deo Egiptioru^ deos sacrificium victima^que offerre, etc.
writing to the Gentiles, in the defense of Christian religion, to induce them
to become Christians, says, that the Israelites did remain a long time in
Egypt, where they were infected with the evil manners of the Egyptians, and
were taught by them to offer Sacrifices to the Diabolicke Idols, and were
accustomed to dancing, and to Instruments of Music, etc. God did deliver
them, and gave them a Law, by the which he commanded them to offer to him who
is the true God, in Sacrifice, all those things which they did wickedly worship
before (to wit, in Egypt) of earthly Beasts, the Goats, the Bullockes, and
Sheep; of flying Beasts, the Turtle and the Dove, etc.

God did not institute Sacrifices, as having need of killed Beasts, or that
he has any pleasure in the savor of burnt flesh: but he did so of his
wisdom, in consideration of the peoples weakness: even so did he suffer
Musical Instruments, to wit, in the time of the Sacrifice, not that he would
please his ears with the consent of the singing of them, but that he might by
little and little, draw away the delusions of the Idols: Thus far be the
words of Theodoretus.

Seeing that God ordained the Ceremonies, with the which the Israelites were
accustomed when they did worship the Idols of Egypt, to be used in his own
worship, it follows, that these customs and Ceremonies, as also the material
things that were abused to Idolatry, the Surplice, Music, and Musical
Instrument, may lawfully be converted to some use in the true worship of God,
according to these examples of the Ceremonial Law.

In the time of the Captivity of Babylon, Dan. 5. 2. 3. 4.
Belshazzar did make a great feast, and commanded to bring him the golden and
silver vessels, which his Father Nabuchadnezzer had brought from the Temple of
Jerusalem, and the King; and his Princes, his wives and his Concubines drank
in them, and praised the Gods of gold and silver; and notwithstanding that
these were profaned to the Service of Idols, yet when Cyrus did send the
people of Judah to build up again the Temple and the City of Jerusalem, he
restored to them the vessels of the house of the Lord. The Priests of the
second Esdr. 1. 7. 8.
Temple did use them in the service of the true God, although they were (as is
said) abused in the Idolatrous Feasts, to the Service of the false Gods of
Babylon. Even so, the external Ceremonies, as well of clothing, as others,
which are used in the Church of England, were first instituted to be used in
the Service of the true Religion, but afterward was violently employed by the
Popes, after they became temporal Tyrants, to the Service of the new Idol of
the Mass: and now again, the Mass being abolished, are restored unto their
true and ancient use in the worship of God.

By these examples then of the old Testament it is manifest, that it is
lawful to convert the clothing vesture and Ceremonies, abused by the Popish
Idolatry, to be used in the true worship of God.

A great number of the Priests were converted, Acts 6. 7. all which did
continue in observing of the Law, etc. Acts 17. 20. So that the Priests being
made Christians, did wear the linen Ephod. Iosippus, who was near to the
(...). Eusebius Hist. Cap. 23. Page 19.
Apostles, writes of James the Just, the Lords Brother, that it was permitted
to him only, to enter into the Sanctuary, because he did not wear a woollen,
but a linen garment.

The forms and Ceremonies of the Christian Church were not established in the
time of the Acts of the Apostles, but afterward, and S. John the Evangelist did
ouerliue all the Apostles and S. Paul many years: for S. Paul and S. Peter
were put to death by Nero, which was An. 70.

But S. John did live to the time of Traiane the Emperor, who did begin
Anno. Dom. 100. and then writ his Euangell, 30. years after the death of the
Apostles: during the which time, he being the alone Apostle that did live
long, and being Bishop of Ephesus, he established the form and Ceremonies of
Christian Religion, he did wear, as a Priest or Bishop, the white Garment: of
this we have an evident testimony, written by Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 3.
cap. 25 Ioannes qui suprapectus Domini recubuit, (...).
Policratis, Bishop of Ephesus, and one of S. John's Successors, who did write
in an Epistle sent to Uictor Bishop of Rome, that John, who did lie on Christ's
breast, was a Priest, and did wear a garment, called (...), which is a white,
loose, and long garment.

The 8. Book of the Constitutions of the Apostles, attributed unto Clemens
Bishop of Rome, disciple to S. Peter, contains the forms and Ceremonies of
the Churches Service: and amongst other circumstances, it is said, that the
Bishop ministering the holy Communion is clothed with a white garment, which is
called (...).
splendida Vide Iulium Pollucem in Ommastico, in voce (...), non potest hic
sumi pro lamina, quia solu^ summus Sacerdos illam gestabat.
ves^is.

This Book is named in the last of the Cannons Ecclosiastike, called
Apostolic, which no doubt are very ancient; and is approved by Athanasius, and
many others of the learned Fathers, and is the Book, in which the true
ministration of the Sacraments is prescribed, with the true worship of God, and
affords us most evident testimony against the Popes falsely pretended
succession from Peter: against the monstrous Transubstantiation, and the
invocation of all creatures inferior to the holy Trinity, whether they be men
or Angels: And therefore we shall do well to follow the authority of this
most ancient Book in all controversies betwixt us and our Adversaries the
Papists: and much more in the matter of the white garment, and other
Ceremonial matters.

These testimonies are sufficient to persuade us, that the Apostles did
con^^nue in the ^stablishment of the Christian Religion, the use of the white
Garment in the Church Service; notwithstanding that they knew well that it was
before their time, abused to the service and worship of Idols, and false Gods
of the Gentiles, and her then people.

Clemens Clem. Al. Pae-dag. lib. 2. cap. 10 Reijciendae quoque sunt vestimenti
tincturae, etc. atque eos quidem qui sunt candidi, and non intus adulterini
candidis, and minime cariosis ac operosis vestibus vti est conuenientissimum,
etc. quocirca Cum Sophistam iure approbo, qui virtutis and improbitatis aptas
describit imagines: quarum hanc quidem fecit simpliciter stantem, candidae
vest indulam et pura^, nempe virtutem, sola verecundiae ornatam, etc.
Alexandrinus, a very learned Presbiter, (and Pantenus Disciple, who was S.
Mark the Evangelists Disciple, and did live but 50. years after S. John,) is
a sufficient witness, to testify unto us, that the use of the white garment
did continue in the true Church of GOD after the death of all the Apostles. The
words of Clemens Alexandrinus be these.

The dying of clothes should be rejected (to wit, from the use of the Christian
service) for they (to wit, that dies clothes) are very far from the truth,
etc.

It is most convenient (says he) that those who are candidi, pure of mind,
and are not inwardly counterfaited to no curious and precious clothing, etc
Dan. 7. Clemens Alex. Paed. lib. 3. C. 11. Illud autem memoria maxim tenendum
est, quod sancte dictum est, conuersatione^ vestram in Gentibus habentes
honestam, vt in quo de vobis male loquuntur, tanquam maleficis, ex honest is
^^ribus suspicientes Deum glorificent. (...), and c. Nobis ergo concedit
Paedagogus frugali vest vti, albo (...) etc. Albi vero colores honestati
conueniunt, etc. Congruunt autem vestes aetat^ personis, ^guris, naturae,
studijs.
Daniel (says Clemens) does speak evidently and purely, saying, the Thrones
were placed, and one like to be of very old age did sit on them, and his
clothing was white as the Snow. John says, that he did see in a vision, the
Lord wearing such a clothing. Also he says, he did see the Souls that were
Martyrs or witnesses of Christ, under the Altar, and that to every one of them
was given ^^ white garment, etc.

And the said Clemens says, I do approve the Philosophers of the I Will of Coos,
who did describe Virtue and Wickedness by two fit Images. He made the Image
of Virtue, standing simply clothed with a white Garment, as being the Virtue; a
pure thing decked with modesty. And a little after he says, if any will all
edge Christ's long clothing of diverse colors, it signified the diuen and sundry
colors of wisdom, and of the Scriptures, which never withered, and the
eloquent speeches of the Lord, which does shine with the clearenes of the
truth. Thus far the words of Clemens.

This testimony, which is very evident, is a proof that the use of the white
garment was continued amongst the Christians, after the death of the Apostles.

Tertullianus Tertul. de resurrect. carnis. Si famulum tuum liberate
mutaueris, and vestis albae nitore, and annuli aurei honor, and patroni
nomine, ac tribu, mensaque honoratur, ob hanc causam albis vestibus induebantur
baptizati, quo meminissent, se iam manumissos.
, who did live an hundred years after S. John, says, If thou change thy
bondman to freedom, he is honored with the brightness of a white garment,
and with the honor to bear a gold Ring; to have the name of a Counselor of
Law; to be of a Family, and to keep a Table, and from this it comes, that
they who are baptized, are clothed with white clothing, that they may remember,
that they are made freemen, and of bondmen and of slaves of the Devil; they
are made the freemen of Christ.

Eusebius Eusebius. Hist. lib. 10. cap. 4. (...).
has inserted in his History Ecclesiasticke a Panagiricke or public speech
made in an assembly of Bishops, in the dedication of a Temple, builded by
Paulinus, Bishop of Tirus, where he called the Bishops, the Friends and
Priests of God, having an holy long Garment which was white: and says, that
they were all clothed with the Garment of Priestly office.

This was the first Temple, builded 300. years after Christ* when Constantinus
Magnus did establish the Christian Religion.

These testimonies serve to prove, that the first three hundred years after
Christ, which was the time of the perfection of the Primitive Church, when the
Bishops and Presbiters were holy Martyrs, that they did use a white garment, in
exercising the Church service.

Paulinus. Ducit de font Sacerdos infantes niuios corpore, cord, animo.
Pontius Paulinus, S. Augustines Disciple, says to this purpose, that the
Priest does bring from the Well of Baptism, the children, colored with white
in their body, in their heart, and mind.

So that the ancient Primative Church called the week which followed Easter
week, Septima in albis, the week Septimana in albis, vide capitula Carol.
Maxim. anno Dom. 800.
in white clothing; because the Baptism was administrated in that week, and
Whitsun week only, unless the Children were in danger of their life.

I hope in God that these testimonies and proofs heretofore cited, shall
persuade all reasonable men's consciences two points concerning this matter: the
one is, that although the white Garment was abused in the service of the false
Gods and Idols of the Gentiles, both before the Law of Moses; and also before,
and in Christ and his Apostles time, yet they did not abrogate the use of the
said white Garment, but converted it to the Service of the true God, to be used
in all religious Service of the Church: and consequently, the Reformers of the
Church of England, have lawfully retained the use of the white Garment,
notwithstanding that it is used to the service of Idols in the Popish Church.

The second point is, that the use of the white Garment is an Institution
Apostolic: and seeing that the said Book of the Constitution of the Apostles
makes mention thereof, and that James the Lords Brother, and John the
Evangelist, his beloved Disciple, did use the said Garment, as is evident by
the testimonies heretofore cited; it follows, that the use of it in our
Church Services of England, has for the warrant thereof the authority of the
holy Apostles of Christ, so that no man which will follow the example of the
Apostles, should except anything against the use of the said white Garment.

The second THESE.
THe Jews and the Gentiles, in the time of the Nativity of Christ, were
accustomed to lie about a Table, set low, as well in their ordinary meals and
Suppers, as in their solemn feasts; and Christ finding this custom in use in
the feasts of the Easter Lamb, he retained it in the Institution and
celebration of the holy Communion, notwithstanding, that it was before his
Nativity used, in the solemn Feasts, in the Temples of Idols. Therefore,
seeing Christ did neither stand, sit, nor kneel, in this holy Action, but
followed the custom received, there is no necessity in any of these gestures,
but they are indifferent: so that every man should follow the received Custom
in the Church where he does live and dwell: And that although this gesture of
kneeling was, and is yet abused in the Popish Idolatry, it was lawfully
retained by the godly Reformers of the Church of England.

The Testimonies and proofs of this, do follow.
THe Jews, during the time of the second Temple, were Subjects, and
Tributaries; sometime to the Persians; sometime to the Grecians, and the
Syrians: and finally, were subdued by Pompey, and made a Roman Province, about
sixty years before Christ's Incarnation: being thus subdued, they were governed
by the Romish Deputies, who did keep in Jerusalem a strong Garrison of
Soldiers: so that this was the cause why the Jews did imitate and follow
many of the Customs and Rites of the Persians, Greeks and Romans; as well in
the solemn feasts of the Church, as in their ordinary dinners and Suppers at
home.

The Heathenish Roman Historiographers, and Poets, do teach us, that they
were accustomed in their most solemn Sacrifices to make public Feasts in the
Temples of their Idols, which they did celebrate lying upon Beds, Carpets, or
Cushens, spread upon the floor of their Temples, even as they did in their
solemn Feasts in their houses.

The learned do write, that these beds, or cushens, etc. which they did lie
upon, were called Puluinaria dicebantur lectis i Dijs dedicati, in quibus ill
^umsimula^ra solebant reclinari, in hac significatione vtitur Cicero in Orat
pro domo sua.
Puluinaria Decrum, which is a kind of beds dedicated to the Heathenish Gods,
in the which the Images of their false Gods did lie at great feasting times.

Also Liu^o, Dicuntur lectisternia, cum sacr^ru^ gratia lecti in Temples ster^
bantur ad discumbendu^ in Epulo publico.
Lectisternia, as witnesses Liuie, were beds spread in the Temples of their
Idols, upon which the Priests and others, that did assist to their sacrifices;
did lie at their public feasts.

The Poet Virg. Aenei. 1 Aulaeis iam se regina superbis. Aurea composuit sponda
mediamque locauit. Iam pater Aeneas, and iam Troiana ^uentus Conueniant:
stratoque super discumbitur Ostro, etc. (paulo post.) Nec non and Tirij
perlimina laeta frequentis, Conuene^e Toris uissi discumbere pictis.
Uirgil, who did write in the time of Augustus, before the Nativity of our
Lord, does express the form of the solemn suppers which were in use, as well
in the feasts and suppers which they did celebrate in the Temples of their
Idols, as also in their private houses. For in the first Book of his Aeneids,
the form of that solemn Supper which Queen Dido made in her Palace to
Aeneds, and to his fellows, is described; where it is said, that in eating and
drinking, at that solemn Supper, they did lie down upon most costly Carpets.

And in the Seruius in vocem sponda. Stipadia, inquit, antiqui non habebant,
sed stratis tribus lectis epulaba^tur. Vnde Triclinium dicitur.
Capitol of the Heathenish Rome, in the solemn feasts made to their false
Gods, the custom was, as (you heard before) to lay down their Images upon
beds, or thick Carpets, and to set before them all kind of meats and drink,
which was eaten and drunk up by the Priests and others, which were busied
about the Sacrifices.

The selfsame gesture of the body was used in Saint Paul's time, at such
feasts as were celebrated in the Temples Sic Luc. cap. 22. Locum vbi Christus
celebrauit vltimam Caenam, vocat, (...), Caenaculum stratum.
of the Idols; which is most evident by the words of the Apostle, and the
propriety of the Greek tongue: for in the 1 Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap.
8. he exhorts the Corinthians to abstain from the feasts which were then
celebrated in the Temples of the Idols at Corinth and in all other places which
were subject to the Roman Empire. Liuius libro 5. in Capitolio (inquit)
Stratis tribus lectis, conuiuiu^ opponebatur tribus Dijs, Ioui, Iunoni, and
Mineruae: Jupiter, id est, Iouis, simulacru^ sternebatur in lectulo recubans.
Juno et Minerua in sellis considebant, sed appositis epulis non ipsi, sed
septem epulones fimbantur.


The learned Christians of Corinth, which were truly converted, were
persuaded, that the Idols were not gods, and therefore, that they had no power
at all to contaminate, or defile, the meat which was dedicated unto them,
because it was Gods creature, given to men to be used with thanksgiving,
wherefore they made no conscience to assist at their feasts. But the Apostle
does condemn such abuse of Christian liberty, because it was offensive to the
weak and unlearned sort of Christians, which makes him to say in the 10. verse
of the 8. Chapter; for if any man see thee, which have knowledge, to lie at
meat in the Idols Temples: shall not the conscience of him which is weak, be
enboldened or persuaded to eat those things which are offered to Idols?

The Greek word (...) comes from the Et Isidorus, libro 20. cap. 11. Apud
veteres inquit, non eraet vsus accumbendi, vnde and considera dicebantur:
Postea, vt Varro ait de vita Populi Romani viri, discumbere coeperunt, mulieres
sedere: quia turpis visus est in muliere accubitus, haec ille, cum quo
consentit Valor. Maximus lib. 2. cap. 1. Vbitamen not at posterioribus
temporibus mulieres etiam, contramorem maiorum cum viris accumbere coepisse.
Vide Iustum Lipsium libro 3. Antiquarum lectionum. (...).
Verb (...), which signifies to lie upon a bed or Carpet, or any such like
thing, so that ye may see in S. Paul's time, the gesture of the body when they
did eat or drink at solemn feasts in the Temples of the Idols, was in lying
on beds or cushens, or the like, which was spread in the floor of the temples.

The custom of the Jews, before the Captivity of Babylon, was to eat the
Easter Lamb standing, as it is commanded in the 12. Chapter of Exodus. And in
their religious feasts they did sit at Table as we do: for we read in the
first of Samuel, Chap. 20. verse 5. that David says to Jonathan; Behold,
tomorrow is the first day of the month, and I should sit with the King at
meat; but let me go, that I may hide my self in the fields. And in the 24.
verse. it is set down, that when the first day of the Month came, the King
sat to eat meat. And in the 25. And the King sat, as at other times, upon
his seat, even upon his seat by the wall, and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat
by Saul's side, but David's place was empty.

The word sitting, in Hebrew is Iaschab, which signifies, sitting on stools
or chaires; it signifies also, the sitting of Kings on their Thrones, Deuteronomy.
17. ver. 18. the Hebrew word that does signify a Stool, seat, chair, or
Throne, is Moschab, which does come from the foresaid Verb, Iaschab, as in the
first verse of the first Psalm, that man is said to be blessed, that sits
not in the seat or chair of the scornful.

The Hebrew word for lying is Scacab, which signifies to lie, as in the second
of Samuel, Chap. 13. verse 5. And Ionadab said to Amon, lie down on thy bed,
and make thy self sick.

The Hebrews used another word, for to signify the lying down upon the
ground, which is Rabatz, as it is in the 49. of Genesis, ver. 9. Judah cubabit
tanquam Leo, Judah shall lie and couch like a Lion.

This word also signifies the lying on the ground, as flocks of Sheep do in
their folds. Ierem. 33. ver. 12: There shall be dwelling for Shepherds to rest
their flock: so, before the Captivity of Babylon, the Jewish custom was to
sit at Table as we do.

But in the time of Christ's Nativity, they did no more use standing at the
celebration of the feast of the Easter Lamb, as it was prescribed by Moses,
Exodus 12. but followed the custom of the Gentiles, unto whom they were
Tributaries, both in their ordinary feasts and meetings at home, and in the
feasts of the eating of the Pascall Lamb.

That this was their custom in their ordinary meals it is manifest; yea,
before the Nativity of Christ: for in the second Chapter of Mark, verse 15.
and in the fifth of Luke, verse 29. we read, that Leui the Publicane (who was
Matthew) being called to follow Christ, made him a great feast in his own
house: in Mark verse 15. the words are these, concerning the gesture of his
body, (...), when he did lie down in Leuies house, many Publicanes and sinners
did lie down with Jesus. And in Luke the words are these: A multitude of
Publicanes and others, (...), were lying down with them. And this is the
selfsame word, that S. Paul uses in the 1 Cor. Chap. 8. as is above
signified, to signify the lying in the feasts celebrated, and in the Temples
of the Idols.

Even so the feast and supper of Herod's birthday: all those that were at it,
are called, (...), Mat. 14. Mark, 6. that is, all lying down together.

All those that understand the Greek tongue, know, that (...) signifies to
lie down, and not to sit, in our manner.

The words of the three Evangelists, relating the Lords Supper, do signify
lying down, and not sitting: for in the 26. of Matthew, verse 19. it is said,
that the Disciples that were sent by Christ, did prepare, and make ready the
Passover. In the 20. verse, it is said, that toward the evening, Christ
(...), which word, Theodor. Beza, does interpret, recubuit, he did lie down.

In the 14. Chapter of S. Mark, verse 18. it is said, (...), that they, to
wit, Christ and his Apostles, aid lie down at the table, and did eat.

Luke, Chap. 22. ver. 12. it is related, that the Master of the house had
prepared (...), a Room strowed over for the Supper. And a little after, verse
14. it is said that when the hour was come, Christ (...), which comes from
(...), that signifies in Latin, decido, in English, ^o full ^owne.

In the 15. Chapter of S. Matthew, Christ uses the self same word, where he
speaks of the feeding of 4000. people with seven loaves saying, that Christ
commanded the multitude, (...), to fall down, or lie down on the earth, which
word is rehearsed also in the 8. Chapter of Mark.

In the 13. Chapter of S. John's Euangell, verse 4. it is said of Christ, that
he did rise from Supper: the Greek word is, (...), to rise up from the
ground, the Latin is, resurgere, which is applied to the Resurrection, 1 Cor.
15. verse. 44. The body is sown a natural body, and it is raised a spiritual
body.

In the foresaid 13. Chapter of S. John, it is said, that after Christ had
washed his Disciples feet, (...), lying, or falling down again, with his
Disciples, in the Supper before begun, in the 23. verse, it is said, there
was one of Jesus Disciples lying on Jesus bosom, even he whom Jesus loved.
The Greek word, which he uses here, is (...), that is, a lying down; the
same which ye heard used before in Matthew and Mark.

In all these places before cited, the English Translation does follow the use
and custom of England: for in the place of lying down, (which is the true
signification of the Greek word) the English Translation has, sitting, as ye
may read in sundry places, but especially, in the 14. Chapter of S. Mark, ver.
18. The English Translation is, as they sat at Table, although the Greek word
does signify to lie at Table. So that without any doubt, Christ in the
celebration of the Easter Lamb, and of the Communion, did use the gesture of
lying at Table, which was in use before his time, although the same gesture was
then abused in the feasts of the Heathens Idolatry, as is said.

Further, this custom of lying is expressed in the Ceremonial Books of the
Jews; and namely, in that which is entitled, Orach Chaim, that is, The way of
Life; where it is said, that the Jews did eat the Easter Lamb lying at, or
about a Table.

Burdorsius, a very learned man in the Hebrew and Chaldaike languages, and in
the Thalmud and Ceremonial Books of the Jews, in the 13. Chapter of his
Book, entitled, Synagoga Iudaeorum, has set forth in Latin, the form of
the Ceremonies of the eating of the Easter Lamb, out of the foresaid Book,
called Orach Chaim, where it is related that Baal Both, Paterfamiliaes vino
benedicit(...), sestumque seu decet, initiat hoc pacto, poculum suum quilibet
euacuat, sese in sinistram, super puluinos isios sericos, tanquam Baro quidam
reclinans. Et post pauca, cum comederunt, Paterfamilias de Placenta paululum
mandit, reliqui^que frustulum de eadem imp^rtit, hic vrbane sese in latus
sinistrum inclinant, manus lauant, vnicuique Poculu^ vino implent, i^^letum ^^x
cuacuant, and (...) p^culum benedictis, est tert^um (...) deinde act^^, etc.
Baal Both, that is, the Master of the house, after he had given thanks and
blessed the Wine, he began the Supper with a cup of wine, and after him,
every one about did empty his cup, lying upon their left side on Carpets or
Cushens of silk, like some great Baron or noble man. After they have eaten,
the foresaid Master of the house does eat of a thick Cake, and does
distribute unto the rest some part of it, while they lie on their left side;
and last of all, they end the whole action, with a third cup of wine, which is
blessed, and so they give thanks to God.

It is manifest by these testimonies, that the mistaking of the propriety and
signification of the Greek tongue, has bred a great division, which is
grounded upon a double error. The first is an error of the History of the
custom observed in Christ's time, insomuch that many will not kneel, because
they are persuaded that Christ did sit and not kneel at the Communion.

Seeing therefore ye see it clearly proved, that Christ and his Disciples did
not sit, but lie, according to the custom of the Jews and Gentiles in his
time; it is a great error to hold that sitting is necessarily to be observed
in the holy Communion, and to abstain from it, unless it be performed in
sitting in our manner.

The other error does proceed from this, that men do enjoin necessity to
things which in their own nature are indifferent: as to hold, that the gesture
of the body which Christ did use in the institution of the holy Supper is
substantial, and not indifferent: and therefore men surmising that Christ did
sit in our manner at his last Supper, that it is a substantial thing to sit at
the Communion: and on the other part, that it is unlawful to kneel at the
Communion, because Christ and his Disciples did not kneel at the first
institution of this holy action.

Christ did celebrate the Communion after Supper: now if we were bound to
follow the gesture of the body which Christ did use, we should be also bound
to the performing of this action after our Supper.

Moreover, it is to be observed for our instruction, that Christ, in this
action, did follow the gesture of the body, which was brought from the Gentiles
to the Jews, against the prescript of Moses Law, although it was abused before
Christ's Nativity, to the service of Idols.

This example of Christ does much concern us: for as Christ did use the
custom of lying, received before his time, to draw the Jews and Gentiles to
his Church, (notwithstanding the abuse of it in the Idols service) even so, the
holy Martyrs of the Church of England, who were Reformers of the same, did
imitate Christ, in retaining that custom of the gesture of the body, which was
in use in the Popish Church, although it was abused to Idolatry, to draw the
Papists from the Idolatrous kneeling, in the Adoration of the external
Sacrament to adore Christ himself, in receiving the holy Sacrament of his
blessed body and blood.

Now seeing it is manifestly proved, that Christ did neither sit nor stand in
executing this holy action, there it no necessity in standing nor sitting. And
if there were any necessity, to follow precisely the form that Christ used,
we should all lie about a Table, set low on the ground, as Christ and his
Disciples did. And therefore no man can have any likelihood of reason to
abstain from the holy Communion, unless it be administered to them sitting at
a Table, or in seats, or in Pewes.

The third THESE.
THE Apostles, and Christ's Church founded by them, did use to celebrate a
public feast in their Assemblies, which was called Agape, or the Feast of
Charity: because in it, the poor were relieved by the rich: after the which,
their custom was to celebrate the Lords Supper, all lying on Carpets, Cushens,
or the like, as Christ did: which custom continued in many places, many
hundred years, but the Catholic Church did change this custom both of lying
and eating after Supper: which change is allowed of by those, who in our time
have brought in the gesture of sitting at table in receiving the Communion. And
therefore, there is no reason, but they should as well allow of the change of
lying into kneeling.

The Proofs and Testimonies of the third THESE.
We read in the sixth of the Acts, verse 7. that (...), a great multitude of
the Priests received the Faith, and in the 21. Chapter, verse 20. James the
Bishop of Jerusalem, and the Presbyters or Elders, did inform S. Paul, that
many Myriades, that is, a very great multitude of the Jews had received the
faith, which were all zealous obseruers of the Law: whereof we collect, that
they did retain Circumcision, and the celebration of the Jewish Passover,
together with Baptism and the holy Communion, after that same kind of gesture
of accubation as Christ himself did: which we have proved before in the
second These.

To this purpose does agree that which is written in the Acts of the Apostles,
Chap. 2. verse 42. (...), that the faithful, assidue operam dabant; did
continually travel in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in the Communion and
breaking of bread, and prayers. And in the 46. verse of the said Chapter, it is
said, that they continued daily in one accord in the Temple, and breaking of
bread from house to house; and did eat their meat together with gladness:
Whereof we may easily gather, that they did assist in the Temple to the
Ceremonies of the Law, but in their private houses they did daily celebrate the
Communion at their ordinary feasts, which they could not perform publicly, by
reason of the persecution of the Sinagogue. So that without all doubt, the
gesture of their bodies in all their public meals was conform to the custom
of the Jews, which was accubatio, a lying down.

Also the Gentiles, that were converted, did celebrate the feast of Agape, and
after it the holy Communion, observing the gesture of accubation, as shall
hereafter be sufficiently (God willing) proved.

S. Paul did reprove the Corinthians, because they did not lawfully observe the
first institution of these public feasts, in communicating together, the rich
relieuing the poor: His words are these; When ye come together 1 Cor. 11. 20.
21
therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lords Supper: for every man
when they should eat, takes his own supper before: and one is hungry, and
another is drunk. So that ye see the abuse of this feasting was, that they
did not follow the first institution; in making their meat and drink common to
all equal: but did convert public eating to private use: the rich men eating
apart by themselves, and the poor by themselves. Therefore the Apostle
commands them in the end of the Chapter, that when they come to eat, they
tarry one for another.

S. Peter in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. verse 13. disclaimeth against false
Christians, which did seek nothing in their public feasts, but the
satisfaction of their own bellyes: the word which Peter uses is, (...), which
signifies to make a public feast in a common society.

The Apostle Jude, in the 12. verse of his Epistle, speaking of them that
abused these feasts which were dedicated to an holy use, to their own
pleasures, says; These are like spots in your feasts of Charity, when they
feast with you, without all fear, feeding themselves: these feasts are called
here by the name of Agapae, which signifies a Feast of Charity or love.
Theodor. Beza does retain the same word in his Latin Translation: Hae sunt in
Agapis vestris, maculae, dum vobiscum conuiuantur, absque vllius metu, scipsos
pascentes: where he does note, that Agapae erant Cap. 39.
sraterna ac ecclesiastici coetus conuiuia, quae describuntur a Tertulliano in
Apologetico, that these were the public feasts in their Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, which are described by Tertullian in his Apologeticke: which is a
Book written in defense of Christians, against the Gentiles. In the end of
these feasts the Communion was celebrated as Christ did after Supper.

It is mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles Chap. 6. verse 2. that the
Apostle called the multitude together, and said; It is not meet that we
should leave the word of God and serve the Tables. These Tables are the public
feasts, mentioned in the second Chapter of the said Book, verse 46. In the
which, the holy Communion is called the breaking of bread. Without all doubt,
in these public feasts, the Apostles and the saithfull, did celebrate the
Communion in the self same manner and gesture of body, which Christ did
institute, which was, as is proved in the second These, the gesture of
accubation.

The holy Martyr Ignat. Epist. ad. Smyr. Eusebius. Hist. eccl. lib. 5. cap. 30.
Ignatius, second Bishop of Antiochia, and Successor to S. Peter, called these
public feasts, (...), which word is also mentioned in Luke Chapter 5. verse
19. where it is said, that Leui, which is Matthew the Publicane, made a great
banquet to Jesus: where Theod, Beza notes the word (...), to signify ad
verbum acceptionem quod passim in eo omnes accipiantur. For it comes from the
Verb (...), which signifies, to receive.

That which S. Jude calls (...), the same is called by Ignatius, (...).
Ignatius his words are these; It is not lawful to baptize without the Bishop,
nor to offer oblations, nor to bring any Sacrifices, nor to celebrate the feast
called, (...).
(...): where mark by the way, that in the false Popish Translation it is
Mossas celebrare: from the which, the Papists do pretend to prove the
antiquity of their Mass.

Hyeronimus Vairlenius Siluius, of the Romish profession in the notes of his
Translation of Ignatius Epistles, Printed at Antwerpe, by Plantinus, who had
permission to print the same, from the Spanish King, and is approved by those
of the Inquisition, says after this manner; reliquimus hic vocem Graecam, quae
conuiuium significat, Latin sic dictum ab accipiendo, quod omnes promiscue
acciperentur: videtur autem id conuiuium idem fuisse cum eo, quod Tertullianus
in Apologetico suo Agapen suo seculo appellatum scribit, quamuis and beatus
Judas in Epistola sua cadem voce Agape vsus sit pro conuiuio eiusmodi. Where it
is evident, that Uairlenius in the Translation of Ignatius Epistles, does
follow the opinion of Theod. Beza in this matter. And therefore the foresaid
vulgar Translation of the said testimony is false.

Plinius Plinij 2. verba epist. ad Traian. Quod essent soliti Christiani stato
die ante lucem conuenire: carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum inuicem,
seque Sacramento non in scelus obstringere; sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne
adulteria, committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositu^ appellati abnegarent:
quibus peractis, morem sibi discedendi fuisse, rursusque conueniendi ad
capiendum cibum promiscuum, tamen and in noxium.
the second President of Bithynia, under the Emperor Traiane, which was an
hundred years after Christ writes to the Emperor, that he had examined
sundry Christians, as he had commanded him; and that he had learned of them
that they were accustomed, at an appointed day, to meet together before
daylight: and to say one after another, a Song or Rhyme to Christ as to God,
and to bind themselves by a Sacrament, or holy promise, not to commit any
villainy; but especially, not theft, not robbery, not adultery, not to break
their promise, that being required, they should not detain any thing that was
committed to their custody. And after this, their custom was to depart, and
afterward to assemble together to their common Feasts, which were without any
harm. Where we observe beside our purpose, that the first Christinas did sing
their Songs, one answering to another, which form is followed in the
Seruice-Booke of England.

The public feasts performed in the Assemblies of the Christians, were the
same which we called before Agape; and under the name of cibus promiscuus is
contained the celebration of the holy Communion; which, in that age, was
executed every day in the Christian Assemblies.

To this purpose does the testimony of Tertullian serve; who lived an hundred
years after Saint John, who does relate many ancient customs, which were
observed in the Church: and amongst other, speaking of the holy Communion, he
says; Tertul. de corona militis. Eucharistiae Sacramentu^ in tempore victus,
in omnibus mandatum a Domino, etiam antelucanis caetibus, nec de aliorum manu,
quam de Praesidentium sumimus.
We Christians do receive from the hands of our Presidents and Rulers, the
Sacrament of the Eucharist in the time of our meals; in all things being
commanded by the Lord, yea, and also in our Assemblies, before the day breaking.

The said Tertullian, in describing the form of the public feasts of
Christians after the which they did celebrate their holy Communion, calls the
place in which they did celebrate the same, Triclinium, which signifies a
Parlour, or Supping room; in which three beds were spread to lie upon, round
about a Table, which was set low, as we have proved heretofore in the second
These. Even so, the word, discumbere, which Tertullian uses, signifies to lie
at Table, on Cushens, Carpets, or the like, spread upon the ground, as is said.

These are Tertul. in Apologet. cap. 39. Nam and Caenas nostras praeterquam
sceleris infames, vt prodigas quoque suggillatis, etc. Sola Triclinia
Christianoru^ retractantur: Caena nostra de nomine rationem sui ostendit;
vocatur enim (...), Id quod dilectio penes Graecos est: quantiseunque sumptibus
constet lucrum, est pietatis nomine facere sumptus: Siquidem inopes quoque
refrigerio isto iuuamus, etc. Non prius discumbitur, quam oration ad Deum
praegustetur: editur quantum esurientes capiunt: bibitur quantum pudicis est
vtile: ita saturantur, vt qui meminerint etiam per noctem adorandum Deum sibi
esse: Ita fabulantur, vt sciant Dominum audire, post aquam manualem, and
lumina, vt quisque de Scripturis sanctis, vel de proprio ingenio potest,
prouocatur in medium Deo canere, hinc probatur, quomodo biberit aque oration
conuiuium dirimit, etc.
Tertullians words, For ye Gentiles do not only blaspheme our Suppers to be
infamous, but also prodigal: only the Triclinia of the Christians, that is,
the place of their public feasts, are evil spoken of: but the name of our
Supper shows the reason thereof: for it is called Agape in the Greek tongue,
because it was a feast of charity or love: whatsoever cost is bestowed, it is
not to be counted cost, but gain: for to make such cost for pieties sake, it
is to be esteemed gain; because by this refreshing, we relieve the poor,
etc. Ere we lie down at Table, we first say our prayers, the hungry do eat
as much as may satisfy them, and the thirsty do drink so much as is
profitable for temperate men: they are but so satisfied with food, as that in
the night, they may remember they must worship God. They talk so as if they
knew the Lord heard them: after the washing of their hands, and the lighting of
candles, every one is provoked to sing a Song unto God, either out of the holy
Scriptures, or of their own invention.

In the end of this public feast, the custom was, to celebrate the Communion:
for Tertul. de corona militis Eucharistiae Sacramentu^ in tempore victus
sumimus.
Tertullian in his book De corona militis, as is said, bears witness, that
the Christians did receive the Sacrament in the time of their meals, meaning
of the public meals, because the Communion, was every day celebrated in all
public assemblies in that age.

Julian Anno Dom. 365
the Apostate, who was for many years a Christian, and did exercise the Office
of Deaconus in his younger age; after that he was Emperor, and became an
Apostate, he re-established the heathenish Sacrifices and public feasts; in
the which he used the gesture of Accubation: which did continue in that age,
as well amongst the Christians as heathens.

Theodoretus Theod. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 14.
does relate the form of the solemn feasts, which were solemnized by Iulias
to Ap lio Daphnaeus: where he says, that the Son of the heathenish Priest,
in the first day of the feast, which continued seven days, did use sprinkling
of consecrated water to the Idol, which was called aqua ^ustralis, by the
which the feast was dedicated to the said Idol: where we observe, beside our
purpose that the Popish Holy Water comes from this Heathenish ceremony.

That the gesture of Accubation was used in this Feast, it is clear by the
words of (...).
Theodoretus: where he says, that in the first day of this Feast, the Priests
Son, standing nigh the Emperors bed, did sprinckle over all the meat, with
this Holy Water.

Out of which we may see plainly, that the Emperor lay on a bed at this
Solemn Feast, according to the ancient custom of the Greeks, and Romans,
before Christ's Nativity, and since.

These public Feasts began to be abused in Saint Paul's time: so the abuse
did continue till a National Council (holden at Laodicaea, Anno Domini, 368)
did forbid these public banquets and feasts to be solemnized in the Church, as
is expressed in the 28. Canon of that Council, in these words following:
Council. Loadic. Can. 28. (...).
It is not lawful to make Feasts, called Agapae, in the Lords houses or
Assemblies, or to eat in the house of God, and spread Carpets or any such like
thing, for to lie upon, to wit, at the said Feast.

The words of the selfsame Canon are repeated in the sixth general Council,
holden in Constantinople, in the Palace called Trullus, which Council was
holden under the Emperor Justinian, Anno Domini, 555. So that notwithstanding
that this manner of Supper was forbidden by the National Synod of Laodicaea,
yet (...) in the time of Justinian, otherwise the said (...) of Constantinople
would not have prohibited th^^ by a new Canon, not making mention of the Synod
of ^^odicaea.

This Agapae was also called Caena Dominica, as Renanus does note upon
Tertulisans Book de corona militis: whose words are these: Ren. in Tert. de
corona militis. Verisimile tamen est Christianos in die Caenae Domini,
Conuiuium simulin Templo celebrasse, cuius rei certa sunt apud nos vestigia:
Nam Tertuilianus in libro ad vxorem, de ethnico verba faciens, cuius vxor sit
Christiana: quis denique (inquit) solennibus Pasche obnoctantem vxorem securus
sustinebit? quis ad conuiuiunt Dominicum illud, quod infamant (scilicet
Ethnici) fine sua suspitione dimittet? Docet in Apologetico frequenter
Christianos simul Caenitare consuenisse, quod genus Agapen vocatum tradidit.
It is very likely, that the Christians did celebrate together a Feast in the
Temple upon the day of the Lords Supper, whereof there are some signs left
with us: for Tertullian writing to his wife, who making mention of a Heathen,
who had a Christian to his wife, says after this manner; Which of the Gentiles
will endure securely, that his wife assist all the night long to the solemnity
of the Easter? or which of the Gentiles without suspicion, would give his wife
leave to assist to the Lords Feast, which they have in great infamy? etc.

These words, conuiuium Dominicum in this testimony, and the words Sacramentum
Eucharistiae tempore victus sumimus, heretofore cited; and the description of
the Supper called Agape, being conferred one with another, does show that the
Communion was, in that age, celebrated after the said Supper, as Christ
himself did: so that the Christians in the time of Tertullian, did retain
eating and drinking at the Communion in a common society, according to S.
Paul's commandment; Wherefore 1 Cor. 11. 33.
my brethren, when ye come together to eat, tarry one for another.

The ordinary custom to celebrate the Communion after Supper, was changed
about the end of the first four hundred years after Christ, and was converted
into a public feast, called Caena Dominica, the Lords Supper.

Socrates Socrat. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. ca. 21 Egiptij vicini Alexandriae, and
qui Thebaida incolunt. (...).
and Sozomenes, do relate the diversity of customs and Ceremonies, that were
in use in their time in sundry Churches: the words of Socrates are these: the
Egiptians which dwell nigh to Alexandria, and they that do inhabit the
Country called Thebs, do celebrate their solemn Synaxis or Communion upon
Saturday: but according to the custom of the Christians, to wit, of that age
which was four hundred years after Christ, after they have ended their
Communion, or public Supper, and are filled with diversities of meat, they
celebrate the Communion in the evening, being all pertakers of those holy
Mysteries.

About the selfsame time there was a Council assembled of all Afric, in
the which Saint Augustine was present, who subscribed to the Canons made
therein.

In the 8. Chapter of this Council. African. Vt Sacramentum altaris non nisi a
ieiunis hominibus celebretur, exceptovno die anniuersari^, quo Caena Domini
celebratur.
Council, it was ordained that the Sacrament of the Altar should be celebrated
by men fasting; except upon the Annual feast day, whereon the Lords Supper
was yearly celebrated.

By this Canon it is evident, that in that age, which was Centuria 5. after
Christ, that there was a yearly and solemn Supper of the Lord celebrated in
the form and manner, and in the selfsame time of the day, that Christ did
institute this holy Communion: so that in this day they did celebrate the
Communion, not fasting, but after their public Supper.

To this purpose do S. Aug. ad ^an. Epist. 118. In quibusdam (inquit) locis
vbi mayor and feruentior erat populus De^, qui^^a Sabbat^ bebdomade vltimae
Quadra. gesimae, and mane, and ad vesperum, alijs autem in loeis in fine tantum
diei mos erat offerre.
Augustines words serve: where he says, that in some places where the
greatest number of Gods people, and most fervent were, it was their custom to
offer, (that is, to celebrate the Communion) the first day of the last week of
Lent (which we call Holy-thursday) both in the morning and in the evening, but
in other places their custom was, to celebrate the Communion only in the
evening ^o wit, after Supper.

The Cap. 16. In Bracarensi Concilio, collecto in Hispania Anno Dom 600
praecipitur a ^eiunis missas tenere caenae Dominicae hora nona.
Council called Bracaren^^ Concilium, holden in Spain, in the year of our
Lord 6^0. did abrogate this Africane statute, ordaining that the Lords Supper
should be celebrated fasting, at the ninth hour of the day.

And in the Gratian. de consec. did 1. citat canonem Concilij Cabileonensis
collecti in Gallijs Anno Dom. 654. auditis M^ssar^^ solenni^us et vespertinis
officijs, and largitis Eleemosiuis ad cibum accedendum est.
Council called Cabileonense Concilium, which was holden in France in the
year of our Lord 654 in the time of Eugen. 1 Pope, as is cited by Gratian, it
was ordained, that after the solemnity of the Mass (at that time the Mass
was a Communion as ours is,) after the evening Service, and the distribution of
Alms, they should fall to their meat.

These Testimonies are sufficient to prove* that the Lords Supper was solemnly
observed, according to the form instituted by Christ, 700. years after
Christ, in the which the gesture was accuba^io, as is said.

Walafridus Strabo Walafridus, qui vixit anno Dom 900. in libro de rebus
Eccles. cap. 1. Tempus Missu^ faciendae secundum rationem solennitatum diuersum
est. Interdum ^^im ante meridiem, interdum circa nonam, aliquando ad vesperum,
interdum noctu celebratur.
, who did live about 900. years after Christ, testifies that then the hour
or time of the celebration of the Mass, (which was in his time as has been
already said, the Communion; wherein the Clergy and the people did all eat
and drink together) was diverse, according to the diversity of solemn days:
and that it was sometimes celebrated in the morning, and sometimes at nine of
the clock, sometimes in the evening, and sometimes in the night.

But in the ages following, the whole ancient form of the Church-Seruice began
by little and little to be abolished by the Popes, who did change the yearly
feast of the Lords Supper, heretofore mentioned in the African Council, and in
place of this holy action; the Popes did institute the washing of the poores
feet (which custom is unto this day observed, by Emperors, Kings, Popes,
Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots) adding thereto a distribution of Alms to the
poor.

The fourth THESE.
ACcording to the Analogy of the Scriptures, kneeling is the most convenient
gesture that is to be used in our Inuocations, or Prayers, before, and in the
receiving of the holy Communion, in the which Prayers, the gesture of kneeling
was used in the old Mass, which was agreeable to our Communion, and was not an
Idolatrous Institution. And therefore the Reformers of the Church of England,
have done well to restore the kneeling to the original use again.

The Testimonies and Proofs of the third THESE.
THe gesture of standing was used by the Priests of the Law in some cases, as
Deuteronomy. Chap. 4. ver. 20 it is said, the Lord separated the Tribe of Leui, to
bear Deuteronomy. 4. 10.
the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, and to stand before the Lord, to
minister unto him, and to bless in his Name unto this day: so that the Priest
did stand in offering Sacrifices.

The solemn blessings were pronounced standing: Thou shall stand upon mount
Gerizzim, to bless the people when ye shall pass over Jordan. Deuteronomy. 27. 12.


In Inuocations and prayers there is a threefold kind of gesture, expressed by
David: the first is a falling down Psalm. 95. 6,
or prosterning of the body: the second is, according to the Hebrew word, a
bowing down of the head to the ground. The third is kneeling.

Solomon, at the solemnity of the dedication of the Temple, in his solemn
Prayer, he is said to use the gesture of kneeling. The words are these: He
kneeled down upon 2 Chronicles. 6. 13.
his knees before all the Congregation of Israel, and stretched out his hands
toward Israel; but he stood when he blessed the people. 1 Kings 8. 55.


In the new Testament Christ does reprove the Hypocrites, who (as the words of
the Text do bear) did love Mat. 6. 5.
to stand in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the streets to pray.

Also the Publicane is said to stand a far off when he Luke 18. 13. (...).
did pray.

And in Mark; when ye shall stand to pray, forgive, etc. Mark 11. 25.


The gesture of standing, is meant of the standing in the Temple, to hear the
blessing ordained by the Law, and to put up their Prayers of Thanksgiving,
according to the Law heretofore mentioned: for when Christ did speak so, he
and his Disciples did observe the Law: but Christ himself, a little after the
institution of the holy Communion, did go apart from his Disciples, and as
man, apprehending the cruel torments which he was to suffer for the sins of
mankind, he began to wax Mat. 26. 37. 38.
sorrowful, and to be grievously troubled: saying; my Soul is very heavy,
even unto the death, and he fell down on his face and prayed. In Mark it is
said; he fell down to the Mark 14. 35.
ground and prayed. In Luke it is said, that he kneeled down Luke 22. 41.
and prayed.

The word used by Matthew is the selfsame which Luke uses to express the
gesture that Christ had when he instituted the holy Communion, where it is
said: When the hour was come, (...), he fell down. Cap. 22. 14.


By these diverse words of the Evangelists, the one using the word of Kneeling,
and the other of falling down, we learn that both kneeling and falling down,
are agreeable to Christ's gesture.

Christ exhorts his Disciples often to pray, and teaches them the form of
prayer, which we call the Lords Mat. 6. 9. Luke 11.
Prayer: but he does not prescribe any particular gesture of the body to be
used when we pray, so that he did leave the gesture to be observed according to
the order and custom of the Church.

We are commanded by Saint Paul to examine our 1 Cor. 11. 27. 28 29.
selves before we participate the Lords Supper: for if we do not so, we are
guilty of Christ's death, and we eat our own condemnation.

This examination of our selves consists in the confession of our sins, and
sorrow of our hearts, with a desire to abstain from them, with humble prayers
to God the Father through Christ Jesus, that he would grant us true Repentance,
and his grace to abstain from our sins, that his holy Communion may be unto
us, an Antidote and medicine to purge us of all the spiritual poison of sin
and corruption, that we be not guilty of Christ's death, and that we eat not
unworthily to our own condemnation.

Seeing that in all this trial of our selves before the Communion, prayers and
repentance is to be used: and the gesture of prayer is kneeling, as we have
already proved by Christ's example, it follows, that the gesture of kneeling
is the most convenient and agreeable to Christ's own gesture.

This gesture of kneeling in prayers continued in the Apostles time: for the
holy Martyr S. Steven being to Acts 7. 60.
receive (according to the interpretation of his name) the crown of
Martyrdom, in yeeelding up the Ghost, he did pray kneeling. When S. Peter did
raise the Widow Cap. 9, ver 40.
Tabitha from death, he did pray kneeling. S. Paul after a long exhortation to
the Church of the Ephesians, taking Chap 20. v. 36.
his last leave of them made them pray with him kneeling: so did he in taking
his leave of the Church of Tyrus. and Chap. 21 v. 5 ^ Kings 19 10. Romans 11. 4.


Kneeling is taken often in the Scriptures for the worship of God: and S. Paul
to the Romans by the bowing of the knee to Baal, does understand the
worshipping of Baal. And to the Philippians, it is said, that all knees shall
Philip. 2. 10.
bow to the name of Jesus, that is, shall worship Jesus, as a true God.

The celebration of the Communion is the most notable action of our Christian
Religion: for, in it the effect of all other things is applied to us, and
therein is represented Gods blessings, as the preaching of the Gospel,
prayers, inuocations, thankesgiuings; and lastly, the very death of Christ
therein is represented, which does work in us, by the participation of this
holy Communion. Therefore seeing kneeling in the Scripture signifies the
worship of God, it follows that it is the most convenient gesture of our
body, which is to be used in this holy action.

The gesture of standing in the time of prayer, all the days between Easter
and Penticost, and in all the Sundays of the year, did begin in the
Primative Church in the commemoration of Christ's Resurrection. The first
mention that we read thereof is in Tertul. lib. de coron. milit. Die Dominico
ie iunare nefas esse ducimus, vel de geniculis adorare.
Tertullian, who does relate it to be an ancient custom, his words are these:
We esteem it an unlawful thing to fast on Sunday; or to pray in kneeling.

Beatus Renanus Beat. Ren. in annot. in Tertullianum. Geniculari in adorande
velut penitentis est, qui stans adorat, iam veniam consequutus gratias agit.
, in his notes upon these words, says; it appertains to a penitent man to
pray on his knees, but he that prays standing, gives thanks, as having
obtained forgiveness.

Cyprian Cyp. Ser. 6. de orat. Dom. Quando stamus ad orationem, sratres
dilecti, vigilare and incumbere ad preces toto cord debemus.
, disciple to Tertullian, says; Beloved brethren, when we stand at prayer, we
should be awaked, and with all our hearts bend our selves in our prayers
toward God.

Wherefore we may gather that standing was then in use, partly, for to avoid
sleeping, because the Christians made their assemblies in the night, during the
time of their great persecutions.

This custom was long after continued: for the 20. Can. 20. 1. Nic. council.
(...).
Canon of the Nicean Council does enjoin an uniformity of standing at
prayers, to be kept in all Churches.

Basilius Magnus, lib. de sancto spiritu, does relate this custom of standing
at prayers, amongst the ancient traditions received in the Church for a long
time: he gives the reason of standing, and says; Basil. lib. sanct spir. Ca.
27. Non solum quod veluti cum Christo simul resuscitati, qua sursum quaerere
debeamus in die resurrectionis data nobis gratia stando precantes nos^^^tips^^
commonifacimus coporis erecto habitu, etc. Insuper, quoties genua flectimus and
rursus erigimur, ipso facto est eudimus, quod ob peccatum in terram dilaps^
sumus, and per humanitatem eiu^, qui ereauit nos, in coelum reuo^ati sumus.
Because we are risen again together with Christ, we ought to seek after
those things that be above: and in the day of the Resurrection, by standing at
prayers, we admonish our selves, by this upright gesture of the body, of the
grace which we have received by the Resurrection, etc. Moreover (says
Basilius) when we do bow our knees, and life our selves up again, we do
show by this fact, that we were fallen down to the earth by sin; and that we
are lifted up again to heaven, by the humanity of him who did create us.

This custom was in Hieromes days, who relates it among the Traditions of the
Church: and Hierom. aduer. Lucifer.
Austine gives a reason of it, in these words following: In the days of
Pentecost (that is, the fifty days between Easter and Whitsunday) which are
celebrated after the Resurrection, are now a figure, not of labor, but of rest
and joy: and for this cause, in these days we use no fasting, and we pray
standing, which is a sign of the Resurrection. Of this it comes to pass, that
the same custom is observed all the Sundays in the year, at the Altar.

The gesture of kneeling was not abused in the old Mass, for to adore the
Sacrament, as the Papists erroniously do in our age: but when the Priest and
the people August. Epist. 119. ad Ian. cap. 15. De diebus Pentecostes, quae
celebrantur post resurrectione^, i am figura non labori^ sed quietis and
laetitia, propter hoc and ieiunia relaxamus, and stantes oramus, quod est
signum Resurrectionis: vnde etiam omnibus diebus Dominicis ad Altar^ id
obseruatur.
did receive the consecrated bread and wine, which was distributed amongst all
them that were there present to communicate; then they kneeled down and did
pray to God, according to the form of Prayer expressed in in the Book, De
diuinis officijs Missae, which is Printed at Paris, Anno Dom. 1610. the which
prayer is in our English Communion Book.

Augustine does not express the form of this prayer, only he says, Aug. Tom.
2. Epist. 59. quest. 5 ad Paulinum. Precationes accipimus dictas, quas facimus
in celebratione Sacramentoru^, antequa^ illud quod est in Domini me^sa incipiat
benedici: orationes cum benedicitur, and sanctificatur, and ad distribuendu^
comminuitur, quam totam petitionem fere omnis Ecclesia dominica oratione
concludit.
We take, (the words of S. Paul. 1 Timothy 2. 2) precations or supplications, to
be those which we make in the celebration of the Sacraments, before that which
is on the Lords Table be blessed, and oration and prayers to be when it (to
wit, the bread) is blessed and sanctified, and broken in pieces to be
distributed, all the which Petitions the whole Church does conclude with the
Lords Prayer.

They that do refuse to kneel at the Communion, do not refuse kneeling in
the Lords Prayer, which is said in the Communion, and therefore I see no reason
why they should refuse the one, and embrace the other.

The form of the celebration of the old Mass, was called before Carolus
Magnus time, and in his time, Ordo Romanus, the which is published in sundry
manners in the foresaid Book De diuinis Officijs, together with Rabanus
Maurus, Amalarius Walafridus, who did live Anno Dom. 855. and have all written
the form, order, and manner of the old Mass, they do express the standing
in a great part of that holy action, but they make no mention of the Prayer
used before the actual receiving of the Communion.

Johannes Micrologus Io. Microl. de Offic. Missae. cap. 18. Facta autem
confractione omnes debent communicare, etc. orationem quam inclinatidicimus
antequam communicemus, non ex ordin^, sed ex religiosorum traditione habemus,
scilicet hanc Domine Jesus Christ qui ex voluntate patris etc.
, who did write in the time of Gregory the seventh, as he himself testifies
in the seventeenth Chap. De officijs Missae, which was anno Dom. 1080. does
express the said Prayer performed in kneeling, in the 18. Chapter, where he
says, that after the breaking of the bread all should communicate, that the
Prayer which we do say kneeling, before we take the Communion, we have it
not from the Roman order, but from some religious Tradition. Of the which
Prayer Micrologus has only the beginning, but Rodolphus de rino, Decanus, who
did live 1400. years after Christ, does Rodolphus de rino de Canon obseruantia
repetit verba Micrologi, and hanc precationem integra^ habet his verbis: Domino
Jesus
express this holy prayer: his words are the selfsame which Micrologus has,
that is: Lord Jesus Christ, who by the will of the Father, and cooperation of
the holy Ghost, have restored to life, by thine own death, the world, deliver
me from all my iniquities and transgressions, through this thy holy body and
blood, and make me to cleave fast to thy Commandments, Christ, qui ex
voiuntate Patris coopera^te Spiritu sancto, per morte^ propriam mundu^
viuificasti, liberae me per hoc sacrosanctum corpus, et sanguinem tuum ab
omnibus iniquitatibus and malis meis, and fac me tuis inhaerere mandatis, et a
te nunquam in perpetuum seperari, qui cum Patre, etc.
and never to depart from thee, who live and raignest, etc. And when he does
distribute the Eucharist, he says; the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ
may profit thee to eternal life, Amen. All ought to communicate, and in the
mean while an Antheme, which borrowed the name from the Communion, is sung.

By these last testimonies every man may learn two things: the one is, that
the old Mass in Micrologus and Rodolphus time, was altogether like unto the
Communion of the Church of England, and therefore that the new Roman Mass,
wherein there is no Communion, is not the true, but a false supposed Mass,
newly invented by the Gray-Fryers, as (God-willing) we are amply to prove by a
Treatise upon the said matter. The other point is, that we learn by the last
testimony, that kneeling Cum distribuit Eucharistia^ dicit: Corpus and Sanguis
Domino nostri Jesus Christi proficiat tibi in vitam aeterna^, Amen.
at the receiving of the Communion did begin with the said form of Prayer,
the which is an invocation of Christ, and not an invocation of the host of the
Mass, which is an abominable Idolatry, and therefore the Bishops and holy
Martyrs of the church of England, in reforming of the Popish Idolatry of the
new Mass, did restore the true old Mass, which is our Communion, and did well
to Omnes debent co^municare, and interim cantatur Antiphora quae de Communione
nome^ mutuauit. Eaae^ forma precationis habetur in Canone Missae, inserto
Missali, secundum vsum Sarum.
retain the gesture of kneeling, as it was in the old Mass of the Communion,
and although the Papists do abuse kneeling in the Idolatrous adoration of the
Sacrament, it was lawfully restored to the invocation of God by Christ, in the
receiving of the Communion, even as Christ himself, and his Apostles, and the
Christians in the primative Church did use, it is also manifest, as well by the
testimonies of the first These, as by this, that neither Prayer nor the
Communion, nor any other religious Action was performed in sitting after the
manner of our Country. Wherefore they that refuse to receive the Communion,
unless they receive it sitting, have no warrant, neither by the example of
Christ, nor by his Apostles, nor by the Primative Church.

FINIS.

