THE Well spryng of sciences, which teaches the perfect work and practice
of Arithmeticke, both in whole nombers and fractions, with such easy and
compendious instruction into the said Art, a^ has not heretofore been (...)
any set out nor labored.

Beautified with most necessary rules and questions, not only profitable for
Merchants, but also for all Artificers, as in the Table does partly appear:
set for the by Humfrey Baker Citezeine of London.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyng^ton, for James Rowbothum.

M. D. LXVIII.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Master Ihon Fitz* williams Governor of the most
famous society of Merchants Adventurers into Flaunders. And to the right
Worshipful the Consult, Assistens, and comminaltie of the same society,
Humfrey Baker wishes health with continual increase of commodity by their
worthy travail.
ALthough heretofore (right worshipful) diverse and sundry well skilled men in
y^ feate, and science of numbrynge, have not spared their labor, not only in
beatifiyng, but also in augmentyng the same with such increase of wit, as
has excedinglye contained the studientes therein, and made them riper, in the
exact knowledge and readiness of it. Yet because an art can not have to much
setting furthe, neither can be to much commonded, I (among, and after so
man^pregnaunt wits) am bold to put forth the fruicte of my blunt
understanding and travail, in the like science, not correctyng or reprouyng
any man's former edition, but making an attempt of my gross, and mean study
herein, to the intent that this my enterprise may (by other men's doings
(be either gently amended, or friendly received. And because I desire
specially that it may be gratfullie accepted, I have chosen you (worshipful)
to be as defendours of this little lucubration, to whom I know it shall be
welcome, not so much for my sake, as for the science love it self, wherein it
is well known you have ripe judgment and good understanding, as by your
daily exercises it may appear. And although some folishe heads of fancy
overthwart, think this Arithmetical art peculier only to a few, vsyng the
trade of marchaundise, as though it were not so necessary for other men: yet I
am sure, the wisest and best learned perceiuyng the wonderful art, the deep
diuises, and the cunnyng conclusions that are comprised in it: affirm it (that
of right) to be the best whetstone, or sharpnyng of the wit of every man
that ever was invented, and think it most necessary to be taught unto
children, without the which, nothing either private or common can be well
ordered. And true it is, that whosoever is ignorant of this science of
numbering, he stepeth in all the rest and lacks that promptitude of wit,
which other have in calling and accomptynge of great sums. Yea, I say he
that has the exact knowledge of it, has a special gift of God, and carries
about him a note and token of a good wit: and I doubt whether ever any was
counted or esteemed simple or folishe, that had this science in his head Now if
some curiours brain would ask me this question: six you commend much your
art of numbering, can you tell who was the first inuentor of it, or what this
word Arithmetica does signify, I would answer him that it is uncertain who
invented it first, but well I know, it is one of the seven liberal sciences:
which, if I say god gave unto man to adourne his life with all, I say as it
is, and as we ought to believe of whom we acknowledge to have received them and
not of the Poets, or heathen gods, as some schole men will say. Moreover, I
know that Abraham taught it first unto the Egiptians, and no man will deny but
that he received all his knowledge of god for he worshipped no strange gods
neither received any gifts or sciences of them. And although many years after,
Pythagoras declared it to the Greeks, yet was not he the first inuentor of it,
but god. Plato also commended it as most necessary, willinge it to be taught
to all youth before all other things. And thinks be to god, it appears that
his precept has been very well followed here in England, for I find not in
any nation (I speak not flateryng my country men but commending them) more
ready knowledge in this science, then there is in the most part of our youth
here in England, and namely in London, which I seeing it is in them, it is
(out of question) in their masters and tutours, which by their great care
over them, have trained them up unto the practice thereof, to whom the
greateste part of the praise redoundeth. And now right worshipful, when I
consider how little profit my simple trauaill shall bring, being but as it
were an assaye of further attempt, I am compelled to crave at your hands only
to accept my good will with the work: for will and ability are somewhat
unequal in me, but if ability were corespo^dent to will, I would gladly
pleasure you in greater things then this is, which is but a shadow
incomparison of other me^nes substanciall labor and trauail in this art: yet I
trust it is not altogether so unpolished, but it has passed under the file of
some workemanshippe, whereby some men may take occasion of profit and
furtherance herein, which is my chief desire, although I know many are able
to do better: for England is not so destitute of learned heads, but my doings
may sone be followed, yea rather amended. But yet forasmuch as I would they
should know, that know not* I thought it not good to hide that which has
been opened unto me. And so casting with my self the so^me of all, I destre you
eftsoon, right worshipful (to whom I thought it most mete to present the
fruicte of my study) thankefullye to receive it, as your wonted wisdoms does
all things well and virtuously purposed.

Thus fare you well, destryng God to maintain you in your estate, to prospere
and further all your traffickes and voyages, increase you in virtue, and keep
you in good health.

Amen.
THE DIFFINITION of Number.
Number is as much to say, as a multitude compound of many vnityes, as two is
compounde of two unities, three is compounde of three unities, four of four
unities, five of five unities ten of ten, fourtene of fourtene, fyftene of
fyftene, twenty of twenty unities, etc.

And therefore an unity is no number, but the beginning and original of
number, as if you do multiplye or divide an unity by it self, it is resolved
into it self without increase. But it is in number otherwise, for there can be
no number, how great so ever it be, but that it may continuallye be
increased by adding evermore one unity unto the same.

Numeration. Cap.i.
NUumeration is the art whereby to express and declare the value of any sum
proposed, and is of two kinds, the one gathers y^ value of a sum proposed,
and the other expresses any sum conceived by oue figures and places, for
the value is one thing, and the figures are another thing: and that comes
partlye by the diuersitye of fygures, but chiefelye of the places wherein they
be ordeclye sei. And first mark, that there are but ten fygures or characters
which are used in Arithmeticke, whereof nine of them are called signifiynge
fygures, and the tenth is called a ciphar, which is made like an 0. and of it
self signifies nothing, but it being joined with any of the other figures,
increases their value, and these be they.

1 one. 2 two. 3 three. 4 four. 5 five. 6 sire. 7 seven. 8 eight. 9. nine.
Also you shall understand that every one of these fygures has two values: One
is always certain and has his signification of his own form, and the other
is uncertain which be takes of his place.

A place is called the scate or room that a figure stands in, and how many
fygures so ever are written in one sum, so many places has the whole value
thereof. And that is called the first place (which next is toward the
right hand) of any sum, and so recknynge by order toward the left hand,
so that, that place is last which is next the left hand. And contrariwise,
when you express the value of the fygures in any sum you must begin at
the left hand, and so reckon toward the right hand.

Every of these nine fygures, (which are called signifiynge fygures) has his
own simple value when he is found alone, or in the first place of any sum.
In the second place toward the left hand; he betokens his one valewe ten
times. As. 70. is, seven times ten: that is to say seventy, 80. is viii.
times ten: that is to say eyghtie. In the third place every figure betokens
his own value a hundredth times. As. 700. in that third place betokens, a
hundredth times. 7. that is to say, seven hundred: In the fourth place every
figure betokens his own value a thousand times. As. 7000. is seven
thousand, and 8000. is eyghte thousand. These four first places must be
had perfectlye in mind, ye and that by heart, for by the knowledge of them you
may express all kind of nombres how great so ever they be.

In the fyfte place every figure by tokeneth his own valewe ten thousand
times. As 70000. is ten times seven thousand, that is to saye^ seauentie
thousand: In the sytte place every figure stands for his own value, a
hundredth thousand times. As 700000, is seven hundredth thousand. The vii.
place a M. M. times, or a million: as 7000000, is vii. M. M. or vii. millions.
And the viii. place.x. M. M. times, or ten millions, so that every place
toward the left hand, excedeth the former ten times. But now for the easy
reading, and Redye expressing orderlye of any sum proposed you shall
practice this manner, following. And for example I propone this number 765432658.
in the which are nine places. In the first place is 8. and betokens, but
eyghte, in the second place is 5. and betokens, x. times five that is fyfte,
in the third place is six, and betokens a. C. times six, that is.vi. C. In
the forth place is. 2. and that is two. M. And 3. in the fyfte places is x.
M. times 3. that is xxx. M. So 4. in the syxie place is a C. thousand times. 4.
that is.iiii. C. M. then five in the seventh place is a. M. M. times 5. that is
v. M. or rather 5. millyons. And 6. in the viii. place is.vi. times x.
millions, that is lx. millions. And last of all.vii. in the. ix place, is vii.
C. millions now follows the practice. First put a prick over the fourth
figure, and so over the seuenthe, and likewise over the tenthe. And also over
the 13, 16. or 19 if you had so many, and so still leauinge two fygures between
every two pricks and those rooms from one prick to an other are called
ternaries, then you must pronounce every three fygures from one prick to an
other as though they were written alone from the rest. And at the end of
their valewe, add so many times thousand, as your number has pricks (that
is to say, if there be but 1. prick, it is but one M. if two pricks a M. M.
or else a million yt 3. pricks a. M. M. M. or a M. million, and so
consequentlye of all other fygures following.) Then come likewise to the next
three fygures, and sound them as if they were aparte from the rest, and add
to their valewe so many times thousands as there are pryckes between them and
the first place of your whole number. And so do by they next three fygures
following and of all the rest likewise as in example. 451234678567. The first
prick is over. 8. in the fourth place, which is the place of a. M. the
Second prick is over 4. in the vii. place, which is the place of a M. M. or
one million, the third prick is over the.x. place which is the place of a M.
M. M. or of a M. million, as in the former example. Then for the expressing of
this number by the valewe of every figure, according to the place wherein they
stande^, you shall first begin at the last prycke over one, and take yt and
the other two fygures. 5. and. 4. which do follow him and value them alone
and they are iiij. C li. MMM. or else CCCC li. M. millions. Then take the other
iij. fygures from one to the nerte prick, and valewe them as if they were a
part from the other, and they are. 234. which are. CCxxxiiij. million, or 234.
MM. Then come to the third prick over 8. and take the other ii. fygures
behind it, and reckon them likewise as if they were alone, and they are vi C
lxxviii. M. And last of all come to the other two fygures which remain,
that is. 567. and they are five Clxvii. Thus the whole sum of these fygures,
is iiii. Cli. M. ii Cxxxiiii. Millions, viC.lxxviii. M. vClxvii, as before.

Note also that whole number is divided (...) of (...)
into three kinds, that is to say, diget number, article, and mixte or
compounde number. The dyget number, is all manner of nombres (...)
under. 10. which are these. 9. fygures 123456789. of the which I have spoken
before. The Article number Article.
is any kind which begins with a cyphar as this. 0. and they may ever be
divided Just by. 10. without any remain as these. 10. 20. 30. 40. 50. 100.
and all other such like. The mixte, or compounde Mixte or compounde.
number, contains diverse and many articles, or at the lest one article, and a
diget, as. 11. 12. 16. 19. 22. 38. 108. 1007. and so forth. And as any article
number may be made a compounde, by putting thereto a diget, even so likewise
every compounde number, may be made an article number by addinge thereunto a 0.

And here follows a brief rehersall of the order and Denominatours of the
places. And this shall be sufficient for Numeration.
The denominatours. of the places. The order of the places. M. of Millions. 4
Tenth. C. of Millions. 3 Nyneth. X. of Millions. 2 Eyghteth. Millions. 1
Seventh. C. of Thousands. 0 Sixte. X. Thousands. 1 Fyfthe. Thousands. 8
Fourth. Hundrethes. 3 Third. Tenthes. 4 Second. Unities. 5 First.

Addition in whole number Chap. 2.
ADdicion is as much as to bring together two sums or more into one, as if
there were due to any man 223, li. by seem one body, and 334.li. by another,
and 431. by another, and you would know how many pound is due to the same
man in all, these iii. summee shall you set down orderly the one under the
other, writing the greatest sum highest and the next to the greatest under
it, and the least sum under the last, in such sort that the first figure of
the one su^me by directly under the first figure of the other, and the second
under the second, an so forth in order, when you have thus done draw under
them a straight line, and then will they stand thus. ^

Now begin always at the first places toward yours right hand, and put
together the.iii. first figures of these.iii. sums, and look what comes
of them, write that under the^ beneath the line, as in saying. 3. 4. and 1.
being put together do make 8. write 8. under. 3. as thus. ^

And then go to the second figures and do likewise: as in saying. 2. 3. and
3. makes 8. write 8. under. 2. as here you see. ^

And likewise do with the fygures that be in the third place, in saying. 2.
3. and 4. are. 9. put. 9. under them and so will your whole sum appear thus: ^
whereby you may perceive that those three sums being added together do make
988 li. and this is y^ art of addicion according to his simplicitye, if the
sum of any place do not excede a diget number. But in case the sum of any
one place can not be expressed by one figure but by two you shall put the first
of those figures under the line, and keep the other in your mind for to add
it unto the first figure of the next place. And if the same next place can
not be aualued but by two fygures, you must in like manner put the first of
those fygures under the line, and reserve the second for the other place next
after, and thus must you do from one place to another until you have come to
the last place, where in case you do find that the sum be of two fygures,
you must set them both down because it is the end of that work, as in this
example. ^ where the first figures are, 3. 1. 5. 6. which added together
makes 15. and for that, that 15. is of two figures, I do put the first
figure 5. under the line, and keep the second figure (which is. (...)) in my
mind, the which I must add with the next fygures of the second place,
that is to say with 2. 9. 4. and. 5. the which together make 21. I writ 1.
under the line for the second figure of that addition, that is to say after.
5. and I keep 2. to be added unto the third place the which with the other
fygures 1. 8. 3. 4. do make 18. therefore I put. 8. next after. 1. in the
third place under the line, and keep 1. to be added unto the fygures of the
fourth place, which is with 2. 7. 2. 2. the which with the 1. that I keep do
make 14. I set down 4. for the fourth figure (under the line) that is to say,
after 8. and I keep 1. to be added unto the fygures of the fyfte place, the
which is 7. 6. 3. 8. with the 1. that I keep makes. 25. I put. in the fyfte
place under the line next after, 4. and keep 2. in mind to be adoed with the
fygures of the syxie place, that is with 6. 4. 9. 6. and that 2. which I keep,
makes 27. I write down 7. under the line in the syxte place, and I keep 2.
which I add with the fygures in the seventh place, and they make 13. I put
down 3. under the line in the seventh place, and add 1. unto the fygures in
the eight place and they are 10. I do put 0. under the line in the eyghte
place, and then I add 1. unto the nynethe place, that is to say with 4. 7.
and they make 12. the which 12. I writ at length under the line because it
is the end of this addicion, and this is to be done of all such like. And for
the easyer understanding of that which we have spoken of addition, you may
e^amen these two other examples folowinge, in the which the first has these
nombers. 3570. 2763. 579. 28. which being added toghther do make this number
6940, and in the second example does resolute this number 51683. by adding
together of these nombers, 47630. 3756, 272, 25, as here under written. ^

Of substraction in whole number. chap. 3.
SUbstraction teaches how you shall abate one lesser number from a greater,
and what there does reremaine after that you shall have abated the same, I
speak not of the abating of one egall number, from an other egall unto it, for
the facility thereof requires no Rule.

In substraction are found three nombers, the one is that, from the which the
substraction is made. The second is the number, that is to be subtracted, and
the third is the number which remains after the substraction is ended. As
when I would substract. 25. from 40. The 40. is the number from the which the
substraction is made, 25. is the nombre to be subtracted, and. 15. is the
number which remains after you have done the substraction, here follows the
practice. You shall put the lesser number under the greater in such sort, that
every figure of the one number may answer unto every figure of the other
orderlye, and then draw a right line under those two numbers, as you did in
Addition. Then must you begin at the right hand and take the first figure
of the vndermoste number, and abate that from the first figure of the uppermost
number, and that which remains you must set underneath the line right under
that figure which you have subtracted. Then afterward take likewise the
second figure of the neither^ most snumbre, and abate that also from the
second figure of the higher number. The third from the third, and so fourth
of all the rest till you come to the end, putting always the remain of
every figure under the line in his order, example. I will subbstracte. 2345.
from 9876. ^ after that I have put them down according to the manner
aforesaied. I take first. 5. from. 6. and there rests. 1. the which I set
under the line right against. 5. Secondlye I abate. 4. from. 7. and there
rests. 3. the which I set in the second place under the line, next after.
1. Thirdly, I abate. 3. from. 8. and there rests 15. The which I put under
the line in the third place, finallye I do abate. 2. from. 9. and there
rests. 7. the which I put under the line in the fourth and last place,
and thus is this substraction ended, by the which there rests. 753.

But when two fygures of one likeness do chance to meet, so that the one
must be abated from the other, as if I should abate seven from seven, there
remains nothing, and then must I set a ciphre. 0. under the line. But when
the figure which is to be abated, does excede the figure which is over him,
so that it can not be taken out of the same figure. Then must you abate the
nether figure from, 10. And that which does remain you shall add unto the
same figure which is uppermost. And the sum which comes thereof shall you
set under the line. But when so ever you do borow any such. 10. of the over
number: you must add. 1. unto the next nether figure following which is to
be abated. And there is nothing else to be done in substraction. Example I
will substract 93576. from. 4037479. after that I have placed my two nombers,
as I ought to do, I do first.

^ Abate. 6. from 9. and there rests. 3. then I put the 3. under the line
right against. 6. And secondlye, I abate. 7. from 7. And there rests
nothing. I do put a cipher. 0. under the line right against. 7. in the
second place. Then I come to the third place where I find. 5. which I cannot
abate from the figure over him which is but 4: therefore I do abate it from 10.
as before I taught, and there rests. 5. the which I do add with the. 4.
which is over him, and that makes. 9. I put 9. in third place under the line
for the third figure, fourthlye for the. 10. which I borrowed I add one unto
the nerte nether figure which is 3. and they make 4. the which I do abate
from the over figure. 7. and there rests 3. I put. 3. under the line for the
fourth figure. And then I come to the fyfte place where I do find. 9. which I
can not abate from the figure over him which is but. 3. but I abate 9. from
10. and there rests. 1. the which I do add with 3. and they make, 4. I put.
4. under the line for the fyfte figure. And if it were not, for that I did
last borowe. 10. the substraction should have been ended. But for because
that I must (for every such ten that I borowe) always add. 1. unto the
next nether figure following, I must therefore proceade unto the
substraction. And for that, that there is noe other figure following in the
nether number, it shall suffice to have kept the unity, and to abate it from
the nerte over figure. But I find there. 0. and I cannot abate. 1. from. 0.
therefore I abate it from. 10. and there rests nine which I do put under
the line in the sixte place, finally for the tenthe, which I borrowed, I keep.
1. in mind. The which I do abate from. 4. and there remains three, the
which I do (...)tte under the line in the seventh place after nine. And the
operation is thus ended.

Another Example.
^ But if there were many numbers to be subtracted from one number alone, then
must you first add those numbers together according unto the doctrine of the
chapitre going before, and then to make your substraction as above said. As if
I would abate these three sums. 123. 234. 456. from. 98925 first I do add
the. 3 sums into one and they are 813. The which I do abate from 98925. and
there rests 98112.

Of multiplication. Chapter. 4.
IN multiplication there are three numbers to be noted, that is to say the
number which is to be multiplied, the which we will call the multiplicande:
and the number by the which we multiply, we call the multiplier, or
multiplicator. And the third number is that which comes of the multiplication
of the one by the other, which is called the product. As when I would know how
much mou^teth. 10. multiplied by 9. y^ is to say how much are. 10. times 9. I
find that they ar worth 90. tha^ 10. is the multiplica^o. 9. is the multipter.

And 90. is called the producte: Then for to multiplye, is none other thing,
but to find a nombre which contains the multiplicande so many times, as the
multiplyer contains unities. As 10. multiplied by 9. do make 90. as before
said. And 90. conteyneth 10. so many times, as 9. contains unities, that is
to say nine times.

In multiplycation, it forces not much which of the two nombers by the
multiplicande, nor which be the multiplier. For 10. multiplied by 9. makes as
many as 9. multiplied by. 10. yet nevertheless it shall be more commodious that
the lesser number be always the multiplier.

And for that, that the multiplication of fygures the one by the other, is the
most chief and necessaryest kind, whereby to know how to work in the
multiplication of compounde nombers, and that every man has it not at the
fingers end: I will therefore give you hear certain easy ways of
multiplication of diget nombers. When you would multiplye two simple fygures,
or digits the one by the other, abate each of those diget nombers from 10. Then
multiplye the two remains the one by the other. And if the sum do excede
10. writ only the first figure, and keep the other to be added to the next
operation, which is thus. Add your two simple figures together: And of the
which resulteth of that addicion, take only the first figure, unto the
which you must add the unity which you kept before. And that shall be the
second figure of the sum which you do seek. Example, I would multiply 7.
by 6. I take 7. from 10. and there rests 3. likewise I abate 6. from 10. and
there rests 4. then I say thus 3. times 4. make 12. I writ 2. for my first
figure, and I keep 1. in my mind, then I add 6. with 7. and they are 13. of
the which I cast away the second figure. 1. and I take only the first
figure. 3. unto the which I add the unity which I kept, and they make 4.
which I write in the second place after. 2. And thus I find. 42. which is
the valuer of 7. multiplied by. 6.

Otherwise, and all comes to one effect, set doiune your two dig^^e
numbers the one right over the other, and right against every or them toward
the right hand wryt and his own distaunce from. 10. Then multiply the two
differences together, the figure which comes thereof, shall you set down
under both the differences. But if there be two fygures set down but the
first, and keep the other in your mind, afterward abate (from one of the
two digit numbers) the difference of the other digite number that is to say,
croswise. And unto the remain add the figure which you kept, and that shall
be the second number, and thus you shall have your multiplication. Example of
the like figures, that is to say, of 7. multiplied by. 6. the distaunce of. 7.
unto. 10. is. 3. And the distaunce of. 6. from. 10. is. 4. I set them down
crossewaies, as you see: ^ And then I say. 3. times. 4. are. 12. I set
down. 2. and keep one in my mind, then I abate. 4. from. 7. or else. 3. from.
6. it forces not from which of them: and there rests always. 3. unto the
which I add the unity, which I kept in my mind, and they are four,
which shall be the second figure of the multiplication. And thus I find
that seven, multiplied by six, makes fowertle and two, as in the other
operation. This practice has no place where the two digette noumbers (do
not exceade ten) by addyng them together, and then is multiplication easy
enough without any rule.

An other way to know the multiplication of simple numbers, is by this table
following: the use whereof is thus.

First you shall understand, that the nombers from 1. and so downewardes to
9. set in the left part or hanging margin of this table do betoken the
multipliers of all simple nombers. And the elements or fygures being put
highest in every square room drawing toward your right hand right against
every of the multipliers, do signify, the multiplicands, unto the multipliers
of the hangyng margin. And the lower or inferior nombers in every square
room, do betoken the product of that multiplication, which is made in
multiplyinge the upper number over it, with the figure in the hanging margin,
answering directly unto the said square: as by example.

THE TABLE OF multiplication by all the diget nombers.
1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 2 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 3
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 9 12 15 18 21 24 27 4 4 5 6 7 8 9 16 20 24 28 32 36 5 5 6 7 8 9
25 30 35 40 45 6 6 7 8 9 36 42 48 54 7 7 8 9 4 56 63 8 8 9 64 72 9 9 81

First, because one does not multiply, I set in the upper margin the
figures from. 1. to. 9. both in the hier and also in the inferior rows, for
one in the hangyng margin, multiplied by one the upper number in the first
square brings but one, so likewise two being the higher number in the
second square of the upper margin, multiplied by. 1. in the hangyng margin,
brings two for the lower number in the second square of the upper margin,
for one times one makes but one, and one times two makes two, then one
times three makes. 3. and one times four makes four, and so continewyng
toward the right hand, until you come to the figure of 9. which is one
times. 9. makes. 9. Then after multiply two of the hangyng margin by two,
the upper number of the square, next toward the right hand, and that makes
four, which is the producte of two, multiplied by two, which four is set
under the two, for two times two are four, and two times thread makes
six, then two times four makes 8. and two times. 5. makes. 10. and so
conunewyng unto two times. 9. which makes. 18. The like is to be done with
the third row, and so likewise of all the residue.

Example, I would know what is the producte of. 9. multiplied by. 8. I seek in
the hangyng margin the multiplier eight, and amongst the squares directly
against eight, drawyng toward the right hand, I seek the multiplicande. 9. in
the higher row, and I find the producte right under. 9. to be. 72. Then. 72.
is the number which comes of the multiplication of. 9. by eight, and so is to
be understand of all the rest of the table, which table must be of all
men learned by heart, or as they say without book, which being learned,
you shall the better attain to the resle of multiplication. To come now unto
the practice of multiplication, when you would multiplye two nombers, the one
by the other, you must set them down after the same manner as you did in
addicion, and in substraction. That is to say, the first figure of the
multiplier, under the first figure of the multiplicande, the second under the
second, and the third under the third, if there be so many, and then draw a
right line under them, as in the other operations going before.

After you shall multiply all the fygures of the multiplicande by the
multiplyer, and set down the fygures (coming of any such multiplication)
under the line every one in order.

Example, I would multiplye 123. by. 3. that is to say, I would know how
much amounts iij. times one hundredth, twenty and three. The two nombers
being placed in such order as is before said, you must begin toward the
right hand: and say thus three times three are nine, write down 9. under the
line right against 3. for the first figure: ^ secondlye by the same three you
must multiply the second figure 2. and they make 6: put down 6. after the
9. under the line: Thirdly by the same 3. you shall multiply the last figure.
1. and they are but 3. set down 3 after 6. for the third and last figure.
And thus is that work ended: whereby you shall find, that 123. being multiplied
by 3. makes 369.

But when that of the multiplication of one figure by an other: The sum which
comes thereof shall be of two figures, as it happens most often, then shall
you write down the first figure, and keep the other figure to be added unto
the multiplication of the next figure.

Example. Six men have gained (every one of them) 345. crowns, I would
know how many Crowns, they had in all. ^Fyrste I multiplye 6. times five
are. 30. I wright. 0. under the line, and keep. 3. to be added to the next
multiplication: Secondlye I say 6. times four, are. 24. unto the which I add
3. which I reserved. And they make 27. I wryt. 7. in the second place under
the line, and I keep 2. to be added to the next multiplication, thirdly I
say sire times. 3. are 18. unto the which I add the. 2. which I keep, and
they make. 20. the which I wright all down for because that is the last
work. And so I find that 345. being multiplied by. 6. do make 2070. When
the multiplier is of many figures you must multiply all the whole
multiplycande by every one of those figures, and write the productes every
one under his own figure.

Example. I would know how many days are paste from the nativity of Jesus
Christ until the year 1560. full complete. I have to multiply. 1560. by
365. which are the days of one whole year. The leap years not being
reckened, which have every one of them. 366. days.

First by the figure. 5. I multiply ^all the higher fygures, saying thus. 5.
times. 0. makes. 0. I write. 0. under the line for the first figure, and
because I keep nothing for the next place. I proceed and say. 5. times 6.
are. 30. I set 0. under the line for the second figure, and I keep. 3. to
be added to the next multiplication, thirdly I say 5. times. 5. are. 25. The
which with 3. that I keep are. 28. I set down 8. and keep. 2. to be
added with the next multiplication. Then coming unto the fourth and last
figure, I say five times. 1. are. 5. the which with 2. that I reserved are 7.
I put 7. for the last figure of this first operation by the figure. 5. with
the which figure we have no more to do. And therefore I cancel the same. 8. with
a little strik through it, to signify that we have finished with that figure.
And for as much that in multiplication there is always as many simple
operations, as the multiplier contains figures. There rests yet two
operations to be made. I come then unto the second operation, which is by the
figure 6. by the which I must again multiply all the figures of the
multiplicand as I did by 5 and the first figure, which shall be produced, you
must put one rank more lower then the figures of the operation even now
made by five: not right under the first figure of the multiplier five, but
under six: that is to say: one place more forward then the five toward the
left hand, and one rank more lower then the first operation: and you shall
put afterward every of the other figures which comes of the same
multiplication in their order: thirdlye you must make the multiplication by
the third figure and that which shall come thereof you must set in his
rank, as here under you see. And now we need make no further discourse
hereof, because that he which can do the first multiplication by five,
may as easily do all the others. It shall therefore suffice to set here
under the examples. ^

Now, if you will know how much the operations thus placed do amount unto,
which in value are but one number: you must add those three numbers together,
but not after the same manner as we have done in the chapter of addition, the
first figure of the first rank with the first figure of the second rank, and
of the third: but you must add them in the same sort as you shall find them
situated or placed: that is to say, the first figure of the first rank
alone by it self the second of that rank with the first of the second
rank. The third of the first rank with the second figure of the third
rank: and so of all other as hereafter does appear.

^ And thus the 1560 years do contain five hundred sixty and nine thousand
four hundred days not counting herein the days of the leap years, which
are hear in number 320. then the whole sum of the days should be 569790.

Another Example.
^ The sum of multiplication, when you would multiply any number by 10. you
must only add one cipher unto all the number. As 345. multiplied by 10.
makes 3450. if you will multiply by. 100. Add vnthe whole number two
ciphers. 00: if by 1000. add. 000. And to be brief, when the last figure of
the multiplier is. 1. and all the rest be ciphers, add so many ciphers to your
multiplicande, as there shall be found in your multiplier

But if in multipliyng, the last figure were not one, but that there were
only certain Ciphers in the beginnynge: and that the other were signifiynge
fygures, and likewise those of that multiplicande, then shall you put those
ciphers a part, and multiply the signifiyng figures of the one by the
signifiyng figures of the other. Than add unto the product of that
multiplication, all the ciphers which you did before put a part. As if I would
multiply. 46000 by 3500. I put apart the three ciphers of the first, and two
ciphers of the second numbers. And then I multiply forty six by 35. and
thereof comes 2610: unto the which I add the 00000. and then the whole
producte will be. 161000000. ^

Of diuition the 5. chapter.
DIuition or partition is, to seek how many times one number does contain an
other for in this operation at first required two numbers for the findyng out
of the third. The first number is called the diuidende or number which is to
be divided, and that must be the greater number, the other number is called
the divisor, and that is the lesser. And the third number which we seek is
called the quotient. As if I would divide 36. by 9. the dividend shall be 36.
and the diuisour is 9. And for because that nine is contained in 36. four
times, that is to say, that 4: times 9. do make 36. The quotient shall be 4. as
in marking how many times 9. is contained in 36.

The practice.
Write down first the diuidende in the higher number, and the divisor
underneath, in such sort, that the first figure of the diuisour toward the
left hand be under the first of the dividend, and every figure of the same
diuisour under his like, that is to say, the first under the first, the
second under the second, the third under the third, and so consequentlye of
the other, if there be any more, which is contrary to the other three
kinds before specified, but you must consider if all the lower fygures of the
divisor, may be taken out of the higher figures of the diuidence, by the order
of substraction. The which if you can not do, then must you set the
first figure of the Dyuysour (toward the left hand) under the second
figure of the diuidende, and so consequently the rest, if any be to be
set down every one of them under his like as before is said. And than
draw a line between the diuidence and the diuisour. And at the end of them an
other crooked line, behind the which toward the right hand, shall be set your
quotient. As by this example following where the divisor is but of 1. figure

If you would divide 860. by. 4. you must set down. 4. under the. 8. with
a line between them as herevnder you may see. ^

And then you must seek how many times the diuisour in contained in the
higher number, or diuidende aunswering to him, as in this our example I must
seek how many times 4. is contained in. 8. in the which I find 2. times, then
I write down. 2. aparte behind the crooked line, as you se, which shall be
the first figure of the quotient to come, secondlye by this figure (being
thus put aparte) I must multiply the divisor: ^ and under the same
multiplication.

I must set that number which commcth of the same multiplication, as two
times four do make eight, which eight I do set under the four, which is
the diuisour. Thirdly I do substract the producte of the said multiplication
(of the quotient by the divisor) from the higher number corespondant to the
same, as if I abate 8. from 8. there rematneth nothing, and then I cancel or
stryke out that which is done as you see. In these three operations is
comprehended the art of diuition. The which are to be obseraed from point to
point, for there is no diversity in the finishyng of the same which is thus.

I must remove mye divisor one place nerer toward my right hand, as in
procedyng with. our example, I remove ^ my diuisour 4. which was under. 8.
and I set it under. 6. then I seek how many times. 4. is contained in. 6.
where I find but one time, then I set. 1. behind the crooked line behind.
2. afterward by this last and new figure. 1. I multiply the diuisour. 4 and
that makes but. 4 (for an vninitie which is but. 1. increases nothing) I
abate 4. from the higher figure. 6. and there rests. 2. the which 2. I set
over the 6. and I cancel the. 6. for so must you do when there rests any
thing after you have made the substractio^. Thirdlye for that there yet
remains an other, figure in the dividend, I remove again the diuisour, and I
set under the cipher. 0. Then I seek how many times four is in the higher
number which is. 10. where I find 5. times, I put. 5. behind ^ the crooked
iyne for the third and last figure of the quotient. Then by the same 5. I
multiply the diuisour 4. and that makes 20. the which I abate from the
higher number, and there rests nothing. And so is this diuisyon ended: and I
have found that. 860. being divided by four, brings for the quotient 215.
that is to say, that. 4. is contained in 860. two hundred and fiftene times.
This is the most eastest workynge that is in division, but that which
follows, appertains to the whole and perfect understanding of the same.
When the first figure of your divisor toward your left hand is greater then
the first of diuidende, you must not place the first figure of your divisor
right underneath the first of your dividend, but under y^ 2. figure of the same
diuidende, nerer to your right hand, as before is said.

When the diuisour is of many figures, and that you have to seek how many
times it is contained in the higher number (for the more easier workyng) you
must uot seek to abate the diuisour all at one time, but you must see and
mark how may times the first figure of the same toward the least hand is
contained in the higher number aunsweringe to the said number, and then to
work after y^ same manner as is before taught.

Erample. I have. 316215. crowns to be divided among. 45. men for to make
my division, I must not put the first figure of the diuisour which is. 4.
under the first of the deuidende, which is. 3. because that. 4. is greater
number then. 3. And further, I can not take. 4. out of. 3. wherefore I must
set the. 4. under the second figure of the higher number which is. 1. and
the figure. 5. of the diuisour next right under the 6. as you may see.

I must first seek, home many times ^ 45. ie contained in 316. which is but
part of the diuidende, wherefore for the more casie workyng I need but to seek
how many times 4. is contained in 31. and because I may have it 7. times I put.
7. behind the crooked line, as is before said, then by. 7. I multiply all the
diuisour. 45. and they are 315: the which I set under the same diuisour, the
first figure under the first. And the other in order toward the left hand.
Then I substract three hundred fiftine, from the higher number. 316. and of this
first working there remains but. 1. the which I set over the 6 and I
cancel the 315, and the other figures 3, 1, 6, also the diuisour: and then it
will stand thus. ^

And when I come to remove the diuisour, and that I must seek how many
times it is contained in the higher number, if I se that I can not find it
there, that is to say that if the higher number be lesser tha^ the diuisonr,
as it is in this example, then must I put a cipher in the quotient behind the
crooked line, and if there remain any fygures in the diuidende which are not
finished, I must remove t(...) divisor again nerer toward my right hand by
one place, for to find a new figure in the quociente. As in this our example,
for after that I have removed the divisor, I seek how many times. 45. is
contained ^ in. 12. and because I can not have. 45. in. 12. I put a 0. behind
the crooked line after 7. then without multipliyng or abatyng, I remove again
the divisor nerer toward my right hand, and I seek how many times 4 (which is
the first figure of the diuisour) is in the higher number, that is to say, in.
12. whereas ^ I find it 3. times I put. 3. behind the crooked line, for the
third figure of the quocient: then by. 3. I multiply the divisor. 45. and
thereof comes 135.

But here is to be noted, that if it happen that the figure being last
found, which is put in the quotient, do produce or bring for the a greater
number (in multipliyng all the divisor by the same) then that which is over the
said divisor: you must then make the same figure of your quotient (which you
do put down) lesser by one. and after that you have cancelled the first
multiplication, you must make a new. And the same must be so done as often
times: as (in decreasyng the same) it produces a lesser number, or at the
least, a number egall to that, which is over it. As in the last work for
because that the diuisour, being multiplied by. 3. brings for the 135. which
amounts more then 121. the same producte must be cancelled. And likewise the
figure. 3. which I did put in the quotie^t, must be changed into a figure of.
2. Then by the said. 2. I must multiply the divisor. 45. and thereof comes
90. the which I abate from 121. and there remains. 31. And then will the
sum stand thus. ^

And here is also to be noted, that the A note.
sum which remains, must be always lesser then the divisor. Then finally,
I remove the divisor to the. 2. last figures toward the right hand, and I
seek how many times 4. is in 31. And for because I find it. 7. times I put.
7. in the quotient: by the which I multiply the diuisoure, and thereof
comes. 315 the which I abate from the higher number of the diuidende, and
there remains nothing, as here you may see. ^

But in case that after the division is ended, there do remain any thing in
the diuidende, as most often times there does: I must then set that remain
aparte behind the crooked line, after the entier quotiente, and the divisor,
right under the same remain, with a line between them both, as in this
division followyng, where there remains. 3. in the last work of the same.
And we shall see what the same does signify, when we shall treat of
fractions, or broken nombers. ^

In sum, all the whole practice of division, may be kept in remembrance by
three letters, that is to say: S. M. A which three letters do signify to
seek, to multiply, to abate.

First, I must seek how many times the divisor is contained in the higher
number: then, by the quotiente (which I find) I must multiply the divisor:
finally, I must abate the producte of that multiplicacion, from the higher
number to the same correspondent, that is to say: out of the diuide^de
aunsweryng to the divisor.

And further, besides this kind of woorkyng in division. The which is reguler
and common: I will here put an other manner of woorkyng very easy. The which
shall serve for such diuisio^s as are difficil to be wrought. That is to
wit, when the number to be divided is very great, and the divisor great
also, and it shall serve again for to avoid error in supputacion, and for
the placyng of fewer figures in the quotiente: and consequently it shall save
much labor unto the^, which as yet have not much studied in this art. The
practice whereof is thus, as follows.

I have to divide. 7894658. by 643. In the first place, you shall understand,
that although the first figure of the divisor toward your left hand, may
be found many times in the higher number, as. 10. times, 12. times or more:
yet is it so, that you must never put but one figure only at a time in your
quotient.

And thus you shall at no time put any number in your quotient, which
exceadeth the figure of. 9. that is to say, any number being greater then 9.
for to come then unto your practice, write done your diuisour one time: and
behind it toward your right hand, draw a line down straighte, and right
against the same divisor behind the line put this figure. 1. Then double your
said diuisour, and right against the same (being doubled) put behind the
line the figure of. 2. After add unto the same number (which you doubled)
your said diuisour, and right against the same producte, behind the line
put the figure of 3. And unto this third producte, you must add again
your divisor: and right against the same producte, behind the line set the
figure. 4. And this must you do, until you come to the figure of. 9: in
such sort that every of the productes do surmounte so much his former
noumber, as all the diuisoure does amounte unto: placyng at the right side of
every producte behind the line, the noumber which signifies how much he is
in order. That is to say, right against the fifte producte, you must put.
5. right against the sixte producte, you must put. 6: and so likewise of all
the other.

Example of the diuisour proponed, 643. first, I write down. 643. and right
against the same behind the ^ line, I put. 1. secondly, I double 643. and they
make. 1286. and right against him behind the line I put. 2.

Thirdly, unto that same. 1286. I add the divisor. 643. and they are 1929. and
right against the same I set. 3. Fourthly, unto the said 1929. I add the
divisor. 643. and they are 2572. and right against the same I put. 4. And
thus must you do always by encreasyng so much every producte, as the
divisor does amount unto, until you have so done nine times, as you see in
this present table.

This being dooen, you must set down your divisor under the diuidende,
after the same manner as is before declared: that is to say. 643. under the
three first figures of the diuidende, toward your right hand, which are.
789: Then must you seek how many times. 643. are contained in. 789: And for to
know the same, I look in my foresaied table, if I may there find the same
nombers. 789. the which is not there: The refore I must take a lesser number,
the nereste to it in quantity, that I can find in the table, the which is.
643. which number has against it on the right hand of the line this diget.
1. Then I take the said. 1. and I put it behind the crooked line, for the first
figure of the quotiente.

Then I do abate. 643. from. 789 and there remains. 146. the which I put
over the. 789. and I cancel the. 789. and thus is the first operacion ended.
Then I set forewarde the diuisour, one figure nerer to my right hand, and I
seek a new quotient, as I sought this, where I find the higher number over
my diuisour to be. 1464. The which I do seek in the table, and because I
can not find it there, I take a lesser number, the nigh^st to it that I can
find, and that is. 1286: which number has against it this digette. 2. I
put. 2. for the second figure of the quotient behind the line, and I do
abate. 1286. from. 1464. and there remains. 178

Thirdly, I remone forward the divisor, as before, and I find the higher
number to be. 1786. and that the next lesser number to it in my table, is
again. 1286. I put the refore ones again. 2. in the quotient for the third
figure: and I abate. 1286. from. 1786. and there remains. 500.

Fourthly, I set forward the divisor and the higher number over it, is. 5005
and the next lesser number to it in my table is. 4501. right against the which
noumber is. 7. I put. 7. in the quotiente, for the fowerth figure. And after
that I have abated. 4501. from 5005. there remains. 504.

Finally, I remove forward my divisor unto the last place: and I find the
higher number to be. 5048. And the next lesser noumber to it in my table, is.
4501. I set. 7. again in the quotient, for the fifte and last figure. Then
I take. 4501. from. 5048. and there remains. 547. which must be put at the
end of the whole quotieute with the divisor under it, and a line between them,
in this manner following. ^

The sum of division.
WHen you would divide any number by. 10. you must take away the last figure
next toward your right hand, and the rest shall be the quotient. As if you
would divide. 46845 by 10. take away the. 5. and then. 4684. shall be the
quotiente, and the. 5. shall be the number that does remain. Likewise when you
would divide any number by. 100. take away the two last figures toward
your right hand, and if you would divide by. 1000 take away three figures, if
by. 10000. take away four figures. And so of all other, when the first figure
of the divisor toward the left hand, shall be only. 1. and the rest of the
same diuisour being but ryphers.

Here follows the proofs of addition, substraction, multiplication, and
division.
The proof of addition.
WHen you would prove, whether your addition boe well made, consider the
figures of the numbers, which be added, every one in his simple value: not
having any regard to the place where he stands, but to reckon him as though
he were alone by himself, and then reckon them all, one after an other, casting
away fram them the number of 9. as often as you may.

And after your discourse made, keep in mind the same figure which remains
after the nines be taken away, or set the same in a void place at the upper
end of a line. For if your addition be well made, the like figure will
remain, after that you have taken away all the nines, out of the totalle
sum of the same addition, as often ^ as you may there find any: as in this
addition which here you se. There remains. 2. for each part

The proof of substraction.
Add the number which you do substracte, with that number which remains
after the substraction is made: and if the total sum of that addition, be
like unto the number from the which the substraction was made, you have dooen
well, otherwise not: as in this example does appear, ^ where you see the
number which is to be subtracted, is. 3584. and the number which does
remain, is 1879. the which two sommes being added together, do make 5463.
which is like to the higher number, out of the which the substraction was made,
as before is sated.

The proof of multiplication.
THe proof of multiplication, is made by the help of division, for if you
divide the number produced of the multiplication, by the multiplier: you shall
find the higher number, which is the multiplicande.

The proof of division.
TO know if your division be well made: you must multiply all the quotiente by
your divisor, and if any thing remained after your division was made. The same
shall you add unto the producte, which comes of the multiplication: and you
shall find the like number unto your diuidende if you have well divided:
otherwise not

Of progression, the vi. Chapter.
PRogression Arithmeticall, Progression Arithmeticalle.
is a brief and spedie assemblyng, or addyng together of diverse figures or
numbers, every one surmountyng the other continually, by equal difference: as 1.
2. 3. 4. 5. etc. here the diffrence, from the first to the second is but of 1.
and so do all the other, every one excede an other by. 1. still to the end. Like
ways. Here 2. 4. 6. 8. etc. do proceade by the difference of. 2. also. 3. 6.
9. 12. etc. do every one differ from other by. 3. and so may these nu^ters
continue. Infinitty after this order, in addyng unto the thirds number, the
quantity wherein the second does differ from the first: like wates addyng the
same difference unto the fowerth number, also to the fifte, and so unto all the
other. As. 14. the difference of the second to the first is. 3: add. 3.
unto. 4: and they are. 7. for the third number: Then add. 3. unto. 7: and
they make. 10. for the fowerth number, and so of all other.

Then if you will add quickly the number of any progression, you shall do
thus, first tell how many numbers there are, and write their sum down by it
self, as in this example, 2. 5. 8. 11. 14. where the numbers are 5 as you may
see, therefore you must set down. 5. in a place alone, as I 5.
have dooen here in the margent.

Then shall you add the first number, and the last together, which in this
example are. 14. and. 2. and they make. 16. take half thereof, which is. 8.
and multiply it by the. 5. which I noted in the margente, for the number of
the places, and the sum which amounts of that multyplication, is the just
sum of all those figures added together, as in this example: 8. multiplied
by. 5. do make. 40. and that is the sum of all the figures.

An other example of parcelles that are even, as thus. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. in
this example you must likewaies note down the number of the places, as before
is taught, and the^ add together the last number and the first. And the sum
which comes of that addition, shall you multiply by half the number of the
places, which before are noted, and that, which resulteth of the same
multiplication, is the whole sum of al those figures, as in this former
example, where the number of the places is 6. I note the 6. apart, and then I
add 6.
6. and 1. together, which are the last and first nombers, and they make. 7.
the which I multiply by. 3. which is half the number of places, and they
make. 21. and so much amounts all those figures added together.

Progression Geometrical is, when Progression. geometrical.
the second number contains the first in any proporcion. 2. 3. or. 4. times
and so forth. And in like proporcion shall the third number contain the
second, and the fowerth, the third, and the first the fowerth. etc. As. 2. 4.
8. 16. 32. 64. here the proportion is double.

Likewaies. 3. 9. 27. 81. 243. are in triple proportion.

And. 2. 8. 32. 128. 512. are in proporcion quadruple.

That is to say, in the first example, where the proporcion is double, every
number contains the other. 2. times. In the second example of triple
proporcion, the noumbers exceade each other three times. And in the third
example, the nombers exceade each other four times, and thus you se that
progression Arthmeticalle, differs from Progression Geometricalle for that,
that in y^ Arithmeticall. The excess is only in quantity, but in the
Geometrical, the excess is in proporcion.

Now if you will easelie find the sum of any soche nombers, you shall do
thus, consider by what noumber they be multiplied, whether by. 2. 3. 4. 5. or
any other, and by the same number you must multiply the last sum in the
progression. And from the producte of the same multiplication, you shall abate
the first number of the progression. And that which remains of the said
multiplicacion, you shall divide by. 1. less then was the number, by the which
I did multiply. And the quotient shall show you the so^me of all the nombers
in any Progression. As in this exaumple. 5. 15. 45. 135. 405. which are in
triple proporcion: now must you multiply. 405. by. 3. and they are. 1215.
from the which you shall abate the first number of the progression, which is.
5. and there rests 1210. the which you shall divide by the number less by.
1. then by the which you did multiply, that is to say, by. 2. and you shall
find in the quocie^t 605. which is the total sum of the no^bers of that
progression. Likewise. 4. 16. 64. 256. 1024. which are in proportion
quadruple: therefore multiply 1024. by. 4. and thereof comes 4096. from the
which abate the first number. 4. and there rests. 4092: the which you must
divide by. 3. and you shall find in your quotient. 1364 which is the total
sum of that progression, and this shall be sufficient for progression.

The.vij. Chapter treats of the Rule of. 3. called the golden Rule.
THE rule of three is the chiefest, the most profitable, and the most
excellent rule of all the rules of Arithmetike. For all other rules have need
of it, and it passes all the other, for the which cause it is said, that the
Philosophers did name it the golden rule. And after others opinion and
judgment, it is called the rule of proportions of nombers. But now in these
days, by us it is called the rule of three, be cause it requires three
nombers in his operacion. Of the which three nombers, the two first are set
in a certain proportion. And in such proportion as they be stablished, this
rule serves to find out unto the third number, the fourth number to him
proportioned, in such sort as the seeonde is proportioned unto the first. Not
for that, that the four noumbers, nor yet the three, are or be proportional,
or set in one proportion, but such proportion, as is from the first to the
second, ought to be from the third unto the fowerth, that is to sat, if the
second noumber do contain the first, two times or more, so many times
shall the fourth number contain the third. And note well that the first
noumber, and the third in every rule of three, ought and must be always
semblable, and of one condition. And the second number, and the fowerth must
likewise be of one semblaunce and nature.

And are dissemblaunte, and contrary to the other two noumbers: that is to
say to the first, and the third. And if you do multiply the first by the
fowerth. And the second noumber by the third. The two multiplications will
be egall. Likewise if you divide the one sembleaunte by the other, that is to
say, the third noumber by the first. And likewise the one dissembleaunt by
the other: that is to say, the fowerth number by the second (which are
dissembleaunt to the other two nombers) your two quocientes will be egall

The style of this rule in thus, you Regul.
must set down your three noumbers in a certain order, as by example here
under shall appear. And then multiply the third noumber, by the second. And
the producte thereof you must divide by the first noumber, or otherwise,
divide the first noumber by the second. And the quocient thereof shall be
divisor also unto the third number that is to say, the third number shall be
divided by the quotient of the foresaied division, that is of the first
noumber divided by the second. Or otherwise divide the second noumber by the
first. And that which comes into your quotiente, you shall multiply it by
the third number. And thus shall you have the fowerth noumber, which you seek
for.

Example.
IF, 8. be worth. 12. what are 14. worth after the rate, or else if. 8.
require. 12. for his proportional, what will. 14. demand? The which three
noumbers may conveniently be set in soche order, as hereafter does appear.

If. 8.-12.-14. multiply the third number. 14. by the second, which is. 12.
And thereof comes (for the whole producte of this multiplication. 168. the
which (as the rule teaches) you must divide by the first number, that is to
say by. 8. and thereof comes. 21. And so much are the 14. worth. This is
the way, which is most used.

Otherwise divide. 8. by. 12. which you can not do, for they are 8/72.
wherefore abreuie. 8/12. and they are 2/9. for your quotient, then divide the
third number. 14. by the said, and you shall have. 21. as before. Orels
divide the second number. 12. by the first number. 8. thereof comes. 1. the
which 1 you shall multiply by 14. and thereof will come. 21. as is above
said, and thus must you do of all other. And although, that the no^bers of
this rule may be found in three differences, for sometimes they are whole
nombers and broken together, sometimes broken and broken together, and somtymes
all whole nombers, if they be whole nombers, you must do none otherwise,
then you did in the last era^ple. But in case they be broken noumbers, or
broken and whole noumbers together, the manner and way to do them, recetueth
a certain variacion, and difficultee, according to the variety of the
noumbers, the which operation easeiy to do, and unvariable, this rule teaches.

The three noumbers being sotte down, according unto the order of the whole
noumbers aforesaied, without any broken number, let. 1. be put always
underneath every whole number, with a line between them fractio^ wise, as thus
8/1. and that. 1. is denominatour to every soche whole number. When you have
whole number and broken, they must be reduced and added with their broken
number, and if there be broken number without any whole number, the same broken
must remain in their estate.

A Rule.
This being deen, you shall multiply the denominatour of the first number,
by the numeratour of the second, and the producte thereof again by the
numerator of the third number. And so shall you have the diuidende, or number
which must be divided, then multiply the numeratour of the first number, by
the denominator of the second, and the product thereof by the denominator of
the third number, and that which comes of this multiplication shall be your
divisor. Then divide the number, which is to be divided, by the diuisour, and
you shall find the fowerth number that you seek. Of the which manner and
fashions of the rule of. 3. are diverse kinds, whereof the first is of. 3. whole
nombers, as was the last example, and here follows the second

If. 15. pounds do buy me two clothes, how many clothes will. 300. pou^des
buy me of the same pr^e, that the two clothes did cost, set down your three
nombers thus.

Lib: Clothes. Lib.

^ And tha^ as you see, multiply y^ third number, which is. 300. l^. by. 2.
which is the second number, and thereof comes 600. the which. 600. you must
divide by the first number. 15. and you shall find in your quocie^t 40. which
is. 40. clothes, and so many clothes shall I buy for. 300.l. as appears by
practice here above written. And here you must mark that the first number and
the third in this question be of one denominacio^, and like wise the second
and the fowerth which you have found are of one semblaunce: but in case that
the first number and the third in any question: be not of like denominacion,
you must in workyng bring them into one, as in this example following. If. 12.
nobles do gain me 6. nobles, how many nobles will. 48. pounds gatne me: Here
you se that y^ denominacio^ of the first number is nobles, and the denominacion
of the third, is pounds, wherefore, before you do proceed to work by the
rule of three, you must first turn the pou^des into nobles in multipliyng.
48. pounds by three nobles and they make. 144. nobles, for that there is in
every pound of money. 3. nobles, or otherwise if you will, you may bring the
first number being. 12 nobles, into pounds, by dividing the^ by. 3. and thus
shall your first and third nombers, be brought into one denominacion. Then shall
you set down your. 3. nombers in order thus.

If. 12. nobles do gain me. 6. nobles, what shall. 144. nobles gain? the
which. 144. are the nobles which are in. 48. (...). Then multiply the third
number. 144. by the second number 6. and thereof comes 864. the which you
must divide by. 12. nobles, and thereof comes. 72. nobles.

But here it may perchance make some men mass, to see all the three
nombers in this rule of three, to be of one denomination, which can not
otherwise be dooen, if you reduce the third number, to the denominacion of the
first. But if you will reduce the first number, to the denomination of the
third, that is to say the. 12. nobles into pounds, then shall the first and
the third nombers only agree in one denominacion, and the fowerth number which
you seek, shall be of the same denominacion as is the second, as in the former
example. If. 12. nobles do yield me. 6. nobles, what will. 48. pounds yield
me: first you shall divide 12. nobles by three to bring them in pounds, and
they shall be like to the third number, which is also pounds, then will
they stand thus. ^

There is yet a more exact way to work in this rule of three, which is
thus. You must mark if the third and first nombers in the rule of three, may
be both divided by one like divisor: the which after you have divided the^,
you shall write down each of the quocientes orderly, in the said rule of. 3.
every one of them in his own place, as though those were two of the no^bers
of your question, and not chaungyng the middle noumber, that is to say the
second, as thus, if. 50. Croudes do buy me. 44. yardes of clothe, how many
yardes shall I have for 120, here you may see that the third and the first
nombers, may be divided by. 10. which in the third number is. 12. times, and
in the first. 5. times. Wherefore you shall put. 12. for the third number in
the rule of three* instead of 120. and 5. for the first number instead of 50.
and let. 44. remain still in the midst for the second number, after this
sort as follows, and then work by the rule as before. ^

Multiply. 44. by. 12. and thereof comes. 528. divide the same. 528. by 5.
and you shall find in your quocient 105.. and eue^ so many yardes should you
have found, if you had wrought the rule of three, by the first no^bers
proposed. There is yet certain other varieties, in woorkinge by the rule of
three, but for that they require the knowledge of fractions, and because they
are not so east as this first way, which is common, therefore content your
selves with this same, until you have tasted the fractions, the which by gods
help I intend to fet forth in second part of this book, incontinently after
that I have first taught you the backer rule of three.

The backer rule of three is so called: because it requires a contrary woorkyng
to that, which does the rule of three direct, where of we have now
treated. For in the direct rule of three the greater the third noumber is, so
much the greater will the fourth be. But here in this backer rule it is
contrariwise, for the greater the third number is, so much lesser will the
fowerth be. Then, where as in the rule of. 3. direct, the third noumber is
multiplied by the second, and the producte thereof divided by the first. Here
you must multiply the second noumber by the first, and divide the producte
of the same by the third, and the number which comes in the quotiente,
answers to the question. For such practice comes often times in use: In
such sort, that if you work the same by the rule of three direct (not
having a regard unto the Proposition of the question) you should then commit
an euidente and open error.

Example.
If. 15. shillynges worth of Wine will serve for the ordinary of. 46 men when
the Tonne of Wine is worth 12. pounds: for how many men will the same. 15.
shillynges suffice, when the Tonne of Wine is worth but. 8. pounds? It is
certain, that the lower the price is, that the Tonne of Wine does cost, and
so many more persons will the said. 15. shillynges in Wine suffice. Therefore
set down your nombers thus, if. 12. pounds suffice. 46. men, how many will.
8. pounds suffice, you must multiply 46. by. 12. and thereof comes. 552.
the which. 552. you shall divide by. 8. and thereof comes. 69. and unto 69.
men will the said. 15. shillynges worth in Wine suffice, when the Tonne of
Wine is worth but eight pounds, as hereafter does appear by practice. ^

Likewise, a messenger makes a journey in. 24. days, when the day is but,
12. hours long: how many days shall he be upon the same journey, when the day
is. 16 hours in length? Here you must perceive, that the more hours are in a
day, the fewer days will the messenger be in going his iouruey. Therefore
write down your no^bers thus, as here you may se. ^

And then multiply 24. days by. 12 hours, and thereof comes. 288. divide
the same. 288. by the third number. 16. and you shall find 18. the which is.
18. days, and in so many days will the messenger make his journey when the
day is. 16. hours long.

Likewise, when the Bushel of wheat does cost. 3. shillynges, the penie
loaf of bread waieth. 4. lib.

I demand what the same penie loaf shall weye, when the bushel of wheat is
worth but two shillynges: here is to be considered, that the better cheap
the Wheat is, the heavier shall the penny loaf wiie, and therefore write
down your. 3. nombers, thus. ^

Then multiply. 4. lib. which is the second number, by the first number 3.
and they make. 12. the which. 12 you shall divide by the third number. 2. and
thereof comes. 6. lib. and so much must the penie loaf of bread way,
when the bushel of wheat is worth but two shillynges, as may appear.

And now, according to my former promise, shall follow the second part of
Arithmeticke, which teaches the workyng by Fractions.

Here ends the first part of Arithmeticke.
The second part of Arithmeticke, which treats of Fractions or broken
nombers.
The first Chapter treats of Fractions, or broken nombers, and the
difference thereof.
BRoken number is as much as a part or many parts of one, whereof there are
two noumbers with a line between them both: That is to say, the one which is
above the line, is call led the numerator. And the other underneath the line, is
called the denominator: as by example, three quarters, which must be set
down thus, 4: whereof. 3. which is the higher number above the line, is
called the numerator, and. 4. which is under the line is called the
denominator. And it is al ways convenient, that the numerator be less in
number, then the denominator. For if the numerator, and the denominator were
egall in value: then should they represente a whole number, thus, as 1/1, 2/2,
3/3, which are whole nombers: by reason that the numerators of these, and al
such like may be divided by their denominators, and their quotie^tes will
always be but. 1. But in case that y^ numerator do excede his denominator,
then it is more then I whole: as 20/18, is more tha^ a whole number by 2/18,
other diffinition does not hereunto appertain. Furthermore it is to be
understand, that the midst of all broken nombers, is the just half of. 1.
whole, as 5/12, 7/14, 8/16, 9/18 and other like, are the halfes of one whole
number, whereof does grow, and come forth 2. progressions natural: the one
progrediyng by augmentyng, or encreasyng, as these.

6/7 8/9 9./10 etc.

And they do proceade infinitely, and will never reche to make a whole number,
thus 1/1. And the other progression, does progrede by diminishyng or
decreasyng, as thus.

1/7 1/9 1/10 etc.

And these do proceade infinitely, and shall never come to make a.. which
signifies nothing, but shall ever reiaine some certain number whatsoever,
whereby it does appear that broken nombers are infinite.

The second Chapter treats of the reducyng or bringyng together of two
nombers, or many broken dissemblyng, unto one broken semblyng.
REduction, is as much as to bring together, or to put in sembleaunce, two or
many noumbers dissembling one from the other, in reducyng them unto a common
denominator. For because the diversity and difference of the broken numbers,
do come of the denominators part, or of diverse denominators, and for the
understanding hereof, there is a general rule whose operation is thus. Multiple
the Denominators the one by the other, and so you shall have a new denominator
common to al, the which denominator divide by the particular denominators, and
multiplye every quotie^t by his numerator and so you shall have new
numerators, for the numbers which you would reduce, as appears by this
example followyng.

Reduction in common denomination.
IF you will reduce 3/3 and together, you must first multiply 1.
the. 2. denominators the one by the other, that is to say 3. by 5. makes 15.
which is your common denominator, that set under the cross, ^ then divide.
15. by the denominator 3 and you shall have 5. which multiply by the numerator.
2. and you shall find 10. set that over the. and they are 10/11 for the..
Afterward divide. 15. by the denominator. 5. and thereof comes 3. the
which multiply by the numerator. 4. and you shall find 12. which set over
the head of the.. and they make. 12/15. for the.: as appears more plainer in
the margent.

If you will reduce,,,, together, you must multiply all the denominators, the
one by the other, that is to say, 2. by. 3. makes. 6. then. 6. by 4. and
mounteth. 24. Last of all. 24. by. 6. and thereof comes. 144. for the common
denominator. Then, for the first divide. 144. by the denominator. 2. and
thereof comes. 72. the which multiply by the numerator 1. and it is still
72. set that over the and it is 27/144, for the: Then divide 144 by the second
denominator 3. and thereof comes 48: the which multiply by the second
numerator 2. and they are 96. which set over the and they make 96/144, for
the: Then divide 144. by the third denominator 4. and thereof comes 36. the
which multiply by the third numerator 3. and they make 108. which set
over the. and they are 108/144 for the 5/4.

Finally divide. 144. by the last denominator. 6. and thereof comes 24: the
which multiply by the last numerator 5. and thereof commet 120 Which set
over the.. and they are 120/144, for the, as appears here by pratise.

The example.
^

Reduction of broken nombers of broken.
IF you will reduce the broken 3.
of broken together, as thus, the of of, you must multiply the numerators the
one by the other, to make one broken number, of three broken nombers, that is
to say. 2. by. 1. makes. 2. and then. 2. by 4. makes 8. which is your
numerator. Then ^ multiply the Denominators, the one by the other, that is to
say. 3. by 4. makes. 12. and then 12. by. 5. makes. 60. for your
denominator, set. 8. over. 60. with a line between them, and they be. 1/60.
which being abreuied, are. 2/15. and so much are the. of. 5/4. of.. as
appears in the margent.

An other example of the same reduction, and of the second reduction.
IF you will reduce.. of. 5/4. of. the 5/4. of 5/7: and the. of the. of the..
of the.. First, it behooves you of every party of the broken no^bers, to make
of each of them one broken, as by the third reduction is taught: That is to
say, in multipliyng the numerators by numerators, and denominators by
denominators: first, for the first part, which is. of. of, you must as is
said before, multiply. 2 by. 1. and then by. 4. and you shall have. 8. for the
numerator, likewise multiply. 3. by. 4. and the producte by. 5. and you shall
have. 60. for the denominator, so they make. 8/60. which being abreuied, are
2/15 for the first part, that is to say, for the of (...) of, secondly for
the of 5/7 multiply likewise the numerator. 3. by. 5 makes. 15. for the
numerator, and multiply. 4. by. 7. makes. 28. for the denominator, and then
they be. 15/28. for the second part, that is to say, for the of 5/7.
Thirdly, for the of of of. multiply the numerators the one by the other, that is
to say. 1. by. 1. and then by. 2. and last by. 1. and all makes but 2 for
the numerator, likewise multiply. 2. by. 2. makes. 4. and 4. by 3. makes.
12. and then. 12. by. 3. makes. 36. for the denominator, and they are 2/36,
which being abreuied makes 1/18. for the third part, that is to say, for
of the. of of. Last of al, take the 2/15 the 15/28. and the 1/18. and reduce
them according to the order of the second reduction, and you shall find
1000/7^60. for the 2/15. And 4050/^500 for the 15/28. And 426/7560 for 1/18:
and thus are broken nombers of broken, reduced, as appears by by practice. ^

Reduction of broken nombers, and the parts of broken together.
IF you will reduce. and the of. together, to bring them into one broken
number, you must first set down the. and. as appears in the margent with
a cross between ^ them, and then multiply the two denominators. The one by
the other, that is to say, 2. by 3. makes. 6 set that under the cross, then
multiply the first numerator, one by the last denominator two, and that
makes. 2. unto the which add the last numerator one, and they be three,
which set above your cross, so you shall find that the and the of ^/3. do
make 3/6. which being abreuied does make, which is as much as the.. and the..
of.. Likewise if you will reduce the, and the. of. you must do as before, set
down the and with a cross between the^, and then multiply the two
denominators, the one by the other, that is to say. 3. by. 4 makes. 12.
which set under the cross ^ as you see in the margent, and then multiply the
first numerator 2 by the last denominator. 4. and thereof comes. 8.
whereunto add the last numerator. 1. and that makes: 9. which set over
the cross, so shall you find that the. and the of are worth 9/^, which
abreuied, do make, as appears by example in the margent.

Reduction of whole nombers and broken together into a Fraction.
IF you will reduce whole number 6.
with broken, you must bring the whole number into broken, as by this example
may appear: reduce 17. into a broken number, first you must multiple the
whole number. 17. by the denominator of the broken, which is. 8. in saying. 8.
times. 17. do mass. 136. unto the which you must add the numerator of.
which is. 5. and al amounts to. 141. which set over. 8. with a line
between them, and they will be 141/8 so much is. 17.. worth in a fraction,
as it appears here by practice. ^

In case you have whole number and broken to be reduced, with broken you must
bring the whole number into his broken, in multiplyinge it by the denominator
of the broken number going therewith, and add thereunto the numerator of the
said broken number, as in the last example, and then reduce that broken
number with the other broken, as here appears by this example. Reduce 10. and
4/7 together, first bring 10 al into thirds, as by the syxt reduction, and you
shall find (...), then reduce the 32/3 and 4/7 together, by the first
reduction, and you shall find 224/21 for the 32/3: and (...) for (...) as
appears here by practice. ^

Also in case you have in both parts of your Reduction, as well whole number
as broken, you must always put the whole into their broken (as by the syxte
reduction) of either part.

Example.
If you will reduce 12. with 14. to bring them into one denomination, first
bring the 12. all into fourthes, and you shall find 49/4: then likewise
reduce 14. all into thirdes, and you shall have 4^/3, for the 14., then reduce
(...) and 44/3 together, by the order of the first Reduction, and you shall
find (...) for the (...). And (...) for the 14. as here by practice does
plainlye appear. ^

The third Chapter treats of abbreuiation of one great broken number into a
lesser broken.
ABbreuiation is as much as to set down, or to write a broken number by figures
of less signification, and not diminishing y^ value thereof. The which to
do, there is a rule whose operation is thus, divide the numerator and likewise
the denominator, by one whole number, the greatest yt you may find in the
same broken number, and of the quotient of that numerator, make it the
numerator, and likewise of that of the denominator, make it your denominator,
as by example.

1. If you will abbreuiat 54/8^, you shall understand that the greatest whole
number that you may take, by the which you may divide the numerator and
denominator is 27, which is the half of y^ numerator, and that is a whole
number, for you can not take a whole number out of the denominator. 81. but
that there will be either more or less than a whole number, therefore if you
divide 54. by 27. you shall ^ find 2. for the numerator, likewise if you
divide 81. by 27. you shall find 3. for the denominator. then put. 2. over the
3. with a line between the^, and you shall find and thus by this rule the 53/81
are abreuted unto, as appears in the margent, and so is to be understand all
other.

The form and manner how to find out the greater number, by the which you may
wholly divide, y^ numerator and denominator (to the end yt you may abreuiat them)
is thus.

First, divide the denominator by his numerator, and if any number do
remain, let your divisor be divided by the same number, and so you must
continue until you have so divided y^ there may nothing remain, then is it
to be understand, that your last divisor (whereat you did end, and that o did
remain after your last division) is the greatest number, by the which you
must abreuiat, as you did in the last example, but in case that your last
divisor be 1. it is a token that the same number can not be abreuied. Example,
of 54/81 divide 81. (which is the denomination) by 54. which is his numerator,
and there rests 27. then divide 54. by 27. and there remains nothing,
wherefore your last divisor 27. is the number, by the which you must abreuiat
54/81 as in the last example is specifyed.

An other style of abbreuiation.
2. Mediate the numerator, and also the denominator of your fraction in case
the noumbers be even, that is to say, take always the half of the numerator,
and likewise of the denominator, and of the mediatio^ or half of the
numerator, make the numerator, also of the denominator, make your denominator,
and so continue as often as you may in taking always the of the numerator,
and semblably of the denominator, or else see if you may abbreuiate the numbers
which do remain, by 3. by 4. by 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. or by 10. for you must
abbreuiate them as often as you can by any of the said numbers, and it is to
be noted, that with whatsoever number of these, you do abbreuiate the
Numerator of your Fraction, by the same you must abbreuiate likewise the
Denominator, so continuynge until they can no more be abbreuied. And it is to
be understand that if the Numerator and the Denominator be even numbers, as
you may know when the first figure is an even number, or a (...), the^ may
you perceive if both the Numerator and the Denominator may be abbreuied by 10.
by 8 by 4. or by 2. although yt some times they may be abbreuied by three.

And if they be odd numbers, then must you consider if they may be
abbreuied by 9. by 7 by. 5. or by 3: but when the first number, as well of the
Numerator, as of the Denominator are even numbers, then may you well know that
such numbers may be abbreuied be 2. as is aforesaid. And if you add the
fygures of the Numerator together, in such manner as you do in making the
proof by nine in whole Numbers: that is, if you find 9. (...) appears that
you may abb(...) that number by 9. And likewise by 3. and sometimes by 6. if
you find 6. it may be abbreuied by 6. and always by 3. if you find 3. it
is a sign that you may abreuiate by 3. And by whatsoever number that you do
abreuiate the numerator, by the same must you abreuiate likewise the
denominator, and if the first figures of the same number be. 5. or 0. you may
abreuiate them by 5. but if the first fygures be both 0. they may be abreuied
by 10. in cutting away the two Ciphers thus, as (...) which makes 2/^, and
sometimes by 100. thus, as (...) in cutting away the four ciphers after this
sort, (...) and then the 100/200 do make, and after this manner have I set
here diverse examples, although that all numbers cannot be abreuied by this
rule, that is to say, all those which may be well abreuyed by the first
rule aforesaid. ^

3. Furthermore you shall understand that sometimes it happens, that all the
fygures of the numerator are egall unto them of the denominator, which when it
so happens, you may the^ take one of them of the numerator, and also one of
them of the denominator, and it shall be abreuyed as 555/888, being
abreuiated after this manner comes to. And yet it happens sometimes, that
two, or many fygures of the numerator are proportioned unto two, or many
fyguree of their denominators and the other fygures of the same number do
behold the one the other in this proportion? Then may you take two or many
fygures, as well of the numerator as of the denominator, and by this manner the
same number shall be abbreuied, as 4747/(...) which being abbreuied by this
rule, do come to (...).

4. Also it happens sometimes that you would abbreuiate one number unto the
semblaunce or likeness of another. And for to know if the same may by
abbreuied, and also by what number it may be abbreuied, you must divide the
numerator of the one number, by the numerator of the other, and likewise the
denominator of the one, by the denominator of the other, for in case that after
every division there do remain 0. and that the two quotiens be (...) all,
then is one of them the number by the which the said fraction must be
abbreuied, as by example of 11^/(...). I would know if they may be abbreuied
unto 5/9, and for to do this, you must divide 115. by 5. and you must divide
207. by 9. and there will come into both the quotients 23. by the which it
appears that this number may be abbreuied by 23. ^

The 4. Chapter treats of the assembling of two or many broken numbers
together, as by example.
FOr to add broken numbers together, there is a general rule, which is thus,
if the numbers be unlike yt one to the other, you must reduce the^ into a
common denomination, which after you have reduced the^, you must then add
both y^ numerators together, and set y^ product of the said addition over the
cross, and divide the same by the common denominator, as by this example
folowinge.

1. If you will add with, you must first reduce the two fractions both into
one denomination, according to the introduction of the first reduction, that
is to say, in multiplyinge the denominator of the first fraction which is 3,
by the denominator of the other fraction which is four, and they make 12. for
your common denominator, ^ the which 12. set under the cross, the^ multiply
yt first numerator 2. by the last denominator 4. and thereof comes 8. which
set over the, and then multiply y^ last numerator 3. by the first denominator
3. and thereof comes 9. which you must set over the, then add the numerator
8. with the numerator 9. and they make 17. which set over the cross, and then
your fraction will be 17/12 which is the addition of the with. And because
your numerator 17. is greater tha^ his denominator 12. therefore you must divide
17. by 12. and thereof will come 1. and 5. remaining, which 5. are worth ^/12,
and so much are the added with as does appear.

Addition in broken. numbers.
2. Also if you will add,,,, together, you must first add the (...) and
together, according to the doctrine of the last rule, and you shall find
7/6: then add and together by the said last chapter, and they make (...).
Then finally add the 7/6 (which came of the and added together) with 31/20,
and you shall find by the foresaid addition that they amounte unto 326/120,
Wherefore divide 326. by 120. and thereof comes 2. and 86. remains which is
86/120 of one whole, and they being abreuied do make 43/60: and thus the,,,,
added together do amount to 2. 4^/^^, as here under does appear. ^

Addition of broken numbers of broken.
3. Furthermore, if you will add the broken numbers of broken together, as to
add the of of with the of of (...): first you must reduce the numbers
according to the order of y^ fourth reduction, in multiplying the numerator of
the first 3. fractions, the one by the other, and of the producte make your
numerator, and likewise you must multiply y^ de nominators of the foresaid
three fractions, the one by the other and of the product make your denominator,
and you shall find 24/60 for the first three broken numbers, which being
abbreuied do make, then reduce the other 3. fractio^s, by the said fourth
reduction, in multiplyinge the numerators by numerators, and denominators, by
denominators, as you did by the first 3. broken numbers, and you shall find
25/96 then must you add y^ which came of the first 3. broken numbers, and
25/56 which are of the last 3. fractions, both together, by the instruction of
y^ first addition and you shall find 317/480 which cannot be abreuied, but is
the product of y^ addition: so much are the of of added with the of (...) of
as hereafter by practice does evidently appear. ^

Addition of broken number the parts of broken together.
4. Likewise if you will addde the, and the of with the and ^/4 of (...), you
must reduce the 11/32 by the fyft reduction and thereof comes 3/6 for the
(...) and (...), of one of the said thirdes, then reduce the and by the said
fifth reduction, and thereof comes (...).

Last of all add the and 17/20 together according to the first rule of
addition, and you shall find 20^/(...) which being divided brings 1. and
(...) part remaining, which abrouied makes 41/60 and thus you do perceive
that the 2/1 and (...) added with the and do amounte unto 1. (...) as
hereafter by practice does plainly appear. ^

Addition of whole number and broken together.
5. Also if you will add. 12.. with 20., you may (if you will) add. 1^. and.
20. together, and they make. 32. and then add the two broken nombers
together, that is to say, and, by the order of the first addition, and they
make 49/(...): therefore divide 49. by (...), and thereof comes 1. and (...)
parts remain, which. 1. you must add unto the. ^2 and the whole addition
will be. 33 (...), or otherwise, you may reducte 12.. into the likeness of a
fraction by the sixth reduction, and they will be (...), and likewise by
the same reduction, reduce. 2(...), and they be (...), then add (...) with the
(...), by the first addition, and you shall find. (...). Therefore divide
^^09. by. ^0, and thereof comes (...). as before, and as by practice of
the same both the ways, does here under appear. ^

The.v. Chapter treats of Substraction in broken nombers.
IF you will substracte from 2/4 you must first reduce both the fractions
into a common denomination by the first reduction, and you shall find 8/12 for
the, and 9/12 for the. Therefore abate the numerator 8. from the numerator 9.
and there remains 1/12 as may appear here by practice. ^

2. But if you have a broken number, to be subtracted from a whole number,
you must borow one of the whole number, and resolve it into a fraction of like
denomination, as is the fraction, which you would abate from the same whole
number, and then abate the said fraction there from, and you shall find what
does remain, as by this example. If you abate from. 8. you must borowe out of
the said. 8. and resolve it into fiftes like unto the fraction, because it is
4. fiftes, that. 1. will be 5. fiftes thus 5/5. therefore abate. from 5/5. and
there will remain, and substract that. 1. which you borrowed from 8. and there
does remain. 7. and also the. Thus the being subtracted from. 8. does leave.
7., as by practice does plainly appear ^

3. If you will substract broken number, from whole number, and broken being
together: thus, as if you would substract. from. 6., you may by the first
substraction, abate. from, and there will remain 1/12, and the 6. does still
remain whole, because that 5/4. being abated from. 6.. leaves. 6. 1/12. as
appears by practice. ^

Likewise if you will abate, from 14., you must first reduce. 14.. all into
fiftes by the. 6. reduction, and they be (...), then reduce. into a common
denomination, by the first reduction, and you shall find 10/15. for the: and
21^/15 for the 70/5: then substracte the numerator. 10. of the first fraction,
from the numerator. 216. of the second fractio^, and there remains 206/15.
Therefore divide 206. by. 15. and thereof comes 13.11/15, and so much remain
of this substraction, as may appear. ^

4. If you will substracte whole number and broken, from whole and broken, as
thus, if you will substract. 9. from. 20.. you must reduce. 9.. into fowerthes,
and likewise the. 20. into halfes by the sixth reductio^: and you shall find
37/4 for the. 9.. And 42/2. for the 20. ^/2. Then reduce 57/4 and 31/2 into one
denominatio^, according unto the first reduction and you shall find 74/8 for
the 37/4, and ^64/^ for the 41/2 tha^ abate the numerator of ^65/8 and there
remains 90/8 then divide 90. by 8. and thereof comes 11. which is the
remain of this substraction. ^

Substraction of broken nombers of broken.
5. If you will substracte, the of of. from the. of. of, you must first bring
the. of. of. into one fraction by the. 3. reduction, and the of of likewise
into one fraction by the same reduction, and you shall find 6/30. for the
first. 3. broken nombers, which being abreuied do make.: and for the other
3. broken nombers, you shall find 105/192: which being likewise abreuted do
make 35/64. then you shall substracte. from. 35/64. by the instruction of the
first substraction, in reducyng both the fractions into a common
denomination, as before is dooen, and you shall find remainyng (...)/3^0, as
may appear by example. ^

The sixth Chapter is of multiplication in broken nombers.
First, for to multiply in broken number, there is a rule, which is thus,
multiply the numerator of the one fraction, by the numerator of the other. And
then divide that fraction if you may, or else abreuiate it, and you have do^en:
but if there be whole number and broken together, you must reduce the whole
nombers into broken, and add thereunto the numerator of his broken, and then
multiply, as is before said, as also hereafter by examples shall more plainly
appear.

1. If you will multiply by, you must multiply the numerator. 2. by the
numerator. 3. and thereof comes 6. for the numerator. Likewise multiply the
denominators the one by the other, that is to say. 3. by. 4. and thereof
comes. 12. for the denominator, so that this multiplication comes to 6/12,
which being abreuied do make. and so much amounts the multiplicatio^ of
the. by as by practice. ^

2. Likewise, if you will multiply a broken number by whole number, or whole
number by broken, which is all one, as. by. 18 or else. 18. by, you must set.
1. under. 18. thus. 18/1: and then multiply. 18. by the numerator 4. and
thereof comes. 72. the which divide by the denominator. 5. and thereof
comes. 14.. for the whole multiplication, or otherwise abate from. 18. his
^/5. part, whithe is. 3., and there remains. 14.. as above. ^

3. Also if you will multiply a whole number, by whole number and broken, or
else whole number and broken by a whole number, which is all one. As by
example. If you will multiply. 15. by. 16.. or else. 16. by. 15 First reduce.
16 all into fourthes, in multipliyng 16. by ye deneminator of which is 4. and
thereof comes 64 whereunto add the numerator. 3. and it makes 67/4, which
multiply by 15/1, according unto thinstruction of the last example, and you
shall find ye product of this multiplicatio^ to be 251 as by practice does here
appear ^

4. And if you will multiple a broken number, by whole number and broken, or
else whole number and broken by a broken. As by example, if you will multiply.
by. 18., or else 18. by, which is all one: you must reduce the whole noumber
into his broken by the sixth reduction. And you shall find, 56/3, which you
shall multiply by the, after the doctrine of the first multiplication, that is
to say: in multipliyng the numerator. 56. by the Numerator of, which is 1. And
it is still 56. because 1. does neither multiply nor divide. And likewise you
must multiply the Denominator. 3. by the Denominatour. 4. and it makes. 12.
then divide. 56. by. 12. and thereof comes. 4.. And so much amounnteth the
multiplication of the (...).. multiplied by, as by example. ^

5. If you will multiply whole number and broken, with whole and broken, you
must first put either whole number into his broken, according to the
instruction of the sixte reduction, and (...) multiply the one numera(...) the
other, and of the producte make your numerator. And likewise multiply the
denominators, the one by the other, and thereof make the denominator, then
divide the numerator, by the denominator, and the quotient shall be the increase
of this multiplication.

Example.
If you would multiply. 12.. b(...).: first by the sixte reduction, the. 12.
will make 64/5, and the. 6.. will make 27/4 then multiply the numerator. 64.
by the numerator. 27. and thereof comes. 1728. for the numerator. And then
you must multiply the denominator. 5. by the denominator. 4. and they do
make. 20. then divide. 1728. by. 20. and thereof comes. 86.. for the whole
multiplicatio^, as by example. ^

6. If you will multiply one broken number by many broken nombers, thus: As to
multiply. by 5/7. and by 4/9: you must multiply the numerators of all the
fractions, the one by the other, and of the product make the numerator, that is
to say: 2. by. 5. and they be. 10. then. 10. by. 4. and they be 40. for the
numerator. Likewise you must multiply the denominators, the one by the other,
that is to say. 3. by. 7. makes. 21. then. 21. by. 9. makes. 189 for the
denominator: then set. 40. over the. 189. with a line between the^, and they
make 40/189. And so much amounts the whole multiplication of the, multiplied
by 3/7 and 4/9, as by example following. And thus is to be understand of all
such like. ^

The.vii. Chapter treats of division in broken nombers.
NOte, that in division of broken nombers, you must set your divisor down
first, next unto the left hand, and the diuidende or number, which is to
be divided always toward the right hand.

And then multiply cross wise, that is to say, the numeratour of your
Diuisour by the Denominator of the Diuidende, and the producte shall be the
Denominatour, which afterward shall be your Diuisour. And likewise you must
multiply the Denominatour of your first noumber, that is to say of your
Diuisour: By the Numeratour of the Diuidende, which afterward shall be the
Diuidende, and that must be set over the Cross, and the Denominatour under
the Cross, then shall you divide the Numeratour by the Denominatour, if any
may be divided, if not, you must abreuiate them, as hereafter by examples
shall more plainly appear.

1. If you will divide. by, you must set the Diuisour (which is) next to
the left hand, and the diuidende. toward your right hand, with a cross
between them: as may appear by this example in the margente. Then ^ you shall
multiply the numer at or of the, which is. 2. by the denominator of the.
which is 4. and thereof comes. 8. which shall be your new diuison: set that.
8. under the (...)osse, as the denominator, then multiply the numerator of the
diuidende, that is to say, of the which is 3. by the denominator of the
diuisour, that is to wit, of the.. which is. 3. set that over the cross, and
it is. 9. for the numerator, which shall be now the diuidende, or number to be
divided. Then finally, you shall divide. 9. by. 8. and thereof comes into the
quotient. 1. 2/8 and so often times is. contained in, as does appear before
in the margente. But in case you would divide. by., you must likewise set
your divisor next to your left hand, as is before said. And then proceed, as
is above declared, and you shall find that divided by brings into ye
quotie^t 2/9, which can not be divided nor abbreuied, wherefore it appears
that divided by brings but 2/9 of one unity into the quotient as does
appear. ^

2. Likewise if you will divide a broken number by a whole number, or else a
whole number by a broken, as to divide by 13. you shall put 1. under 13. and it
will be 13/1 which is your divisor, set yt toward ^ your left hand, and then
multiply 13. by 4. according to the first division, and thereof comes 52. for
the denominator, set that under ye cross and multiply 3. by 1. which is 3. for
the numerator, that set over the cross, and it is 3/52 as appears in the
margent. But if you will divide 13. by then set the next your left hand and
put one under 13. as in the last example, and it is ^/3 set yt toward your
right hand thus, as appears in the margent ^, and then work according to ye
doctrine of the first division, and you shall find that 13. being divided by
brings into ye quotient 52/4, then divide 52. by 3. and thereof comes 17.
^/3, and so oftentimes is contained in 13. as does appear. ^

3. And if you will divide whole number by whole number and broken, or else whole
number and broken by whole number, as to divide 20. by 5., you shall reduce 5.
into his broken by ye sixth reduction, and it makes 35/^ for your divisor, then
put 1. under 20. And it will be 20/1, then shall you multiply ^ 35. by 1. and
20. by 6. as is taught in the other divisions, and you shall find 220/3: then
divide 12. by 35. and you shall find in your quotient 3. 3/^ and so many times
is 5. ^/6 contained in 20. as in the margent does appear.

But if you will divide 5. 3/6 by 20. you must divide 35. by 120. which you can
not, wherefore you shall abbreuiate 35/120, and thereof comes. 7/24.

4. If you will divide a broken number by whole number and broken, or else a
whole number and broken, by a broken number. As to divide by 13., you must
reduce 13., into his broken, by the syxte reduction And they be 41/3 for your
divisor, then multiplye 41. by 4. and they make 164. for your denominator,
likewise multiplye 3. by 3. and they make 9. for the numerator, and then will
your su^me be 9/104. But if you will divide 13. by then you must divide 164. by
9. and you shall find 18. 2/9.

5. If you will divide whole number and broken, by whole number and broken, as
to divide 7. by 13. you must reduce the whole numbers into their broken, by the
doctrine of the sixth reduction, and you shall find 31/4 for the 7., and 41/3
for the 13.. Then set down 41/3 toward ^ the left hand because it is your
divisor, and the 31/4 toward the right hand, and multiply 41. by 4. for your
denominator, and thereof comes 164. Likewise multiply 31. by 3. for your
numerator, and it amounts to 93. the which division will be thus (...) as
before does appear.

But if you will divide 13. by 7. you must contrariwyse to the other example,
divide 164. by 93. and you shall find in the quotient 1. 71/93.

6. The broken numbers of broken, must be divided in such manner as broken
numbers are, and there is no difference, saving only that of many broken
numbers you must make but two broken numbers, that is to say ye divisor, and
the dividend, or number that is to be divided, example. If you will divide the
of of, by the 2/2 of 4/7. For the first, the of of are 9/4. by the third
reduction: and the of 4/7 are by the same Reductio^ 8/21, then have you 8/21
for your ^ divisor, and 9/40 for your number to be divided, then multiply 8.
by 40. which makes 320. set that under the cross and multiply 9. by 21: and
thereof comes 189. which set over the cross for the numerator, and they make
189/120 for this division as does appear.

But if you would divide 1/21 by 9/200. you must work contrary to the last
example, that is to say, you must divide 320. by 189. And thereof comes in
the quotient 1. 131/189.

The eight Chapter treats of duplation, triplation, and quadruplation of all
broken numbers.
IF you will double any broken number, you shall divide ye same by: likewise if
you will triple any fraction you must divide it by. And for to quadruple any
broken number, you shall divide it by, and so is to be understand of all other.

Example of duplation.
IF you will double you shall divide 3/^ by, and thereof comes 6/8, which
being abbreuied ^ are: as by example.

Or otherwise, in case the denominator of any fraction be an even number, you
may take half the said denominator, without any other operation, and the
numerator to abide still ye numerator, unto the said half of the denominator
of the Fractio^, as by the other example before rehearsed: that is to say of
(...), take of 8. which is 4. and that is the denominator, and 3. remains
still numerator to 4. and it makes and so of all other. But in case the
denominator be an odd number, that is to say, not even, then you may multiply
the numerator by 2. or else double ye numerator, which is al one thing; and
that fraction shall be doubled. Example, if you will double ^/5 you must only
multiply the numerator 3. by 2. and they be 6. which makes that fraction to
be (...), the which 6. being divided by 5. brings 1. and so much is the
double of 3/^.

Example of Triplation.
If you will triple you must divide ^/5 by ^/3 and thereof comes 9/5 which
being divided brings 1, or otherwise, because the denominator is an odd
number you may multiply the numerator 3. by 3. and therefore comes 9. which
makes (...) as before.

Example of quadruplacion.
If you will quadruple, you shall divide by and thereof comes which 16. being
divided by 5. brings 3^/5, or otherwise, because the denominator of the
fraction is an odd number, you shall multiply the numerator of the (...) that
is to say 4. by 4. and thereof comes 16. the which divide by 5. and you shall
find 3. ^/5 as before, and this suffices for duplacion, tripiacion and
quadruplacion.

The 9. Chapter treats of the proofs of broken numbers. And first of
Reduction.
IF you do abbreuiate y^ broken numbers which be reduced, you shall return
them into their first estate: as by example, if you reduce ^/5 with you shall
find 10/(...) and 12/(...), then abbreuiate 10/15 and you shall find,
abbreuiate likewise (...) and thereof comes as before.

The proof of Abbreuiation.
IF you do multiply that number which you have abbreuied by that or those
numbers, by the which you have abbreuied them, you shall return them again
into their first estate. Example, if you will abbreuiate 32/48 by 16. in
taking y^ (...) part both of the numerator, and also of the denominator, you
shall find, y^ proof is thus, you must multiplye both the numerator and
denominator of 2/^ by 16. that is to say, three by 16. makes 48. for the
denominator, and 2. by 16. makes 32. for the numerator, then set the numerator
32. over the denominator 48 and they be 32/48 as before.

The proof of Addition.
If you do substract one of the numbers, or many of them (which you have
added) from the total sum, there shall remain the other, or others; Example:
if you do add 1/^ with you shall find 7/12. The proof is, is if you
substract from 7/12 you shall find remaining the other number which is 2/4,
or else if you do substract from (...) there will remains the other number,
which is 1/^.

The proof of Substraction.
If you do adds that number which remains, with the number which you did
substract, you shall find the total sum, out of the which you made y^
abateine^t: or otherwise, if you add the two lesser no^bers together, you
shall find the greater. Examplet if you do abate or substracte from there
will remain ^/12. The proof is thus: you must add 1/12 and together, and you
shall find ^/3, which is the greatest number.

The proof of multiplication.
If you divide the producte of the whole multiplication, by the multiplicator,
you shall find in your quotient, the multiplicande or number by the which you
have multiplied: or else if you divide the total so^me which is come of the
multiplication, by the multiplicande: you shall find in the quotie^t the
multiplicator. Example, if you multiply (...) by, the product of this
multiplication will be 8/15. The proof is thus: you shall divide 8/15 by y^
multiplicator, and thereof comes. Or else divide 8/15 by and you shall find
the which is the multiplicator.

The proof of Division.
If you do multiplye the quotient by the divisor, you shall find the number
which you did divide, yt is to say, your diuidende. Example: if you divide by,
your quotient will be 2/9 y^ proof is thus, you must multiply 8/9 by, and
thereof comes 24/36 which being abbreuiated art which is your diuidende,
and by this manner all whole numbers have their proofs as well as broken
numbers.

The tenth Chapter treats of certain questions done by broken numbers. And
first by Reduction.
Find two numbers, where of the 2/^ of the one number may be egal unto the
(...) of the other. Answer: you shall reduce 2/7 and crossewise, and you
shall find 16. over the and 21. over the, which are the two numbers that you
seek: for the of 16. are 6. and so are the 2/^ of 21. likewise 6. wherefore
you may perceive that the the of 16. which are 6. are egall unto the 2/7 of 21.
which is also 6.

2. Find two numbers, whereof y^ 2/^ of the one may be double to the of the
other. Answer: double and you shall have 2/4, which being abbreuiated is: the^
reduce and crossewise, and you shall find 4. over the and three over the which
are the two numbers that you seek. For the 2/1 of 3. which is 2. is double
unto the of 4. which is but 1.

3. Find two numbers whereof the and the of the one, may be egall unto the
and of the other. Answer: Add the and together, and they make 7/12 then add
and ^/5 together, and they are 6/20, then reduce 7/17 and 9/20 crossewise, and
you shall have 140. over the 7/12 and 108. over the 9/20, which are the two
numbers that you seek. For 63. which are the 7/12 of 108. are also the 9/20 of
140.

4. Find two numbers, whereof the ^/2 the and the of the one of them, may by
egall unto the the and 1/7 of the other number. Answer: first you must add,,
and together, and they make 13/12: then add, and 1/7 together, and they make
207/210. Then reduce 13/12 and 107/210 crossewise, as by the first question of
reduction, and you shall find 2730. over the 13/12 and 1284. over the 107/210,
which are the two nombers that you seek: for 1391 which is the the and of
1284. is like to the 11/56 and of 2730, which is also 1391.

5. Find three nombers, whereof the of the first, the 4/7 of the second, and
the 4/9 of the third, may be egall the one to the other. Answer: set down
the 23/57 and (...), and then multiply the Denominator of the that is to say
5. by the Numerators of the other two Fractions, that is to say, by the
Numerator of 3/7, and by the Numerator of 4/9, which is 3. and 4. And thereof
comes 60. for your first number, then shall you multiplye the Denominator of
the 3/7 which is 7. by the Numerators of and 4/9, that is to say by 2. and 4.
and thereof comes 56. for the second number: Then multiply the Denominator
of 4/9, that is 9. by the Numerators of and ^/7 that is by 2. and by 3. and
thereof comes 54. for the third number

And thus the of 60. which is 24. is likewise the 3/7 of 56. which is the
second number and the 4/9 of 54. which is the third number.

6. Find three nombers, of which the first and the second may be in such
proporcion as and, and the second and third in such proportion as and.
Answer: reduce and crossewise, and you shall have 3. over the and 2. over
the, then reduce and in like manner, and you shall find 5. over the and 4. over
the 3/^. Then say by the Rule of three, ^^ 5. do give me 4. what shall two
give me, which is the second proportional, multiply the second number 4. by
the third number two, and thereof comes eight, the which divide by the
first number 5. and thereof comes 1. for the third proportional, and you shall
find that 3. 2. 1. are the three nombers proportional that I demand, or else
15. 10. and 8. in whole numbers.

1. What number is that, unto the which if you do add 13. the whole
amounts to 31. Answer: rebate 13. from 31. and there will remain 18. which
is the number that you seek.

2. What number is that, unto the which if you add the addition will be.
Answer: abate from, and there will remain 13/30, which is the number that
you desire.

3. What number is that, whereunto if you add 7., the whole addition will be
12.. Answer: abate 7. from 12.. and the remain will be 4 7/12 which is the
number yt you desire to know.

4. What number is that, whereinto if you add the of it self, that is to say,
of the number that your seek, the whole addition may be.

Answer: Here follows a general rule for all such like questions. First,
of. 3. which is the numeratour of.. make still the numeratour, and likewise
of. 3. and. 4 together, which is both the numerator, and the denominator of
the.. make your denominatour, so you shall find. 3/7, then take the 3/7 of,
which is 15/42, or 5/14; and substracte them from, and there will remain
10/21, which is the number that you seek.

5. What number is that, unto the which if you add his own. that is to say.
of it self, the whole addition shall be. 20. Answer: do^e as in the last
question: of the numeratour of that is to say, of. 2. make still your
numerator. And likewise of the numerator. 2. and the denominator. 3. of the,
make of them both, your denominator, and you shall find, then take the. of.
20. which are. 8. And abate them from. 20. and there will remain 12. which is
the number that you desire, and so is to be dooen of all such like reasons.

1. What number is that, from the which if you do abate. 17. the rest may
be. 19. Answer: add. 17. and 19. together, and you shall find. 36. which
is the number that you seek.

2. What number is that, from the which if you abate, the rest may be.
Answer: add and together, and you shall find 29/40, which is the number
that you demand.

3. What number is that, from the which if you deduct. 13. the rest may be.
5. 5/7. Answer: add. 13. and. 5. 5/7. together, and there of comes. 19. 1,
which is the number that you seek.

4. What number is that, from the which if you substracte his, the rest may
be. 12. Answer: and a rule for A rule.
such like reasons, that is to say, from the denominator of 5/2. which is.
5. abate. 2. which is his numerator, and there rests. 3. for the
denominator, and thus of. you have you made, then take the (...) of. 12. which
are 8: and add them unto. 12. and thereof comes 20. for the number which you
desire.

5. What number is that, from the which if you do abate his, the rest may
be 8/^. Answer: from the denominator of, which is. 4. substracte his
numerator. 3. and there rests. 1. Thus of. you have made. 3/1. Then multiply
5/^ by 8/9, and thereof comes 2., the which add unto 8/9, and you shall
have. 3. 5/9, which is the number that you seek.

6. What number is that, from the which if ye abate his, the rest may be.
12.. Answer: Do as you did in the last question, and you shall find that
the. will be 4/1. And therefore multiply. 12. by 4/1, and thereof comes.
50, the which add unto. 12, and you shall find. 93. (...), for the number
that you demand. And thus of all like questions.

1. What number is that, which being multiplied by 13. the whole.
Mul^iplication shall m^^nte to. 221. Answer: (...)de. 221. by. 13. and thereof
comnieth. 17. which is the number that you seek.

2. What number is that, which being multiplied by. 15. the whole
multiplication will amount to. Answer: divide. by 15/1. and thereof comes
1/20. which is the noumber, that you seek.

3. What number is that, which being multiplied by. 21. the whole
multiplication will be: 16.. Answer: divide. 16.. by. 21/5, and you shall
find, which is the number that you demaund^.

4. What number is that, which being multiplied by. the multipliplication will
amounte to. 18. Answer: divide 18/1 by, and there of comes. 24. which is
the number that you desire to know.

5. What number is that, which if it be multiplied by. the whole
multiplication will be. ^/4. Answer: divide by. and the quotient will be,
which is the number that you require to know.

6. What noumber is that, which being multiplied by, the product of that
multiplication will be. 16.. Answer: divide. 16. by. by (...). and thereof
comes. 26., which is the number that you seek.

Here ensues other necessary questions, which are wrought by multiplication
in broken nombers.
I Demand how much the of. 20. shillynges are worth or what are the. of.
20. shillynges. Answer: you must multiply by 1^/5, and the product will be
100/8, therefore divide. 100. by. 8. and thereof comes. 12., which is to
say. 12. shillynges. 6. pence, and so much are the 5/^. of. 20. shillynges
worth.

2. I demand what the of of (...) pound of money are worth, that is to
sa^e, of. 20. shillynges. Answer: multiply.. by. And thereof comes 5/2.
Then take the 5/^ of 20. shillinges, as in the last question going before and
you shall find. 12. shillynges. 6. pence, and so much are the of, of 20
shillynges worth.

3. I demand what the of. 8. pence ^/2 are worth. Answer: multiply. 8. ^/2
by, or else by. 8. and ^/2 which is all one, and you shall find 34/6. Then
divide 34 by. 6. and your quotient will be five pence, and so much are the.
(...). of. 8. pence (...) (...)the.

4. What are the. of. 14. pence (...), Aunswers multiply. 14. by, and thereof
comes 219/20. Therefore divide 219. by. 20. and your quotiente will be. 10.
pence 19/20. and so much are the ^/4 of. 14. ^/5.

5. How many (...) of sworth (...) ^^^contain^r in. 7.. Answer multiply, 7.
by 4/^ (because one whole contains. 4. quarters) and thereof comes, 30.,
and so many quarters are in the. 7.. that is to say. 30. quarters, and of a
quarter.

6. How many thirdes are in and ^/2, that is to say in. 3, quarters, and ^/2
of one quarter, which are by the (...) reduction. Answer: multiply 7/^ by
(...) (for because that in one whol^ are contained. 3. thirdes) and thereof will
come and of a third, and so many thirdes are in and or in, which is al one

Question done by division in broken number.
WHat number is that, which being divided by. 17. the quotiente will be. 13.
Answer: multiply. 17. by. 13. And thereof comes. 221. which is the number
that you seek.

2. What number is that, which being divided by, the quotient will be 21.
Answer: multiply 23/1. by ^/4 and thereof comes 63/4. Then divide. (...) by
4 and thereof comes. 15., which is the number that you seek.

3. What number is that, which being divided by., the quotiente will be.
Answer: multiply 2/1. by. and thereof comes 2/24, which being abreuiated
are 1/12. for the number, which you require.

4. What number is that, which being divided by. the quotient will be. 16.?
Answer: multiply. 16., by, and thereof comes 200/15. Therefore divide.
200. by. 15. and thereof comes. 13. ^/3, which is the number that you desire
to find.

5. What number is that, which being divided by. 13., the quotient will be.
20. Answer: multiply (...), by. 13 (...) and thereof comes 900/3, then
divide 800. by. 3. and thereof comes. 266 (...) for the number, which you
seek,

6. What number is that, which it it he divided, by. 12., the quotiente will
be 7/^. Answer: multiply 7/^ by. 12 and thereof comes 175/(...), then
divide 175 by. 16. and thereof comes. 10 15/^^ for the number which you
desire.

Other necessary questions dooen by division in broken number.
I Demand what part. 30. is of. 70. Answer: divide. 30. by 70. which you
can not, for they are 30/7^, but abreuiate them and they are 3/7. Thus. 30. are
the 3/7. of. 70.

2. I demand what part. 10. is of 16. Answer: divide. 10/(...). by. 16,
and thereof comes 30/50, which being abreuiated are (...). And thus 10. is
found to be of. 16. 2/^.

3. More, what part is. 25. of. 5/^. Answer: divide 5/^. by. 25/10, and
thereof comes 5/20^, which being abreniated is. 1/40. And thus. 5/^. is but
the 1/40. of. 25.

4. More, what part are they of Answer: divide by, and you shall find 4^/42
which abreuiated are 20/21.

5. More, what part are they of. 13. (...). Answer: divide by. 13.. and you
shall find 12/200, which being abbreuiated are ^/50. And thus 4/1 are the
3/50. of 13..

6. More. 12.. what part are they of. Answer: divide. 12.. by 30/^, and you
shall find. ^5/60, which being abreuiated are ^/12, and thus. 12., are the
5/12 of. 30.

7. More. 16. ^/3, what part are they of. 57. 1/7. Answer: divide. 16. by.
57 ^/7. and thereof comes 550/1200, which being abreuiated are 7/24, and
thus. 16.. are the. 7/24 of. 57. 1/7.

8. More, ^/4 and of ^/4, or three quarters, and of one quarter, what part are
they of. 1. Answer: reduce 5/4, and the of ^/4, into one broken by the first
reduction, and you shall find 11/12. And thus the ^/4, and ^/3 of are the
11/12 of one whole.

9. More, of what number are. 9. the (...). Answer: divide. 9. by 3/3, and
thereof comes. 13. ^/2, which is the number whereof. 9. are the (...).

10. More, of what number are the ^/4. Answer: divide by, and thereof comes
8/15, which is the number whereof 2/^ are the of the same number.

11. More, of what number are. 5.. the ^/7. Answer: divide. 15. by 3/^, and
you shall find. 13. 5/12, which is the number whereof. 5, ^/4 are the 3/7.

12. More. 9. (...) what part are they of. 33. Answer: divide. 9. 2/^ by
33.. And thereof comes 18/20^: and thus 9. (...) are the 58/201 of 33. as
appears.

The third part treats of certain brief rules, called rules of practice,
with diverse necessary questions, profitable for Merchants.
The first Chapter.
SOme there be, which do call these rules of practice br(...) rules, for that
by the^ many questions may be done with quicker expeditio^, then by the rule
of three. There be others, which call them the small multiplication, for
because that the producte, is always less in quantity, then the number
which is to be multiplied. This practice comes not in use, but only among
small kinds of nombers, which have over them, other nombers that are
greater. And this being well considered, is no other thing, but to convert
lesser and particular kinds of number, into greater, the which may be dooen
by the means of division, in taking the half, the third, the fowerth, the
fifth, or such other parts of the sum, which is to be multiplied, as the
multiplier is part of his greater kind, and that which comes thereof is
worth as much (not in quantity, but in his own form) as if you did
multiply simply the two sommes, the one by the other, and for the better
understanding of such conuersions, you must have respect to one of these two
considerations. The first is, when one would demand this question. At 6.
pence the yard of Cotton, what are. 18. yardes worth by the price? It is
manifest that they are worth. 18. pieces of. 6. pence the piece, or. 18. half
shillynges, which must be turned into shillynges, in taking the half of. 18.
shillynges, and they make. 9. shillinges. Or otherwise you must consider, that
at. 1 shillyng the yard, the. 18. yardes are worth. 18. shillynges, wherefore
at. 6. pence they shall be but half so much, for. 6. pence is but the of. 1.
shiliyng. Therefore you must take of. 18. and they make 9 shillinges, which
are worth as much as. 108. pence, that is to say, as. 18. times. 6. pence.

2. First, if you will multiply any number, after this manner by pence,
whereof the number of the same pence do not extend unto. 12. and thereof to
bring shillinges into the product: you must know the certain parts of. 12
which are these: that is to say, 6, 4. 3. 2. and. 1. For. 6. is the of. 12.
and. 4. is the (...). of. 12: 3. is the: 2 is the: and 1. is the. ^/12. Then
for. 6. pence, which is the half of. 1. shillyng, you must take the of all
the number, which is to be multiplied. And that which comes thereof, shall be
shillynges, if there do remain. 1. it is. 6. pence.

For four pence you must take the ^/4 of all the number, that is to be
multiplied: and if any unities do remain they shall be thirdes of a shillyng,
every one being in value. 4. pence.

For. 3. pence you must take the,. of all the sum: if any unities do
remain, they shall be fowerthes of a shillyng, every one being worth three
pence.

For 2 pe^ce you must take the of all the the sum, and if any unities do
remain, they shall be six parts of a shillyng, being every one of them
worth two pence.

For. 1. penie, take the 1/12 of the whole sum, if any unities remain, they
are. 12. parts of a shillyng, each of them being in value. 1. penie, as by
these examples following does plainly appear. ^

Here you may se in the first example, that. 59. yardes, at. 6. pence the
yard is worth. 29. shillynges. 6. in taking the of. 59. And in the second
example, the. 82. yardes at. 4. pe^ce the yard is worth. 27. shillynges. 4.
pence, in taking the of. 82.

Likewise, in the third example. 97 yardes, at three pence the yard, bringeeh.
24. shillynges. 3. pence, in taking the of. 97. Also in the ^owerth example.
346. yardes, a^. 2. pence the yard, makes. 57. shillynges eighte pe^ce, in
taking the 1/^ of. 346. And final- in the fyft example. 343. yardes, at I. d.
the yard, amount to 28. shill. 7. d. in taking the 1/12 of 343. And so is to
be done of all such like, when the number of the pence, is any of the certain
parts of 12.

But if the number of the pence be not a certain part of 12. you must reduce
them into some certain parts of 12. and after the foresaid manner you shall
make two or three productes as need shall require, and add them together into
one sum as 5. d. may be reduced into 4. and I. or else into 3. and 2. wherefore
if you will work by 4. and by I: you must for 4. d. take first the. of ye
number, that is to be multiplied, and for I. d. take the 1/12, or rather for
I. d. you may take the of the producte which did come of the 4. d. because
that I. d. is the of 4. d. But if you will work by. 3. and you shall take for
3. d. the of the number which is to be multiplied: and likewise for 2. d. the
of the same number, adding together both the productes. The total sum of
those two nombers shall be the solution to the question. And in like manner is
to be done of all other. As by these former following may appear. ^

Here in this same example where it is demanded (at 5 pence ye yard) how much
are nine and forty yardes worth? First for four pence, I take ye ^/3 of 49.
s. and thereof comes 16. s. 4. d. the^ for 1. d. I take the of the same
product, that is to say, of 16. s. 4. d. and that brings. 4. shill. 1. d.
these. two su^mes added together, do make 20. s. 5. d. And so much are the 49.
yardes worth at 5. d. the yard.

For 7. d. take the and the of the whole sum which is to be multiplied, and
add them together, that is to say, for 4. d. the (...) and for 3. d. the:
because 4. d. is the (...) of 12. d. and 3. d. is the as in the second example
before does appear: Where the question is thus, at 7. d. the yard what are
54. yardes worth? First for 4. d. I take ye (...) of 54: and they make 18. s.
Likewise for 3. (...). I take the (...) of 54. and they are 13. s. 6. d. Then I
add 18. s. and 13. s. 6 d. together, so both amount to ^1. s. 6. (...) and so
much are the 54 yardes worth at 5. d. the yard.

Otherwise for 7. d. take first the, of the whole su^me for 6. d. Then for 1.
d. take the of the same product, and add them together, so shall you have the
like sum as before.

For eight pence you must first take ^/3 of the whole su^me for 4. pence, and
another ^/^ for other 4. d. and add the^ together as in the. 3. example does
evidently appear. Where the question is thus, at 8. d. the yard, what are 40
yardes worth? First for 4. d. I take the of 40. which is 13. s. 4. d. Again,
I take another for the other 4 pence which is also 13. shillings and 4. pence.
These two sums being added together, do make 26. shillings 8. pence, and so
much are the 40. yards worth at 8. pence the yard, as in the third example
abouesayd does appear.

Otherwise, for eight pence you may take first the of the whole su^me for 6.
d. Then for 2. d. you shall take the ^/3 of the product, which did come of the
said, and add them together, so shall you have likewise the solution to the
question. As in the same third example of 40. yardes, I take first the of 40.
for 6. d. and thereof comes 20. shil. then for 2. d. I take ^/3 of the said
product, that is to say of 20. s. which brings 6. (...). 8. d. these two
sums (20. s and 6. s. 8. d.) I add together and they make 26. s. 8. d. as
before.

For 9. d. you must take the ^/2 and the of the whole su^me, and add them
together: or else for 6. d. take first of the whole sum, then for 3. d. take
ye ^/2 of the same product, because 3. d. is ye half of 6. d: And 6. d. added
with 3. d. brings 9. d. as by the fourth example, where it is demanded after
this sort: at 9. d. the yard, what are 73. yardes worth. First for 6. d. I
take the of 73. and thereof comes 36. s. 6. d. then for 3. d. I take of ye
same 36. shil. 6. d. which is 18. s. 3. d. these two sums do I add
together, and they make 54. shil. 9. d. as in ye said fourth example is evident.

For 10. d. take first the, then ye of the whole sum, and add the^ together

For 11. ^^take first for 4. pence, secondely, another for other 4. d. and
thirdly for 3. d. of all the whole su^me. and add them together.

Or else for 11. d take first the then then of the whole sum, and finallye the
of the last producte, addinge them together.

3. Likewise by the same reason, when you will multiply (by shillings) any
number that is under xx. s. you shall have in the product pounds, if you know
the certain parts of 20: which are these. 10. 5. 4. 2. and. 1. For 10. is the
of 20. 5. is the part: 4 is the. 2. is the 1/10: and 1. is the 1/20.

Then for 10. s. which is the of a pound: you must take the ^/2 of the
number, which is to be multiplied, and you shall have pounds in the product.
If there do remain 1, it shall be worth ten shillings.

For 5. shillinges you must take the of the number which is to be
multiplied, and if there do remain any unities, they shall be four parts of
a pound, every one being in value 5. s.

For 4. (...). you must take the ^/5 of the number which is to be multiplied.
And if there do remain any unities, they shall be fifth parts of a pound, every
one being worth four shillings. ^

For 2. shillings you must take the 1/10 of the number that is to be
multiplied. Wherefore, if you will take the 1/10 of any number, you must
separate the last figure of the same number which is nerest your right hand,
from all the other fygures. For all the other figures which do remain
toward your left hand, from the same figure, which is separated, shall be
the said 1/1^ of a pound: and that separated figure, toward your right hand
shall be so many pieces of 2. shillings the piece: the which figure must be
doubled, to make thereof shillings, as by these examples appears. ^

Herevpo^ does depend an other exact way for to multiply by shillings (if ye
number of shillings be even) which is thus: you shall take (...) the number of
the same shillings, and convert them into pieces of 2. shillings. Then by the
number of this half, you must first multiply the last figure toward your
right hand, of the number which is to be multiplied: And if there be any tennes
in the same product, those must you reserve in your mind: But if (with the
same of else without the same) you do find any diget number, the same diget
number shall you double, and put it in the place of shillings: Then must you
proceed to the multiplication of the other figures, adding unto ye product the
tennes which you before reserved: and thereof shall come pounds.

Now, for your better understanding of this which has been said and by the
way of example, I will propone unto you this question.

At 8. shillings the gross, what are ^7. gross worth after the rate?

First in this example I take half the number of Shillinges, as before is
taught, that is to say of eighte shillings, which is four shillinges, this 4.
shil. I put apart, behind a crooked line right against 97. toward the left
hand, as here you may see and as here after does appear by diverse examples. ^

Now in the first example, where it is demanded, at 8. (...). the gross,
what are 97 gross? First the of 8. s. which is 4. s. being set apart behind
the crooked line, as before is said: the^ I multiplye ye 97 by 4. saying first,
4. times 7. is 28. I double ye diget number 8. and that makes 16, the which
16, I do put under the line, in the place of shillings and I keep y^ tennes in
my mind, which here are 2. For 20. are two times ten: Then secondly, I multiply
9. by the said 4, and thereof comes 36: whereunto I add the 2. tennes, which
before I reserved, and they make 38. Therefore I put 38, under the line in the
place of pounds, and the whole sum will be 38.li. 16. s. Thus much are the
97. gross worth, at eight shillings the gross: the like is to be done of all
other. As of 12. shillings in multipliyng by 6. Likewise of 6. shillings if you
multiply by 3. also of 14. if you multiply by 7. And so of all even nombers
after the same manner.

For 1. Shilling you must take the of the 1/10 part of any number that is to
be multiplied. And if any thing ^ do remain, they are shil. Thus by this manner
shil. are converted into pounds: for it is even like, as if you did divide
the^ by 20. s. as by this example in the margent does appear. Where it is
demanded at 1. s. the yard, the piece, or any other thing, what are 350. worth?

First I separate the last figure of 359. next to my right hand, which is the
0 with a line between it and the figure 5. Then I make a line under the 3 0,
and I take the of 35, after this manner: saying the of 3. is I. and I remains,
which remain signifies 10. in that second place. Then I put I. under the
line against 3, and I proceed to the rest, saying: the half of 15. is 7.
(which 15. came of the I. that remained, and of the 5. in y^ first place) I put
7. under the line right against 5, and they make 17 li. The I. which did last
remain, is 10. s. Therefore I put 10. s aparte under the line, and the whole
sum is 17.li. 19. s. so much are 350. worth at I. s. the piece.

But when the number of shillings is not some certain part of 20. shil. you
must then convert the same number of shillings, into the certain parts of 20.
and make two or three products, as need shall require, the which must be
added together after this manner following.

For 3. shillings you must first take for 2. shil. the 1/10 of the number that
is to be multiplied, the^ for 1. shilling you must take the of the producte
which did come of the same 1/10 part: and add those two su^mes together, as
appears by this example following.

At 3. s. the piece of any thing, what shall 684 pieces cost me after the
rate. First, for 2 shillings I take the 1/10 of 684, which is 68: in separating
the last ^ figure 4, which 4 I must double, and they be 8. I set eight
shillings aparte from the place of pounds, and then I have 68. pou^des 8. s.
for the 1/10 part, that is to say, for the 2. s. secondlye, for 1. shil. I
take the of the product, that is to say: of 68.li. 8. s. which is 34.li. 4.
s. and I put the same under the 68.li. 8. shil. Then finally, I add those two
sums together, that is to say, 68.li. 8. s. and 34.li. 4. shil. so they make
102.li. 12. s. and so much are the 684. pieces worth at 3. shillings the piece,
as may appear in the margent.

For 6. shll. take 3/^^ of the number which is to be multiplied: that is to
say, first 1/10, then double the product of the same 1/10 and add them
together. Or otherwise for 4. s. take first ye of ye number that is to be
multiplied, then take the of the product which is for two. s. and add them
together.

Or else take for 5. shill. the of the whole sum, then for 1. shil. the 1/^^
of the product and add them together.

Likewise for 7. shil. take first for 5. shil. the then for 2. shillings take
the 1/10 of the number which is to be multiplied, and add them together. For
eight shillings take the at two sundry times, that is to say, first for 4.
shil. and then as much more for other 4. shil. and add them together.

For 9. shil. take first the and likewise the of the number that is to be
multiplied, and add them together.

For 11. shil. take first for 10. s. The^ for 1. shil. take the 1/10 of the
producte, and add them together.

For 12. shil. take first the for 10. shil then for 2. s. take the part of the
product, and add them together,

For 13. shil. take the then the, and again another of the number which is to
be multiplied. And add the productes together, that is to say: first for 5.
shil. take the, then for 4. shil. take the. And again, another for the other 4
shil. and assemble the three productes, the like is to be done of all others,
when the price of the thing which is valued, is only of shillings. And as by
these examples followyng does plainly appear. ^

4. Likewise in multipliyng by pe^ce you shall have (at the first instaunte)
pounds in the producte, in case you know the certain parts of the 1/10 of a
pound, or of. 24. pence, which are these, 12. pence. 6. 4. 3. and. 2. For.
12. is the of. 24:8. is the:6. is the. 4. is the:3. is the:2. the 1/12: but
for. 12. pence, which is 1. shillyng: we have before made mention thereof.

For 8 pence you must take the of the 1/10, and the rest which are the pieces
of 8 pence, must be doubled to make of them pieces of. 4. pence. And of the
same number being doubled, you must take the, which will be shillynges, and
if there do yet remain any thing, they are thirds of a shilling being in value
4 pence the piece.

For 6 pence take the of the 1/12, and of that which remains, you must take
the, which shall be shillynges, if there do yet remain. 1. it shall be in
value. 6. pence.

For 4 pence you must take the of the 1/10, and of that which rests, take
the to make thereof shillynges, if any thing do yet remain, they are thirdes
of a shillyng, being in value. 4. pence the piece.

For 3 pence take the of the 1/10, and of that which remains, take the, to
make of them shillynges: if any thing do yet remain, they are fourethes of a
shillyng, every one of them being worth 3. pence.

For 2 pence take the 1/12 of the 1/10: and of that which rests take the,
the which are shi. if there do still remain any thing, they shall be sixte
parts of a shilling, every one being in value 2 d.

For 1, penie it is impossible with ease, to bring of pence, pounds (into the
producte) upon the total sum: But first you must bring them into shillinges
by the order of the second rule of this chapter, and then afterward you
shall convert them into pounds, if need so require. As by these examples
followyng may appear. ^

But if the number of pence, be not a certain part of 24. pence. Then must
you bring them into the certain parts of 24. and make thereof diverse
productes, which must be added together, as shall hereafter appear.

For. 5. pence you shall first take for 3. pence, then for. 2. pence, and add
the^ together, according to the instruction of the last rule. Or else first
take for 4. pence, and then for. 1. penie.

For. 7. pence, first take for. 4. pence then for. 3. d, and add them together.

For 9 pence, first take for 6 pence, then for 3 pence adoyng the^ together.

For. 10. pence, first take for 6. d. then for. 4. d, and add them together.

For. 11. pence take first for. 8. pence then for. 3. pence, and add them
together: as by these examples followyng does appear. ^

5. If you will multiply any number by shillynges and pence, being both
together, you must take first for the. s. according to the instruction of the
third rule of this chapter, then take for the pence, after the order of the
^owerth rule before mentioned: but if there be any certain parts of. 1.
pound, containyng both shillynges and pence, then for such parts you shall
take the like part of the number that is to be multiplied, as the number is
part of 1.li. the which certain parts are these, 6. s. 8. d: 3. s. 4. d: 2.
s. 6. d: and. 1. s. 8. d: For 6. s. 8. d. is the of a li. 3. s. 4. d. is the of
a li. 2. s. 6. d. is the: and 1. s. 8. d. is the 1/12: then for 6. s. 8. d. you
must take the of the number that is to be multiplied: and if any thing do
remain, they are thirdes of a pound, every one being worth 6 s. 8. pence. For
3. s. 4 d. you must take ye if any thing do remain, they are 6 parts of a li.
every one being in valor 3. s. 4. d. For 2. s. 6. pe^ce, you must take the * if
any thing be remainyng, the^ are 8 parts of a li. every one being worth 2.
(...). 6. d.

For. 1. shillyng. 8. pence, you shall take the ^/12, if there do any thing
remain, they are twelfth parts of a.li. every one being valued at. 1. s. 8.
d. ^

6. Here shall you accustom your self, to multiply by all sorts of sommes,
being compounde of shillynges, and pence, which may come to practice. As
thus, for. 1. shillyng. 1. penie: for. 1. shillyng. 2. pence: for. 1. shillyng
3. pence: for. 1. shillyng 4. pence. Likewise for 2. shillynges 1. penie: 2.
shilly. 2. pence: 2. shillynges. 3. pence. 2. s. 4. d And so of all other:
considering moreover, many subtle abreuiations, which happen oftentimes, that
are easy to be conceived. As thus: at 11. s. 3. d. after that I have taken
first the for 10. shillynges. Then for 1. shillyng. 3. pence. I take the of
the product, because 1. shillyng. 3. pence is the of 10 shillynges, in taking
thesaied of the producte. And by this means, when ye have taken one producte,
ye may oftentimes upon the same, take an other more briefly, then upon the
so^me that is to be multiplied, which thing you must foresee. ^

7. But if you will multiply, by pounds, shillinges and pence being together.
First you must wholly multiply by pounds. Then take for the shillyngs and
pe^ce, as in the. 5. rule of this chapter is plainly declared. And as by these
examples following may appear. ^

8. So these rules do serve, both to buy and sell, at such a price the ell, the
yard, y^ piece, the li. weight or any other thing: how much such a thing.
Likewise they are very necessary to convert all pieces of gold and silver into
li. for I may as well say, at. 4. s. 8. d. the French croune, what are 135
crounes worth? As to say at. 4. s. 8. d. the yard of clothe, what are 135.
yardes worth?

9. When any 1 of the so^mes (which is to be multiplied) is co^pounde of many
denominations: and the other is of one figure alone: then shall ye multiply all the denominations of the other sum, by the same one figure, beginning first
with y^ sum, which is least in value toward your right hand, and bring the
product of those pence into shi. and the product of the shillinges into pounds
as by this example does appear. ^

10. But ((...) of the nombers which are to be multiplied) there be with it a
broken number, you must (according to his denominator) take one or many parts
of the number, as need does require: and set the number which comes
thereof, under the productes, addyng the same together. As thus: At 5. pound
7. shillynges 8. pence the gross, what shall. 34. gross cost? First you shall
multiply ^ 5. pound. 7. s. 8. pence by. 34. gross, saying. 5. times. 34. do
make 170. pound then for. 6. shilly. 8. pence, take the ^/3 of. 34. which is.
11. pound. 6. shillynges, 8. pence. Thirdly, for. 1. shillyng, take. 34.
shillynges, which is 1 pound 14. shillynges. 0.

Lastly, for the gross, you must take of the. 5. pound 7. shillynges 8
pence, which is. 2. pound. 13. s. 10. d. And then add the^ all together, so
you shall find that the. 34. gross at. 5.li. 7. shillynges. 8 pence is
worth. 185. pound. 14. shillynges. 6. pence, as appears in the margent.

And as in this last example, you did take the half of the money, (which one
gross was worth) for the gross Because that one gross being worth 5.
pound. 7. shillynges. 8, pence, the gross must be worth half so much So
likewise, if you have of a gross or of any other thing, you must take the..
of the price, that one gross is worth. Semblable, for the.. of any thing you
shall take the of the price, that one is worth, and of all other fractions, as
by these examples following does appear. ^

11. If you will make the proof of these rules aforsaid, you must first abate
the sum of money (which the fractio^ of the multiplicand does importe) from
the total sum. And divide the rest of the pounds of the said total so^me,
by the whole multiplicande, the fraction only accepted. And if any thing do
remain after the division is made, that remain shall be multiplied by 20 and unto
the producte of that multiplication, you shall add the shi. which remained of
the rest of the total so^me. Again, if anything do remain after the same
division, you must multiply the same by 12 and unto ye product add the pence
of ye total so^me that remained if any be left And thus if ye have truly
wrought, you shall find again the higher so^me of your question, that is to
say, the price that one gross, or any other thing is worth, whereof you
demand.

Or otherwise, reduce the remain of the total sum (the value of the money
that the fraction is worth, being first deducted) all into pence, in
multipliyng the pounds by. 20. and the shillynges by. 12. addyng thereunto the
shillynges and pence, which are i^igned with the remain of the said total
sum, if any such be, then divide those pence by the foresaied number that is
to be multiplied, the fraction of the same number being also abated. So shall
you find the price that one piece, I gross, or any other thing is valued at.
As in the first example going before, where the total so^me is. 201. pound.
10. shillynges, from the which I do first abate the price of the half
gross, which is. 2. pound 3. shillynges. 4. pence, the rest is 199.li. 6.
shillynges 8. pence, which being reduced into pence, brings 47840. d. I
divide the same by 46. and thereof comes 1040. d. Then I divide that 1040. d.
by 12, and they bring 86. s. 8. d. that is to say 4.li. 6. s. 8. pe^ce, which
is the price that one gross, or any other thing did cost, as in that first
example does eppeare.

12. The like is to be done of any manner of thing, that is sold by the
hundred, or by Kintall. As thus: at 12. pound seven shillynges six pence the
hundredth pound weight: what shall. 374. pound weight cost. You shall first
multiply twelve pound seven shillinges, six pence by three: that is to say,
by three hundredth. Then for 50.li. weight, you ^ shall take the of 12.li. 7. s.
6. d. because 50.li. is the of 100.li. Likewise for 20. pound weight, which is
the of 100.l. take the of 12.li. 7. shil. 6. d. lastly for 4.li. weight take
the of the last product. This done, you must add all these productes into
one sum, which will make the sum of 64.li. 5. s. 7. d., as by this exa^ply
above written does appear.

The proof is made by reducinge the total sum into pence. And to divide the
product by the number y^ is to be multiplied, that is to say by 374 likewise
divide the quotient produced of that first division by 12. so shall you find
again the higher sum 12.li. 7 shil. 6. d. which is the price of 100.li.
wayght, as before.

13. Also the like may be done of our usual weight here in England (which
is 112.li. for every hundred pound weight). in case you know the certain
parts of a hundred, that is to say, of 112.li. weight, which are these 56.li.
28.li. 14.li. 7.li. For 56.li. is the of 112. 28.li. is the of 112.li. 14.li.
is the, and 7.li. is the 1/16.

Therefore, for 56.li. take the of the sum of money, that the 112. pound
weight is worth.

For 28.li. take the of the sum of money that the 112.li. is worth.

For 14 li. take the of the sum that the C. is worth.

For 7.li. take the 1/16 of the sum of money that the C, is worth.

As thus: at 3.li. 6. s. 8. d. the hundredth pounds weight, that is to say, the
112, li. What shall 24. C. 3. quar. 21, li. cost after the ra^e?

First, you shall multiply 24, hundredth by 3. which is the 3.li. and thereof
comes 72.li. then for 6. s, 8, d. which is the of 20. s. you shall take y^
of 24 which is 8, li. for ^ 24. nobles makes 8, li. afterward, for the 3.
quarters of the C. you shall first for the 56.li. take ^the of 3.li. 6. s. 8,
d. because 56. li is the of the C. and thereof comes 1.li. 13. shil. 4. d.
then for 28.li. (which is the quar. of a C.) you shall take the of 3.li. 6. s.
8. d. or else the of the product, which came of 56.li. which is 16, s. 8, d
likewise for 14.li. take the of 3.li. 6, s. 8. d. which is 8, d. 4, d. or else
the of the producte of 28.li. which is all one: lastly for 7.li. take the 1/16
of 3, li. 6. s. 8, d. or else the of the product, that came of 14 li. and thereof
comes 4, s. 2, d. Then add al these products together: and the total sum
will be 83.li. 2. s. 6. d. so much are y^ 24.c. 3. quar. 21.l. weight worth
after 3, li. 6. s. 8. d. y^ C. as appears in the margent.

The proof hereof is made, like to to the other proofs aforesaid, saning
that where in those proofs, you aba^e the price of the money, that the
fraction was worth, from the total sum: here in this example (and in such
other like) you must abate the price of money, that the odd weight amounts
unto (over and above the just hundrethes) from the said total sum, the rest
thereof shall you convert into pence, diuidinge the product of ye
multiplication by the just number of the hundrethes, so shall you find the
pence ye one hundredth is worth, which you shall bring into pounds by the
order of division, and so all other.

The second Chapter treats of the rule of three compounde, which are four in
number.
THere belongs to the first and second parts of the rule of three compound
always five numbers: whereof (in the first part of the rule of three compo^nde
the second number and the (...), are always of one semblaunce, and ^ke
denomination: whose rule is thus, multiply ye first number by the second, and
that shall be your divisor: then multiply the other three no^bers the oneby the
other to be your diuidende. Example, of this first part: if 100. crowns in 12.
months, do gave 15.li. what will 60. crowns gain. in 8. months? Answer,
first multiply 100. crowns by 12. months, and thereof comes 1200. for your
divisor: then multiply 15.li. by 60. crowns, and by 8. months and you shall
have 7200. divide 7200. by 1200, and thereof comes 6.li. so many li. will 6.
crowns gain in 8. mo^thes: this question may be done by ye double rule of 3.
yt is to say by ye rule of 3. at 2. times, but yet this rule of 3 co^pou^d is
more brief. ^

2. In the second part of the rule of third compound, the 3. number is like
unto the fifth, whereof the rule is thus: multiply the 3. number by the 4. the
product shall be your divisor: then multiply the first number by ye second, and
the product thereof by the fifth, yt which number shall be your dividend, or
number yt is to be divided: as by example,

When 60. crowns in 8 months do gain 6.li. in how many months will: 100.
crowns gain. 15.li. Answer Multiply the third number 6. by the fourth number
100, and there of comes 600 then multiplye the first number 60. by the second
number 8. and by the fifth number 15 thereof will come 7200. then divide 7200.
by 600. and ye quotie^t will be 12: in so many months will 100. crowns gain
15.li. This question may likewise be done by the double rule of 3. ^

3. In the third part of the rule of 3. compound, there may be 5. nombers or
more: and in this rule the first number and the last always dissemblaunt the
one to the other: and the question is from the last number unto the first, whereof
ye rule is thus: multiply that number which you would know by those no^bers
which do give the value, and divide the product of the same, by ye
multiplication of the no^bers which are already valued, as by example. If 4.
deniers Parisis, be worth 5. deniers arnols, and 10. deniers tournois, be world
12. deniers of Sauoy, I demand how many deniers Parisis are 8. deniers of
Sauoy worth* Answer: Multiply 8. deniers of Sauoy (which is the number yt you
would know) by 4. deniers parisis, and by 10 deniers t(...)is which are ye
no^bers that give ye value, and they make 320: then multiply 5. denters
tournois, by 12 deniers of sauoy (which are the nombers alredye valued) and
they make 60: lastly divide 320. by 60 and you shall find 5. deniers parisis,
so much are the denies of Sauoye worth. ^

4. In the fourth part of the rule of three compounde: the first number and
the last are always semblant and of one denomination, and the question of this
rule, is always from the last number to the last saving one. Whereof there is
a rule which is thus. You must multiplye that number which you would know,
by the nombers that are already valued, and divide the product of the same, by
the multiplication which comes of the nombers that give the value, as by
example

If 4: deniers Parisis, be worth 5. Deniers Lournois, and 10. Deniers
Lournois, be worth 12. Deniers of Sauoy, I demand how many Deniers of Sauye.
are 15. Deniers Parisis worth. Answer: Multiplye 15. Deniers Parisis that you
would know, by 5. Deniers Lournois, and by 12. Deniers of Sauoye, which are
the nombers already valued, and they make 900 Divide the same by 4 times 10.
which are the nombers that do give the value, and you shall find 22. Deniers
of Sauoye, so much are the 15. Deniers Parisis worth. ^

The third Chapter treats of questions of the trade of Marchaundise.
IF 31. Deuonsh. dose^s do cost me 100.li. 15. shil. What shall 4. dosens cost?
Answer: first bring the 100.li. 15. shill. all into shillings, in multiplying
ye 100.li. by 20. adding to the product the 15. shill. and thereof comes
2015. shill. then multiplye 2015. by the third number 4. and divide the
product by 31. and the quetietit will be 260. s. The which divide aagaine by 20.
and thereof comes 13.li. ^

If four Dosens be worth 13. pound What are 31. Dosens worth by the price?
Answer: Multiply 31. by 13. and thereof comes 403. The which you shall
divide by 4. and thereof comes 100.li., which are 15. s. and so much are 31.
Dosens worth as before. ^

If 49 else be worth 2, li. 4, s. 11, d. what are 18 else worth by the
price? First you must bring 2.li. 4, s. 11, d. all into pence, in multipliyng
2.li. by 20. makes 40. add thereto 4, shil. they make 44. s. y^ which
multiply by 12. d. and they make 528, d. wheru^to add 11. d all is 539, d. the
which 539, d. must be your second number in y^ rule of 3. then multiply 539
by 18, and thereof comes 9792. divide y^ same by 49, and you shall have in
your quotient 198, d. y^ which divide by 12. and you shall find 16 s. 6 d. so
much are the 18. else worth. ^

IF 18. else be worth 16 s. 6. d. what are 49. else worth by the price? Auns.
bring 19. s. 6. d. into pence, in multiplying 19. by 12. and thereof comes
198. d. with the 6. d. add dto it, then multiplye 198 by 49. the product will
be 2702. The which divide by 18. else and thereof comes 539. d. Then divide
539. d. by 12. and the product thereof by 20. So shall you have 2.li. 4. sh. 11.
d. so much are the 49. else worth. ^

If a yard of Ueluet cost 19. s. what shall of a yard cost? Answer: set
down your nombers thue. If 1/1 19/1 3/^, Then multiplye 1. times 16. by 3. and
thereof comes 57, for your diuide^de, or number to be divided. The which 57.
you shall divide by 1, times 1, four times; which are 4, and your quotient will
be 14 s., which is worth 3. d. so much are the of a yard worth after 19.
shil. the yard, as by practice follows. ^

Or otherwise by the rules of practice first for 2/4 of a yard which is of a
yard, you must take the of 19 s. which is 9, s. 6, d. then for, take the of
the product, that is to say, of 9, s. 6, d. and thereof comes 4, s. 9. d.
add these no^bers together, and ^ you shall have 14, s. 3, d. as above is
said, and as appears here in the margent.

IF of a yard of Ueluet do cost 14. shil. 3. d. What shall 1. yard cost, set
your nombers down thus: if 14 1/1. Reduce 14, into a traction, and they will be
57/4 the^ multiply 57. by 1. 4, times, and thereof comes 228. for your
dividend. Likewise multiply 1. times 4, 3, times, and thereof comes 12, for
your divisor: then divide 228 by 12. and your quotient will be 19. shil. so
much is the yard of velvet worth. ^

Or otherwise by y^ rule of practice: you shall take the part of 14, sh. 3. d.
and add it with the same 14, sh. 3, d. and you shall have 19, shill. as
before. ^

If one elle of Hollonde clothe be worth 5, s. what are worth after the rate?
Answer: say thus if 1/1 5/1. Then multiply 2 times 5, one time, and thereof
comes 10, for your diuidende: likewise multiply three times 1 one time, they
make 3, for your divisor, then divide 10, by 3. and thereof comes 30. s.
which ^/3 is worth 4. pe^ce, and so much are the (...) of an ell worth. ^

Or otherwise, by the rule of practice: take first the of 5. s. for the of an
ell, which is 1. s. 8. d. Likewise, for the other of an ell take again another
of 5. s. which is also 1. sh. 8, d. and add them together, and so shall you
have 3. s. 4. d. as before. ^

If of an ell of Hollande cloth do cost me 3. s. 4. d. what shall the el cost?
Answer: set down your su^me thus, if (...)3(...)(...). First reduce 31/^ all
into thirds, and it will be 10/3. Then multiply 1. times 10. 3, times, and
thereof comes 30. for your diuide^de. Likewise multiply 1. times 3. 2 times,
your quotie^t will be 6. then divide 30, by 6. and you shall have 5, s. so much
is the ell of Hollande clothe worth. ^

Or otherwise by practice, take the of. 3. s. 4. which is. 1. s. 8. d. and
add it to the same 3. s. 4. d. and thereof will come. 5. as before. For the
of. 5. s. is as much as the of 3. s. 4. pe^ce, which was the ^ price that the
of an elle did cost, as appears.

If one elle cost me. 17. s. what shall 15. else part cost? Which is half a
quarter of an elle. Answer: safe of (...)(...)15.. First reduce 15. 1/^ into.
8. parts, and they make 121/8, then multiply 121. by. 17. 1. time, and
thereof comes 2057. for your diuidende. Likewise multiply. 8. times. 1. 1.
time, and your quotiente will be. 8. for your divisor, then divide. 2057. by.
8. and you shall find. 257. shillynges, which is. 12. (...). 17. shillynges. 1.
penie, and so much are the. 15. else worth, as by practice does appear. ^

Or otherwise, for 10. s. take the of 15, which is 7 li. 10. s. then for 5 s.
take the of 7 li. 10s: which is 3 li. 15 s: thirdly, for 2: s: take of 7 li:
10: s: because the of 10. s: is 2: s: Fourthly, for the of ^ the ell, you shall
take the (...) of 17: s: which is 2: s: 1: d:: Lastly, add all these so^mes
together, and then shall you find 12.li. 17: s: 1: d: as before, and as
appears more plainly in the margent.

If 25 else be worth 2, li: 3: s: 4: d: what are 18 else worth by the
price? Answer: first put 3. s. 4. d. into the part of a li. and you shall have,
then say, if 25/1 give me 2 li. what shall 18 give: put the whole number into
his broken, and then multiply 1 times 13 by 75: the product will be 975 the
which you shall divide by 25 times 6: 4 times, which makes 600. Then divide
975 by 600, and your quotient will be 1 li. and 375. remains, the which 375.
you shall multiply by 20. thereof comes 7500. divide the same by 600. your
quotient will be 12. s. and 300. remains yt which abreuiated brings which
is 6. d. thus the 18. else are worth 1.li. 12. s. 6. d. as by practice
appears. ^

Or otherwise by the rules of practice: for because that 12. else is the of
25. else, therefore take the of 2.li. 3. s. 4. d. which is. 1.li. 1. s. 8. d.
then for 9. else take the of 2.li. 3. s. 4. d. or else the of the last product
(that is to safe of 1.li. 1. s. 8. d.) which is all one, and add them
together, so shall you have 1.li. 12. s. 6. d: as before. ^

If. 15. yardes be worth. 32. s. what are half a yard, or half a quarter, or
else (...) of a yard worth. Answer: say, if (...) give 32/^ what will give?
Multiply (...) times 32. by 5, and divide the product by. 15. times. (...). s.
and 4, remains, which is of a shi. that is to say 4. d and so much are 5/2
of a yard worth. ^

Otherwise, see what the yard is worth, after the manner aforesaied in the
other examples, and you shall find that the yard is worth, 2. s. 1. d. of the
which number take first the for 4/6, which is 1. s. 0. d., of the which
number, take the for the other (...), which is 3. d., add these. 2. nombers
together, and you shall find the to be worth 1. s. 4. d. as before is said. ^

If 13 else (...), be worth 27. s. what are 10 else worth by the price?
Answer: say if 13 give 27/(...) which shall 10 give: put the whole nombers
into their broken, and you shall find 83/6, 27/1, end 32/3. Then multiply 6
times 27 by 32 and thereof comes 5184 the which number you shall divide by 83
times (...) three times, and you shall find 20. s. (...) which is worth 9. d.
(...)/85 part of a penny. ^

If two yardes be worth 4. s. 8. d. what are 8 yardes worth? Answer put the
8. d. into the part of a shillyng, which will be, then reduce the whole nombers
into their broken, and they will stand thus, 5/2, 14/3, 33/4, then multiply
two times 14 by 33, and divide the producte by. 5. times 3. 4. times, and you
shall find 15. s. 4. d., so much are the eight yardes worth. ^

If one Kersey be worth 2.li. 6. s. 8. d. how many Kerseis shall I buy for
36.li. 3. s. 4 d. after ye rate: Answer: put 6. s. 8. d. into the part of a
li. and you shall have 2 li. for the first number in the rule of 3. and 1 elle
for the second number: then put 3 s. 4 d: into the part of a li. and you shall
find 36 li. 3/6 for the 3 number, then will your 3 nombers in the rule of 3
stand thus. 2 1/1 36. Therefore reduce the whole nombers into their broken, and
you shall have 7/31/1217/6. Then multiply 1 by 217, and thereof will come 651
for your diuidende. Likewise, multiply 7 times 1 by 6, and the producte
thereof will be 42. Then divide 651 by 42. and you shall find 15. So many
Kerseis of 2 pound, 6 shillinges 8 pence the piece shall you have for. 36.
pound, 3. shillynges 4 pence. ^

The fowerth Chapter treats of losses and gains, in the trade of
marchaundise.
IF 13 yardes be worth 22 li. 10 shillynges, how shall I sell the yard to
gain, or to make of 3. 4? which is all one? Answer: say by the rule of 3,
if 3 be come of 4. or if 3. yield 4. what will 22.: multiply and divide, and
you shall find 30.li. Then say again by the rule of 3. if 13 yardes 1/(...) do
give 30.li. as well of principal as of gain: what will 1 yard be worth by the
price? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 2. pound 5 shil. and for that
price must the yard be sold to gain the, or to make of 3. 4. ^

Or otherwise, take the part of 22. ^i. 10. s. which is 7.l. 10. s. that shall
you add with 22 pound 10 shillynges, and you shall have 30 pound as before.
Then divide ^ 30. by 13.. and you shall find 2 pound 5 shillynges, as above
is said.

If one yard be worth 27. s. 6. d. for how much shall 16 yardes be sold,
to gain 2. s upon the pound of money, that is to say: open 20. s. Answer:
add 2 unto 20 and you shall have 22, then say: if 20. s. of principal, do
give 22. s. as well of principal as gain: how much will 27. s. 6. d. principal
yield. Multiply and divide and you shall find 30. s.: then say again by the
rule of 3, if 1. yard do give me 30. s (which is as well the principal as the
gain) what shall 16 yardes give me? Multiply and divide, and you shall find
25.li. 4. s. 2. d. For the same price shall the 16 yardes be sold to gain
after the rate of 2. s upon the pound of money, or in 20. s. which is all one.
^

If 10 yardes be worth 25.li. 10. s For how much shall 2 yards be sold to
gain after 10.li. upon the 100.li. of money? Answer: say if 100 of
principal yield 110 as well principal as gain how much will 25.li. 10. s.
yield me? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 28.li. 1. s. Then say if
10 yardes do yield me 28.li. 1. s. as well of principal as of gain, how much
shall. 2. yardes yield me? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 5.li. 18.
s. 4. d. 1/^2, for so much shall the two yardes be sold, to gain after
10.li. upon the 100.li. of money. ^

And although that in these questions of gain and loss, sometimes the first
no^bers is not like unto the third number, that is to say, of the same
denomination: as one would say: if 20. shillynges gain. 2. shillynges, what
shall. 50.li. gain? Or 25.li. etc. Or if 20.li. do gain 2.li. What shall 25.
s. gain me, or what shall. 27. s. gain? Yet nevertheless, the rule is not
therefore false. For if 20. s. do gain 2. s: 20.li. shall gain 2.li. and 20.
d. shall gain 2. d. likewise 20 crounes shall gain 2 crounes, and so of all
other: therefore it is to be understand, that the first number in these
reasons, is presupposed to be semblable to the third.

When one merchant sells wares to an other, and he gives to the buyer 2
upon 15: how much shall the buyer gain upon the 100 after the rate? Answer:
say if 15 give 17, what shall 100 give? Multiply and divide, and you shall
find 113, so the buyer gets after the rate of 13 upon the 100. ^

If 1. North dosen cost me 3 li. 5 s. and I sell ye same again for 3.li. 12. s.
6 d. how much do I gain upon the li. of money after the rate. Answer say if
3.li. do give 3. li, what shall 20/8 give, put the whole number into their
broken, and you shall have 13/4, 29/8, 20/1, then multiply 4 times 29, by 20,
and thereof comes 2320 for your number that is to be divided, likewise
multiply 13 times 8. 1 time, and thereof comes 104. Then divide 2320 by 104,
and you shall find 22 shillinges 4/13. So I shall get 2 shillynges 4/13 upon
20 shill. or upon the li. of money. ^

If a yard of clothe cost me 7 shillynges 8 pence, and afterward I deliver
out 13 yardes, for 4 pound 13. s. 4 pence. I would know whether I do win or
lose, and how much upon the 100 pound of money? Answer: se first at 7
shillynges 8 pence the yard, what the 13 yardes shall cost, and you shall
find 5 pound 1 shil. 7 pence. And I sold them but for 4 pound 13 shil. 4
pence, so that I do lose upon the 13 yardes the sum of 8 shilly. 3 pence.
Then for to know how much is lost upon the 100: say by the rule of 3, ^^ 5.
pound 1 shil. 7. pence do lose 8 shil. 3. d What will 100 lose? First put 1
shill. 7 pence into the part of a pound, and it will be 19/240. Likewise put 8
shill. 3. d. into the part of a li. and it is 33/80. Then will your number
stand thus 5. 19/240, 33/80, 100/^^, put the whole into his broken, and then
multiply and divide, so you shall find 8.li. 1184/9752, which is worth 2.
shillynges. 5. d. 169/1219 and so much is lost upon the 100.li. of money. ^

More, if 12 yardes of Scarlet bes sold for 30 pound 15 shillynges, upon the
which is gained after the rate of (...) 1/9 upon the 100. I demand what the
yard did cost at the first. Answer: from 30 pound 15 shillynges,
substracte his 1/10 part, which is 3.li. 1. s 6. d. and there rests 27.li.
13. s. 6. d. the which number multiplied by. 2. brings 55.li. 7. s. of the
which is 2 pound, one shillyng and ^ower pe^ce. Then take again the of
thesaied (...) pound 1 shillyng 4 pence, which is 2 pound ^ower shillynges
three pence, 9/25. And so much did the elle cost at the first penie. ^

More, if 15 yardes of Scarlette do cost me 32 pound 13. s. 4. pence. And I
sell the yard again for 2 pound, whether do I win or lose, and how much
upon the pound of money.

Answer: look what the 15 yards are worth at 2.li. the yard, and you shall
find that they are worth 31.l. 10. s. But they did cost 32.li. 13. s. 4. d. so
that there is lost upon the whole 1.li. 3, s 4. d. The^ to know how much is
lost upon the li. say by the rule of 3, if 32 li. do lose 1 li.: what will
lose? That is to say: what will 1 li. lose? Reduce the whole nombers into
their broken, and then multiply and divide, so shall you find 21/^8^ part of
a li. Then multiply 21 by 240. because so many pence are in a li. and divide
the producte by 588. so shall you find 8. d. which being abreuiated do make
4/7, and thus you se that 8. d. 4/7 is lost upon the li. of money. ^

If 1. yard of cloth of tissue be sold for 3.li. 15. s. whereupon is lost
after the rate of 10. s. upon the 100. I demand what 12. yardes of the same
tissue did cost? Answer: add unto 3.li. 15. his own 1/10 part, which is 7.
s. 6. d. and al amounts to 4.li. 2. s. 6. d. then look what the 12. yardes
will amount unto, after 4.li. 2. s. 6. d. and you shall find that they will
come to 51.li. 11. s. 3. d. so much did the 12. yardes cost. ^

More, if I sell 1 Wilshire white for 6 li. 12 s. whereupon I do gain after
the rate of 2 shil. upon the li. of money, that is to say, upon 20 s. I
demand what 11 pieces of the same whites did cost me? Answer: abate from 6
pound 12 s. (which is 132 s) his 1/^^ part, and thereof comes 12 s. and
there remains 120 s. or. 6 li. Then se at 6.li. the clothe, what the 11
clothes are worth and you shall find them to be worth 66 li. so much did
the 11 clothes cost. ^

If I sell 10 else of Holla^d for 12 s. 6 d. whereupon I do lose after the rate
of 2 s. upon the li. of money. I demand what the ell did cost me? Answer:
say by the rule of: 3, if 18 give 20: s. what will 20 s: 6: d: give? Multiply
and divide, and you shall find 25 s: Then dinide 25 s. by 10, and thereof
comes 2 shil. 4. d. 4/7. So much did the ell cost ^

If I sell 1 clothe for 5 li. whereupon I do lose 10 upon the 100, I demand
how much I should lose or gain upon the 100, in case I had sold the same for
5 li. 10. s. Answer: say, if 90 yield 100, how much will 5 li. give.
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 5 li. 5/9: then say again by the
rule of 3, if 5/9 come to 5, what will 100 come unto? Multiply and divide, and
you shall find 99 li. which being abated from 100. there will remain 1 pound,
and so much is lost upon the 100. ^

The fifte Chapter treats of lengthes and breadthes of tapistrie, and other
clothes.
IF a piece of Tapistri^e be 5 else long, and 4 else in breadth, how many
else square does the same piece contain? Answer: multiply the length by the
breadth, that is to say 5 by 4, and thereof comes 26 else, so many else
square does the same piece contain.

More, if a piece of Tapistrie do contain 32. else square, and the same
being in length 6 else. I demand how many else in breadth the same piece
does contain. Auns. divide 32. else by 6 and thereof comes 5. 3/28: So
many else does the same piece contain in breadth.

More, a piece of clothe being 13. yardes in length, and 5, quarters in
breadth, how many yardes of and broad will the same piece make? Answer: see
what part of a yard, the 5/4 and be, and you shall find that they make 1
yard. Then multiplye 13 yardes (...) by 1 yard and you shall have 18. yardes
in square the which you must divide by and that is to say by (...), (because
the, being brought into 1 fraction makes 5/(...)) and you shall find 22.
yardes: So many yardes of (...) and (...) large does the same piece contain.

More, a merchant has bought 4. yardes of cloth being sire quarters (...)
broad to make him a gown the which he will line thoro^out, with black Say of
three quarters of a yard broad, I demand how much Say he must bye? Answer:
Multiplye the length of the cloth, by the breadth, that is to say 4 by 1,
(which is the syx quarters) and thereof comes 7. yardes 7/12, the which
divide by and you shall find ten yardes 1/9. So many yardes of Say must he have
to line the same 4 yardes of clothe of 6. quart. (...) broad.

More, at 6, s. 8, d. the elle square, what shall a piece of tapistrie cost me,
which is five else long and 4, else broad? Answer, multiply 5, by 4, (...)
and thereof comes 23 else square: then say by the rule of three, if one elle
square cost me 6, s. 8, d. what shall 23 cost? Multiplye and divide, and you
shall find 7 li. 15. s. 10 d. so much the said piece of tapistrie did cost.

Or otherwise, by the rules of practice, take the of 23.: and you shall find
7.li. 15. s. 10. d. as above is said.

More, a piece of Hollande clothe containing 42. else Flemish, how many else
English do they make? Here must you first note that 100. else Flemish, do make
but 60. else English, and so consequentlye five else Flemishe do make but 3.
else English. Therefore say by the rule of 3. if 5. else flemish do make three
else English, how many else English will 42, else Flemish make. Multiply and
divide so shall you find 25. else English, and so many else English does
42. Flemish contain, the like is to be done of all others.

More, I have boughte a piece of Tapistrie, being 5. else long, and 4. else
broad measure of Flaunders, I demand how many else square it makes
English measure? Answer: First, forasmuch as three else english are worth 5
else flemishe, therefore put 3 else english into his square, in multipliyng
3. by himself which makes 9: likewise multiplye 5. in himself squarely, and
it will be 25. Then multiplye 5 which is the length of the piece, by 4 which is
the breadth, and thereof comes 26 else square, then say by y^ rule of three,
if 25 else square of flemishe measure, be worth 9 else square of english
measure, what are 26 else flemish worth? multiply and divide, and you shall
find that they are worth nine else 33/50 square of english measure.

More at 3. s. 6. d: the ell flemish what is the english ell worth after y^
rate. Answer: say if 5. else flemishe be worth three else english, what is
1 ell flemishe worth? multiply and divide, and you shall fiynde 3/^ of an
english ell. Then say by the rule of 3, if (...) of an english ell, be worth
3 s. 6 d. what is 1. english ell worth? multiplye and divide, and you shall
find 5 s. 10. d. so much shall the english ell be worth.

More at 6 s. 8 d. the flemishe elle square, what is the english ell worth.
Answer: say by the aforesaid reason, if 25 else flemishe square, be worth 9.
else square english, what is one ell square flemishe worth? multiply and
divide, and you shall find 9/25 of a square english elle: Then say, if 9/25
of an english elle be worth 6 s. 8. d. what is one square elle english worth?
multiply and divide, and you shall find 18. s. 6. d. ^/9, so much shall one
english elle square be worth.

The sixth Chapter treats of the reducing of the paumes of Genes into english
yardes, whereof four Paumes makes one english yard.
I Have bought 97. paumes (...) of Genes velvet, and I would know how many
yardes they will make? Answer, Divide 97. (...) by 4. and you shall have 24.
yardes (...). So many yardes do the 97. paumes ^/2 contain.

Or otherwise, take some other number at your pleasure, as 20, paumes, which
do make five yardes, and then say by the rule of three, if 20/1 paumes, give
5/1 yardes, what will 97. give? Multiplye and divide, and you shall find 24.
yardes as before.

More, at two shillings 7, d. y^ pau(...) of Genes, what will the English yard
be worth after the rate? Answer, say by the rule of three, if of an English
yard be worth two shillings 7/12. What is (...) yard worth? Multiply and
divide, and you shall find ten shillings 4. d. So much is the English yard
worth.

Or otherwise, multiply 4. paumes (which is one yard) by two shillings 7,
pence, and you shall find 10, s. 4. d. as before.

If 257. Paumes be worth 20.li. 16. s. 8. d. What is one yard worth after
the rate? Annswere, say: by the rule of 3, if 257, paumes be worth 20. 5/^,
what are 4/^ paumes worth. Multiply and divide, and you shall find 100/309
part of a pound, which is worth 6 s. 5. pence, (...): so much is one yard
worth.

The vii. Chapter treats of marchaundise sold by weight.
AT 9. d. the ounce, what is the li. weight worth? Answer, say if 3/^ give 9.
what will (...) give multiply and divide, and you shall find 12. s. 8 d. so
much is the yard worth?

Or otherwise, by the rules of practice for sire pence, take the of 16. which
is 8. s. then for 3. d. take the of 16. s. which is 4. s. Finally, for the
halpenye, take 16. ob. which are 8. d. add all these nombers together and you
shall find 12. s. 8. d. as before.

More, at 10 d. the ounce, what are 112.li. weight worth after the rate?
Answer reduce. 112.li. into ounces: in multipliyng. 112.li. by 16. ounces and
you shall have 1792. ounces, then say by the rule of 3. if 1/^101722/1:
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 18816 d. which do make 78.li. 8. s.
and so much are the 112.li. worth after 10. d. the ounce.

At 12. s. 8. d. the li. weight, what is the ounce worth: Answer: put 12. s.
8 d. into pence, and you shall have 152. pence: then say by the rule of 3. if
16. ounces cost 152. d. what shall 1. ounce cost, multiplye and divide, and
you shall find 9. d. 1/1, so much is the ounce worth.

Or otherwise, take the of 12 s. 8. d. for 4 ounces, and thereof comes 3. s.
2. d. then for one ounce, take the of 3. s. 2 d. and you shall have 9. d. as
before.

At 32.li. 10. s. the quintall, that is to say, the 100.li. weight what is
1.li. weight worth after the same rate? Answer: Put 32.li. 12. s. al into
shillings and you shall have 650. s.

Then say, by the rule of three, if (...) 650 (...). multiply and divide, and
you shall find, 6 s. 6. d. so much is the 11. worth.

If one pound weight of saffron do cost me 18. s. 8 d. what shall 355.li. 10.
ounces cost me by the same price? Answer, say by the rule of 3. if 18 355.
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 331.li. 18. s. 4. d. so much are the
355.li. ten ounces worth.

Brief rules of weight.
WHo that multiplieth the pe^ce that 1.li. weight is worth by (...), and
divides the product thereof by. 12. he shall find how many pounds in money
the quintal is worth that is to say, how much the 100.li. weight is worth.

And contrariwise he that multiplieth the pounds of money that the 100 weight
is worth by 12. and divide the product by 5. and you shall find how many
pe^ce the pound weight is worth.

Example.
AT seuentene pence the pound weight, what is the 100 pound weight worth?
Answer, Multiply 17. by 5, and thereof comes 85. divide the same by 12.
and you shall find 7. pound 1/12, which 1/12 is worth one shilling and eight
pence. So much is the 100 pound weight worth.

More, at 13, li. the 100 li. weight, what is one pound weight worth?
Answer, Multiply 13. by 12. amounts to 156. the which divide by 5. and
you shall find 31. d. ^/5 which is 2. s. 7 d. 1/^ and so much is one pound
weight worth.

The like is to be done of yardes, else, or of any other measure, when we
reckon but five score to the hundred.

Brief Rules for measure.
Who that multiplieth the pence that one ell is worth, by 6. And divides the
product by 12. he shall find how many pounds in money ye 120. else are
worth, which 120 else we count but for a C.

And contrariwise, be that multiplieth the pounds in money that the 120 else
are worth by 12, and divides the multiplicotion by 6, shall find how many
pence the ell is worth.

Example.
At ten pence the ell, what are 120. else worth: Answer, multiply 10. d. by
6. and thereof comes 60: The which divide by 12. and you shall find five
pound, so many pounds in money are 120. else worth at 10. d. the ell.

More. at 9. pound, the 120, else, what is one elle worth? Answer,
Multiply nine pound by twelve, and thereof comes 108, the which divide by 6.
and you shall find 18. d. so much is one elle worth.

The like is to be done of alll manner of wares, which are sold after 120. for
the hundred.

Brief Rules for ^ure hundredth weight here at London, which is after 112.li.
for the C.
WHo that multiplieth ye pence that one pound weight is worth by 28. and
divides the product by 60. shall find how many pounds in money the 112.li.
weight is worth.

ANd contrariwise, he that multiplied y^ pounds in money that the 112, li. is
worth by 6^, and divides the product by 28. shall find how many pence one
li. weight is worth.

Example.
AT nine pence the pound weight, what is the 112 li. weight worth^ Answer:
multiply 6. (...). by 28, and thereof comes 2, 2, the which divide by 60,
and you shall find 4.li. 12/60 which being abbreuiated is (...) of a pound,
which is worth 4, s. And thus the (...).li. 2. is worth 4. pound 4, shil.

At 8 li. the 112, li. weight, what is 1.li. weight worth? Answer, Multiply
8 li. by 60, and thereof comes 480, the which divide by 28. and you shall
find 17. d. (...): so much is 1, li. weight worth.

The.viij. Chapter treats of tares and allowances of marchaundise sold by
weight:
AT 12 li. the 100. suttell, what shall 987 li. suttell be worth? in giving 4
li. weight upon every 100 for tret? Answer, add 4 li. unto 100. and you
shall have 104. Then say by the rule of three, if 104. be worth 1^.li. what are
987 li. weight worth? multiply and divide, and you shall find 113, li. (...)
which is worth 17. s. 8, d. 4/^^. So much shall ye 987.li. weight be worth. ^

At 6, s. 8. d. the pound weight what shall 345, li. be worth in giving 4, li.
weight upon every 100, for the tret. Answer, see first by the rule of three,
what the 100 pound is worth saying, if (...)6100/1 Multiply and divide, and
you shall find 33.li. then add 4.li. unto 100, and they are 104. then say
again by the rule of 3. if a 104.li. be sold for 33, li. for how much shall
345.li. be sole? multiply and divide, and you shall find 110.l. 14. s. 8. d.
12/13 So much shall the 345.li. ^/2 be worth, at 6. s. 8. d. the pound, in
giving 4. upon the 100.

More, if 100 be worth 36. s. 8 d. what shall 780.li. be worth in rebating 4
li. upon every 100, for Tare and Close? Answer, Multiply 780. by 4. and thereof
comes 3120. The which divide by 100. and you shall have 31, li. abate 31. from
780. and there will remain 748. Then say by the rule of three, if 100/1 do
cost 36., what will 748. cost after the rate? Multiply and divide so shall you
find 274. s. 6. d. ^8/25, and so much shall the 780.li. cost, in rebatinge
4.li. upon every 100. for Tare and Cloffe.

More, whether does he lose more that gives 5 li. upon the 100. or he that
rebateth 5.li. upon the 100. for care and cloffe? Answer. First, note that he
which gives 5.li. upon the 100. gives 105. for 100: and he which rebateth
5.li. upon the 100. gives the 100. for 95. Therefore say by the rule of 3. if
105. be given for 100: for how much shall y^ 100. be given? Multiply and divide
and you shall find 65. 5/2^: and be which rebateth 5. upon the 100. makes but
95. of 100: so that he loses 5. upon the 100 and the other which gives 5.
upon y^ 100 loses but 4. 16/21 upon the 100. Thus he that rabateth 5. upon the
100. loses more by 5/21 upon the 100. than the other which gave 5. upon the
100. for tare and clo^fe.

If 100. of Allam do(...) me. 26. s. 8. d. how shall I sell the li. weight to
gain after the rate of 10. upon y^ 100. Answer, put 26. s. 8. d. al into
pence. and you shall have 320. d. The^ say by y^ rule at 3. if 100. give 110
what shall 320 give multiply and divide, and you shall find 352. d. The^ say,
if 100 li. be worth 352 d. what is (...), li. multiplye and divide, and you
shall have 3, d. 26/50 which 26/50 is worth, and 1/25 of. That is to say, the
pound weight shall be worth 3. d., 1/25 of a half pennye, in gaining 10. upon
the 100.

If one pound weight do cost me, 6 s. 10, d. and I sell the same for 7, s. 2
d. I demand how much I should gain upon the 100 li, of money after the rate?
Answer, say by the rule of 3. if 6, yield 7. 2/6 what will 105/1 yield? Put
the whole nombers into their broken, the (...)ul^iplie and divide, and you
shall find 10436/41 from the which substract 100, and there rests 4.li.
36/41 so much is gained upon the hundred pound of money after the rate.

More, if one pound do cost me 5, s. 4. d. and I sell the same again for 4, s.
9 d. I demand how much I shall lose upon the 100. pound of money? say, if 5,
do give but 4,, what shall 100/1 give? Put the whole number into their
broken. Then multiply and divide, and you shall find 89 1/10. the which you
must substract from 100. and there will remain. 10. pound 15/^6, so much is
lost upon the. 100. pound of money.

More, if the pound weight do cost me. 3. shillynges. 2. pence: and I sell it
again for. 3. shillynges. 4. pence, how much shall I gain upon. 20. shillin.
Answer: say if 3 give 4, what shall 20/1 give. Multiply and divide and you
shall find 27. shillinges 7/19: out of the which abate. 20. shillynges, and
there will remain. 7. shillynges 7/19, which is. 4. pence 4/19: and so much
is gained upon the pound of money, that is to say upon 20. shillinges.

If the pound weight do cost me 4. shillinges. 4. pe^ce, and sell it again
for. 3. shillinges. 2. pence. I demand how much I shall lose upon the pound
of money? That is to say, upon. 20. shillynges. Answer: say, if, 4. give but
3, what will 20/1 give, multiply and divide, and you shall find. 14. s.
(...), the which you must abate from. 20 shillynges, and there will remain.
5. shillinges 5/13, which (...), is worth. 4. d. (...) of a penie, and so
much is lost upon the pound of money.

The ninth Chapter treats of certain questions, done by the double rule, and
also by the rule of three compounde.
WHen the quarter of Wheat does cost 6. s. 8. d the loaf of bread waiyng.
20. ounces is sold for a ob. I demand that if the quarter of Wheat did cost
10 shillinges, for how much shall the loaf of bread be sold, that waieth. 16.
ounces? Answer: by the first part of the rule of 3. compounde, which is
mentioned in the third part of this book, and in the second Chaptier of the
same. Therefore say by the same first part of the rule of. 3. compounde, if
620/110/116/1.

Then multiply the first number by the second, and the producte thereof
shall be your divisor. Likewise multiply the other three nombers, the one by the
other, and the producte thereof shall be your diuidende: As thus, first
multiply. 6 by. 20. and thereof comes 400/(...) for your divisor, then
multiply by 10/1, and the producte thereof by 16/1, so you shall have (...)
for your number that is to be divided, then divide 150/^ by 400/^^, and
thereof comes 480/800. the which being abbreuiated, brings (...). of a
penie: and for that price must the loaf of bread be sold, which waieth
sixtene ounces, and the quarter of Wheat being worth ten shillynges.

Or otherwise by the rule of three, at two times. First say if ^0/1 ounces
give, what will 16/1 ounces give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find
2/^, of a penny. Then say again, if. 6. (...) do give me, what will 10/2
give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find of a penie, as before is said.

When the carriage of one hundredth waighte of Marchaundise. 50. miles does
cost. 5. shillinges, what shall the carriage of. 500. weight cost me for. 16.
mile? Answer. By the first part of the rule of. 3. compounde, saying, if
10050550016 Multiply. 100. by 50. the produ^^e will be. 5000. which shall be
your divisor. Then multiply 5. times. 500. by. 16. and thereof comes. 40000.
for your diuidende. Therefore divide. 40000. by. 5000. and you shall find. 8.
shillynges, so much shall cost the carriage of. 500. weight. 16. miles.

Or otherwise by the double rule of three, that is to say, by the rule of
three at two times: first safe if. 50. miles do pay. 5. shillinges, what
shall. 16. miles pay? Multiply and divide, and you shall find. 1. shilling.
Then say again, if. 100. weight do cost me. 1: shilling 3/^, what shall.
500. waighte cost? Multiply and divide, and you shall find. 8. shillinges,
as before.

When the carriage of. 800. pound weight of Marchaundise. 84. miles, does cost
me. 6. shillinges, how many miles may I have. 64. pound weight carted for. 3.
shillinges. 4 pence. Answer, by the second part of the rule of 3. compounde:
say if (...) 84/1 6/1 64/1 3.

Then multiply the fowerth number 64/1 by the third number, and thereof comes
(...) for your divisor. Likewise multiply. 3 by 100/1, and by 14/1, and you
shall have in the product 24000/^. then divide ^^000/3 by 384/1 and you shall
find. 72. miles 11/12 of a mile. So many miles shall the. 64. pound weight be
carried, for three shillinges. 4. pence.

Otherwise by the rule of. 3. at two times: first say, if. 100. weight do
cost me. 6. shillinges, what shall. 64. p^u^d weight cost? Multiply and
divide. and you shall find. 3. shillinges 21/25. Then say, if 3 21/25. he
paid for. 84. miles carriage: for how many miles shall (...). shillynges be
paid? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 72 miles 1^/12.

If 100 horses in 100. days do spend 180. quarters of otes: how many quarters
of Otes will. 300. horses spend in. 150. days? Answer: by the first part
of the rule of three compounde: multiply. 180. times. 350. by. 150. and divide
the product by. 100. times. 100 and you shall find. 945. quarters. So many
quarters of Otes will 350. horses spend in. 150. days.

Or otherwise by the rule of three at two times: first say, if 100. days do
yield me. 180. quarters of Otes: what shall. 150. days yield: multiply and
divide, and you shall find. 270. quarters: then say again, if. 100. horses
do spend. 270. quarters of otes, how many quarters of otes will. 350. horses
spend? Multiply and divide, as you shall find. 945. quarters as before.

The tenth Chapter treats of the rule of fellowship, with out any time
limited.
THE rule of Fellowship is thus: you must set down each man's sum of
money that he lays into company, every one directly under the other, the
which you shall add altogether, and the total sum of all their whole
stock being thus assembled, shall be your common divisor, to the findyng out of
every man's part of the gain. Then shall you multiply the gain, or else the
loss, by each man's portion of money that be laid in, and divide the
productes by the said divisor: so shall you have in your quotient every man's
part of the gain, or else of the loss, if any thing be lost.

Example.
1. Two Merchants have made company together, the first laid in five
hundred pound. The second put in three hundred pound, and with occupiyng they
have gained. 64. pound: I demand how much each man shall have of the same
gains, according to the money that he laid in. Answer: Add. 500. and. 300.
both together, which are the percelles that they laid in, and thereof
comes. 800. for your divisor: then say by the rule of three, if 300.li.
(which is their stock) do gain 64.li. what shall. 500.li. gain? (which is the
first man's money that he laid in) multiply and divide, and you shall find.
40.li. for the first man's part of the gain: then say if. 800. give. 64. what
will. 300. give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 24.li. for the
second man's part of the gain. ^

Or otherwise, put 500.li. which is the first man's money that he laid in, over
the 800 li. which is the whole, stock, and you shall have 509/800 which being
abbreuiated, do make, and such part of the gain shall the first man take, that
is to say of 64.li. which is 40.li. And consequently, by the same manner, the
second shall take the of 64. which is 24. pound for his part of the gain as
before. ^

2. Two Merchants have compainied together, the first put in 640.li. and he
takes parts of the gain. I demand what the second Marchaunte laid in?
Answer. Seeing that the first Merchant takes of the gain, it follows
that the second must have which is the rest, and there fore say by the rule of
three, if of the gain, which the first manne takes, did say into the stock
(...). How much shall the of the gain lay in, which is the second man's
gain? Multitiplie and divide, and you shall find 384. pound, so much ought
the second man to lay into company.

3. Two Merchants have companied together, the first manne laid in. 640.
pound, and the second has laid in so much, that he must have 60. pound
for his part of. 100. pound which they have gained. I demand how much the
second man did lay into company? Answer: seeing that the second man takes.
60. pound of the gain: it follows that the first must have but. 40.
pound. Therefore say by the rule of. 3. if. 40. pound do lay in. 640.
pound, what shall. 60. pound lay in? Multiply and divide, and you shall
find. 260.li. so much did the second Merchant lay in.

4. Two Merchants have companied together, the first laid in. 83. pound
6. shillinges. 8: pence, the second put in. 170. duckettes: and they have
gained 100. li of yt which the first man must have 60 pound. I demand what
the ducket was worth? Answer seeing that the first man must have 60 pound, it
follows that the second must have. 40. pound, therefore say by the rule
of three, if. 60. pound of gain that the first man takes did lay in. 83.li.
6 s. 8. pence of principal, how much shall. 40.li. of gain put it, mulplie
and divide, and you shall find 55.li. 5/9: so much are the 170. ducats
worth. Then put 55.li. 5/9 into shillings and you shall have 1111. s. 5/9 then
to know what the ducket is worth, say by the rule of three, if a (...) give
1111. (...), what will (...) give? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 6.
s. 6. d. 12/51, so much is the ducket worth.

5. Two Merchants have companied together, the second man laid in more by
30. pounds then did the first man: and they gained 120. pounds of the which
the first man ought to have 50. pounds. I demand what each of the^ did lay
in. Aunsware, from 120. pound abate 50. pound and there rests 70. pound for
the second man's part: so that by this means the second manne (because he
laid in 30. pound more then the first man did) takes 20.l. more of the gain:
and therefore say by the rule of 3. if 20.li. of gain did lay in. 30. pound
of principal, how much shall. 50. pound lay in Multiply and divide, and
you shall find. 75. pound, so much did the first man lay in, and
consequently the second laid in. 105. pound.

6. Two Merchants have companied together, the second has laid in twice so
much as the first man did, and. 10. pound more: and they gained 100. pound,
of the which, the first ought to have. 32. pound for his part: I demand
how much each of them did lay into company? Answer. If it were not for the.
10. pound that the second manne laid in more: he should have had but. 64.
pound of the gain, which is the double of the first man's part. But because
he laid in. 10.li. more, he has ^ower pound more of the gain, and therefore
say by the rule of. 3. if. 4. pound of gain did lay in 10 pound of
principal (which was over and above the double of the first man's laiyng in)
what shall 32.li. of gains lay in? which is the first man's part of the
gains that he takes. Multiply and divide, and you shall find 80.li. for the
first man's laiyng in: and consequently. 170. pound for the second man's
portion that he laid in.

4. Two Merchants have companied together, and they have gained 100. pound
of the which the first must have after the rate of 10 upon the 100 pound, and
the second must have after the rate of 15 pound upon the 100.li. I demand
how much each of them ought to have? Answer. But 10.li. for the first
man's laiyng in, and. 15 li. for the second man's laiyng in Add 10.li. and.
15. pound together, and they make 25. pound. Then put 10. over 25 and it is
10/25, which being abreuiated are. Therefore he that takes 10 li. upon the
100. it must have the 2/^ of the gain, which is 40.li. Then put. 1^. over 25.
and it is 15/25, which being abreuiated are 3/^. Therefore the second must have
3/^ of the 100.li. which is. 60.li.

8. Two Marchautes have companied together, the first laid in 46.li. 18.
shilling. and the second laid in 33. pound 2. s. so they have gained 30.
pound. I demand how much every man shall have for his part of the gain
Answer: Add 46. pound 18. shilling and 33. pound 2. shilling both together
and you shall find 80. pound for your common divisor: then say if 80. pound
which is all their stock do gain 30.li. what will 46. 6/10 gain, which is the
first man's laiyng in: Multiply and divide, and you shall find 17. pound 11.
shillyng 9. pence for the first man's part of the gain. Then say again, if
80. pound do gain 30. pound what will 33. pound 1/10 gain, which was the
second man's laiyng in: multiply and divide, and you shall find 12.li. 8. s.
3. d. for the second man's part of the gain.

And after the same manner shall you do, in case there were three or four
Merchants that would company together: Addyng al their sums of money
(which they lay into the stock) into one total sum: which shall be your
common deuisor: and then work with the rest, as is taught in the former
questions of the rule of company.

9. Three Marchautes have companied together, the first laid in I know not how
much: the second did put in 20. pieces of clothe, and the third has laid
500. pound. So at the end of their company, their gains amounted unto a
thousand pound, whereof the first manne ought to have 350. pound, and the
second must have four hundred pound.

Now I demand how much the first man did lay in, and for how much the
twenty pieces of clothe were put into company?

Answer.

Seeing that the first and the second Marchautes must have 750.li. for their
parts of the gain. Then the third manne must have the rest of the thousand
pound which is 250.li. And theerfore say by the rule of. 3. (...) 250. of
gain, be come of 500. pound of principal: of how much shall come 350 pound
of gain? which the first man takes, multiply and divide, and you shall
find 700. pound. So much did the first man lay in then say if. 250 pound of
gain be come of. 500. pound of principal, of how much will come 400. pound,
which is the gain that the second man takes. Multiply and divide, and you
shall find. 800. pound For so much were the. 20. pieces of clothe laid into
company.

10. Three Merchants have gained. 100.li. the first must have the, the
second must have: and the third must have. I demand how much every manne
must have of the gain? Answer: reduce,,, into a common denomination, after
the order of the second reduction in fractions, and you shall find 12/24, for
the, 8/24, for the: and 6/^^, for the: Then take twelve for the first man's
laiyng in, 8. for the second man's laying in: and 6 for the third man's
laying in. The which three nombers being added together shall be your common
divisor, which do make 25. Then multiply 100 by 12 for the first man, by 8,
for the second man, and by 6 for the third man. And divide every multiplication
by 26. So shall you find 46 li. 2/13 for the first man's part of the gain.
30.li. 10/13 for the second man's part: and 23 li. 1/1^0 for the third man's
part.

11. Two merchants have gained 100 li. the first must have and 5 li. more:
the second must have and 4 li. more: I demand how much ethe of them shall
have? Answer, From 100 abate 5 and 4. so there will remain 91. then take the of
100 l. which is 50 li. for the first man's laying in: Likewise, take of 100 li.
for the second man's laying in, which is 33 li.. Then add 50 li. and 33 li.
together, and you shall have 83 li. for your common divisor, then multiply 91.
pound by 50. and divide by 83.: and thereof comes 54 pound, unto the which
number add 5, and all is 59.li. for ye first man's part. Likewise multiplye.
91. by 33.: and divide by 83.: and you shall find 36 li. unto the which add 4:
and you shall have forty pound, (...) for the second man's part.

12. Two Merchants have gained a hundred pound, the first must have the
less by 4 pound, the second must have: less by 2 pound. I demand how much
each of them shall have? Answer, Add 4 and 2. with 100. and they make 106.
The^ take as before is said ^0 pound, for the first man, and 33. for the
second, add them both together, and they be 83. which shall be your divisor.
Then multiply 106. by 50. and divide the product by 83, so thereof comes
63.li.. From the which abate the four pound less yt the first man takes,
and then is there remaining 59. pound, for his part. Likewise multiply 106
by 33. and divide by 83 and you shall find 42.li.: from the which abate 2.li.
less and there remains 40. pound, for the second man's part.

The rule of Fellowship with time.
THe money that every man lays in, must be multiplied by the time that it
remains in company: and of that which comes thereof you shall make their
new layings in for each of them: and then multiplye the gains by every one of
them severally, the which you shall divide by all their new layings in adding
together, and you shall have proportionally each man's part of the gain
according to his laying in.

Example.
1. Two Merchants have companied together, the first has put in the first of
January 450. pound, the second did lay in ye 2. of May. 750. pound And at the
years end, they had gained 100 li. I demand how much each of them shall
have of the gain? Answer: forasmuch as the first did put 450.li. the first
of January: his money remained in company 12. months, and therefore multiply
450. by 12 months, and thereof comes 5400. for his new laying in. And the
second laid in his 7, 0 li. but at the first day of May: so that his money
remained in company but 8 months. Therefore multiplye his 750 li. by 8. and
thereof comes 6000 for his new laying in: The^ ^dde 5400. with 6000. and they
make 11400 for your common divisor: Then multiply 100 li. which is the gaynes
by 5400, and divide the product by 11400. and thereof comes 48 li. 7/19 for
the first man's part of the gain. Likewise multiplye 100. by 6000, and divide
the producte by 11400, and you shall find 52. 12/19 and so much must the
second man have for his part of the gain.

2. Two marchaunts have companied together, the first has put in the first of
January 640.li. The second can lay in nothing until the first of April. I
demand how much he shall then lay in, to the end that he may take half
the gains? Answer, Multiply 640 li. by 12. months that his money abides
in the company, and thereof comes 7680 li. for his layinge in. And so much
ought the second man's layinge in to be, for because he takes of the gain:
But for that, that be puts in nothing until the first of April, his money
can be in company no longer than 9 months. And therefore divide 8680 by 9,
and thereof comes 753 li. So much ought the second merchant to lay in the
first of April, to the end that he may take the one moy^y of the gaynes.

3. Three Marchayntes have companied together. the first laid in the first
of March 100 li. The second laid in ye first of June so much money, that of
the gain, he must have the part: and the third laid in ye first of
November so much money, that of the gains he must have likewise and they
continued in company, until ye next March following. I demand how much the
second and the third Merchants did lay in? Answer, Multiply 100. which
the first man did lay in, by 12. months that his money continued in
company, and thereof comes 1200. for his laying in: and so much ought the
second and the third merchant each of them to lay in: Because they part the
gaynes by thirdes. But for that, that the second Merchant puts in nothing
till the first of June, his money can be in company but nine months.
Therefore divide 1200. by nine months, and thereof comes 133.. And so much
ought the second Merchant to lay in: Then, forasmuch as the third
Merchant, did lay in nothing until the first of November: His money abides
in company but the space of four months. Therefore divide 1200. by 4. and
thereof comes three hundred pound. And so much ought the third merchant to
lay into company.

4. Three Merchants have companied together, the first laid in the first of
January a hundred Duckettes. The second has laid in fyftye pound, the
first of March: And the third put in a Jewel the first of Iulye: And at
the years end, they had gained four hundred crowns: of the which, the
first merchant must have fifty crowns, and the second must have 80. I
demand what the Duc^et was worth and at what price the Jewel was valued,
which the third Marchaunte laid in?

Answer: the first man's money is 1200 as before is said, and he takes 50
crowns of the gain: therefore say, if fifty crowns of gain be come of 1200,
whice was his stock, of how much shall come 80. crowns of gain that the
second man takes? multiplye and divide, and you shall find 1920. for the
second marchaunts laying in. Then say again, if 50 crowns be come of 1200.
stock: of how much shall come 270. crowns, which the third man takes of the
gain? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 6480. for the third merchants
laying in. Then divide 1920, which is the second man's laying in, by 10.
months that his money did continue in company, and you shall find 192
Ducats, which are worth 50.li. because he laid in 50 li. Then divide 192
Ducats by the said 50, li. (being reduced into shillinges) and thereof
comes 5. shillings 2. pence,. So much was the Ducket worth: Finallye, divide
6480. (which is the third man's layinge in) by 6. months that his Jewel
remained in company, and you shall find 1080 Ducats: and for that price was
ye Jewel put in company.

5. Three Merchants have companied together: the first laid in the first of
January 100 li. and the first of April he has taken back again 20.li. The
second has laid in the first of March 60.li. and afterward he did put in
more 100 li. the first of August. The third laid in the first of July 150.li.
And the first of October he did take back again 50 li. And at the years end,
they found that they had gained 160 li. I demand how much every man shall
have? Answer, Multiply 100 li. which the first man laid, by 12 months, and
thereof comes 1200. li from that number abate 9 times 20 which are 180. and
there will remain 1020, for the first man's laying in. The^ multiply 60. which
the second man laid in, by ten and you shall have 600 unto the which add 5.
times one hundred, which are 500. so all amounts to 1100. for the second man's
laying in Afterward, multiply 150. pound, which the third man has laid
in, by 6. months, and thereof comes 900. from the which number abate three
times 50. and they are 150: so there rests 750. for the third man's laying
in. Then proceed with the rest, as in the first Question of the rule of
fellowship with time, in adding 1020, 1100. and 750. altogether, which shall be
your Divisor: Then multiply 160 by 1020. by 1100. and by 750. and divide at
every time by your Divisor, which is by all their layinges in added together,
and they make 2870, so you shall find 56. 241/287: for the first man, 61.
93/^87 for the second, and 41. 233/287 for the third man.

6. Two Marchaunts have companied together, the first has put in 960. pound,
for the space of 12. months, and he ought to have 8. pound upon the hundred
pound of the gain. The second has laid in 1120.li. for the space of eight
months, and he ought to have after 12. pound upon the 100. pound of the gain.

And at the years end, they have gained eight hundred pound. I demand how
much each of them shall have of the gain. Answer, multiply 960. that the
first man did lay in, by 12. months, and the product thereof, multiply
again by 8. and you shall have 62160. for the first man's laying in: then
multiplye the 1120. that the second has laid in by eight months, and that
which comes thereof you shall multiply again by 12. and you shall find
10^520. for the second man's layinge in, then proceed with the rest, as in the
first Question of the Rule of Fellowship, and as in the last Exaumple, and
you shall find 3993/13 for the first man: and 430.li. 10/13 for the second man.

The rule of company, between Merchants and their Factours.
7. The estimation of the body or person of a Factour, is in such proportion
to the stock, which the Merchant lays in: as the gain of the said Factour
is unto the gain of the said Merchant. As thus: if a Merchant do put into
the hands of his Factour 200 li. to employe, and he to have half the profise,
the person of the said Factour shall be esteemed 200 li. And if the Factour do
take but the ^/3 of the gain, he should have but so much of the gain as the
merchant takes, which should take wherefore the person of the Factour is
esteemed but the of that which the Merchant lays in, that is to say 100 li.

And if the Factour did take the of the gain, then the Merchant shall take
the residue, which are of ye gain wherefore the gain of the Master unto that
of the Factoure is in such proportion as 3 unto 2. Then if you will know the
estimation of the person of the Factour, say if 3 give me 2 what will 200 give?
Multiply 200 by 2 and divide be 3 so you shall find 133 ^/3 Otherwise,
consider that the Factour takes the of that which the Marchaunte takes. And
therefore take the of 200, and you shall find 133. as before: and so much is
the person of the Factoure esteemed to be worth.

8. And if the Merchant should deliver unto his Factoure 200.li. and the
Factour would lay in 40.li. and his person, to the end he might have the
half of the gain: I demand for how much shall his person be esteemed Ans.
abate 40 li. from 200 li. and there will remain 160.li. And at so much shall
his person be esteemed.

And if the factour would take the of the gain, his person with his 40
pound, shall be esteemed twice as much as the stock that the merchant lays
in, which should have but of the gain: for unto, is in double proportion.
Therefore double two hundred pound, thereof comes 400.li. from the which
abate 40.li. and there will remain 360.li. And if the Factour would take but
the of the gain, that shall be but the of which the merchant takes: then
the estima^ion of his person, with his layinge in should be esteemed but the
half of the which the merchant lays in: take therefore the ^/2 of 200.li.
which is 100.li. from the which abate forty pound and the rest which is
60.li. is the estimation of his person.

9. If it so chance that for to make traffic of 240.li. ye person of the
factour should be so esteemed, yt he should have but the of the gain, and yet
he would have the, I demand how much he should put in of ready money,
besides his person? Answer, seeing that his person gains the, all the whole
layinge in, shall gain the rest that is to say the: now for because is the
of therefore his person shall be esteemed the of all the layinge in. Take then the
of 240. and you shall have 80. for the estimation of his person, and for that,
that he will have the half of ye gain, you shall add 80. with 240.li. and
thereof comes 320. of the which take the half, which is 160. and from the
same you shall abate the 80. and there will remain other 80. which he ought to
lay in of ready money, and the merchant must lay in the overplus, which
amounts to 160.li.

10. A merchant has delivered to his Factour 1200.li. to govern them in the
trade of Merchandise upon such condition that he for his service shall have
the of ye gain if any thing be gained, or of the loss if any thing be lost: I
demand for how much his person was esteemed? Answer, seeing that the Factoure
takes the of the gain, his person ought to be esteemed as much as of the
stock which the Marchaunte lays in, that is to say ye of 1200 li. which is
900 l. The reason is, because the of the gain that the Factoure takes, is the
^/2 of the of the gain that the Merchant takes.

11. A Merchant that delivers unto his Factour 1200 li. and ye Factour
lays in 500 li. and his person: Now, because he lays in 500 li. and his
person, it is agreed between them that be shall take the of y^ gain: I demand
for how much his person was esteemed? Answer, Forasmuch as the Factour
takes the of the gain, he saketh the of that which y^ March^u^t takes, for
are the of: and therefore the Factours laiyng in ought to be 800. pound, which
is the of 1200. pound, that the merchant laid in: Then abate 500. pound,
which the Factour did lay in, from 800. pound, which should be his whole
stock and there remains three hundred pound for the estimation of his person.

12. More, a merchant has delivered unto his factoure a thousand pound upon
such condition, that the factour for his pains and service, shall have the
gains of 2. hundred pound, as though he had laid so much in of ready money: I
demand what the portion of the gain, the said Factour shall take? Answer:
See what part the two hundredth pound (which the Factour laid in) is of one
thousand two hundredth which is the whole stock of their company, and you
shall find that it is the, and such part of the gain shall the Factour take.

But in case that in making the couenauntes, it were agreed that the Factour
should have the gain of two boundred pound of the stock, which the
marchaunte lays in, that is to say of the thousand pound. Then should the
Factour take the part of the gain. For two hundred pound is the of a
thousand pound.

The 11 Chapter treatteth of the Rules of barter.
Two Marchaunts will change their merchandise, the one with the other. The
one of them has clothe of 7. s. 1. d. the yard to selle for ready money, but
in barter he will sell it for 8. s. 4. d. The other has Sinamon of 4. s. 7. d.
the li. to sell for ready money. I demand how he shall sell it in barter to
the end he be no loser? Answer, say, if 7. 1/12 (which is the price that
the yard of clothe is worth in ready money (be sold in barter for 8. for
what shall 4. 7/12 be sold in barter which 4. 7/12 is the price that the l. of
Synamon is worth in ready money, reduce the whole numbers in to their broken,
and then multiply and divide, and you shall find 5. s. 4. d. ^2/1^ parts, of a
penie, and for so much shall he sell the pound of Synamon in barter.

2. Two Marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the other, the
one of them has Chamlets of two pound 18. s. 4. pence the piece to sell for
ready money, and in barter he will sell the piece for 4.li. 3, s. 4. d. the
other has fine cappes of 35. s. 10. d. the dossen to sell in barter. I demand
what the dosen of caps did cost in ready money? Answer: say if 4.li. 3. s. 4.
d. which is the ouerprice of the piece of Chamlet, become of 2.li. 18. s. 4.
pence which was the just price of the same, of what shall come 35. s. 10. d.
which is the ouerprice of the dossen of cappes? Multiply and divide, and you
shall find 25. shil. 1. d. and so much are the dossen of caps worth in ready
money.

3. Two Mharchants will change their marchaundise the one with the other: the
one of them has Fustians of 18. s. 4. d. the piece to sell for ready money,
and in barter he will sell the piece for 26. s. 8. pence. The other has
tapistrie of 15. d. the ell to sell for ready money, and in barter he will sell
it for 20. pence the ell: I demand which of them gains, and how much
upon the hundred pound of money?

Answer: say if 18. s. (which is the just price of the piece of F^itian)
be sold in barter for 16. s.: for how much shall 1. s. (which is the just
price of the ell of Tapistry) be sold in barter? Multiply and divide, and you
shall find 21. d. 9/11. And he does ouersel it but for 20. d. so that of 21.
d. 9/11: be makes but 20. d. And therefore say by the rule of three, if the
second marchaunte, of 21 9/11, do make but 20/1 how much shall he lose upon
the 100/1? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 21., the which being abated
from a hundred there will remain 8.. And after the rate of 8.. does the
second merchant lose upon the 100. And consequently the first merchant, of
20. d. makes 21. d. 9/11: and therefore say again by the rule of three, if the
first marcha^t of 10/11, do make 21. 9/11 how much shall he gain upon 100/1?
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 102.li. 1/11. Thus the first gains
after the rate of nine pound. 1/11 upon the hundred pound of money.

For your better understanding of these questions, you must note that when one
Marchante gains of an other after the rate of ten pound upon the hundred
pound he gains the (...) of his own principal, and the other which
loses after the rate of 9. 1/11 upon the hundred he loses the 1/11 of his
principal. And it may be proved thus: When one merchant will sell his wares
unto an other, which wares stand him but in 100.li. and he will sell the^ for
110.li. he of his 100.li. makes 110.li. wherefore he gains after 10. li upon
the 100. which is the 1/1^ of his principal, and the other which byeth wares
for 110.li. that cost but 110.li. of the 110. pound he makes but 100.li. And
therefore say by the rule of three, if 110. become of 100. of how much shall
come 100? Multiply and divide, and you shall find 90. 10/11, the which abate
from 100: and there rests 9. 1/11 which is the 1/11 of his principal that
y^ second leseth upon the 100. as afo^^ is said. And therefore, who so that
will know what one merchant gains of another, either after the rate of ten
upon the hundred, which is the 1/11 of his principal, or else after the rate
of twenty upon the hundred which is the, or of any other part, and that he
would likewise know what parts the other loses of his principal: he must
take for the numeratour of the broken number of him that loses, as much as for
him that gains, then add the numerator and the denominator (of the broken
number of him that gains) both together, and make thereof the denominator of
the broken number of him that loses, and then shall you have the part of him
that loses, as by example, of him that gains after ten pound upon the
100.li. which is the 1/10 of his principal: take the numerator which is 1.
and make that the numeratoure of the broken number of him that loses, then
add 1. which is the numerator of the fraction of him that gains with ten,
which is his denominator, and you shall have 11. for the denominatour of the
fraction of him that loses. Then put one over the 11. and you shall have 1/11.
Thus it appears when one merchant gains of an other after ten upon the
hundred, he gains the 1/10 of his principal, and the other loses 9. 1/11
which is the 1/11 of his principal. And if he would gain after twenty
upon the hundred which is the of his principal, the other should lose
sixtine which is the of his principal, and so is to be understand of al
other fractions.

4. Two marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the other, the
one of them has Seies of 20. s. and 10. d. the piece to sell for ready money,
and in barter he will sell the piece for 23. s. 4 d. and yet he will gain
moreover after ten pound upon the hundred pound. The other has wol of 50.
s. the hundred to sell for ready money. I demand how he shall sell the C. of
woll in barter; Answer: say if 20. s. 10. d. which is the just price of the
piece of Seye, be sold in barter for 23. s. 4. d. for how much shall 50. s.
(which is the just price of y^ C. of woll) be sold in barter? Multipliye and
divide, and you shall find 56. s. Then for because the first merchant gains
after 10. li upon the C.li. he makes of his c.li. 110.li. and consequently the
second merchant makes of 110.li. but 100.l. And therefore say, if the second
merchant of 110. do make but 100 how much shall he make of 56: Multiply and
divide and you shall find 50. s. 20. d. 10/12 of a penie, and for so much
shall he selle the hundred of woll in barter.

5. More, two Merchants will change their marchaundise, the one with the
other, the one of them has Taffeta, of 16 crowns the piece to sell for
ready money, and in barter he will sell the piece for twenty crowns, and yet
he will gain moreover after ten pound, upon the hundred pound. The other has
ginger of 3. s 9. d. the pound weight, to sell in barter. I demand what the
pound did cost in ready money? Answer: say if twenty crowns which is the
surprice of the piece of Laffeta, become of 16. crowns the just price, of how
much shall come. 3. s. 9. d. which is the price of the ouerselling the pound
of Ginger? Multiply and divide and you shall find 3. s. Then, for because that
the Merchant of Laffeta will gain after the rate of ten upon the hundred*
say if 100. do give 100. what shall 3. s. give? Multiply and divide and you
shall find three shillinges three pence (...) and so much did the pound of
Ginger cost in readite money.

6. More two merchants will thaunge their marchaundise the one with the
other, the one of them has Worsteds of 25 shil. the piece to sell for ready
money, and in barter he will sell the piece for 33. shill. 4. pence and yet he
loses after ten upon the hundred: the other has wax of 3 pound 6. shil. 8.
pence the hundred to sell for ready money. I would know how he should sell his
ware in barter? Answer: say if 25. shil. which is the just price of the
piece of Worsted be sold in barter for three and thirty shill. 4. pence, for
how much shall three pound 6. shil. 8. d. be sold, which is the just price of
the hundred of wax. Multiply and divide, and you shall find four pound 4/9
which is eight shillinges ten pente, then for because that the Merchant of
Worsteds, loses after ten upon the hundred: Of a hundred he makes but
sixty. And thererefore, say: If ninety give a hundred what gives four
pound. 4/9? Multiply and divide, and you shall find four 76/81 which is
worth eightine shillinges nine pence 5/27, and for so much shall he sell the
one hundredth of Wax in barter.

7. More, two Merchants will change their marchaundise the one with the
other, the one of them has Worsteds of 5. pound six shillinges, eight pence
the piece to sell for ready money, and in barter he will sell the piece for
6. pound, 13. shillinges. 4. d. and yet he loses after ten upon the
hundred, and the other has Musk of two shillings. nine pence the pound
weight, to sell in barter? I demand what the pound did cost in ready money?
Answer: say if 6 pound. which is the ouerprice of the piece of Worsted,
become of 5. pound, 1/9 which is the just price of the same, of how much shall
come two shillinges 9. pence.. Multiplye and divide and you shall find 2.
2/9. which is two pence then for because that the marchaunte of Worsteds
loses after ten upon the hundred, of a hundred he makes but 90. and
therefore say if a hundred give but 90. how much shall 2. s. 2/9 give?
Multiply and divide and you shall find two shillynges and so much cost the
pound of Musk in ready money.

Other Rules of Barter, wherein is given some part in ready money.
WHen a Merchant ouerselleth his marchaundise and he will give also some part
of his ouerprice in ready money as in the the or the etc. He must substract
the same part of money from the just price, and also from the ouerprice of his
merchandise: and the two numbers that remain after the substraction is made,
shall be that two first numbers in the rule of three and the just price of the
second merchant shall be y^ third, to know how much he shall ouersel the part of
his marcha^dise

8: Two Marchaunts will change their marchaundise the one with the other the
one of them has fine woll at five pound the hundredth, to sell for ready
money, and in barter he will sell it for six pound, and yet he will have
the ^/3 in ready money. The other has clothe of 13. shillinges four pence to
sell for ready money. I would know how he shall sell the same in barter?
Answer: take the of 6.li. which is the ouerprice of the 100. of wolle, and
you shall have 2. pound the which abate from 5.li. which is the just price of
the 100. of woll and from 6.li. which is the ouerprice, and there shall rest
3.l. and 4.l. for the 2 first numbers in the rule of three, then take 1^. s. 4.
d. which is the just price of a yard of clothe for the third number: Then
multiply and divide and you shall find 17. shill. 9. d.. for so much shall
the second selle his clothe in barter.

9. More, two Merchants will change their marchaundise the one with the
other, the one of them has wax of three pound. 6. s. 8. d the C. to sell for
ready money, and in barter he will sell the same for 4.li. 3. s. 4. d. and yet
he will have the in ready money, and the other has fine Crimson sattine of 15.
s. the yard to sell in barter. I demand what it is worth in ready money.
Answer. Take the of 4.li. 3. s. 4. d. and abate it from 4.li. 3. s. 4. d. and
from three pound 6. s. 8. pencs, and there rests 3.li. 2. s. 6. d. and 2.li.
5. shillinges 10. pence for the two first numbers in the rule of three, and 15.
s for the third number which is the ouerprice of the yard of sattine. Then
multiply and divide, and you shall find 11. shillinges. And so much did the
yard of sattine cost in ready money.

10. Two Merchants will change their merchandise the one with the other, the
one of them has tin of 50. shillings the hundred to sell for ready money,
and in barter he will sell it for three pound 6. s. 8. d and he will gain after
ten upon the hundred, and yet he will have the one half in ready money: and
the other has lead of 3. halfpence the li. to sell for ready money. I
demand how he shall sell the pound in barter? Answer: See first at ten
upon the hundred, what the three pound will come unto, and you shall find that
they will come to 3.li., which is 13. s. 4. d. of the which, the half which he
demands in ready money, is 36 shillinges and 8. pence the which being
abated from fifty shillinges, and also from three pound 13. shillinges four
pence, there shall rest 13. shillings four pence, and one pound sixtine. s.
eight pence, for the two first numbers in the rule of three, which you must
put al into halfepence, and three halfepence for the third number, and then
multiplye and divide, and you shall find 4. pence, and for so much shall he
sell the pound of lead in barter.

11. More two merchants will change their marchaundise the one with the
other, the one of them has steel of 16. s. 8. d. the hundred weight to sell
for ready money, and in barter he will sell it for 25. s. and yet he loses
after ten upon the hundred, but he will have the in ready money, the other
has iron of 6. shill. 8. pence the dundred to sell in barter, I demand what
it did cost in ready money?

Answer: say if a hundred come but to 90. how much shall 25. s. come to?
Multiply and divide, and you shall find 22. s. 6. d. of the which number,
take which is 11. s. 3. d. and substract it from 22. s. 6. d. and from 16. s.
8. d. and there shall rest 11 s. 3. d. and 5. s. 5. pence for the two first
numbers in the rule of three, and 6. shil. 8. pence which is the ouerprice of a
hundred of iron for the third number, then multiply and divide, and you shall
find. 3. s. 2. pence, 4/7: and so much did the hunof iron cost in ready
money.

12. More, two merchants will change their marchaundise, the one with the
other, the one of them has says of 200 shill. 10 d. the piece to sell for
ready money, and in barter he will sell the piece for 21 shillings, and he will
have the in ready money: The other has cappes of 35 shill. the dosen to tell
for ready money: but he will gain after 10 upon the 100. I demand how he
shall sell the same cappes in barter? Answer, say, if 100 be worth 110:
What shall 35. shill. be worth, which is the just price of the dosen of
cappes? Multiplye and divide, and you shall find 38 shill. 6. d. Then take the
of 25. which is 6 sh. 3. d. and substracte it from 20 shill. 10. d. and from
25. sh. and there shall rest 14 sh. 7. d. and 18 shill. 9. d. for the two
first numbers in the rule of three, and 38 shill. 6. d. which is the just
price with his gain of the dosen of cappes, for the third number: then
multiply and divide, and you shall find 49. shill. 6. d. and for so much
shall he sell the dosen of cappes in barter.

The 12 Chapter treats exchaunging of money from one place to another.
First, you must note, that at Andwerpe they use to make their accomptes by
Deniers de gros, that is to say by pence Flemishe, whereof 12 do make 1
shill. Flemishe, and 20 shil. Flemish do make 1 li. de gros.

1. If I deliver in Flaunders, 500 li. Flemishe, at 19 shil. 6. de gros that is
to say, at 19s. will. 6. d. Flemish, to receive 20 shil at London: I demand
how much I shall receive sterlynge at London for the said 500 li. Flemishe?
Answer: Say, if 19 give 20/1^ what will 50^/1 give? Multiply and divide,
and you shall find 512 li. 16. sh. 4. d. 12/13 of pennye. And so much sterling
shall I receive in London for my 500 li. Flemishe.

2. If I deliver in London 375 li. sterlyng, to receive in Andwerpe 21 shill.
9. d. de gros, that is to say Flemishe, for every pound sterlinge. I demand
how many pounds Flemishe I shall receive in Andwerpe, for the said 375 pound
sterling?

Answer, say if 23/^ give 21: what will 375/^ give? Multiply and divide, and
you shall find 407.li. So many pounds Flemishe shall I receive for the said
375.li. sterlinge in Andwerpe.

3. If I take up money at Andwerpe after 19 sh. 6 d. Flemishe to pay for ye
same at London 20 s. ster. and when the day of payment is come, I am forced to
rechaunge the same, and to take up money again here in London to repay the
same, so that for 20 shillings, which I take up here, I must repaye, 19 shill.
9. at Andwerpe. I demand whether I do win or lose, and how much upon the
100 pound of money? Answer, Say, if 19 ^/4 give 19 ^/^, what will 100/^ give?

Multiply and divide, and you shall find 9858/79, the which being abated
from 100 there will remain 121/79. And so much do I lose upon the 100 li. of
money.

4. If I take up at London 20. shill. ster. to pay at Andwerpe 21. shill. 8.
d. Flemishe, and when the day of payment is come. I am constrained to take up
money again at Andwerpe wherewith to repay the foresaid sum: and there I
do receive 22. shill. Flemishe to pay 20. shill. at London. Now I demand
whether I do win or loss and how much upon the 100 pound of money after
the rate.

Answer: say, if 212/2 give 22/1. What will 100/1 given Multiply and divide,
and you shall find 1017/13, from the which abate 100, and there will remain
1(...) and so much shall I gain upon the 100 li. of money.

The exchaunce from London into France, is not like as it is into Flaunders
but is delivered by the French crown, which is worth 50 souse Tournois the
piece.

And here must you note that in France they make their account by Deniers
Tournoys, whereof 12 makes one souse Tournois, and 20. souse. Tournois makes
1. pound Tournois, which they call a Liver, and the French Crown is current
among Merchants for 51 souse Tournois, but by excaunge it is otherwise, for
they will deliver but 50 souse. Tournois, which is 2 li. 10 souse. Tournois
for a crown, or at such price as the takers up of money can agree with the
deliverer. As by Example.

5. If I deliver 340 pound ster. here in London after 6. shill. 4. d. ster. the
crown, to receive at Roan or at Paris 50 souse Tournois for every crown, I
would know how many livers Tournoys I shall receive there for my 340 li.
ster. Answer, say if 6 sh. do give me 2 li. Tournois what will 6100/1 sh.
give (which is the 340 li. reduced into shillings) multiply and divide, and
you shall find 2684 Liores 4/19 which is worth 4. shill. 4/19 Tournois, and
so much shall I receive in Roan or Paris for my 340 li. sterling.

6. If I deliver in Paris or Roan, or else where in France 1250 livers
Tournyis, at 50 souse tournois the crown, to recyue for every such crown 6
shillings 3. d. sterling at London. I demand how much sterling money I shall
receive at London for my 1250.li. Tournois. Answer: say, if two li. do
give me 6 shillinges, what will 1250/1 give? Multiply and divide, and you shall
find 3125 shyllynges sterlynge, which makes 156, pound, five shillyngs
sterlynge. And so many pounds shall I receive at London, for the said 1250
pound Tournois, after 6 shillinges 3 pence for every crown.

The 13 Chapter treats of the Rule of Alligation.
THe Rule of Alligation is so named, for that it teaches to alligate or bind
together diverse percelles of sundry prices, and to know how much you must
take of every percell, according to the nombers of the Question.

Example.
1 A Goldsmythe has three sorts of Gold. The first is worth thirtye Crowns
the pound weyghte: The secende is worth 36 Crowns. And the third is worth
45. crowns, and of these three sorts he will make a Scepter of six pound
weight, which shall be worth 40, Crowns the pound. I demand how much he
must take of every sort? Answer: first you must set down the no^bers
whereof you will make the Alligation (which are 30. 36. 38, and 45) orderly the
one under the other, as if you should make of them an addicio^: and the common
number whereunto you will reduce them, shall you set on the left hand, which
common number in this example is 40. Then mark what sums be lesser, then
that common number, and which be greater, and with a draught of your pen,
evermore lynke two nombers together, so that the one be lesser then that common
number, and the other greater then he. For 2 greater nor two smaller nombers
may not be linked together, for they will either be lesser, or else greater
then the common number: but one greater number, and one smaller may be so
mixed, that they will make the common number. And two greater or two smaller
nombers, can never make the common number in dew order, as here after shall
appear.

After that you have thus lynked them, then make how much each of the lesser
nombers is smaller then the common number, and that difference shall you set
against the greater nombers, which be linked with those smaller, each of them
with his match still on the right hand. And likewise you must set the
excess of the greater nombers against the lesser which be combyned with them.
Then shall you add all those differences into one sum, which shall be the
first number in the rule of three, and the second number shall be the whole
massye piece that you will have of all the perticulers, the third sum shall be
each difference by it self, and by them shall you find out the fourth number
declarynge the lust portion of every particular in that mixture, as now by
the former example, I will make it plain. ^

Here in this former example, you see that I have set down the several
prices, which be 30, 36. 42. 45, and have linked together 30, with 45. and 36.
with 42. The common price 40, I have set on the left side, and the difference
of it from every several price, I have set on the right hand, against that
sum with the which it is lynked. So the difference of 30 from 40 is 10,
which I set against 45, that he is lynked wythall, and the difference of 45,
above 40 is 5. which I have set against 30.

So lykewayes, the differences of 42 above 40, is 2, that I have set against
36. And the difference between 36 and 40 (which is 4) I have set against 42.
Then I add all those differences together and they make 21, which I make the
first number in the Rule of three, and 6 the second number, which is the
weight of the Scepter of Gold, and the third number shall be every
particular difference. Then I work by the Rule of three: saying if 21.
(which is the differences added together) do give me 6 pound, which is the
weyghte of the Scepter, what shall 5 give, which is the first difference?

Multiply and divide, and you shall find one pound 1/7: so much must I
have of the first price. Then do likewise with the rest and you shall find
4/7 of the second price, 1 li. 1/7 of the third price, and 2.li. 6/7 of the
fourth, the which 4 sums being added together, do make 6 li. which is the
total that I would have. And now to prove if the prices do agree, you shall do
thus: First multiply this total sum 6 by the common price 40 and it will
make 240 Crowns, which you shall keep be it self. And afterward multiply
every several sum of weight by the price belonging to the same weight, and
if that sum do agree with the first that you kept by it self, then is your
work well done, as here 1 li. 3/7 is the weight of that sort of gold which
is of 30 Crowns price. Then multiply 30. by 1 li. 3/^, and it makes 42.
crowns, 6/7, which you shall set down. Then multiply 4/7 (which is the
weight of the second sort of gold) by 36, which is the price of the same,
and thereof comes 20 crowns 4/2: so again

1.li. multiplied by 42, does make 48 crowns. And last of all 2 pound. (...)
multiplied by 45. makes 128 crowns 4/7. Al these added together does make
240 crowns, agreeable to the former sum of 40 multiplied by 6: And thus I
may affirm that this work is well done.

2. A Tauerner has four sorts of wine, of four several prices, the first
of 8 pence the Gallonde, the second of ten pence the Gallonde, the third of
15 pence, and the fourht of 18 pence. And he will mingle one pu^chen with all
these sorts, so that the Gallonde shall be worth but twelfe pence. I demand
how many Gallondes he must take of every sort? Answer: First suppose the
punchen to hold some certain measure, as to conteyne 84 Gallondes and then
the (form will be after this sort, as you see here after following. ^

The 14 chapter treats of the rule of falshode, or false positions.
THe Rule of falsehod is so named not for that it teaches any deceyte of
falsehode, but that by feigned nombers taken at all adventures, it teaches to
find out the true number that is demanded. And this (of all the vulgar Rules
which are in practice) is the most excellent: this rule has two parts, the
one is of one false position alone: the other is of two positions as here after
shall appear.

Those questions which are done by false positions, have their operations, in
a manner like unto that of the rule of three, but only that in the rule of
three, we have three nombers known, and here in this rule we have but one (I
mean that comes in operation) unto the likeness whereof we must divise two
other, the one multiplying, and the other diuidyng, as by example.

1. I have delivered to a banker a certain sum of pounds in money, to have of
him by the year 6 li. upon the 100 li. And at the end of 10 years he paid me
500 pound for all both principal an gain. I demand how much was the
principal sum that I delivered at the first. Here you see that there are
diverse terms: but the chief to work with all is 500 li. which comes of
the other nombers, that is to say, of 10, and 100 for of them is compounde the
tenor of the question, the practice whereof is thus.

Let us feign a number at pleasure, and with the same let us make our
discourse, even as though it were the principalll sum that we seek for. As by
Example. Suppose that I delivered him at the first 200 pound, the which were
worth to me in 10 years 120 pound after the rate of 6 upon the hundred
pound. Then 120 pound added with 200 pound. Do make but 320 li. and I must
have 500 li. Thus you see that I have three terms for the rule of three: the
one which shall contain the Question the other two, which I have 200, and 320:
in such sort, that 320, ought ta have suthe proporcion to 200, as 500 hat unto
the number that I seek: that is to say, unto the true principal sum, then
must I have recourse unto the rule of three, after this sort, saying. If 320.
pound become of 200. pound of how much shall come 500. pound Multiply 500:
by 200. and they are 100000. the which you shall divide by 320. pound and
thereof comes 312. pound. which is the sum that I delivered at the
first, and thus, this rule has some congruence with the double rule of three.

2. I have a Cesterne with 3. vnegal cocks containing 60. pipes of water: And
if the greatest cock be opened, the water will avoid clean in one hour, at
the second yt will anoyde in two hours, and at the third it will require
three hours. Now I demand in what space will it avoid, all the cocks being
set open. Suppose that it will avoid in half an hour, that is to say, in
30. minutes. Then must there avoid at the first cock, the, which is
thirty pipes, and by the second cock the which is 15, pipes, and by the
third cock the, that is ten pypes, all the which sums being added
together doeo make fifty five pipes, but it should be sixty pipes. Therefore
I say by the rule of three, if fifty five pipes do void in thirty minutes:
in how many minutes will sixty pipes void? Multiply and divide, and you
shall find thirty two minutes 40/55. And in that space will the water avoid
if all the cocks be set open.

Of the rule of two false positions.
THe sum of this rule of two false positions is thus, when any question is
proponed appertaining to this rule. First imagine any number at your pleasure,
which you shall name the first position, and with the same shall you work instead of the true number, as the question does import, and if you see that you
have missed. Then is the last number of ye work either to great or to little,
yt shall you note for to be the first error, in the which you have missed with
the sign of more, or less, which signs shall be noted with these figures, 4^:
-- This figure 4: betokens more, and this plain line -- signifies less,
that is to say the one signifies to much and the other to little: then begin
again, and take an other number, which shall be the second position, and work
by the question as before, if you have missed again, note the excess or want,
for that is the second error. Then shall you multiply the first position by
the second error crossewise, and again the second position by the first
error (and this must always be observed) and keep the two productes: then if
the signs be both like, that is to say, either both to much, or both to
little, abate the lesser producte from the greater and likewise, you shall
substract the lesser error from ye greater, and by the remain of those
errors, you shall divide the residue of the products: the quotient shall be the
true number that you seek for. But if the two signs be unlike, that is to
say, the one to much and the other to little, then shall you add those
productes together so shall you also add both the errors together, and by
the sum of those errors, divide the total sum of both the products: the
quotient shall be likewise the true number that the question seeks, and this
is the wholerule, as by example. ^3. A manlying at the point of death, said
that he had in a certain Coffer a hundred ducats, the which he bequea ched to
3. of his friends by him named, after this sort. The first must have a certain
portion, the 2. must have twice so many as the first abatyng 8. Ducats and
the third must have 3. times so many as the first, less by 15 Ducats. Now,
I demand how many every of them must have. Answer: First I do imagine
that the first man had thirty Ducats, then by the order of the question, the
second should have fifty two: and the third seventy five. These three
sums being added together do make 157: and I should have but a hundred so
that this fiirste error is to much by fifty seven, then I note a part the
first position thirty, with his error fifty seven, to much after this sort
thirty. 457.

Therefore I prosecute my work and I suppose that the first had twenty
four, then by the orderder of the question, the second should have 40. and
the third, fifty seven, these three sums being added together, do ma^^ 121.
and I must have but a hundred, so the second error, is to much by 21.
Therefore I note 24. 421. under the thirty. 457. as you may see in the
margent of the next side following. Then I multiply crossewaies, thirty
(which is the first position) by twelve which is the second error, and
thereof comes 630. likewise I multiply twenty and four (which is the second
position) by fifty seven, which is the first error, and I find 1368: then
because the signs of the errors are ^ both like: that is to say much, I
must therefore substracte 630. from 1368. and there will remain 731 which is the
diuidende: again I must substract the lesser error from the greater, that is to
wit, 21. out of 57. and there will remain 36. which shall be my divisor. This
done I divide 738 by 36 and the quotient will be 20. (...). The which 20. is
the just number of the ducats that the first man had for his part, so
consequently the second manne had thirty three Ducats, and the third forty
six, as by proof in the margent may appear.

The like number will also appear. in case the errors were both to little, as
in making the two positions by 18. and 20. where you shall find the ^ two
errors both to little, the first will be to little by 15. and the second to
little by 3. as by perusing this work in the margent you shall well perceive.

Again if one of the errors were to much, and the other to little, yet shall
I have the true number, as before: As if the two positions were 24. and 20. I
shall find that the first error will be 21. to much, and the second will be
three to little: Therefore I multiply twenty four by thirty, crossewaies,
thereof comes 72. Likewise I multiply twenty by 21. ^ the product will be
420: These two sums 72. and 420, I add both together because ye signs of
the errors be unlike, and they make. 492. the which shall be my diuidende, and
again, I addde the lesser error three, with the greater error 21. and they
make 24. for my divisor, then dividing four hundred ninety two by twenty
four, the quotiet will be twenty: as in the margent does plainly appear.

And now because you shall not forget this part of the rule, learn this
brief remembrance followyng.

The signs both like substraction do require
And unlike signs addition will desire
The meaning whereof is thus if both the errors have like signs, then must
the diuidende and the divisor be made by substraction, as is taught before,
and if those signs be unlike, then must I by addition gather the diuidende,
and the divisor, as I have done in this last example.

4. A man has two silver cups of unequal weight, having to them both, but
one cover, the weight whereof is five ounces, if the cover be put to the
lesser cup, it will be in double proportion unto the weight of the greater,
and the cover being put to the greater cup, will be in triple proportion,
unto the weight of the lesser. I demand what was the weight of every cup.

Suppose that the lesser cup did wayghe seven ounces, then with the cover it
must weigh twelve, and this weight should be in double proportion unto the
greater, therefore the greater must weigh six ounces ^ add unto it 5 ounces
for ye cover, all will be 11. ounces, but it should be 21 for to have it in
triple proportion, unto 7. which represe^teth ye weght of the lesser cup So
that this first error is to little by 10. which you shall note after seven in
this sort. 7.-10.

After you shall suppose some other number, as 9. and make the like work as
before, so shall you find 15. to little, for the second error, which you shall
put behind nine, and then work with the rest as above is said, and you shall
find that the lesser cup wayed three ounces, and consequentlye the greater
four ounces.

5. One man demanded of another in a morning what a clock it was, the other
made him this answer, if you do (...) (says he) the of the hours which
he passte since mindnight, with the of the hours which are to come until
noone, you shall have the just hour, that is to say, you shall know what a
clock it was: Suppose that it was 4^ clock in the morning, so should there
remain 8. until none: then I take the ^/4 of 4. which is 1. and the of 8.
which is 5., and I add them together, so I find 6. and I supposed but 4.
therefore this first error is to much by 2. (...), which I note after my
position thus 4. 2. ^/3: then again I suppose an other number, that is to say
nine, so should remain but 3. hours until noone., I take the of 9. and the
of 3. which is 2. and 2. these I add together and they make 4.: but I
supposed that it was 9. therefore the second error is 4. to little which I
note behind my position thus. 9. 4. 2/4. And then I multiply crossewyse, as
before ^ is taught, and because the signs of the errors are unlike, that is
to say, the one to much, and the other to little, therefore in this work I
must add the products, and they will be forty. Likewise I add the
errors, and they be seven, (...). Then I divide forty by seven 1/12, and
thereof comes five hours 11/17, and that hour it was in the morning.

The fiueth Chapter treats of sportes, and pastime, done by number.
IF you would know the number that any man does think or imagine in his mind,
as though you could divine.

Bydde him triple the same number, then of the product let him take the (...)
if the number be even, or else the greater half, if the same be odd, then bid
him triple again the said: after say to him that he put away, if he can 36.
27. 18. or. 9. from the last number being tripled: that is to say, cause him
subtellye to put away nine as many times as is possible and keep the number
secretly: and when ye can no more take away 9. then to know if that yet there
remain any number, bid him abate three and two or one, if he can: this
done, see how many times nine you have caused him to abate, for the which
keep you in mind so many times 2. and if that you know that he had any
thing remaining beside the nines, ye same shall also note unto you (...).

Suppose that he thought 6. which being tripled is 18. whereof the ^/2 is 9.
the triple of that is 27: now cause him to abate 18, or 9. or 27. and again 9:
but then he will say unto you that he cannot, bid him then abate 3. or 2. or
1. ^e will say also that he can not: wherefore considering that you have made
him to abate 3. times nine justly, you shall tell him that he thought 6. for 3.
times 2. makes 6. If he had thought 5. the triple thereof is fiftene, wherefore
the greater is 8. the triple of that makes 24. which contains 2. times 9.
they ar worth 4. and the remain signifies 1. the which added together make 5.
which is the number that he thought.

2. If in any company, one of them has a ringe upon his finger, and you
would know by manner of deuining, who has the same and upon what finger and
what joint: cause the persons to sit down in order, and keep likewise an
order of their fingers: then separate your self from them in some certain
place, and say unto one of the lookers on, that he double the number (markyng
the order) of him that has the ring: and unto the double bid him ad 5. and
then cause him to multiply this addition by 5 and unto the product bid him add
the number of the finger of the person which has the ring: be if that the
same last sum did amounte to 89. then afterward say to him yt he put after the
same last number toward his right hand a figure signifiyng upon which of
the iointes he has the ring. As if it be upon the third iointe, let him put
3. after 89. and it will be 893: this done, you shall ask him what number he
keeps, from the which you shall abate 250. and you shall have three figures
remainyng at the least. The first toward your left hand shall signify the
number of the person which has the ring. The second or middle figure shall
represente the number of the finger. And the last figure toward your right
hand, shall be token the number of the ioynte. As if the number which he did
keep were 893. from that you shall abate 250. and there will remain 64^ Which
do note unto you, that the sixth person has the ringe upon the fourth finger,
and upon his third iointe.

But note that when you have made your substraction, if there do remain a
cipher in the place of tennes, that is to say in the second place, you must
then abate from that figure which is in the place of hundreds, that is to say
from the figure which is next your left hand, and that shall be worth ten
tenthes, signifiyng the tenth finger: as if there should remain 703. you must
say that the sixte person) upon his tenth finger and upon his third joint)
has the ring

3. And after the same manner, if a man do cast three dice, you may know the
poincts of every one of them, for if you do cause him to doube the poincts of
one die, and unto that double to ad 5. and the same sum to multiplye by 5. and
unto the product ad the poincts of one of the other dice, and behind the number
toward the right hand, to put the figure which signifies the poinctes of ye
last die, and then shall you ask him what number he keeps (...) ye which abat
250 (...) there will rema(...) figures, which do note unto you the points of
every die.

4. Likewise if 3. of your companions, to say Peter, James, and Ihon, that
would (in your absence) give them self every one a contrary name: as for
example: Peter would be called a king, James a duke, and Ihon a county: And I
would divine which of them is called the king, which the duke, and which
the county. Take 24. stones, or other pieces whatsoever, and give unto Peter. 1.
unto James 2. and unto Ihon. 3. or otherwise. But mark well unto which of
them you have 1. unto which 2. and unto whom 3. Then leuing the 18. stones
(before them) that are ramainyng, you shall absent your self from their
sight, or else turn your face from them, saying thus unto them, whosoever
names himself a king: for every stone that I gave him let him take one of
the residue, and he that names himself a duke foreuerie stone that I gave him
let him take two of them that remain, and he that calls him self a
county, for every stone that I gave him let, him take four, this being done
approache nere them, and mark towe man^e stones are remainyng: and know this
that there can not remain any other, but one of these sire, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7,
for the which sire numbers we have chosen to every of them a several name,
which are these: Angeli, Beati, qualiter, Messiah, Israel, p^etas: each of
them containyng three ^oweiles, a, e, i, which do show the names by order:
that is to say, a, shows which is the king, e, tells which is the duke, i,
sheweeth which is the cou^ (...) folewynge the order how, and to whom you have
given 1. ^ stone, to which (...). and to which (...). Then there do remain
but 1 stone, the first name Augeli^ by these three vowels a, e. i, shows that
Peter is the king, James the doke, and Ihon the county. And if there do
remain 2 stones, the second name Bea^, shall show you by these three vowels,
e, a, i, that Peter is the duke. James the king, and Ihon the county. And so
of the other as by this Table does plainly appear.

FINIS.
Here begins the table of this Book.
The contents of the Chaptters of the first part.
THe diffinition of number. fol. 1 Numeration in whole number. Fol. eodem Chap.
1. Addition in whole number. ca. 1. fo. 6. Substraction. capt. 3. fol. 9.
Multiplication. capi. 4. fol. 12. Division. capi. 5. fol. 21. Progression
Arithmeticall and Geometrical. capi. 6. fol. 32. The Rule of three called the
Golden Rule. And the backer Rule, unto all these is added their profes. ca. 7.
fo. 34
The contents of the second part.
The first chapter shows what a fraction or a broken number is. fol. 43.
Reduction of fractions. capi. 2. fol. 44. Abbreutation. capi. 3. fol. 50.
Addition in fract. capi. 4. fol. 54. Substraction. capi. 5. fol. 58.
Multiplication in fract. capi. 6. fol. 61 (...)sion in broken number. cap. 7. fo.
64 Duplation, Triplation, and ^uadruplation. ca. 8. fol. 68 All the profes of
fractions. ca. 9. fo 69 Questions done by Reduction, by Addition, Substraction,
Multiplication, and by Division in broken numbers. Chapter. 10. fol.. 71.
The contents of the third part.
Rules of practice called brief rules. capi. 1. fol. 79. Rules of three
compounde, being. 4. in number. capi. 2. fol. 99. Questions of the trade of
Marchaundise. capi. 3. fol. 101. Questions of loss and gain in the trade of
marchaundise. cap. 4. fol. 108. Questions of diverse breadthes and lengthes of
tapistries. cap. 5. fol. 113. Questions of the reducyng of paumes of Genes into
yardes. ca. 6. fol. 115. Questions of Marchaundise sold by weight, with brief
rules for the same. Chapter. 7. fol. 116. Questions of Tares and allowaunces.
cap 8. fol. 119. Questions done by the double rule of three, cop. 9. fol. 122.
Questions of the rule of fellowship. Chapter. 10. fol. 124. Questions of
bartering. cap. 11. fo. 138. Questions of the exchaunges. Chapter. 12. Fol.
146. Questions of the rule of Alligation. Chapter. 13. fol. 148. Questions of
the rule of falsehode. Chapter 14. fol. 152. Questions of sport and pastime
do^n by number.
FINIS.

