THE HAPPINESS of the Church.

OR, A Description of those Spiritual Prerogatives wherewith Christ has
endowed her.

Considered in some contemplations upon part of the 12. Chapter to the
Hebrews.

Together with certain other Meditations and Discourses upon other portions of
holy Scriptures: the titles whereof immediately precede the Book.

Being the Sum of diverse Sermons preached in S. Gregory's London: By Thomas
Adams, Preacher there.

2. Corin. 12. 15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for your souls.
LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Grismand, and are to be sold at his shop
near unto the little North door of Saint Paul's, at the sign of the Gun. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR HENRY MOVNTAGVE, the Lord Chief Justice of
ENGLAND, my very good Lord.
RIght Honorable, my allegiance to the Almighty King necessitates my endeavors
to glorify his Great Name. My Profession has imposed on me all ministerial
services. My filial duty to our blessed Mother the Church, has taught me to
help forward her cause, both with tongue and pen. My thankfulness to your Lo.
ties me to seek your honorable authorizing of all these labors. They run to
you first, as if they waited your manumission of them to the world. If books
be our children, and the masculine issue of our brains; then it is fit that
your Lo. who have the patronage of the father, should also vouchsafe a blessing
to the children. Nor is this all: there is yet a weightier reason why they
should refuge themselves under your Los. protection. The world is quickly
offended, if it be told of the offenses: men study courses, and practice them;
and if the Clergy find fault, yea if we do not justify and make good what
they magnify, and make common, they will be angry. It is the most thanklesse
service to tell men of their misdeeds. Now a business so distasteful requires a
worthy Patron: and whose Patronage should I desire but your Los. whose I am,
and to whom I owe all duty and service? whose but your Los. who are in place to
reform vice, and to encourage goodness: to make that practical and exemplary,
which is here only theoricall and preceptory? God has entrusted to your hands
his Sword of Justice: draw it in his defense against the enemies of his Grace
and Gospel. You sit at the common stern, and therefore are not so much your
own as your Countries. Help us with your hands, we will help you with our
prayers. The God of majesty and mercy, sanctify your heart, rectify your
hand, justify your soul, and lastly crown your head with eternal glory.

Your Lordships obseruant Chaplain, Tho. Adams.

To the worthy Citizens of Saint Gregory's Parish, sincere lovers of the
Gospel, present happiness, and everlasting Peace.
I Owe you a treble debt, of love, of service, of thankfulness. The former,
the more I pay, the more still I owe. The second I will be ready to pay to the
uttermost of my power; though short both of your deserts, and my own desires.
Of the last I will strive to give full payment; and in that (if it be possible)
to come out of your debts. Of all I have in this volume given you the earnest:
as therefore you use to do with bad debtors, take this till more comes. You see
I have venturously trafficked with my poor talent in public, whilst I behold
richer graces kept close at home, and buried in silence: liking it better to
husband a little to the common good, then to hoord up much wealth in a sullen
niggardice. I censure none: if all were writers, who should be readers? if
none, idle Pamphlets would take up the general eye, be read and applauded,
only through want of better objects. If the grain be good, it does better in
the market, then in the Garner. All I can say for my self is, I desire to do
good; whereof if I should fail, yet even that I did desire it, and endeavor it,
shall content my conscience. I am not affrighted with that common objection of
a dead letter: I know that God can effectuate his own ends, and never required
man to appoint him the means. If it were profitable being spoken, sure it
cannot be unnecessary being written. It is not unknown to you, that an
infirmity did put me to silence many weeks: whilst my tongue was so suspended
from preaching, my hand took opportunity of writing. To vindicate my life from
the least suspicion of idleness, or any such aspersions of uncharitable
tongues, I have set forth this real witness, which shall give just
confutation to such slanders. If it be now condemned, I am sure it is only for
doing well. I very well know the burden of preaching in this City: we may say
of it in another sense, what Christ said of Jerusalem, O thou that killest the
Prophets. Many a Minister comes to a Parish with his veins full of blood, his
bones of marrow; but how soon does he exhaust his spirits, waste his vigor!
And albeit there are many good souls, for whose sake he is content to make
himself a sacrifice: yet there are some so unmerciful, that after all his
labor would send him a beggar to his grave. I tell you but the fault of some,
quitting your particular selves: I speak not to diminish the credit of your
bounty, which I have found, and here with a thankful profession acknowledge
it. In testimony whereof I have set to my hand, and sent it you a token of the
gratitude of my heart. Receive it from him that is unfeignedly desirous of your
salvation: and if he knew by what other means soever he might bring you to
everlasting peace; would study it, practice it, continue it; whilst his Organ
of speech has breath enough to move it.

Your unworthy Preacher, Thomas Adams.

The Contents.
The Happiness of the Church. Hebr. 12. 22. But ye are come unto Mount Sion.
The rage of Oppression. Psalm. 66. 12. Thou have caused men to ride over our
heads. The victory of Patience. Psalm. 66. 12. We went through fire and through
water. Gods house. Psalm. 66. 13. I will go into thy House. Man's Seed-time and
Harvest. Gala. 6. 7. Whatsoever a man sowes, he shall reap. Heauen-Gate. Reave.
22. 14. And may enter in through the gates. The Spiritual Eye-salue. Ephe. 1.
18. That the eyes of your understanding. The Cosmopolite. Luke 12. 20. But God
said unto him, Thou fool. The bad Leaven. Gala. 5. 9. A little leaven
leaueneth the whole lump. Faiths Encouragement. Luke 17. 19. And he said unto
him, Arise. The Saints meeting. Ephe. 4. 13. Till we all meet in the unity of
the faith. Presumption running into despair. Reave. 6. 16. They said to the
Mountains. Majesty in misery. Math. 27. 51. And behold, the veil of the
Temple. The Fool and his sport. Prou. 14. 9. Fools make a mock at sin. The
fire of contention. Luke 12. 49. I come to send fire on the earth. The
Christians walk. Ephe. 5. 2. Walk in love. Loves Copy. Ephe. 5. 2. As Christ
loved us. A Crucifixe. Ephe. 5. 2. He has given himself for us an offering.
The good Politician directed. Math. 10. 16. Be wise as Serpents. The way home.
Math. 2. 12. And being warned of God in a dream. Semper Idem. Hebr. 13. 8.
Jesus Christ the same yesterday. Gods bounty. Prou. 3. 16. Length of days is
in her right hand. The lost are found. Luke 19. 10. For the Son of man is
come to seek. A Generation of Serpents. Psalm. 58. 4. Their poison is like the
poison of Serpents. Heaven made sure. Psalm. 35. 3. Say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation. The Souls refuge. 1. Pet. 4. 19. Let them that suffer according.
The end of the Contents.
THE HAPPINESS OF THE CHVRCH.
HEBR. 12. Ver. 22. But ye are come unto Mount Sion, and to the City of the
living GOD, the heavenly Jerusalem; and to an innumerable company of Angels:

23. To the general assembly, and Church of the first borne which are written
in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect:

24. And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel.


THEY that make comparisons, alteram partem deprimunt, vt res alterius
emineant; debase the one part, that they may advance the honor of the other.
Our Apostle abates the glory of the Law, that he may give more glory (where it
is more deserved) to the Gospel. 2 Cor. 3. 9.
For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more does the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory. The sum of the comparison is
spent in these three generals. 1. There were, Omnia terrena, et externa: all
things outward and sauouring of earth: ver. 18. A Mount that might still be
touched, etc. Here, all Interna et coelestia, spiritual and heavenly. 2. There
are all Obscura et caliginosa, dark and difficult: Blackness and darkness,
etc. Here, all Clara et illustria, clear and conspicuous: therefore the Prophet
called Christ Solemn Iustitiae, Mal. 4. 2.
The Sun of Righteousness: and John Baptist styled him John. 1. 8.
That light, which lightens every one coming into the world. 3. There, all
were Terribilia, fearful and amazing: not only to the people, ver. 19. who
entreated that the Word should not be spoken to them any more. But even to
Moses, ver. 21. So terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear
and quake. Here, all Amabilia et laeta, lovely as Rachel, delightful as
Music: the Gospel is called the Message of peace. Our Apostle therefore
preaches a double quantity in the Gospel; Magnitudinem Gloriae, multitudinem
gratiae: the greatness of Glory, to work in us reverence: the multitude of
Grace, to work in us love and obedience. Ioh. 1. 17.
The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Christ Jesus. The
excellency of Christ above Moses, is exemplified in the third Chapter of this
Epistle, Heb. 3. 6.
Moses verily was faithful in all Gods house as a servant: But Christ as a
Son over his own house, etc.

To the words; the parts are generally two, the Access, and the Object. First,
for the Access, Ye are come. What, on your own feet without a Guide? No;
Paraeus.
Accessistis, hoc est, fide Euangelica perducti estis. Ye are come, that is,
ye are brought by the faith of the Gospel. There is one that brings you; God:
every person in the blessed Trinity. It is Opus Patris; Ioh. 6. 44.
No man can come except the Father draw him. Opus Filij, Can. 1. 4.
Draw me, we will run after thee. Opus spiritus sancti, Psalm. 143. 10.
Let thy good spirit lead me into the Land of righteousness Man is by nature in
Zedechias case, 2. Kin. 25. 7.
blind and lame: Blind, Non inuenisset viam, nisi via inuenisset eum: unless
the way had found him, he could never have found the way. Lame, he may know
that the Temple of heaven has a Acts 3. 2.
beautiful gate; Grace: but cannot come thither till God brings him, loo sen
his stupefied joints, and put into his hand the Alms of mercy. This done, he
may enter into the Temple, walking, and leaping, and praising GOD.

Thus first he gives the Soul eyes, understanding; then feet, gracious
affections: and now expects that he should come. God has not so done all for
thee, that thou should do nothing for thy self. A Deo sine te factus, a te
fine Deo infectus, A Christo sine te refectus, non a te fine Christo, nec a
Christo sine te perfectus: God did create thee without thy self, thou did
lose thy self without God: without thy self Christ did redeem thee; but
neither thy self without Christ, nor Christ without thy self shall perfect
thee. Potest Dominus inueniri, adueniri, non praeueniri: There may be a finding
of God, a coming to God, but Ber.
no preventing of God. Have faith. Heb. 11. 6.
He that comes to God, must believe: and that of thine own, for there is no
coming on another foot. Thus that we might come to Christ, Christ came to
us. Non de coelo merita nostra, sed peccata traxerunt: Not our merits, but our
maladies drew that great Physician from heaven to us.

Ye are (not coming, but) come: it is rather a time perfectly past, then
expectantly future. Which plainly demonstrates, that this is a description of
the Church in her militant estate, so well as triumphant. Indeed either has a
relation to other, a communion to other; and the inestimable privileges of
them both are wrapped up together. The connection of Glory to Grace is so
infallible, that they often change names: Heaven is called the kingdom of
Holiness, and Holiness is called the kingdom of Heaven. Romans 8. 24.
Ye are saved by hope: and John 5. 24.
He that belieueth, has everlasting life, and is passed from death to life.
So sure, as if they were already in Heaven. So Paul, Phil. 3. 20.
Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for our Savior Jesus
Christ.

The object or place of our arriual is described by many excellent and
honorable titles. First, it is called a Mount: but is there so much happiness
in that? Feriunt summos 1
fulgura montes: the highest Mountains are most danger'd to the violences of
Heaven. ver. 18. There was a Mount burning with fire. This is no Mountain of
danger, or terror, but Sion: safe, pleasant, delightful Sion; the joy of the
whole earth, the beloved of GOD: the John that leaned on the bosom of Christ.
Psalm. 87. 2.
The Lord loves the gates of Sion better then all the dwellings of Jacob. But
though a Mount, though Mount Sion, yet it might be a solitary and vnfrecuented
Hill: like that whereunto Math. 4. 8.
the Devil took Christ, and showed him the kingdoms of the world: where a
man can only see glory, not enjoy it. Or like that mount Deu. 34. 4.
Nebo, or top of Pisgah, whereon Moses might only stand, and behold the Land
of Canaan.

Not so, but on this Mount there stands a City: a populous 2
City, and full of buildings: like that, wherein Christ says Ioh. 14. 2.
there are many mansions. But now whose City is this? For it may be some poor
decayed thing, that has only some ruins of remaining monuments: No, it is
the City of GOD. They are superlatiue things, that have attributed to them the
Name of God. Saul's sleep was called S^por Domini, a sleep of God. Genesis 30. 8.
Rachel said, With great wrastlings have I wrastled: Hebr. the wrastlings of
God. Psalm. 36. 6.
Thy righteousness is like the great Mountains: Hebr. the Mountains of God.
Ion. 3. 3.
Nineveh was an exceeding great City: Hebr. a City of God. This Hebrew
dialect our Apostle follows to the Hebrews, and calls this excellent City,
the City of God Not that it is only Gods ^y way of as^ription, but even by
foundation, and everlasting possession: but to vindicate it from any
obscurene^se, it is the City of God. But there were many concei^ed gods; it
may be this belonged to some Idol, as Peor ^id to Pa^l, and Ekron to Baalzebub:
No, these were all ^ead gods; this is the Living GOD. The Psalmist calls them
(...): Psalm. 106. 28.
They did eat the sacrifices of the dead: but this God is called Uiuens, Heb.
9. 14.
the Living: and Deus viuentium, Mat. 22. 32.
the GOD of the living. Well, yet what is the name of this City? Is it a
City, a City on a Mount, a City of God, and does it want a name? Not a great
man but if he build a fair house, he will give it some name: Perhaps Psalm.
49. 11.
call it after his own name. The name is Jerusalem, famous, blessed Jerusalem;
a City of Peace. But there was a Jerusalem on earth, whereof we may only say,
Fuit, It was. That was fulfilled on it, which Christ foretold against it; Mat.
24. 2.
There shall not be left one store upon another. But this City is built with
no other stones then Iaspers, Saphirs, Emeralds, and Amathysts. Reave. 21. 19.
It is here distinguished from that terrene, by the name of Heavenly; above the
wheel of changeable mortality, it is not subject to mutation. The celestial
Jerusalem.

But yet, though it be a City on a Mount, though Jerusalem, 3
though heavenly; yet the perfection of all may be empaired through the want,
either of Inhabitants, or of good Inhabitants. There be Cities eminent for
situation, glorious for building, commodious for traffic: yet have all these
benefits poisoned by evil Citizens. When Alcibiades would sell a house, among
other conueniences for which he praised it, he especially commends it for this;
that it has a good neighbor. Who be the neighbors in this City? Angels,
glorious and excellent creatures, the great Kings Courtiers; here, our
Guardians, there, our companions. Yes, you will say, one or two Angels: yea a
company; not like David's at Adullam, nor Absolons in Hebron; but innumerable,
Myriads of Angels.

Are there none in this City but Angels? what habitation 4
is there then for men? Yes, there is an Assembly of men: not some particular
Synod, nor Provincial Convocation, nor national Council; but a General
assembly. What do you call it? The Church. Of whom con^sts it? Ex
Primogenitis, Of the first borne. But then it may seem that younger brothers
are excluded: No, the first borne of the world may be a younger brother in
Christ, and the first borne in Christ may be a younger brother in the world.
Be they younger or elder, all that are written in heaven, if their names be in
the Book of life, their souls are in the bundle of life: All they, and none
but they. Reu. 21. 27.
Then shall enter into it no unclean thing: but only they which are written
in the Lambs Book of life.

But now is it a City, so pleasant, and peopled with such inhabitants, and
has it no Governors? Yes, God, 5.
Iudex vniuersorum (...) Judge of all. But here is more matter of fear then
comfort: we may quickly offend this Judge, and so be quite cast out of this
City: the very name of a Judge implies terror. No, for it is the part of a
just Judge, Parcere subiectis, and debellare superbos: to punish obstinate
Rebels, and to protect peaceable and obedient subjects.

Somewhat was said of adopted Citizens, such as were strangers borne, and by
grace naturalized. What manner 6.
of creatures are they, that GOD has admitted to dwell there? Spirits. Why,
Devils are spirits: No, spirits of Men. But many men have wicked spirits, and
shall such dwell there? No, the spirits of Just men. Why, Solon, Aristides,
Phocion, Scipio, were just men: they were morally just, but not truly
justified, not perfected. These are just spirits made perfect.

How came they to be thus perfect? By Jesus, Romans 4. 25.
who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our 7.
justification. What is this Jesus? A Mediator. Man was guilty, God was angry:
how should they be reconciled? A Mediator must do it. For this purpose
Apparuit inter mortales peceatores, and immortalem iustum, mortalis cum
hominibus, iustus cum Deo. He appeared between mortal Aug.
sinners, and the immortal Judge, mortal with men, just with God: so was a
perfect Mediator. Whereof? Noui foederis, of the new Covenant. The old was
forfeited, a new one comes by him that renues all. Not Do this and live: but
John 3. 16.
believe on him that has done it for thee, and live for ever. How is this
Covenant confirmed? It is sealed with Blood. How is this blood applied?
Aspergendo, by sprinkling: as the dore-posts sprinkled with the blood of the
Paschall Lamb, caused the destroying Angel to pass over the Israelites: So
the aspersion of this immaculate Lambs blood upon the conscience, shall free
us from the eternal vengeance. But what is the virtue of this blood? It
speaks better things then that of Abel. That blood cried for vengeance; this
cries for forgiveness. The voice of that was, Lord, see and judge: the voice
of this is, Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.

Thus briefly have I paraphrased the Text. Now for methods sake, in the
tractation we may consider generally these five points. 1. There is a City;
Jerusalem, the City of the living God. 2. The situation whereon it is built,
Mount Sion. 3. The Citizens, who are Angels and men: an innumerable company of
Angels, and spirits of just men. 4. The King that gouernes it; GOD the Judge of
all. 5. The Purchaser that bought it, and gave it us, Jesus, the Mediator of
the new Covenant. But now the situation has the first place in the words,
therefore challenges the same in my discourse. And indeed on good cause should
the foundation go before the building: we first seek out a fit ground, and
then proceed to edify on it.

Mount Sion.
Not literally that Mount Sion whereon Solomon built the Temple, and David his
Palace. That local Sion became like Shiloh: first, exceedingly and
superlatiuely Psalm. 87. 2.
loved, afterward Psa. 78. 60.
abhorred and forsaken, like the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the Tent that he pitched
among men. This was threatened to that sacred place, as a just punishment of
their rebellious profaneness. Therefore will I do unto this house, that is
called by my Name, as I have done to Shiloh. It lies in the power of sin, to
make the most blessed places accursed. Psalm. 107. 34.
God turns a fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of the
inhabitants that dwell therein. Ciuitatis euersio morum, non murorum casus. The
ruin of a City is not the breach of the walls, but the apostacy of manners.
Were our Fences stronger then the seuen-folde walls of Babylon, the sins
within would hurl down the Bulwarks without. If there be Prauilegium among
us, there is no Priuilegium for us.

This Sion then stands not on earthly foundations; for at the general
dissolution, 2. Pet. 3. 10.
the earth with all the works in it, Cities, Castles, Towns, Towers, shall be
burnt up. If it were built on a Mat. 7. 27.
sa^dy foundation, when the rain, the floods, and winds shall conspire
against it, it would fall, and the fall of it would be great. But Sion is built
on Christ: 1. Pet. 2. 6.
Behold, I say, in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and precious, he that
believes on him, shall not be confounded. This is conspicuous by the
Antithesis of Mount Sion with the Gospel, to Mount Sinai with the Law. The
Apostlecals that montem (...), a mount that might be touched: if this had been
upon earth, it had also been contrectabilis, touchable: but it is only
spiritual. He alludes to Gods Prophesies and Promises, Euangelium proditurum
de monte Sion, that the Gospel should come out of Mount Sion. This is manifest
to those that will consider and confer these places, Obad. verse. 21. Esa. 2.
3. Mie. 4. 2. Come, let us go up to the Mount of the Lord; for out of Sion
shall go forth the Law, and the word of God from Jerusalem, Esa. 59. 20. with
Romans 11. 26. There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob. Sinai gave thraldom by Moses, Sion gives freedom and
salvation by Jesus.

These two words give us two comforts of grace. Fortitudinem quia mons,
Beatitudinem quia mons Sion. Security, because it is a mountain; Felicity,
because it is Mount Sion.

1. Here is considerable, the validity and strength of grace that comes by
Christ: we are not built in a valley, but on a mount. A mountain has ever
been held the place of safety. Psalm. 30. 8.
I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved. What is his reason? Lord,
thou of thy favor have made my mountain so strong. But alas, what are all the
mountains of the earth to mount Sion? Amos 6. 1.
Woe to them that trust in the mountains of Samaria. The profane Edomite
stands on his Esa. 21. 11.
mountain, and derides the judgment of God. The Syrians thought God only Deum
montium, 1. King. 20. 23.
a God of the mountains. It was upon Ierem. 3. 6.
the high mountain that Israel played the harlot. Many sit on their mountains,
and give defiance to heaven. The covetous man's mountain is his riches, there
he thinks himself safe; Luke 12. 19.
Soul rest, thou have much goods laid up for many years. The ambitious man's
mountain is his honor, and who dares find fault with so promontorious a
celsitude? yes, Esaias 40. 4.
Every mountain shall be brought low. Sensuality is the voluptuous man's
mountain, there he refugeth himself against all reproves. But when the
judgments of God shall come upon the earth, in vain they shall cry Luke 23. 30.
to the mountains, Fallon us, and to the hills, Cover us. As neither against
the waters in the former Deluge, so nor against the fire in the latter
dissolution, shall the mountains defend; only this Mount Sion shall save us.

The mountain of worldly confidence has not more strength of defending
against the assaults of men, then danger of exposing to the violences of
heaven. Here is the difference betwixt the worldlings building, and the
Christians.

1. They think themselves only to build high, aspiring to an equality with
mountains: and as low builders, poor, dejected, and rejected creatures. But
indeed they build low, for all sublunary things are low buildings, only he
that builds on this Mount Sion, builds high and sure; when all oppositions, and
adversary forces have done their worst, he stands firm Psalm. 125. 1.
like Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides fast for ever.

The Sen.
Wise man's mind is ever above the Moon, yea, above the Sun. What turbulencies
soever be in the world, all is peace there. John 14. 2.
In my Fathers house there are many mansions. In domo, it is a house, not a
Tabernacle: Of my Father, for if he has afforded such a house for his enemies,
how glorious is that he has reserved for himself, and his friends! Patris
mei, says Christ, My Father: your Father is able to give you a cottage for
your short life: My Father gives a house for ever. There are Mansions, a
manendo; not moveable tents, but mansions. Many, enough for all, none shall be
troubled for want of elbow-roome. Therefore let all Mountains stoop to this.
Esaias 2. 2.
The mountain of the Lord shall be established in the top of mountains, and
shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it. This is
Gods Mountain, who has chosen of all Nations, Israel; of all Tribes, Judah; of
all Cities, Jerusalem; of all Temples, that of Solomon; of all Mountains,
Mount Sion.

2. The worldlings think this Mountain is but a dream, because they cannot
see it, nor touch it. But our Apostle says, it is intrectabilis: it cannot be
touched with earthly fingers; no profane feet must tread in those holy Courts.
Natural men's understandings are led by their senses; Plus oculo quam oraculo:
they will believe no further then they see. Give me good cheer, says the
Epicure, this I can see and taste: and tell not me of your spiritual banquet in
heaven. Give me good liquour, says the Drunkard, the blood of the grape: this
gives colorem, saporem, odorem; color to the eye, savor to the palate, odor
to the sent: heaven has no Nectar like this. Give me honor, says the
Ambitious, which may advance me: that from this Mountain of preferment I may
ouerlooke the inferior world, and behold vassals prostrate to my Celsitude;
this I can feel and see: tell not me of your invisible kingdom, and Psalm. 149.
9.
Such honor have all his Saints. Give me gorgeous apparel, says the proud:
this will make me admired, and give me admission among the great ones: tell
not me of our Robe of Glory. Give me gold, says the Covetous, this I can see;
it is my Sun by day, and my Moon by night. I can spend my time delightfully
in telling, feeling, treasuring this: never tell me of your treasure in heaven.
Well, if there be no remedy, but Sense must be your Religion, and this world
your God; take your choice; these gross and palpable things; trust you in
these Mountains: but Lord give us this Mount Sion, which our Lord Jesus Christ
has established for us.

Now, since we are built upon a Mountain, let us know that we are conspicuous;
all the world takes notice of us. The faithful are not ordained to live in
corners, unobserved: but are set on a Mountain, as examples of goodness to
all. Mat. 5. 14.
A City that is set on a hill cannot be hid. God meant you notable, take heed
you become not notorious. As Mount Sion Psalm. 48. 2.
is the joy of the whole earth, so it is the light of the whole earth. If that
light become darkness, how great, and how greatly to be condemned is that
darkness? This was that great exception God took against Israel, that Romans 2.
24.
through them his Name (which should have been honored) was blasphemed among
the Gentiles. You are founded on a Mountain, therefore 1. Pet. 2. 12.
have your conversation honest among men, that by your good works which they
behold, they may glorify God in the day of visitation.

2. The felicity that comes by Christ, insinuated by Sion, which was a place
of blessedness. This is either Praemissa, or Promissa: already sent into our
hearts, or certainly objected by promise to our faiths. It is either assumed,
or assured. Inre, or in spe: either that we have, or that we shall have. The
happiness we have already by this Mount Sion, consists in three privileges:
the Favor of God; Joy of the holy Ghost; and peace of Conscience.

1. In the Favor of GOD, which is to Sion, as the Exodus 10. 23.
light was once to Goshen: shining there, and no where else. Or as to Gedeon,
the Iud. 6. 37.
Fleece on the Mountain is wet with the dew of Heaven, when all the earth is
dry besides: This Lux vultus tui, Psalm. 4. 6.
the light of thy Countenance, which puts more gladness into our hearts, then
the abundance of earthly fruits rejoice the covetous: The wicked shall never
see it, unless so much as may increase their anguish, when they must depart
from it for ever.

2. In the joy of the Spirit, which is (hilaris cum pondere virtus) a gladness
that can neither be suppressed, nor expressed. Sentire est cordis, dicere non
est oris: The heart does feel it, the tongue cannot tell it. It is that Reu.
2. 17.
Stone with the new Name written in it, which no man knows, saving be that
receives it. There is much rejoicing in the world, but the matter of it is
mutable. These lower delights are more sensitive, but more fluid. They sooner
cloy us; Magna foelicitas est a foelicitate non vinci. It is a great happiness
not to be overcome of happiness. Corporal Sen.
delights work in us a great hunger till they are attained. But Spiritual, Cum
non habentur sunt in fastidio: cum habentur in desiderio: Whiles we have them
not, we Greg.
care not for them, but when we have them, we more eagerly desire them. There
is no hunger of it, till we taste it. In illis appetitus generat saturitatem
saturitas fastidium. In istis appetitus parat fruitione^, fruitio parit
appetitum. In carnal pleasures, appetite begets fullness; fullness, lothing:
in spiritual, desire prepares fruition, fruition begets desiring. Voluptuous
pleasure, is like a blister: it begins first with an itching, but at last it
swells, and breaks forth in anguish and putrid corruption. There are two
observations able to keep us from ouer-affecting the joys of this world, and
from vilipending the joys of Sion.

1. First, resolve every carnal delight in the first matter and principle of
it, and there will be more likelihood of despising, then danger of much
desiring. The Covetous makes Job. 31. 24.
gold his hope, and says to the Wedge, Thou art my confidence: and what are
those precious metals he so worshippeth, but veins of the earth better
colored. T^ Ambitious builder, that erects a Dan. 4. 30.
Babel for the honor of his own Majesty, thinks all eyes standamazed at his
magnificence. And what are those sumptuous monuments wherein he so glories,
but monumentall witnesses of his folly, a little hewne timber, some burnt and
hardened earth? The Adulterer admires the beauty of his harlot, kneeles to a
pledge of her memory, by wanton sonnets Idolizes her, turns his soul to an
Elephant, and worships this Sun. Now what is that stately building of a humane
lump, but the same earth his foot treads upon, better tempered, because
painted worse; when it wants the guest, the soul that quickens it worst of
all? The proud dotes on his costly robes, centers his eye upon himself, as if
no second object was worth looking on; the Tailors hand has made him a man,
and his purse makes the Tailor a Gentleman. And what are those curious rags,
but such are given of worms; and consumed of mothes? Consider the materials of
your lower joys, and if you will persist in their dotage, you shall do it
without our envy.

2. Observe their Conclusion; look from their beginning to their end.
Delectatio vulnerat, and transit: infoelicem Ambr.
reddidit, and reliquit. Pleasure, like an Irish man, wounds with her dart, and
is suddenly gone: it makes a man miserable, and so leaves him. Mors in olla;
behold laughter concluded in tears. The protasis delights, the apodosis
wounds. The Conscience receives a long vexation, for a transient delectation:
for an imperfect content, perfect torment. This is a hard penniworth, so little
pleasure for so much repentance. He that for a little joy, gives that Christ
bought with so much pain, Stultum Aug.
Christum reputat mercatorem; thinks Christ a foolish buyer; but the event
proves him a foolish seller. Esau bitterly repented this bargain.

This for the world: but now the joys of Mount Sion are for matter spiritual,
for substance real, for use universal, for continuance eternal.

3. In the peace of Conscience. There is little outward peace in the world; we
have either an Esau with his hand, or an Ismael with his tongue, bent against
us. Gal. 4. 29.
As then he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after
the Spirit, even so it is now. So it is, and so it will be to the end of the
world. This is the difference betwixt Mount Sion militant, and Mount Sion
triumphant. In heaven are all comforts without any crosses: in hell are all
crosses without any comforts: on earth comforts and crosses, joy and grief,
peace and trouble, misery and mercy are blended together. We may say of a
Christian, as Lorinus the Jesuit writes of an Archbishop of Toledo, who
weighing the much disputed controversy, whether Solomon was saved or damned,
and not being satisfied with the arguments of either side, caused Solomon to be
painted on the walls of his Chapel, half in Heaven, and half in hell. So
the Christian in respect of his outward calamities, seems to be half in hell,
but in respect of his inward comforts, he is the better half in heaven.
Howsoever, Romans 5. 1.
Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. And wheresoever we are
dispersed, or howsoever distressed, the Peace of God which passes all
understanding, and surpasses all commending, preserves our hearts in Jesus
Christ evermore.

But all this in Possesso, we have already: there is something more in
Promisso, which we shall have: 1. John 3. 2.
We are now the sons of God, but it appears not yet what we shall be. Have
thou here much peace? there is more: here we have desiderium pacis, there
pacem desiderij: Here a desire of peace, there the peace of our desires. Have
thou here some joy? there is more: now joy with sorrow, checkerworke, white
and black; roses, but thorns with them: then joy with safety, safety with
eternity; such joy Ioh 16. 22.
as shall never be taken from us. There Rex veritas, Lex charitas, Aug.
pax foelicitas, vita aeternitas. If Psalm. 84. 10.
one day in lower Sion be better then a thousand days in the tents of
wickedness, then one day in upper Sion, is better then a thousand years in
this valley of tears. If Peter was so ravished with Mat. 17. 2.
Mount Tabor, where only Christ was transfigured, what is he with this Mount
Sion where all are glorified? Psalm. 84. 1.
How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord! If Gods Tabernacles be so lovely,
what is his mansion? If there be such joy in the remission of sin, what is
there in the abolition of sin? If there be now such sweet peace in thy
heart, such music in thy conscience, what may thou think there is in
heaven? But because non capimus illa, illa capiant nos: we cannot comprehend
those pleasures, let those pleasures comprehend us. Good servant, (the joy is
too great to enter into thee, therefore) Mat. 25. 23.
enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

This Mount Sion did God give to Christ, and Christ to us. God to his Son,
Psalm. 2. 6.
Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. The Son to us; Reu. 14. 1.
A Lamb stood on Mount Sion, and with him 144. thousand, etc. A Lamb in
figure, slain from the foundation of the world. A Lamb in fact, Acts 8. 32.
led like a Lamb to the slaughter, stands, sits not idle, nor lies asleep:
Psalm. 121. 4.
he that keeps Israel, neither slumbers nor sleeps: whereon? not as the two
beasts his opposites, that rise out of the earth and Sea, but on a Mount. What
Mount? not Sinai, but Sion. Other mountains quake at his presence. Psalm. 97.
5, 8.
The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord. But Sion heard and was
glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced. Other mountains in homage to this,
have skipped and danced about it. Psalm. 114. 4.
The mountains skipped like Rams, and the little hills like Lambs. He stands,
therefore is willing to defend; on a Mount, therefore able to defend; on Mount
Sion, therefore ready to defend, because he is in the midst of his own, and
sees his Church round about him. So that though all the red Dragons on earth,
and black Devils in hell, rage against us, yet the Lamb on Mount Sion will
defend us. There now he stands, calling us by grace, there we shall one day
behold him calling us to glory, until he give this glory to us; yea, then and
ever, let us give all glory to the Lamb that stands on Mount Sion.

This is the place which the Lord chose and loves. He refused the Tabernacle of
Joseph, and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim, Psalm 78. 68.
But chose the Tribe of Judah, the Mount Sion which he loved. This praise did
inherit and inhabit Sion: Psalm. 132. 13.
The Lord has chosen Sion, he has desired it for his habitation. This is my
rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have desired it. Let the precedent of
Gods affection work in all our hearts a zeal to Sion. The Lord that chose
Sion, choose us to Sion; he that desired it his habitation, make it the
habitation of our desires. It is his rest, let it be ours, that we may rest
with him: Here will I dwell, says he; let us all pray to dwell there. Though
it be a hill, a high hill; though pains and toil in getting up, yet let us
ascend, for above there is eternal joy. The City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem.


I come from the Situation, to the City: you hear where it is, hear now what
it is. A City in a Mountain. Psalm. 48. 4. etc
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised in the City of our God, in the
Mountain of his holiness. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole
earth is Mount Sion, on the sides of the North, the City of the great King. God
is known in her Palaces for a sure refuge. Here be four circumstances. 1.
Quae sit, not a Village, but a City. 2. Cuius, not man's, but Gods, not a
feigned, but the living Gods. 3. Qualis, not earthly, but heavenly. 4. Quo
nomine, not Sodom or Samaria, but the City of peace, Jerusalem.

The City.
The Church may be compared to a City for three resemblances; of Safety,
Unity, Paucity.

1. For safety: Cities have ever been held the securest places. So Lot said of
little Zoar; Gene. 19. 20.
Let me escape thither, and my soul shall live. Cain fearing the execution of
his curse, built him a Genesis 4. 17.
City for refuge, and called it Enoch. The motive that caused those wicked to
build a City, was security, Gene. 11. 4.
lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. The Israelites
had their Cities of refuge, and a Law of their protection. Number. 35. 27. But
there is no City of sure refuge, but this City of the living God. It is
ordinary with men, to put too much trust, like Israel, in their walled Cities.
Psalm. 127. 1.
Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain. Iere. 22. 15.
Shall thou reign because thou closest thy self in Cedar? Thou think thy
self secure, because an inhabitant of this famous London. No, thou live in
an Island, therefore in danger of the Sea: in a Christian Island, therefore in
danger of the Turk: in a Protestant Island, therefore in danger of the Pope: in
a chief City of this Island, therefore in danger of the devil. The City is
perilous for pride: the more spectators, the more acclamations: the larger the
Theater, the louder the applause. The solemn assembly in Cesaria, puffed up
ambitious Herod to his own destruction. The people showted Acts 12. 23
Vox Dei, but the worms confuted their flattery, and his folly. Simon Magus
ventured that flight in a City, to which in an obscure Village he had neither
been tempted, nor would have attempted. And whether quick commings in of
money, make not this City unsafe to many souls, miserable experience has
euinced. Praeceps locum, princeps damnum: sudden profit is capital loss.
But suppose men care not so much for the safety of their souls, are their
bodies secure? Thieues, homicides, fires deny it. But if they escape all these
fires, yet not the last fire. Your buckets may quench other fires, not this: no
milk nor vinegar can extinguish that wild fire. As in the days of Noah, a
Dove could not set down her foot for water, so nor at this day for fire. Let
this meditation like a fortunate storm drive you to harbor: the weakness of
all Cities in the world to the safety of the City of God.

2. For unity; Familiarity has the name, Quasi eiusdem familiae, as it were
of the same family. Concord and agreement is taught by the Corporation of one
City. Psalm. 122. 3.
Jerusalem is built as a City well compacted together. Here is no need of
Lawyers, all are at peace. Not a tell-tale, not an Incendiary in it. Inferior
Cities have good orders for unity, but all will not embrace the unity of
order. Saepe inter ciues turbauerit amnia dives. It must be as the rich will
have it, or there is no rule. These Citizens are not Urbani, but Turbani. It
was David's care to Psalm. 101. 8.
cut off such wicked doers from the City of GOD. Here they Mat. 10. 23.
persecute us from City to City, going over the Cities of Israel: not leave
us till we are driven to this City, then shall we rest in peace: every one
loving another, and the Lord Jesus loving us all.

3. For Paucitie: indeed a City is great compared with a Village, but what is
it in respect of the earth? Luke 13. 23.
Are there few that shall be saved? No, there are many: Romans 8. 29.
Christ is the first borne among many brethren. Romans 7. 9.
Lo, a great multitude which no man could number, of all Nations, and
languages, stood before the Throne. Are there many that shall be saved? No,
few: Mat 10. 16.
Many are called, but few are chosen. Christ's is a Luke 12. 32
little flock. The best courses have the fewest followers: Numerus paucior,
numerus melior. Gods reservation is Esaias 1. 9.
a very small remnant: a very Tenth. Esaias 6. 13.
In it shall be a Tenth, many leaves, the sap is but a Tithe. Esaias 17. 6.
As the shaking of an Olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the
uppermost bough; four or five in the outmost fruitful branches. They are
compared to the Esaias 24. 13.
Gleaning of the Grapes after the Vintage. It was the Churches complaint; Mich.
7. 1.
Woe is me, for I am as the gleanings. This was Gods collection, Iere. 3. 14.
I will take you one of a City, and two of a family. God is a Shepherd that
saues some from the Lion; Amos 3. 12
taking out of his mouth two legs, or the piece of an ear: rescues a few
from that universal Apostasy. Of the 600. thousand that came out of Egypt,
but two entered into Canaan, Caleb and Joshua. Even the best is but Titio
ereptus ab igne, a brand snatched out of the fire. Gene. 6. 12.
All flesh had corrupted their way, only Noah escaped. Not one righteous in
Sodom, but Lot. Four hundred and fifty Prophets for Baal, but one for the
Lord: four hundred flatterers for Ahab, one Michaiah for the truth. Esaias 8. 18.
Behold, I and the children whom the Lord has given me, are for signs and for
wonders in Israel. So few and rare, that they are gazed on for Monsters. When
they sat in council against Christ, none spoke for him but Ioh. 7. 51.
Nicodemus. Paul answering before Nero, 2 Timothy 4. 16
no man stood with him, but all men for sooke him. But to the Idol all consent,
Exodus 32. From young to old given to Sodomie, Genesis 19. Pilate asking what shall
be done with Jesus, All cry, Crucify him. There was a general shoute for
Diana two hours together, Act. 19. 34.
Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Reu. 13. 16.
All, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, received the mark
of the Beast in their foreheads. 1. Kin. 20. 27.
The children of Israel are like to little flocks of Kids; but the wicked like
the Syrians fill the Country. But those few Innocents speed best. Romans 9. 27.
Though the number of Israel be as the sand, a remnant shall be saved. Among us
many rob the Church, few add to the dition of it: there are many Usurers, few
restorers. Lord, Reave. 3. 1.
thou have but a few names in Sardi.

That of Esdras concerning Israel, is true of this mystical City. 2. Esdr. 5.
23.
Of all the trees thou have chosen thee only one Vine: of all the Lands of the
whole world, thou have chosen thee one pit: of all the flowers, one Lilly: of
all the depths of the Sea, thou have filled thee one River: of all builded
Cities, thou have hallowed Sion unto thy self. Of all the fowls created, thou
have named thee one Dove: of all the cattle, thou have provided thee one
sheep: Among all the multitudes of peoples, thou have gotten thee one people.
If we should divide the world into thirty parts, scarce five of them are
Christian. Of those five, the Pope challenges (at the least) half. He says,
I have one Church in Italy, one in Germany, one in Spain, one in France, one
in England. One in England? Now the Lord one day convince him, and grant us he
may have none in England. Now it is a quarrel betwixt us and Antichrist
whether they or we belong to this City, we cannot agree about it. One day it
will be a quarrel betwixt Antichrist and the Devil, and they shall agree
about it. Now subdiuide all these five parts of the world, whether theirs or
ours, and scarce one is truly sincere. Hypocrisy has one part, Heresy
another part, Profaneness a third part, Luke-warmenesse a fourth, God has
least that owes all. O the small number sealed up by the Spirit of the living
God! Let this teach every one to suspect himself: when Christ said, One of you
shall betray me, they presently all cry, Master, is it I? when he was asked,
whether only few should be saved, he tells them of neither many nor few, but
charged them to look to themselves, that they might be of the number; Luke 13.
14.
Strive to enter in at the straight gate. 2. Esd. 7. 6.
There is a City built in a broad field, full of all good things, but the
entrance thereof is narrow, besides the dangerous passage between a violent
fire, and a deep water. Study, strive, pray, that thou may pass through the
narrow way, by the sweet-guiding hand of Christ.

Of God.
God is the Proprietary of this City. Est vna ciuitas, and vna ciuitas: vnus
populus, and vnus populus: vnu^ Rex, and Aug.
vnus Rex: vna Lex, and vna Lex. There are two Cities, two peoples, two Kings,
and two Laws. For the Cities, there is Reu. 18. 2.
Babylon the great, and Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem the Mother of us all. For the peoples, there is the seed of the
woman, and of the Serpent, Corn and Tares, Sheep and Goats, vessels of
honor, and vessels of dishonor, Jacob and Esau, Christ and Belial. Nec est
tertius, nec ad tertium: there is no third person, nor designement to a third
place. For the Kings, there is Christ, Psalm. 2 6.
Yet have I set my King upon Sion the mountain of my holiness: and Satan
Ephesians. 2. 2.
the Prince of the power of the Air. The Prince indeed, not Mundi; sed
tenebrarum mundi; not of the world, but of the darkness of the world, 2. Cor.
4. 4. you have both these Kings together; The god of this world had blinded the
minds of unbelievers, that the light of Christ might not shine unto them. For
the Laws, Gods Law is, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
Let every ox that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. Satan's Law
is, 1. Ich. 2. 16.
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. Gods Law
is, Thou shall not swear: Satan's, thou shall forswear. Gods Law, Covet not;
Satan's, covet all. Nihil praecipit Deus nisi charitatem, nihil Diabolus nisi
cupiditatem. God commands nothing but love, the Devil nothing but lust.

Now these two Cities were begun in Cain and Abel: Cain a Citizen of the world,
Abel a Citizen of God. Their names signify their natures: Cain signifies a
profession, and he built a City: for the children of this world are wiser in
their generation, then the children of light. Iniqui mentem in amore praesentis
vita figunt. Wicked men set Greg.
their whole delight in this present world. What moved Cain to this? Not to be
defended against wild beasts, which Plato says first moved men to build
Cities; for then Abel would have builded so well as Cain. nor because man is
animal sociale, a sociable creature; which Aristotle makes a special motive
hereof: for then the righteous would also have builded. But because Cain was a
fugitive, he builded for a protection against Gods curse; especially because he
had no expectation of a better City. Unlike to Abraham, who Hebr. 11. 10.
looked for a City that has a foundation, whose builder and maker is God. The
Greeks say, that Cecropolis built by Cecrops, the Egyptians that Thebes, the
Argiues that Argos, was the first City. But it is manifest, that this City
built by Cain was the first. He called the name of this City Enoch, but Henoch
in the righteous line is the seventh; Iud. ver. 14.
Enoch the seventh from Adam. So the wicked dedicate worldly possessions in the
first place, the righteous in the last. Cain and Henoch had their possession
and dedication here. But Abel signifies mourning, and he built no City. Our
possession is in heaven, this City of God, invisible to the eye, incredible to
the faith of the world, but infallible to all believers.

And for Cain, it is not properly translated, Aedificauit, but Erat
aedificator, as Iunius: erat aedificans, as the Septuagint; he began to build,
but he finished not: he was still a runnagate. So all worldlings are but
aedificantes; like the Babel-erecters, they but began to rear the tower, but
never could come to roof it. This man began to build, says Christ, but could
not make an end. They are persuaded, yea, Psalm. 49. 13.
their inward thought is, that they build houses to all ensuing generations;
but this their way is their folly. Aedificat mortalis, mors diruit
aedificantem: Mortal man builds, and death pulls down both builder and
edifice. You have heard it talked of Castles built by day, and still (no man
knows how) pulled down again by night. That fabulous report is mystically
true of the worldlings hope: what ever he erecteth in the day of his
prosperity, the night of his ruin shall overthrow.

Here are the two Cities: Omnis homo vel in coelis regnaturus cum Christo, vel
in infernis cruciandus cum Diabolo. Aug.
Every one shall either reign with Christ in Heaven, or be tormented with the
Devil in hell. But how then is it said, that 2. Cor. 5. 19.
God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself? therefore the whole
world is reconciled. But Saint John contradicts it, Mundus positus in maligno,
1. John 5. 29.
the whole world lies in wickedness: therefore the world is not reconciled to
this City. Here qui been distinguit, been doeet; a proper distinction does
clear this difficulty. The world is sometimes taken for good, then Denominatio
sequitur meliorem partem: often for evil, then Denominatio sequitur maiorem
partem. In a word, says Augustine, Amor Dei constituit Jerusalem, amor mundi
Babylonem. The love of God intitles us to Jerusalem, the love of the world to
Babylon. Thus may we distinguish the Citizens: for Bonos vel malos mores
faciunt boni vel mali amores: Our good or bad loves, make our good or bad
lives. There is no man which belongs not to one of these two Cities: No? To
which of them belongs the Hypocrite? to Babylon? his face is toward Jerusalem.
To Jerusalem? his heart is with Babylon. His misery is great: because he
wears Gods outside, the world will not be his mother: because he wears the
worlds inside, God will not be his Father. He has lost eart^ for Heavens
sake, and Heaven for earths sake. We have some such rushers into authority
uncalled, vicious correctors of vice, that undertake to cleanse the Augean
stables, perhaps somewhat the sweeter till themselves came in: officious
Scauengers of iniquity. If with this lome they dawbe over their own
debauchednesse, they are like dung, which is rotten and stinking of it self,
yet compasses the ground, and makes it fruitful. Or like the shepherds
dog, that hunts the straggling sheep to the fold, yet is a dog still, and
has his teeth beaten out, lest he should worry them. Will you hear to what
City hypocrites belong? The wicked servant shall have Mat. 24. 51.
his portion with hypocrites, where shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. So
then the Hypocrites home is the city of weeping and gnashing of teeth.

But in this blessed City God is King, Christ his Hebr. 1. 6.
eldest Son, the elect are his younger Romans 8. 29.
brethren, his Viceroyes are Kings, Angels his Nobles, Romans 13. 4.
Just Judges his Magistrates, 2. Cor. 5. 20.
good Preachers his Ministers, 1. These. 4. 3.
holiness his Law, the godly his Subjects, Mat. 6. 32.
Providence his government, Mat. 5. 34.
Heaven his Court, and Romans 6. 23.
salvation his recompense.

Further observe, that if this City be Gods, then so are all things in it.
Whence I infer, that all sacred things in this City being Gods, must not be
violated. For the things in heau^n they are safe enough, out of the Incrochers
reach: but the holy things of this militant City are universally abused.
Sacrilegium, quasi sacrilaedium, a profaning that is holy. Now holiness is
ascribed to Persons, Places, or Things. Sacrilege may be committed, says
Aquinas, 1. Uel in Personam, against a person, when one Ecclesiastical man is
abused. Luke 10. 16.
He that despises you, despises me. 2. Vel in locum, against a place, when
the Temple is profaned. Mark 11. 17.
My house is called the house of prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieues.
3. Vel in Rem, when things dedicated to holy uses are perverted. Mala. 3. 8.
You have robbed me in tithes and offerings. Simon Magus would have bought a
Act. 8. 19.
power to give the holy Ghost (...) imposition of hands. He would have given
money for it, no doubt to have gotten money by it. No Spiritual things are to
be barterd for money. Now Spiritual things are of four sorts.

1. Essentialiter, the gifts of Gods Spirit, justification, sanctification,
Gala. 5. 22.
love, peace, patience, goodness, faith: Charismata salutis: which make those
that have them spiritual.

2. Causaliter, The Word and Sacraments, which are the conduct-pipes to convey
our souls those graces, from the fountain of all grace, Jesus Christ: Ioh. 6.
63.
The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.

3. Effectualiter, as power to heal, to work miracles, to excommunicate, to
absolve: gifts not imparted to secular hands, but committed with the keys to
the Church.

4. Per annectionem, such are spiritual Livings and endowments: these are not
to be profaned in buying and selling. Selling is like the sin of Gehesi;
buying, like the sin of Simon Magus. Anathema danti, anathema accipi^nti.
There is a curse to the giver, and a curse to the receiver. Now Sacrilege to
these holy things of God is committed three ways.

1. Quando ausertur sacrum de sacro: when a holy thing is taken from a holy
place: as the consecrated vessels out of the Temple. Foelix seeing the costly
Chalices Constantinus and Constantius had bestowed on the Church, maliciously
scoffed, What stately plate is there for the Carpenters Theodoret.
Son? But he that had so base a conceit of Christ's blood, did himself nothing
night and day but vomit blood, till his unhappy soul was fetched from his
wretched carkase. We have too many of those, that like Belshazzar, with the
riches of the Church have furnished their cup-bords of Plate.

2. Quando non sacrum de sacro, when a common thing is stolen from a sacred
place. As if a thief breaks open a Church to steal some private treasure hid
in it. So the Churchwardens may defraud the poor of the money in the box. It
is the poores, not sacred to the Church, yet is it sacrilege to embezzel it.

3. Quando sacrum de non sacro, when a holy thing is taken out of a common
place: as when the Church is robbed of her possessions and endowments. O the
mercy of God, what shall become of England for thus robbing Gods City! Our
Patrons are like those Christ whipped out of the Temple; yea worse: for they
bought and sold in the Church, these buy and sell the Church it self. Prou.
20. 25.
It is a snare to the man that deuoureth that which is holy. A snare has three
properties. 1. It catches suddenly: Vzza did but touch the Arc, and presently
fell down dead. 2. It holds surely, 2. Chr. 26. 19.
Vzziah will offer Incense, but the Leprosy (which was his plague) held him to
his dying day. 3. It destroys certainly, the earth swallowed Corah and his
confederates, when the rest escaped.

The Prophet bestows a whole Psalm against this sin, Psalm 83. The Center
of it, upon whom all the lines and proiections of his inuectiues meet, are
those ver. 12. that say, Let us take to our selves the houses of God in
possession. He calls them Gods enemies, tumultuous, proud, God-haters, ver. 2.
Crafty enemies, with their plots, tricks, subtilties; much like our
Impropriators legal* iustifyings. ver. 3. Confederate enemies, combining
themselves to annihilate a Church; Come, let us cut the^ off from being a
Nation. ver. 4. endeavoring to extinguish the very Name of Israel; breaking
down the pale, that the Psalm. 80. 13.
Bore the depopulator, and the wild beast the corrupt Patron, may waste and
devour it. They would plow up the Universities, and sow them with the seed of
Barbarism. Now mark how he prays for them. ver. 9. Do unto them, as unto
the Medianites: Judge. 7. 22.
who were by the trumpets and lamps so terrified, that they drew their swords
one upon another: so that these by the trumpets of the Law, and lamps of the
Gospel, might be awaked. As to Sisera and to Iabin at the brook of Kison:
Judge. 4. 9.
that great Captain, whom God delivered into the hands of a woman. ver. 11.
Make their Nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea all their Princes as Zebah, and
Zalmunna. All Princes, yet died violent and ignominious deaths, and became like
dung for the earth. Does he stay here? No, ver. 13. O my GOD, make them like a
wheel, and as the stubble before the vvind: Infatuate all their plots, turn
their brains, and disperse their stratagems. Is he yet satisfied? No. ver. 14.
As the fire burns a wood, and as the flame sets on fire the mountains; so
persecute them with thy tempest. He uses imprecations to open the floud-gates
of Gods wrath; that like fire it might consume them, either naturally as fire
burns the wood, or miraculously, as it enflameth the Mountains. ver. 16. Fill
their faces with shame. If this be to take Gods houses in possession, who dares
lay sacrilegious hands upon them? Yet for all this, those men did not what they
desired. Let us take, ver. 12. they said it, they did it not. Perhaps no thanks
to the^, they would if they could. We have done it, taken, inhabited,
inherited: as Elias said to Ahab; 1. King. 21. 19
We have killed, and also taken possession. His tithes, his offerings, all his
holy rites, yea his very Churches: we have gotten them, and led them captive
away, bound in chains of iron, conveyed by deeds, grants, seals, fines, as
if you would make sure, they should never return to the owner; God is robbed
of them for ever.

Ier. 5. 29.
Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation? What family, that has had but a finger in these
sacriledges, has not been ruinated by them? They have been more unfortunate
to the Gentry of England, then was the gold of Tholossa to the followers of
Scipio. Remember the Proverb; He that eats the Kings goose, shall have the
feathers stick in his throat seven years after. Justinian said; Proximum
sacrilegio crimen est quod maiestatis dicitur. Treason is a petty sin in
respect of sacrilege. Augustine seems to give the reason: Tanto grauius est
peccatum, quanto committi non potest nisi in Deum. It is so much the more
heinous, because it cannot be committed, but immediately against God himself.
Well then, as the Philistines made haste to send home the Arc; and the
Egyptians to rid 1 Samuel 5. 11. Exodus 12. 31.
themselves of Gods people; so let us restore to God his dues with all speed.
Otherwise, as he smote the Philistines with Emrods secretly, and the
Egyptians with plagues publicly: so only himself knows what he has
determined against us. With what face can thou expect an Inheritance from
Christ in heaven, that detainest from Aug.
Christ his Inheritance here on earth? Let us not so Iewishly with the spoils
of Christ, purchase fields of blood.

It is much, if at all this any guilty soul tremble: but howsoever, like
Pharaoh, when the thunder and lightning are done, they are where they were. O
this is a difficult Devil to be cast out.

Mark. 12. 17. Aug.
Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are
Gods. Reddite Deo sua, vt Deus restituat vobis vestra. Return unto God that
which is his, that God may allow you that which is yours. We pay to the King
Impost, Subsidies, and Fifteenes; so give we all these in a resemblance to God.
The Lords impost for all his blessings, is our gratitude. Psalm. 116. 12.
What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
the cup of salvation, and bless the Name of the Lord. If we forget to pay
this Impost, the commodity is forfeit; God will take it back. Our Subsidies
are according to our parts. The subsidies of our eyes are our tears: he that
pays not this tribute of rain, shall want the sunshine of mercy. The
subsidies of our mouths are our praises. Tibi omne os confitebitur. Psalm. 51.
15.
Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise. The
subsidies of our ears are attention to his word. Luke 10. 39.
Mary sat at Jesus feet, and heard his word. The subsidies of our heads are
meditations of his power, justice, mercy, truth. Gal. 1. 2.
The blessed man does meditate in the Law of the Lord day and night. This
reduces Christianity to practice: a rare habit; and yet it is as possible to
be good without it, as to swallow and never chew the cudde. A Sermon without
consequent meditation may come to be remembered again in hell. The subsidies of
our knees are geniculations. Ephesians. 3. 14.
I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Act. 7. 60.
Steven kneeled down and prayed, etc. If our knees be too stout to pay this
tribute, heaven gate will be too low for our entrance. The subsidies of our
hands are alms to the poor: the due payment of this interest shall bless and
increase the principal. Luke 6. 38.
Give, and it shall be given you. To the King we pay Fifteenes, to God
Tenths: these he has separated to himself. The honest Pharise could say, Tyth
and be rich: the dishonest Christian says, Tyth and be poor. But what men
get by this detinie, shall be their fatal destiny: they shall leave the gold
behind them, but carry the guilt with them to everlasting fire. Rob not this
City militant, lest God turn you from the City triumphant.

Of the living God.
This has been an ancient attribute to God; living: and it is added here
partly for distinction, partly for demonstration. First, it distinguishes the
owner of this City from other titular gods. For 1. Cor. 8. 5.
there be gods many, and lords many. The name of gods has been given to men,
to Idols, to lusts. Homines Dij mortales, Idola dij mortui, Libidines dij
mortiferi. Men are gods dying, Idols dead, lusts deadly. There are

1. Dij deputati; reputed and deputed gods: such are Magistrates and Princes.
Psalm. 82 6.
I have said, Ye are gods: but these are mortal gods; ye shall die like men.
You have your life from this living GOD: both the life of nature common with
others, and the life of power superior to others. Romans 13. 1.
The powers that be, are ordained of God. Pilate received that power from God,
whereby he unjustly condemned the Son of God. Ioh. 19. 11.
Thou could have no power against me, except it were given thee from above.
We must give to those gods obedience, either active or passive: active when
they command well, passive though they command ill. Otherwise we incur Romans
13. 2.
damnation for obstinate disobeying, as themselves have damnation for unjust
commanding. These are momentany gods, as men are Kings on the stage, till the
play is done.

2. Dij fictitij, feigned gods, as Mars the god of war, Neptune the god of the
sea, etc. They were strange gods, that ran a whoring after women, made way to
their lusts, if not by flattery, by blood. Scarce ranker villainy in the Devils,
then was found in those gods. This the Philosophers objected against Paul, that
he was Acts 17. 18.
a setter forth of strange gods. The superstitious Lystrians took Paul and
Barnabas for such gods; Dij descenderunt: Acts 14. 11.
the gods are come down to us in the likeness of men. But Paul, verse. 15.
points them to the living GOD that made heaven and earth. Those feigned gods are
confounded by this living GOD.

3. Dij manufacti, gods made with men's hands; Idols, but these are Psalm. 106.
28.
dead gods. Yea, not only dead, but nothing. 1. Cor. 8. 4.
An Idol is nothing in the world. It is true that they have matter and form:
the gold, brass, wood, or stone whereof they are made, be substances: they
have something in esse naturae, nothing in esse vitae: they have stuff, but no
life in them. Psalm. 135. 17.
They have eyes and see not, there is no breath in their mouths. S. Paul
commends in the Thessalonians this happy conversion, 1. These. 1. 9.
from dead idols to the living God. O that it were as easy to confute
Idolaters, as it is to confound Idols. Res hominis conculcat talem Deum. No
Idol is so great a god, but the foot of man can kick it down.

4. Dij vsurpantes, usurping gods, devils. So Paul calls Satan 2. Cor. 4. 4.
the god of this world. Of the whole world? What is then left for God? Not so,
he is Deus improborum, not elementorum: God of the wicked, not of the frame, of
the world. John 16. 11.
The Prince of this world is already judged. A goodly god that is already
judged! Romans 16. 20.
The God of peace shall tread Satan under your feet. Not you, but God shall
tread him down (to your comfort) under your feet. Therefore Ephesians. 4. 27.
give no place to the Devil: for there is no place for the Devil, but where
it is given him.

5. Dij sensuales, sensual gods. Some make their belly their god, and delicate
cheer his sacrifices. (...). Cor. 6. 13.
Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it
and them. Others make gold and silver their gods: worse then Pagan Idolatry:
they had gods of corn, and of wine, But Esa. 2. 20.
These idols of silver, and of gold, which they made for themselves to worship,
they shall one day castaway with malediction. Some make their wife a goddess,
dote upon her with the extremest Idolatry: a fair colored piece of clay has
more worship then the Lord of heaven. To some their Patron is a god: they more
quake at his frown, then at all the curses in the Bible. These are not only
dead, but deadly gods.

For demonstration, the owner of this City is the living God: both formaliter
in himself, and effectiue to others, 1. Tim 6. 16.
who only has immortality. Only? Are not Angels and men's souls immortal?
But God gives to them this immortality; only he has it in himself. Therefore
he is called the living God, and the God of life: there be three degrees of
life, all given by this living God. 1. Universal, which consists of sense and
motion: of this the beasts participate. Psalm 104. 3.
Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, and they are created. 2. Rational, a life
proper to man, not to other earthly creatures. 3. Supernatural, which belongs
only to the faithful. Christ himself is this life in us. Gal. 2. 20.
Now live not I, but Christ lives in me. Haec vita reponitur, deponitur
nunquam. This life is laid up, but never lost. The world sees it not, because
Col. 3. 3.
it is hid with Christ in God. We now feel it, live by it. Ver. 4.
But when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall we appear with
him in glory.

Behold here with comfort the master we serve, the living God. Riches is a
flying Master; it hasts away Prou. 23. 5.
with the wings of an Eagle. Honor is a dying master, it brings a man to the
sepulcher, and then goes back with the Heralds. Pleasure is a spilling Master;
Luke 6. 25.
Woe to them that laugh, for they shall weep. Satan is a killing master, his
wages is hell fire. But all in grace is living and enliuing. Idols are dead,
and never were alive: men are alive, but shall be dead: pleasures are neither
alive nor dead: Devils are both alive and dead; for they shall live a dying
life, and dye a living death. Only the living God gives everlasting life.

Jerusalem.
This is the appellation of the City. As Canaan was a figure of heaven; either
of them called the Land of Promise: so local Jerusalem is a type of this
mystical City. There are many conceits concerning the denomination of
Jerusalem. Hierom thinks that the former part of the word comes from the Greek
(...), Holy: because Jerusalem is called Mat. 27. 53.
the holy City: But then there should be a mixture of two several languages,
Greek and Hebrew, to the making up of the word. The Hebrews derive it better:
they say, Sem called it Salem, Peace: and Abraham Iireh. The place where he
attempted the sacrifice of his son, he called Gene. 22. 14.
Iehouah-Iireh: The Lord will see. Thus put together it is Jerusalem,
visiopacis. This is more probable, then from the Greek (...), as Ierom: or from
Iebus, as Pererius. This is evident from the 76. Psalm. ver. 2. In Salem is
his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion. So that Salem and Sion were
both in one place. The Jews have a Tradition; that in one and the same place
Cain and Abel offered, in the same place Noah coming out of the Arc
sacrificed, in the same place Abraham offered Isaac, in the same place stood
Areunah's threshing floor which David bought, in the same place Melchisedek
the Priest dwelt, in the same place Solomon built the Temple, and our Lord
Jesus Christ was crucified.

But to let go ambiguities, Jerusalem is a City of Peace. This is plain, Heb.
7. 2.
Melchisedek was King of Salem, that is, King of Peace. Gods Church is a Church
of peace. That of Plato over his door, is worth our remembrance. Nemo nisi
veritatis et pacis studiosus ^trabit. Let none enter, but such as love peace
and truth. Saint Paul is bold to his Galathians; Gala. 5. 12.
I would to God they were even cut off that trouble you. Contra rationem nemo
sobrius, contra Scripturas nemo Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus
senserit. No sober man speaks against reason, no Christian against the
Scriptures, no peaceable man against the Church. He that is not a man of
peace, is not a man of GOD. Peace is the effect of patience: if men would bear
injuries, and offer none, all would be peace. It is the greatest honor for a
man to suffer himself conquered in that, wherein he should yield. 2. Cor. 13.
11.
Be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace be with you. A
just reward; if we have one mind, and live in love and peace, the God of love
and peace shall be with us.

Heavenly.
This City is on earth, but not of earth. This is not terrestrial Jerusalem:
Gala. 4. 25.
She is in bondage with her children. She was not only then under the Roman
servitude literally: but according to Paul's meaning allegorically, she could
not attain the liberty of the Spirit, but abides under the wrath of God, and
horror of conscience. But this Jerusalem is heavenly. Reu. 21. 2.
I saw the holy City, new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven,
prepared as a Bride adorned for her husband.

Now it is called Heavenly in three respects; Of Birth, of Conversation, of
Inheritance. Ortus coelestis quoad originem: progressus coelestis quoad
conuersationem; finis coelestis quoad translationem. Here is all heavenly.
Gala. 4. 26 Hugo Card.
Jerusalem that is above is free, the mother of us all. In hoc quod dicitur
sursum, originis altitudo: quod Jerusalem, pacis multitudo: quod libera,
libertatis magnitudo: quod matter, faecunditatis amplitudo: quod nostrum omnium,
charitatis latitudo. The Church in the Creed has three properties; Holy,
Catholic, knit in a communion. The word Above intimates, she is Holy: the word
Mother, that she is knit in a communion: the word Of all, that she is
Catholic.

Jerusalem is a type of the Catholic Church, in Election, Collection,
Dilection. First for Election, Psalm. 132. 13.
The Lord has chosen Sion. That out of all Cities, this out of all Nations. 1.
Pet. 2. 9.
Ye are a chosen generation, a peculiar people: enclosed from the Commons of
this world, Gods own appropriation. 2. For Collection; that was walled with
stone, this hedged in with grace. Esaias 5. 2.
God planted a vineyard in a very fruitful hill: and he fenced it. It is well
mounded, and the Citizens of it linked together with the Ephesians. 4. 3.
Bond of peace. 3. For dilection; Beautiful for situation, the Palace of the
great King: the Sanctuary of his holy worship, his Presence Chamber: 1. Tim. 3.
15.
the pillar and ground of the truth. There Psalm. 122. 5.
was the seat of David: here the Throne of the Reave. 3. 7.
Son of David, that opens and no man shuts, that shuts and no man
opens. A heavenly City.

1. In respect of her Birth and beginning heavenly. For the Lord of heaven has
Iam. 1. 18.
begat her of immortal seed by the word of truth. Art thou a Christian?
behold thy honorable birth and beginning. Was it an honorable style, Troianus
origin Caesar? Then much more, Coelestis origin sanctus: Every Saint is by
his original heavenly. Bear thy self nobly, thou have a celestial
generation.

2. In respect of growth and continuance heavenly. Our conversation is in
heaven: We live on earth, yet says the Phil. 3. 20.
Apostle, our conversation is expressly in heaven. Our affections are so set on
it, that we scarce look upon this world: we so run to our treasure there,
that we forget to be rich here: but like the Saints cast our money at our
feet. Act. 4. Corpore ambulantes in terris, cord habitantes in coelis. Our
bodies walk on earth, our hearts dwell in heaven. To the hating and despising
world we answer; Nil nobis cum Mundo, nil vobis cum Coelo. We have small
share in this world, you have less in the world to come.

3. In respect of the End. Ideo dicitur coelestis, quia coelum seeds eius. Our
souls are never quiet, till they come Ambr.
to their wished home. Ephe. 1. 3.
Thus has GOD blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places. The
Church in her worst part is below, in her best above. Earth is Patria loci, but
heaven Patria iuris. As Irishmen are dwellers in Ireland, but Denisons of
England. We Job 4. 19.
dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, but are ruled by
the Laws of that supernall City. John 17. 24.
Father, my will is that those thou have given me, may be with me where I am.
Amator mortuus est in corpore proprio, vi^us in alieno. A Lover is dead in his
own body, alive in another. Animus velut Plato.
pondere, amore fertur, quocunque fertur; says August. Love waighes and swayes
the soul, whither soever it be carried. Exi de terra tua, said God to Abraham;
Genesis 12. 1.
Get thee out of thy Country: yea rather de terra non tua, from a Country that
is none of thine, unto a Land that I will show thee; thy own Land, the
kingdom of Heaven. Though man be called Iere. 22. 29.
Earth, Earth, Earth; thrice with one breath: (earth by procreation, earth by
sustentation, earth by corruption, says Bernard) yet the Christian is not
Habitator, sed accolaterrae; not a dweller, but a passenger on the earth. Hebr.
13. 14
For here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come. An Englishman
that traffiques in Turkey, and gets wealth in Turkey, yet plants not in Turkey,
but transports for England. A Christian what ever he gets on earth, treasures
up in heaven. Socrates being asked what Countryman he was, answered, Sum ciues
mundi, I am a Citizen of the world. But a Christian must answer, Sum ciues
coeli, I am a Citizen of heaven. Forsake we this home-stall with a ready mind,
when GOD calls us. And the Lord grant us so to live in this City of Grace,
that we may all live for ever in the City of Glory, through Jesus Christ.

To an innumerable company of Angels.
Behold one special dignity the Gospel brings us, Consociari Angelis; to be
made companions with the Angels. The incorporeall spirits are of two sorts;
Celestial and Infernal. If we weigh the malignancie of the one with the
benignity of the other, we shall truly meditate this benefit. Infernal
spirits are tempters to evil, and tormentors for evil. Homines seducunt,
seductos damnant, damnatos torquent. They seduce mortals, seduced they damn
the^, damned they torment them. Because they lost being like God, they strive
to make men like themselves. The devil enhanceth his own damnation, to
procure others. He knows himself irrecouerably lost, therefore is desperate.
These are wretched companions; Lord grant us to know no more of them then by
hearesay. But the good Angels strive by all means to uphold us in our
integrity, to keep us in the fear of that God they know and worship: to
preserve us from dangers whilst we live, and being dead to transport us to
everlasting joy. Bless us O Lord with the society of these Angels for ever.

Here we must consider two circumstances; Quales and Quoti: the Persons what
they are, Angels: the number, how many they are, An innumerable company. First
what they are, Angels. An Angel is an intellectual and incorporeall substance,
free of will, a servant to God, and by his grace Damasc.
immortal in blessedness. Cuius substantiae speciem et terminum solus qui
creauit, nouit. We cannot sufficiently know them whiles we are on earth; O may
we one day see and know them in heaven. That we may receive comfort by this
consorting with Angels, and understand what good they do unto us, let us
consider in them these six particulars. Their nature, their knowledge, their
power, their dignity, their distinction, their ministry.

1. Their nature; they are not qualities and motions, but spiritual
substances, really subsisting. This their actions testify, running on Gods
commands; executing his hests, etc. They are not flesh and bone, yet sometimes
have taken visible forms. Abraham intertaining three Angels, set meat before
them, Gene. 18. 8.
and they did eat. Theodoret says, they did take the meat simulatis manibus,
and did put it into simulatum os: they seemed to eat, not in truth. But they
had palpable and tractable bodies for the time, as appears plainly, verse. 4.
by washing their feet. Thomas, thinks they assumed a true body, but non fuit
vera comestura, it was not a true eating. But this is an idle opinion, for
there may be a true eating, though the meat be not converted into the substance
of the body. So our Savior did eat after his rising from death, yet no man
thinks his meat was turned into his substance. It is safe to say with the
Text, they did eat, and perform other offices of a body truly. Now this was
by divine dispensation for a time, the bettter to accomplish their enjoined
duties. Yet were these bodies no part of their natures, but only as garments
are to us. But whence had they these bodies? They were either immediately
created of God, or conflate of some presubsistent matter. What Calvin.
became of these induments deposed? Either as they were made of nothing, so
resolved into nothing: or else turned into the first matter whereof they were
composed: and so was also the meat they did eat. Thus they have been called
men: Genesis 18. 2.
Three men came to Abraham: The women that came to Christ's Sepulcher, found
Luke 24. 4.
two men standing by them in shining garments. This is their nature, which in
it self, says Isodore, is mutable: for some of them Jude. ver. 6.
fell from that blessed estate, and left their own habitation. But now for the
rest, Seruauit eos incorruptos charitas aeterna: the eternal love of God has
made them unchangeable. For Christ Col. 1. 20.
has reconciled all things to himself, whether they be things in earth, or
things in heaven. This is their excellent nature, inferior to God, superior to
man. In the Prophets vision, Esa. 6. 2.
each of the Seraphins had six wings: with twain he covered his face, and
with twain be covered his feet, and with twa^ he did fly. They have two
wings to cover their faces, as not able to behold the glory of God; and two to
cover their feet, because we are not able to behold them in their excellency.

2. Their knowledge. Austin says, They are taught of God, in the eternal
contemplation of whose truth, they are most blessed. Quomodo quae scienda sunt
nesciant, qui scientem omnia sciunt? How should they be ignorant of such Greg.
things as are fit to be known, that know him that knows all? Their knowledge
is threefold; Natural, Experimental, and Revealed. 1. Natural, received of
God in their creation, endued with an extraordinary light above man. 2.
Revealed, as God according to process of time has manifested to them. God
revealed things to the Angels, they to the Prophets. 3. Experimental, which
they have acquired by observation: they mark Gods doings. For it is certain,
the Angels did not know all things from the beginning, which they know now.
They knew not perfectly the manner of man's redemption. That mystery from the
beginning of the world has been hid in God: and is Ephesians. 3. 10.
Now made known to the principalities and powers in heavenly places. Great is
the mystery of godliness; God is manifested in the flesh, justified in the
Spirit, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
seen of Angels. Res mira Angelis, quanta hominibus! A matter worthy the
wonder of Angels, much more of men.

There be things which yet the Angels do not know. 1. not the day of judgment.
Mat. 24. 36.
Of that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of heaven. 2. not man's
heart. Acts 1. 24.
Thou Lord only know the hearts of all men. If Angels knew men's hearts,
they were Gods. 3. Neither do I think with Saint Augustine, that they know
Quanti numeri supplementum de genere humano integritas illus ciuitatis
expectat; what definite number of mankind must concur to the perfection of
that heavenly City. Man is circumscribed in place, knowledge, and mortality.
Angels are circumscribed in place and knowledge, not in mortality. God is not
circumscribed in either place, knowledge, or mortality. Man knows much,
Angels know more, only God knows all.

3. Their Power. Christ suffering himself to be apprehended, said he could
command more then twelve Legions of Angels. Whereupon one notes the mightiness
of his rescue: for every Angel is stronger then a Legion of men. They are said
to excel in strength. Psalm. 103. 20.
Bless the Lord, ^e his Angels that excest in strength. Mighty Angels. 2.
These. 1. 7.
The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels. Mighty,
but His: the original has it, the Angels of his mighty power. Innumerable,
first borne of Egypt were slain by one Angel. An hundred eighty five
thousand Assyrians smitten by one Angel, 2. Sam. 24. 2. Kings. 19. 35.
Seventy thousand killed by one Angel. Therefore they are called Potestates,
Powers. Powerful in themselves, but how mighty, when they are strengthened by
the Almighty!

This is wonderful comfort to us; they are not weak that fight for us. Reu.
12. 8.
Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and
his angels; but prevailed not. The Devil has a raging malice, but no
prevailing power. One Angel is too hard for many devils. But against the power
of Angels it is objected, that a man prevailed against an Angel. Hos. 12. 9.
Jacob had power over the Angoll, and prevailed. Some had a sottish opinion,
that this Angel was the Devil in Esau's likeness, and that by the power of a
good Angel Jacob overcame. Now lest he should ascribe the victory to himself
and his own strength, the Angel smote him on the thigh, so that he halted.
But there is no mention made save of one Angel: he that wrastled with him, was
the same that blessed him: he that blessed him, was the same that touched him:
a good Angel, for an evil would never have blessed him. But indeed this
Angel was the Son of God. 1. Because he blessed him, God blesses, not
Angels. 2. It is said, Genesis 32. 28. that he prevailed with GOD; and verse 30.
that he saw God face to face: therefore it was God, not an Angel. Whether it
were God or an Angel, you may see the power of faith, that it can preuail with
mighty Angels, with almighty God. He that wrastled with Jacob, gave him power
to overcome. Seipso fortior est, so God is stronger then himself. He could
not prevail because he would not: he disposes his power according to his
will, not his will according to his power. Genesis 19. 22.
Haste thee to Zoar, for I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither.
Exodus 32. 10.
Let me alone, that I may consume them. As if Lot and Moses could hinder God.
Faith and Prayer are manicles to his hands, whereunto he gives victory
against himself.

4. Their dignity consists in two things; In respect of their Place, and of
their Grace. 1. For their abode, it is in heaven. Evil Angels dwell below, 2.
Pet. 2. 4.
they are cast down into hell: good above, Mat. 18. 10.
The Angels do behold the face of my Father in heaven. They are heavenly
Courtiers, and heavenly Quiristers, eternally singing Ichouahs praise. 2. In
respect of their Grace, so that they are called the Angels of GOD: and are
far more excellent then man. It is true that the Son of God dignified man's
nature more then theirs: Heb. 2. 16.
For he took not on him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. Greg.
Timet Angelus adorari ab humana natura, quam videt in Deo sublima^am: The
Angels refuse to be worshipped of man's nature, which they see GOD himself has
accepted. But though he took not their nature, yet he dignified their office:
for he is often called by the name of Angel. Gene. 48. 16.
The Angel that redeemed me, says aged Israel: the only redeeming Angel is
Christ. Exo. 14. 19.
The Angel that went with the Camp of Israel, is called, ver. 24. The Lord.
Paul says expressly, it was Christ. 1. Cor. 10. 4. 9. He is called Angelus
foederis, the Mal. 3. 1.
Angel of the Covenant. Reave. 20. 1.
I saw an Angel having the key of the bottomless pit: and he bound Satan: but
only Christ can bind Satan, and Reave. 1. 18.
has the keys of death and hell. Thus Christ has accepted the name of
Angels, yet he took not on him the nature of Angels, but of man: no more then
the Angels took on them the nature of man, when they appeared in an humane
shape.

5. Their distinction. Gregory collects from the Scriptures Nouem Angelorum
ordines, nine several orders of Angels. Angels, Archangels, Virtues, Powers,
Principalities, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubim and Seraphim. We grant indeed
that there be certain distinctions and degrees in the Quire of Heaven: but
whether distinguished by nature, gifts, or offices, none can determine. The
Papists plead much for the Princedome of Michael above all other Angels. Their
ground is Revel. 12. 7. Michael and his Angels fought etc. Bellarmine affirms,
that ever since the fall of Lucifer, Michael is head of the glorious Angels:
and the Rhemists collect from that place the reason, why Michael is ordinarily
painted fighting with a Dragon. But the foolish Painter so well as wise
Bellarmine, can tell us how Michael came to be chose in Lucifers room. Jude
says, the wicked Angels that left their habitation, are reserved in chains of
darkness: but he tells us not, that such as did not fall are preferred to
higher places, but rather continue still in their first estate and dignity.
Indeed Jude calls Michael an Archangel, and Daniel Vnum de principibus, one of
the principal Angels: but it can never be proved, that he was, is, or shall be
Monarch, or head of all Angels. Themselves say, that the greatest Angel is used
in the greatest Embassage: but Gabriel, not Michael, was sent for the
contracting of that sacred match between the GOD of Luke 1.
Heaven and the blessed Virgin. Therefore Gabriel, not Michael, should be
supreme both in natural graces, and supernatural prerogatives. Indeed Christ
is the Michael there mentioned: for the blessed Angels cannot be said to be any
other Michaels Angels, then Christ. So August. Bulling. Marlor. Perhaps in the
vision Michael and an host of Angels appeared to John, but they represented
Christ and his members. Christus est Ecclesiae suae Promachus, Angeli eius
Symachi: It is against the principles of holy belief, Aretius.
to ascribe this victory to Michael or any other Angel whatsoever. Reu. 12. 11.
They overcame Satan by the blood of the Lamb, not by Michael, or any Angel.

6. Their ministry: from hence, some of the Fathers say, the Angels took
their names. So Gregor. Angeli vocabulum nomen est officij, non naturae: Angel
is a name of office, not of nature. The Inhabitants of that celestial Country
are always Spirits, but cannot always be called Angels. Tunc solum sunt
Angeli, quando per eos aliqua nuntiantur: they are then only Angels, or (it is
all one) messengers, when they are sent on some message. Therefore he
concludes; Hi qui minima nuntiant Angeli, qui summa nuntiant Archangeli
vocantur: They that are sent on business of less moment are called Angels, of
greater importance Archangels. August. Ex eo quod est, Spiritus est: ex eo quod
agit, Angelus est. They are Spirits in regard of their Being, Angels in regard
of their Doing. Good Angels, says Isidor, are deputed for the ministry of
man's salvation. God has given man three helps: Sense to see danger near,
Reason to suspect danger far off, Angels to prevent that he neither sees nor
suspects. Now the ministry of Angels is threefold; to God, to his Church, to
his Enemies.

1. To God, which consists principally in two things. 1. In adoring, and
ascribing glory to him. So the Seraphims cried Esaias 6. 3.
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts. An Army sung, Luke 2. 14.
Glory to God on high. The whole Quire of heaven, Reave. 4.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive honor and power. 2. In standing in his
presence, ready at his command. Psa. 103. 20.
They do his commandments, harkning to the voice of his Word. For this
promptnes of obedience we pray, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
Quod oramus, agamus. Thus Angels were messengers, that Christ should be
conceived. Luke 1. 31. that he was conceived. Mat. 1. 20. that he was borne.
Luke 2. 11. that he was risen. Luke 24. 4. that he was ascended. Act. 1. 11.
These were great mysteries, therefore were confirmed with the testimony of
Angels.

2. To the Church. Heb. 1. 14.
Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who
shall be heirs of salvation? And by this their ordination to service the
Apostle shows, how infinitely far the preeminence of Christ transcends
theirs. But did not Christ put Phil. 2. 7.
upon him the form of a servant? Does not himself profess, that Mat. 20. 28.
he came not to be ministered unto, but to minister? The answer is easy; Non
esse hoc naturae, sed voluntariae exinanitionis: This was not a natural or
enforced, but a willing abasement of himself. Humilitatem non habitam induit,
celsitatem habitam non exuit. He put on an humiliation that he had not, he
did not put off the glory that he had: But the Angels were created to this end,
that they should serve; Totamque conditionem sub ministerio contineri. Istis
natural, illi aduentitium. Calvin.
To them it was necessary, to Christ voluntary. Now then ministry to the
Church is three ways considerable.

1. In this life, and that to our Bodies, and to our Souls. 1. To our Bodies:
for they necessarily tend to the preservation of our temporal estates, even
from our Cradles to our Graves. This is true in Doctrine, and in Example. In
Doctrine: Psa. 91. 10.
There shall no evil befall thee, nor any plague come nigh thy dwelling. Why,
how shall we be protected? ver. 11. Angelis mandabit; For he shall give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee
up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. In example: an
Angel comforts, directs, feeds Elias. Angels pluck Lot out of Sodom. An
Angel advises Joseph to fly into Egypt with Jesus. Abraham so encouraged his
servant, Gen 24. 7.
The Lord will send his Angel before thee. Gene. 32. 1.
Jacob went on his way, and the Angels of God ^et him. Peter was in prison, and
Acts 12. 7.
the Angel of the Lord freed him.

2. To our Souls, furthering the means of our salvation. The Law was given by
them, says Steven. Acts 7. 53.
Ye received the Law by the disposition of Angels. GOD makes them instruments
to convey knowledge to his Church. It was Gods charge; Dan. 8 16.
Gabriel, make this man to understand the Uision: it was the Angels
performance; Dan. 9. 22.
Daniel, I am come forth to give thee skill and understanding. Saint John
acknowledges in his Revelations, that Reu. 22. 8.
an Angel showed him those things. They preserve us in the true worship of God,
and cannot endure any attribution of his glory to a creature, no not to
themselves. When John fell down at the Angels feet to worship him, he
prevented him; Reave. 19. 10.
See thou do it not. They rejoice in our conversion; Luke 15. 10.
There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner that
repents. They joy in this for two causes. 1. To behold the glorious fruit of
their labors: for it delights a man to see the works of his hands prosper. GOD
has sent them to guide us to good, to guard us from evil: when we follow their
guidance, they rejoice. Let us hate to sin, as we would not wish to bring
grief to the thresholds of heaven. 2. That their number might be made up
again. They lost a number of Spirits, they are glad to have it made up with
Souls. The Angels joined company with men, praising God on earth: so they
delight to have men made their fellow-Choristers in heaven. Luke 2.


2. At the end of this life to carry our souls to heaven. Luke 16. 22.
When the beggar died, he was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. He
that in life was scorned of men, and had no companions but the dogs, is so
regarded of God, that he is guarded by Angels. He that could neither go, nor
sit, nor stand, is now carried: not on the shoulders of men, as the Pope the
proudest on earth, but he rides on the wings of Angels. He is carried to a
glorious Port, by gracious Porters.

3. At the last day, Math. 24. 31
Christ shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall
gather together the Elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the
other. These are those Mat. 13. 30.
Reapers, that in the time of harvest must gather the tares to the fire, and
the Wheat to Gods barn.

This is their ministry to us. But it is the Lord, Psalm. 37. 23.
that orders all our steps: he spreads the gracious wings of his
providence over us: and the Lord Jesus Christ is all in all unto us. Now the
rule is, Non multiplicanda Entie sine necessitate; and Frustra fit per plura,
quod fieri potest per pauciora. It seems then the help of Angels is more then
needs. For 2 Psalm. 121. 4.
he that keeps Israel neither slumbers nor sleeps. I answer, that
Angelical custody does not extenuate, but extol Gods goodness and Greatness
toward us: for this is but the execution of his high and holy Providence. It
is the wisdom of the King, that gouerns all the Cities and Castles in his
Dominions: yet he leaves not these unfurnished of men and munition, to
withstand the enemies invasion. The devils range and rage against us in every
corner, therefore God has ordained for our guard an Host of Angels. Psalm. 34. 7.
The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them. True it is that God is able to defend us himself by himself,
through that immediate concourse that he has in all things. But to show that
the Almighty God being tied to no means, does yet work by means, to uphold
the weakness of our natures. A Prince sees his little children besieged, and
sends his stronger sons, able soldiers to relieve them. Their help to us is
certain, though not visible: we cannot describe it, nor prescribe it, but we
feel it in the success: they preserve us. Against the Syrian band, (...).
King. 6. 17.
the mountain was full of horses, and charets of fire, to defend Elisha.
Neither is this all, but to manifest his abundant goodness to mankind. Psalm.
8. 4.
What is man, O Lord, or the son of man, that thou so (gardest and) regardest
him? They are dust and vanity, and rottenness, yet the Lord sends his glorious
Angels, his Pages of honor, and Princes of his Court, for their messengers and
ministers. As if a King should not only give his subject a charter and Patent
of safe conduct, but also sends his own guard to attend him. So the Lord honors
us with his own guard royal through Jesus Christ.

3. To enemies; not for their safety, but for the execution of Gods judgments
on them. The huge Army of Senacherib was overthrown by an Angel. Indeed they
will not the destruction of any man, further then the Justice of God ordaines
it. But sometimes they are sent out for the protection of the very wicked: so
Daniel speaks of the Grecians Angel, and of the Persians Angel. The Daniel 10.
Romists allot a particular tutelar Angel to every College and Corporation:
yea to the generation of flies, fleas, and ants: yea to every Infidel kingdom
such an Angel: yea to Antichrist; lastly, even to hell it self. Sure then they
will not pinch themselves: they appoint to the Pope two principal Seraphims,
Michael and Gabriel, ever attending his Person. For that Michael is the
chiefest, Victorellus produces two very equal witnesses: the Roman Liturgy,
and Tasso's Jerusalem: as a worthy Divine observed. To the Conclaue they
assign one special assistant Angel. But me thinks, as they Ideate their
Hierarchy, this Angel should desire the room, and become a suter to the holy
Ghost to name him Pope in the next Conclaue. For by this means he does
wonderfully enlarge his Diocese, having all the lower world under him; all
particular Angels of special Societies subject to him: yea all the Archangels
and Principalities officed to several Estates, must concur to his guard and
assistance.

The truth is, God sometimes allows the help of Angels to the very reprobates:
but to this scope and purpose, Populs sui promouere salutem, to further the
welfare of his own people. For all the atchieuements and victories, which come
to the heathen by help of Angels, are intended not for their good, but the
good of the Saints. It is for the Son of Gods sake they minister to us: and
to none do they perform these comfortable services, but to the Elect in Jesus
Christ.

Thus you see what these Angels are; now let us consider how many. An
innumerable company. The original is Myriades. Myrias is ten thousand;
innumerable: a finite number is put for an indefinite. Dan. 7. 10.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stood before him. Reave. 5. 11.
I heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throue, and the number of
them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands. Hom.
34. in Euang.
Gregory thinks there are so many Angels, as there are Elect. Super^a illa
ciuitas ex Angelis et hominibus constat: ad quam tantum credimus humanum genus
ascendere, quantos illi^ contigit electos Angelos remansisse. Vt scriptum est;
statuit terminos Gentium iuxta numerum Angelorum Dei. So many Angels, says
he, as fell from heaven, so many souls shall go up to heaven.

It is a question much disputed, whether besides the protection of Angels in
common, every particular man have one particular Angel for his Guardian. I find
many of the Fathers allotting every one a particular Angel. Isidor. Singulae
Gentes praepositos Angelos habere creduntur: imo omnes homines Angelos suos.
Origin, Basil, Hierome, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Gregory Nyssen, Primasius,
Justin Martyr, Augustine, most of the Schoolmen, and some Protestant Divines:
all conclude that every man from his birth, or especially from his Baptism,
has a particular Angel. I will not dispute it, yet I must doubt it; because I
see no clear ground in the Scriptures to prove it. The two chief places cited
are these, Math. 18. 10. Despise not these little ones, for their Angels behold
the face of my Father in heaven. This place Caietan and others expound, not
that every little one has a peculiar guardant Angel, but Omnes omnibus; that
all the Angels take care of all Gods little ones. As the Scriptures construe it
self; Luke 15. 10.
All the Angels rejoice at the conversion of one sinner. The other place is,
Acts 12. 15. Peter being unexpectedly delivered out of prison, came to Mary's
house where the Saints were gathered together. Rhoda hearing his voice, ran
in, and told them how Peter stood at the gate. They said to her, Thou art mad:
but when she constantly affirmed it, they said, It is his Angel. I answer
that the Disciples amazed at the strange report, spoke they knew not what. On
the like reason, because Peter transported in beholding Christ transfigured,
said, Math. 17. 4.
Let us build here three Tabernacles: some might infer that Saints departed
dwell in Tabernacles. Because the two sons of Zebede desired to Mat. 20. 21.
sit one at Christ's right hand, the other on his left in his kingdom; they
might have concluded that Christ was to be a temporal King. Or because the
Disciples seeing Jesus walking on the Sea, in their troubled minds, said Math.
14. 26.
It was a spirit; others might prove that spirits walk. Omne dictum sancti non
est dictum sanctum. All are not Christian truths, that true Christians have
spoken. Dicunt errores non Christiani, sed homines: they err not as they are
Christians, but as they are men.

But it is objected, that they spoke after the common opinion of men in that
age. We reply, that in that age it was a common opinion that dead men walked:
so it appears by Herod hearing the fame of Jesus; Math. 14. 2.
This is John the Baptist, he is risen from the dead. Uox populi is not ever
vox Dei: common errors are no rules of truth. And if the place were so
manifest, as they could wish it, why might it not rather be understood thus? It
is his Angel, that is, some Angel that God has sent for his deliverance.
Sometimes many men have but one Angel, other times one man has many Angels.
Exodus 14. 10. There was but one Angel for many people. 2. King. 6. 17. There
were many Angels for one man. Let us now make some uses concerning this
discourse of Angels. These may be twofold; some for imitation, others for
application.

First for imitation; there are three things specially to be observed in
Angels: Pureness of substance, Readiness of obedience, Fervor of Charity.
These are covertly implied from Psalm. 104. He makes his Angels spirits, his
ministers Psalm 104. 4.
a flaming fire. Spirits, there is the Purity of their substance: ministers,
there is the Readiness of their obedience: Flame of fire, there is the heat of
their Charity. Thus were the Cherubims of the Tabernacle made, figuring these
three virtues in the Angels. Exodus 25. First, they were made of Pure gold. ver.
18. This shows the excellency of their substance, for gold is the purest and
best of metals. To this Gods own Word is compared: Cant. 1. 11.
We will make thee borders of gold, with studdes of silver. Secondly, they had
two wings stretched out, to witness Promptitudinem obedientiae; Dan. 9. 21.
Gabriel did fly swiftly. Of all creatures the winged are the swiftest. Psalm.
55. 6.
O that I had wings like a Dove, then would I fly away, and be at rest. The
most suddenly transient thing, riches is compared to a winged creature: Prou.
23. 5.
Riches makes it self wings like an Eagle. Thirdly, they were made with their
faces one toward another, to manifest the truth of their love; not like proud
men turning away their countenance from their brethren. Lastly, though one were
toward another, yet both toward the Mercie-seate: beholding him in sight, to
who^ they were beholden in duty.

Thus we see, 1. that their nature is pure; and this their mansion declares,
which is heaven: for into it shall enter no unclean thing. They are shining
and singing stars: Job 38. 7.
When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for
joy. Heaven like fire, Similem sibi reddit ingredientem, makes that it receives
like it self. 2. That their obedience is ready and swift, their very name
imports, Angels. Aquo dominatio, ab eo denominatio: for a name is given from
some supereminent quality. Psalm. 18. 10.
He rode upon a Cherub, and did fly. 3. That their Charity is great, appears
by their busy protecting us, grieuing at our falls, rejoicing at our
perseverance in good, and helping us forward to salvation. Let us imitate them
in four things.

1. In Purity: nothing is more pleasing to God. It has the blessing of this
life, and of the life to come. Of this life; Psalm. 73. 1.
Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a pure heart. God is good
to the whole world with his common benefits, better to Israel with
extraordinary blessings, but best of all to the Pure in heart with his saving
Graces. Of the life to come: Psalm 24. 4.
Who shall stand in Gods holy place? he that has clean hands, and a pure
heart. Mat. 5. 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Thereis no joy like to
this beatificall vision, to see God is the height of happiness. But so shall
the wicked; Reave. 1. 7.
they shall see him whom they have pierced. Divines usually distinguish of that
sight: Luke 11. 27.
They shall see the Son of man coming in a cloud; they shall see him as man,
not as God; as their just Judge, not merciful Savior.

2. In Piety and obedience, wherein the Angels are ready and speedy, resolute
and absolute. As they help us to command the creature, so let them teach us
to obey the Creator. They fly when God sends them: true obedience has no lead
at the heels. Paul herein was like an Angel; having his Commission, he stood
not to Gala. 1. 16.
confer with flesh and blood. Quantum morae addis, tantum obedientiae
detrahis. So much as a man adds to delay, he takes away from obedience. The
truly obedient man does not procrastinate: Sed statim parat aures auditui,
linguam voci, pedem itineri, manum operi, cor praecipienti. He Bern.
instantly prepares his ear for the message: 1. Sam. 3. 10.
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears. His tongue gives a ready answer to the
question: Ioh. 21. 16.
Simon, love thou me? Lord, thou know that I love thee. His foot is shod
for the journey; Ephesians. 6. 15.
his feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. His hand is fit
for the work, Gene. 22. 10.
Abraham stretched forth his hand to slay his son. His heart is pliable to
the Commander: Paratum cor: O Lord, my heart is ready.

3. In Charity: Angels look upon and love one another, and all love us: Let
this teach us to love them and our selves. Do they seek our peace, and shall
we uncharitably war? It was the Angels song, Luke 2. Pax in terris, Peace
upon earth: war with none but with Antichrist and the devil. The Angels have
no need of our love, we of theirs. Love we that on earth, which shall dwell
with us for ever in heaven, Charity.

4. In humility: those glorious spirits stoop to do us service, let us not
think it bad or base to serve one another in love. No one man can so far
exceed another, as the Angels excel the best men: do they abase themselves
to our succor, and shall we in a foolish pride soorne our brethren? The
haughty piece looks on the poor betwixt scorn and anger; Touch me not, I am
of purer mould: yet Mors dominos seruis; blended together in the forgotten
grave, none makes the finer dust: we cannot say, such a Ladies rottenness
smells sweeter then such a beggars. Come down thou proud spirit, deny not
succor to thy distressed brother, lest God deny his high Angels to succor
thee. Thus for imitation, now for application, learn we other uses.

1. This is terror to the wicked, who contemn and condemn the righteous.
Math. 18. 10
Despise not these little ones, for their Angels are with my Father in heaven.
Beware you that scoff at poor Innocents, their Angels may plague you. They
for their parts may be content to put up abuses, and to forgive injuries: but
their Angels may take vengeance. Acts 12. 1.
Herod vexed certain of the Church, killed James with the sword, and seeing it
please the Jews, he took Peter also. They could not help this; but their
Angels did: for verse 23.
an Angel of the Lord smote him that he died. Thou may have evasion from the
executioners of men, but no protection against the Officers of GOD. When they
are bidden to strike, they will lay on sure strokes. Gene. 19. 13.
We will destroy this place, for the Lord has sent us to destroy it.

2. They teach us devout reverence, so to behave our selves as in the sight and
presence of holy Angels. The consideration of so blessed a company, does not
only Confer fiduciam, and afferre deuotionem, but infer reuerentiam; says
Bernard. When to Jacob in his dream was presented that Ladder, and the Angels
ascending and descending on it: wakening he says; How fearful is this
place! Genesis 28. 17.
This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
Seneca said, that the conceit of Cato and Plato, and such grave men in our
company would restrain us from evil: but what are these to the holy Angels of
heaven? 1. Cor. 4. 9.
We are a spectacle to the Angels: they are obseruers and witnesses of all our
actions. 1. Cor. 11. 10.
For this cause the woman ought to have power on her head, because of the
Angels. This is not to be understood of offense only given to the Ministers of
the Church: but to signify that a woman throwing off the veil of modesty,
and token of subjection to her husband, does make even the Angels of heaven
witnesses of her dissolute contumacie. The Angels are present with thee when
all men on the earth are absent from thee. I ask thee, when thou pollutest the
marriage bed, attemptest an homicide, plottest a treason, forgest a vvriting,
would thou then have the Angels present with thee, or absent from thee? If
thou desire them present, why do thou offend them by thy turpitudes? If
absent, thy protectors are gone, and the devils would easily confound thee.
Nonfacias coram Angelis Dei, yea coram Deo Angelorum: Do not that thing before
the Angels of God; yea before the GOD of Angels; which thou would shame to
do in the sight and presence of an earthly man.

Yet let us mark here by the way, that albeit the Angels deserve our
reverence, yet they desire not our adoration. Indeed the evil Angels request
it: it was a special boon which the Devil begd of Christ, Math. 4. 9.
to fall down and worship him. But the good refuse it; Reave. 19. 10.
See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant; says the Angel to kneeling
John. As we usually come too short in our due reverence to the Angels; so the
Papists go too far in undue adoration. They have a set prayer for it: Angele
Dei, Custos mei me tibi commissum lege super^a, semper rege, custodi guberna.
This sacrilegious honor those holy spirits refuse: they take no charge of such
superstitious souls. Accipiunt commissum, non arripi^nt inconcessum.
Honorandi, non adorandi sunt Angeli. Let them be honored, but not adored. Love
and reverence the Angels, only worship God and Jesus Christ.

3. This declares to us the excellent company that is in heaven. Were the place
less noble and maiesticall, yet the company it affords is able to make the
soul right blessed. We are loath to leave this earth for the society of some
friends, in whom we delight; yet we are all subject to mutual dislikes.
Besides the meeting of those good friends again in heaven, there be also
glorious Angels. There is nothing in them but is amiable, admirable: nothing in
possibility of changing our pleasures. There thou shall see and converse with
those ancient Worthies, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
Fathers of the Primitive times, all of them out-shining the stars: where our
love shall be as eternal, as is our glory. There we shall live familiarly in
the sight of those Angels, whom now we receive good from, and see not. Yea
there is the fountain of all felicity, that Savior of ours, whose grace only
brings us to the blessed vision of the whole Trinity. Neither can there be a
higher happiness, then the eternal fruition of Jesus Christ. Let this teach
us all to bless our God that has thus advanced us. Man is corporeal dust; O
that this clay of ours should come to dwell with those incorporeal spirits!
Math. 22. 30.
We shall be as the Angels of God in heaven. Sicut, non ipsi; like Angels, though
not Angels in nature. Communicatione spei, non speciei: we have now a communion
of hope with them, hereafter of glory. To this place, O thou Creator of men and
Angels bring us through Jesus Christ.

To the general assembly, and Church of the first borne which are written in
Heaven.
Our Apostle has spoken of the Churches glory typically, and topically: now he
describes it materially. First, the Essence of it, what it is; The Church.
Secondly, the Property of it, what kind of Church it is; General or
Catholic. Thirdly, what are the parts of it, and of whom it consists; Of the
first borne written in Heaven.

The Church. This word is taken in diverse significations. For the material
Temple. 1. Cor. 11. 18. When ye come together in the Church, I hear there are
divisions among you. For the faithful domestikes of one Family. 1. Cor. 16.
19. Aquila and Priscilla salute you, with the Church that is in their house.
For the professors of one Province; The Church of Corinth, of Ephesus, etc. For
some famous company of Believers gathered together in one place. 1. Cor. 14. 4.
He that prophecieth, edifies the Church. For an Ecclesiastical Senate or
Synod. Mat. 18. 17. If he shall neglect to hear them, Dic Ecclesiae, tell it
unto the Church. For the whole number of the Elect. Mat. 16. 18. Upon this
Rock I will build my Church. Acts 5. 11. Great fear came upon all the Church.
1. Tim. 3. 15. Which is the Church of the living GOD, the pillar and ground of
truth. Here first let me premise three circumstances concerning the Church.

1. Though it be a General Assembly, yet it is but one. Cant. 6. 8.
There be threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without
number: but my Dove, my undefiled is but one: she is the only one of her
Mother. Indeed there be two parts of this One Church: Triumphant in Heaven, and
Militant on Earth. The Triumphant part is a company of Justified spirits,
triumphing over the flesh, world, and devil: spirits, I say, for Except our
Saviors, and the bodies of Enoch and Elias, and of those Saints that rose at
Christ's Resurrection, of which yet many Divines doubt.
bodies are not yet ascended. They have two happy privileges. 1. To rejoice in
the conquest over sin and death: the most righteous man living is in praelio,
in a continual warfare. But so are the other: for Saint John says, Reave. 12.
7.
There was war in Heaven. This must be understood of heaven on earth; where
there is no truce with Satan; Pax cum Deo, bellum cum diabolo: We have peace
with God, but (on this condition, that) war with the devil. Therefore so
run the promises, Uincenti dabitur: To him that ouercomes, shall be given
Reave. 7. 9.
Palms: to show that they had been warriors, are now conquerours, 1. To
praise God continually, and to sing Amen: Blessing and glory, thanksgiving and
honor be unto God for ever and ever.

The militant part is a company of men living under the cross, and desiring to
be with Christ. They suffer, and this is their way to glory; Act. 14 22.
through much tribulation entering into the kingdom of God. They desire
dissolution, being 2. Cor. 5. 8.
willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord,
not simply and absolutely desiring death: but first that they might leave
sinning, and so cease to displease God: and then to come nearer to their
blessed Savior, whose love has ravished their hearts. Now this militant
Church may have many parts: as the Ocean sea is but one, yet distinguished
according to the Regions upon which it lies. So there is the Spanish Ocean, the
English Ocean, the German Ocean. There is a Church in England, a Church in
France, a Church in Germany: yet there is but one militant Church. Multa
Ecclesiae, vna Ecclesia; says S. Augustine. One Sun, many beams; one
Kingdom, many shires; one tree, many branches.

2. We must note, that Christ is the alone head of his Church, and can have no
other partner to share with him in this dignity. Ephesians. 2. 21.
Jesus Christ is the corner stone, in whom all the building fitly framed
together, grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord. He does not only by his
authority govern it, but also by his grace quicken it: so that we live not,
but Christ lives in us. Col. 2. 19.
Let us hold the head, from which all the body by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered, increases with the increase of God. He requires no
deputy, he needs none. For Mat. 18. 20.
wheresoever you are gathered together in my name, I am in the midst of you.
Now every Commission cease in the presence of him that gives it.

It is therefore as great arrogance in the Pope to call himself Caput
Ecclesiae, Head of the Church; as for a subject to keep himself in commission
in the presence of the King. But they distinguish of heads; there is a
Principal, and a Ministerial Head. Christ is not so weak in himself, or so
respectlesse of us, as to need any Ministerial head. Indeed there be Heads
Materialiter, who are no other then principal members. So Saul was called Head
of the Tribes, Psalm. 18. 43. Thou have made me the head of the heathen, 2. Sam.
23. 8. The Tachmonite head of the Captains. Nehem. 11. 16. Iozabad head of the
Levites. The eldest was called head of the family, Exodus 6. 14. These be the
heads of their fathers houses. But there is a Head Formaliter, to give sense,
motion, virtue, governance: this none but only Christ.

3. We must know, that there is no salvation out of this Church; such as never
become members of it, must eternally perish: they that are true members, shall
be saved. 1. Ioh. 2. 19.
If they had been of us, they would have continued with us: but they went out
from us, that it might be manifest they were not of us. Reu. 22. 15.
Without are dogs and scorners, etc. All out of the Arc perished in the
waters. Act. 2. 47.
The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. First, because
there is no means of salvation out of it; no word to teach, no Sacraments to
confirm. And especially because out of the Church there is no Christ, and out
of Christ no salvation. Who have not the Church their Mother, cannot have God
their Father. This teaches us to honor our Mother, and like little children
to hang at her breasts for our sustenance. Esa. 66. 11.
Suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations, milk out and be
delighted with the abundance of her glory. Run not to strange nurses for
poison, when you may have pure milk of your own mother. 1. Pet. 2. 2.
Desire like babes, that sincere milk of the Gospel, that ye may grow by it.
Qualis nutritio, talis complexio. The complexion of your manners, the
disposition of your lives, will witness whose children they are.

The general assembly: this is the property of the Church; General. It is
Catholic in three respects; of Time, of Persons, of Place. 1. Of Time, because
the Church had a being in all ages, ever since the Promise was given to our
first Parents in Paradise. If there had been a time when no Church had been
on earth, the world should have then perished: for it stands for the Elects
sake. 2. Of persons; for it consists of all degrees and sorts of men; rich and
poor, Princes and subjects, bond and free. There is no order nor state
excluded, if they exclude not themselves. 1. John 2. 1.
Christ is the Propitiation for our sins. He may be so indeed for the sins
of John, and the Disciples, but how appears it for mine? yes; Verse. 2.
not for our sins only, but for the sins of the wholeworld; every
condition of believers. 3. Of Place, it is gathered from all parts of the
earth; especially under the new Testament. Mat. 26. 13.
Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole world. When Christ
gave his Apostles their Commission, he gave also the whole world for their
Parish. Go teach all nations, and baptize, etc. Mat. 28. 19.


Thus we see the property of this Church, Catholic or General. It is one, but
not tied to one time, nor one place, nor one person: it is Catholic to all
times, to all places, to all persons. Augustine says that the Donatists in his
days would have tied the Church to Cartenna in Africa: as the Papists in our
days to Rome in Italy. How is it then a General assembly? Thus that
Antichristian rabble, which have almost nothing in their mouths but the
Church, the Church; yet do mostly infringe the liberties of the Church, and
hedge it in. All of them have made the Catholic Church, to be nothing else but
the Roman Church; and some of them the Roman Church to be nothing else but
the Pope. So in effect Papa virtualiter est ^ota Ecclesia; say they. The
Anabaptists imagined a Church like the Ticke, all body and no head: the Papists
have made a Church like the Toadstoole, all head and no body. What a monster is
their Pope, that will be all in all; eye and tongue, body and head, and tail
too? As Caligula took off the head of Jupiter, and set on another of his own:
so they have smitten off Christ's head, and set on the Pope. Let them take their
imaginary head: say we only to Christ: Whom have we in heaven but thee? and on
earth none besides thee. Our dependence be for ever on our Head the Lord Jesus.

Before I leave this point, I desire to express two things: one for
distinction, the other for instruction. First for distinction betwixt this
General assembly, and particular Churches: then for instruction, to show who
be true members of this Catholic Church.

1. The maine difference between them consists in this: that the Catholic
Church is always invisible, the members thereof only known to God: particular
Churches are sometimes invisible, and lying hid; other times manifest in the
open profession of Christ's name. As the Moon is eft-soones ecclipsed or
clouded, and often shines in the full.

1. It lies hid through want of the word preached, and public administration
of the Sacraments. So it was in the days of Elias, when he wished to die; 1.
King. 19. 14.
I only am left. Strange Apostacy, when so notable a Prophet could not
discern the Church! yet; verse. 18. I have left seven thousand, that never
bowed their knees to Baal. So it was in the reign of Asa; 2. Chro. 15. 3.
For a long season Israel has been without the true God without a teaching
Priest, and without the Law. The Papists demand where our Church was before the
days of Luther: we answer, that an universal Apostacy was over the face of
the world, the true Church was not then visible: but the grain of truth lay
hid under a great heap of popish chafe. But this inuisibility does not prove
a nullitie. They cannot impugn the antiquity of our Church, unless they
convince themselves. For the Church of England holds no other doctrine then that
the Church of Rome primarily did hold, and that which S. Paul delivered to them
in sacred writing; Justification only by the blood of Christ. If they be fallen
from this, who can blame us for falling from them? It was high time to leave
them, when they left the Lord Jesus. So long as we preserve the truths
antiquity, we must smile at their fond objection of nouelty. The Church of God
is Catholic, not Roman Catholic: that's just as foolish a phrase, as the
byword of Kent and Christendom. Particular and universal are
contradictories. If we have any thing from them, that they had from God; it is
our blessing that we have kept it, their woe that they have lost it. Esau's
blessing and birthright is lost to himself, and given unto Jacob. They have
not so much reason to boast, as we to rejoice.

Our Church had a substantial being before, but has gotten a better being by
the repurgation of the Gospel: which is maintained by our Christian Princes,
justly styled Defenders of the ancient Faith. It was Gods Floor before, though
full of chafe: but now since Mat. 3. 12.
he that has his fan in his hand has purged it, it is clearer in show and
substance. It was before a wedge of pure gold, but usurped by the hands of
Impostors: that by their mixtures, and sophistications for gain and sinister
respects, augmented it into a huge body and mass. It had the tincture of gold
still, but mingled with the dross of traditions, superstitions, will-worships.
You ask where was the gold? show us the place. We answer, it was in that mass:
now for extracting and purifying it from the dross, God gave us the touchstone
of his word, which made it sound, and manifests it to be sound. The Lord does
not then forsake his: the time was that the whole world seemed to groan, factum
se videns Arrianum, beholding it self made Arrian; yet God had his number.
Sardis is said to be dead, Reu. 3. 1.
thou have a name that thou live, but thou art dead: yet there be Verse. 4.
a few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments. When ordinary
means fail, by extraordinary the Lord gathers his elect. The Israelites in
the wilderness wanted both Circumcision and Passover, yet GOD made supply by
Manna, and the Pillar of the cloud.

2. A Church is visible when it flourishes: not that the faith and secret
election of men is seen; but there are apparent signs by frequenting the
Sanctuary, and submitting themselves to the Ministry of the Word. Now this
visible Church is a mixed company of men professing the faith. I call it mixed,
for in it are both believers and hypocrites, corn and tares: it is a band of
men, where be some valiant soldiers, and many cowards. It is called a Church
from the better, not from the greater part. The ungodly, though they are in the
Church, are not of the Church: as the superfluous humors in the veins are not
parts of the body, but rather the sickness of it. These profess veram fidem,
sed non vere; the true faith, but not truly. Hence it appears, that there be
two sorts of members in the Church: members before God, such as beside the
outward profession keep a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.
Members before men, such as have only the color and husk of Religion, in
heart denying the power of godliness: yet these are by us to be esteemed
members, according to the rule of charity judging the best.

2. Now for Instruction, what I have to say consists in the examination of two
points. First, whether the Church of England be a part of this Catholic
Church: then next, whether the Church of Rome have the same prerogative.

For our selves; the most infallible mark of the true Church, is the right
ministration of the Sacraments, and sincere Preaching the true Doctrine of the
Gospel. That is the true Mother and Spouse of Christ, that brings forth
children to him 1. Pet. 1. 23.
of immortal seed, by the Word of GOD which abides for ever: not of
traditions, miracles, dreams; but of this incorruptible seed. And when they
are borne anew, feeds them with sincere Milk out of her two breasts, the two
Testaments. This you know in your consciences to be true in our Mother: she
does not give us pro lacte venenum, but milk; even the same that Christ
himself put into her breasts. When we grow strong, she gives us meat, not
bones: troubles us not with the subtilties of the Schools; that have Plus
argutiarum quam doctrinae, plus doctrinae quam vsus: but Quod accepit a Domino,
what she has received of the Lord; neither more nor less, but just weight.
She does not say, Haec dicit Papa, but Haec dicit Dominus: not thus says the
Pope in his Decretalls, but thus says the Lord in his Scriptures. She does
Romans 9. 1.
say the truth in Christ, and lies not, her conscience bearing her witness in
the holy Ghost. She does not sophisticate truth, not mingle wine with water,
not dawbe the walls of Gods house with untempered mortar: not build upon the
foundation straw and stubble: not adulterate the Word; like a lustful man,
whose end is not to increase mankind, but to satisfy concupiscence. O then let
us hang upon her lips, that preserve this true knowledge: and say with Peter;
John 6. 68.
Lord, to whom should we go? Thou have the words of eternal life.

Thus we have proved the truth of our Church by Scripture: but our
adversaries oppose the sufficiency of this proof, by disabling the
Scriptures. They say we cannot know Scripture to be Scripture, but by the
testimony of the Church. It is false, for the witness of man subject to error,
is nothing to the testimony of GOD that cannot err. Therefore the Scripture is
called the Esaias 8 20.
Testimony, because it bears witness to it self. Besides, the Church has
her beginning from the Word, for there can be no Church without faith, no faith
without the Word, no Word without the Scriptures. So the Church depe^ds on the
Scripture, not the Scripture on the church. The Lawyer that has only power to
expound the Law, is under the Law. But they object, that Faith comes by Romans
10. 17.
hearing, and hearing by the voice of the Church. Paul intends there not that
general faith whereby we believe Scripture to be Scripture: but that
justifying faith whereby we attain salvation. And this comes by the voice of
the Church, not of it self, but as it is the ministry of Gods Word. John is
but Uox clamantis, Christ is Verbum clamans. Particular Churches have erred;
therefore the best security from error is in the Scriptures.

This is a Lesbian rule, able to decide all Controversies, and it is vitio
hominum, by the fault of bad Interpreters that it does not. For whether Aliorum
incuria that despise it, or Aliorum iniuria that pervert it, it suffers
martyrdom, and may not be heard declare it self. The Papist in expounding
Scripture after his own fancy, makes himself Judge, not the Scripture. But
all their drift is with Gods loss to promoue the Popes gain. He must be
Judge, yea he shall be an unerring Judge. Yet if the Pope have this
infallibility, I wonder what need there is of Counsels. Here they fly to
distinctions, as to familiar spirits. The Pope may err Argumentatiue, not
Definitive: in his chamber, not in his chair: Personaliter, non Formaliter: as
man, not as Pope. How prove they such an exposition of the Scripture? Here they
fly to the Pope, he so expounds it. How prove they the Pope cannot err? Here
straight they fly back again to Scripture; Peter, I have prayed for thee that
thy faith shall not fail. These hang gether like a sick man's dream.
Insequeris? fugio. Fugis? insequor. Yet thus they conclude against their own
wills; whiles they only prove the Pope by the Scripture, spite of their teeth
they prefer the Scripture above the Pope.

If this be so, that the truth of the Gospel being professed, believed, obeyed
among us, manifest us against all adversaries, to be true members of this
General assembly: then two subordinate questions offer themselves collaterally
here to be handled. First, whether corrupters of our Truth, and disturbers of
our peace are to be tolerated. Secondly, whether for some corruptions of
doctrine, or vices in manners, it be lawful for any of us, to make separation
from us.

1. Seditious and pestilent seedsmen of heresies are to be restrained. If a
little leven sour the whole lump, what will a little poison do? If Paul to
his Gala. 5. 9.
Galatians could not endure Christ and Moses together: how would he to his
Corinthians, endure 2. Cor. 6. 14.
Christ and Belial together? He sticks not to ingeminate Anathema's to them
that preached another Gospel. The Papists cry out against us for persecution:
they that shame not to belly the Scriptures, will not blush to belly us. Their
prosperity, their riches, their numbers among us, directly prove; that a man
may be a Papist in England, and live. But if their religion turn to treason,
shall it escape unpunished? A Papist may live, a Traitor may not live. To
persuade that a Christian king at the Popes will may, yea must be decrowned or
murdered: is this the voice of Religion, or Treason? If this be conscience,
there is no villainy: if such an act merit Heaven, let no man fear Hell. I
would ask a Papist, whether he be not bound by his religion to execute the
Popes doctrinall will: whether if he bid him kill his King, he may refrain
from that sacred blood, and not sin. If he refuse treason, he is not constant
to his Religion: if he keep his Religion, he must not stick at any act of
treason. So that who knows whether this day a mere Papist, may not on the
Popes command to morrow be a Traitor?

But say they, this a supposition as likely as if Heaven should fall: the Pope
will never command it. I answer, that Popes have commanded it. But we hope his
present Holiness will not: we were in a pitious case, if our security was no
better then your hope. God bless our gracious Sovereign from ever standing at
the Popes mercy. Why should such Seminaries of heresy, and Incendiaries of
conspiracy be suffered? What atonement of affection can there be in such
disparitie of Religion? when some cry, God help us: others, Baal hear us.
They to Angels and Saints, we to the Lord that made Heaven and Earth. But the
event has often proved, which of these could best hear prayers. As in that
memorable fight on the Leuant Seas, of five English ships against eleven
Spanish; they crying for victory to our Lady, we to our Lord: it seems, the
Son heard better then the Mother, for the victory was ours. The
Commonwealth that stands upon legs, partly of iron, and partly of clay, is
never sure. One womb held Romulus and Remus in peace, one kingdom could not
contain them.

But every man's mind is as free as the Emperors: Conscience is a Castle, and
there is nothing so voluntary as religion: faith comes by persuasion, not by
compulsion. Yield all this: and say with Tertullian; Nihil minus fidei est,
quam fidem cogere. And with Bernard; Suspendite verbera, ostendite vbera. Make
a man in error rather blush, then bleed. But if they break the foundation,
Non ferendi, sed feriendi. First speak to the Conscience by good counsel: but
if that ear be stopped, shake the whole house about it. Speak to the ears of
the inheritance, of the liberty, of the body; by mulct, by prison, by exile.
Let the Liberty say to the Conscience, For thy sake I am restrained: let the
Inheritance say, For thy sake I am empouerished: let the Body say, For thy sake
I am afflicted. But because heresy dies not with the particular person, but
kills also others: and Centum inficit, dum vnum intersicit. And because it
strikes at the life of a Christian, that is his Faith; For the just shall live
by his faith. Therefore pereat vnus, potius quam vnitas. Haretici corrigendi ne
pereant, reprimendi ne perimant. Heretics are to be corrected lest they damn
themselves, to be restrained lest they damn others. Persecutio facit Martyrs,
haeresis apostatas: plus nocuerunt horum Tertull.
tog^, quam illorum galeae. Persecution made Martyrs, heresy makes Apostates:
the Heretics words have done more hurt then the tyrants swords. Aperte sauit
persecutor Aug.
vt Leo: haereticus insidiatur vt draco. Ille negare Christum cogit, iste
docet. Aduersus illum opus patientia, aduersus istum opus vigilantia. The
persecutor rages like a Lion, the heretic insinuates himself like a serpent.
To deny Christ he compels, this man instructs. Against the former we have need
of patience, against the latter of vigilance.

Excommunication, bondage, exile have bin thought fit punishments for
heretics: fire and faggot is not Gods Law, but the Popes Canon-shot. An
heretic dying in his heresy cannot be saved: therefore Luther thinks, he
that puts an heretic to death is a double murderer; destroying his body with
death temporal, his soul with death eternal. But says Augustine, Diligite
homines, interficite errores: Love the persons, kill the errors. Presume on the
truth without pride, strive for it without rage. Seueritas, quasi s^ua veritas:
but verity and severity do not agree. Fire and sword may put to death
heretics, but not heresies. See here the difference betwixt the Papists
proceedings against us, and ours against them. They dye not among us for
refusing our faith: but us they burned (not for denying any article of faith,
but) for not believing Transubstantiation. So strange an Article, that
Bellarmine himself doubts whether it may be proved from Scripture or no: but
that the Church has declared it so to be. But though faith be above reason,
yet it is not against reason. This is my body, says Christ. Hoc, This bread:
this Pronoune demonstratiue they will have to demonstrate nothing. Hoc aliquid
nihil est. How then? this nothing is my body: not this bread, but this nothing.
Others will have something demonstrated to the understanding, nothing to the
senses. Some will have a demonstration to the senses, nothing to the
understanding: some partly to both: others expound it, This body: then it is
thus; This body is my body: others say it is indiuiduum vagum. But Quod
multipliciter exponitur, communiter ignoratur. That which is so variously
expounded, is generally unknown. The most judicious among them cannot
explicate it. Corpore de Christi lis est, de sanguine lis est:
Deque modo lis est non habitura modum.


What damnable cruelty then was it in them to burn silly women, for not
understanding this their inexplicable mystery? Those gunpowder divines
condemned others to the fire for not knowing that, which they never knew
themselves. We teach such erring souls be corrected, that they may be
converted: not be confounded. Excommunicated 1. Cor. 5. 5.
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus.

2. Whether a separation may be justly made from our Church for some errors or
corruptions of life. I know that diverse, who were once among us, never of us,
have put out their own lights, indeed excommunicated themselves. What Is their
plea? that our assemblies are full of enormities. I answer, that the defects
and corruptions of a Church must be distinguished: they are either in doctrine
or in manners. For doctrine, some errors are Citra fundamentum, some Circa
fundamentum, others Contra fundamentum. Errors beside the foundation trouble,
errors about the foundation shake, errors against the foundation ouerturne all.
So long then as no foundation is harmed, it is not lawful depart. until the
Church separates from Christ, we must not separate from it. In two cases there
is warrant of separation. First, when the substance of Gods worship is quite
corrupted. 2. Cor, 6. 16.
What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? when this is, ver. 17. Come
out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, when Jeroboam had set
up Idols in Israel, 2. Chr. 11. 14.
the Priests and the Levites left their suburbs and possession, and came to
Judah and Jerusalem. Secondly, when the substance of doctrine is quite
corrupted. 1. Tim. 6. 3.
If any man consent not to the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness, etc. From such, verse. 5. withdraw
thy self. Paul in the Synagogue at Ephesus preached for the space of three
months together. Acts 19. 9.
But when diverse were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of that way,
he departed from them, and separated the Disciples. In these two cases lawful,
not else.

For corruption in manners, they make not Nullam Ecclesiam, sed malam
ecclesiam; not no Church, but a bad Church. Wicked Scribes sitting in Moses
chair, and teaching the things he wrote, must be heard. Mat. 23. 3.
Whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do: but do not after their
works. Separate from their private society, not from the public assembly. But
they charge us, that we deny Christ. I answer, Denial of Christ is double,
either in judgment or in fact. Denial of Christ in judgment, makes a
Christian no Christian: denial in fact, the judgment being sound, makes him
not no Christian, but an evil Christian. When the Jews had crucified the Lord
of life, they remained still a Church, if there were any on the face of the
earth: and Jerusalem was still called the Mat. 27. 53.
Holy City. To them belonged Acts 2. 39.
the promise, and to their children. Romans 9. 4.
To them pertains the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants. I would to
God this bloody issue were stanched: but what age has not complained it? This
mischief is intestine. Amara persecutio in cruore martyrum, amarior in pugna
haereticorum, amarissima in malis moribus domesticorum. The persecution of
Tyrants was bitter, the poison of heretics more bitter, but the evil lives of
Christians most bitter of all. Phil. 3. 18.
Many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they
are enemies of the cross of Christ. Whereupon says Augustine; How comes that
great Champion to fall a weeping? Could he endure 2. Cor. 11. 24.
stripes above measure, prisons frequent, shipwrackes, perils by sea and land;
among enemies, among false brethren; hunger, thirst, cold, weariness,
painfulnesse: 1. Cor. 15. 32.
Did he fight with beasts after the manner of men; was he raped up among the
Angels? Did he bear all these miseries? was he honored with all these
mercies? and now does he weep? Yes, sin and sensuality was crept into the
Church; and this made that undaunted spirit fall a weeping. Pax a Paganis, Pax
ab H^reticis, nulla pax a falsis filijs. We have quiet from the Pagans, quiet
from heretics, but no quiet from wicked and exorbitant professors. Our
greatest enemies are they of our own house. Lord Jesus heal this plague.

Now we have proved and approved the truth of our own Church at home; let us
examine whether the Church of Rome be also a true member of this Catholic
Assembly. Errors that annihilate a Church, are of two sorts, some weakening,
others destroying the foundation. Weakening error is the building of 1. Cor. 3.
12.
hay and stubble on the foundation: the stubble burnt, their souls may be Ver.
15.
saved. A man breaks down the windows of his house, the house stands though
defaced: he pulls down the lead or tiles, the house stands though uncovered: he
beats down the walls, the house stands though deformed? he plucks up the
foundation, the house falls, and cease to be an house. Those which destroy
the foundation, are the overthrowing errors; by them a Church cease to be a
Church. Yet if an error be against the foundation, we are to consider the
persons; whether they err of malice, or of weakness. If of malice, 2. Tim. 3.
8.
like Iannes and Iambres that withstood Moses, resisting the truth; it is no
longer a Church. But if of weakness, we must not so peremptorily conclude:
for Paul writes to the Galatians as a Church of God, though they were perverted
to another doctrine; embracing a fundamental error of Justification by works.
The Church of Rome does wilfully and obstinately destroy the foundation,
therefore may be concluded for no Church. If they will be justified by the works
of the law, they are fallen from Grace.

Let us hear how they quit themselves. First, they would do it by retorting
all this back upon us: they tell us flatly, that we are no Church, and thus
they prove it. They say, we have no Bishops, so no Ministers, so no
Sacraments, therefore no Church. Here they clappe their wings, and crow,
Victory, Victory. Esaias 9. 21.
As Manasseh against Ephraim, and Ephraim against Manasseh, and both against
Judah. So they have set our brothers against us, us against our brothers,
Papists against us all. Behold the exigent we are in: the Papists say we have
no Ministers, because they are not made by Bishops; the Puritans say we have no
Ministers, because they are made by Bishops. Which of these speak true?
Neither. First to answer the Puritan; Bishops may make Ministers: Paul charge
Timothy to 1. Tim. 5. 22.
lay hands suddenly on no man: therefore he may lay hands on some. To Titus:
Titus 1. 5.
For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou should ordain Elders in
every City. Now we have true Bishops, therefore in Gods name allow us to have
true Ministers. For the Romanists, that tell us we have none of these, how
strangely do they belly us, and themselves? Oportet mendacem esse memorem. Have
they forgot their obrayding us, that we have all our Episcopal rites from
them? All our ministerial orders from them? If we have it from them, then we
have it. They are Bristo's own words in his Motives: The Protestants are Apes
of the Papists, the Communion-booke is made altogether out of the Masse-booke.
Why then do they not communicate with us? It is not for conscience, but for
malice. Let it be granted, that we have this from them: but then they must
grant withal, that Jacob by Gods disposing has gotten Esau's Birthright. So
the Israelites were feign to go to the Philistines to sharpen their sythes. We
abhor not Episcopal ordinations, but Papal. Our substance from them, their
circumstances to themselves. Papales ordinationes sunt foedaenundinationes. We
have their gold, they have left themselves nothing but Tinkers metal. Let them
keep their own, give us ours.

But further they object the continuance of their succession. We answer, the
succession of Person is nothing worth without the succession of Doctrine; which
they want. If it were by us granted, what never shall be by them proved, that
Peter is succeeded by the Pope: Yet as Matthias succeeding Judas was never the
worse, so the Pope succeeding Peter is never the better. Perijt dignitas
Cathedrae, quando veritas Doctrinae. But they say that in the Roman Church,
Baptism is rightly for the substance of it administered; therefore it is a true
Church. Indeed they have the outward washing, but quite overthrown the inward;
which stands in justification by the imputed righteousness of Christ. But the
Samaritans had Circumcision, yet were they not a true Church. Baptism severed
from the preaching of the Gospel, is of no more force, then a seal when it is
plucked off from the Indenture. Indeed truly, though they have Baptism, yet it
belongs not to them, but to a hidden Church among them. For doubtless God has
his chosen and sealed number in the midst of those Apostates. As the light in
the Lanthorn belongs not properly to the Lantern, but to the Passenger. That
Sacrament in the assembly of Rome, is like a true man's purse in a thiefes hand:
it no more proves them a true Church, then that purse proves the thief a true
man. The Lord of his goodness, that has given them the sign of the Grace,
give them also the grace of the sign, true washing away of their sins in
the blood of Christ.

Some have objected, and they seem to be kind friends to Rome: that Antichrist
must sit in the Temple, that is the Church: therefore this sitting of
Antichrist in Rome, proves them to be a true Church. But I am sure by this
argument what they get in the hundred, they lose in the Shire: they may put
these gains in their eye. I hope they will not confess their Pope Antichrist,
to have us grant them a true Church. Therefore some of them have affirmed,
Hominem non Christianum posse esse Romanum Pontificem. And would not he be a
strange Head of Christ's Church, that is not a true member of Christ's Body? But
howsoever, their argument holds not: for it is one thing to be in the Church,
another thing to be of the Church. Antichrist sits in that place, not as a
member of the Church, but as an Usurper. So the Pyrate sits in the Merchants
ship, yet has no right to it. All that can be proved hereby is, that among
the Papists there is a hidden Church, in the midst whereof Antichrist
dominereth, but has no part of salvation in it. What cause then have we to
bless our GOD, that has brought us from Babylon to Jerusalem, out of
darkness into his marvelous light, from the Romish Synagogue to the General
Assembly, and Church of the first borne which are written in Heaven? and the
Lord of his mercy preserve us in it for ever and ever.

To conclude, there be diverse Censures of the Roman Church. Some say it is no
Church, but Aequiuoce; as the picture of a man is called a man: or a painted
fire, a fire. It is no more a Church, then the carkase of a dead man, that has
on a living man's garments, is a living man, look it never so like him. These
look upon it Oculo vero, sed seuero: with a true, but a sharp eye. Others
say, It is non sanum membrum, sed membrum: It is not a sound member, but a
member. It has Scriptures, but corrupted with Traditions: but indeed they have
nullified the native sense; and so are Lanthornes that show light to others,
none to themselves. They have the Articles of the Creed, and make the same
general confession of faith: yet overthrow all this another way. Herein they
are like a fond Father, that with much indulgence tenders the body of his
child, would not suffer the cold wind to blow upon him, yet by secret
conueyances inwardly infects the heart, and destroys him. Thus they say, it is
still a member, still a Church; as a braine-sick man is a man. The Roman
Assembly is Vere Ecclesia, sed non vera Ecclesia: truly a Church, but not a
true Church. A leprous man is a man: Adultera vxor, tamen vxor est: an
adulterous wife is still a wife. So Duraus. In Papatu est Ecclesia, et Papatus
non est Ecclesia. Vt Ecclesia Dei, vt Papalis Diaboli. In Popery is a Church,
yet Popery is not the Church. As it is a Church, it is of God; as Popish, of
the devil. It is Incurata Ecclesia, an incurable Church, that hates to be
reformed: therefore no Church. We would have cured Babel, but she would not be
cured. She has apostated into treason, clipped Regiam monetam, the great Kings
coin, the Word of God: turned that pure gold into sophisticate Alchimy: prayer
to Christ, into invocation of Saints. These men conclude, that it is not a body
diseased, and full of wounds, that has the throat cut, yet with some life and
breath remaining: but a rotten and dead carkase, void of spiritual life. It
has blended Iudaisme and Paganism together with Christianity, and so sweld
up a superstitious worship of God; therefore no Church.

For my part I judge not: GOD reserues to himself three things; The revenge of
injuries, The glory of deeds, The judgment of secrets. I will not judge, but
like a witness give in my testimony. And here Qui been distinguit, been docet.
The best construction is that which enclines to charity: that is, there is no
probable salvation in the Zanch.
Church of Rome. Infants dying before they come to these errors, I believe
saved: for others, Nescio quid dicere; I know not what to say. They have
damnable heresies, as that of Free will, of Merits, etc. yet the persons that
of weakness defend them, may be saved. God pardons even wilful errors, if
they be truly repented. Therefore I believe that many of our forefathers went
to Heaven, though through blindness. Now indeed they are more inexcusable,
because our sound is gone out among them. There are Seducentes and Seducti: the
wilful blind lead the woeful blind, until both fall into the ditch. If they
will not see, there is no help, no hope. If simple ignorance mislead, there is
hope of return: but if affected, it is most wretched. Our office is to help
them with our prayers: and let us pray for them as Paul for his Ephesians; That
the eyes of our understanding being enlightened, Ephe. 1. 18.
they may know what is the hope of Gods calling, and what the riches of the
glory of his inheritance is in the Saints. Many of them have ready hearts, but
they want eyes: we have open eyes, God grant us ready hearts.

The first borne which are written in heaven. This is a description of the
persons, of whom the Church consists. The Church it self is a number of men,
which God has set apart by an eternal decree, and in time sanctified to
become real members of it. They are written in heaven, there is their eternal
election; and they are the first borne, that is (...) borne, there is their
Sanctification. For the two parts of the description, Their Primogeniture, and
Registring in Gods book; are but borrowed speeches, whereby God would ratify
the everlasting Predestination and salvation of his Church. That as the First
borne is not to be defeated of his inheritance; and the Enrolled names are
never to be obliterated: so certainly shall they inherit eternal life.

The first borne. Some understand by the first borne not all the Elect; but
only the Patriarchs, and such ancient Saints, the noble and primitive parts of
the Church. Calvin. Then this should have been referred only to the Church
triumphant in heaven; but the Catholic Church is here expressly meant, which
co^prehends also the Saints upon earth: therefore they also are first borne.
Besides, they are said to be written in heaven, which had been a superfluous
speech of those who are already in heaven: they that are there, need no
writing. Unusquisque Elect^est Pimogenitus.

But this seems to infringe the Primogeniture of Christ, to whom that Name is
by special title and right given. Primogenitus inter multos fratres, says
Paul: he is the Romans 8. 29.
First begotten among many brethren. Primogenitus vniuersae creaturae; the Col.
1. 15.
first borne of every creature. Primogenitus mortuorum; the Verse. 18.
first borne from the dead. He is the first borne, as he is the Son of God,
and as he is man. As he is the Son of God, in respect of time, before all
things, the beginning of all: in respect of dignity, because he is the
foundation of all good to his Church. Ioh. 1. 16.
Of his fullness have we all received, and grace for grace. As he is man, he is
the first borne, not in respect of time, but of excellency and virtue. In
respect of his miraculous conception; the first that ever was conceived without
sin, and Luke 1. 35.
by the ouershadowing of the holy Ghost. In respect of his birth, he was the
first borue of Mary. Mat. 1. 25.
She brought forth her first borne Son, and called his name Jesus. In
respect of his resurrection; when GOD raised him out of the grave, he is said
to beget his Son. Psalm. 2. 7.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And lest the interpretation
of birth only should be deduced from that place, Saint Paul expressly applies
it to his resurrection. Acts 13. 33. God raised up Jesus again, as it is
written in the second Psalm; Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.
Lastly, in respect of his preeminence: Col. 1. 18.
he is the first borne from the dead, that in all things he might have the
preeminence. So the privilege of primogeniture is singularly and indiuidually
his.

How then are the faithful here called the first borne? To answer this, we
must know that God has sons by nature, and by grace. Christ by nature only,
all the elect by grace. Christ is a Son begotten, not made; we are sons
made, not begotten in respect of nature. Christ as God is begotten, not borne:
as man he is borne, not begotten. We see the privilege of Christ's
primogeniture: from his let us look to ours, for from him we have it. The
elect are called Firstborn in three respects.

1. Because they are united to the first borne. Hebr. 2. 11.
For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one: for
which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. He that is made vnus cum
primogenito, may be well called primogenitus: one with the first borne is a
first borne.

2. Because they are culled and called out of the world. Many wicked are
created before them, but they are elected in Gods decree to life before the
other; for the wicked are not chosen at all. Esau was Isaaks first borne, but
Jacob was Gods first borne. Many of the worlds firstborne have been rejected.
Genesis 48. 17.
Israel laid his right hand upon Ephraim the younger, and his left upon
Manasseh the elder. Genesis 49. 4.
Reuben, thou art my first borne, but thou shall not be excellent. Cain Adams
first borne; Ismael, Abraham's first borne, were cast off. Exodus 4. 22.
Thus says the Lord, Israel is my son, even my first borne. The Lord had
first chosen that nation to be his people, yet afterward rejected them, and
accepted the Gentiles: so that the elder serve the younger. But Gods first
borne are never refused: whom he has predestined to be sons, he has
also called to be heirs. So that this primogeniture is not in respect of
generation, but of regeneration. Though they be not primo conditi, they are
primo reconditi. John 1. 13.
Flesh and blood has no work in this birth, nor the will of man; but the will
of God. Iam. 1. 18.
Of his own will begat he us, with the word of truth, that we should be a
kind of first fruits of his creatures. The Spirit begets of immortal seed,
grace; in the womb of the Church; the means of this Birth being the Word.
John. 3. 3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Out of that
universal apostacy God sent his Son, to beget some first borne to himself.

3. Because the privileges of the first borne are theirs. These were many, as
we may find in allusion to the Law. 1. The excellency of strength: Genesis 49. 3.
Reuben my first borne, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the
excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power. Man decays, and the
children of age are not so strong as the children of youth: therefore the first
borne are called the beginning of power, and the excellency of strength. True
it is, that there is no decay in Gods Spirit that begets: yet because the
faithful are first in Gods intention of favor, and he gives them that
strength of grace to resist sin, and to serve him, which the world has not;
therefore they are called his Firstborne, the excellency of his power. Though
we be weak in our selves, yet his strength is glorified in our weakness, his
2. Cor. 12. 9.
Grace is sufficient for us.

2. The name of the family was given to the first borne. 1. Sam. 9. 21.
Is not my family the least of all the families of the Tribe of Benjamin, says
Saul? Judge. 11. 1.
Gilead made his whole family to be called Gileadites. For further exemplying
of this privilege, read Numbers. chap. 26. ver. 23. to ver. 52. Is this
dignity lost under the Gospel to the first borne in Christ? no, for even the
wicked dwelling among the righteous, are for their sakes vouchsafed the name of
Christians. The name of the first borne has christened all the family.

3. Priesthood and the right to sacrifice. Exodus 24. 5.
Moses sent twelve young men, according to the twelve tribes of Israel, to
offer burnt offerings, and sacrifice peace offerings unto the Lord. Those young
men are thought to be no other, but twelve of the first borne of the chief of
the Tribes: to whom the right of sacrificing and Priesthood did belong, till
the Levites were separated for that end. Number. 3. 45.
Take the Levites in stead of all the first borne among the children of Israel.
Neither is this privilege lost by the Gospel: Reu. 1. 6.
Christ has made us Kings and Priests unto God his Father; to offer up
spiritual sacrifice of thanksgiving to him. Priests, but Priests to God; lest
the Schismaticke should take advantage thereby to trouble the civil state. The
Propitiatory sacrifice is offered for us by our high Priest Jesus: the
sacrifices of our Priesthood are only gratulatory.

4. Double portion. Deuteronomy. 21. 17.
If a man have two wives, one beloved, and another hated, and children by them
both: if the first borne son be hers that is hated, yet when he makes his
sons to inherit, though perhaps he would favor the son of the loved, yet
he shall acknowledge the son of the hated, by giving him a double portion of
all that he has: for he is the beginning of his strength, the right of the
first borne is his. So the elect have a double portion: not only a share in
the things of this life, but much more in heaven. 1. Tim. 4. 8.
Godliness has the promise both of the life that now is, and of that which is
to come. It is a false imagination that God makes none of his children happy in
this life. Abraham was rich, David a King. But if he denies them opulencie, he
never denies them content. This is the chief riches; for we see others
Esurientes in popina; as the byword is, staruing in a Cooks shop, wretched in
their highest fortunes. The godly have so much share of this world, as may
stand with their eternal blessedness in the world to come. And such may be
content with a small portion here, that are sure of the inheritance hereafter.
Iehoshaphat gave great gifts of silver and gold, and precious things, to all
his children: 2. Chr. 21. 3.
but the kingdom he gave to Iehoram, because he was the first borne. Our Law
gives the first borne son the inheritance: God will not deprive his of it.
Thus has Christ promised a double portion to the faithful; Mark. 10. 30.
He shall receive an hundred fold now in this time, and in the world to come
eternal life. And indeed the Birthright with the Jews was a type of
everlasting life. The consideration of this excellent privilege does teach us
three lessons.

1. That we are dedicated to God. Exodus 13. 2. Numb. 3. 13. Sanctify to me all
the first borne. 1. Sam. 1. 28.
So Ha^nah dedicated her first borne Samuel to the Lord. Luke 2. 22.
Mary brought Christ to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord; as it is written
in the Law; Every male that opens the womb, shall be called holy to the
Lord. To rob God of his tithes is sacrilege; but to take away from him our
souls, this is the highest sacrilege. In this we have a sequestration from
common use, we are no longer as we were. They are mine, says the Lord: not
only by a common right, so al things are his. The earth is the Lords, and the
fullness of it. nor only for a grateful acknowledgement, that the increase of
all things comes from him. But as the Israelites were Gods by a special
claim; because he preserved them in Egypt, when the first borne were slain.
For whose redemption he accepted the first borne of their beasts: when he might
have commanded all, lest this should seem grievous to them, he required but the
first part. He only reserved what he preserved. So we were all by nature in
as much danger of Gods wrath, as were the Israelites of the destroying Angel
when the first borne of the Egyptians were smitten dead. But the Lord
sprinkled the doors of our hearts with the blood of his holy Lamb Jesus. Has
the Lord spared us? then he chalengeth us. To take from man his own is
injurious, from God sacrilegious. 1. Cor. 6. 20.
Glorify God in your body, and in your spirit. why? for they are Gods, ye are
not your own, says the Apostle. Thus he confessed himself not his own man:
Acts 27. 23.
There stood by me this night the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve.
We are Gods possession, the first borne which he has redeemed by his own
Firstborn, Christ. This we acknowledge when we present our children to God
in Baptism. Yet O strange and forgetful inconstancy! when we have given them
to God in baptism, by a foolish indulgence we take them away again in
education. A Prince abhorres to have his eldest son marry with a harlot; this
were to vilify and ignoble that royal blood. And shall God brook his First
borne to be contracted with that ugly strumpet, Sin? This were to forfeit and
make void the right of primogeniture.

2. Seeing we are Gods first borne, let us offer our first and best things to
him. The Lord has deserved the priority of our service: Mat. 6. 33.
First seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. Our first
studies, our first labors must be consecrated to God. The Law required three
properties in the sacrifices offered to God. 1. They must be first borne: vt
illi reddamus prima, qui nobis debil omnia: that we should willingly give
him the first, that had bountifully given us all. So we must give the first
hour of the day, the first work of our hands, the first words of our lips
to the Lord. 2. They must be clean beasts, for God abhorred the unclean,
maimed, or deformed. Mal. 1. 8.
Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar. If ye offer the blind for sacrifice,
is it not evil? if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now
to the governor, will he be pleased with it? So we must hold up to God
clean hands, and send up pure hearts: Hebr. 12. 13.
making straight paths for our feet, lest that which is halting be turned out
of the way. 3. The sacrifices must be Males, because the best and most perfect
things are to be given to God. Multi homines, pauci viri. Let us offer up our
masculine virtues, Ephesians. 4. 13.
growing to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. We must aim at this perfect sacrifice.

Besides in the Law there were three other rules obseruable in the consecration
of the first borne. 1. That they should be seven days with the damme, and the
eight day be given to God. Exodus 22. 30. wherein there was not only a
respondence to the rule of circumcision, limited to the eight day, Genesis 17. 12.
But to prevent their fraud in offering to God things of no service, being too
soon taken from the damme. 2. In voluntary oblations they were forbidden to
dedicate to the Lord any of the first borne. Leuit. 27. 26.
The firstling of the beasts which should be the Lords firstling, no man shall
sanctify it. The reason is, because that was the Lords already. We have such
names highly recorded on our Hospitall-walls, painted on the windows of our
Churches, often engraven in marble the memorable tenent of worthy acts, for
excellent benefactors. Yet All their benevolence to God, is not the Tenth of
that they have robbed God, and taken from his Church. Fool, give of thine
own, if thou will have reward in Heaven: first restore justly what thou have
gathered unjustly. To give of that is not Liberaliter dare, sed partialiter
retribuere: thou bestowest on God a Lamb of his own Evve. Do thou look
for thanks for such a gift? Alas, it was Gods own before. 3. They were
commanded neither to work nor sheare the first borne. Deuteronomy. 15. 19.
Thou shall do no work with the firstling of thy Bullock, nor sheare the
firstling of thy Sheep. To curb their covetousness: though they would not
deceive the Lord of his first borne, yet they would take so much profit of it
as they could. But they are restrained from diminution; they must not present a
worn Bullock, nor a shorn Sheep. Now if the Lord was so ielous of first
borne beasts, how is he ielous of first borne souls? Let us not think our
choicest and most excellent things too dear for God, that has made us his
first borne in Jesus Christ.

3. Lastly, let us upon no condition part with our Birthright. Has God
advanced us to this honor? ( Psalm. 89. 27.
I will make him my first borne, higher then the Kings of the earth) then let
us never sell it. Heb. 12. 16.
Let there be no person profane as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his
Birthright. Has the elder brother Primariam potestatem? Gene. 27. 29.
Be Lord over thy brethren, and let thy mothers sons bow down unto thee. Let
no lust subject us seruire minori, to serve the younger. The enemies rage
against them, but says God to Pharaoh; Let my son go that he may serve me:
if thou refuse to let him go, behold I will slay thy son, even thy first
Exodus 4. 23.
borne. Thus says the Psalmist; God reproues even Kings for their sakes. Now
Omne beneficium petit officium: every benefit is obligatory, and binds to some
thankful duty Has God dignified us with a Privilege, he expects that our
carfulness should never forfetit. Naboth would not sell his Vineyard: yet his
Vineyard was but a part of his Inheritance, and his Inheritance but a part of
his birthright. Though Ahab profferd him a better vineyard, or the worth of it
in money; yet says Naboth, 1. King. 21. 3.
The Lord forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto
thee. And shall we for trifles pass away our eternal Birthright? It is a
wretched bargain: yet the Blasphemer swears away his birthright, the Epicure
feasts away his birthright, the winebibber drinks away his Birthright, the
Lavish spends his birthright, the covetous sels his birthright for ready money.

There be some, 1. that sell their Birthright: it is said of the Lawyer that
he has linguam venalem, a saleable tongue: the covetous venalem animam, a
saleable soul: the harlot venalem carnem: a saleable flesh. Esau sold his
birthright, Ahab sold himself to work wickedness, Judas sold his soul for
thirty pieces. Eccle. 10. 9.
There is not a more wicked thing then a covetous man: for such a one sets
his soul to sale, because while he lives he casts away his bowels. Others
pawn their Birthright: they are not so desperate as to sell it outright, but
they will pawn it for a while. They seem to make conscience of their ways
generally, and to be good husbands of their talents: but when an opportune
temptation comes, with meat in the mouth; a fit advantage of much wealth, of
high honor, of secret pleasure; they will embrace and fasten on it, though
they pawn their souls for a season. And indeed he that knowingly ventures to
sin, does as it were morgage his birthright, puts it to the hazard of redeeming
by repentance. But it is dangerous to be a Merchant venturer in this case: the
birthright is precious, if that infernal Broker get but a color of title in
it, he will use tricks to make thee break thy day, and then sue out a
Judgment against thee. 3. Some lose their Birthright; profane and negligent
wretches, that leave their soul perpetually unguarded, unregarded. They may be
careful about many things, but one thing is necessary, to keep their
Birthright. While they sleep, the enemy sowes tares: it is a wretched slumber,
that sleeps, and slips away the birthright. 4. Others give away their
birthright, and these are specially the envious and the desperate. Malice gives
it away, and has nothing for it. The Ambitious bargains to have a little
honor for his Birthright, the Covetous to have some gold for his birthright,
the voluptuous to have some sensual pleasure for his birthright: but the
malicious gives it away for nothing, except it be vexation, that does anguish
him, and languish him. The desperate destroying his body, gives away his
birthright: he has naught for it but horrors within, and terrors without.
These men serve the devils turn for nothing. Look O miserable man upon the
Purchaser of thy Birthright Christ, and consider the price it cost him: if thou
sell that for a little pleasure, that he bought with so much pain, thou
think him an idle Merchant. No Lord, as thou have given it to us, so keep
it for us: that having now the assurance of it in grace, we may have one day
the full possession of it in glory.

Written in heaven. This phrase is often used in the Scripture, and is but a
metaphor whereby God declares the certainty of some men's eternal
predestination, and eternal salvation. Tostatus makes three written books of
GOD. 1. The great book, wherein are written all persons, actions, and events,
both good and bad. Out of this are taken two other books. 2. The book of
Predestination, consisting only of the Elect. 3. The book of Gods Prescience,
which he calls the Black book, wherein are registered only the Reprobate. But
this latter book has no warrant in the Scriptures: it is true, that as there
is a certain number to be saved, so the Lord knows them that are ordained to
destruction: but the Scripture gives only a name of book to the first, not to
the worst. Non quod scribuntur in aliquo libro, sed quod non scribuntur in illo
libro. Psalm. 69. 28.
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and let them not be
written among the righteous. Reave. 17. 8.
Whose names are not written in the Book of Life from the foundation of the
World. Not that they are written in any other book, but that they are not
written in that book. Indeed God may be said to have diverse Books.

1. Liber Prouidentiae, the book of his Providence, wherein God sees and
disposes all things that are done by himself in the World. Psalm. 139. 16.
Thine eyes did see my substance yet being imperfect: and in thy book were all
my members written, when as yet there was none of them. Not a sparrow falls
from the house, not a hair from our heads, without the record of this book.

2. Liber Memori^, the book of Gods memory, wherein all things done by men,
whether good or evil, are registered. Mala. 3. 16.
A book of remembrance was written before GOD, for them that feared the Lord,
and thought upon his Name. Reu. 20. 12.
The books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of
Life. Hence it is plain, that there are other books besides the book of
Life. This is that which manifests all secrets, whether mental, orall, or
actual. Eccl. 12. 14.
Whereby GOD shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
be it good or evil. This Book shall be opened in that day, Romans 2. 16.
when God shall judge the secrets of all hearts by Jesus Christ.

3. Liber Conscientiae, the book of every man's conscience: this is a book of
Record or testimony; not so much of Judicature, as of witness. 1. Ioh. 3. 20.
If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and knows all
things. There is Conscientiae per^rsa, that does wholly condemn: there is
Conscientiae dubia, that does neither condemn nor acquit: there is
Conscientiae b^e ordinata; such a one had Paul, Romans 9. 1.
I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness
in the holy Ghost. Every man's conscience bears witness: but vbi cogitatio
non habet quod accuset, where the thought has no matter of accusation against
a man, that conscience does bear witness in the holy Ghost. Look well to
thy life, for thou bear about thee a book of Testimony, that shall speak
either with or against thee.

4. Liber monumentorum, a book of Monuments; which contains the acts of the
Saints for the memory of times to come. Of this nature were the Chronicles,
the Acts of the Apostles, that martyrologie or golden Legend of the Saints in
the Chapter preceding my Text. God threatens the false prophets, that Ezekiel. 13.
9.
they shall not be written in the writing of the house of Israel.

5. Liber veritatis, the book of Truth: this may also be called the book of
Life, because it contains those rules, that lead and direct us to life
eternal. As that is called a book of warfare, wherein the precepts of the
Military Art are written. John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for therein ye have eternal life. Eccl. 24. 23.
All these things are the book of the Covenant of the most high God.

6. Liber Vitae, the book of Life it self, wherein only are written the
names of the Elect, whom GOD has ordained to salvation for ever. This is to be
written in h^uen. Reu. ^1. 27.
Into that holy City shall enter nothing that defiles: but only they which are
written in the Lambs book of Life. Paul speaks of his fellow laborers,
Phil. 4. 3.
whose names are in the book of Life. When the Disciples returned said; Lord,
even the devils are subject to us through thy Name: true says Christ, I saw
Satan as lightning fall from Heaven. Luke. 10. 20.
Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you:
but rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven. This is a borrowed
speech; Sicut nos ea literis consignamus, As we commit that to writing, the
memory whereof we would have kept. So does God, not that he needs any book of
remembrance, but because all things are present with him, as if they were
written in a book. They among men which are chosen to any special place or
service, are written in a book: so the Roman Senators were called Patres
conscripti: and it is called the Muster-booke, wherein stand the names of the
Soldiers pressed to the wars. To conclude, this writing in heaven, is the
book of Election, wherein all that shall be saved, are registered.

Here unavoidably we come to the maine question, that may seem to infringe
this happy privilege of the Church. Whether to be written in Heaven be an
infallible assurance of salvation: or whether any there registered may come to
be blotted out. The truth is, that none written in heaven can ever be lost; yet
they object against it, Psalm. 69. 28. Let them be blotted out of the book of
the living, and let them not be written among the righteous. Hence they
infer, that some names once there recorded, are afterward put out. But this
opinion casts a double aspersion upon God himself. Either it makes him
ignorant of future things, as if he foresaw not the end of elect and reprobate,
and so were deceived in decreeing some to be saved, that shall not be saved. Or
that his decree is mutable, in excluding those upon their sins, whom he has
formerly chosen. From both these weaknesses S. Paul vindicates him. 2. Tim. 2.
19. The foundation of GOD stands sure, having the seal, The Lord knows
them that are his. First, the Lord knows them that are his; this were not true
if Gods Prescience could be deluded. Then his foundation stands sure: but that
were no sure foundation, if those he has decreed to be his, should afterward
fall out not to be his. The very Conclusion of truth is this; Impossibilis est
deletio: they which are written in heaven, can never come into hell. To
clear this from the opposed doubt, among many I will cull out three proper
distinctions.

1. One may be said to be written in heaven simpliciter, and secundum quid. He
that is simply written there, In quantum praedestinatus ad vitam, because
elected to life, can never be blotted out. He that is but written after a
sort, may; for he is written Non secundum Dei praescientiam, sed secundum
praesentem iustitiam: not according to Gods former decree, but according to
their present righteousness. So they are said to be blotted out, not in
respect of Gods knowledge: for he knows they were never written there; but
according to their present condition, apostating from grace to sin. Lyran.

2. Some are blotted out, non secundum rei veritatem, sed hominum opinionem:
not according to the truth of the thing, but according to men's opinion. It is
usual in the Scriptures, to say a thing is done, quando innotescat fieri, when
it is declared to be done. Hypocrites have a simulation of outward sanctity,
so that men in charity judge them to be written in heaven. But when those
glistering stars appear to be only Ignes fatui, foolish meteors; and fall
from the firmament of the Church; then we say they are blotted out. The written
ex existentia, by a perfect being, never lost; but ex apparentia, by a
dissembled appearance, may. Some God so writes, In se vt simpliciter habituri
vitam; that they have life simply in themselves, though not of themselves.
Others he so writes, vt habeant non in se, sed in sua causa; from which
falling they are said to be obliterated. Aquin.

3. Augustine says, we must not so take it, that God first writes, and then
dasheth out. For if a Pilate could say, Quod scripsi, scripsi; what I have
written, I have written; and it shall stand. Shall God say, Quod scripsi
expungam, what I have written I will wipe out, and it stall not stand? They are
written then Secundum spem ipsorum, qui ibi se scriptos putabant; according to
their own hope that presumed their names there. And are blotted out, Quando
ipsis constet illos non ibi fuisse; when it is manifest to themselves that
their names never had any such honor of inscription. This even that Psalm
strengthens, whence they fetch their opposition. Psalm. 69. 28.
Let them be blotted out of the book of the living: and let them not be
written among the right^ous. So that to be blotted out of that book, is
indeed never to bewritten there. To be wiped out in the end, is but a
declaration that such were not written in the beginning.

But how then shall we justify Moses his desire? Exodus 32. 32.
If thou will forgive their sin, fair and good: but if not, blot me, I pray
thee, out of thy book, which thou have written. Did Moses wish an
impossibility? Some opinionate, that this was not the book of life that Moses
meant: but they err. 1. Some by this understand the book of the Law: as if
this were his meaning. If thou destroy the people to whom thou have given the
Law, let not my name be mentioned as the Law giver. But it is answered. 1. that
the book of the Law was not yet written; and he could not desire blotting
forth of a book that was not. 2. This was in Moses his power when he wrote the
Law, to leave out his own name; he needed not to trouble God about it. 3. He
opposes the greatest loss he could sustain, against the greatest benefit the
people could obtain: but this was no great loss to be blotted out of that
book. 4. Moses speaks of a book that God had written: but the book of the
Law, saving only the Decalogue, Moses wrote himself. 2. Jerome understands
this desire of Moses for death in this life; Perire in praesentem, non in
perpetuum. But if he conceiues no more then a temporal death, Gods answer
confutes it; Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out. ver. 33.
Only sinners are raced out of this book; but from the book of terrene life,
both sinners and just come to be blotted: for good and bad are subject to
temporal death. 3. Caietan understands it De libro Principatus in hac vita, to
be the book of Sovereignty: because it is decreed by God as in a book, quod
isti vel illi principentur: that this or that man should have the dominion. But
God answers, only sinners are raced out of the book: but in the book of
government are bad Kings, so well as good. And for that book, Ezekiel. 13. 9. as
if he wished no more, but not to be counted of Israel; or have his name among
the Patriarchs and Prophets. If Israel had perished, the book of his Covenant
with Israel had also perished. So for that book of Iasher. Josh. 10. 13. it is
thought to be lost; therefore no great matter to be put out of it. It must
needs be then the book of life, and how could Moses wish a racing out of that
book?

Some say, that by sin a man may come to be blotted out of that book,
wherein he thought himself written. But if it could not be done without sin,
this construction were to make Moses Petere peccare mortaliter; to beg power to
sin mortally, that he might be blotted out. Neither does God for
unrighteousness race out any, but indeed they race out themselves. Some take
it to be a parabolicall speech, to show the intention of his desire. As Rachel
said to Jacob, Genesis 30. 1.
Give me children, or else I die. Yet she had rather live and have no
children, then have children and presently dye. As if one should say; Do this,
or else kill me: yet he had rather have the thing omitted, then himself
killed. Tostat. But this were to make Moses speak one thing, and mean
another: whereas he desired it from his heart. Others think Moses spoke
affirmatively, after this sense: that if God would not pardon the peoples
sin, it would follow that himself should be blotted out. Rupert. But this
had been against the justice of God, that one should be damned for the sin of
another. Again this had convinced Moses of wavering and doubtfulnesse of his
salvation: but the faithful have confidence, that though thousands should
perish, yet they are sure of eternal bliss.

Some say, Moses wished this after the disposition of the inferior part of his
soul; and not in voluntate rationem superiorem sequente; not in that will
which is governed by reason. They exemplify it in Christ, who desired the cup
to pass from him, yet simpliciter vellet pati, simply he would suffer. But
there is great difference in the example. 1. Christ eschewes death, Moses
ensues death: the object of their desires was unlike. 2. Christ by his office
was to bear the sin and punishment of his people: Moses was never called to
such a mediatorship. 3. Christ prays there as a man: for as God he prays
not, but is prayed to. There is Duplex affectus, Mentis and Sensus. Christ in
the affection of his mind was willing to suffer, but in his affection of Sense
he desired the cup to pass. So that in Christ to escape death, was a natural
desire: in Moses to wish death, yea an eternal death, was a contranaturall
desire: it proceeded not from the sensual part, but from his inward feeling
and meditation.

Others think he prayed, quia turbatus erat, being troubled: not considering
at that instant whether that was possible that he begged. ^x impetu passionis,
says Lyranus, vehementia fuisse abreptum, vt loquatur quasi ecstaticus; says
Calvin. But this accuses him of rashness: for it is fit he that prays,
should be of a calm and composed spirit. Others conclude, that Moses
preferred the safety of the people before his own soul. Calvin. He thought of
nothing, but vt s^luus sit populus, that the people might be saved. But this is
against the rule of charity: for though another soul be dearer to me then my
own body: yet my own soul ought to be dearer unto me then all men's souls in
the world. yea if all the souls of the Saints; yea of the Virgin Mary her
self, should perish, except my soul perished for them: says Tostatus: Citius
deberem eligere omnes illas perire quam animam meam. I ought rather to choose to
save my own soul, then all theirs.

Lastly, the most and best rest upon this sense. Because the salvation of
Israel was joined with the glory of God: both in respect of the promises made
to the Fathers, which was not for his honor to frustrate: and to prevent the
blasphemies of the enemies insulting on their ruin; God has forsaken his
people: Moses ante omnia gloriam Deispecta^t: He respected the glory of God
above all: in regard whereof, he was careless of his own salvation. Precious
to us is the salvation of others, more precious the salvation of our selves,
but most precious of all is the glory of God. Such a wish as this great Prophet
of the old Testament, had that great Apostle of the new. Romans 9. 3.
I could wish my-selfe accursed from Christ, for my brethren my kinsmen
according to the flesh. They say, to clear both these desires from sin,
there is no other solution but this: that both of them for Gods glory in
Isreal's safety desired a separation from glory for a time, not damnation of
body and soul for ever. Howsoever, there was some difference in their wishes.
Chrysostom. Moses wished Perire cum caeteris, Paul perire pro caeteris. Moses cum
pereuntibus, Paulus ne pereant. Moses desired to perish with them that
perished: Paul desired to perish, that they might not perish. But the aim of
both was the Lords glory, and the peoples safety. Their zeal was ineffable,
their example inimitable, their affection unmatchable. Yet thus far
desirable, that all Ministers, like Moses and Paul, zealously seek their
peoples salvation. And I am persuaded, that a Parent does not more earnestly
desire the welfare of his child, then does a good Minister the saving of his
flock. What we desire for you, do you labor for your selves, and the Lord
Jesus work for us all.

There be some that would have it granted, that Moses and Paul did sin in
those wishes; and the concession thereof does safely end all controversy. I
see no prejudice in this answer, for the best Saints living have had their
weaknesses. But if you please after all these, to admit also the hearing of
my opinion. Mine I call it, because I never read or heard any yet give it: I
call it an opinion, because vnusquisque abundat sensu suo, and may take which
his own judgment best likes. By this Book I think he means Gods favor:
as we usually say, to be in a man's favor, is to be in his books. We speak of
one that dissemblingly cousoned us, such a man shall never come in my books.
For you will not enter that man into your book, whom you do not both trust
and favor. To be blotted out of Gods book, is to be liable to his
displeasure, subiectuall to his judgments. Now I cannot be persuaded, that
Moses ever imagined God would eternally destroy Israel: therefore nor did he
beg eternal destruction to himself. He wished no more to himself, then he
feared to them. But it is expressly set down, ver. 14. that God would not cast
away Israel to everlasting perdition. The Lord repented of the evil, which he
thought to do unto his people. But thus; Lord, if they must needs undergo thy
wrath and severe punishment for their sin, so punish me in the same measure
that have not sinned. If thou will not favor them, forget to favor me: let
me feel thy hand with them. It was not then everlasting damnation, that he
either feared to them, or desired to himself: but only the desertion of Gods
present love and good pleasure to him, together with subjection to his
judgments; whereof they should taste so deeply, as if God had never booked
them for his own. This seems to be the true sense by Gods answer; Those that
have sinned, I will blot out of my book. The offenders shall smart, they that
have sinned shall be punished. So David and other Saints felt grievous
impositions, though they never perished, but were ordained to eternal life.

To conclude, they that are written in heaven can never be lost. Woe then to
that Religion, which teaches even the best Saint to doubt of his salvation
while he lives. Has Christ said, Believe: and shall man say, Doubt? This is
a rack and strappado to the conscience: for he that doubts of his
salvation, doubts of Gods love: and he that doubts of Gods love, cannot
heartily love him again. If this love be wanting, it is not possible to have
true peace. O the terrors of this troubled conscience! It is like an Ague, it
may have intermission, but the fit will come and shake him. An untoward beast
is a trouble to a man, an unto ward servant a great trouble, an untoward wife a
greater trouble, but the greatest trouble of all is an untoward conscience.
Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven: where there is no remission of
sins, there is no blessedness. Now there is no true blessedness but that is
enjoyed, and none is enjoyed unless it be felt, and it cannot be felt unless
it be possessed, and it is not possessed unless a man know it, and how does he
know it, that doubts whether he has it or not?

All souls are passengers in this world, our way is in the middle of the sea:
we have no sure footing: which way soever we cast our eyes, we see nothing but
deep waters, the Devil and our own flesh raising up against us infinite
storms. God directs us to Christ, as to a sure Anchor-hold, he bids us undo
our Cables, and fling up our Anchors in the veil, fasten them upon Jesus: we
do so and are safe. But a sister of ours passing in the ship with us, that
has long taken upon her to rule the helm, deals unkindly with us; she cuts
in pieces our Cables, throws away our Anchors, and tells us we may not presume
to fasten them on the Rock, our Mediator. She rows and roues us in the
midst of the sea, through the greatest fogs, and fearefullest tempests: if we
follow her course, we must look for inevitable shipwreck. The least flaw of
wind will ouerturne us, and sink our souls to the lowest gulf. No, they that
are written in the eternal leaves of heaven, shall never be wrapped in the
cloudy sheets of darkness. A man may have his name written in the Chronicles,
yet lost: written in durable marble, yet perish: written on a monument equal
to a Colossus, yet be ignominious: written on the Hospitall-gates, yet go to
hell: written on his own house, yet another come to possess it. All these are
but writings in the dnst, or upon the waters; where the characters perish so
soon as they are made. They no more prove a man happy, then the fool could
prove Pontius Pilate a Saint, because his name was written in the Creed. But
they that be written in heaven, are sure to inherit it.

Now to apply all this usefully to our selves; some perhaps would be satisfied
how we may know our names written in heaven. It is certain that no eye has
looked into Gods book, yet himself has allowed certain arguments and
proofs, whereby we have more then a coniecturall knowledge. The principal is
the Testimony of Gods Spirit concurring with our spirit. Romans 8. 16. But of
this I have liberally spoken in some later passages of this book; together
with the most pregnant signs of our election. Here therefore I am straightned
to insert only some (there omitted) effects. Which are these four; If our
hearts be on Gods book, If the poor be in our book, If we well order the
book of our conscience, Lastly, if we can write our selves holy in earth, then
be bold we are written happy in heaven.

1. If our heart be on Gods book; and this we shall find e conuerso, if Gods
book be in our heart. Mary laid up Christ's words in her heart. It must not lie
like loose corn on the floor, subject to the pecking up of every foul; but
it is ground by meditation, digested by faith: manet alto cord repostum. God
says, My son, give thy heart to me: do thou pray, My Father, first give thy
self to my heart. I ask not whether this book lies in thy study, but whether
the study of it lies in thy heart. The life of the Scriptures is not in
verborum folijs, sed in medulla cordis; not in the letters and leaves, but in
the inwards of the heart. It is not lectio, nor relectio, but dilectio: not
reading, but leading a life answerable, that assures us. If we syncerely love
this book, we are certainly in Gods book. Mary zealously loving Christ's
word, is said to choose the better part, that shall never be taken from her.

2. If the poor be in thy book: and this is reciprocal, then thou art in
their book: and the conclusion is infallible, thou art in the book of Life.
For the relieved poor by their prayers, Luke 16. 9.
entertain, or make way for thy entertainment into everlasting habitations.
And Christ at the last day calls them to himself, that have been charitable
to his members; Come ye blessed, receive the kingdom prepared for you. Your
works have not merited this kingdom, for it was prepared for you: but as that
was prepared for you; so your charity has prepared you for it: Come and take
it. Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does: Do thou write it in
the dust, the poor will write it in their hearts, GOD finds it in their
prayers, their prayers prevail for thy mercy, and mercy writes thy name in
heaven. Acts 10. 4.
Thy prayers and thy alms are come up for a memorial before God. Therefore
Cast thy bread upon the waters, drown it in those watery eyes: it is not lost
in that River; like Peter thou throwest in an angle, and bring up silver;
enough to make thee blessed. Via coeli est pauper: si non vis errare, incipe
erogare. The poor is the Aug.
highway to heaven: if thou would not wander in thy journey, show mercy.
Non potes habere nisi quod acceperis: non potes non habere quod dederis. Thou
can have nothing unless thou receive it: thou can keep nothing unless
thou give it. Him that the poor writes not charitable on earth, nor does God
write saueable in heaven.

3. If thy name be written Christian in the book of thy Conscience, this is a
special argument of thy registring in heaven 1. John 3. 21.
For if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness and confidence toward
God. Ang. What if man's ignorance and unmerciful jealousy blot thee out of the
book of his credit; Si de libro vinentium nunquam propria deleat conscientia:
so long as thy own conscience does not blot thee forth the book of
blessedness. If the good spoken of us be not found in our conscience, that
glory is our shame. If the evil spoken of us be not found in our conscience,
that shame is our glory. Therefore it is that Hugo calls the conscience Librum
signatum et clausum, in die Indicij aperiendum, a book shut and sealed, only
at the Resurrection to be opened. Conscientiam, magis quam (...).
famam attend: falls saepe poterit fama, conscientiae nunquam. Look to thy
Conscience more then to thy credit: fame may often be deceived, conscience
never. The beams that play upon the water, are shot from the Sun in heaven:
the peace and joy that danceth in the conscience, comes from the Son of
righteousness, the Lord Jesus. If a hearty laughter dimple the cheek, there is
a smooth and quiet mind within. Upon the wall there is a writing; a man sitting
with his back to the wall, how should he read it? but let a looking-glass be
set before him, it will reflect it to his eyes, he shall read it by the
resultance. The writing our names in heaven is hid, yet in the glass of a good
conscience it is presented to our eye of faith, and the soul reads it. For it
is impossible to have a good conscience on earth, except a man be written in
heaven.

4. If the book of Sanctification have our names written, then surely the
book of Glorification has them, and they shall never be blotted out. For God
Ephe. 4. 1.
has chosen us in Christ before the foundation of the world; that we should
be holy and without blame before him in love. Now as we may reason from the
cause to the effect, so certainly from the effect to the cause. Election is
the cause, Holiness the effect: as therefore every one written in heaven,
shall be holy on earth, so every one holy on earth, is written in heaven.

This sanctity is manifested in our obedience; which must be Ad totum; Psalm.
119. 6.
I had respect to all thy commandments. Per totum; ver. 112.
I have inclined my heart to keep thy statutes Always, even to the end. De
tote; ver. 69.
to keep thy precepts with my whole heart. In Rome the Patres conscripti were
distinguished by their robes: and they of the Livery in London have a peculiar
habit by themselves, to differ from the rest of the Company. Is thy name
enrolled in that Legend of Saints? thy livery will witness it; Phil. 3. 20.
thy conversation is in heaven. A Senator relating to his son the great
honors decreed to a number of Soldiers, whose names were written in a book:
the son was importunate to see that book. The father shows him the outside;
it seemed so glorious that he desired him to open it: No, it was sealed by the
Council. Then says the son, tell me if my name be there: the father
replies, the names are secreted to the Senate. The son studying how he might
get some satisfaction, desired him to deliver the merits of those inscribed
Soldiers. The father relates to him their noble atchieuements, and worthy
actions of valor, wherewith they had eternized their names. Such are written,
and none but such must be written in this book. The son consulting with his
own heart, that he had no such trophies to show; but had spent his time in
courting Ladies, rather then encountering Knights; that he was better for a
dance then a march: that he knew no drum but the tabret, no courage but to be
drunk. Hereupon he presently retired himself, repented, entered into a combat
with his own affections: subdued them, became temperate, continent, valiant,
virtuous. When the Soldiers came to receive their wreathes, he steps in to
challenge one for himself. Being asked, upon what title; he answered, If
honors be given to Conquerers, I have gotten the most noble conquest of all.
Wherein? These have subdued strange foes, but I have conquered my self: and
indeed this is judged the greatest victory. The application is familiar: thou
desire to know whose names are written in blessedness, it shall not be told
thee, This or that individual person: but generally thus, men so qualified:
faithful in Christ, and to Christ: obedient to the truth, and for the truth:
that have subjected their own affections, and resigned themselves to the
guidance of the heavenly will: these men have made noble conquests, and shall
have Princely Crowns: find in thy self this sanctimony, and thou have a sure
testimony: thou art written in heaven.

But all men challenge this: they believe and obey, and do good deeds: and
therefore some to be sure of putting in themselves, constantly affirm all men
are written. But infinite numbers will be deceived at the last. For if there
were universal inscription, there should follow universal Election: if
universal election, then universal salvation. If the former were true, then
were not election any such name. If the latter, to what purpose did God make
hell? 1. Ioh. 3. 16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: What, that all
should be saved? no, but that Whosoever believes, might have everlasting life.
Not all; for he that takes all cannot be said to choose. Let this stir us up
to get security that our names are written there. Benefits common to all, as
light of the Sun, dewes of heaven, are little regarded: but quae rarissima,
carissima: things hard to come by, are much set by. Because God does not give
riches to all men; but isti multum, illi paruum, huic nullum: much to one,
little to another, none at all to a third: hereupon men debase themselves to
moiling slaves, yea to earth-rooting beasts, to get them. For the race of this
world, where onel the first obtaines the goal, gets the money; all trusse up
their loins, run apace, none will be hindmost. For heaven, where all that
run well, shall speed well, and have for their prize a Crown of
righteousness; men are so courteous, they will give another leave to go
before them. But let thy grace in this life, witness thy hope of glory in the
life to come.

To God the Judge of all.
We have considered the Citizens, let us now look upon the glorious majesty of
the King that gouerns them. Where first let us observe in general, that there
shall be a day of Judgment, otherwise to what purpose is there a Judge? If
there were no such scoffers, as to say: 2. Pe^. 3. 4.
Where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep: all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation: this
observation might well have bin spared. The reason to prove it is derived from
the justice and goodness of God. 2. These. 1. 6.
It is a just thing with God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble
you. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels. This for the honor of the
faithful, and for the horror of reprobates. Here the good man finds the
sharpest misery, the evil man sweetest felicity: therefore it is just that
there should be a time of changing turns and places. Prou. 21. 18.
The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the transgressour for the
upright. The rich man's table stood full of delicates, Lazarus lackes crummes:
therefore they must change states; Luke 16. 25.
He is comforted, and thou art tormented. There is a time to get, and a time
to lose: Luke 6. 25.
Woe to you that laugh, for you shall mourn: Mat. 5. 4.
Blessed are you that mourn, for you shall rejoice. God shall give the one
Fletum pro ris^, the other Risum pro fletu: wiping away all tears from their
eyes. Rejoice thou irrefragably dissolute, follow the lusts of thy own heart:
Eccl. 11. 9.
but remember for all these things thou must come into judgment. It is a dear
penniworth, to buy the merry madness of one hour, with ages of pangs,
infinite and eternal. If there were no judgment, how should God be just? But
the righteous shall see the vengeance: Psalm. 58. 11.
So that a man shall say, Uerily there is a reward for the righteous, verily
there is a God that judges the earth. otherwise where is our hope? 1. Cor.
15. 19.
For if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we of all men are most
miserable. But it is objected:

1. That the whole world consists of belieuers or unbelievers: now there is no
last judgment for either of these. none for belieuers, for Ioh. 5. 24.
He that belieueth has everlasting life, and shall not come into judgment.
None for unbelievers, for John 3. 18.
He that believes not, is condemned already. I answer, first for the latter:
the vnbelieuer is condemned already in effect three ways. 1. By the purpose of
God, who did foresee and appoint his condemnation, as a punishment for his
sin, and execution of his Justice. 2. By the word of God, where his
condemnation is set down. 3. By his own conscience, which every hour does
judge and condemn him. Yet all this hinders not, but that he may also pass
the judgment of Christ at that general Assizes: which is the manifestation
and completion of that inchoate judgment. To the former I answer; it is not
said The believer shall not come into judgment; but he shall not come into
condemnation. 1. Cor. 5. 10.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ; even the very
faithful, absoluendicausa, that Christ may publicly acquit them.

2. That Conscience is a sufficient judge, what needs more? I answer,
properly Conscientia testis, non iudex: the Conscience is a witness, rather
then a judge. Indeed it has a great office here, and so it shall-haue there.
It is felt now, but then more sensibly. Now many are so borne away with the
precipices and streams of their sensual pleasures; vt cogitationes
accusatrices non audiant. Lyran. That they hear not the accusation of their
thoughts: but then it will be heard and felt. Now it may pluck a man by the
sleeue, and crave audience, but it is drowned with the noise of good
fellowship. Besides Hactenus est ^ccultus testis, it is hitherto a secret
witness, only known to him that has it: but then the book that is now
sealed, shall be opened, and all the world shall read it. As the seal leaves a
print in the wax behind it; so the conscience an impression of past sins in
the thoughts; indeleble characters, which death it self shall not eat out.
Conscience here does witness, Romans 2. 15. 16.
accuse or excuse: but Christ shall there judge the secrets of all hearts.

God the Judge of all: let us now look into the particulars; Quis, Qualis,
Quorum. Deus, Iudex, vniuer sorum. The three words answer to three questions.
Who? God. What is he? A Judge. Of whom? Of all.

God. It is manifest that this honor belongs to Christ, therefore Christ is
God. Acts 17. 31.
God has appointed a day, wherein he vvil judge the world in righteousness, by
that man whom he has ordained. Ioh. 5. 27.
He has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man.
To this consents that article of our faith in the Creed; that he who suffered
under Pilate, shall come to judge quick and dead. But it is objected, that to
judge is the action of the whole Trinity: true, it is common to all, but the
execution of it pertains to one. God judges, but by the Son: so distinctly.
Romans 2. 16. God shall judge the secrets of al hearts by Jesus Christ: God by
Christ.

But it is further objected, that the Saints shall judge. Mat. 19. 28.
Ye shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. 1. Cor.
6. 2.
Know ye not, that the Saints shall judge the world? This truly is a great
honor to the Apostles and Saints. To be Judge of a Circuit is an honorable
office, what is it then to judge the world? But there is great difference,
they have potestatem accessoriam; an accessory power; Christ imperatoriam, a
principal and imperial power. Math. 28. 18.
All power is given to me in heaven and in earth. He has Honorem Primarium,
the prime honor; they subordinatum, derived from his. Christ gives Sententiam
iudicatoriam, they only appr^batoriam: he the sentence of judgment, they of
approbation. As the Justices on the bench are in some manner Judges: not in
giving the sentence, but in approving the sentence given. The Saints therefore
may be said to judge; Vel exemplo, vel testimonio, vel ^ffragio. 1. By their
example: for their lives shall condemn the wicked, as Noah's handy work did the
old world. So the Apostles shall judge Israel, because their faith shall take
from Israel all excuse. Such a judgment Christ speaks of: Mat. 12. 41.
The Niniuits shall rise in judgment with this generation, and shall condemn
it. The Queen of the South shall rise up in judgment with it, and shall
condemn it. The goodness of the one shall judge and condemn the badnes of the
other. So Christ stops the blasphemous mouths of the Jews; accusing him to
work by Beelzebub. If I do it by him, by whom do your children cast out
Devils? Mat. 12. 27.
Therefore they shall be your Judges. 2. By their Testimony, who can witness
that the means of salvation was offered them in the Gospel, which they not
accepting are justly condemned? Ioh. 12. 48.
He that rejects me and receives not my words, has one that judges him.
The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. So shall
Babylon be judged by those that would have cured her, but she would not be
cured. 3. By their suffrage and approuall of Christ's righteous sentence. Thus
shall the Elect judge the world, yea even the Angels. 1. Cor. 6. 3.
Know ye not that we shall judge the Angels? By world we must understand the
wicked, and by the Angels Devils. And certainly the Saints have some place in
this judgment. Wisd. 3. 8.
They shall judge the Nations, and have dominion over the people, and their
Lord shall reign for ever. Christ shall set all his adversaries before his own
face, and the face of his Church: where they shall behold those become their
Judges, whom they once esteemed and used as their slaves. Wisd. 5. 5.
This is he whom we sometimes had in derision: now he is numbered among the
children of GOD, and his portion is among the Saints. But why is the execution
of this judgment committed to the second person in the Trinity; to Christ?

1. It is fit that he, who came to be judged, should also come to judge. Tunc
manifestus veniet inter iustos iudicaturus Aug.
just, qui occulte vener at iudicandus ab iniustis unjust. He that came in
humility to be judged by the unjust unjustly, shall come in glory to judge all
justly.

2. As it is for the honor of Christ, so is it for the horror of his enemies;
when they shall see him wh^m they have pierced: entreating the Reu. 6. 16. Greg.
Rocks and mountains to hide them from the presence of him that sits on the
Throne. In maiestate visuri sunt, quem in humilitate videre noluerunt. Vt tanto
districtius virtutem sentiant, quanto contemptius infirmitatem d^riserunt. They
shall behold him in Majesty, whom they would not daigne to look upon in
humility. The baser they esteemed his weakness, the heavier they shall find
and feel his mightiness. Then Christ stood like a Lamb before Pilate a Lion:
now Pilate like a malefactor shall stand before Christ his Judge. Crucify him,
crucify him, was the sentence of the Jews: Bind them hand and foot, and
throw them into utter darkness, will be the sentence of Christ. Luke 19. 14.
We will not have this man reign over us, was their sentence. Ver. 27.
Bring those mine enemies which would not that I should reign ^uer them, and
slay them before me; this is Christ's sentence. The ungodly conspire, Psalm. 2. 3.
Let us break his bonds afunder, and cast away his c^rds from us: therefore,
verse. 9. he shall break them with a rod of iron, and dish them in pieces like
a potters vessel. Thus he that was once made the footstool of his enemies,
shall reign Psalm. 110. 1.
till he has made all his enemies his footstool. As Joshua dealt with the
five Kings hid in the Cave of Makkedah, Josh. 10. 24.
brought them out, caused his Captains of war to set their feet on the
necks of them, then slew them, and hanged them on trees. So shall Christ
triumph over his enemies; their necks subjected to the feet of the Saints, and
their substances cast into endless torments.

3. For the comfort of his chosen ones, he is their Judge, that is their
Savior. He that gave the blood of mercy to save them from the hand of Justice,
will not now condemn them. O blessed mercy, that so triumphs against Judgment!
yea Justice and Mercy are met together in this Judge: Justice upon them that
despised him, mercy to them that feared him. Happy faith that shall not be
ashamed at that day! 1. Ioh. 2. 28.
Abide in him, that when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be
ashamed before him at his coming. The heavens shall be on fire, the elements
melt with the flame; the earth be burnt, Castles, Cities, Towns and Towers be
turned to one pile: the Devils shall make a hideous noise, the reprobates
shrieke and howl like Dragons: all because this Judges wrath is kindled. But
the faithful shall rejoice: Ioh. 16. 22.
I will see you again, and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy no man
takes from you. The music of Saints and Angels shall be joined in one Quire;
and all sing, Reu. 5. 13.
Blessing, honor, glory and power be unto him that sits on the Throne, and to
the Lamb for ever.

The Judge. This is his authority: now there are certain properties required
in a just Judge; some of them are found in some Judges, many in few Judges, all
perfectly in no Judge, but this Judge of all, Jesus Christ.

1. Perspicacitas ingenij: sharpness of apprehension, and soundness of
understanding. Ignorance in a private person is a weakness, in a Judge a
wickedness. Ignorantia Aug.
Iudicis, calamitas innocentis. A Judge ignorant, makes wretched the innocent.
It was a curse; Esa. 3. 4.
I will give children to be their Princes, and babes shall rule over them: that
is, Governors of a childish discretion. It is a woe; Eccl. 10. 16.
Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a child. Justice was anciently painted
blind, to show that no favor be given to persons: but it was not meant so
blind, as not to discern causes. It is woeful when Judges are so blind,
that they are feign to feel the right. No man would have his body come under
the cure of a foolish Physician. nor his estate under an ignorant Judge. But
this Judge of heaven and earth is so wise, that he knows the very secrets of
men's hearts. Hebr. 4. 13.
All things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him, with whom we have to
do. The wicked can have no hope, that a bad cause flourished over, should
pass vnconstrued, uncensured. Reu. 1. 14.
His eyes are as a flame of fire, clear to search and find out all secrets.
Accordingly, he has now put in his interlocutory, then will give his
definitive sentence.

2. Audacitas animi; boldness of courage: a timorous Judge loses a good
cause. In the fable, when the Heart is made Judge between the Wolf and the
Lamb; it must needs go on the Wolfes side. The fear of displeasing
Greatness is a sore Remora to the vessel of Justice. Therefore the poor
complain; Psalm. 11. 3.
If the foundations be cast down, what can the righteous do? Quis metuet
offendere, cum Iudex metuat abscindere? Who will fear to do mischief, when
he knows the Judge dares not punish him? Therefore when GOD made ^oshua Judge
of Israel, observe how he doubles this charge. Josh. 1. ver. 6. 7. 8. 9. Be
strong, and of a good courage. And the people again. ver. 18. We will obey
thee, only be thou strong, and of a good courage. But this Judge will not be
danted with faces of men. Reave. 6. 15.
The Kings of the earth, the great men, the rich men, the chief Captains, and
the mighty-men, hid themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the
Mountains. Those terrors of slaves, and mirrors of fools; that made the
underlings tremble, and Heb. 11. 38.
hide themselves in caves: now for all their puissance are glad to run into a
hole, and cowardly shroud themselves. Adducetur cum suis stultus Plato
discipulis, Aristotelis argumenta non proderunt: Hero^is maiestas Hierom.
deijcietur: cum filius pauperculae venerit iudicat^rus terram. Then foolish
Plato shall appear with his scholars, Aristotle shall be confuted with all his
arguments, Herod^ pomp shall be turned to shame, when that Son of the Virgin
shall come to judge the world.

3. Honestas conscientiae, honesty of conscience. The Judge that will be
corrupted, dares corrupt the truth. Woeful is that judgment which comes from
him, who has vaen^lem ^nimam, a saleable soul. F^lix was such a Judge, who
Act. 29. 26.
hoped that money should have been given him of Paul. Qui vendit iustitiam pro
pecuniae, perdit pecuniam cum anima. He that sells justice for money, shall lose
mercy and his soul. Amos 5. 12.
You afflict the just, you take a bribe, and turn aside the poor in the gate
from their right. They have built them houses of ^ewen stone. ver. 11. How? By
bribes. What shall become of them? They shall not dwell in them: for Job. 15.
34.
fire shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery. If any Iusticers think so to
raise themselves, it is but vt lapsu grauiore ruant; that they may have the
sorer fall. There are certain rich stuffes forbidden by the Statute: but to
wear clothes cut out of bribes, and laced with exactions; is specially
forbidden by the Statute of heaven. When money can open the lock of Justices
door, the worst cause is first heard. This pocket-key is fitted for all doors.
One spoke unhappily: I have a key in my pocket, says he, that will pass me in
all Countries: he meant his purse. In Italy it can open the door of life: Do
you hate a man? for money you may have him pistold or poysond. In Fr^nce it can
open the door of love: lust you for such a woman? money makes her your harlot.
In Spain it opens the door of Justice: the case shall go on the rich man's
side. In England it can open the door of honor; money makes a Gentleman, and
reputation swells with the Barnes. In Rome it can open the door of heaven, for
they sell Claues, Altari^, Christum; peace, and pardon, and heaven, and Christ
himself. Gra^s lacerantur pauperes a prauis Iudicibus, Isidor.
quam a cruentissimis hostibus. Nullus praedo t^m cupidus in alienis, quam
Iudex iniquns in suis. The robes of peace covering corruption, are worse to the
poor then hostile invasion. But this Judge of heaven will take no bribes:
other Judges may procrastinate, put off, or pervert causes. Saepe non finiunt
negotia, quousque exhauriant marsupia: they will often see an end of the
Clyents money, before the Clyents see an end of their cause. They often
determine to hear, but seldom hear to determine. But Christ shall judge
those Judges. Psalm. 2. 12.
Be instructed ye Judges of the earth: kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye
perish. At that day Plus valebunt pura corda, quam as^ta Bern.
verba: conscientia bona, quam marsupia plena. Pure hearts shall speed better
then subtle words: a good conscience better then a full purse. Iudex non
falletur verbis, nec flectetur donis. That Judge will neither be moved with
our gifts, nor deceived with our shifts. Happy soul, that forsaking the love
of money, has gotten a pure heart to appear before Jesus Christ.

4. Impartialitas Iustitiae, impartial Justice. Tully tells us of a Proverb.
Exuit personam Iudicis, quisquis amici induit: He has put off the person of a
Judge, that puts on the person of a friend. The good Judge neither has his
right hand filled with love, nor his left with hatred: the scole of Justice is
not swayed. Indeed tamdiu Iudex, quamdiu Iustus: he is so long a Judge, as he
is just. Nomen quod ab ^quitate sumitur, per praeuaricationem admittitur.
Zeleucus was commended, that when (according to his Law for adultery, which
took from the offender both his eyes) his son was deprehended in that fact;
put out one of his own eyes, and one of his sons. Duo lumina cacantur iuxta
legem, duo supersunt iuxta misericordiam. Two eyes are lost according to
justice, and two remain according to mercy. A marvelous temper Inter iustum
Iudicem, and misericordiem Patrem: between a just Judge, and a kind Father.
But GOD is so just, that because sin would let him save none of us, he slew
his Son to save all of us. Romans 5. 8.
God commends his love to us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us. God commends his love; indeed he might justly commend it: and to
us by this token, that being rebels he bought us with the blood of his own
Son. He will ever continue so just, in punishing traitors, in crowning his
faithful subjects. Iudex damnatur, cum nocens absoluitur. Sen. He that
iustifies the guilty, transferres the guilt to himself. But Gene. 18. 25.
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Yes, we have all sinned, but
Thou continuest holy, O thou worship of Israel.

5. Aequitas Sententiae; the equity of Sentence; it shall be given upon good
testimony. Ambrose says, It is not the part of a Judge to condemn any man
without an accuser. Christ did not cast away Judas, though he knew him a
thief, because he was not accused. When that adulteress was left alone before
Christ, he said John 8. 10.
Woman where are thine accusers? Has no man condemned thee? She said, No man,
Lord. Then said Jesus; Neither do I condemn thee: go and sin no more. But
here shall be no want of accusers; their own conscience, all the creatures,
all the Elements, Angels, men, devils shall accuse: then Christ shall judge.
Heu miser! sic deprehensus quo fugias? Anselm.
Latere erit impossible, apparere intolerabile. Whither will thou fly, O
wretch thus accused? To lie hidden it will be impossible, to appear,
insufferable. 2. Cor. 5. 10.
Every man shall receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or evil. The same, neither more nor less, but
just weight. The wicked wrought their pleasure while God did suffer: therefore
God will work his pleasure while they suffer.

Of all; both good and evil, Elect and Reprobates, men and Angels: but of
these in a different manner. To show how this shall be done, I must lead your
attentions orderly through five passages; a Citation, Separation, Probation,
Sentence, and Retribution.

1. The Citation: there is a summons sent out to make all appear before
Christ's Tribunal. This citing is done by the voice of Christ. John 5. 28.
All that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth. The
power of this voice is unspeakable: to empty earth, sea, air, heaven, and
hell: and presently to fill earth, air, heaven and hell. To empty all upon his
summons, and to fill all upon his Sentence. Therefore it is compared to a
Trumpet, the lowdest of all musical instruments. 1. Cor. 15. 52. Chrysostom.
The Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised. Uere vox tub^
terribilis, cui omnia obediunt elementa. Petras scindit, Inferos aperit, portas
aereas frangit, vinculae mortis dirumpit, et de profund^ abyssi animas
liberatis corporibus assignat. A terrible voice, that shall shake the world,
rend the rocks, break the mountains, dissolve the bonds of death, burst down
the gates of hell, and unite all spirits to their own bodies. There shall be
no concealing, no keeping back from this voice. Now Christ calls; Math. 11. 28.
Come unto me all that labor: John 5. 40.
yet you will not come unto me that you might have life. Then he shall call,
Come you that must labor in torments, and be laden for ever; then they must
come to receive the doom of death. Now Ephe. 5. 14.
awake thou that sleep, and Christ shall give thee light: but they will not
rise. At that day awake thou wicked that art dead, and Christ shall send thee
to darkness: and then they must rise. This is that general day, that shall
congregate all: they shall come from the four winds, and corners of the world,
to make an universal appearance. But if this be the voice of Christ, how is it
then said, the Archangel shall sound the Trumpet of collection? Mat. 24. 31.
He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall
gather all together. 1. These. 4. 16.
The Lord shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the trumpe of God. I answer, the voice is originally
Christ's, ministerially the Angels. As now he speaks to us 2. Cor. 5. 20.
by men, so at that day by Angels. O what a glory of our Savior shall then
appear, when he is set on his Throne, before so full a Court, as all the
reasonable creatures GOD ever made! Uideat nosiam in sanctimonia, vt tunc
videamus eum in gaudio. Let him now behold us in holiness, that then we may
behold him in happiness.

2. The Separation: we have thus brought all together, now we must separate
one from another. The form hereof is given by Christ himself. Mat. 25. 32.
Before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from
another, as a Shepherd divides his sheep from the goats. This full and
final separation is reserved for Christ, and not performed till that day. For
Si^ite crescere; Math. ^3. 30.
Let them grow both together, corn and tares, until the harvest. This world
is the floor, fan while you will there will be some chafe: fish never so
discreetly, you shall meet with some sturdy dogge-fish that will rend the
net. In Heaven are none but Saints, in Hell none but reprobates, on earth
they are both promiscuously blended together.

Do you wonder that the Lambs cannot live in quiet? consider the number of
goats among them. Ezekiel. 34. 18. They eat up the good pasture, and tread down
the residue with their feet: they drink of the fountains, and foul the
residue with their feet. My flock are feign to eat that they have trodden, and
to drink that they have fouled with their feet. But GOD shall judge and
separate. ver. 20. Behold, I, even I will judge between the fat cattle, and
the lean cattle. Because they have thrust with side and shoulder, and pushed
all the diseased with their horns: therefore I will save my flock, and they
shall no more be a prey, and I will judge between cattle and cattle. The
goats will annoy till they be quite separated. Too many among us have these
goatish conditions: they climb up ambitiously to the mountres of preferment,
like goats: they pill and bark the Commonwealth, like goats: they lust
after women as hot as goats: they trouble the waters of Israel, the peace of
the Church, like goats: they tread under feet Gods blessings; like goats:
they smell of impiety, as rank as goats: and therefore they must be
separated, as goats.

We have all from Adam the nature of the goat: let us weep away, and keep
away such goatish qualities. And let us put on the properties of sheep: which
Christ John 10. gives to be three; Audire, obedire, sequi: to hear Christ's
word, to obey Christ's will, to follow Christ's steps. Search thy soul for these
brands and marks of a sheep, or else thou will prove a goat. Have thou
fidem agni, the faith of a Lamb reposed in the Lamb of God? Have thou
innocentiam agni, the innocence of a Lamb, free from wrong? Vellus agni, the
fleece of a Lamb, to warm the poor? humilitatem agni, the humbleness of a
Lamb, a stranger to pride? patientiam agni, the patience of a Lamb, ready to
lay down thy life for Christ? then thou shall have gloriam agni, the reward of
a Lamb, assured salvation in heaven.

Thus the goats and the sheep be like in external fashion: they feed both in
one pasture, lie both in one fold, all their life time: but Christ will put
them asunder at the last day. Like two travelers that go together to one
Town, take up one Inn, feed together at one board, sleep together in one
bed: but in the morning their ways part. The sheep and goats eat
together, drink together, sleep together, rot together, but at this day there
shall be a separation. The goats may deceive man both in life and death, they
may be taken for sheep, but Christ can discern between cattle and cattle.
God judges by the Liver, man by the Livery. If the Liver be rotten, look the
flesh never so fair, the good marketman will not buy it. If Christ find not
the heart sound, he will none of the carcass.

3. The Probation; every man must undergo his trial. From the prison of the
grave; they are set before the Judge, and there suffer discussion or trial.
There are certain books to be opened for this probation: some rolls Reu. 20.
12.
or Records filled up in the Court of Heaven. There is Liber praeceptorum
secundum quem, and liber conscientiae ex quo iudicamur. Quicquid praecipitur
scriptum in illo, quicquid delinquitur in isto. Here is Diuina scientia, and
humana conscientia met together. We may forget our sins, but God keeps a
true Register. If the sufferings of the Saints be recorded, then sure their
violences by whom they suffer are not forgotten. Now the book of the Law
whereby men are judged contains three leaves: Nature, the Law written, and the
Gospel. Some must be tried by the first only, some by the first and second,
others by all three.

First, that some shall be judged only by the Law of Nature, it is clear.
Romans 2. 12.
As many as have sinned without the Law, shall perish without the Law. Here two
things are considerable, two things; one, what this Law of nature is: the
other, whether the breach of it be sufficient to condemn.

1. It is a knowledge of certain principles tending to live well; and of
conclusions thence necessarily inferred, agreeable with the eternal rule of
Truth, planted by God in man, and teaching him to worship his maker. Thus
Melancthon defines it. The matter of it is Principles with conclusions
directing to a good life. Parents are to be honored; this is a principle
engraffed: therefore I must honor my Parents, this is a conclusion deducted.
The form of it is an accordance with the rule of truth, Gods moral Law: for
the Law natural is the summary abridgement of the Law moral. The Author of it
is God, who has written it in man's heart. Ambros. Deus omnium Creator
singulorum pectoribus infudit. The end is, that it might be a testimony of that
Divine providence whereby God now rules, and of that Justice whereby he will
judge men. This agrees with the Apostles definition. Romans 2. 15. Which show the
work of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness, and
their thoughts excusing or accusing. The work, there is the matter of it: of
the Law, there is the form: written, there is the Author that imprints it: the
conscience accusing or excusing, there is the end. In this inward testimony
arising from nature, are these two principal things: (...), a comprehension of
practical principles, and natural discerning between just and unjust. And
(...), conscience chideing for choosing evil, and approving for doing good. The
one makes the proposition, the other the assumption.

2. The other point to be discussed is, whether the breach of this Law does
condemn. Some object, that it is quite blotted out of man, therefore cannot
bind him. No question, it is much obscured in respect, both of intellectual
and effectual faculties. For understanding it gropeth, Acts 17. 27.
ifhaply it might feel after God. Adam had the knowledge of good by
experience, of evil only by contemplation: but falling he had also an
experimental knowledge of evil. For affection, man's will is so perverse, that
when as naturally he desires to be happy, yet he wiilingly commits those
things against his first intendment, that make him most unhappy. As a thief
steals, to keep himself from famine, and so from misery: thus Ne miser fit,
malus fit: and ideo miserior, quia malus. Lest he should be wretched, he
becomes wicked: and is so much the more wretched by being wicked. Beatus vult
esse h^mo, etiam non sic viuendo vt possit Aug.
esse. Man seeks for blessedness in all places, but where it is. Yea, custom
brings this will to contempt of sin. Peccata quamuis ho^renda, cum in
consu^tudinem venerint, creduntur parua, aut nulla. Aug. Sins horrid and
uncouth at first, become triuiall and familiar by practice.

Thus is this natural light dimmed and ouercast by the corruption of
prosperous lusts: yet ne ipsa quidem delet iniquitas: sin does not quite race
it out. 1. Because there are certain principles reviving in the most
dissolute. As the desire of happiness; and every one would attain that end,
though they err in the means. Yea they know that evil is to be avoided,
which appears in that they would not have any wrong offered to themselves.
These general rules all know, albeit in the particular applications they are
blinded. Hence it came, that some gross sins were not condemned of them: as
robbery among the Germans, lust of males among the Grecians. Romans 1. 27. Indeed
God did punish malitiam per duritiem: yet still remain some sparks and cold
sinders of that primary and original fire. 2. That the light of nature is not
quite extinct, appears by the force and working of the conscience; for this
does vex and sting the most obstinate soul. By this Cain was driven to
confess the monstrousness of his sin. 3. The practice of natural men
euinceth it, who by force of nature performed some things agreeable to equity.
Romans 2. 14.
The Gentiles having not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the
Law. The very Gentiles had many excellent politic Laws, and positive
constitutions. This seems to clear the meaning of Plato's two assertions:
Legem esse inuentionem veritatis, that was the Law of Nature: Legem esse
imitationem veritatis, such were the positive decrees grounded upon the other.
But what precepts does this Law contain, and what remnants of it does man
retain?

The Law of nature commands man, to live religiously to God above him, justly
to man with him, soberly to things under him. To deal justly with men nature
gives him two rules: one affirmative, What thou would have others to do to
thee, so do to them: the other negative, Quod ^ibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris: Do not that to others, which thou would not have them do to thee.
Even nature Instructs a man how to rule his affections. So Tullie; Animus
imperat corpori, vt Rex ciuibus: ratio libidmi, vt seruis dominus. The mind
gouernes the body, as a King reigns over his subjects: the reason lust, as a
master over his servants. Whence had he this, but from nature? There is vis
rationis, orationis, adorationis. By the virtue of reason man loves man, by the
power of discourse man regards himself, by the power of worship man respects
God. If we should examine the particular commandments. 1. They acknowledged
one God: T^lly protested, that when he wrote seriously, he mentioned but one
God: and he did but ludere, play the Poet when he spoke of more. Moses called
this God (...), and Plato (...). 2. Numa Pompilius judged it unlawful to
ascribe any form to God invisible. 3. They durst indeed play with their
puppets, imaginary gods; Uenus and Cupid, etc. But for the Deity, O may not the
reverence of his unknown name condemn us! They cry out, Great is their Diana:
this vindicates them from vilipending the name. If they had known a greater
God, they would have given greater reverence to his Name. 4. Diverse of the
Gentiles had their Sabbaoths, mingled with strange superstitions: but they were
taught by nature to set apart some time for worship. 5. They commanded and
commended honor to Parents: Solon ordaining no law for Parricides, answered
there were none so unnatural for to attempt it. 6. That murder was held
abominable, appears by their punishing it, according to Gods Law, with death.
7. That Adultery was odious, it is manifest by Pharaoh. Genesis 12. 19.
Why said thou, She is my sister? so I might have taken her to me to wife. By
Abimelech to Abraham; Genesis 20. 9.
What have I offended thee, that thou have brought on me, and my kingdom a
great sin? By Abimelech to Isaac: Genesis 26. 10.
What is this thou have done unto us? one might have lain with thy Wife, and
thou should have brought guiltines upon us. 8. Theft some punished with
death, other with double restitution. Cato being asked, Quid foenerari? what it
was to practice usury; answered, Quid hominem ^ccidere? the same, that to kill
a man. 9. They so hated and avoided falsehood and lying, that they would not
suffer a man to be witness against his enemy. 10. They thought it unlawful to
covet other men's goods. One of them said, Concupiscere alien^, sit a me
alienat^.

But now their natural knowledge being so obscured, shall yet the Law of
nature condemn? yes, for Romans 1. 20.
the invisible things of God might be understood by the things that are made:
so that they are without excuse. God could not be apprehended by them any
other way then by nature: yet sinning against him they are without excuse. Ier.
10. 25.
Power out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not: Psalm. 79. 6.
and upon the kingdoms that have not called on thy name. 2. These. 1. 8.
He shall come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God. By
this shall many millions of men be condemned. Inexcusabilis often omnis peccator,
vel reat^ originis. Original guilt makes us inexcusable, without voluntary
additament. Aug.
Ignorantia ^ius qui ^oluit intelligere, est peccantis culpa: Ignorantia eius
qui no^ potuit intelligere, est peccati p^na. In virisque non est iusta
^xcusatio, sed est iusta dam^atio. His Ignorance that would not understand, is
the wickedness of sin: his ignorance that could not understand, is the
punishment of sin. Does not this latter excuse? Yes a Tanto, but not a Toto:
from so much guiltines, but not from all guiltines. Ignorance can be no plea,
for all are bound to know: it serves not a malefactors turn, to plead
Ignor^tiam iuris, that he knew not the Law of his Prince which he has broken.
I know that simple nescience is minoris culpae, but not nullae; a less fault,
not no fault. The Luke 12. 47.
knowing servant disobedient shall have many stripes: the ignorant is not
spared, though less punished. To the ignorant are two wants, knowledge and a
good will: but he that sins wittingly, has but one want, only a good will.
He that fails on knowledge, has voluntatem facti and peccati, a will both to
the deed, and to the sin. He that fails in ignorance, has only voluntatem
facti non peccati, a will of the deed not of the sin, though the deed be a
sin. Perer. Ignorantia duplex; vna quae est causa culpae, altera cuius causa
culpa est. There is an ignorance that is the cause of sin; and there is a
sin that is the cause of ignorance. No ignorant has his sin mitigated; but
Is solum qui non habuit vnde discere, says August. He only that had no means
of learning. For Christ is a just Judge, and would not condemn without fault.
We have all good means of knowledge, GOD keep us from the condemnation of
ignorance.

The next book is the Law: that others shall be judged by this, it is clear
without question. Romans 2. 12.
As many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by the Law. The Jews shall
be thus judged rather then the Gentiles, who had not the Law written. The Law
of Moses did only bind the Hebrews, the Prophets were not commanded to
publish it to the Gentiles. Paul calls the times before Christ, Acts 17. 30.
the times of ignorance; and the Gospel Romans 16. 25.
a mystery kept secret since the world began. Now to object, first that the
Jewish Merchants taught other Nations the Law, is vain: for they were
generally more apt discere religionem alienam, quam docere suam; to learn
false religions, then to teach the true. And many of them did not even by their
own types and sacrifices, perfectly understand the sacrifice of Christ. Then
to say, their books were manifest, is false: for the Jews kept them. Romans 3.
2.
Unto them were committed the oracles of God. They were first d^positarij, then
oeconomi, dispensers. Esa. 2. 3.
For out of Sion shall go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. Psalm. 147. 19.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes unto Israel, he has not dealt so
with any Nation. So Christ to the Samaritan woman; John 4. 22.
Salvation is of the Jews. Now as this crediting facit ad honorem persona cui
confidimus. Ambr. makes to the honor of the person whom we credit. This was a
great credit to the Jews; so it brings them to a strict account: exigendum cum
vs^is; as in the Talents; God looks for his own with usury. Some of them kept
them in their hands, but not in their hearts; alijs magis profu^ura quam ipsis.
Erasm. for the benefit of other, more then of themselves.

Now this book is the Touchstone or trial of our works: whatsoever we have
either thought, said, or done; is either with or against this Law of God. How
we wrangle here to justify many things, which there will not abide the
trial? How many arguments does a contentious man produce, to countenance his
wrangling Law-suites? Defensio iuris, Intentio legis, retardatio iniuriarum.
The defending of his right, the purpose of the Law, the keeping back of
injuries; forbear one wrong, and provoke more: and Correctio iniustorum, the
punishing of evil doers: and be not these smooth colors? who can now say,
Peccasti in litigando? thou have done ill in going to law? but still we reckon
without our Oast: thou think thy penny good silver, as the fool thought
his peble a diamond: bring it to the test. (...). Cor. 6. 7.
There is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one with another.
Whether will God judge thee according to thine own humor, or according to
this precept? Alas he will then try thee Secundum legem suam, non secundum
legem tuam; after his law, not after thy lust. It is opus carnis, and will not
abide tentationem ignis. Gal. 5. 20.
Contention, strife, variance, are works of the flesh: and they which do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Hell fire will confute alreasons.

So among others, an angry word calls on a challenge: they have plausible
reasons for it. Their credit lies upon it: and better lose life then
reputation. If being wronged they challenge not, or being challenged they answer
not; the world condemns them cowards. So they fight not so much against
another life, as against their own reproach. This were somewhat if it were
tam been, quam magne propositum: if the project were as Christian, as it is
Roman. Now they must go to the field, pray, embrace, forgive; then fight and
kill. But is this the Law that God vvil judge by? no, that Law is, Thou shall
not kill. But perhaps they purpose not to kill; yet says God; Return not evil
for evil: how does this agree with thy color and humor? Yet more peremptorily.
Romans 12. 19.
A^enge not your selves, but give place unto wrath. For vengeance is mine,
says the Lord. Will you steal this from him in a glorious theft? hazard your
soul more then your body? thrusting one upon an enemies sword, the other on
Gods sword? Will you meet together in so bloody a design; wherein vterque
letaliter peccat, saepe alter aeternaliter perit, both sin deadly, often one
or both perish eternally* Thus your pretenses may blanch it over with the name
of honor: but the law you must be tried by, will find it homicide.

For Usury, how is it bedawbed with arguments, probabilities, patronages,
examples! Books have been written to justify it: But none of these is that
law whereby the Usurer must be judged. They do not only reason thus; I must
give to the poor, therefore I must take usury of the rich: an argument of
Stand-gate hole: I may rob some, that I may give to others. But they defend
it by Scripture. Exodus 22. 25.
If thou lend money to the poor, thou shall not lay upon him usury. Not on the
poor; therefore they infer, we may lay it on the rich. Prou. 22. 22.
Rob not the poor, because he is poor, faith Solomon, therefore we may
rob the rich, because he is rich, and can spare it. Is not this a goodly
strong argument? So because it is said, Exo. 22. 22. Ye shall not afflict the
widow, or fatherless child: it must needs follow, that they may trouble a
woman married, or a child that has a father. There are infinite excuses: but
the Law of trial is; Thou shall not lend upon usury: study an answer to that
question. As much may be said for Impropriations: what shall become of all our
legal pleas, our Alienations, Prohibitions, Customs, Fines? all fine excuses?
when Christ shall set the sacrilegious before him, and read this Law; Math. 3. 8.
Thou shall not rob God of his tithes and offerings? Where now are all
reasons and excuses? This spiritual Court will admit of no corrupt customs,
no devices: Me thou have robbed, by me thou shall be condemned. Lord, enter
not into judgment with us: who shall be justified in thy sight? We cannot
answer ex millibus vnum, one of a thousand. Help us, O thou Judge and
Savior: let thy mercy as Jesus, help us against thy Justice as Judge. We must
come under probation, defend us from reprobation, and let us find approbation;
not for our works, but thy mercies, O blessed Redeemer. Amen.

Lastly, others are to be judged by the Gospel: and this certainly binds our
conscience he^e, for it shall judge us hereafter. John 3. 18.
He that believes not on Christ, is condemned. Now the Gospel requires of us
two things, Faith and Obedience. Faith; Mark 1. 15.
Repent and believe the Gospel. Obedience; Romans 6. 17.
Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine. Which obedience must be
Prompta, ye have obeyed: voluntaria, from the heart: discreta, that true form
of doctrine. Lyran. Indeed Obedientia Euangelica est ipsa fides. Many think
they are not bound to believe the Gospel; but by this they shall be judged.

True it is, that all are not bound to it: they to whom Christ never spoke, was
never spoken, have an excuse; not of every sin, but of this sin, that they
have not believed on Christ. It is objected, The Law bound all, therefore the
Gospel binds all. No, for the Law was given to man's nature: so though the
knowledge was lost by man's default, yet the bond remains on Gods part. The
Gospel was never given to man's nature, but after the fall, and is above nature.
Adam was the root of mankind in respect of nature, not in respect of grace.
When God gave the Law to him, he bound him and all his posterity to keep it.
When he gave the Promise to him, and faith to believe it, he did not withal
give it to all mankind. Neither if Adam had afterward fallen from faith, should
all mankind have fallen with him. The first Adam was not the root of the
Promise, but the second.

But now to our selves; we must all stand before the Tribunal of Christ: to the
Statutes of the former books who can answer? All our help is in this latter
book, we fly to the Gospel. We John 1. 29.
behold the Lamb of GOD, that takes away the sin of the world: and comfort
our selves, that 1. John 2. 2.
if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righ^ous: and he is the propitiation for our sins. Now as Festus said to
Paul. Acts 25. 12.
Have thou appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar shall thou go. So, have thou
appealed to the Gospel? thou shall go to the Gospel for thy trial. Vel te
totaliter absoluit, vel te capitaliter damnat. It shall either thoroughly
justify thee, or extremely condemn thee. The Spirit shall convince the world
of sin, says Christ; John 16. 9.
Because they believe not on me. Now what is the holy Ghosts judgment here,
will be Christ's hereafter. But why are they condemned of sin for not
believing? 1. Because other sins are condemned by nature and Law; as murder,
adultery: both among Jews and Gentiles: but not to believe is the proper sin
of Christians; and it is a grand sin, because they have the doctrine of
faith. 2. Because infidelity is the root of all sins, as faith is of all good
works: the want of faith leads from transgression to presumption, from
presumption to despair. 3. Especially, because faith takes away the guilt of
all sins, and freeth from condemnation: but infidelity retains the guilt of
it self and others. Omnia peccata per infidelitatem retinentur, per fidem
remittuntur. Aug. Luther has it out of Augustine. Nullum peccatum nisi
infidelitas, nulla iustitia nisi fides. There is no sin but infidelity, no
righteousness but faith. Not that Adultery, Intemperance, Malice are no
sins: but Infidelitate manente, manet omne peccatum: eadem decedente
absolu^tur, omnia quoad reatum. Unfaithfulness remaining, every sin
remains, that departing, every sin is pardoned, and quite taken away in
respect of the guiltiness. Peccata sunt, tua peccata non sunt. After thou
becommest a Believer, the sins thou do are sins; but not thy sins,
because they are forgiven thee. This appears by the purpose of Christ's
coming; which was to 1. John 3. 8.
dissolve the works of the devil: believe on him, and thy sins are dissolved,
absolved: thou art as if thou never had offended. Non quod peccatu^ omnino
non erit, sed quod non omnino imp^atum erit. Not that sin altogether should
not be, but that it shall not be imputed. How quick a riddance penitent faith
makes with our sins! They are too heavy for our shoulders, faith presently
turns them over to Christ. Whereas there would go with us to judgment a huge
kennell of lusts, an Army of vain words, a legion of evil deeds: faith
instantly discharges them all, kneeling down to Jesus Christ, beseeching him
to answer for them.

Therefore make we much of faith: if our souls be ballaced with this, they
shall never shipwreck. A^asuerus had many virgins, none pleased him like
Ester: none pleases God but faith; all the rest for her sake. She is that
Judith, that saves the life of all thy good works, by cutting off the
usurping head of Satan. Thou can not be unwelcome to God, if thou come with
confidence: nothing more offends God, then the not taking his word. Sin
offends his Law, but unbelief offends his Gospel. Though we do not what he
bids us, yet let us be sure he will do what he tells us. It is good to obey
the former, better to believe the latter: because he is more able, and more
good then we. Well now, after this Gospel we must be judged: so Paul writes to
his Romans; Romans 2. 16.
GOD shall judge the secrets of all hearts by Jesus Christ, according to my
Gospel. Thou can not satisfy the Law, therefore study thy soul an answer
to this book. Otherwise, says Christ, The word that I have spoken, the same
shall judge John 12. 46.
thee in the last day. The Sermons thou have heard, shall rise up in judgment
to condemn thee. Hence arise three conclusions.

1. It is no presumption for a Christian to believe the pardon of his sins in
Christ: for to do the will of God is not to presume. If we do not believe
this, Christ shall judge us damnable by the Gospel: therefore if we do
conscionably believe this, he shall acquit us by the Gospel. Non est
praesumptio credentis, vbi est authoritas iubentis. There is no presumption in
man to believe it, when there is the authority of God to command it. Of all
things in a Christian, God does not love a nice dainty, and maidenly faith. He
loves to have a man's modesty bashful, his humility fearful, his penitence
sorrowful, his patience joyful, his compassion pitiful: but he loves a faith
that has boldness in it. That is not afraid to trouble God with a^iance, or
suppliance: but is confident ruat ^rcus et ortus. Without faith it is dangerous
pressing into the Presence Chamber; as it was to the marriage without the
wedding garment: but in faith Sequere et consequere; qui cupit, capit; speak
and speed. John 16. 23.
Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. It is
no sin to trust God with thy soul: Paul teaches it by example. 2. Tim. 1. 12.
I know whom I have believed, that he will keep that I have committed to him
against that day. Peter by counsel, 1. Pet. 4. 19.
Commit your souls to God in weldooing. It is no sin to call God Father; for
he has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba Father. It is
no sin to trouble him with our Gala. 4. (...).
suites: Heb. 1^. 22
Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith. Not to do
this faithfully, is against the Gospel; therefore to be judged of that sin.

The infallible certainty of a true Christians salvation, is known to
himself, and cannot be doubted without sin. For if it be sin to distrust
this, it is then righteousness to believe it. The sum of the Gospel is man's
salvation by Christ: he that belieues not this, belieues not the Gospel: and
he that knows the Gospel, and belieues it not, shall by it be condemned. Now
God in the Gospel does not require that absolute perfection, which he did in
the Law, under the peril of damnation: but qualifies the rigor of the Law by
the satisfaction of a Mediator. So that the Gospel accepts the intent and
endeavor for the act; as the will to repent for penitence, and the will to
believe for faith. It is then not only a weakness, but a wickedness to distrust
Gods mercy in thy salvation; let not this faultiudge thee before Jesus Christ.

3. The Gospel requires probation of faith by a good life. Norma fides, forma
vitae: as we believe we must live. Do we believe Christ has redeemed us? We
must live like such as are redeemed: if freed, let us demean our selves as
children of freedom. It is nothing at this judgment to say, I have believed,
when the life shall witness the contrary: thy lips affirm, but thy works
deny. As our Savior said, Opera testantur de me; my works bear witness of
me, that I am Christ: so thou must say, Opera testantur de me, my works bear
witness of me, that I am a Christian. Thou shall be saved for thy faith, not
for thy works: but for such a faith as is without works thou shall never be
saved. Works are disioyned A iustificando, non a iustificato; from the act of
justifying, not from the person justified. If this Judge for his own merits
give us salvation, we must show him the fair copy of our conversation.
Quicquid Christus operatur pro nobis, operatur in nobis. Whatsoever Christ
works for us, he also works in us. If he has freed us from the damnation of
sin, he has also freed us from the dominion of sin. Albeit in our
justification Fiet nobis secundum fidem nostram; Be it unto us according to our
Faith: yet in salvation Reddetur vnicuique secundum operasua; Every man shall
be rewarded according to his works. Let not that which is a word of comfort
to us, be a bill of indictment against us.

4. The Sentence. As there be two sorts of men to be sentenced, so there is a
double sentence: one of Absolution, the other of Damnation. With Absolution our
Savior begins in action, with that let us begin in meditation. He begins with
favor, O he is ready to show mercy: and comes slowly to wrath and judgment.
In the Absolution are considerable four circumstances; A Calling, a
Commending, a Reply, and an Answer. First, the calling is set down. Math. 25.
34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world. In which gracious speech we may perceive six
gradations.

1. Amabilis vocatio; Come. This was the voice of Christ generally to all in
the day of Grace, is particularly to the Elect in the day of Glory. Now he
calls more then will come, then he will not call all that would come. Now he
gives many Venite's. Mat. 11. 28.
Come to me all that labor. Ioh. 7. 37.
If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. Reu. ^2. ^7.
The Spirit and Bride say, Come, and let him that hears say, Come: and let
him that is athirst come. Send not others, but come your selves. Come to no
others, either Saints or Angels, but come to me. Let us take heed of that
Discedite, quia nol^stis venire; Mat. 7. 23.
Depart from me; good reason, for Ioh. 5. 40.
you would not come unto me. You declined my call when I was humbled. Mat. 13.
55.
Is not this the Carpenters Son? I will decline you now I am exalted; Luke
14. 24.
None of those men that were called shall taste of my supper. But such as have
obediently heard his Come in holiness, shall also graciously hear his second
Come in happiness.

2. Su^is Benedictio; Ye Blessed. Never man was, is, or shall be, but desires
secundum sensum suum, after his own sense to be blessed; says Aristotle:
though the most have sought it out of the right vbi, where it was not to be
found. In Christ only it is found, who is indeed the Father of blessedness.
Mat. 3. 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit. The first word of the first lesson
of Christ's first Sermon is Blessed. So he begins, so there he continues, so
here he concludes, Come ye blessed: a word able to make a man blessed.

3. Patris dilectio, Of my Father: to be blessed of God, is to be surely
blessed. Parents do well in blessing their children, Princes in blessing
their people: here is the difference, Benedicunt, but not Beatificant: they may
wish them blessed, but not make them blessed. But says God to Abraham; Genesis
22. 17.
In blessing I will bless thee: Genesis 27. 33.
I have blessed him, and he shall be blessed. All blessedness springs from that
fountain: the Lord has blessed us, and requires us to bless him; Romans 9. 5.
who is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen. This the universal song of all
creatures gives him; Reu. 5. 13.
Blessing, honor, etc.

4. Foelicitatis Possessio, Inherit. Inheritance is of Birth, not industry:
the younger brother is often of more desert then the elder, yet cannot this
make him his Fathers Heir. This is of Inheritance, therefore not of merit. It
differs from an earthly Inheritance in three things. 1. In that the Testator
must be dead, and the successor living: in this God the Testator is ever
living, and his heirs before they can fully possess it, must be dead. Ambr.
A temporal inheritance divided, is diminished: one is of so much land
shortened, as is to another shared. The heirs here are without number; Reu. 7.
9.
of all nations, kindred and languages; yet though the inheritance be imparted,
it is not empaired. Tanta singulis, quanta omnibus. Every one has as ^ch as
any one. Ardens. 3. The partition of an earthly inheritance breeds among the
coheyres envy and grudging: but in this the joy of one is the joy of all.
Dispar gloria singulorum, tamen communis laetitia omnium. Aug. One star may
excel another star in glory, but none shall envy another in glory. There
shall be no repining at another more glorious clearenesse, where remains in
all one gracious dearness. Inherit.

5. Haereditatis Perfectio; a kingdom. The top of man's desires is a kingdom;
nil nisi Regna placent. Yet if they be earthly kingdoms, they will not
satisfy: Alexander is not content with his universal Monarchy. But here is a
kingdom will satisfy: you will say, there are many Kings, and but one
kingdom; therefore not room enough: yes, for the bounds of the least are not
narrower then heaven it self.

6. Regni Paratio; Prepared for you: Not merited in your times, but prepared
before all times. It had no beginning in respect of Gods intention: it shall
have no end in respect of your possession. Gods decree to give it us had no
beginning, but shall have an end: our fruition of it shall have a beginning, but
no end: Gods mercy in both has neither beginning nor end; but is from
everlasting to everlasting. Had the Lord such care to provide a kingdom for his
children before they were; then sure he will give it them at the appointed
time. So certain are they of blessedness, that it is prepared for them from
the foundation of the world. For you: not for all: there is no universal
election, God decrees not all to be saved. Then Christ should have said thus,
Inherit the kingdom; Paratum omnibus, Datum vobis: prepared for all, and given
to you: but he says, Prepared for you, therefore not purposed to all. Seeing
there is so good cheer prepared for us, let us prepared for us, let us prepare
our selves for that: like some dainty guest, who knowing there is such delicate
fare behind, keeps his stomach for it. Let us disdain the course diet of
this world, that dangers us to the dropsy of couetice, or the surfets of riot.
We use to fast on the Eeues, that we may feast on the Holy Days: let us here
abstain from the table of sin, that we may hereafter banquet in the
Kingdom of Heaven.

This is matter of comfort to us: here the world condemns the godly: therefore
they shall have a time of absoluing. When that General Session comes, Luke 21.
28.
then look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. There
is no mercy to be had in this world, for the wicked themselves are accusers,
witnesses, judges: but at that day a poor man's case will be heard. Therefore
Psalm. 10. 14.
the poor commits himself unto thee, for thou art the helper of the
fatherless. Christ will take the cause into his own hand. Reu. 6. 10.
The souls under the Altar cry with a loud voice; How long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth!
Yes, it is fit every one should have a day of hearing. This is theirs, that
shall be ours: Psalm. 58. 10.
The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance. Rejoice? yes, they
have no charity to us on earth, we must have no charity to them in hell.

2. The Commendation follows the calling, Mat. 25. 35. For I was hungry, and
ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, etc. Christ witnesses
their faith from the effects: they brought forth fruits of mercy. Thus it is
evident, that not according to the internal habit of faith and charity, but
according to the external acts proceeding from them, is the reward bestowed.
Christ before justified them by their faith, apprehending his merits: now he
iustifies them by testimony (of that faith) arising from their works. The
point Christ insists in, is their works of mercy; which are six, visito,
poto, cibo, redimo, tego, colligo fratres. Giving them meat, drink, harbor,
clothing, visitation in sickness, redemption from bondage.

Where observe, that the maine point Christ will scanne at the last, is the
point of mercy. Not how wise, nor how learned, nor how just, but how merciful.
Ambr. Now if a Scholar standing for preferment, knew directly that one
question wherein he should be opposed; he would study a full and ready answer
to it. We all know that one and maine question wherein Christ will examine us,
what works of mercy have we done: if we have gotten no demonstration of
mercy, we are vvorthily condemned. Now their mercy is commended, partly in
respect of the object, and partly in respect of the act. For the object, it is
done to Christ: happy mercy that is done to the Lord Jesus; it shall never
pass unrewarded. 2. Chr. 24. 22.
Ioash forgot the kindness of Iehoiada; but the King of heaven will remember
all the good done unto him. Says that good malefactor; Luke 23. 42.
Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. I will not forget thee,
answers Jesus; To day thou shall be with me in Paradise. I was hungry, and ye
fedme. I, and me, says Christ.

In regard of the act, the thing they distribute and contribute, is not bare
words, but actual mercies; food, clothing, etc. This is the effect of a true
faith, not a verbal, but a real working faith. A faith, not like that the
Psalmist seems to mention, (though in another sense) I believed, and ideo
locutus sum, and therefore I spoke: but such as the Apostle speaks of; I
believed, and ideo operatus sum, and therefore I wrought a faith working by
love. It is easy to mistake Saint Paul, Romans 14. 22. Have thou faith? have it
to thy self before God. unless we expound him by S. James, Iam. 2. 18. Have
thou faith? show thy faith by thy works. If we will be the children of
Abraham, Romans 4. 11.
who is the Father of them that believe: we must be so by Sara, who is the
mother of 1. Pet. 3. 6.
them that obey. They that will be trees of righteousness in Gods garden,
must not be like the fig tree in the Gospel, that had only leaves, no fruit:
but like the Psalm. 1. 3.
tree that brings forth her fruit in due season. Or like Aarons rod, that of a
dead stick, having life and sap put into it; presently bare Almonds; fruit,
no leaves spoken of.

Some give words enough; contrary to Moses, who was a man of few words. The
Papists will rather loose a penny then a Paternoster: these will give ten
Paternosters before one penny. They give the words of Nepthali, pleasant words;
but no meat. As if the poor were like Ephraim, Hos. 12. 1.
fed with the wind. Or as if their word were verbum Domini, the Mat. 4. 4.
word of God, that men might live by it. Solomon says, Wisdom is good with
an inheritance, so good counsel is good with an alms. If a famished man
beg bread of thee, and thou only fallest to instruct his soul, but deniest
food to his body: he may reply, as Hushai said to Absolon of Achitophels
counsel. 2. Sam. 17. 7.
The counsel that Achitophel has given is good, but not at this time. Martial
demands of Caius a small piece of silver; Quod vel donanti non grave. Caius
blamed him for his idle profession of Poetry, counseled him to study the Law,
that would enrich him. To him Martial; Quod peto da mihi tu, non peto
consilium. Give me that I ask thee, I do not ask thee counsel. Many are
like S. Peter's fish; it had money in the mouth, but not a hand to give it. Or
like Dives his dogs; they can lick a poor man with their tongues, else give
him no relief. Diogenes a witty beggar would usually walk in a place where
earthen Statues were erected, in honor of some that died for their country. To
them he would pray, to them reach out his hand, bow, and beg: being asked the
reason, he answered; Nihil aliud quam repulsam meditor. I think of nothing,
but a repulse and denial. We have many such living Statues, mere Idols: that
have mouths and speak not, eyes and pity not, hands and give not: the poor
are sure of nothing but a repulse.

3. The reply, or question upon this commendation made by the Saints. Math. 25.
37. Then shall the righteous answer him; Lord, when saw we thee an hungered,
and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? etc. This is no denial of
that truth Christ has avouched. But 1. to magnify Christ's mercy, who takes
these works as done to himself, which are done for his sake. Let no covetous
Churl plead, he wants subjects upon whom to exercise his mercy; Pauper vbique
iacet: which way can he walk, and not behold one hungry, another thirsty, etc?
2. To testify their humility, that albeit these things are true, yet they
acknowledge no merit in them: they have not done so much of these as they
ought. Besides, they might have an after-consideration of their sins past;
which valued with their good works, they find one to outweigh a thousand. The
Papists ostent their merits on earth, the Saints dare not do so even ready for
heaven: but Reu. 4. 10.
cast down their crowns before the Throne: saying, Thou, O Lord, art only
worthy to receive glory and honor. They have nec boni inopiam, nec in bono
superbiam. They are not poor in good works, nor proud of good works. They
wrote their charity in the dust, therefore did God write it in Marble. They
seem to forget the works of mercy they have done, therefore are they
remembered by Jesus Christ.

4. The answer of Christ, Mat. 25. 40. In as much as ye have done it to one
of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. The miseries of my
brethren are my own miseries. Heb. 4. 15.
We have an high Priest touched with the feeling of our infirmities. That
invulnerable and glorified breast, is still touched with the sense of our
wounds. Saul, thou persecutest me: he says not mine, but me: me in mine.
Zach. 2. 8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye. Surely he will pity the
misery of every one, that is afflicted with the sorrows of all. Quis recusabit
pro Christo pati, quando Christus compatitur patienti? Who would refuse to
suffer for Christ, when he is sure that Christ suffers with him?

Here is excellent direction for our works of mercy: that no sinister end draw
them from us, but sincere love to Christ. If any fish for the applause of men,
his bait shall be his own hook, to snare himself. Da Christo; look on the
poor man, and in that member behold the Head, Christ. Mat. 10. 42.
He that shall give a cup of cold water to one of these little ones, in the
name of a Disciple, he shall in no wise lose his reward. A cup of water is but
a small gift, yet done in that Name, and for that cause, it is rewarded, as an
excellent work of mercy. It is the true note of a child of God, to show mercy
to a Christian, because he is a Christian. Natural men have their private
ends, and aduantagious respects, in their beneficences. Such a one shall do me
service, flatter my addiction, bring intelligences to mine ear; I will make
him my property: my charity shall bind him to me. Moral men will sometimes
give, even for pities sake: but the true Christian does it for Christ his sake,
and looks no further. Gala. 6. 10.
Doing good unto all, especially to them that are of the household of faith.
Some think, that the best work is to build Temples and Monasteries: but
indeed the best work is to relieve (not the dead, but) the living Temples of
Christ's mystical Body. It was an ancient complaint; Fulget Ecclesia in
parietibus, ^get in pauperibus. The Church flourishes in her glorious
buildings, but mourns and pines away in her poor members. Deny not due cost
to the dead walls, but first satisfy the living bowels; that Christ may say,
Come ye blessed.

I come now to the sentence of Condemnation, Math. 25. 41. Then shall he say to
them on the left hand; Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his angels. In this form of damnatory judgment,
are four points considerable. A Reiection of the wicked, a Reason of that
reiection, an Objection against that reason, a Confutation of that objection.
In the Reiection are many particulars gradually inhancing their judgment. They
are partly Privative, and partly Positive. Depart from me ye cursed, there is
Poenadam^i: Into everlasting fire, there is Poena sensus. As there be two
kinds of sin: Delictum and Peccatum. Delictum est desertio boni, Bern.
Peccatum perpetratio mali: the one a forsaking of that is good, the other a
committing of that is evil. So there is a like proportion of punishment; a
depriving of joy, and a giving over to torment. Here is

1. A grievous refusal; Depart. This seems nothing to the wicked now, such is
their dead security. Depart? Why they are content to be gone. Ecclc. 8. 11.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
their heart is fully set in them to do evil. But as when a Prince opening his
long locked up Treasury, graciously takes some in with him, and saying to
other ill-meriting followers, Depart: it will be a disgraceful vexation. So
when the glory of heaven, and those invaluable treasures shall be opened, and
dealt about to the faithful; what horror will it be to the Reprobates to be
cast off with a Depart? Luke 10. 23.
Blessed are the eyes that see the things which ye see: says Christ to his
Saints. For Kings have desired to see them, and were not suffered. If it were
such a Blessedness to see Jesus in humility, what is it to see him in glory? But
from this the wicked are bidden, Depart.

2. The loss of Salvation; From me: your Savior that was wounded for you;
that offered my blood to you, which was offered for you. And if from me, then
from all that is mine; my mercy, my glory, my salvation. Consider here, what an
excellent thing it is to have familiarity with Christ on earth, that he may not
cast us off as strangers from heaven. He that would have Christ know him there,
must not be a stranger to Christ here. He must have some fellowship with GOD:
How? If we walk in the light, we have fellowship with God, and with his Son
Jesus 1. John 1.
Christ. To walk in the dark, is to have fellowship with the Prince of
darkness: to walk in the light, is to have fellowship with the Father of
lights. Will a Reprobate that has always turned his back upon Christ, here
press into his company? Upon what acquaintance? Yes, Luke 13. 26.
We have eat and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets:
as if they should say, We have fed at thy Communion table, and heard thee
preach in our Pulpits. Still this proves no acquaintance: for in the one you
did eat Panem Domini, non Panem Dominum; the bread of Christ, but not Christ
with the bread. In the other you have heard Uerbum Domini, not regarded Dominum
verbi. Your ear has been open, but your conscience shut. Therefore, ver.
25. Non noui vos; as familiar as you presume, yet you are such strangers to me,
that I know you not. They never willingly came near Christ but to persecute
him; therefore he shall then cast them far enough off for ever.

3. The deserved Malediction; Ye cursed. He is cursed, that being borne in
sin, lives in it, and dies in it, without seeking recovery. I call this curse
merited, because they love it. Psalm. 109. 17.
As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him. Has he loved it? Let him take
his love. As he clothed himself with cursing as with a garment: so let it
come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. ver. 18. It was
his outside, let it be his linings: it was his outward stuff, let it be his
inward stuffing. Every one that has not first a pardon by Christ, must hear
this curse pronounced against him from Christ. O then suffer not thine eyes to
sleep, till Christ has sealed thee a Quetus est. Give no peace to thy self,
till thou have peace with GOD. Quamdiu imp^nitentia manet, maledictio imminet.
So long as unrepentance abides in us, Cursednesse hangs over us. He that
wilfully goes on in known wickedness, hazards himself to inevitable
cursednesse. Go ye cursed.

4. The horror of the pains; Into everlasting fire. Fire; of all elements the
most violent, therefore fittest to describe those pangs. Esaias 30. 33.
The pile thereof is ^ire and much wood: the breath of the Lord, like a river
of bri^stone, does kindle it. Everlasting; the torments thereof are ever
frying, never dying. Mark. 9. 44.
Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Aug. Vermis corrodet
conscientiam, ignis comburet carnem; quia and cord and corpore deliquerunt.
The fire shall torture their flesh, the worm their spirit: because both in
flesh and spirit they have sinned. The reprobates shall be packed and crowded
together, like ^rickes in a fiery furnace, having not so much as a chinke where
any wind may enter in to cool them.

5. The preordinance of their torments; Prepared for the Devil and his Angels:
ordained beforehand. Origin held that the Devil and his angels should one day
be released from their tortures: and that these words of Christ were spoken
Minaciter, potius quam veraciter; rather by way of threatening, then true
meaning. But Augustine answers, that the Scripture has confuted him plenissime
ac planissime. For the fire prepared for Satan is not temporary, but
everlasting: where though floods of tears be continually raining upon it,
yet can it not be put out.

Prepared: to the terror of wicked men, that covenant with hell: alas they are
deceived, it was made for some purpose. That fire was prepared for some, and
some have prepared themselves for it. Burning in lusts, in malice, in revenge;
until themselves, their lusts, malice and revenge, and all burn in hell. The
Devil was crafty, yet he could not escape hell: be as vvily as you can, yet
beware hell. It is not policy, but piety, that must escape this fire. Now as
this brings to the wicked much terror, so it helps to preserve the godly
against error. And this was one principal cause of the penning this sentence.
The wise master of the family will chide his servants, vea and upon desert
correct them, in the presence of his child, that he may learn by it to stand
in awe of his Father. So deals God; Minatur quod faciet improbis, ne faciat
quod minatur sanctis. He threatens the wicked what he will do to their
sins, that the godly may avoid what he threatens for sins. Omnis minatio
amica monitio: every threatening is a fair warning. The Lord give us mutare
sententiam nostram, vt ipse mutet sententiam suam; to change our mind, that
God may change his menace. Let us now come humbly to him in repentance, that
we may never depart from him into vengeance. The other circumstances I will
but touch.

2. The reason of this reiection, Mat. 25. 42. For I was hungry, and ye gave
me no no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink. They are not judged
Ex malis commissis, sedex bonis omissis; not by the evil deeds they have
done, but by the good things they have not done. Christ says not, Ye took
away my meat when I was hungry: but you gave me not your meat. You did not
strip me of the clothes I had, but you gave me no clothes when I had not.
Mat. 3. 10.
The axe cuts up the tree which brought not forth good fruit; though it be not
accused for bringing forth bad fruit. Innocence is good, but not enough: we
see that not to have relieved, is an unanswerable indictment at that day. How
heavy will this sentence fall upon many among us! What heaps have many in
this City; perhaps some got without a tenter'd conscience, yield it no worse:
yet would to God it were so well: for it is hard Bonum cito ^uadere diuitem;
for an honest man to become rich on the sudden. They have it, and now may they
not keep it? is it not their own? But O it is fearful, when for this
keeping they shall be condemned. It is not a groat weekly, or monthly to the
poor, and a small pension to the much-robbed Church, that can discharge you:
but you must give proportionably. Plead what you can to the poor, Christ
will not be so answered. Who can force me to give? none: but because thou will
not give unforced, thou shall justly be condemned.

3. The objection against this reason, Math. 25. 44. Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered, or athi^st, etc. and did not minister unto thee? They have a kind of
impudence still adhering to their foreheads: they would seem to justify
themselves, though they be deservedly punished. When did we see thee? Often.
When this poor widow has departed without thy mercy, that orphan without thy
help, that blind or lame without thy alms. When? when not? every occasion
shall be a bill of enditement against thee. Who will wonder to see a Romish
Pharise sooth and flatter himself on earth, when he is not ashamed to do it
in judgment before the Lord Jesus Christ? Sed nulla defensio absoluet reum,
nulla infensio dissoluet iudicium. Plead they whether subtly, or angrily, as
if some vvrong were done them; it is Equity it self that does sentence them.

4. The confutation of their objection. Math. 25. 45. Insomuch as ye did it not
to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. This one distinction takes
away all their arguments: here is a full answer to their Quando: a declaration
of their death-deseruing wickedness: that would have no pity on the Lord
Jesus. Iam. 2. 13.
Judgment merciless shall be given to them that show no mercy: you know this.
Dives was denied a drop, because he would not give a crumme: you know this: He
that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, shall cry himself and not be
heard. Did not I tell you Prou. 21. 13.
thus? The poor you had ever, this mercy you showed never: therefore Go ye
cursed.

5. Lastly the Retribution: this is set down in brief; but the matter it
contains, is long and everlasting. John 5. 29.
All shall come forth; they that have done good, to the resurrection of life;
they that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnation. Mat. 25. 46.
These shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life
eternal. An estate soon versed: never to be reuersed. The voice of Christ
shall speak it; and the power of Christ shall effect it. No Angel shall
speak against it, no devil shall withstand it.

How should this teach Saint Paul's use; who considering that there shall be a
resurrectian of the dead, both of the just and unjust; resolved with himself
Acts 24. 16.
to have always a good conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man.
Let it instruct us al to watch for this day; a decayed charge, then which
nothing was more current in the mouth of Christ. Let me conclude with that
sigh from his soul; Could ye not watch with me one hour? It will not be long
ere the glass be run, the hour out; Judas is at hand, judgment is not
far off: then may you sleep and take your rest. This day is nearer you now,
then when you first entered the Church. Twice have the blasted ears eat up the
full corn: twice have the lean kine devoured the fat: Pharaohs dream is
doubled for the certainty and expedition. Heb. 10. 37.
Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come and will not tarry. If
we shall have comfort in this day when it is come, we must long for it before
it do come. What comfort shall the Usurer have? he desires not this day: for
then the Reu. 10. 6.
Angel swears there shall be no more time; and his profession is to sell
time. He sels it dear, very costly to another purse, but most costly to his
own soul. Such as bribe for Offices, farm Monopolies, contract an usurious
rent for life; do they desire it? Amos 5. 18.
Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord: to what end is it for you? the
day of the Lord is darkness, and not light. The soul groaning under sin
desires it. Romans 7. 24.
Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? The suffering soul may
desire it. Come Lord Jesus. The faithful Spouse wedded to Christ desires this
coming of her Husband: she is now espoused, that is the plenary consummation
of the marriage. Reu. 19. 7.
Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and the Bride has made her self ready. Blessed are they that
be called to this marriage supper.

To the ungodly it will be a fearful day. Ignis vbique ferox ruptis regnabit
habenis: there shall follow an universal dissolution. Downwards go Satan,
his angels, and reprobates; howling, and shriking, and gnashing of teeth: the
effect of a most impatient fury: to be bound hand and foot with everlasting
chains of darkness. Where fire shall torture, yet give no light: worms gnaw
the heart, yet never gnaw in sunder the strings: eternal pains punire, non
finire corpora. Small sorrows grow great with continuance: but O misery of
miseries, to have torments universal, and withal eternal: not to be endured,
yet not to be ended. Upwards goes Christ, the blessed Angels and Saints,
singing with melody as never mortal ear heard. The only song which that
Quire sung audible to man, was that which the Shepherds heard: Luke 2. 14.
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. Yet
Christ was then coming to suffer: what may we think are those Halleluiahs
everlastingly chanted in the Courts of Heaven! we know not, yet we may know one
special note, which an universal Quire of all nations, kindred, and tongues;
Angels, Elders, All shall sing; Reu. 7. 12.
Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power,
and might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.

To the spirits of just men made perfect. The Citizens of he^uen are of two
sorts; by Creation or Adoption. Created and natural Citizens are the Angels,
Adopted are Men. Of these be two kinds, some Assumed, and others Assigned. The
Assigned, such as are decreed in their times to be Citizens; said before to be
written in heaven. The Assumed, such as are already possessed of it, here
Spirits of just men made perfect. But how then is the Apostles meaning cleared?
How are the militant on earth said to be come unto these just spirits in
heaven? Yes, we have a Communion with them, participating in Spe, what they
possess in Re. (...). 2. 19.
Now we are no more strangers and forreiners, but fellow-Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of GOD. Only our apprentiship of the flesh is not
yet out; but they have their freedom. But as we have all an union with
Christ, so a Communion with Christians: the combatant on earth, with the
triumphant in heaven.

Spirits: this word has diverse acceptions. It is taken 1. Pro animo, for the
Mind. Luke 10. 21. Jesus rejoiced in spirit. 1. Chron. 5. 26. God stirred up
the spirit of the King of Assyria. 2. Pro sede rationis, et (...), 1. Cor. 2.
11. What man knows the things of man, save the spirit of man which is within
him? 3. Pro Affectuvel Afflatu, for the motion of the mind, whether good or
bad. Luke 9. 55. Ye know not what manner spirit ye are of. So there is called
the spirit of lust, the spirit of pride, etc. 4. Pro donis spiritus sancti, for
the gifts of Gods Spirit. Act. 8. 15. Peter and John prayed for the disciples
at Samaria, that they might receive the holy Spirit; meaning the graces of the
holy Spirit. Gala. 3. 2. Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by
the hearing of faith? 5. Pro efficacia Euangelij, for the effectual working of
the Gospel; and so it is opposed to the letter. 2. Cor. 3. 6. The letter
kills, but the Spirit gives life. 6. Pro spiritualibus exercitijs; for
spiritual exercises. Gala. 6. 8. He that sows to the spirit, shall of the
spirit reap everlasting life. John 4. 23. True worshippers shall worship the
Father in spirit and truth. 7. Pro regenerata part: for the regenerate part of
a Christian, and so it is opposed to the flesh. Gala. 5. 17. The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit lusts against the flesh. 8. Lastly, Pro
anima immortal^, for the immortal soul. Eccl. 12. 7. Dust shall return to
the earth as it was, and the spirit shall return to God who gave it. This
spirit did Steven commend into the hands of Christ. Act. 7. 59. And Christ into
the hands of his Father. Math. 27. 50. yielding up the spirit. Thus it is taken
here.

Spirits, he does not say bodies: they lie in the dust under the hope of a
better resurrection. Spirits: We find here what becomes of good men's souls
when they forsake their bodies: they are in the heavenly City. There are many
idle opinions, what becomes of man's soul in death. Some have thought, that the
souls then, though they die not, yet are still kept within the body (as it
were asleep) until the last day. But the Scripture speaks expressly the
contrary: for Dives his soul was in hell, and Lazarus his soul in Abraham's
bosom. Reu. 6. 9.
I saw under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the Word of God.
Some have imagined a transmigration of souls forsaken of their own bodies,
into other bodies. Herod seems to be of this opinion: when news was brought
him concerning the fame of Jesus, he said to his servants; Mat. 14. 2.
This is John the Baptist, he is risen from the dead. He thought that the soul
of John was put into the body of Jesus. It is alleged, that Nebuchadnezzar
living and feeding with beasts, until seven times were passed over him; had
lost his own soul, and the soul of a beast was entered in the room. But
this is a frivolous conceit: indeed God had bereft him of common reason, yet he
had still the soul of a man. Do not many among us, that have the souls of
men, live like debauched beasts? The lustful like a goat, the covetous like a
wolf, the drunkard like a hog, the Politician like a fox, the rayler like
a barking curre. Others think, that the soul neither dies nor sleeps, nor
passes out of one body into another, but wandreth up and down here on earth
among men: and often appears to this man, often to that: whence came that
fabulous opinion that dead men walk. For this purpose they allege the Witch
of Endor, who made Samuel appear to Saul, and answer him. But the truth is,
that was not Samuel indeed, but an apparition, the mere counterset of him. For
not all the Witches in the world, nor all the Devils in hell can disquiet the
souls of the faithful: for they are in Gods keeping. Dying, their souls are
immediately translated to blessedness: there are the spirits of just men made
perfect: and there to abide, until the general Resurrection shall restore
them to their own bodies. For the souls of the Reprobates, departing in their
sins, they go directly to hell, and are kept there as in a sure prison.

Let this instruct all such as have a Christian hope, to let their souls
depart with comfort. Emittuntur, non amittuntur: death does not lose them, but
loosen them, and set them free from the bondage of corruption. Howl and lament
if thou think thy soul perishes. There are some that fear not so much to
die, as to be dead: they know the pang is bitter, but it is short: it is the
comfortless estate of the dead that is their dread. They could well resolve
for the act of their passage, if they were sure to live afterward. Animula
vagula blandula, Whither go thou, said that Heathen Emperor on his
deathbed? lamenting the doubtful condition of his soul after the parture.
Very not being is abhorred of nature; if death had nothing else to make it
fearful. It is woeful to lie rotting in the silent grave, neither seeing, nor
seen. Here the Christian lifts up his head of comfort; Lord, into thy hands I
commend my spirit. I lose it not, because thou have it: thou will keep it in
peace, and g^ue it me back again in eternal joy.

Of just men. Justice is ascribed to a Christian two ways: There is 1.
Passiua iustitia, a passive justice, Christ's righteousness imputed to him: and
hereby he stands perfectly just before God. This the Apostle calls Romans 3. 22
The righteousness of GOD, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all. 1. Cor.
1. 30.
Christ is made unto us righteousness. This justice is attained by faith; Heb.
11. 7.
Noah became heir of the righteousness which is by faith. Romans 4. 3.
Abraham believed GOD, and it was counted unto him for righteousness. Without
this no spirit shall appear just before God in heaven. Our own righteousness
is a covering too short to hide our nakedness: Christ's garment is a long robe,
that couers all.

2. Actiua iustitia, active righteousness, an effect of the former: which is
indeed a testimony that we are justified by Christ. 1. John 3. 7.
Let no man deceive you: he that does righteousness, is righteous. Therefore
says James, Iam. 2. 24.
A man is justified by his works: if his meaning had been that our own works
simply acquit us before GOD; it could never be reconciled to that of his
master; when we have done all we can, we must call our selves unprofitable
servants. Nor to that of his fellow; Romans 7. 23.
I see a law in my members, warring against the law of my mind: nor to that of
himself; Iam. 3. 2.
In many things we sin all. Now this justice effectiue from God, active in
us, is taken two ways; Late and Stricte.

In a larger sense it is taken for all Piety, and so justice and holiness are
all one. Properly taken, Justification is imputed, Sanctification inherent: but
understanding our justness an effect of Christ's justice imputed to us, so
Iustus and Sanctus are conuertible terms. They are Just spirits, that is, they
are Saints. Now if we desire to come ad Sanctos, to the Saints: we must live
sancte, a holy life. God by telling us who are in heaven, teaches us who shall
come to heaven; none but Saints. They are set before us as examples: Vt eorum
sequamur gratiam, et consequamur gloriam: that steering their course, we might
come to their Haven. The Scripture teaches us Quid agendum, what is to be
done: the Saints Quo modo, how it is to be done. Uita sanctorum, interpretatio
scripturarum. The lives of holy men is a kind of Commentary or interpretation
of the holy writ. Let us as we do by good copies, not only lay them before
us, and look on them, but write after them. For it is not sufficient Legere,
sed degere vitam sanctorum: not to read, but to lead the lives of Saints.
Papists in this go too far, as evil men come too short. Good men imitate the
Saints, but do not worship them: Papists worship the Saints, but do not
imitate them: lewd men do neither. Perhaps they will imitate their
infirmities: as if only for that they liked them, for which only God misliked
them. The Saints are to be held as Patterns, not as Patrones of our life. But
the Papists praise not God in his Saints, nor the Saints for God, but as God.
Only let us reverently walk in their grace, that we may joyfully come to
their place.

In a stricter sense it is taken for that moral virtue, which gives to every
man his own. This virtue has been highly commended in the heathen: but one
says truly, Iustitia ethnic orum miranda potius, quam laudanda: their Justice
deserved more admiration, then commendation: they wanted him that should make
them just. They so affected this justice, that they took Sirnames from it;
Aristides was called Iustus: Scipio, Iustus: Fabius, Iustus. Their justice was
no virtue, but a shadow of virtue. They neither knew the Lord Deum virtutis,
nec Christum virtutem Dei; the God of virtue, nor Christ the virtue of God.
Only Jesus is Iustus. 1. Pet. 3. 18.
Christ suffered for sins, the just for the unjust. Acts 3. 14.
Ye denied the Holy one, and the Just. There was another Col. 4. 11.
Jesus called Iustus, a helper of the Apostles: but Christ is Dominus Iustitia
nostra; Ier. 33. 16.
The Lord our Righteousness. By him we are only made just: Esa. 45. 25.
In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and glory.

Being thus justified, let us be just: not doing that to others, which we would
not have others do to us: and doing that to others which we desire to be done
to our selves. Some are just in small matters: so the Pharisees Mat. 23. 23.
pay tithe of mint, and annise, and cummine; but omit waightier things. This is
Pharisaica Iustitia, a Puritan righteousness: not to endure an hours
recreation on the Sunday, yet to rob the Church by usurpations, to exact
interests and forfets; these be nothing. So the money might not be put into the
Treasury, that might hire Judas to betray his master. The ten brethren were
so just, as to return the money in their sackes; yet stuck not to sell their
brother Joseph.

Some are just in great things, not in small. As the other strain at a gnat,
and swallow a camel: so these are like the net, that takes the great fishes,
and lets go the little fry. Wantonness is no fault with them, if it extend
not to adultery. They stick not to swear, so long as they swear not to a
lie. Maliciously to hate, or peeuishly to quarrel, is triuiall; if they
proceed not to blows and blood. So long as they are not drunk, swallow down
wine, and spare not. De minimis non curat Lex; the Law takes no notice of small
faults. But indeed Eadem ratio rotunditatis, there is the same respect of
roundnesse in a penny, that is in a platter; though not of largenes. To steal
the bridle, as to steal the horse, is Tam, though not Tantum: such a sin,
though not so great a sin. Thou say minimum est, minimum est; it is
little, it is little. Sed in minimo fidelem esse magnum est: to be faithful
in a little is a great virtue. Mat. 5. 19.
Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, he shall be called
least in the kingdom of heaven. Erit minimus, that is Nullus: he shall be
least in heaven, that is, he shall not be there at all. But well done good
servant: Luke 19. 17.
Because thou have been faithful in a very little, have thou authority over
ten Cities. Been vtere paruo, fruere magno: the just dispensation of a
little, shall bring thee to be entrusted with much. Whether great or small we
must be just, if we look ever to reign with these just spirits. Ad societatem
iustorum non admittuntur nisi iusti.

I wonder what place the defrauder expects; that wraps up his conscience in a
bundle of stuffes, and swears it away. The buyer thinks he is just, and he
is just cousoned, no more. The Usurer would storm and stare, as if had seen a
spirit, if he were taxed for unjust. Presently he consults (his Scriptures)
his bonds, and (his Priest) his Scriuener: and there the one swears, the other
shows in black and white, that he takes but ten in the hundred. Is he then
unjust? Yes, Ezekiel. 22. 16
Thou have taken usury and increase, and have greedily gained of thy neighbors
by extortion. He takes hire for that should be freely lent: is not this
unjust? Besides, the people curse it, and they curse not but for injustice.
Ier. 15. 10.
I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent me on usury, yet every one
does curse me. Insinuating, that if a man lend upon usury, it is no wonder if
the people curse him. Where must the Lay-Parson sit, that fattes himself with
the Tyth-graine, and will not give the poor Minister the straw? Is this just?
He takes the tenth of his neighbors profits, and never so much as reads him
an Homely for it: is this just? He lays sactilegious hands on Gods
sanctified things, and never asks him leave: is this just? Where shall the
Engrosser appear, that hoords up commodities bought with ready money, and when
he vents them, makes the poor pay treble usury for it: is this just? What
shall become of that unspeakably rich Transporter, who carries out men and
money, to the impouerishing of the Land, and brings home gawdes and puppets,
fit for no bodies use but prides? Surely, as heaven is for Just spirits, so
there is some other place for the unjust. 1. Cor. 6. 9.
Know ye not that the unjust shall not inherit the kingdom of God? If not
Gods kingdom, then the kingdom of darkness; downwards, hell. I do not say,
that every unjust deed throws a soul thither: Iniustum esse damnat, non
unjust semel agere; to be unjust is damnable, not one thing unjustly done: the
habit, not the act. But for others; Qui unjust dominantur, i^ste damnantur.
They have unjustly lived, but they shall be justly condemned.

Made perfect. This is a passive quality; non qui se perficiunt, sed qui
perficiuntur: not such as have made themselves perfect, but are made perfect.
The other property is actiuely expressed; Just, it is not said Justified: not
that they made themselves just, but that Christ's righteousness has justified
them; so both they are, and are reputed just. But here passiuely, Perfected:
which plainly shows that all is from God: for omne maius includit minus. If
only Christ make them perfect; then only Christ does make them ^ust. For it is
nothing so difficult for a just man to become perfect, as for an evil man to
become just. As it is easier for a man healed and directed the way, to come to
the goal; then for him that lies lame in darkness. Qui dedit ingressum, must
also dare progressum: conficere and perficere; to make and to make up, to do
and to perfect, are both the works of God. We could never be just, unless
Christ justify us: never come to perfection, unless he perfect us. He that
begun this good work, must also finish it.

Made perfect. In heaven are none but the perfect. Talis seeds expectat talem
sessorem: such a house requires such an inhabitant. On earth there is a kind of
Perfection: all the faithful are perfectly justified, but not perfectly
sanctified. The reprobates are perfect imperfecti: the godly imperfecte
perfecti: those perfectly imperfect, these imperfectly perfect. They are so
perfect that they are acquitted in Christ, and there remains no judgment for
them, but only a declaration of their pardon. Justification admits no
latitude, in it nec magis nec minus, for none can be more then just. But the
perfection of sanctity is wrought by degrees: non plenam induimus perfectionem,
donec totam exuimus infectionem: all the stains of our infection must first be
cleansed, and quite washed away; before this full perfection be given us.
Christ's blood does now wholly take from us the guiltiness of sin, not wholly
the pollution of sin: that blessedness is reserved only for heaven.

Let us therefore be perficientes, going and growing up, that at last we may be
Perfecti, made perfecti. This is not wrought on a sudden; a child does not
presently become a man. Even the Lord Jesus had his time of growing, and can
any member grow faster then the Head? Indeed the malefactor on the cross shot
up in an hour; but this was miraculous, and God seldom works by such
miracles. God neither sends Angels from heaven, nor the dead from hell, to give
warning to men upon earth. Luke 16. 31.
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead. But repentance has the promise of a
Qandocunque; whenever a sinner repents, etc. I will not limit Gods infinite
mercy; but only advise thy sick soul, who after a desperate and inueterate
wound look for a sudden cure by repentance: it is better to make this thy
diet, then thy physic. Repent every day, that thou may have remission one
day. Melior medicus qui excludit morbos, quam qui curat. He is a better
Physician that keeps diseases off us, then he that cures them being on us.
Prevention is so much better then healing, because it saues the labor of being
sick. Thou allowest not a Surgion unnecessarily to break thy head, to try his
skill, and the virtue of his plaster. Sprindges were better taken away quae
non prosunt, because they do no good: then the setting of watchmen by them to
warn travelers, ne noceant; that they be not hurt by them. Take away thy lusts
quite, this is the way to be sure: for repentance may be like Baal, so fast
asleep that all thy cries are not able to waken her.

To conclude, he that will wear a crown in heaven, must be all his life on
earth preparing the gold to make it. Not that thy own virtues crown thee, but
that GOD without thy virtues will never crown thee. The robe of glory that is
worn there, must be spun and wouen here: spun out of the side of Christ by
faith, and embroydered with our good works. That eternal light arises from
this internal life. 1. Tim. 6. 19.
Lay up in store for your selves a good foundation against the time to come,
that you may lay hold on eternal life. The ground work of salvation is made
here: that high Tower of glory that is built for thee in heaven, has the
foundation of it laid upon earth.

How should a man be Perfectus, that was never factus, well begun? I wonder
what perfection a wine-bibber looks for; sure to be a perfect drunkard. What
perfection expects the luxurious prodigal: sure to be a perfect beggar. What
perfection hopes the covetous Churl; that allows himself a race of
fourscore years; and sets God at the latter end of it: and he has that place
too with this condition, that he trouble not his mind about it till the last
day comes. Surely to live unblessed, and to die vnpittied: but that some now
bless God he is gone; and other say, it is pity he died no sooner. All his
proiections have aimed at this perfection, to make himself a perfect slave.
What perfection dreams the Jesuit to himself, but to become a perfect
traitor? What perfection is likely to the incontinent adulterer, but to be a
perfect Lazar. What the malicious, but a perfect villain: what the proud, but
a perfect fool: what the blasphemer, but a perfect Devil?

They say, early holiness proves ripe corruption: but I am sure, habituated
profaneness proves rank damnation. Alas, how should they make an end, that
never begin? This man began to build, says Christ, but could not make an end:
how should they finish that never began? you that spend your days in a lazy
forgetfulness of religion, examine your own consciences: do you ever think to
be perfect? Are you content still to be abortiue, and shall you be perfected in
the womb of the grave? God has given you time and means: he did not say,
Sumite and consumite: take it, and spend it at your pleasure. O begin, that you
may continue and end: hear to learn, learn to do, do to continue, continue
to be perfect. Begin betimes, lest Gods end come before your beginning. Enter
into the way of Piety, and follow it: striving with all your powers to grow up
Ephesians. 4. 13.
to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things then that of Abel. We have considered the glory of
the City, the felicity of the Citizens; we are lastly come to the Mediator,
who brings both these together, and without whom they had been everlastingly
asunder. We are all by nature belonging not to Mount Sion, but to the valley of
Hinnon: not to the celestial Jerusalem, but to the infernal Babylon: not to
the society of glorious Angels, but of afflicting Devils: not to the Church of
the first borne, but to the assembly of abortiue reprobates: we had no
reference to God as a kind Father, but as a severe Judge: not to just spirits
made perfect from sin, but to lost spirits made perfect in sin. Thus were
we by nature, but Jesus has brought us to Mount Sion, etc. How blessed a
thing will it be to come unto this Jesus! It was Saint Augustines special
wish, to have seen Christ in the flesh. If there were such comfort in seeing
Christ humbled, if such admiration in seeing him transfigured, what joy is it
to behold him in heaven glorified! How glorious a matter do some think it to
stand in the Court of an earthly Prince, to receive a gracious look, to hear
a royal word, or to be commanded some honorable service! what is it then to
stand in the Court of heaven, to have the King of Kings speak peaceably to us,
to behold our Lord Jesus crowned with that immortal Diadem, to sing his
praises as free from flattery, as from inconstancy, and to live in that
Paradise for ever! Vbicunque fueris Domine Jesus: wheresoever thou art O blessed
Savior, give us no more happiness then to be with thee. If thou be in the
earth, we will travel day and night to come to thee; if on the sea, with
Peter we will swim to thee: if on the Cross, we will stand weeping by thee:
if riding in triumph, we will sing Hosanna to thee: if transfigured on Tabor,
we will be ravished with thee: but if sitting in thy heavenly Throne, how
blessed even to look upon thee! It is his John 17. 24.
will, that we should be with him where he is, and behold his glory. We are
now come to him by a conjunction mystical, we shall then have a vicinity
local, and eternal.

The Mediator, not a Mediator, but The, That Mediator, that only one. 1. Tim.
2. 5.
For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus. God was angry, man was guilty, Christ is the Mediator betwixt them: who
being God, could satisfy God, and being man, could suffer for man. We are
lost, and desire something to recover us: what shall that be? Mercy? No, God is
just: he that has offended must be punished. Shall it be Justice? No, we have
need of mercy: that he who has offended might be spared. Here, to be so
merciful as not to wrong his justice, to be so just as not to forget his mercy;
there must be a Mediator. This must not be the world, that was Gods own
before, he made it: not Angels, for they are engaged for their own creation;
and being finite, cannot satisfy an infinite Majesty by infinite punishment
for infinite sins.

Gods Son must do it: now if he come to satisfy for pride, he must put on
humility: if for rebellion, he must put on obedience: if for stubbornness, he
must put on patience: he must serve if he will deserve: this God alone cannot
do: if to die, he must be mortal, this only God cannot be. Therefore this
Mediator is made man, to be himself bound; as he is GOD to free others that
are bound. Man to become weak, God to vanquish. Man to die, God to triumph
over death. This is that sacred Ladder, whose top in heaven reaching to the
bosom of God, expresses his Divinity: and his foot on earth close to Jacobs
loins, witnesses his Humanity. We are bankrout debtors, God is a sure
Creditor, Christ sets all on his score. We are ignorant Clients, God is a
skillful Judge, Christ is our Advocate to plead our cause for us. God is a just
Master, we are unfaithful, unfruitful, unprofitable servants, this Mediator
takes up the matter between us.

Of the new Covenant. For Moses may seem to be a Mediator of the Old Covenant.
Deuteronomy. 5. 5.
I stood between the Lord and you at that time, to show you the Word of the
Lord. This Mediatorship of the New covenant is a high office, competible to
none but the Lord Jesus. Who should appear between a just God, and sinful
men; but he that is mortal with men, and just with God? It is a Covenant, for
there is something agreed on both sides: we covenant to believe, and God to
forgive. A New covenant; there was cold comfort for us in the old. A man
reading, Fac hoc et vines, Do this and thou shall live: thinks of it as if he
were bidden to catch a star from the firmament, and take it for his labor.
But in the New, Creed et vine; believe and live for ever. The condition on man's
part is believing, the covenant on Gods part is Saving. Now, though it be true,
that it is as easy for man of himself to fulfill the Law, as it is to believe
the Gospel, yet the New covenant, Dat credere, gives a man power to believe:
for faith is the fair gift of God. Praecipit non adiuvat Lex, offert et affert
Euangelium. The Law gives commandment, but not amendment: the Gospel brings
salvation to our hearts, and our hearts to salvation. As it charge us, so it
aydeth us. As this Mediator gives Fidem quam credimus, the faith which we
believe, mercy and remission: so also Fidem qua credimus, the faith whereby we
believe, grace to apprehend this mercy. Heb. 8. 6.
Christ has obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the
Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better promises.

Briefly here consider the excellency of this New and Evangelical Covenant,
above the Old and Legal. In the beginning God made man righteous: for he
created him Gene. 1. 27.
in his own Image, which the Apostle says Ephe. 4. 24.
consisted in righteousness and the holiness of truth. But man soon defaced
this goodly and godly picture. Eccl. 7. 29.
This I have found, that God made man righteous, but he sought out many
inventions; waves to make himself wicked and wretched. Hence it followed that
our restitution was a greater work then our constitution. The house was with
more ease built up new, then repaired being old and ruinous. That was done per
verbum enuntiatum, this per verbum annuntiatum. There he spoke the word, and
all things were created: here the John 1. 14.
Word was made flesh: Fecit mira, tulit dira: passus dura verba, duriora
verbera. There it was done by saying, Dic verbum tantum: here by doing, yea by
dying: suffering grievous words, more grievous wounds: Factus in terris,
fractus in terris. There all begun in Adam, who was Terrae filius, a son of
the earth: here all in Christ, who is Coeli Dominus, the Lord of Heaven.
Spiritual life is better then natural, firmer, surer. There man had only a
power to stand, but with it a power to fall, according to his own pleasure:
here he has a certainty of inseparable conjunction to Christ. He so stands
as never to fall, so lives as never to die, so is loved as never to be hated.
There Adam and Eve were married to propagate filios carnis, children of the
flesh: here Christ is married to his Church, to beget filios spirituales,
children in the Spirit: and that with a bond never to be divorced. Thus at
first God commanded that to exist, which was not before: now he makes one
contrary to be changed into another: flesh into spirit, darkness into light,
corruption into holiness: greater miracles, then changing stones into bread;
Dignus vindice nodus, a knot worthy the finger of God to untie. Here is the
wonderful work of the New Covenant: we were made Ex spirituoris, redeemed ex
sanguine cordis: created by the breath of Gods mouth, but saved by the blood of
his heart. Therefore not six Cherubims as in the vision of Esaias, nor four and
twenty Elders, as in the Revelation of John; but a royal Army of heavenly
soldiers were heard praising GOD at the birth of Jesus Christ.

In sum, there is but one Mediator of the New Covenant: neither Saint nor
Angel has any part in this dignity. Melancth. Idem est multos Deos fingere, ac
sanctos mortuos inuocare: to worship old Saints, is to make new Gods. He that
shall pray to dead men, dishonours the living Mediator. Saint Paul says
expressly, 1. Tim. 2. 5.
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.
Whence it is manifest, that it is the same blasphemous presumption to make more
Mediators then one, that to make more Gods then one. Here the Romanists
distinguish; Christ is the sole Mediator of Redemption, not of Intercession.
Opus est mediatore ad mediatore Christum. We must have a Mediator of
intercession to this Mediator of redemption. A blind answer: for Paul directly
there speaks of prayers and Intercession. ver. 1. etc. But say they, Our
prayers are to be made to God alone, tanquam per cum implenda; because our
desires are fulfilled only by him: but unto the Saints, tanquam per eos
impetranda; because they are obtained by them. As if Christ were so busy that
he could not tend to hear us: or so stately, that he would not bend to
hear us: or so unjust, as to deny his own Venite, and not to perform his
promise; Mat. 11. 28.
Come unto me all that labor.

We oppose against them that comfortable saying of S. John. 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, the
righteous. They answer, Indeed Christ is our chief Advocate, Saints and
Angels secondary or subordinate Advocates. But the word Advocate is borrowed of
the Lawyers, and signifies him only that does plead the justice of his clients
cause. A stranger in the court may become a petitioner to the Judge, and
entreat favor for the person guilty: but Advocates are Patrons and Proctors of
their Clients. Angels in heaven, and Saints on earth, are suitors in our
behalf to God: but Christ alone is our Advocate. And upon good cause, for who
but he can so well plead his own righteousness whereby he has justified us?
Therefore the Apostle calls him there our Propitiation: he that will be our
Advocate, must also be our Propitiation: no Saints or Angels can be a
Propitiation for us; therefore no Saints or Angels can be our Advocates.
Augustine says, that if S. John had offered himself to this office, he had
not been Apostolus, sed Antichristus.

We object further Christ's promise. John 16. 23.
Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. Not in
Mary's, or Peter's, but in my Name. Bellarmine answers, that there may be a
Mediator between disagreeing parties three ways. 1. By declaring who has the
wrong: and so there is no controversy; for all agree that GOD is the party
grieved. 2. By paying the Creditor for the Debtor; so Christ is alone Mediator.
3. By desiring the Creditor to forgive the Debtor; and in this sense, he says
Angels and Saints are Mediators. But this distinction is no other then
Bellarmines mincing; who indeed seems to be ashamed of the blasphemous phrases
in their Missals. As Maria matter gratiae: Sancte Petre miserere mei, salua me,
etc. These, says he, are our words, but not our meanings; that Mary or Peter
should confer grace on us in this life, or glory in the life to come. Yet
both their School and Practice speaks more. For Aquin says, our prayers are
effectual by the merits of Saints; and that Christ's intercession is gotten by
the patronage of Apostles, by the interuention of Martyrs, by the blood of
Becket, and merits of all Saints. And the practice of the people, is to hold
Angels and Saints immediate Mediators, able to satisfy and save. But as one
has well observed; if every Saint in the Popes Calender be received as a
Mediator, we shall worship unknown men, as the Athenians did unknown gods. For
the best Papists doubt whether there were ever any S. George, or S. Christopher.

But say they, The Virgin is a known Saint: she can and may by the right of a
Mother command her Son Bon^.
Christ. Their whole Church sings, O foelix puerpera, nostra p^ans scelera,
inre matris impera. And Maria consolatio infirmorum, redemptio captiuorum,
liberatio damnatorum, salus uniuersorum. They have given so much to the Mother,
that they have left nothing for the Son. Ozorius the Jesuit says, Caput
gratiae Christus, Maria collu^: Christ is the Head of grace, but Mary is the
Neck: no grace can come from the head, but it must pass through the neck.
They invoke her their Advocate: but of Christ's mediation the medium or better
half is taken from him: as if he were still a child, in subjection to his
Mother. But as he is Mariae filius, so he is Mariae Dominus: the Son and the
Lord of his Mother. Therefore the first words that we read Christ ever spoke to
his Parents, were rough, and by way of reproof. According to Saint Luke, these
were his first: Luke 2. 49.
How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers
business? According to Saint John more sharply, John 2. 4.
Woman, what have I to do with thee? Quanquam locuta est iure matris, tamen
duriter respondet. Where was then their Monstra te esse Matrem? Though at the
command of his Mother he spoke, yet he spoke roughly. Whereas Gods kingdom
consists of his Justice and Mercy; the Papists attribute the greatest part,
which is his Mercy, to Mary: making her, as one noted, the Lady high
Chancelour, and Christ as it were the Lord chief Justice. As we appeal from
the King's Bench bar to the Chancerie, so a Papist may appeal from the
Tribunal of God to the Court of our Lady. So they make her Domina fac totum:
when one flatteringly wrote of Pope Adrian; Traiectum plantauit, Louanium
rigauit, Caesar autem incrementum dedit. Traiectum planted, Louaine watered,
but the Pope gave the increase: one wittily vnderwrites; Deus interim nihil
fecit; God did nothing the while. So if Mary be the comfort of the weak, the
redeemer of captives, the deliverer of the damned, the salvation of all, the
Advocate of the poor, the Patroness of the rich; then sure Christ has
nothing to do. No beloved; Abraham is ignorant of us, the blessed Virgin
knows us not; but the Lord Jesus is our Redeemer. Prayer is not a labor of
the lips only, but an inward groaning of the spirit, a pouring out of the
soul before God. Now Saints and Angels understand not the heart: it is Psalm
7. 9.
the righteous God that tries the heart and the reins. Christ is the master
of all Requests in the Court of Heaven, there needs no porter nor waiter. It is
but praying, Lord Jesus come unto me: and he presently answers, I am with
thee. Hear me O Christ, for it is easy to thy power, and usual to thy
mercy, and agreeable to thy promise. O blessed Mediator of the new Covenant,
hear us.

To the blood of sprinkling. Aspersionis, Hebraico more pro asperso. Two things
are employed in the two words; Sacrificium and Beneficium. Blood, there is the
sacrifice of Sprinkling, there is the benefit.

To the blood. To speak properly, it is the death of Christ that satisfies the
Justice of God for our sins: and that is the true material cause of our
redemption. Yet is this frequently ascribed to his blood. Hebr. 9. 14.
The blood of Christ purges the Conscience from dead works. Ioh. 19. 34.
Out of his pierced side came forth blood and water. As God wrote nothing in
vain, so what he has often repeated, he would have seriously considered. Non
leuiter praetereat lectura nostra, quod tam frequenter insculpsit Scriptura
sacra. There are some reasons why our salvation is ascribed to CHRIST'S blood.

1. Because in the blood is the life. Genesis 9. 4.
Flesh with the blood thereof, which is the life thereof, you shall not eat. Leu.
17. 14. The soul of a beast is in the blood, and in the blood is the life of
every reasonable creature on earth. The effusion thereof does exhaust the
vital spirits, and death follows. In Christ's blood was his life; the shedding
of that was his death: that death by the loss of that blood is our redemption.

2. Because this blood answers to the types of the legal sacrifices. This our
Apostle exemplifies in a large conference. Heb. 9. 18. etc
The first Testament was not dedicated without blood. Moses sprinkling the
book and all the people, said, This is the blood of the Testament. Almost all
things are by the Law purged by blood, and without shedding of blood is no
remission. No reconciliation, no remission without blood. All directed us to
this Lamb of GOD, whose blood only vindicates us from eternal condemnation.
Not that the blood of a mere man could thus merit; but of that man who is
also God: therefore it is called the Acts 20. 28.
Blood of God.

3. Because blood is fitter for applyment to the heart of man; who is so weak
in apprehension that GOD is feign to lead him as it were by the senses? Not
that there is a necessary receiving of Christ's material blood by every one
that shall be saved: so it might sprinkle upon the soldiers that crucified
him, who yet might go to hell. But it is received Mentaliter and
Sacramentaliter; there is a mental and a sacramental application. Thus we
are said to drink his blood, that receive it spiritually by faith. The Papists
in their opinion are fed orally with the very material blood of Christ: but
then surely none of them can go to hell; for he that eats the flesh, and
drinks the blood John 6.
of the Son of Man, has eternal life. But now the Priests, for fear belike
lest too many of the people should be saved, and so Purgatory the Popedomes
pillar be quite overthrown, have taken away the Cup from them; and turned
Christ's Bibite omnes into Bibite non omnes; Drink ye all, into drink ye only
Priests, not the rest. When they had given this blood so high an honor, they
thought it too good for the common sort. First they said, it is really in the
Cup; there they gave it too much: then they took it from the people, there
they gave them too little. First they strained it, and then they restrained it.
But they answer, the people have this blood in the bread; for that is flesh,
and can there be flesh without blood? If so, why then do themselves take the
Cup? Either it is necessary for the people, or superfluous for the Priests.
Unless they value a Clergy man's soul at a higher rate then a Laymans: as if
Christ's blood were not shed for the one, so well as for the other.

But to let go their sacrilegious absurdities, let us content our selves
spiritually to receive this blood, shed for us, and communicated to us. This
blood is ready for application, if our hearts be ready for apprehension. To us
it is, though not elementally, yet alimentally profitable. There is a blood
that nourishes, as the Pelican her young ones with her own blood; Christ so
feeds our souls to salvation with this blood. There is a blood that
mollifies; as the warm blood of a goat softens the Adamant: we have obdurate
hearts if Christ's blood cannot melt them. There is a blood that purges as the
Kids; so the 1. John. 1. 7.
blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. There is a blood that colors, as
the Deeres; so does Christ's blood give a pure color to his Church; Thou art
all fair my love. Reu. 7. 14.
These are they which have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood
of the Lamb. This blood is Semen vitae, substantia gratiae, fundamentum
iustitiae, aedificium meriti, magna charta coeli. A flux of blood in the head
is stanched by opening a vein in the foot: but here to save all the members
from bleeding to death, blood must be drawn from the Head. As Eve came out of
Adams side sleeping, so the Church is taken out of Christ's side bleeding. Thus
God disposed it in mercy; Ut effundatur sanguis Christi, ne confundatur anima
Christiani: that Christ's blood should be spilt, to save our souls from
spilling.

Of Aspersion; in relation to the typical manner. Exodus 24. 8.
Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people. To this alludes Paul
here; and Peter calling it 1. Pet. 1. 2.
the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. In the Passover the doors were
sprinkled with the blood of the Paschall Lamb; and the destroying Angel
passed over them. All those whom the eternal judgment shall pass over, must
have their hearts thus sprinkled. We have many spots, had need of many drops.
For a spot of avarice a drop of this blood: for a spot of lust a drop of blood:
for a spot of drunkenness a drop of blood: for a spot of oppression a great
drop of blood: for the wounds and gashes of oaths, execrations, blasphemies,
many drops of blood to stanch them. Yea we are not only sinners, but says
Micah, Sins: therefore must be sows'd and drenched in this blood, that we
may be be clean.

That speaks better things then that of Abel. This is a Metaphor, to show the
force of Christ's blood, so prevailing with God as if it had a tongue. The
comparison is between Abels blood and Christ's: now Abels is said to cry; Genesis
4. 10.
The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the ground. Clamitat in
coelum vox sanguinis. So Christ's blood is said to speak; Quot vulnera, tot
voces; so many wounds, so many words.

There is great respondence of Christ to Abel. Abel was slain by his brother,
Christ by his brethren; the voice of the Jews was Crucify him. Abel was
slain because he sacrificed; Christ was slain that he might be sacrificed.
Cain envied Abel because he was accepted; the Jews hated Christ because he
was good. Abel might say to his brother; For my sacrifice do thou kill me?
Christ did say to the Jews; For which of my good works do you stone me?
Abel was so slain, that his blood was abundantly shed, and that in many
places; for it is said Vox sanguinum; the voice of bloods. So Christ's blood was
let out with thorns, scourges, nails, spear. As Cain sustained a threefold
punishment; he was cursed in his soul, a vagabond on earth, unprosperous in
his labors. So are the Jews plagued; they have no place they can call their
own; when they have heaped up riches, some other takes them away; they cannot
see their own City but they must pay for it; they are cursed in their
obstinate blindness: thus according to their own request, the blood of Christ
is upon them and upon their children.

But now Christ's blood speaks better things: Abels cried vindictam, Christ's
speaks misericordiam. That, Lord see and revenge; this, Father, forgive them,
they know not what they do. God has an ear of mercy, so well as of Justice.
If he heard that blood speaking for confusion, then he will hear this speak
for remission. If he heard the Servant, he will much rather hear the Son:
if he heard the servant for spilling, he will much more hear the Son for
saving. Postula a me, says God to his Son: Psalm. 2. 8.
Ask of me, and I will give thee: the Father will deny the Son nothing. Thus
has he saved us Prece and Pretio, by his blood, and that a speaking blood: if
that blood speak for our safety, nothing shall confound us. Now the blood of
this Mediator our Lord Jesus speak for us to the Father of mercy, that the
Holy Ghost may seal us up to eternal redemption. To whom, three persons, one
blessed God, be praise for ever.

Amen.
THE WORLDS GREAT RIDERS: OR, The rage of Oppression.
PSALM. 66. 12. Thou have caused men to ride over our heads: we went through
fire and through water: but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.
THIS verse is like that Sea, Math. 8. 24. So tempestuous at first, that the
vessel was covered with waves: but Christ's rebuke quieted all, and there
followed a great calm. Here are cruel Nimrods riding over innocent heads, as
they would over fallow lands; and dangerous passages through fire and water:
but the storm is soon ended, or rather the passengers are landed. Thou
broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

So that this strain of David's music or Psalmodie consists of two notes; one
mournful, the other mirthfull: the one a touch of distress, the other of
redress: which directs our course to an observation of Mise^e, Mercy; of
grievous misery, of gracious Mercy. There is desolation, and Consolation in one
verse: a deep deiection, as laid under the feet of beasts; a high erection,
brought out into a wealthy place.

In both these strains God has his stroke: he is a principal in this
Consort. He is brought in for an Actor, Author; an Actor in the Persecution, an
Author in the deliverance. Thou causest, etc. Thou broughtest etc. In the one
he is a causing worker, in the other a sole-working cause. In the one he is
joined with company, in the other he works alone. He has a finger in the
former; his whole hand in the latter.

We must begin with the Misery, before we come to the Mercy. If there were
no trouble, we should not know the worth of a deliverance. The passion of the
Saints is given by the hearty and ponderous description, for very grievous: yet
it is written in the forehead of the Text, The Lord caused it. Thou causedst
men to ride, etc.

Hereupon some wicked Libertine may offer to rub his filthiness upon Gods
purity; and to plead an authentical deriuation of all his villainy against the
Saints from the Lords warrant: He caused it. We answer to the justification
of Truth it self, that God does ordain and order every persecution, that
strikes his children; without any allowance to the instrument that gives the
blow. God works in the same action with others, not after the same manner. In
the affliction of Job were three Agents: God, Satan, and the Sabeans. The
Devil works on his body, the Sabeans on his goods: yet Job confesses a third
party. The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away. Here Oppressors trample on the
godly, and God is said to cause it. He causes affliction for trial: (so ver.
10. and 11. Thou have tried us, etc.) they work it for malice: neither can
God be accused, nor they excused.

In a sinful action there be two things: the Material, and the Formal part:
which we commonly distinguish into the act and defect. The Material part is of
GOD; from whom is all Motion: the Formal is from the prauitie of the agent.
Persecutors could not accuse us maliciously, if GOD gave not motion to their
tongues; nor strike us wrongfully, if he denied strength to their hands.
Thought, sight, desire, speech, strength, motion are Gods good gifts: to turn
all these to his dishonor, is the wicked persons fault.

God has another intent, then man has, even in man's work. The Chaldeans
steal Jobs wealth, to enrich themselves: the Devil afflicts his body, in his
hatred to mankind: God suffers all this for the trial of his patience. Man for
covetousness, the devil for malice, God for probation of the afflicted's
constancy, and advancing his own glory. In the giving of Christ to death, as
Augustine observes; the Father gave the Son, the Son gave Epist. 48.
himself, Judas betrayed him, and the Jews crucified him. In one and the same
tradition, God is to be blessed, and man condemned. Quia in re vna quam
fecerunt, causa non vna ob quam fecerunt. Because in that same thing they all
did, there was not the same cause why they all did it. Gods end was love,
Judas his avarice, the Jews malice.

The covetous Extortioner takes away the goods of his neighbor; that robber
spoyleth. He could have no tongue to plead, nor wit to circumuent, nor hands to
carry away, without God: from him he has those creatures, that notion and
motion. But to pervert all these to damnifie others, and to damn himself,
arises from his own auarous and rancorous prauity. His intent is wicked; yet
not without Gods wisdom to raise profit from it. Perhaps the oppressed had too
good a liking to the World, and began to admit a little confidence in their
wealth: the Lord has benefited them, in taking away these snares, to save
their souls.

Yet without toleration, countenance, or help to the wicked. The Usurer has
done thee good: by making thee poor in purse, helped thee to the riches of
grace; yet he goes to hell for his labor. They that do GOD service against
their wills, shall have but shrewd wages. It cannot be denied, but the devil
did God service; in trying Job, winnowing Peter, buffetting Paul, executing
Judas: yet shall not all this ease the least torment of his damnation. For
trial here, are these oppressors suffered to ride over the godly's heads, and
to drive them through fire and water: when these have like furnaces, purged
them from dross and corruption, themselves shall be burnt. For it is usual
with God, when he has done beating his children, to throw the rod into the
fire. Babylon a long time shall be the Lords Hammer to bruise the Nations, at
last it self shall be bruised. Judas did an act, that redounds to Gods eternal
honor, and our blessed salvation, yet was his wages the gallhouse. All these
hammers, axes, rods, sawes, swords, instruments, when they have done those
offices they never meant, shall for those they have meant, be thrown to
confusion.

I will now leave Gods justice to himself; and come to the injustice of these
Oppressors, and the passion of the sufferers. And because the quality of these
latter shall add some aggrauation to the cruel malice of the former; I will
first set before your eyes the Martyrs. The Psalm being written by David, and
the suffrers spoken of in the first person plural; We, Us, and Our: it
follows, that it was both David, and such as David was; beloved of God, holy,
Saints.

And whom does the world think to ride over, but Saints? Psalm. 44. 22. Who
should be appointed to the slaughter, but Sheep? The Wolf will not prey on
the Fox, he is too crafty: nor on the Elephant, he is too mighty: nor on a dog,
he is too equal: but on the silly Lamb, that can neither run to escape, nor
fight to conquer. They write of a Bird, that is the Crocodiles toothpicker, and
feeds on the fragments left in his teeth whiles the serpent lies a sunning:
which when the unthankful Crocodile would devour, God has set so sharp a
prick on the top of the Birds head, that he dares not shut his jaws till it be
gone. And they speak of a little Fish, that goes bristling by the Pike, or any
other ravenous water-creature, and they dare not for his pricks and thorns,
touch him. Those whom Nature or Art, strength or slight, have made inexposable
to easy ruin, may pass vnmolested. The wicked will not grapple upon equal
terms: they must have either local or ceremonial advantage. But the godly
are weak and poor; and it is not hard to prey upon prostrate fortunes. A low
hedge is soon trodden down; and over a wretch dejected on the base earth, an
insulting enemy may easily stride. Whiles David is down, (or rather in him
figured the Church) the plowers may plow upon Psalm. 129. 3.
his back, and make long their furrows.

But what if they ride over our heads, and wound our flesh, let them not wound
our patience. Though we seal the bond of conscience with the blood of
innocence; though we lose our lives, let us not lose our patience. Lactantius
De falsa Sapient. lib. 4.
says of the Philosophers, that they had a sword, and wanted a buckler: but a
buckler does better become a Christian, then a sword. Let us know, Non nunc
honoris nostri tempus esse; sed doloris, sed passionis; that this is not the
time of our joy and honor, but of our passion and sorrow. Therefore, let us with
patience run the race, etc. Heb. 12. 2.


But leave we our selves thus suffering; and come to speak of that we must be
content to feel, the oppression of our enemies. Wherein we will consider the
Agents, Actions.



The Agents
Are Men. Thou have caused men to ride, etc. Man is a sociable living creature,
and should converse with man in love and tranquillity. Man should be a
supporter of man, is he become an ouerthrower? He should help and keep him up,
does he ride over him, and tread him under foot? O Apostacy, not only from
divinity, but even from humanity. Quid homini inimicissimum? Homo. The
greatest Sen.
danger that befalls man, comes whence it should least come; from man himself.
Caetera animantia, says Pliny, in suo genere, probe degunt, etc. Lions fight
not with Lions: Serpents spend not their venims on serpents: but Man is the
maine suborner of mischief to his own kind.

It is reported of the Bees, that ^grotante vna, lament^ntur omnes: when one is
sick, they all mourn. And of Sheep, that if one of them be faint, the rest
of the flock will stand between it and the Sun, till it be revived, only
man to man is most pernicious. We know that a bird, yea a bird of rapine,
once fed a man in the Wilderness: 1. King. 17. 6. Dan. 6. 22.
that a beast, yea a beast of fierce cruelty, spared a man in his den.
Whereupon says a learned Father, Ferae parcunt, aues pascunt, hommes saeuiunt.
The birds feed Cypr. Ser. 6.
man, and the beasts spare him; but man rages against him. Wherefore, I may
well conclude with Solomon, Prou. 17. Let a Bearerobbed of her whelps meet a
man, rather Prou. 17. 12.
then a fool in his folly.

God has hewne us all out of one rock, temperd all our bodies of one clay, and
spirited our souls of one breath. Therefore says Augustine, Since we proceed
all out of one stock, let us all be of one mind. Beasts molest not their own
kind; and birds of a feather fly lovingly together. Not only the blessed
Angels of heaven agree in a mutual harmony; but even the very devils of hell
are not divided, lest they ruin their kingdom. We have one greater reason of
unity and love observed, then all the rest. For whereas God made not all
Angels of one Angel: nor all beasts of the great Behemoth: nor all fishes of
the huge Leuiathan: nor all birds of the maiesticall Eagle: yet he made all
men of one Man. Let us then not jar in the dispensation of our minds, that
so agree in the composition of our natures. You see how inhumane and unnatural
it is, for man to wrong man; of his own kind, and as it were, of his own
kin. Thus for the Agents.

The Action
Is amplified in diverse circumstances; climbing up by rough stairs to a high
transcendency of Oppression. It arises thus; In Riding. Riding over us. Riding
over our Heads. Driving us through fire and water.



1. They ride. What need they mount themselves upon beasts, that have feet
malicious enough to trample on us? They have a Foot of Pride, Psalm. 36. from
which Psalm. 36. 11.
David prayed to be delivered. A presumptuous heel, which they dare lift up
against God; and therefore a tyrannous toe, to spurn dejected man. They need
not horses and mules, that can kick with the foot of a reuengefull Psalm. 32.
9.
malice.

2. Over us. The way is broad enough wherein they travel, for it is the Devils
road; they might well miss the poor: there is room enough besides, they
need not ride Over us. It were more brave for them to iustle with champions,
that will not give them the way: we never contend for their path: they have it
without our envy, not without our pity: why should they ride Over us?

3. Over our heads. Is it not contentment enough to their pride to ride? to
their malice, to ride over us? but must they delight in bloudinesse, to ride
over our heads? will not the breaking of our arms and legs, and such
inferior limbs, satisfy their indignation? Is it not enough to wrack our
strength, to mock our innocence, to prey on our estates; but must they thirst
after our bloods and lives? Quo tendit saua libido? whither will their madness
run?

But we must not tie our selves to the latter. Here is a mystical or
metaphorical gradation of their cruelty.

Their Riding Over us Over our heads is Proud Malicious Bloody Oppression.

They Ride.
This phrase describes a vice compounded of two damnable ingredients; Pride,
and Tyranny. It was a part of Gods fearful curse to rebellious recidiuation,
Deuteronomy. 28. that their enemies should ride and triumph over them; and they should
come down very low, under their feet. It is delivered for a notorious mark of
the great Whore of Revel. 17. 4.
Babylons pride, that she rides upon a scarlet-colou'rd Beast. Saint Paul
seems to apply the same word to oppression. 1. These. 4. That no man oppress
his brother. The original 1. These. 4. 6.
(...); to go upon him, climb on him, or tread him under foot.

O blasphemous height of villainy; not only by false slanders to betray a man's
innocence, nor to lay violent hands upon his estate; but to trip up his heels
with frauds, or to lay him along with injuries, and then to trample on him! And
because the foot of man, for that should be soft and favoring, cannot
dispatch him, to mount upon beasts, wild and fauage affections, and to ride
upon him.

Over us.
This argues their malice. It were a token of wilful spite for a horseman, in
a great rode, to refuse all way, and to ride over a poor traveler. Such is
the implacable malice of these persecutors. Esa. 59. Wasting and destruction
Esa. 59. 7.
are in their paths: yea, wasting and destruction are their paths. They have
fierce looks, and truculent hearts: their very breath is ruin, and every
print of their foot vastation. They neither reverence the aged, nor pity the
sucking infant: Virgins cannot avoid their rapes, nor women with child their
massacres. They go, they run, thy stride, they ride over us.

The language of their lips, is that which Babylon spoke concerning
Jerusalem: Down with it, down with it, Psalm. 137. 7.
even to the ground. Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.
Desolation sits in their eyes, and shootes out through those fiery windows,
the burning glances of waste, havoc, ruin: till they turn a land into
solitude; into a Desert, and habitation for their fellow-beasts, and their
worse selves. O unmerciful men! that should be to men kind as God; but are
more ragingly noxious then wolves. They have lost the nature, let them also
lose the name of men.

Uix repperit vnum,
Talibus e multis, hominem consultus Apollo. But it is ever true: Optimi
corruption pessima. The fairest flowers putrified, stink worse then weeds:
even an Angel falling became a Devil: and man debauched, strives to come as
near this Devil as he can. They should put their hands under our falling
heads, and lift us up: but they kick us down, and ride over us.

Over our heads.
This notes their bloudinesse, vnpacifiable but by our slaughters. The
pressing, racking, or breaking of our inferior limbs contents not their
malice: they must wound the most sensible and vital part, our heads. The Lord
be blessed, that has now freed us from these bloody ridings; and sent us
peace with Truth. Yet can we not be forgetful of the past calamities in this
Land; nor insensible of the present in other places. The time was when the
Bonners and butchers rode over the faces of Gods Saints, and madefied the earth
with their bloods; every drop whereof begot a new believer. When they martyred
the living with the dead; burnt the impotent wife with the husband; who is
content to die with him, with whom she may not live; yea, rejoicing to go
together to their Savior. When they threw the newborn (yea scarce-borne)
infant, dropping out of the mothers belly, into the mothers flames: whom, if
they had been Christians, they would first have Christened, if not cherished.
This was a fiery zeal indeed; set on flame with the fire of hell. They love
fire still: they were then for fagots, they are now for powder. If these be
Catholics, there are no Canibals. They were then mounted on horses of
authority, now they ride on the wings of policy.

Our comfort is, that though all these, whether persecutors of our faith, or
oppressors of our life, ride over our particular heads, yet we have all one
Head, whom they cannot touch. They may massacre this corporal life, and spoil
the local seat of it, whether in head or heart: but our spiritual life,
which lies and lives in our Head Jesus Christ, they cannot reach. No hellish
stratagems, nor combined outrages; no humane powers, nor devilish
principalities can touch that life: for it is Colos. 3. 3.
hid with Christ in God.

Indeed this Head does not only take their blows, as meant at him; but he
even suffers with us. Acts 9. 4.
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Saul strikes on earth, Christ Jesus suffers in
heaven. There is more lively sense in the Head, then in other members of the
body. Let but the toe ache, and the head manifests by the countenance a sensible
grief. The body of the Church cannot suffer, without the sense of our blessed
Head. Thus says Paul, 2. Cor. 1. 5.
The sufferings of Christ abound in us. These afflictions are the showers that
follow the great storm of his passion. Colos. 1. 24.
We fill up that which is behind, of the affliction of Christ in our flesh.
We must be content for him, as he was for us, to weep, and groan, and bleed,
and dye, that we may reign. If we Psalm. 126. 5.
sow not in tears, how shall we look to reap in joy? how shall we shine like
stars in heaven, if we go not through this fiery trial? or land at the
haven of bliss, if we pass not the waves of this troublesome water?

You see the Riders: but you will say, What is this to us? we have no such
riders. Yes, many; too many; even so many as we have Oppressors, either by
tongue or hand. Shall I name some of them?

The malicious slanderer is a perilous Rider; and he rides like death upon a
Revel. 6. 8.
pale horse, Envy. Thus were the Pharisees mounted, when they rode over Christ,
even the Head of our heads. If Jesus will not be a Pharise, they will nail him
to the Cross. These venomous Cantharides light upon Gods fairest flowers: and
strive, either to blast them with their contumelious breaths, or to tread them
under their malicious feet.

The griping Usurer is a pestilent Rider; and he is mounted on a heavy Jade,
Mammon or love of money. Every step of this beast wounds to the heart, and
quasheth out the life-bloud. O that this sordid beast of usury, with all his
ponderous and unwieldy trappings; bills, obligations, pawnes, morgages, were
thrown into a fire temporal; that the riders converted soul might be saved
from the fire eternal. If any Alcibiades had authority and will, to kindle
such a fire in England as was once at Athens, I believe that no tears would be
shed to quench it: but the music of our peace would sound merrily to it: and
the rather, because there would be no more groans to mollify it.

The destructive depopulator is another pestiferous Rider. He is a light
Horseman; he can leap hedges and ditches, and therefore makes them in the
midst of plain fields. He loves to ride in his own ground; and for this
purpose expels all neighbors. Though Solomon says, that the King is served
by the field that is tilled: ye he, as if he were wiser then Solomon,
promises to serve him better Eccl. 5. 9.
with grass. He posteth after the poor, and hunts them out of his Lordship.
He rides from town to town, from village to village, from land to land, from
house to house; a doloso fur to ad publicum latrocinium, and never rests till
he has rid to the Devil.

And there is a fourth Rider gallops after him amain, as if he had sworn not
to be hindmost, the oppressing Landlord: and he rides upon a horse that has
no pace but racking; for that is the Masters delight, racking of rents: and he
has two Lacquays or Pages run by him, Fines, and Carriages. Thus ascended, and
attended, twice a year at least, he rides over the heads and hearts of the
poor Tenants: that they can no more grow in wealth, then corn can that is
scattered in the high way: for they as that, are continually ouer-ridden by
their merciless Landlords. Let these riders take heed, lest the curses of the
poor stumble their horses, and break their necks.

The churlish Cormorant is a mischicuous Rider: he sits on a black Jade,
Covetousness; and rides only from market to market, to buy up grain, when
he has store to sell: and so hatcheth up dearth in a year of plenty. Our Land
is too full of these riders: they repine and complain of the unseasonableness
of the weather, of the barrenness of the earth: but they conceal the true
cause, whereof their own souls are conscious, their uncharitableness. The
earth has never been so frozen as their consciences: nor is the ground so
fruitless of plenty, as they of pity. This is not mala terra, bona gens; but
mala gens, bona terra: we have bad minds, good materials. The earth has not
scanted her fruits, but our concealings have been close, our enhancings
ravenous, our transportations lavish. The Lord sends grain, and the devil
sends garners. The imprecations of the poor shall follow these ^iders, and the
ears of God shall attend their cries.

There is the proud Gallant, that comes forth like a May-morning, decked with
all the glory of Art; and his adorned Lady, in her own imagination a second
Flora: and these are Riders too, but closer riders: the world with them runs
upon wheels; and they hastening to overtake it, out-runne it. Their great
revenues will not hold out with the year: the furniture on their backs
exceedes their rent-day. Hence they are feign to wring the poor spundges of
the Country, to quench the burning heat of the City. Therefore say the
Contrymen, that their Carts are never worse employed, then when they do
service to Coaches.

There is the fraudulent Tradesman; that rides no further then between the
Bursse and the shop, on the back of a quick-spirited hobby called Cheating:
and whereas greatness presses the poor to death with their weight, this man
trips up their heels with his cunning. They have one God at the Church, another
at their shops: and they will fill their coffers, though they fester their
consciences. This Rider laughes men in the face, whiles he treads on their
hearts; his tongue knows no other pace, but a false gallop.

The bribe-groping Officer, in what Court soever his dition lies, is an
oppressing Rider: they that would have their suites granted, must subject their
necks to his feet, and let him ride over them. He confutes the old allegory of
Justice, that is usually drawn blind; for he will see to do a Petitioner ease
by the light of his angels. Nothing can unlock his lips but a golden key. This
Riders horse, like that proud Emperors, must be shod with silver: and the poor
man must buy of him, and that at a dear rate, his own treading on.

I come to him last, whom I have not least cause to think upon, the
Church-defrauder; that rides upon a vvinged horse, as if he would fly to the
devil, called Sacrilege. He may appear in the shape of a Protestant, but he
is the most absolute Recusant; for he refuses to pay God his own. He wears
the Name of Christ, for the same purpose the Papists wear the Cross; only
for a charm. These are the Merchants of souls, the Pirates of Gods Ship the
Church, the underminers of Religion; that are still practicing trains to blow
it up. They will not pay their Levites, their Levites must pay them. They will
not part with their Cures, whereof they have the donation, but upon purchase.
But it is no wonder if they sell the Cures, that have first sold their souls.
The charitable man dreams of building Churches, but starts to think that
these men will pull them down again.

There is yet one other Rid^r, though he spurs post, must not pass by me
vn-noted: the Truth-hating Jesuit, that comes trotting into England on a red
horse, like Murder; dyp't and died in the blood of souls; and if he can reach
it, in the blood of bodies too. Neither does he thirst so much after ordinary
blood, that runs in common veins, as after the bloud-Royall. There is no
discase, says one, that may so properly be called the Kingseuill. He is the
devils makebate, and his chief Officer to set Princes together by the ears.
He sittes like the Raven, on a dead bough; and when the Lion and Leopard come
forth to fight, he sounds out a point of wa^re; hoping which soever falls, his
carkase shall serve him for a prey to feed on. His maine study is to fill the
Schools with clamours, the Church with errors, the Churchyard with corpses,
and all Christan states with Tragedies. The Seminaries were once, like that
strange weed, Tobaccho at the first coming up; but here and there one
entertained in some Great man's house; now you may find them smoking in every
cottage. The have deseruingly increased the disgrace of that Religion: so that
now in the common censure, A Papist is but a new word for a Traitor. They
received their errand at Tyber, and they deliver it at Tyburne.

There are many other Riders, so properly ranking themselves in this number,
and assuming this name; which for modesties sake, I bury in silence.
Considering, that Quaedam vitia nominata d^centur: some sins are taught by
reproving their names.

But I perceive a prevention: I have not time enough to end our misery, much
less to enter the speech of our mercy. The journey they make us take through
fire and water, requires a more punctual tractation, then your patience will
now admit. Two short uses shall send away our Oppressors with fear; our selves
with joy.

1. For them; let all these tyrannous Riders know, that there is one rides
after them; a great one, a just one; even he that rides on the vvings of the
wind, and the clouds are the dust of his feet. He that has a bridle for
these Senacheribs, and strikes a s^affle through their jaws; and turns their
violence with more ease, then the wind does a fane on the housetop. Then a
horse shall be but a vain thing to save a man, says the Psalmist. Horse and
Master shall fall together.

Then the covetous Nimrod, that rode on the black beast Oppression, shall be
thundered down from his proud height; and the Jade that carried him shall dash
out his brains, and lie heavier then a thousand talents of lead on his
conscience. His oppression shall damn himself, as before it did damnifie
others. It was to them a momentany vexation, it shall be to him an eternal
pressure of torment.

Then the bloud-drawing Usurer, that rode so furiously on his Jade Extortion,
shall (if timely deprecation and restitution stay him not) run full butt
against the gates of hell, and break his neck. And he that at the bars of
temporal Judgments, cried out for nothing but Justice, Justice, and had it:
shall now cry louder for mercy, mercy, and go without it.

And let the Cormorant, that rides ever on the back of Engrossing, whose soul
is like Erisicthons bowels in the Poet, Quodque vrbibus esse,
Quodque satis poterat populo, non sufficit vni.
that starues men to feed vermin; know, that there is a Pursuiuant flies after
him; that shall give him an eternal arrest, and make him leave both Horreum
and hordeum, his barn and his barley; to go to a place, where is no food but
fire and anguish.

And the lofty Gallant, that rides over the poor with his Coaches and
Caroches, drawn by two wild horses, Pride and Luxury; let him take heed, lest
he meet with a wind that shall take off his Charriot-wheeles, as Pharaoh was
punished; and drown horses, and chariots, and Riders; Exodus 14.
not in the Red Sea; but in that infernal Lake, whence there is no redemption.

Let all these Riders beware, lest he that rides on the wings of vengeance,
with a sword drawn in his hand, that will eat flesh, and drink blood; that
will make such haste in the pursuit of his enemies, that he will not bait or
refresh himself by the way; lest this God before they have repented overtake
them. Psalm. 45. 4. 5.
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty; and in thy majesty ride
prosperously, etc. and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Then
shall the Psalm. 137. 7. 8.
Lord remember the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; and reward them,
as they served us. Lo now the end of these Riders: Psalm. 36. 11. Zach. 10. 5.
There are the workers of iniquity fallen: they are cast down, and shall not
be able to rise. Zach. 10. The riders on horses shall be confounded.

2. For us, though passion possess our bodies, let patience possess our
souls. The law of our Profession binds us to a warfare: patiendo vincimus our
troubles shall end, our victory is eternal. Hear David's triumph, Psalm 18. I
Psalm. 18. 38, 39, 40.
have wounded them that they were not able to rise: they are fallen under my
feet. Thou have subdued under me, those that rose up against me. Thou have
also given me the neck of mine enemies, etc. They have wounds for their
wounds: and the treaders down of the poor, are trodden down by the poor. The
Lord will subdue those to us, that would have subdued us to themselves: and
though for a short time they rode over our heads, yet now at last we shall
everlastingly tread upon their necks. Lo then the reward of humble patience,
and confident hope. Speramus et Superamus. Deuteronomy. 32. 31 Psalm. 20. 7.
Our God is not as their God, even our enemies being judges. Psalm. 20. Some
put their trust in Chariots, and some in horses. But no Chariot has strength
to oppose, nor horse swiftness to escape, when God pursues. They are brought
down, and fallen: we are risen, and stand upright. Verse. 8.
Their trust has deceived them; down they fall, and never to rise. Our God
has helped us; we are risen; not for a breathing space, but to stand upright
for ever.

Tentations, persecutions, oppressions, crosses, infamies, bondage, death; are
but the way wherein our blessed Savior went before us; and many Saints
followed him. Behold them with the eyes of faith, now mounted above the clouds,
trampling all the vanities of this world under their glorified feet; standing
on the battlements of heaven, and wafting us to them with the hands of
encouragement. They bid us fight, and we shall conquer; suffer, and we shall
reign. And as the Lord Jesus, that once suffered a reproachful death at the
hands of his enemies, now sits at the right hand of the Majesty in the highest
places, far above all Principalities and Powers, Thrones and Dominations,
till his enemies be made his footestoole. So one day, they that in their
haughty pride, and merciless oppressions, rode over our heads, shall then lie
under our feet. Through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy Name
will we tread them under that rise up against us. At what time yonder glorious
sky, Coelum stellatum, which is now our seeling over our heads, shall be but a
pauement under our feet. To which glory, he that made us by his Word, and
bought us by the blood of his Son, seal us up by his blessed Spirit.

Amen.
THE VICTORY OF PATIENCE: With the expiration of Malice.
PSALM. 66. 12. We went through fire, and through water: but thou broughtest
us out into a wealthy place.
I DID not, in the former Sermon, draw out the oppressing cruelty of these
Persecutours, to the utmost scope and period of their malice: nor extend their
impium imperium to the furthest limit and determination thereof. There is yet
one glimpse of their stinking candle, before the snuff goes out; one groan
ere their malice expire. We went through fire and water.

The Papists, when they hear these words, went through fire and water;
startle, and cry out, Purgatory: direct proofs for Purgatory. With as good
reason, as Sedulius, on that dream of Pharaohs Officer, Genesis 40. 10. A vine
was before me; and in the vine were three branches: says that Apol. contr.
Alcor. Francisca. li. 2. c. 1
the Vine signifies St. Francis; and the three branches the three Orders
derived from him. And as a Pope on that of Samuel: Behold, to obey is better
th^n sacrifice: and stubbornness 1. Sam. 15. 22.
is as Idolatry: inferres, that not to obey the Apostolic See of Rome, was
Idolatry by the witness of Samuel. Or as one writes of St. Francis; that
because it is said, Unless you become as little children, you cannot enter
into the kingdom of heaven; he commanded one Massaeus to tumble round like a
little child, that he might enter. Or as, when the contention was betwixt the
Services of Am^se and Gregory, which should take place; by the common consent
both the Masse-bookes were laid on the (...). de Vorag. in vita Gregor.
Altar of S. Peter; expecting some decision of that doubt by revelation. The
Church doors being opened in the morning, Gregory's Missal-booke was rent and
torn into many pieces; but Ambroses lay whole, and open upon the Altar. Which
event, in a sober exposition, would have signified the Mass of Gregory
cancelled and abolished: and that of Ambrose authentical and allowed. But the
wise Pope Adrian expounds it thus: that the renting and scattering of Gregory's
Missall intended, that it should be dispersed over all the Christian world, and
only received as Canonical. Or as that simple Friar, that finding Maria in the
Scripture, used plurally for Seas; cried out in the ostentation of his lucky
wit, that he had found in the old Testament the name of Maria, for the
Virgin Mary.

But I purpose not to waste time in this place; and among such hearers, in the
confutation of this ridiculous folly. Resting my self on the judgment of a
vvorthie learned man in our Church; that Purgatory is nothing (...). page 106.
de Purgator.
else but a Mythologie; a moral use of strange fables. As when Pius the second
had fent abroad his Indulgencies, to all that would take Arms against the
Turk; the Turk wrote to him, to call in his Epigrams again. Or as Bellarmine
excused Prudentiu^, when he appoints certain De Purgator. lib. 2. cap. 18.
holy days in hell, that he did but poetize. So all their fabulous discourse
of Purgatory is but Epigrams and poetry; a more serious kind of jest. Wherein
they laugh among themselves, how they cousen the world, and fill the Popes
coffers. Who for his advantage, Ens non esse facit, non ens fore. So that if
Roffensis gather out of this Contr. Luther. Art. 37.
place, that in Purgatory there is great store of water; We went through fire
and water. We may oppose against him Sir Thomas More; who proves from Zachary
9. that there Zach. 9. 11.
is no water at all. I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein
is no water. Set then the frost against the rain, and you may go in Purgatory
dry-shod. If there be nothing left but fire, I make no question, but there is
not a spark difference betwixt Purgatory and Hell.

I should narrow up the scope and liberty of Gods spirit, if I should here tie
my discourse to the letter. We went through fire, and through water. It is an
effect of our persecution; and may thus be resolved: we were by their malice
driven to great extremity. Fire and water are two elements, which (they say)
have no mercy: yet either of them more then our oppressors. The time was that a
red Sea divided the waters; and gave dry passage to the children Exodus 14.
of Israel and of God. Whereof the Psalmist here Psalm. 66. 6.
sings, verse. 6. He turned the Sea into dry land: they went through the flood
on foot, there did we rejoice in him. And the fire in an Oven, whose heat
was septupled, touched not those three servants of the Lord. But these more
incensed and insensible creatures have no mercy; nor can they invent a cruelty,
which they forbear to execute.

Some translations have it: We went into fire, and into water: which extends
their persecution to our deaths, and comprehends the latitude of mortal
martyrdom. And thus understood, the next words, of the deliverance (Thou
broughtest us out into a wealthy place) must be meant of our glory in heaven.
But the evident circumstances following deny that interpretation: therefore I
adhere to the last and best Translation; We went through fire and through
water.

Wherein two things may seem to be imported, and imparted to our
consideration. 1. We went. They went so conveniently as they might, and so
conscionably as they durst, from the hands of their persecutors. 2. The hard
exigents they were driven to; when to pass through fire and water, was but a
less evil compared with that they eschewed.

Per mare mactantes fugimus, per saxa, per ignes.
1. From the former observe, that it may be lawful in time of persecution to
fly. This was granted, yea in some respects enjoined by Christ. But must be
warily understood; and the rule in a word may be this. When our suffering may
stand the Church of God in better stead then our flying; we must then lose our
lives, to save Gods honor and our own souls. To deny God this fealty and
tribute of our bloods, when his glory has use of such a service at our hands,
is not only to deny him that is his own by many dear titles; of creation
which was ex spiritu oris, by the breath of his mouth; and of redemption which
was ex sanguine cordis, by the blood of his heart. But to withdraw this justly
required testimony, is to betray and crucify him; and scarce inferior to their
perjury, whose false witness condemned him.

In this we restore to God his talent with profit; not only our own soul he
gave us, but as many more as our example works upon, and winnes to him. When
the people admired the great bounty of John, called Eleemosynarius, Lorin.
he answered them; O brethren, I have not yet shed my blood for you, as I ought
to do for my masters sake and testimony. In the early morning of the world,
did Abel dedicate Martyrdom, without example: and the Lord did approve it by
accepting Abels sacrifice, and Chrysostom.
Abel for a sacrifice. I have read that a worthy Martyr of ours, Dr. Rowland
Tailor, wrote first* with ink, and after with his blood; that it is not enough
to profess the Gospel of Christ ad ignem exclusive; but we must cleave to it
ad ignem inclusiue. This was an honor that Christ accepted presently after his
birth, the Holocaust or Heccatomb of many innocent infants, murdered and
martyred for Math. 2.
his sake.

So that suffering for Jesus, is a thing to which he promises an ample reward.
No man shall for sake parents, or friends, or inheritance, or living, or life
for my sake; but he shall have in exchange a hundred fold so much comfort in
this life, and in the world to come life everlasting. But all times and
occasions yield not warrant for such a service. Much less can the Seminaries,
dying in England for treason, arrogate to themselves the glory of Martyrdom;
though a vicious affectation of it has hartned and hardened them to such a
prodigality of their bloods. They come not to maintain the verity of
Scriptures, but the vanity of Traditions; the entangling perplexities of
Schoolmen, the obscure, tetricall, and contradictory assertions of Popes: who
commands them to steal that with their lives, which not only is in inuolued
being, but in future contingence; whatsoever the Roman Church, that is the
Pope, shall hereafter constitute or declare.

2. From the latter words; Through fire and water, observe; that the children
of God must not expect a gentle and soft entertainment in this world, but hard
exigents; when to fly from their enemies they are feign to pass through fire
and water. Affliction for the Gospel is called by Paul, the marks of the Lord
Jesus. The world often Gal. 6. 17.
sets a man, as those three servants of God were set in Daniels Prophecy. On
the one side a harmony of sweet Dan. 3.
music, the Cornet, Flute, etc. on the other side a burning furnace, hette
above ordinary seven times. Worship the Idol, and enjoy the delight of
music: not worship it, and be cast into the fiery oven. Join with the world
in his ungodly customs, and the world will love, feast, tickle your ears with
music. Separate your selves, and it will hate you, Ioh. 15. If you were of
the world, the world would love his own: but because I have chosen you out of
the Ioh. 15. 19.
world, therefore the world hates you. Thou shall be like Abraham's Ram,
tied in a bush of thorns; from which thou can not extricate thy self, till
thou be made a sacrifice. Genesis 22. 13.


I have read that Caligula the Tyrant being dead, there were found in his
Closet Duo libelli; one called a sword, the other a dagger; wherein many were
by name pricked for death, and destined to it in the Emperors bloody
intention. Presumptuous enemies so cast lots on a Nation before they have it;
and talk of dividing a spoil ere they come at it. Judge. 5. Have they not
sped? have they Judges 5. 30.
not divided the prey? So the proud adversary in that wonderful year, 88.;
that came with an Invincible Navy, and implacable fury; the Ensigns of whose
ships we^e victoria, victoria; brought ready with them instruments of
torture; as if the Land of peace and mercy had in it no such engines of
cruelty; and swallowed down an abundant hope of our desolation. They threw at
dice for our wives and daughters, lands and vineyards, houses and heritages,
shires and kingdom. They purposed to drive us through fire and water, but fire
and water was their destruction. Fire broke the sinews of their combination,
and the waves devoured both their hopes and themselves. The godly at last shall
be as mighty men, Zach. 10. 5. treading down their enemies in the mire of the
streets in the battle: and they shall fight, because the Lord is with them.

The grieuousnesse of these afflictions must teach us two useful lessons:
Patience. Prayer.

1. Patience, Acts. 5. The Apostles departed from the presence of the Council,
rejoicing that they were counted worthy Acts 5. 41.
to suffer shame for the name of Christ. A true Christian rejoices in his
tribulation: especially when it is for his Saviors sake; and takes greater
pleasure in his iron fetters, then a proud Courtier does of his golden chain,
Reu. 14. Blessed are they that dye in the Lord. But if it be so blessed a thing
to dye in the Lord; what is it to die for the Lord! Precious in the sight of
the Lord is the death of his Saints. It was Hardings inuectiue against our
reverend, Psalm. 116. 15.
learned, and precious Jewel; that Protestants were worse then the Devil: for
whereas bread and water and the cross could scarre away Devils; Princes could
be rid of them by no means, but Fire. To whom that excellent Bishop answers;
that though it pleased his malicious humor, to make but a jest of the blood
of Gods Saints; yet it was no more ignominy for Lambs to suffer what Christ
suffered; then it was praise and credit for wolves to betray him, as Judas did.

Our patience is our crown, and others conversion. Eusebius from Clement
reports, that when a wicked accuser had brought S. James to condemnation;
seeing his Christian fortitude, he was touched in conscience, confessed
himself a Christian, and so was taken to execution with him. Where earnestly
beseeching S. James to forgive him, he after a little pawse kissed him, and
said, Peace be to thee, brother; and they were beheaded together. O blessed
Patience! which not only gets honor to our selves, but brings other to
salvation; and in all glorifies God.

2. Prayer. This was the Apostles refuge in the time of affliction, Act. 4. 24.
Bernard in a Fiction does excellently express this necessity, enforce this
duty. He supposes the kings of Babylon and Jerusalem (by whom he means the
world and the Church) to be at war one against the other. During this
hostility, a soldier of Jerusalem was fled to the Castle of Justice. Siege was
laid to this Castle, and a multitude of enemies environed and entrenched it
round. There lies near this Soldier a fainthearted coward, called Fear: this
speaks nothing but discomfort: and when Hope would step in to speak some
courage, Fear thrusts her out of doors. Whilst these two opposites fear and
hope stand debating, the Christian Soldier resolves to appeal to the
direction of sacred Wisdom; who was chief Councellor to the Captain of the
Castle, Justice. Hear Wisdom speak. Do thou not know, faith she, that the
God whom we serve is able to deliver us? Is he not the Lord of hosts? even
the Lord Dan. 3. 17.
mighty in battle? we will dispatch a messenger to him with information of our
necessity.

Fear replies, What messenger? Darkness is on the face of the world: our
walls are begirt with an armed troop; which are not only strong as Lions, but
also watchful as Dragons. What messenger can either escape through such an
host, or find the way into so remote a Country? Wisdom calls for Hope, and
charge her with all speed to dispatch away her old messenger: Hope calls to
Prayer, and says, Lo here a messenger speedy, ready, trusty, knowing the way.
Ready; you can not sooner call her then she comes. Speedy; she flies faster
then Eagles, as fast as Angels. Trusty; what embassage soever you put in her
tongue, she delivers with faithful secrecy. She knows the way to the Court
of Mercy; and she will never faint till she come to the chamber of the
royal Presence.

Prayer has her message, away she flies, borne on the sure and swift wings of
faith and zeal: Wisdom having given her a charge, and Hope a blessing.
Finding the gate shut, she knockes and cries; Open, ye gates of righteousness,
and be ye open ye everlasting doors of glory: that I may enter, and deliver to
the King of Jerusalem my petition. Jesus Christ hears her knock, opens the
gate of mercy, attends her suite, promises her infallible comfort and redress.

Back returns Prayer, laden with the news of consolation: she has a
promise, and she delivers it into the hand of Faith: that were our enemies more
innumerable then the Locusts in Egypt, and more strong then the Giants, the
sons of Anak: yet Power and Mercy shall fight for us, and we shall be
delivered. Pass we then through fire and water, through all dangers and
difficulties, yet we have a messenger, holy, happy, accessible, acceptable to
God, that never comes back without comfort, Prayer.

And here fitly I will end our Misery, and come to Gods Mercy. Desolation has
held us long, but our consolation is eternal. But thou broughtest us out into
a wealthy place.

The Song, you see, is compounded like Music: it has acutum and grave, high
and low, sharp and flat. Thou causedst men to ride over us. But thou broughtest
us out. Sorrow and joy, trouble and peace, sour and sweet, come by
vicissitudes. Inuicem cedunt dolor et voluptas. This discord in Music hurts
not, but graceth the song. Whiles grief and pleasure keep this alteration in
our life, they at once both exercise our patience, and make more vvelcome our
joys. If you look for the happiness of the wicked, you shall find it in
primis, at the beginning: but if you would learn what becomes of the
righteous, intelliges in nouissimis, you shall know it at last. Mark the
upright man, and behold the just: for the end of that man is Psalm. 37. 37.
peace. We were sore oppressed, but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

Every word is sweetly significant, and amplifies Gods mercy to us. Four
especially are remarkable; the Deliverer, the Deliverance, the Delivered, and
their felicity or blessed advancement. So there is in the Deliverer aliquid
Celsitudinis, Thou Delivery Certitudinis, Broughtst out Delivered Solitudinis,
us, Happiness Plenitudinis, Into a vvealthy place. There is highness and
lowness; surenesse and fullness. The Deliverer is great, the Deliverance
certain; the Distressed grievous, their exaltation glorious. There is yet a
first word, that like a key unlocks this golden gate of mercy; a veruntamen;

But
This is vox respirationis; a gasp that fetches back again the very life of
comfort. But thou broughtest, etc. We were fearfully endangered into the hands
of our enemies; they rode and trod upon us, and drove us through hard
perplexities: But thou, etc. If there had been a full point or period at our
misery; if those gulfs of persecution had quite swallowed us, and all our
light of comfort had been thus smothered and extinguished; we might have
cried, Perijt spes nostra, yea perijt salus nostra; our hope, our help is quite
gone: He had mocked us that would have spoken, Be of good cheer. This same
But is like a happy oar, that turns our vessel from the rocks of despair,
and lands it at the haven of comfort. But, etc.

Thou.
Thou only, without help or succor of either man or Angel; that art able to
save with a few, as well as with many; that art A man of war. Exodus 15. and
come armed against thine enemies, with a spear of wrath, Exodus 15. 3.
and a sword of vengeance. Thou, of whose greatness there is no end, no
limits, no determination. Thou, O Lord, without any partner, either to share
thy glory, or our thanks. Thou broughtest us out.

Thou of thy own goodness, so well as by thy own greatness, have delivered
us. No merit of ours procured, or deserved this mercy at thy hands: but our
freedom comes only by thy Majesty, of thy mercy. Here were no arms of
flesh, nor Armies of Angels, in this work of our Redemption: but Thou have
brought us out, that we might praise thy Name. Therefore we say: Bless the
Lord, O our souls: O Lord, thou art very great, thou art Psalm. 104. 1.
clothed with honor and majesty.

Eduxisti: Broughtest out.
Great works become a great God. Opera testantur de me, says our Savior. My
works bear witness of me. I heal the sick, cleanse the Leprous, give
sight to the blind, raise the dead, cast out devils. Will you not believe, O
ye carnal eyes, unless you see? will you trust your five senses above the
four Gospels? verse. 5. Come then, and see the works of God. See works: not a
fancy, speculation, or deceiving shadow; but real, visible, acted,
accomplished works. Eduxists. Sensus assensus. Let demonstration convince you:
the Snare is broken, and we are delivered. The Lord works potenter and
patenter. There is not only manifold mercy, but manifest mercy in his doings.
He brought us out.

When the ungodly see us so low brought, that persecutors ride over our heads;
they are ready to say; Where is now their G^d? Behold, hic est Deus; our God is
here, where there was need of him: opus Deo, a work fit for the Deity to
perform. Misery had wrapped and entangled us; the wicked hands had tied us, as
the Philistines did Samson with the bands of death. Here then was Dignus
vindice nodus; a knot worthy the finger of God to untie. He looked down from
the height of his Sanctuary: from heaven Psalm. 10^. 20.
did the Lord behold the earth. For what purpose? To hear the groaning of the
prisoner: to loose those that are appointed to death. Behold, the waters went
over our soul, yet we were not drowned. Malice had doomed us to the Fire; but
our comfort is, Nihil potestatis in nos habu^sse ignem, that the fire had not
power over us. They trod us under their cruel insultations, but the Lord has
lifted us up. The Lord of Hosts was with us: the God of Jacob was Psalm. 46. 11.
our refuge.

Us.
To this act of God, if we tie the Subject wherein he works; and knit to
Eduxisti, Nos: which I called verbum solitudinis, a word of former
wretchedness and calamity: we shall find our misery a fit object for GODS
mercy; Especially if you set the others malice against our meekness; their
wickedness against our weakness: the persons whom God delivers, and the
persons from whom, will greatly commend the mercy of our deliverance.

It is a pleasure to God, to have his strength perfected in our infirmity.
When the danger is most violent in it own nature, and our sense, then is his
helping arm most welcome. Esa. 17. In the day of grief, and of desperate
sorrow, the harvest shall be great; a plentiful croppe of joy. Qui Deus est
noster, Deus est salutis. Psalm. 68. 20.
He that is our God, is the God of salvation: and unto God the Lord belong the
issues from death. He delights to have us say in this deep extremity;
Eduxisti. Thou have brought us out. When Jonas was taken up by the Mariners,
put from the succor of the Ship; no help in any Rocks, nor mercy in the
waters; neither means nor desire to escape by swimming: for he yields himself
into the iaws of death with as mortified affection, as if a lump of lead had
been thrown into the sea: a man would have thought that salvation it self
could not have saved Jonas. Yet Jonas shall not die. Here is now a delivery fit
for God, a cure for the almighty hand to undertake.

Man's extremity is Gods opportunity. Distressed desire is importunate. Psalm.
102. 13.
It is time that thou have mercy upon us: yea the time is come. But if God do
not presently answer, we are ready to pant out a groan of despair, The time
is past. If our importunity prevail not, we think all opportunity is gone.
But God says, Tempus nondum venit; the time is not yet. God waits the
maturity of the danger, the more to increase his honor. As Alexander cheared
himself when he should fight with men and beasts; haughty enemies, and huge
Elephants. Tandem par animo meo periculum video. I see at last a danger
somewhat equal to my mind. Will you hear when this time is come, John 11.
Martha tells Christ: Master, if thou had been here, my brother had not
died. Christ knevv John 11. 21.
this before, verse. 15. Lazarus is dead* and I am glad for your sakes that I
was not there, that you might believe. Observe the different thoughts of God
and man. Martha is sorry, Christ is glad. She thought that the time of help
was past: Christ thought that the time was not opportune till now. Iairus his
servant comes and tells him, Mark. 5. 35.
Thy daughter is dead; trouble the master no further. This was the word Christ
expected to hear. And now he says, Be not afraid, only believe. Hear the
Israelites desperate complaint. The waters of the Sea roar before their faces;
the wheels of the Chariots rattle behind their backs: hereon they cry to
Moses, Exodus 14. 11.
Were there no graves in Egypt, that thou have brought us hither to die? Now
says Moses; Fear not, stand still, and see the salvation of God.

From that has been spoken, and that which follows, we may observe two works
of Gods mercy. Which consist Remouendo Promouendo: the one removing away much
evil, the other preferring to much good. Eduxisti, shows his kindness in
freeing us from calamity; In locum opulentum, his goodness in exalting us to
dignity. The former is an act of deliverance, the latter of advancement. So
there is Terminus a quo, from whence we are freed; and Terminus ad quem, to
which we are exalted.

For the former, we have God here Educentem, bringing out of trouble.
Sometime we find GOD Ducentem; leading, guiding, directing. Wilt not thou, O
Lord, go forth with our hoastes? And He led them Ducit. Inducit. Adducit.
Reducit. Educit. Non sed^.
through the wilderness, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Sometimes Inducentem,
verse. 11. Thou broughtest us into the net: thou have laid affliction upon our
loins. Sometimes Adducentem. Thou, O Lord, have brought us home to thy self,
etc. Sometimes Reducentem, Psalm. 126. 4. Turn again our captivity, O Lord,
as the streams in the South. Often Educentem, Psalm. 105. 43. He brought
forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness. Never Seducentem;
beguiling, deceiving, causing to err: for that is opus Diaboli, who is the
Accuser and Seducer of men.

For the latter: Into a wealthy place. The greatness of our felicity does
far transcend the grieuousnesse of our past misery. The dimension of our
height exceedes that of our depth: neither did affliction ever bring it so low,
as our elevation has advanced us high. Hereon S. Paul Romans 8. The sufferings
of this present time are not worthy to Romans 8. 18.
be compared with the glory, which shall be revealed in us. whether we compare
or their Strength, Length.



For their vigor or strength: the affliction of man, in the greatest
extremity, that he can lay it on man, is but finite as the afflicter. The blow
comes but from an arm of flesh, and therefore can wound but flesh. Yield the
extention of it to reach so far as any possible malice can drive it: yet it
can but rack the body, distend the joints, sluice out the blood, and give
liberty to the imprisoned soul. Which soul they cannot strike. Therefore
says Christ, Fear not him that has power over the body only, not over the
soul. And even in the midst of this dire persecution, God can either quite
deliver us, that the storm shall blow over our heads, and hurt us not: or if
he suffers us to suffer that, yet he will so qualify the heat of it, that the
cool refreshing of his blessed spirit inwardly to the Conscience, shall in a
manner extinguish the torment. But now this vvealthy place; the spring of joy
that succeedes this winter of anguish, is illimited, insuppressible,
inexpressible, infinite. So strongly guarded with an almighty power, that no
robber violently, nor thief subtly, can steal it from us. Some pleasure is
mixed with that pain, but no pain is incident to this pleasure. There was
some laughter among those tears, but there shall be no tears in this
laughter: For Tears shall be quite wiped from our eyes. By how much then the
power of God transcends man's; yea Gods mercy man's malice; by so much shall our
rejoicing exceed our passion. By how much the glorious City of heaven, walled
with Jasper and pure gold, shining as brass, is Reu. 21. 12. 18.
stronger then the vndefensed and naked cottage of this transient world: our
future comforts arise in measure, pleasure and security, above our passed
distress. Thus for Strength.

If we compare their Length, we shall find an infinite inequality. Paul calls
affliction momentany, glory eternal. 2. Cor. 4. 17.
Time shall determine the one; and that a short time, a very winters day: but
the other is above the wheels of motion, and therefore beyond the reach of
time. For a moment in mine anger, says the Lord, I did hide my face from thee;
but with everlasting mercy I have had compassion on thee. Nothing but eternity
can make either joy or sorrow absolute. He can brook his imprisonment, that
knows the short date of it: and he finds poor content in his pleasure, that
is certain of a sudden loss. We know that our pilgrimage is not long through
this valley of tears, and miserable Desert; but our Canaan, home, Inheritance
is a wealthy place; glorious for countenance, blessed for continuance:
vvealthy, without want; stable, without alteration; a constant Mansion, an
immovable Kingdom. Unto which our Lord Jesus in his appointed time bring us.
To whom, with the Father and Spirit of consolation, be all praise and glory for
ever.

Amen.
GODS HOUSE: OR, THE PLACE OF PRAISES.
PSALM. 66. 12. I will go into thy House, with burnt offerings: I will pay
thee my vows.
THE formerverse connexed with this, demonstrate with words of life David's
Affliction Affection.



His Affliction, to be ouer-ridden with Persecutors: his Affection, to bless
God for his deliverance. Great misery, taken away by great mercy, requires
great thankfulness: I will go into thy, etc.

Before we put this Song into parts, or derive it into particulars, two
general things must be considered. The Matter The Manner
the Substance the Form
The matter and substance of the verse is Thankfulness: the manner and form,
Resolution. The whole fabric declares the former: the fashion of the building
the latter. The Tenor of all is Praising God: the key or tune it is set in
Purpose: I will go into thy house, I will pay thee my vows. So that first I
must entreat you to look upon a Solution, and a Resolution: a debt to be paid,
and a purpose of heart to pay it.

The Debt
Is Thankfulness. This is the matter and substance of the words. God having
first by affliction taught us to know our selves, does afterward by
deliverance teach us to know him. And when his gracious hand has helped us out
of the low pit, he looks that (like Israel, Exodus 15.) we should stand
upon the shore, and bless his name. David that prayed to God de profundis;
Psalm. 103. 1.
(out of the depths have I called unto thee) does after praise him in excelsis,
with the highest Organs and instruments of laud.

General mercies require our continual thanks; but new favors new praises.
Psalm. 98. 1.
O Sing unto the Lord a New Song, for he has done marvelous things. There is
a fourefold life belonging to man, and God is the keeper of all. His natural,
civil, spiritual, and eternal life. Eloudie man would take away our natural
life. Psalm. 37. The wicked watches the righteous, and seeks to slay him. GOD
Psalm. 37. 32.
keeps it. The slanderous world would blast our civil life, God blesses our
memory. The corrupted flesh would poison our spiritual life, God Colos. 3. 3.
hides it in Christ. The raging Devil would kill our eternal life; God
preserues it in heaven. Unworthy are we of rest that night wherein we sleep,
or of the light of the Sun that day wherein we rise, without praising God for
these mercies. If we think not on him that made us, we think not to what
purpose he made us. When I consider the works of GOD, says Augustine, I am
wonderfully moved to praise the Creator; Contra Fa^t. Manich. lib. 21. cap. 5.
Qui prorsus ita magnus est in operibus magnis, vt minor non sit in minimis:
who is so great in his great works, that he is not less in his least. But
when we consider his work of Redemption; about which he was (not as about the
Creation, six days, but) above thirty years. Where non sua dedit, sed se; he
gave not his riches, but himself; and that non tam in Dominum, quam in seruum
et sacrificium: not to be a Lord, but a servant, a sacrifice. We have
Adamantine hearts, if the blood of this salvation cannot melt them into praises.

But special favors require special thanks, whether they consist in
Eximendo Exhibendo;

either in redeeming us from dangers, or heaping upon us benefits. Our Prophet
in five instances, Psalm. 107. exemplifieth this duty. Of Travelers, Captives,
sick-men, Psalm. 107.
seamen, and others subject to the manifold varieties of life.

For Travelers; Ver. 4.
They wander in the Wilderness in a solitary way: hungry and thirsty, their
soul fainting in them. They cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he
delivers them out of their distresses. For Captives; Ver. 10.
They sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death; fast bound in affliction
and iron. Their prayers find a way out of the prison to God, and God delivers
them out of the prison to liberty. For Sick, Ver. 17.
Because of their transgression they are afflicted: their soul abhors all
manner of meat, and they draw near unto the gates of death. The strength of
their prayers recouers the strength of their bodies. For Mariners, Ver. 27.
They reele to and fro, staggering like a drunken man; and are at their wits
end. They by their prayers appease the wrath of God, and he appeaseth the
wrath of the waves and winds.

Now the burden of the Song to all these deliverances is this; Ver. 8. 15. 21.
31.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness; and for his
wonderful works to the children of men. And because these four dangers are
short of the innumerable calamities incident to man's life; therefore in the end
of the Psalm, much misery is heaped up, and the Lord is the scatterer and
dissoluer of that heap: that all flesh might sing; Salvation is of the Lord.

And because these mercies are infinite; so that what Christian may not say
with David? Psalm. 23. 6.
Thy goodness has followed me all the days of my life. Therefore I infer
with Paul, 1. These. 5. 18
In all things give thanks. So our Psalmist, My mouth shall be filled with thy
praise all the day long. What is meant by All the day, says Augustine, but a
praise without intermission? As no hour slips by thee without occasion, let
none slip from thee without manifestation of gratitude. I will praise thee,
says he, O Lord, In prosperis, quia consolaris, in aduersis, quia corrigis: In
a prosperous estate, because thou do bless me; in affliction, because thou
do correct me. Fecisti, refecisti, perfecisti: Thou made me when I was
not, restoredst me when I was lost; supplyest my wants, forgiuest my sins;
and crownest my perseverance. But as, Quo acerbior miseria, eo acceptior
misericordia: the more grievous the misery, the more gracious the mercy. So
the richer benefit requires the hartier thanks. Great deliverances should not
have small gratitude: where much is given, there is not a little required. To
tell you what God has done for us, thereby to excite thankfulness, would be
to lose my self in the gates of my Text. I told you this was the ground and
module of the Psalm. But I know, your curious ears care not so much for
plaine-song; you expect I should run upon Division. Hear but the next
general point, and I come to your desire: reserving what I have more to say of
this, to my farewell, and last application.

I come from the Debt to be paid, to his Resolution to pay it. I will go into
thy house, I will pay, etc. Though he be not instantly Soluendo, he is
Resoluendo. He is not like those Debtors, that have neither means, nor meaning
to pay. But though he wants actual, he has votall retribution. Though he
cannot so soon come to the place, where this payment is to be made; yet he
has already paid it in his he^rt. I will go, I will pay. Here then is the
Debtors

Resolution.
There is in the godly a purpose of heart to serve the Lord. This is the child
of a sanctified spirit, borne not without the throbs and throws of true
penitence. Not a transient and perishing flower, like Ionah's Gourd, Filius
noctis; oriens, moriens: but the sound fruit, which the sap of grace in the
heart sends forth. Luke 15. When the Prodigal Son came to himself, says
the Text; as if he had been formerly out of his wits: his first speech was, I
will arise and go to my Father: and will say unto him; Father, Luke 15. 18.
I have sinned. And what he purposed, he performed: he arose and went.

I know, there are many that intend much, but do nothing: and that earth is
full of good purposes, but heaven only full of good works: and that the tree
gloriously leaued with intentions, without fruit, was cursed: And that a lewd
heart may be so far sinitten and convinced at a Sermon, as to will a
forsaking of some sin. Which thoughts are but swimming notions, and
vanishing motions; embrions, or abortiue births.

But this Resolution has a stronger force: it is the effect of a mature and
deliberate judgment; wrought by Gods Spirit, grounded on a voluntary devotion;
not without true sanctification: though it cannot, without some interposition
of time and means, come to perform that act which it intends. It is the
harbinger of a holy life: the little clowd, like a 1. King. 18. 44
hand, that Eliah's servant saw, pointing to the future showers of devotion.

Well, this is but the beginning, and you know, many begin, that do not
accomplish: but what shall become of them that never begin? If he does little,
that purposes, and performs not: what hope is there of them that will not
purpose? It is hard to make an Vsnrer leave his extortion, the unclean his
lusts, the swearer his dishallowed speeches: when neither of them says so
much, as I will leave them. The habit of godliness is far off, when to
will is not present: and we despair of their performance, in whom cannot be
wrought a purpose.

But to you of whom there is more hope, that say, we will praise the Lord;
forget not to add David's execution to David's intention. God loves the present
tense better then the future: a Facto, more then a Faciam. Let him that is
President over us, be a precedent for us. Hebr. 10. (...) Behold, I come: not I
will come, but I do come, to Heb. 10. 7.
do ^y will, O GOD.

You have heard the matter and manner of the Song: the Substance is Gratitude;
the Form, a Resolution to give it. To set it in some

Division or Method.
That every present soul may bear his part; here be three strains, or
stairs, and graduall ascents: up which our contemplations must mount, with
David's actions.

1. An entrance into Gods house: I will go into thy house. It is well that
David will bring thither his praises, himself. But many enter Gods house, that
have no business there: that both come and return empty-hearted: that neither
bring to God devotion, nor carry from God consolation.

2. Therefore the next strain gives his zeal; he will not come empty-handed;
but with burnt offerings. Manifold and manifest arguments of his hearty
affection. Manifest, because burnt offerings; real, visible, actual, and
accomplished works. Manifold, because not one singular oblation, but plurally
offerings, without pinching his devotion.

3. But yet diverse have offered Sacrifices and burnt sacrifices, that stunke
like Balaams in Gods nosthrils: tendering Bullocks and Goats, not their own
hearts. Therefore the third strain affirms, that David will not only offer
beasts, but himself. I will pay thee my vows. So that in his Gratitude is
obseruable Quo Loco Modo Animo.



In what place, Gods house: after what manner, with burnt offerings: with what
mind, I will pay thee my vows. His devotion is without exception: all the
labor is to work our hearts to an imitation.

I will go into thy house.
The first note has two strains, Place, Entrance.

The place he purposes to enter, is described by the Property, Domus.
Proprietary, Dominus.



This house was not the Temple, for that was after built by Solomon: but the
Tabernacle, or Sanctuary. GOD had his house in all ages; as the wise Creator of
all things, he reserved to him a portion in all things; Non propter
indigentiam, sed in re cognitionem: not that he had need of them, but that he
might be acknowledged in the^. Though he be Lord of all Nations in the world,
because the Maker of all men, yet he reserved a particular number of men, and
appropriated them to himself: and these he called Suum populum, Luke 1. 68.
His people.

Though thousands of Angels stand before him, and ten thousand thousands of
those glorious spirits minister unto him: yet he culleth and calls out some
particular men to celebrate his service: sanctifying, or setting the^ apart to
that office: and these he calls Suos ministros; His Priests, his Ministers.

Though he be a Spirit, immortal, most rich; and Lord of all things: the earth
is his and the fullness thereof; yea heaven and the glory thereof: Psalm. 50. 12.
If I were hungry, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, etc. yet he
reserueth to himself a certain share of these inferior things: and this he
calls Suam sortem: his portion: Mal. 3. 8.
His tithes, his offerings.

Though he be Eternal, first and last: without beginning, without end: God of
all times, and yet under no time: with whom a thousand years is but as one
day: and everlastingly to be honored. Yet he reserueth to himself a certain
time, wherein he looks for our general worship: and this he calls Suum Diem;
his day, Esa. 58. 13.
his Sabbaths.

Though he be the Esa. 57. 15.
High and Lofty One, that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is Holy: though
infinite and comprehended in no place. Yet he sets apart some special place,
wherein his great name shall be called on: and this he calls Suam Domum; His
house. So Math. 21. My house shall be called the house of prayer. Here, I will
go into Thy House. Math. 21. 13.


God never left his Church destitute of a certain sacred place, wherein he
would be worshipped. Adam had a place, wherein he should present himself to
God, and God did present himself to him; Paradise. God appeared to Abraham in
a place, and sanctified it: and there Genesis 12. 7.
Abraham built an Altar; for it was holy. When he commanded him to sacrifice
his Son Isaac, he appointed him a place; on Genesis 22. 1. 2. Chron. 3. 1.
a mountain. And on this very mountain was afterward Salomons Temple built.
2. Chron. 3. Jacob according to the several places he dwelt in, built
several Altars to serve God on. The Israelites were translated out of Egypt
for this very cause, that they might have a place to sacrifice to the Lord.
When they were come into Canaan, God commanded and directed Moses, to make a
Tabernacle: which was but mobile Tabernaculum, to be dissolved when Salomons
glorious Temple was finished. Now all these particular places were consecrated
to the service of God; and called Loca Dei, Gods Places; as David calls this
Domum Dei, Gods House.

This is the first note of the strain, the Place. The next is his Entrance;
wherein observe;

1. That David's first care is to visit Gods house. It is very likely that this
Psalm was written by David, either in exile under Saul, or in persecution by
Absalon, or in some grievous distress: whereout being delivered, he first
resolves to salute Gods House. Chrysostom in Opere imperfect. or whosoever was
the Author of that book; notes it the property of a good Son, when he comes
to town, first to visit his Fathers house, and to perform the honor that is
due to him. We find this in* Christ. Math. 22. so soon as ever he came to
Jerusalem, first he visits his Fathers house, He went into the Temple. What
Mat. 21. 10. 12.
the Son and Lord of David did there, the same course does the Servant of his
Son take here: First, I will go into thy House.

Oh for one dram of this respect of Gods house in these days. Shall that
place have a principal place in our affections? we would not then think one
hour tedious in it, when many years delight us in the Tents of Kedar. This
was not David's opinion. Psalm. 84. 10.
One day in thy Court is better then a thousand. Nor grudge at every penny that
a Leuy taxes to the Church: as if Tegumen parietibus impositum was enough:
bare walls and a cover to keep us from rain: and aliquid ornatus was but
superfluous; except it be a cushion and a wainscot seat, for a Gentleman's
better ease. The greatest preparation usually against some solemn feast, is
but a little fresh straw under the feet; the ordinary allowance for hogs in
the stye, or horses in the stable. For other cost, let it be Domus opportuna
volu^m, a cage of unclean birds: and so it must be so long as some
sacrilegious persons are in it. It was part of the Epitaph of King Edgar.

Templa Deo, Templis Monachos, Monachis dedit agros. He gave Temples to God,
Ministers to those Temples, and maintenance to those Ministers. But the
Epitaphs of too many in these days may well run in contrary terms. They take
Tenths from good Ministers, good Ministers from the Churches, yea and some of
them also the Churches from God. But here Quicquid tetigero, vlcus erit: that
which I should touch is an ulcer: and I will spend no Physic in immedicabile
vulnus, upon an incurable wound; but leave it Enserecidendum Domini; to be cut
off with the sword of Gods vengeance.

2. Observe the reason why David would go into Gods house; and this has a
double degree. To give him. 1. Praise. 2. Public praise*

1. Praise. Might not David praise God in any place? Yes, David might and must
bless the Lord in any place, in every place: but the place that is principally
destined to this purpose, is Domus Dei; Gods House. The name which God imposed
on his house, and by which, as it were, he Christened it; was Domus orationis,
the house of prayer. As Christ, Math. 21. deriues it from Esa. 56. My house
shall be called the house of prayer. Therefore those Math. 21. 13. Esa. 56. 7.
houses were called in the Primitive times, Dominica, the Lords houses; and
Oratoria, houses of prayer, devoted to the praise of God.

I might here take just cause to tax an error of our times. Many come to
these holy places, and are so transported with a desire of hearing, that they
forget the feruencie of praying and praising God. The End is ever held more
noble then the means, that conduce unto it. Sin brought in ignorance, and
ignorance takes away devotion. The Word preached brings in knowledge, and
knowledge rectifies devotion. So that all our preaching is but to beget your
praying, to instruct you to praise and worship God. The most immediate and
proper service and worship of God, is the end, and hearing but the means to
that end. And the rule is true; Semper finis excellit id quod est ad finem: the
end ever excells that which leads to the end. Th. 1. qu. 117 art. 1.
Scientia non est qualitas actiua, sed principium quo aliquis dirigitur in
operando. Knowledge is not an active quality, but only a means to direct a
man in working.

Non tam audire, quam obedire requirit Deus. God reckons not so much of our
audience, as of our obedience: not the hearers, but the Iam. 1. 25.
dooers are blessed in their deed. Indeed Christ says, Blessed are they that
hear the Word of God; but with this condition, that they keep it. The worship
of GOD is the fruit of hearing, show me this fruit. Our Oratoria are turned
into Auditoria, and we are content that God should speak earnestly to us, but
we will not speak devoutly to him. I hope that no man will so ignorantly and
injuriously understand me, as if I spoke against hearing of Sermons frequently.
God forbid: you must hear, and we must preach Acts. 6. The Apostles gave
themselves continually to prayer, and to the preaching of Acts 6. 4.
the Word. Where yet Prayer is put in the first place.

I complain not that our Churches are Auditories, but that they are not
Oratories: not that you come to Sermons, (for Gods sake come faster) but that
you neglect public prayer. As if it were only Gods part to bless you, not
yours to bless God. And hereof I complain with good company. De Incompreh.
Dei naturae, Hom. 3.
Chrysostom says, that such a multitude came to his Sermons, that there was
scarce room for a late commer: and those would all patiently attend the end of
the Sermon: But when prayers were to be read, or Sacraments to be administered,
the company was thin, the seats empty. Uacua, desertaque Ecclesia reddebatur.

Beloved, mistake not. It is not the only exercise of a Christian to hear a
Sermon: nor is that Sabbath well spent, that dispatcheth no other business for
heaven. I will be bold to tell you, that in Heaven there shall be no Sermons;
and yet in Heaven there shall be Halleluiahs. And this same end, for which
David came to Gods house, shall remain in glory; to praise the Lord. So that
all Gods service is not to be narrowed up in hearing; it has greater latitude;
there must be prayer, praise, adoration, and worship of God. Neither is it the
scope of Christianity to know, but the scope of knowledge, is to be a good
Christian. You are not Heathen, to ask Quid credendum, What must we believe?
nor Catechists to demand Luke 3. 10.
Quid faciendum, What must we do? You know what to believe, you know what to
do. Our preaching has not so much need monere, as monere: though you also
need instruction, yet more need of exhortation: for you have learnt more then
ever you have followed. Come then hither, both to hear God, and to praise God.
As David was not only here a Praiser, but ver. 16. a Preacher. Come and hear
all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done for my soul.

2. Which fitly brings me to the further exemplyfying of this cause, moving
David to enter into Gods house. Which was not only to praise him, but to
praise him publicly. Otherwise, he might have muttered his orisons to
himself: no, he desires that his mouth should be a trumpet of Gods glory; as
frequently in the Psalms; I will praise thee before the great congregations.
There are some, that whatsoever service they do to God, desire many vvitnesses
of it: others desire no witnesses at all.

The former are hypocrites; who would have all men's eyes take notice of their
devotion: as if they durst not trust God without witness, for fear he should
deny it. Such were the Pharisees; they gave no alms without the proclamation of
a trumpet: and their prayers were at the corners of streets; such corners where
diverse streets met, and so more spectable to many passengers. To these Christ,
Math. 6. Do thy devotion in secret; and he that see^ in Math. 6. 4.
secret, shall reward thee openly.

The other have a little desire to serve GOD, but they would have no witnesses
at all. They depend upon some great man, that will be angry with it. And these
would feign have God take notice of their devotion, and no body else. So
Nichodemus stole to Christ by night: and many a Papists servant would come to
Church, if he were sure his Master might not know of it. For he fears more
to be turned out of his service, then out of Gods service. To these Christ,
Luke 12. Be not afraid of them that can kill Luke 12. 4.
the body, and no more; but fear him that has power to cast into hell; yea I
say unto you, fear him. A man may better lose his Landlords favor, then the
Lords favor: his Farm on earth, then his manor or mansion in heaven.

David was neither of these. His thankfulness shall not be hidden timore
minantium; nor yet will he manifest it amore laudantium. Neither for fear of
Commanders, nor for love of commenders. He is neither Timidus, nor Tumidus: not
fearful of frowns, nor luxurious of praises: but only desires to manifest
the integrity of his conscience in the sight of God. It is the manner of the
godly, not only to ruminate in their minds Gods mercies, but to divulge them
to the bettering of others. When we yield thus to the world a testimony of
our faith, and thankfulness in Gods public honor; we provoke others to
harken to religion, and inflame their hearts with a fervent desire to partake
the like mercies. The fame of Alexander gave heart to Julius Caesar, to be the
more noble warrior. The freedom of our devotion gives an edge to others.

Sen. de benef. lib. 2. cap. 11.
Beneficium qui dedit, taceat: narret qui accepit. Let him that gives a
benefit, be silent: let him speak of it, that has received it. There is that
law of difference (says that Philosopher) betwixt the dooer of a good turn,
and the receiver of it. Alter statim obliuisci debet. dati, alter accepti
nunquam. The one ought quickly to forget what he has given: the other ought
never to forget what he has received. We are the receivers, and must not
forget. God gave the Law to Israel, and the Custom of the Saints observed it.
Psalm. 78. 4.
What we have heard and known, and our Fathers have told us: we will not hide
from our children, showing to the generations to come, the praises of the Lord.

Indeed there was a time, when Christ forbad the publishing of his benefit.
Mark. 1. to the Leper; See thou say Mark. 1. 44.
nothing to any man of it. But he went out, and began to publish it much, and
to blaze abroad the matter. I know, diverse Divines, by curious distinctions,
have gone about to excuse the matter; by making this an admonitory, not an
obligatory precept. But I subscribe to Calvin and Marlorat, who tax it for an
offense, and manifest breach of Christ's commandment. And Jerome on that place
says, that Non erat necesse vt sermon iactaret, quod corpore praeferebat. His
tongue might be silent, for his whole body was turned into a tongue to publish
it. The act was good, but not good at that time. Disobedient he was, be it
granted: yet of all disobedient men commend me to him. Let not then any
politic or sinister respects tie up our tongues, from blessing him that has
blessed us. Suffocate not the fire of zeal in thy heart by silent lips, lest
it prove key-cold. But say with our Prophet, Psalm. 26. 12.
My foot stands in an even place: in the congregations will I bless the
Lord.

We perceive now the motive cause that brought David into Gods house: I would
take leave from hence in a word, to instruct you with what mind you should
come to this holy place. We are in substance inheritors of the same faith,
which the Jews held: and have in stead of their Tabernacle, Sanctuary, Temple;
Churches, places set apart for the Assembly of Gods Saints. Wherein we receive
divine Mysteries, and celebrate divine Ministeries; which are said by Damascen;
Orthod. Fid. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Plus participare operationis and gratiae diuinae. There is nothing lost by the
Gospel, which the Law afforded; but rather all bettered. It is obseruable that
the building of that glorious Temple, was the maturity and consummation of
Gods mercy to the Jews. Infinite were his favors betwixt their slavery in
Egypt, and their peace in Israel. God did, as it were, attend upon them to
supply their wants. They have no guide: why, God himself is their guide, and
goes before them in a pillar of fire. They have no shelter: the Lord spreads a
cloud over them for a Canopy. Are they at a stand, and want way? The Sea shall
part and give them passage, whiles the divided waters are as walls unto them.
For sustenance, they lack bread: heaven it self shall power down the food of
Angels. Have they no meat to their bread? A wind shall blow to them
innumerable Quails. Bread and flesh is not enough without drink: behold, a
hard rock smitten with a little wand shall power out abundance of water. But
what is all this, if they yet in the wilderness shall want apparel? their
garments shall not wax old on their backs. Do they besiege? Jericho walls
shall fall down before them: for want of engines, hailestones shall brain
their enemies: Lamps, and pitchers, and dreams shall get them victory. The
Josh. 10. 1^.
Sun shall stand still in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aialon; to
behold their conquests. Lack they yet a Land to inhabit? the Lord will make
good his promise against all difficulties, and give them a land that flows
with milk and honey.

But is all this yet short of our purpose, and their chief blessedness? They
want a House to celebrate his praise, that has done all this for them: behold,
the Lord gives them a goodly Temple, neither does he therein only accept
their offerings, but he also gives them his Oracles; even vocal oracles
between the Cherubins. I might easily parallel England to Israel in the
circumference of all these blessings: but my center is their last and best, and
whereof they most boasted: The Ier. 7. 4.
Temple of the Lord, and the Law of their God. To answer these we have the
Houses of God, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ. We have all, though all in a
new manner. 2. Cor. 5. Old things 2. Cor. 5. 17.
are passed away; behold, all things are become new. They had an Heb. 8. 13.
Old Testament, we have the New Testament. They had the Spirit, we have a new
Spirit. They had Commandments, we have Nouum mandatum; the Ioh. 13. 34.
New commandment. They had an Inheritance, Canaan; we have a new Inheritance
promised. Vids nouum coelum, and nouam terram; Reu. 21. 1.
I saw a new heaven, and a new earth. To conclude, they had their Temple, we
have our Churches: to which as they were brought by their Sabbath, so we by our
Lords day: wherein as they had their Sacraments, so we have our Sacraments. We
must therefore bear the like affection to ours, as they did to that. We have
greater cause. There was the shadow, here is the substance: there the figure,
here the truth: there the sacrifices of beasts, here of the Lamb of God,
taking away the sin of the world.

I find my self here occasioned to enter a great sea of discourse; but you
shall see, I will make but a short cut of it. It is Gods house you enter; a
house where the Lord is present; the place where his honor dwells. Let this
teach us to come.

1. With Reverence. Leuit. 19. 30.
Ye shall hallow my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary: I am the Lord. The
very mention of this Reverence, me thinks, should strike our hearts with our
selfe-knowne guiltiness. How few look to their feet, before they enter these
holy doors? Eccl. 5. and Eccl. 5. 1.
so they offer the Sacrifice of imprudent and impudent fools. If they are to
hear, they regard Quis, not Quid: any thing is good that some man speaks, the
same in another triuiall. If the man likes them not, nor shall the Sermon. Many
thus contend, like those two Germans in a Tavern; One said he was of Doctor
Martins religion, the other protested himself of Doctor Luthers religion: and
thus among their cups the litigation grew hot between them: whereas indeed
Martin and Luther was but one man. Others, when they come first into the
Church, they swappe down on their seats, clappe their hattes before their
eyes, and scarce bow their knees; as if they came to bless God, not to entreat
God to bless them. They would quake in the presence of an offended King; who
are thus impudent faced in the house of God. But says the Lord, whose Esa. 66.
2.
Throne is the heaven, and the earth his footstool; I will look to him that
trembles at my word. So Jacob, Genesis 28. was afraid; and said, How fearful
is this place! Genesis 28. 17.
This is none other then the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
Whereupon Bernard, Terribilis plane locus, etc. A fearful place indeed, and
worthy of all reverence: which Saints inhabit, holy Angels frequent, and God
himself graceth with his own presence. As the first Adam was placed in
Paradise to keep it; so the second Adam is in the congregation of his Saints,
to preserve it. Therefore enter not without Reverence. Psalm. 5. 7.
I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercies; and in thy fear
will I worship toward thy holy Temple.

2. With Joy. None but a free will offering is welcome to God. It is a common
opinion in the world, that Religion does dull a man's wits, and deiect his
spirits: as if mirth and mischief were only sworn brothers. But Gods word
teaches, and a good conscience finds, that no man can be so joyful, as the
faithful: nor is there so merry a land, as the holy Land: no place of joy like
the Church. Let the wicked think, that they cannot laugh if they be tied to
the Law of Grace, nor be merry if God be in the company. But the Christian
knows, there is no true joy, but the good joy: and if this be any where, it is
in the Temple. Psalm. 122. 1.
I was glad when they said unto me: Let us go into the house of the Lord.
Indeed therefore we are not merry enough, because we are not enough Christians.
Can you wish more joy to be received, then that Romans 14 Peace of conscience,
and joy of the holy Ghost? Hilaris cum Romans 14. 17.
pondere virtus; a joy that can neither be suppressed, nor expressed. Or more
joy to be communicated, then Colos. 3. in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual
songs, singing with Col. 3. 16.
grace in your hearts to the Lord. Think, think, thy God is here. The Angels
of heaven rejoice in his glorious presence, and crown it as their chief
felicity: and shall not poor man rejoice in his gracious presence; as it were,
his most blessed society? yes; the Psalm. 4. 6. 7.
light of thy Countenance, O Lord, shall put more gladness into our hearts;
then into the worldlings their abundance of corn and wine. Cast away then
your dullness, and unwillingness of heart; Come merrily and with a joyful
soul into the house of God.

3. With Holiness. It is holy ground; not by any inherent holiness, but in
regard of the religious use. For that place, which was once Bethel, the House
of GOD; proved afterward Bethauen, the house of iniquity. But it is thus Gods
Sanctuary, the habitation of his Sanctity: Procul hinc, procul este profani.
Put off thy shoes; d' off thy carnal affections; the place where thou
stand is holy ground. wash thy hands, yea thy heart in innocence, before
thou come near to Gods Altar. Be the Minister never so simple, never so
sinful; the word is holy, the action holy, the time holy, the place holy;
ordained by the most Holy, to make us holy; said a reverend Divine: Gods house
is for godly exercises: they wrong it therefore that turn Sanctuarium into
Promptuarium, the Sanctuary into a Butterie; and spiritual food into
belly-cheere. And they much more, that pervert it to a place of Pastime; making
the house of praise, a house of plays. And they most of all, that make it a
house, not laudis, but fraudis: Math. 21. 13.
My house is the house of prayer; but ye have made it a d^nne of thieves:
robbing, if not men of their goods, yet God of the better part, sincerity of
conscience.

What a horrid thing would it be, Beloved; if you should depart from this
Church, where you learn to keep a good conscience, but into the market; and
there practice deceit circumuentio^, oppression, swearing, drunkenness! O do
not derive the commencement of your sins from Gods house. What a mockery is
this, and how odious in the sight of heaven, if you should begin your
wickedness with a Sermon ^as the Papists begin their treasons with a mass:
I tax no known person; but for the facts and faults, Non ignota cano, I do
not speak of things unknown. I would to God your amended lives might bring me
with shame again hither, to recant and unsay it.

But it often so falls out, that as those conspirators met at the Capitol, so
the Church is made the Communis Terminus, where many wickednesses have
appointed to meet. 2. Cor. 6* ^6.
What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Begin not the day with God,
to spend all the rest with Satan. Your tongues have now blessed the Lord: let
not the evening find them red with oaths, or black with curses. Let not
that saying of Luther be verifyed by you; that In nomine Domini incipit omne
malum; in the name of God begins all mischief. Whatsoever your morning
Sacrifice pretend, look to your afternoon. You have done so much the worse,
as you have made a show of good: and it had been easier for your profane
hearts, to have missed this admonition. This Caveat, before I leave Gods house,
I thought to commend to your practice, when you leave it.

I have held you too long in the Church, speaking of the Church. It was the
most material point I propounded to my discourse: forgive the prolixity; the
breuity of the rest shall make amends. The first strain or staire was his
entrance into GODS house: now he is in, what does he? what brings he? we
find

Burnt Offerings.
I have three disswasions from punctual tractation of this point. 1. The poor
remnant of the fugitive time. See Sermon. on Psalm. 118. 27.
2. I have liberally handled it on former occasions. 3. The necessity is not
great of discoursing the Sacrifices of the Law, in these days of the Gospel
we have the light; and therefore need not trouble our selves to call back the
shadows.

Sacrifices are of great Antiquity: not only the Book of God, but even the
Law of nature has imprinted in man's heart, that Sacrifices must be offered. It
is written in the conscience, that an homage was due to the superior power,
which is able to revenge it self of dishonor and contempt done it; and to
regratifie them with kindness that served it. But David's Sacrifice was the
earnest of a thankful heart. I might amplify it, and perhaps pick up some
good gleanings after others full carts.

I could also observe, that David came not before God empty-handed; but brought
with him some actual testimony of his devoted affection; Burnt offerings. To
the confusion of their faces, who will no longer serve God, if he grows
chargeable to them. If they may receive from God good things, and pay him only
with good words, they are content to worship him. But if they cannot be in his
favor, but it must cost them the setting on; they will save their purses,
though they lose their souls. If he requires ought for his Church, poor
Ministers, or poor members; they cry with Judas, Ad quid perditio haec? why
is this waste? They are only so long rich in devotion, as they may be rich by
devotion: and no longer.

But for our selves, be we sure that the best Sacrifice we can give to God, is
obedience: not a dead beast, but a living soul. The Lord takes no delight in
the blood of brutish creatures; a spirit in bodies; the impassible in savors
arising from Altars. It is the mind, the life, the soul, the obedience, that
he requires: 1. Sam. 15. 22.
To obey is better then sacrifice. Let this be our burnt offering, our
Holocaust: a sanctified Romans 12. 1. 2.
Body and Mind given up to the Lord. First the heart. My Son, give me thy
heart. Is not the heart enough? no, the hand also; Esa. 1. 16.
wash the hands from blood and pollution. Is not the hand enough? no, the foot
also: Remove thy foot from evil. Is not the foot enough? no, the lips also;
Guard the doors of thy mouth; Psalm. 34 13.
Refrain thy tongue from evil. Is not the tongue enough? no, the ear also;
Let him that has ears to hear, hear. Is not the ear enough? no, the eye
also; Let thine eyes be toward the Lord. Is not all this sufficient? No, give
body and spirit. 2. Cor. 6. 20.
Ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify GOD in your body, and in your
spirit, which are GODS. When the eyes abhor lustful objects, the ears
slanders, the foot erring paths, the hands wrong and violence, the tongue
flattery and blasphemy, the heart pride and hypocrisy: this is thy Holocaust;
thy whole burnt offering.

I will pay thee my vows.
The third and highest degree of this Song is, Uowes; I will pay thee my vows.
And here among vows, I might sooner then with Burnt offerings, lose the time,
your patience, and my self. This vow was no meritorious or supererogatory
work in David. But though the Law generally binds him to Gods service, yet to
some particular act of Gods service, he may newly bind himself by a vow. So
Genesis 28. 20. 22.
Jacob vowed a vow, saying; If God will be with me, etc. This stone that I
have set for a pillar, shall be Gods house; and of all that thou shall give me,
I will surely give the Tenth unto thee. Our Prophet did vow performance of that
duty, to which without vowing he was obliged. Psalm. 119. I have vowed or
sworn, and will perform it: that Psalm. 119. 106.
I will keep thy righteous judgments.

There are many cautions in vows, which I must now vow to omit. Only
Salomons rule excepted, Eccles. 5. When thou vowest a vow to God, defer not
to pay it; for he Eccl. 5. 4. 6.
has no pleasure in fools, pay that thou have vowed. Suffer not thy mouth to
cause thy flesh to sin. Let nothing be vowed that is not Penes vonentem, in
the power of the vower: and then the thing being good, and thou enabled to
perform it, this vow must be kept. For thy vows are a heavy charge, Psalm.
56. Thy vows are heavy upon me, O Psalm. 56. 12.
God.

The Papists have strange, and often impossible vows; of Poverty, Virginity,
Pilgrimage. I will teach thee to make these vows too, God enable thee to keep
them. If thou will vow poverty, let it be in spirit. Vow thy self not in the
world a beggar, but a beggar to Christ. Many blessed Saints have served GOD
with their wealth, and thought not that religion was only in them that begged.
If thou will vow virginity, vow thy self a Virgin to Christ: whether thou be
married or single, keep the bed undefiled; that 2. Cor. 11. 2.
thou may be presented a pure Virgin to Christ. If thou will vow Pilgrimage,
let it not be to our Lady of Loretto, or of Halle and Zichem, indeed not to our
Lady, but to our Lord: vow thy self a Pilgrim to Christ: Load not thy self
with the luggage of this world, lest it hinder thy journey; and cease not
traveling till thou come to thy Home; the place of peace and eternal rest.
These are lawful, lawdible vows: the Lord send us all to make them, and to
keep them.

You see, I am quickly got up these two latter stayres: Some more special use
remains only to be made, and so give way to conclusion. I will take from
these three branches, a just reproof of three sorts of people: Refusers,
Intruders, Back-sliders. Refusers to come, being called. Intruders, that come
being not prepared. And Back-sliders, that make vows, but not keep them. The
first say not, We will go into thy house. The second say, We will go into thy
house, but not with burnt offerings. The last deny not both the former: We will
go into thy house, and with burnt offerings; but non soluent vota; they will
not pay their vows.

1. Refusers or Recusants are of two sorts; Papists, and Separatists, or
Schismatikes.

1. Papists; and they have so much recourse ad transmarina Iudicia; to
beyond sea Judgments; that they dare not come into Gods house, because of the
Popes interdiction. And the Popes have so wrought and brought it about now,
that they will not only in abstracto be had in reverence; but in concreto be
feared with observation. Though at first thirty Bishops there successively
yielded their heads to the block for Christ: yet afterward, by change of
Bishops in that See, and of humors in those Bishops, such alteration has
followed; that Rome is no liker to what Rome was, then 1. Sam. 19. 13
Michals Image on a pillow of goats hair, was like David. The cause therefore
of their not communicating with us, is awe of the Popes Supremacy. For some of
their greatest Writers have justified our Communion book, to contain all
doctrine necessary to salvation. The not suffering them to come to Gods house,
is then rather a point of Popish policy and state, then of Christian devotion.
But indeed they are the Satanicall Jesuits that set them afoote. The common
people, like the Mare mortuum, a dead Sea, would be quiet enough, if these
blustering winds did not put them into tumult. And so long as those dogs can
bark against Gods house, the poor affrighted people dare not come there. So
that England may have their bodies, but Rome has their hearts; and the danger
is fearful, lest Satan also come in for his share, and take possession of
their souls.

2. Schismatikes; who, because their curious eyes (looking through the
spectacles of opinion) spy some Morphew of corruption on the Churches face,
will utterly forsake it. There are some that refuse peaceable obedience, as the
Poet made his Plays, to please the people; or as Simon Magus was Christened;
for company. The Separatists are peeuishly wretched: discontent drives them
from God; and though they say, they fly for their conscience, indeed they fly
from their conscience: leaving all true devotion behind them, and their wives
and children upon the Parish.

2. Well, they are gone, and my discourse shall travel no further after them:
but fall upon others nearer hand. There are some so far from Refusers, that
they are rather Intruders. They will come into Gods house, but they will bring
no burnt offerings with them: no preparation of heart to receive benefit in the
Church. They come without their wedding garment, and shall one day hear that
fearful and unanswerable question; Friends, how came you in hither?

These are the utterly profane, that come rather with a lame knowledge, then a
blind zeal. For some of them, good clothes carry them to Church: and they had
rather men should note the fashion of their habites, then God the habit of
their hearts. They can better brook ten disorders in their lives, then one in
their locks. Others are the secure semi-atheisticall Cosmopolites; and these
come too: and none take a truer measure of the Sermon: for their sleep
begins with the prayer before it, and wakens just at the Psalm after it.
These think, that God may be served well enough with looking on. And their
utmost duty, but to bring their bodies a little further living, then they
shall be brought dead: for then perhaps they shall come to the Churchyard, now
they will bring them to Church. Devotion and they are almost strangers, and so
much as they know of it, they dishonor by their acquaintance. Their burnt
offerings are nothing else, but a number of eyes at utmost lift up to heaven;
their heart has another center. They bring as many sins with them every day
to Church, as they have been all their lives in committing. Their hands are
not washed from aspersions of lust and blood: their eyes are full of
whoredom, their lips of slander, their affections of covetousness, their wits
of cheating, their souls of impiety. If there were no Saints in the Church,
how could they hope, the roof would not fall on their guilty heads! But I will
leave them to the Lords reproof. Iere. 7. Will ye steal, murder, commit
adultery, and swear falsely: and come and stand before Iere. 7. 9. 11.
me in this house, staring me in the face, as if you were innocent? Behold,
even I have seen it, says the Lord.

3. There is yet a last-sort; that will come into Gods house, and bring with
them burnt offerings, a show of external devotion; but they will not pay their
Vows. Distress, war, captivity, calamity, famine, sickness, brings down
the most elate and lofty spirits. It turns the proud Gallants fether into a
kerchefe, pulls the wine from the lips of the drunkard; ties up the tongue of
the svvearer, whom thunder could not adjure to silence: makes the Adulterer
loathe the place of his sin, the bed. And though the Usurer stuff his pillow
with nothing but his bonds and morgages, softer and sweeter in his opinion then
Down or feathers; yet his head will not leave aching.

This misery does so sting, terrify, and put sense into the dead flesh of the
nummed conscience; that (all worldly delights being found like plumme^s of
lead, tied about a man while he is exposed in this Sea; so far from helping
him to swim, that they sink him rather) the eye looks about for another
shore, and finds none but God. To this so long forgotten God, the heart
begins to address a messenger, and that is Prayer. God (the wicked see)
must be called on, but they know not how. They have been so mere strangers
to him, that they cannot tell how to salute him. Like beggars that are blind,
they are forced to beg, but they see not of whom. Or if their eyes are so far
open; Vident quasi e longinquo salutem, sed interiacente pelago: vident quo
eundum, non qua: They see health a far off, as it were beyond the Sea: they
see whither they would go, but not which way.

If any inferior thing, or created proppe could uphold them, God should not be
solicited. If friends will, if Physike will, if money will, if all the delicate
objects for any sense will ease or appease their grief, they will not seek to
heaven. Yea, if Beelzebub the God of Ekron can cure them, they will not trouble
the GOD of Israel. But all lower pleasures to one thus sick, is but like a
sweet harmony of music to a deaf man. There is no hope of comfort but from
above the clouds. Health and prosperity is but as a Coach to carry our desires
to heaven, but sickness is the post-horse. Only this Sub poena can bring us to
put up a supplication in the high Court of Requests and Mercy. Now lo, they
pray, they beseech, they sigh, they weep, they bleed, and lastly they vow.

What vow they? Either some new act to be done, or some old act to be left
undone. Now the drunkard vows abstinence, the lustful vows continence, the
swearer vows to leave his blasphemy: the Incloser vows to throw open his
taken in commons: the proud vow to leave their gaudy vanity: the vvorldling
vows to be charitable, and to relieve the poor. And perhaps at such a pinch
or dead lift, one Usurer in a thousand years may vow to forsake his usury, and
to restore all that he has so gotten. Now they say, Lord, remove from me this
malady, this extremity; and I will hereafter serve thee better, love thee more,
believe thy Gospel, relieve thy poor, give something to an Hospital, or do
some such act as may testify my thankfulness.

Well, God hears and grants; health comes, strength is recovered, the danger
is over, they are well. Now vbi vota? Where be their vows? Alas, we rise from
our beds of sickness, and leave our vows behind us. Aegrotus surgit, sed pia
vota iacent.


Physicians have a rule among themselves, concerning their Patients: Take
whiles they be in pain. For whatsoever they promise sick, when they are well,
they will not perform it. So God had need to take what devotion he can get
at our hands in our misery; for when prosperity returns, we forget our vows.
You have often heard that old verse: D^mon languebat, tunc monachus esse
volebat.
Demon conn^luit, demon vt ante suit.
And as wittily Englished: The Devil was sick, the devil a Monk would be,
The Devil was well, the devil of Monk was he.


The moral of it suits full to our present purpose. It is reported of
Constantinople, that a terrible Earthquake had over thrown many houses, slain
much people. Hereupon the remaining Inhabitants affrighted, fell devoutly to
their prayers and vows: privately in their chambers, publicly in their
Churches: the poor were relieved, justice administered, their lives much
amended. But afterward when God held his hand, they held their tongues: he
forbore plaguing, and they forbore praying: the rod ceased, and their piety
withal; they forgot their vows.

When the Lord has stricken us by famine; in withholding the rain from us; or
in pouring down too much too fast upon us: Or by a grievous plague, turning our
popular streets into a Desert: we straight grow penitent; Zeal carries up our
cries to heaven; we pray, we sigh, we weep. Sorrow sits in our eyes,
devotion on our lips, God has at that time more hearty prayers in an hour,
then ordinarily in a year. But as the Poet spoke, Nocte pluit tota, redeunt
spectacula mane.


The Lord no sooner takes off the burden of misery; but we also shake of the
burden off piety; we forget our vows. O the mercy of God, that such
forgetfulness should possess Christian hearts! This was unthankful Isreal's
fault, Psalm. 106. They soon forgot his works: they forgate, yea soon: they
made haste to forget: so the Psalm. 106. 13.
Original is; They made haste, they forgate. Like men that in sleep shake
death by the hand, but when they are awake will not know him.

It is storied of a rich Merchant, that in a great storm at Sea, vowed to
Jupiter if he would save him and his vessel, to give him a Hecatombe. The
storm cease, and he bethinkes himself that a Hecatombe was unreasonable; he
resolves on seven Oxen. Another tempest comes, and now he vows again the
seven at least. Delivered then also, he thought that seven were too many, and
one Ox would serve the turn. Yet another peril comes, and now he vows
solemnly to fall no lower: if he might be rescued, an Ox Jupiter shall have.
Again freed, the Ox sticks in his stomach, and he would feign dravv his
devotion to a lower rate; a Sheep was sufficient. But at last being set
ashore, he thought a Sheep too much; and purposes to carry to the Altar
only a few Dates. But by the way, he eats up the Dates, and lays on the
Altar only the shells. After this rate do many perform their vows. They
promise whole Hecatombes in sickness; but they reduce them lower and lower
still, as they grow well. He that vowed to build an Hospital; to restore an
Impropriation to the Church; to lay open his enclosures, and to serve God with
an honest heart: brings all at last to a poor reckoning; and thinks to please
the Lord with his empty shells. There was some hope of this man's souls
health, vvhiles his body was sick: but as his body rises to strength, his
soul falls to weakness.

It is the reproach of Rome; No penny, no Pater noster: let it not be our
reproach and reproof too; No plague, no Paternoster; no punishments, no
prayers. Thy vows are Gods debts, and Gods debts must be paid. He will not
(as men do desperate debtors) dismiss thee on a slight composition. No; Bern.
Just exigitur ad soluendum, qui non cogitur ad vouendum. He is justly
required to pay, that was not compelled to vow. Aug. in Ep. ad Armentar. et
Paulinum.
Non talis eris, si non feceris quod vouisti, qualis mansisti, si nihil tale
vouisses: Minor enim tunc esses, non peior. Thou remainest not the same having
vowed, and not performed; as thou had been, had thou not vowed. Thou had
then been less, thou art now worse.

Well then Beloved; if we have vowed a lawful vow to the Lord, let us pay it.
Let it not be said of us, that we do Aliud sedentes, aliud stantes: one thing
sitting in our chair of sickness, another thing standing in our stations of
health. The Lord does not deliver us out of the bond of distress, that we
should deliver our selves out of the bond of obedience. Gal. 6. 7.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
reap. The next blow of his hand will be heavier, because thou have soon
forgotten this. Who can blame justice, if he strike us with yet greater
plagues; that have on our deliverance from the former, so mocked him with the
falling fruits of our vowed devotion? Come we then whose hearts the mercy of
God, and blood of Jesus Christ has softened; and say with our Psalmist; We
will go into thy house, O Lord, we will pay thee our vows.

You see all the parts of this Song: the whole comfort or harmony of all is
Praising God. I have showed you Quo loco, in his house: Quo modo, with burnt
offerings: Quo animo, paying our vows. Time has abridged this discourse,
contrary to my promise and purpose.

In a word, which of us is not infinitely beholding to the Lord our God: for
sending to us many good things, and sending away from us many evil things? O
where is our praise, where is our thankfulness? What shall we do unto thee,
O thou preserver of men? What? but take the cup of salvation, and bless the
Name of the Lord? Psalm. 100. 4.
O let us enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with
praise: let us be thankful unto him, and bless his Name. And let us not
bring our bodies only, but our hearts; let our souls be thankful.

Man's body is closed up within the Elements; his blood within his body; his
spirits in his blood, his soul within his spirits; and the Lord rests in his
soul. Let then the soul praise the Lord: let us not draw near with our
lips, and leave our hearts behind us: but let us give the searcher of the
hearts, a hearty praise. Ingratitude is the devils Text; oaths, execrations,
blaspemies, and lewd speeches are Commentaries upon it. But thankfulness is
the language of heaven; for it becomes Saints to be thankful. As therefore
we would give testimony to the world, and argument to our own conscience,
that we serve the Lord; let us promise and perform the words of my Text: We
will go into thy house with burnt offerings: we will pay thee our vows. The
Lord give thankfulness to us, and accept it of us; for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
MAN'S SEED-TIME AND HARVEST: OR, Lex Talionis.
GALAT. 6. 7. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows,
that shall he also reap.
THESE words have so near alliance to the former, that before we speak
personally of them, we must first find out their Pedigree. To fetch it no
higher, then from the beginning of this Chapter, the line of their Genealogy
runs thus. 1. Supportation of the weak, verse. 1. and 2. 2. Probation of our
selves, verse. 4. 3. Communication of duties to our Teachers, verse. 6. The
first is an action of Charity: the second of Integrity: the third of Equity.

This last is the Father of my Text: and it is fit, that we being to speak
of the child, should first look a little into his Parentage. Patrique
simillima proles. It is this. Let him that is taught in the word, communicate
to him that teaches in all good things.

This, one would think, should stand like the Sun, all men blessing it: yet
Mammon has suborned some dogs to bark against it. Will they say, Let him is
only permissi^e? They shall find it was imperative; Genesis 1. 3.
Let there be light, and there was light. Though their sensible hearts want the
obedience of these insensible creatures. Or will they except against Taught; as
if they that will not be taught, were not bound? Indeed many are better fed
then taught; otherwise they would not deny food to his body, that does not
deny food to their souls. Or perhaps they will plead Indignitatem docentis,
the unworthiness of the Teacher. And what Paul shall be worthy if every
Barbarian may censure him? But non tollatur diuinum debi^um, propter humanam
debilitatem. Let not God lose his right, for man's weakness. Mal. 3. 8.
You have robbed me, says God; not my Ministers.

Will not all this quarrelling serve? yet still Paul's proposition must have
some opposition. Though we must give something to our Teachers, yet this charge
does not fetch in Tithes. This, this is the point: prove this, and you shall
find many a great man's soul, as his Impropriations cannot be, in a damnable
Lapse. I would say something of it; but me thinks I hear my friends telling
me, what Sadolet said to Erasmus. Erasmus would prove, that worshipping* of
Images might well be abolished. I grant (quoth Sadolet) thy opinion is good:
but this point should not be handled, because it will not be granted.

I am sure, Gods law gives tithes to his Church: but say they, that Law is
abolished; repealed by a new Act of Parliament. Paul in his Epistle frees us
from the old Law. Indeed Paul speaking of our Sanctification and Salvation;
notes our deliverance from the Lusts of the Flesh, and from the lists of the
Law. From the Ceremonial Law wholly, from the Moral only so far as it
shall not condemn those in Christ. But who, save an Advocate of Mammon, will
limit Tenths to Ceremony? God requires a portion of our Time, of our Goods: the
Seventh of our time, the Tenth of our goods: and we have those, that turn
both into Ceremony. Such make the Sabbath it self a mere Ceremony. But be
not deceived, God is not mocked.

This same (...), In all good things, is of some latitude. Many will allow some
of their goods, but they snarle at Paul's In omnibus. The Minister shall have
the Easter-booke, perhaps some other trifles: it may be (against their wills)
wool and lambs: but shall the black coat carry away the Tith-shocke? The
gumm'd Taffata Gentleman would fret out at this. They plead to their Vicar, We
give what the Law allows. What their Law, not what the Gospel. And yet they
hope not to be saved by the Law, but by the Gospel.

The Apostle says, Part of all; why then not the tenth part, which God at the
first commanded, and custom in all ages commended? That part once assigned of
God, should prevent all arbitrary disposing of men. What Landlord leaves it to
his Tenant, to pay him what rent he list? If Mammon must set out Gods portion,
he is sure to have but a little. It was never well with the Church, since it
was at the worlds finding. No man fears to surfeit, whiles he is at his
enemies feeding.

I think the purest and precisest Reformers (deformers I should say) of
Religion, can hardly order this matter, better then God has done. Every
plummet is not for this sound: nor every line for this level: nor out of many
such blocks can a man carue Mercury. The Canon Law says, that Si Princeps
causam inter parts audierit, and sententiam dixerit; lex est in omnibus
similibus. If the Prince hear a cause betwixt parties, and give a definitive
Sentence, that is a ^aw to decide all controversies of the same nature. But we
have the Prince of heavens Sentence for paying of Tithes; before the Law to
Abraham, under the Law to the Jews; therefore small reason that it should not
hold under the Gospel among Christians. Be not deceived, God, etc.

They were the Churches, why are they not? Plead what you will, God has a
grievous Quare impedit against you. You say, they were taken away from idle
drones, and fat bellied Monks. So Rapiuntur ab ind^gnis, (...) a dignis.
From the unworthy they were taken, and from the worthy they are detained. But
to whom are they given? Possidebant P^pistae, possident Rapistae. Those kept
some good hospitality with them, these keep none. So that as Lib. 1. cap. 4.
Comin^us observes upon the battle of Montlch^y: some lost their livings for
running away; and they were given to those that ran ten mile further.
Idleness lost, and oppression has gained. But let me say with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 11. Psalm. 11. 3.
The foundations are cast down: but what has the righteous done? The
foundations of the Church, which should hold up the Gospel, tenths and
maintenance, are cast down, because of superstitious abusers; but what has
the righteous done, that these things should be taken from them? Arondel. Ar^.
B. of C^nt. S^e Fox. Mar^l. page 533.
A Bishop coming to a Town, because the Bells rang not, suspended the Organs.
A strange kind of revenge, because the Bells rang not in the Steeple, to
suspend the Organs in the Quire. So because those Bells, not of Aaron, but of
Antichrist, did not ring to Gods glory: you have suspended the Organs and
means of living from them that take pains; and in your own consciences
preach to you the sincere Gospel of Christ. But be not deceived, God is not
mocked.

Or perhaps you say, you must have these Church-liuings for Hospitalities sake,
that you may keep the better houses. So you make the Clergy poor, that you
may make the poor rich.

I have read, that the Sophy of Persia, being to send a great sum of money
for an offering to Mahomet in Arabia, would send none of his own coin; for
that he said was gotten by ill means: but exchanged it with English Merchants,
because theirs was gotten honestly, and with a good conscience. So it may be,
you think that your own unjust moneys, and extorted commings in by the ruin
of your Tenants, is no good offering to GOD. But the Church-mans living comes
honestly, and with a good conscience; and therefore you will take that, to
offer your sacrifice of alms to God. But herein you come short of the
Persian: you do not give your own Lordships and lands in exchange. Yet me
thinks, if spiritual livings must be given to the poor, you might suffer the
Church to give her own. I could never find either in Albo Praetorum, or in
Rubrica Martyrum, how the Laity was deputed to this stewardship. Sure they
intrude themselves into this Office, and will be Gods Almoners, whether he will
or no. If they will give to the poor; let them give that is theirs. Ambr.
Dona quaerit, non spolia Deus. God expects and respects gifts of thine own,
not spoils of others. Be not deceived, God is not mocked.

But where is your Hospitality after all this? you can tell me; nay I can tell
you. Bestowed amongst Silk-men, Mercers; yea, upon Taylers, Players, Harlots;
and other insatiable beggars of the same rank. In the reign of Alexander
Seuerus, the Tipplers, and Alehouse-keepers complained against the Christians,
that they had turned a place of ground to some religious use, which belonged to
them. But the very heathen Emperor could answer (upon hearing the cause) that
it was honest and fit, God to be served before Alehouses. Who would not
judge, that Tithes are fitter to be given to God, then to hounds, harlots,
sycophants, inuenters of fashions, and such bawdes of pride and notorious
iniquity?

This I will speak boldly, and justify; that Hospitality was at the same time
impropriated from the land, that spiritual livings were impropriated from the
Church. You have not robbed Peter to pay Paul, but to pay Judas. And hence
misery sets her black foo^ into so many fair doors: all comes to beggary at
last. They that swallow Churches, like dogs that eat knot-grasse, never thrive
after it. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. I have rubbed this sore enough,
and conclude with that saying of Chrysostom: Chry. in Mal. 3.
Moneo vt reddatis Deo sua, vt Deus (...) vobis vestra. Restore to God his
own, that God may restore to you your own.

Thus as he that had pulled one of Salomons Curtains, the rest would follow;
though in the first there were work enough for his admiration. So in this
coherence, pardon me, if I have been somewhat plentiful. It was the induction
to my Text: and the door thus opened, let us enter in to suruay the building.
Be not, etc. The whole may be distinguished into a Caution. Reason.

The caution, Be not deceived, God is not mocked. The Reason; For whatsoever a
man sows, that shall he also reap. The Caution is partly Disswasiue: Be not
deceived. Perswasiue: God is not mocked.

You may deceive your selves, you cannot deceive God. These two circumstances
make against two defects Error. Be not deceived. Hypocrisy. God is not mocked.



The Disswasion: Be not deceived.
This is the voice of a friend, studying Aut praeuenire errori, aut reuocare
errantem; either to prevent a man, before he erres, or to recall him erring. A
phrase often used by our Apostle, Ephesians. 5. Let no man deceive you with Ephesians.
5. 6.
vain words. Nihil facilius est, quam errare. There is nothing easier, then to
err. There is no man but erres; sometime^ in via pedum; often in via morum.
This provision then is necessary. (...). Deceits lie as thick upon the earth,
as the Grasshoppers did in Egypt; a man can scarce set his foot besides them.

But to prevent the deceiuings of sin is our Apostles intention, Hebr. 3.
Lest any of us be hardened, through the Heb. 3. 13.
deceitfulness of sin. Sin is crafty, and full of delusion: there is no
sin but has his couzonage. Usury walks in Alderman Thrifty's gown. Pride
gets the name of my Lady Decency. Idolatry, as if it dwelt by ill neighbors,
praises it self; and that for the purest Devotion. Homicide marches like a
man of valor; and Lust professes it self Natures Scholar. Covetousness is
goodman Nabals husbandry: and Enclosing, Master Oppressors policy. We were
wont to say, that black could never be colored into white: yet the devil
has some Painters that undertake it. Evils are near neighbors to good.
Errore sub illo, Pro vitio virtus crimina saepe tulit. By that means virtue
has borne the blame of vices faults: yea, and more then that; Vice has had
the credit of Virtues goodness. But be not deceived.

When men's wits, and the devils to help, have found out the fairest pretexts
for sin; Gods justice strikes off all, and leaves Sin naked and punishable.
Many pretenses have been found out for many sins: besides distinctions,
mitigations, qualifications, extenuations, colors, questions, necessities,
inconveniences, tolerations, ignorances. But when man has done, God begins.
One argument of Gods now, is stronger then all ours. Thou shall not do this.
Go study to persuade thy self, that thou may: yet at last GOD takes away
all thy distinctions, when he poures his wrath on thy naked conscience. Then
where is thy paint? If it prevail not against the Sun, what will it do
against the fire?

God charged our first Parents, that they should not cate of the forbidden
fruit: If you do, you shall dye. The devil comes first with a flat
Negative; Gene. 3. 4.
Non mori^mini: Ye shall not dye. Then with subtle promises; Ye shall be as
Gods, knowing good and evil. But what is the event? They eat, and they die;
are instantly made mortal, and should have died for ever, but for a Savior.
GOD bids Saul slay all in Amalek, 1. Sam. 15. Smite Amalek, utterly destroy all
that they have, and spare them not. Yet Saul 1. Sam. 15. 3.
spares Agag, and the fat cattle. Why is this a fault? I spared the best of
the cattle for Sacrifice to the Lord. Will not this serve? No: God reiects
Saul from being King over Israel; who had rejected God from being King over
Saul. Be not deceived, God is not m^ked.

Consider we here the examples of Uzzah, and Vzziah. For 1. Chr. 13. 10.
Vzzah; God had charged, that none but the consecrated Priests should touch the
Ark^. Uzzah seeing the Oxen shake the Arc, put forth his hand to stay it up.
Was this a sin to stay the Ark of God from falling? Yes: God proves it; he
lays him dead by the Arks side. For Vzziah, God had charged, Numb. 18. that
none should invade the Priests office. The stranger that comes Number. 18. 7.
nigh, shall be put to death. 2. Chr. 26. 18.
Vzziah will come to the Altar with a Censor in his hand to offer Incense. Why,
is this an offense to offer to the Lord? Yes: GOD makes it manifest; Vzziah is
a Leper to his dying day. God had commanded the Prophet sent to Bethel; 1.
King. 13. 17
Thou shall eat no bread, and drink no water there. Well, he is going
homewards; and an old Prophet ouer-takes him, and persuades him to refresh
himself. No says the other, I must not; For so was it charged me in the Word
of the Lord; Thou shall eat no bread, etc. But says the old Prophet; An
Angel spoke to me, saying, Bring him back, that he may eat bread. Well, he
goes: Is not a Prophets word? an Angels word authority enough? No, the Lord
proves it; he gives a Lion leave to slay him. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked.

The Jews knew, that they ought not to despise their Messiah. He is come: Lo
now, they study arguments against him. John 7. We know this man whence he is:
but Ioh. 7. 27.
when Christ comes, no man knows whence he is. And Ver. 52.
Search and look; for out of Galilee arises no Prophet. Be these their
cauills against Gods express charge? He answers all, when he leaves their
house unto them desolate. I hope I may take a little, says ^ehazi: but enough
took him for it, a continual Lepro^e. The evil Servant has his plea, Math.
25. I knew that thou were a hard man, etc. Therefore I hid thy talent in the
earth: lo, there thou have Math. 25. 25.
that is thine. But what follows, ver. 30? Cast ye that unprofitable servant
into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of ^eeth.

To come from example to application. It is Gods command concerning Princes;
Touch not mine Anointed. The Papists will touch them with the hand of death?
Why, they have warrant from the Pope. Gods Word says not so, either in
precept or precedent. If any King in Gods book had been deposed by a Priest,
all the Schools and Pulpits would have rung of it: we should have had no rule
with the Church of Rome. But it falls out happily; Ut quod praecepto non
iubetur, etiam exemplo careat. That as it is not commanded by charge, so nor
commended by examples. But will they still argue for this shedding of the
bloud-royall? The gallhouse confutes them here; but their worst confutation
will be confusion hereafter.

God says thou shall not put thy money to usury: thou have found out many
distinctions to satisfy thy conscience, or rather thy covetousness. Gods word
and thy will are at odds. He says, Thou shall not: thou say, thou may est.
On these and these terms, Hell fire shall decide the question. Relieve the
poor, says the Lord. Thou suckest their bloods rather: but howsoever wilt
give nothing. Why, may we not do with our own what we list? Well, this same
Ite maledict^; Go ye cursed, is a fearful and unanswerable argument. Thus
flesh and blood speedes, when it will deal with God on terms of disputation.
If Gods own reason, Thou shall not do this, be not stronger then all ours now;
it shall be one day. Ephesians. 5. 6.
Let no man deceive you with vain words: for, for these things, the wrath of
God shall come upon the children of disobedience. Be not deceived.

As every particular Sin has the particular color: so there are general
pretexts for general sins; whereby many souls are deceived. I find this
doctrine, though plain, so necessary, that I must be bold to pursue it. You
may easily forgive all good faults. There are seven general pleas for sin.

1. Predestination is pleaded. If I be written to life, I may do this: for
many are saved that have done worse. If not, were my life never so strict,
hell appointed is not to be avoided. These men look to the top of the
Ladder, but not to the foot. God ordaines not men to iump to Heaven, but to
climb thither by prescribed degrees. Non per saltum, sed scansum. Qui
ordinauit finem, ordinauit media ad finem. He that decreed the end, decreed
also the means that conduce to it. If thou take liberty to sin, this is none
of the way. Peter describes the rounds of this ladder, 2. Pet. 1. (...).
faith, virtue, knowledge, te^perance, patience, godliness, charity. Thou
ru^nest a contrary course, in the wild paths of unbelief, profanenes,
ignorance, riot, impatience, impiety, malice: this is none of the way. These
are the rounds of a Ladder that goes downward to hell. Gods predestination
Augu. de Praedest. Sanctorum.
est multis causa standi, nemini labendi: helps many to stand, pusheth none
down. Look thou to the way, let God alone with the end. Believe, repent,
amend, and thou have Gods promise to be saved. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked.

2. It is Gods will I should do this wickedness: he saw it, and might have
prevented it. It is unjust to damn a man for that he will^ him to do.

Answ. This is a blasphemous and most sacrilegious ^uill. Where did God ever
will thee to lie, to swear, to oppress, to adulterize? His will is his word:
and where find thou his word commanding sin? And shall Gods Sicut (...)
memorta tua no^ cogit (...) esse, quae sunt (...): Sic Deus praescientia sua
non cogit ^acienda, quae sunt futura. Aug. de lib^ (...). lib. 3.
prescience make him guilty of thy evil? Then must thy memory make thee guilty
of other men's evil. As thou by thy memory, do not cause those things to have
been done, that are past: So God by his foreknowledge does not cause those
things to be done, which are to come.

3. Ignorance is pleaded; I knew not the deed to be evil, or if evil, not so
dangerous. Indeed Ignorance may make a sin Minus, not Nullum; a less sin,
but not no sin. 1. Tim. 1. 13.
I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief: says our
Apostle. And Aug.
Peccata scientium peccatis ignorantium praepo^ntur. The sins of them that
know, are more heinous then the sins of them that know not. But if thou had
no other sin, thy ignorance is enough to condemn thee; for thou art bound to
know. (...) ea que sunt Domini nesciunt, a Domino nesciu^. i Gregor. in (...).
lib. 1. cap. 1.
They that will not know the Lord, the Lord will not know them. But I speak to
you that may know: your ignorance is affected. 1. Cor. 15 34.
Some of you have not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame. Be^.
in 11. g^d. (...).
Mul^ vt liberius peccarent, libenter ignorant. Many that they may sin the
more securely, are ignorant wilfully. Thus you may go blindfold to hell. Be
not deceived, God is not mocked.

4. A fourth says; I have many good deeds to weigh with my evils. Indeed I am
an Usurer, an Adulterer, a Swearer; but I keep a good house, I give alms; and
I will do more when I am dead. Indeed these are good works; Bona
accipientibus, non facientibus. Good to the receivers, not to the Giuers. So a
man may be borne for the good of many, not for his own. They write that the
Pyramides of Egypt was built for that great Pharaohs Tomb; but the Red Sea
disappointed him. Many think by good works to build up a heaven for
themselves, but leading unsanctified lives, hell preuents their purpose. And
such a man, as robbes many hundreds to relieve some, may at last for his
charity go to the Devil. The Papists indeed stand extremely for building
Abbeys, Colleges for Jesuits, and augmenting the revenues of Monasteries,
that Masses and Dirige's may be sung for their souls: they give full
absolution to such a man, and seal him a general acquittance of all his
sins. They make the besotted Laity, especially some rich Burger believe, that
without any more ado, it is impossible for a man to be damned that lives in
such a Profession; and which is strange, here they equivocate truly; so long
as a man lives in it; but if he dies in it, there is the danger. But we know*
the poison must be justified, or else the work is not sanctified. Be not
deceived, GOD is not mocked.

5. But say some, God is merciful. Comfortable truth: else woe, woe to
miserable man. But shall God show mercy to those that abuse his mercy? He will
not be so merciful to thee, as to be unjust to himself. God will be just, go
thou on and perish. God showed mercy to the relenting, not to the railing
thief. Would thou have him merciful to thee, that art unmerciful to him,
to thy self? Misericordia amplectenti, non tergiuer santidatur. They that will
lead a wicked life, sub spe misericordiae, in hope of mercy: shall meet with a
fearful death, sub terrore Iustitiae, in the horror of Justice. Kiss the
mercy of God, abuse it not. Where is Praesumptio veniae, will follow Consumptio
poen^: a presuming of favor shall be punished with a consuming wrath. Be not
deceived, etc.

6. Others allege; Christ died for our sins, and his satisfaction is of
infinite price. This is the door of hope, from which the profanest wretch is
angry to be driven. The most presumptuous sinner flatters his soul with this
comfort: as if the gates of Heaven were now set open, and he might enter with
all his iniquities on his back. Indeed there is no want in Christ; but is
there none in thee? In him is plenteous redemption; but how if in thee there
be scarce faith? whatsoever Christ is, what ar^ thou? Io^. 3. 16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only be^otten Son. He did not
let, or lend, or sell, but give: not an Angel, nor a servant, but a Son: not
another, but his own: not his adoptiue, but natural, his begotten Son: not
one of many, but his only begotten Son. Many degrees of love: but what of
all this? That whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. But thou have no faith, therefore no privilege by this gift.
John 10. 11.
I am the good shepherd, says Christ. Why? I give my life: but for whom? for
my sheep. Not for lustful goats, or covetous hogs, or oppressing Tigers. If
thou be such, here is no more mercy for thee, then if there were no Savior.
If there be no careful observation of the Law, there is no conservation by the
Gospel. No good life, no good faith: no good faith, no Christ. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked.

7. Well, yet Repentance makes all even wheresoever it comes; or God is not so
good as his word. Yes; God will be so good as his promise; but here is the
doubt, whether thou will be so good as thy purpose. Thou can charge God no
further then to forgive thee, repenting; not to give thee repentance sinning.
Promisit Deus poenitenti veniam, non peccanti poenitentiam. He has made a
promise to Repentance, not of Repentance. This is Gods tresure. what is the
reason, the malefactor went from the cross to heaven! Dedit poenitentiam, qui
dedit and Paradisum. God gave him repentance, that also gave him Paradise. Art
thou sure God will put this alms into thy polluted hand? It is dangerous
ventring the soul on such an uncertainty. He that sins that he may repent, is
like one that surfet^ that he may take Physic. And whether this Physic
will work on a dead heart, is a perilous fear. Alas! what tears are in
flint? what remorse in a benu^ed conscience? Tutum est poenitenda non
committere, certum non est commissa deflere. It is safe not to do what thou
may repent: it is not certain to repent what thou have done. It is the
fashion of many to send repentance before to threescore: but if they live to
those years, they do not then overtake it, but drive it before them still. Be
not deceived, God is not mocked.

You see now what trust is in colors: how easily you may deceive your selves,
how vnpossibly mock GOD. Leave then excuses to the wicked, that will be guilty
and God shall not know of it. Bernard reckons up their mitigations. Non feci,
etc. I have not done it: or if I have done, yet not done evil; or if evil,
yet not very evil: or if very Non feci: si feci, non male seci: si male seci,
non multum male: si multum male, no^ mala intention: si mala inte^tione, tamen
aliena persuasione. Bern. Tract. de grad. Humil. grad. 8.
evil, yet not with an evil mind: or if with an evil mind, yet by others
evil persuasion. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. If we cry with that
servant; Have patience, and I will pay thee all; the Lord may forbear in
mercy. But if we wrangle, I owe nothing; and God is too hasty to call me from
my pleasures; he will require the uttermost farthing.

I have held you long in this Disswasiue part of the Caution. The Perswasiue
was also much included in it, and therefore I will but touch it.

God is not mocked.
God is often in the Scripture called the Searcher of the heart. Iere. 17. The
heart is deceitful above all things, and Iere. 17. 9.
desperately wicked: who can know it? Who? Ego Dominus; I the Lord know the
heart. So Solomon in his prayer: 2. Chro. 6. 30.
Thou only know the hearts of all the children of men. So the Apostles
about the election of one in Judas room, Acts 1. 24.
Thou Lord, which know the hearts of all men. Now he that knows the heart,
cannot be mocked. It is hard to beguile the eye of man looking on us, how much
more to deceive the eye of God looking in us? Therefore Quod non audes facere
aspiciente conseruo, hoc ne cogites inspiciente Deo.

How vain a thing then is it to be an Hypocrite? As if God had not a window
into the heart, to discern it. Hypocrites, says Augustine, have De Temp. 215.
Christianum nomen ad iudicium, non ad remedium: The name of Christians to
their condemnation, not comfort. Their words are like an Echo, they answer
Gods call, but never come at him. Good company they will admit, to better their
credit, not their conscience. Like crafty Apothecaries, they have one thing
written in their papers and marks, another thing in their boxes. But because
every man is as hasty to condemn an Hypocrite, as David was to condemn the
Oppressor in the Parable, when the 2. Sam. 12. 5.
Tu es homo lies in his own bosom, I will touch two or three particulars.

If we look into Popery, we shall find it universally a professed study to
mock GOD. They make show by their abundant prayers of an abundant zeal: when
(as if God saw not the heart) they think the work done is sufficient. Those
Qui filo insertis numerant sua murmura baccis,
keep number and tale; no matter with what mind: no nor yet to whom; whether
to this Angel, or that Saint; to our Lord, or to our Lady. Yea it is recorded
that the Papists in Scotland (about Henry the 8. his time of England) used to
say the Lords Prayer to Saints. Insomuch Fox Martyrol. Page 1237.
that when a little knowledge came into some men's hearts of this absurdity,
there arose great Schism. And one Friar Toit^ was gotten to make a Sermon,
that the Pater noster might be said to Saints. So were the people divided, that
it was a common question; To whom say you your Paternoster? Call you these
zealous prayers? Be not deceived, God is not mocked.

As much might be said for their unclean Celibate. Their single life makes
show of great pureness, as if their adulteries, Sodomitry, experimental
brothelry, unmatchable uncleannesses were not known. They ostent their
Chastity, when Vrbs est iam tota Lupanar. What would they, but mock God?

No less for their fastings. How deadly a sin is it to eat flesh on a
Friday! yet is it no sin with them to be drunk on a Friday. A poor labourer
plowes all day, at night refreshes himself with a morsel of Bacon: he is an
Heretic. A gallant Gentleman hawks all day, at night sits down to his
variety of fishes, curious wines, possets, iunkets; O he is a good Catholic.
An Hypocrite he is rather. Famam quaerunt abstinentiae in delicijs. They seek
the credit of temperance among full tables, full pots. Famam quaerunt, but
Famem fugiunt. They desire praise, but they refuse hunger. But God is not
mocked. For our selves.

If there be any here, (because my Text depends on that occasion) that robbes
his Minister of temporal food, and yet makes show to hunger after his
spiritual food; though he may coozen man unseen; either by his greatness, or
craftines: Let him know, that Gdo is not mocked.

If there be any fraudulent Debtor, that deceiues his brother of his goods, and
then flatters his conscience that the merits of Christ shall acquit him: so
packes all upon Christ, let him pay it: let him know that God is not mocked.
The blood of Christ was not shed to pay men's debts, but Gods debts. It has
virtue enough, but no such direction. Thou iniurest Christ to lay such
reckonings on him. No, Vende, solue, viue de reliquo. 2. King. 4. 7.
Sell that thou have, pay that thou owe, live of that thou reseruest.

If there be any Usurer, that deals altogether in letting out: that lets out
his money to men, his time to Mammon, his body to pining, his mind to repyning,
his soul to Satan: Though he comes to Church, and sits out a Sermon; let him
know that his mind is then bound to his obligations; and he creepes into the
Temple for the same end, the Serpent crope into Paradise. Wretched men, that
are bound to his mercy: for like a common hackney Jade, he will not bear them
one hour past his day. But let him know, God is not mocked.

If there be any Oppressor, that comes to Church in the shape of Knight or
Gentleman: and thinks to cover all his exactions of his poor Tenants, all his
vvringings of his neighbors; with going three or four miles to a Sermon: let
him know, that God is not mocked. He preferres Mercy before Sacrifice; and
would not have thy profession countenance thy evil deeds, but thy good deeds
commend thy profession.

Baldwin an Archbishop of Canterbury bosted often, that he never eat flesh in
his life. To whom a poor lean widow Act. and Monum. Page 233.
replied, that he said false; for he had eaten up her flesh: He demands how:
She replies, by taking away her Cow. Never pretend your earnest zeal, fasting
or praying, or traveling to Sermons; when you devour widows houses, enclose
Commons, and so eat up the very flesh of the poor.

If there be any that allows sometimes the Church his body, when the Pope
always has his heart; who though he be in Domo Dei; in Gods house; is Pro
Domo Antichristi, is for Antichrists kitchen. Or that keeps a Lady at home,
that will not come two furlongs to Church: whereas our Lady trauelld as far
as Jerusalem. Luke 2. Who must needs be a Papist, because her Grannam was Luke
2. 41.
so: and grows sick if you but talk of the Communion. And all this to save
his Lands on earth, though he lose his Land in Paradise: Let him know, God is
not mocked.

If there be any here, that has given no Religion yet a full persuaded place
in his heart: but because he sees diverse shadows, resolves on no substance.
And is like the Batte, that has both wings and teeth, and so is neither a bird
nor a beast. His mind being like a puff of wind, between two religions, as
that between two doors, ever whistling. Protestants, he says believe well,
Puritans say well, and Papists do well: but till they all agree in one, he
will be none of them all. To quite him in his own fantasy; let him then take
from the one good faith, from the other good words, and from the last good
works, and he may be made a very good Christian. But why then comes he to
Church? By the mere command of the positive Law: as he comes to the Assizes
when he is warned of a Jury. But let him not be deceived: God is not mocked.

If there be any luxurious, that serves God in the Temple, his flesh in the
Chamber. Any covetous, that (as if his soul was diuisible) strives to serve
two masters; though he does it diversely: God with his art, the world with his
heart. If any blasphemer that here sings Psalms, and abroad howles oaths and
curses. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceives Iam. 1. 26.
his own heart, this man's religion is in vain. If any seem (...), when they
are (...), seruers of the Lord, when they are obseruers of the time. Let them
know to their horror, Non deluditur Deus, God is not mocked.

Gold cannot hide a rotten post from GODS eye. If men will be Humiles sine
despectu, and Pauperes fine defectu; Bern.
he sees it. Hypocrisy is like a burning fever, which drinks fervent heat
out of cold drink. The Hypocrite is nothing else but a player on this worlds
stage: the villains part is his; and all his care is to play it handsomely and
cleanly. He maliceth any man that would take his part from him; not unlike to
him that being requested to lend his clothes, to represent a part in a Comedy;
answered; no, he would have no body play the fool in his clothes but himself.
He thinks to coozen all the world with the opinion of his purity; but there
is one above sees him. God is not mocked.

I have ended the Caution; let us come to the Reason. For whatsoever a man
sows, that shall he also reap. wherein observe The Manner. Matter.

In the Manner there is a twofold generality of the Thing. Person.

There is a Whatsoever, and a Whosoever: for the whole speech is indefinite.
The Person is indefinite. A Man, any man,


Every man. This is the first Generality. For Country, be he Jew or Gentile,
Turk or Christian. For degree; high or low, Prince or subject, the greatest
Lord, and the basest Groom. For estate; be they rich or poor, the wealthiest
Burger, and the wretchedst Beggar. For Sex, be they male or female. For
condition; be they bond or free. What a man, any man, sowes, that, etc. The
Thing is indefinite. Whatsoever.


This is the other Generality. Be it good or evil, blessing or cursing,
charity or injury, equity or iniquity, truth or hypocrisy, deceit or honesty.
Whatsoever a man sows, etc. Evil is of the flesh: and verse. 8. He that
sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. And chap. 5. 21. The
works of the flesh are manifest; adultery, etc. they which sow such seed,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Good is of the Spirit: and he which
sows to the Spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. chap. 5. 22.
The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, etc. And To those that walk after
Romans 8. 1.
this spirit, there is no condemnation. Whatsoever. There are no more sorts of
men, but good and evil: nor more sorts of ends, then Poena et Praemum; Reward
and punishment. Therefore Whatsoever whosoever sows, the same shall he also
reap.

You see the manner. In the matter we must also consider two things.

A Seeding. Harvest. Whatsoever a man sows in his Seed-time; that shall he
also reap in his harvest. They that sow grace, shall reap glory: they that
sow corruption, must reap confusion.

To begin with the wicked; he that sowes evil, shall reap evil: he that
sows malum culpae, the evil of sin, shall reap malum poen^, the evil of
punishment. So Eliphaz told Job that he had seen, Job 4 8. They that plow
iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same.

And that either in Kind or Quality. Proportion or Quantity. In Kind, the
very same that he did to others, shall be done to him; or in Proportion, a
measure answerable to it. So he shall reap what he has sown in Quality or
in Quantity: either in Portion the same, or in proportion the like.

In Kind.
The Prophet cursing Edom and Babel, says thus, Psalm. 137. O daughter of
Babylon: happy shall he be that rewards thee, as thou have served us. The
original is; That recompenseth Psalm. 137. 8.
to thee Thy De^de, which thou did to us. So Sion rejoices over Edom, Obad.
As thou have done, it Obad. ver. 15.
shall be done to thee: thy reward shall return upon thine own head. So the
Lord to Mount Seir, Ezekiel. 35. As thou Ezekiel. 35. 15.
did rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel when it was desolate:
So will I do unto thee: thou shall be desolate, O Mount Seir. Yea verse 14.
When the whole earth rejoices, I will make thee desolate. Prou. 1. Wisdom
cries, Prou. 1. 15.
fools laugh: therefore says she; I will also laugh at your calami^y: I will
mock when your fear comes. This is verse 31. to be filled with their own
devices, to eat the fruit of their own way; to reap of their own sowing.

Thus was Gods Law; Eye for eye, tooth for tooth; Lex talionis. Blood for
blood. So ^bels blood spilt on the earth, cries for the blood of Cain, that
runs in his murtherous veins. Nature is offended and must be pacified: and no
pacification can wash the Lamb from blood, but their blood that shed it.
Justice must cause them that have sowed blood, to reap blood. The example of
Adoni-bezek is most obseruable, Judges 1. Judah and Simeon warring against the
Cananites, surprised Adoni-bezek; and cut off Judges. 1. 7.
his thumbes and his great toes. And Adoni-bezek said, Three score and ten
Kings, having their thumbes and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat
under my Table: as I have done, so God has requited me.

Thus is wickedness recompensed suo genere, in it own kind. So often the
transgressor is against the transgressor: the thief robs the thief; Proditor
is proditor. As in Rome many unchristened Emperors, and many christened Popes;
by blood and treason got the Sovereignty, and by blood and treason lost it.
Evil men drink of their own brewing, are scourged with their own rod,
drowned in the pit which they dug for others. As Haman was hanged on his
own Gallows: Perillus tormented in his own Engine. Nec enim lex iustior vll^
est; Quam necis artifices art perire sua. Thus they reap in kind. Now

In Proportion,
The Punishment is apted to the quality of the Sin. Adam at first did eat
in wantonness: Adam shall therefore eat in pain. He excuses his offense
with a bold forehead, therefore in the sweat of his forehead he shall eat his
bread. The woman's eye lusted, therefore in her eye tears. She longed then
against Grace, she shall long now against Nature. She ouer-ruled her husband
before, he shall overrule her now. Man has the preeminence: and her desire
shall be subject to him. Should be, though in all it is not: but lightly when
Eve ouer-rules Adam, the Devil is in the business.

To trace along the passages of holy Scriptures in this point: about
Proportion. The ambition of Babel-builders was punished with ridiculousnesse.
Cha^ offending against natural reverence, was damned to servitude. As it was
but an easy judgment upon H^ricus 5. Emperor of Germany; that had deposed
his natural Father, to have no natural Son. Sodom was burned with fire
unnatural, that had burned with lusts unnatural. Lots wife abusing her sense,
lost her sense: became a senseless Pillar. She would look back, therefore
she shall not look forward: she turned before, therefore now shall not stir.
(...), ibi re^sit.

Thus Absolons folly was the recompense of David's adultery. He had slain Vriah
with the sword, and the sword shall not depart from his house. Solomon deuides
Gods Kingdom, his own Kingdom shall be divided. Because Pharaoh drowned the
male children of the Hebrews Exodus 1. 22. Exodus 14.
in ^iuer, himself and his Egyptian Host shall be drowned in a Red Sea. Dives
would not give Lazarus a crumme: Lazarus shall not bring Dives a drop.
Desider (...), qui non dedit micam. There is fit Proportion, betwixt a crumme
of bread and a drop of water. Aug.
The tongue of that Rich man, that had consumed so much belly-cheere, and
turned down so many tons of wine; shall not now procure one pot of water,
not a handful, not a drop. In his tongue he sinned, in his tongue he is
torm^d. Judas was the instrument of his Masters death, Judas shall be the
instrument of his own death. Insolent (...) vowed to enprison conquered
Tamberlaine, in a cage of iron, and to carry him up and down the world in
triumph. But Tamberlaine conquering that Turk, triumphed over him just in the
same fashion. Those two monsters of the age Pope Alexander 6. and his darling
Borgias, that had bathed their hands in so much blood; were at last by the
error of a cup bearer, poisoned themselves out of those very bottles wherewith
they would have poisoned the Cardinals. Behold the Proportion; punishments
respondent to the sins.

Here is sufficient cause to make the wicked tremble; God has proportioned out
a judgment for their sins. Man by his wickedness, cuts out a garment of
confusion for his own back. I know that this kind of punishing is not always
executed in this world. Gods temporal Judgments are (like our Quarter
Sessions) kept here and there. Some; much; yea most is reserved for another
world. If all sin were punished here, we should look no further. But Esa.
30. 33.
Tophet is ordained of old: the pile thereof is fire and much wood, the breath
of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle it. If no sin were
punished here, man would not believe Gods power. But some is; Psa. 58. 11.
So that a man shall say; Verily there is a reward for the righteous, Uerily
there is a God that judges in the earth.

Think of that lower future place, ye wicked; and the heavy Proportion that
must there be measured you. Here you have sown in your Seed-time, there you
must reap your harvest. Let the Idolater think of this: he has thrust God
out of his throne, God will thrust him out of his Kingdom. The drunkard that
abuses so ^uch wine, must there want a little water. The Usurer shall be there
bound faster with the bonds of torment, then he has formerly bound poor men
with his obligations. The Covetous that had no pity, shall not be pitied, Iam.
2. 13.
He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy. The
Lustful shall burn with a new fire: The Malicious shall find no further
cause of envy. Uaeridentibus; they that laughed, shall now weep; and that as
Rachel, for their joys never to be comforted. Prou. 22. (...).
He that sows iniquity, shall reap vanity.

I list not to enter discourse of those infernal horrors. I may say with the
Poet; if I had a hundred tongues, and a voice of iron; Non Omnia p^narum
percurrere nomina pos^.
I could not run through the names of those endless torments. It is a
fearful place: God send us al never to know more of it, then by heresay.
Where Spirits are the tormentors, Damnation the fire; the breath of an offended
God the bellows; shrieking and gnashing of teeth the music; the effect of
impatient fury. And all these terrors perfected by their eternity, we
commonly say in misery; If it were not for hope, the heart would burst: here is
no hope and yet the heart must hold. The wretchedness is, it cannot burst.
Prosper.
Poena gehennales torquent, non extorquent: puniunt, non finiunt corpora. It is
called by Augustine, De Spiritu and A^. cap. 56.
Mors sine morte, sinis sine fine, defectus sine defectu.

But some will say; Your Text speaks of Proportion: how can eternal vengeance
be proportionable to a momentany offense? Yes; first an infinite God is
offended, and a finite man is the offender. Because he cannot be capable of an
infinite wrath at once, he must have it in eternity: the short dimensions of
his Essence, must have a long extention of his punishment: what wants in place,
must be supplied in time. Christ indeed suffered enough in a short time,
because he was infinite: man cannot do so, and therefore must be for ever in
suffering.

Secondly, he that delights in sin, desires it may always continue: and
velle peccatum, est peccatum: so that an infinite desire, must needs have an
infinite punishment. Qui moritur sine poenitentia, si semper viueret, semper
peccaret. He that dies without repentance, if he should ever live, would ever
sin. So Gregor. It is Gods just judgment, In moral.
Vt nunquam mortu^s care^t supplicio, qui nunquam v^uus voluit carere peccato.
That he dead should have eternal punishment, who living would have been
eternally wicked. Vt nullus detur in^quo terminus vltionis; qui quamd^ valui^,
habere noluit terminum criminis. That no end should be allowed to his
vengeance, that would have allowed himself no end of wickedness. As the good
man, if he should ever live, would ever do well. If thou will therefore offend
in aeterno tuo, God must punish i^ aeterno suo. Thy injustice would put no date
to thy sins; Gods Justice shall set no date to thy sufferings. Hos. 10. 13.
Thus ye have plowed wickedness, and ye have reaped iniquity.

You see the wickeds Seeding and Harvest: God keep us from sowing such seed,
that we may never reap such a crop. The godly have also their Seeding and
their H^uest. All their sowing may be distinguished Into Piety, toward God.
Charity, toward men.



For Piety.
They sow in Faith; and God will bless that Seed: it shall grow up to
heaven, for it is sown in the side of Jesus Christ who is in heaven. Ioh. 5.
^4.
He that believes on God; there is the seed; shall have everlasting life:
there is the Harvest. Qui credit quod non videt, videbit quod credit. He that
believes what he does not see; there is the Seed: shall one day see what he has
believed; there is the Harvest.

They sow in obedience: this is also a blessed Seed, that will not fail to
prosper wheresoever it is cast. Ioh. 15. 10.
If ye keep my Commandments, there is the Seed: ye shall abide in my Love;
there is the Harvest. Romans 6. Ye are the servants to Ro^ 6. 22.
God, and have your fruit unto holiness; there is the sowing: and the end
everlasting life; there is the Reaping. Obedientia in terris, regnabit in
coelis. He that serves God on earth, and sowes the seed of Obedience; shall in
heaven reap the harvest of a kingdom.

They sow in Repentance; and this seed must needs grow up to blessedness,
Psalm. 126. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. He that goes forth
and weepeth, Psalm. 1^6. 5.
bearing precious seed; there is the sowing; shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his sheaues with him; there is the Harvest. Many Saints have
now reaped this croppe in heaven, that sowed their seed in tears. David, Marie
Magdalen, Peter; as if they had made the Proverb; No coming to heaven with
dry eyes. Thus nature and God differ in their proceedings. To have a good crop
on earth, we desire a fair Seed-time: but here a wet time of sowing shall
bring the best Harvest in the Barn of heaven. Math. 5. 4.
Blessed are they that mourn; there is the seeding: for they shall be
comforted; there is the Harvest.

Lastly, they sow in renouncing of the world, and adherence to Christ; and
they reap a great Harvest. Math. 19. 27.
Behold, says Peter to Christ, we have forsaken all and followed thee; there is
the Seeding. What shall we have therefore? what? Ver. 28. 29.
You shall sit on twelve thrones judging the ^vvelue tribes of Israel: all that
you have lost shall be centupled to you; and you shall inherit everlasting
life; there is the Harvest. Hos. 10. 12.
Sow to your selves in righteousness, and reap in mercy.

For Charity.
He that sowes this seed, shall be sure of a plentiful crop. Math. 10. 42.
Whosoever shall give to drink to one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water only, a little refreshing, in the name of a Disciple; verily I say unto
you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. But if he that gives a little shall
be thus recompensed; then 2. Cor. 9. 6.
He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Therefore sparse abroad
with a full hand, like a Seedsman in a broad field, without fear. Does any
think he shall lose by his charity? No worldling when he sowes his seed,
thinks he shall lose his seed: he hopes for amendment at harvest. Dare thou
trust the ground, and not God? Sure God is a better play master then the earth:
Grace does give a larger recompense then nature. Below thou may est receive
forty grains for one: but in heaven (by the promise of Christ) a hundredth
fold: a measure heapen, and shaken, and thrust together, and yet running over.
Psalm. 41. 1.
Blessed is he that considers the poor: there is the Seeding: the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble: there is the Harvest. Is this all? No; Math.
25. Ye fed me when I was hungry, and gave me drink thirsty, comforted Math.
25. 35.
me in misery: there is the sowing. Veni beati, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: there is the Harvest. I shut up this
point with the Apostles Blessing. 2. Cor. 9. 10.
Now he that ministers seed to the sower; both minister bread for your food,
and multiply your seed sown, and increase the fruits of your righteousness.
God send you a good Harvest.

I conclude. Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. O that this
Text might be true upon all us at this time. The Lord has sown the seed of
his Gospel, O that he might reap your souls to his glory. But shall we hope
for that which the Prophets found not? Esa. 49. 4.
I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, says Esaias. Nor
the Apostles? I have fished all night and caught nothing, says Peter. No, nor
Christ himself? who spoke as never man spoke. Yet himself tells us, Math.
13. that of four sorts of ground, wherein the seed was sown, three were
barren, and returned no fruit. Alas! how much seed is sown among thorns,
rocks, and highway grounds! you come to receive this seed, but it fructifies
not. You bring forth hedge-fruit, like the Heathen; scarce so good. We hear
often, and as often forget.

Yet still Beloved, this Text shall be true. God has sown, and he will reap:
sown his Word, and will reap his Glory. His glory either in your instruction
or destruction, conversion or conviction, life or death. O why should that be
to your horror, that is meant to your comforts. Turn not that to your
desolation, which God sends to your consolation. Pray you then with me, every
one to the Lord, that this seed now sown may bring forth fruit in us all; in
some thirty, in some sixty, in some a hundred fold: To the glory of his holy
name: and the eternal salvation of our souls, through Jesus Christ.

Amen.
HEAVEN-GATE: OR, THE PASSAGE TO PARADISE.
REVELAT. 22. 14. in fine. And may enter in through the Gates into the City.
IF we supply these words with the first word of the verse; Blessed; we shall
make a perfect sentence of perfect comfort. Blessed are they that do his
commandments, that they may haueright to the tree of life, And may enter in
through the gates into the City.

In the whole there be Premises. Promises.

The Premises qualify us; we must be such as are Blessed; and who are they?
Qui praestant mandata; that do his commandments. The Promises crown us, and
these are two. 1. That we may have right to the tree of life; even that which,
Reu. 2. is in the midst of the Paradise of God. Reu. 2. 7.
From whence the Angel with a flaming sword shall keep all the reprobate. 2.
Et per portas ingrediantur ciuitatem; And may enter in through the gates into
the City. When without shall be dogs, and scorners, etc. whosoever loves and
makes a lie.

To the last words of the verse, I have bound and bounded my discourse. Wherein
I find three points readily offering themselves to be considered Motus,
Motion. Enter in. Modus, Manner. Through the gates. Terminus. Place. Into the
City.

So there is a threefold circumstance. Quid. What, an Entrance, Qua. How,
through the gates. Quo. Whither, into the City.



The Motion. Enter in.
They are blessed that enter in: Perseverance only makes happy. Our labors
must not cease, till we can (with Stephen) see these Gates open, and our
Savior offering to take us by the hand, and welcome our entrance. We know who
has taught us, that only continuers to the end shall be saved. It is
obseruable, that in the holy Spirits letters sent to those seven Churches, in
the second and third chapters of this Book; all the promises run to
Perseuerers; Uincenti dabitur, To him that ouercomes shall it be given. Nec
paranti ad praliim, nec pugnanti ad sanguinem, multo minus tergiuersanti ad
peccatum, sed vincenti ad victoriam. Nor to him that prepares to fight, nor to
him that resists to blood, much less to him that shows his back in cowardice;
but to him that ouercomes to conquest. Demas seeing this war, ran away;
fell back to the security of the world. Saul made himself ready to this
battle, but he durst not fight, glory and lusts carried him away. Judas stood
a bowt or two, but the High Priests money made him give over; and the Devil
took him captive. But Paul fought out this combat even to victory; though
Gal. 6. 17.
he bore in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus. 2. Tim. 4. 7.
I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith.
Therefore now there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me.

This is a good life, says Bern. Mala pati, et bona facere; et fic vsque ad
mortem perseuerare. To suffer evil, to do good, and so to continue to the
end. Some came into the Vineyard in the morning, some at noone, others later:
none received the Penny, but they that stayed till night. Augustine affirms
this to be almost all the contents of the Lords Prayer; Aug de bon^
Perseuerantia. cap. 2.
Hallowed be thy Name, thy kingdom come, thy will be done. Wherein we desire
that his Name may always be sanctified, his Kingdom always propagated, his
will always obeyed.

Indeed this grace perfects all graces. We believe in vain, if our faith hold
not out to the end. Weeloue in vain, if our charity grow cold at last. We
pray in vain, if our zeal grows faint. We strive in vain at the strait
gate, if not till we enter. Venire adreligionem est vera deuotio; sed non
religiose viuere vera damnatio. To come to the truth of religion is true
devotion; not to live religiously, is true damnation. Man is naturally like a
horse that loves short iourneyes; and there are few that hold out. Whence it
comes, that the last are often first, and the first last. 1. Cor. 9. 2^.
Know ye not that they which run in a race, run all; but one receives the
prize? He that has a good horse can go faster up a hill, then down a hill.
He that has a good faith, does as quickly ascend the Mount Sion, as the wicked
descend to the valley of Hinnon. If men would as strongly erect themselves
upwards, as they direct their courses downwards, they might go to heaven with
less trouble, then they do go to hell.

But he that at every sleppe, looks at every stop, and numbers his perils
with his paces, either turns aside faintly, or turns back cowardly. They that
go wandering and wondering on their journey, are at the gates of Samaria, when
they should enter the gates of Jerusalem. God says, I will not leave you, Heb.
13. Will you then leave GOD? Heb. 13. 5.
One told Socrates, that he would feign go to Olympus, but he distrusted his
sufficiency for the length of the journey. Socrates told him; Thou walk
every day little or much, continue this walk forward thy way, and a few days
shall bring thee to Olympus. Every day every man takes some pains; let him
bestow that measure of pains in trauclling to heaven; and the further he goes,
the more heart he gets; till at last he enter through the gates into the City.

Bernard calls Perseverance the only daughter of the highest King, the
perfection of virtues, the storehouse of good Perseuerantia est vnica summi
Regis filia, vi^tutum consummatio, totius boni rerepositorium, virtus sine qua
nemo videbit Deum. Beru.
works; a virtue without which no man shall see God. There is a last enemy to
be destroyed, Death: we must hold out to the conquest even of this last
adversary. Which if it conquer us by the Sting of our Sin, shall send us to
the doors of hell: if we conquer it by our Faith, it shall send us to the gates
of this City, Heaven. Lauda nauigantem cum peruenerit ad portum. All the
voyage is lost through the perilous Sea of this world, if we suffer shipwreck
in the Haven; and lose our reward there, where we should land to receive it.
What get we, if we keep Satan short of ruling us with his force many hours,
when at our last hour he shall snatch our bliss from us? The runner speeds
all the way, but when he comes at the races end to the goal, he stretches
forth his hand to catch the prize. Be sure of thy last step, to put forth the
hand of faith then most strongly; Ne perdatur praemium tantis lob^ribus
quaesitum; lest the reward be lost, which thou with much labor have aimed at.

It is not enough Quaerere coelum, sed acquirere; non Christum sequi, sed
consequi. To seek heaven, but to find it; not to follow Christ, but to
overtake him, not to be brought to the gates, but to enter in. Math. 7. 22.
Many will say to Christ in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name? But Luke 13. 25.
the Master of the house is first risen, and has shut to the door. Either
they come too soon, before they have gotten faith and a good conscience; or
too late, as those foolish Virgins, when the gate was shut. If then we have
begun, let us continue to entrance. Cuiusque casus tanto maioris est criminis,
quanto prinsquam caderet, mayor is Isidor.
er at virtutis. Every man's fault has so much the more discredit of scandal,
as he before he fell had credit of virtue. Let us beware that we do not
slide; if slide, that we do not fall: if fall, that we fall forward, not
backward. Prou. 24. 16.
The just man often slips, and sometime falls. And this is dangerous; for if a
man, whiles he stands on his legs, can hardly grapple with the devil: how
shall he do when he is fallen down under his feet? But if they do fall, they
fall forward, as Ezekiel. 1. 28.
Ezekiel; not backward, as 1. Sam. 4.
Eli at the loss of the Arc: or they that came to surprise Christ, John 18.
Ioh. 18. 6.
They went backward and fell to the ground.

Cease not then thy godly endeavors; until Contingas portum, quo tibi ^ursus
erat. Say we not like the woman to Esdras, whether in a vision, or otherwise,
when he bade her go into the City. 2. Esdr. 10. 18.
That will I not do: I will not go into the City, but here I will die. It is
a wretched sin, says August. after tears for sin not to preserve
innocence. Such a man is washed, but is not clean. Quia co^missa flere
definit, et iterum flenda committit. He leaves weeping for faults done, and
renues faults worthy of weeping. Think not thy self safe, till thou art got
within the gates of the City. Behold thy Savior calling, thy Father blessing,
the Spirit assisting, the Angels comforting, the Word directing, the glory
inuiting, good men associating. Go cheerfully, till thou enter in through the
gates into the City.

The manner. Through the gates.
Not singularly a Gate, but gates. For Chap. 21. the City is said to have Reu.
21. 12.
twelve gates. On the East three gates, on the North three, on the South three,
and on the West three. To declare that men shall come from all the corners of
the World, Luke 13. 29.
from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the South; and
shall sit down in the Kingdom of GOD. These Gates are not literally to be
understood, but mystically; Pro modo intrandi, for the manner of entrance. The
gates are those passages, whereby we must enter this City.

Heaven is often said to have a Gate. Math. 7. 13.
Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, says Christ. Psalm. 24. 7.
Lift up your heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors;
says the Psalmist. Gene. 28. 17.
This is none other but the house of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven, says
Jacob. There must be Gates to a City: they that admit us hither, are the Gates
of Grace. So the analogy of the words infer; doing the commandments is the
way to have right in the tree of Life: obedience and sanctification is the Gate
to this Citis of salvation. In a word, The Gate is Grace. City Glory.

The Temple had a gate called Acts 3. 2.
Beautiful. Act. 3. But of poor beauty in regard of this Gate. Of the gates
of the Sanctuary spoke David in diverse Psalms with love and joy. Psalm. 100. 4.
Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise. This
was Gods delight. Psalm. 87. 2.
The Lord loves the gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of Jacob. This
was David's election to be a Psalm. 84. 10.
Porter, or keeper of the gates of Gods house; rather then dwell in the Tents
of wickedness. This his Resolution; Psalm. 122. 2.
Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. Solomon made two docres
for the entering of the Oracle: they were made of 1. King. 6. 32.
Olive trees, and wrought upon with the carnings of Cherubins. The Olives
promising fatness, and plenty of blessings; the Cherubins holiness and
eternity. These are holy gates; let every one pray with that royal Prophet,
Ps. 118. 19. 20.
Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and I will
praise the Lord. This is the Gate of the Lord, into which the righteous shall
enter.

In brief, we may distinguish the gates leading to this City, into two;
Adoption and Sanctification. Both these meet in Christ, who is the only gate
or door, whereby we enter Heaven. John 10. 9.
I am the door, says our Savior; Ianua vitae, the gate of life: by me if
any enter in, he shall be saved.

Adoption
Is the first Gate. Romans 8. 15.
We have received the spirit of Adoption. Without this passage no getting into
Heaven. The inheritance of glory cannot be given to the children of
disobedience: they must first be converted, and adopted heirs in Christ. The
Grace of God is twofold. There is Gratia gratis agens; and Gratia gratum
faciens. This second grace, which is of Adoption, is never in a reprobate: not
by an absolute impossibility, but by an indisposition in him to receive it. A
spark of fire falling upon water, ice, snow, goes out: on wood, flax, or such
apt matter, kindles. Baptism is the Sacrament of admission into the
Congregation; of Insition and Initiation, whereby we are matriculated, and
received into the motherhood of the Church. Therefore the sacred Font is placed
at the Church-doore, to insinuate and signify our Entrance. So Adoption is the
first door or gate, whereby we pass to the City of glory.

This is our new Creation, whereat the Angels of heaven rejoice. Luke 15. At
the creation of Dukes or Earls, Luke 15. 10.
there is great joy among men: but at our new creation, Angels and Seraphins
rejoice in the presence of GOD. Our Generation was A non esse, ad esse: from
not being, to be. But our Regeneration is A male esse, ad been esse, from a
being evil, to be well; and that for ever. Through this gate we must pass to
enter the City; without this, death shall send us to another place. No man
ends this life well, except he be borne again before he ends it. August.


Now if you would be sure, that you are gone through this gate; call to mind
what has been your Repentance. The first sign of Regeneration is throbbes and
throws: you cannot be adopted to Christ without sensible pain, and
compunction of heart for your sins. The Christian has two Birthes, and they
are two gates: he can pass through none of them but with anguish. Both our
first and second Birth begin with crying. Our first birth is a gate into this
world: our second is a gate into the world to come. There is some pain in
both. For this world but little joy after the pain; for the other, after
short sorrow eternal glory.

Sanctification
Is the second gate. Make your calling and election sure, says Peter by a holy
life: 2. Pet. 1. 11
For so an Entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But Reu. 21. 27.
there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defiles; neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie. Therefore Paul prays the 1.
These. 5. 23.
God of Peace to sanctify us wholly. Holiness is the way to Happiness; Grace
the gate of Glory. But some may object from that of Paul, that this
Sanctification must be total and perfect: but who can come so furnished to the
gate? therefore who can enter the City? I answer; There is required only
Sanctificatio viae, non Patria; such a Sanctity as the gate can afford, though
far short of that within the City. The School distinguishes well. It must
be communiter in toto, and vniuersaliter in singulis partibus; but not
totaliter et perfect. This Sanctification must be communicated to the whole
man, and universally propagated to every part: though it have in no place of
man a total perfection. Indeed Nullum peccatum retinendum est spe remissionis.
No sin is to be cherished in hope of mercy. But we must strive for every
grace we have not, and for the increase of every grace we have. Quaerendum
quod deest bonum, indulgendum quod adest. Let us make much of that we possess,
and still seek for more; Phi. 3. 14.
striving to the mark. And yet when all is done, Profectio haec, non Perfectio
est: We have made a good step forward, but are not come to our full home.
But still, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. And Enter not into judgment with
us.

Now since this gate stands in our own Heart, give me leave to describe it: and
that briefly, by The Properties. The properties are 2. It is Low. Parts.
Little.

Low.
Heaven is well called a 2. Cor. 5. 1.
Building not made with hands: for it differs both in Matter and Form from
earthly edifices. For matter, it is Eternal, not momentany: for manner,
fabricked without hands. Great Manors on earth, have large answerable Porches.
Heaven must needs be spacious; when a little star fixed in a far lower
Orb, exceedes the earth in quantity: yet has it a low gate, not a lofty
coming in.

They must stoop then that will enter here. Luke 1. 53.
He has filled the bungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty
away. The rich in their own conceits, and proud of their own worth, shall be
sent empty from this gate. Zaccheus climes up into a Sycamore tree to behold
Jesus: but when Jesus beheld him got up so high, he said, Come down Zaccheus,
Luke 19. Make haste, and come down. Luke 19. 5.
Whosoever will entertain Jesus, must come down. The haughty Nebuchadnezzar,
that thinks with his head to knock out the stars in heaven, must stoop at
this gate, or he cannot enter. Be you never so lofty, you must bend. Gods
honor must be preferred before your honors. It is no discredit to your
Worships to worship GOD.

Little.
Christ calls it a Luke 13. 24.
narrow gate. They must be little that enter; little in their own eyes,
slender in the opinion of themselves. Mark. 10. 15.
Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall
not enter therein. Samuel to Saul; 1. Sam. 15. 17.
When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the Head of the
Tribes of Israel? When Iesse had made all his Sons pass before Samuel, he
asked him if none remained yet; Iesse answers, Yes a little one tending the
flocks. 1. Sam. 16. 11
Fetch that little one, says Samuel: for we will not sit down till he come.
That little one was he. Says the Angel to Esdras, 2. Esdras 7. 2. Esd. 7. 7.
A city is built, and set upon a broad field, full of all good things. Yet the
Entrance thereof is narrow. This is spatiosa and speciosa Ciuitas; A city
beautiful and roomthy; yet it has but a narrovv wicket, a little Gate.

Alas, how will the surfeted Epicure do to enter: whose gluttonous body is so
deformed, that it moves like a great Tun upon two pots? What hope has an
Impropriator with four or five Churches on his back, to pass this little
gate? The bribing Officer has a swollen hand; it will not enter; and the gowtie
Usurer cannot thrust in his foot. The factious Schismaticke has too big a
head: the swearer such forked blasphemies in his mouth, that here is no
entrance. Pride has no more hope to get into the gates of that City above;
then there is hope to cast it out the gates of this City below. Much good do it
with earthly Courts: for it must not come into the Courts of Heaven.

Think, O sinners; you cannot go with these oppressions, with these oaths,
frauds, bribes, vsuries; with these wickednesses into the gates of this City.
You must shift them off, or they will shut you out.

You hear the Properties; the Parts are now to be considered; and these are
four. The foundation, the two sides, and the roof. The Foundation is Faith.
One of the sides, Patience. The other, Innocence. The Roof, Charity.

Faith
Is the foundation. Coloss. 1. Be ye grounded and settled Colos. 1. 23.
in the Faith. Credendo fundatur, says Augustine. It is grounded in faith. All
other graces are (as it were) built on this foundation. Credimus quo^d
speramus: quod credimus and speramus, diligimus: quod credimus, speramus, and
diligimus, operamur. What we hope; we believe: what we believe and hope, we
love: what we believe, hope, and love; we endeavor to attain. So all is built
on Faith.

Hope on faith; Nulla spes increditi: it is impossible to hope for that we
believe not to be. Charity on faith: why should a man give all to the poor,
unless he believed an abundant recompense? Repentance on faith: why else
suffer we contrition for sin, if we believed not remission of sin? Temperance
on faith: why forbear we the pleasing vanities of the world, but that we
believe the transcendent joys of eternity, whereof these harlots would rob
us? Patience on faith: why would we endure such calamities with willing
quietness and subjection, if we believed not an everlasting peace and rest to
come? All obedience on faith; that God would accept it in Jesus Christ. If all
be built on faith, I may call it the basis and foundation of this Gate. Hebr.
11. (...).
Without faith it is impossible to please God: for he that comes to God,
must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. Faith is the passage-way to God: not one of that holy ensuing
Legend, entered the City of life without this. He that has faith shall enter:
yea he is entered. John 5. John 5. 24.
He has everlasting life; and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed
from death to life.

Patience
Is one of the Pillars. Hebr. 10. Hebr. 10. 36.
Ye have need of Patience: that when you have done the will of God, ye might
receive the Promise. That when you have suffered before the gates, ye may enter
the City. There be three Enemies that assault the soul, before she enter
the gates; a Lion, a Leopard, and a Fox. The Lion is the Devil, who 1. Pet.
5. 8.
roareth with hideous cries, and bloody jaws. The Leopard is the world, which
has a gay spotted hide; but if it take us within the clutches, it deuoures us.
The Fox is our Concupiscence, bred in us; which craftily Cant. 2. 15.
spoils our grapes, our young vines, our tender graces. Patience has therefore
an armed Soldier with her, called Christian Fortitude; to give repulse to all
these encounters. And what he cannot conquer feriendo, by smiting: she conquers
ferendo, by suffering. Uincit etiam dum patitur. She ouercomes, even while she
suffers. Patience meekely bears wrongs done to our own person: Fortitude
encounters courageously wrongs done to the Person of Christ. She will not yield
to sin, though she die. She has the spirit of Esther to withstand things
that dishonor God; Esth. 4. 16.
If I perish, I perish.

Innocence
Is the other Pillar. As Patience teaches us to bear wrongs, so Innocence to
do none. Patience gives us a Shield, but Innocence denies us a sword. Our
selves we may defend, others we must not offend. Innocence is such a virtue;
Aug.
Quae cum alijs non nocet, nec sibi nocet. Which as it wrongs not others, so
nor itself. He that hurts himself, is not innocent. The Prodigal is no man's
foe, but his own; says the proverb: but because he is his own foe, he is
not innocent. Sen.
Triumphus Innocentiae est non peccare vbi potest. It is the triumph of
Innocence, not to offend, where it may.

No testimony is more sweet to the conscience then this: Esa. 38. 3.
Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart. So Job: My heart shall not condemn me for my days. Blessed soul thus
comforted: it smiles at the frowns of earth, and dares stand the thunder.
Though there be no Innocence, but rejoices to stand in the sight of Mercy:
Yet thus in the midst of injuries it cheeres it self: O Lord, thou know
my innocence. The wicked Psalm. 73. 6.
cover themselves with violence as with a garment: therefore confusion shall
cover them as a cloak. But Math. 5. 5.
Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth. That part of the
earth they live in shall afford them quiet: and their part in heaven has no
disquiet in it. Si amouean^, admouentur in locum, a quo non remouentur in
aeternum. If they be moved, they are moved to a place from whence they shall
never be removed. Psalm. 26. 6.
I will wash mine hands in Innocence: so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord.
If Innocence must lead us to the Altar on earth; sure that must be our gate
to the glory of heaven.

Charity
Is the Roof. Aug.
Diligendo perficitur; lo^ makes up the building. 1. Cor. 13. 13.
Now abides faith, hope, and charity: but the greatest of these is charity. It
is a grace of the loueliest Countenance, and longest Continuance. For
Countenance, it is amiable; all love it. The poor respect not thy faith so
much as thy charity. For Continuance; faith and hope takes their leaves of us
in death: but charity brings us to heauen-dore, and vshers us in to glory. Hugo
de laud. Charitatis.
I know not what to say more in thy praise, O charity; then vt Deum de coelo
traheres, and hominem ad coelum eleuares. Then that thou did bring down God
from heaven to earth, and do lift up man from earth to heaven. Great is thy
virtue, that by thee God should be humbled to man, by thee man should be
exalted to God.

You have the Gates described: Let us draw a short conclusion from these two
former circumstances; and then enter the City.

The Sum.
There is no entrance to the City but by the Gates: no passage to Glory, but
by Grace. The Reu. 21. 12.
wall of this City is said to be great and high. High; no climbing over:
Great, no breaking through. So Christ says; Math. 6. 20.
No thief can break through and steal. Therefore through the gates, or no
way. 1. Cor. 15. 50.
Corruption does not inherit incorruption. This corrupted man must be
regenerate, that he may be saved: must be sanctified, that he may be
glorified. Babel-builders may offer fair for h^uen, but not come near it: the
Giants of our time, I mean the monstrous sinners, may imponere Pelion Ossae,
lay rebellion upon presumption, treason upon rebellion, blasphemy upon all: as
if they would sink heaven with their loud and lewd ordinance, and pluck God
out of his Throne: but hell gapes in expectation of them. This Gate is kept, as
the gate of Paradise, with a flaming sword of Justice, to keep out 1. Cor. 6.
9.
Idolaters, Adulterers, thieves, covetous, drunkards, reuilers, extortioners,
and other Reu. 22. 15.
dogs of the same litter; from the kingdom of God.

Some trust to open these gates with golden keys; but bribery is rather a key
to unlock the gates of hell. Let Rome sell what she list, and warrant it like
the Seller in the Proverbs; It is good, it is good. Yet it is naught; but were
it good, God never promised to stand to the Popes bargains. Others have
dreamed of no other gate, but their own righteousness. Poor souls, they
cannot find the gate, because they stand in their own light. Others think to
pass through the gates of other men's merits: as well one bird may fly with
another birds wings. For all those hot promises of the works of Saints for
their ready money, they may blow their nails in hell.

Only grace is the gate. Aug. Sermon. 136. de Temp.
Per portam Ecclesiae intramus ad portam Paradisi. We must be true members of
the Church, or the door of life will be shut against us. Heaven is a glorious
place, therefore reserved for gracious men. Admittuntur ad spiritus iustorum,
non nisi iusti. Heb. 12. 23.
To those spirits of just men made perfect must be admitted none, save they
that are justified. Kings are there the Company: none of base and ignoble
lives can be accepted. Heaven is the great White Hall, the Court of the high
King; none are entertained but Albi, such as are washed white in the blood of
Christ; and keep white their own innocence. Ungracious offenders look for no
dwelling in this glory. You that have so little love to the gates, are not
worthy the City. If you will not pass through the gates of holiness in this
life, you must not enter the City of happiness in the life to come. Thus we
have passed the gates: and are now come to

The City.
Now if I had been with Paul rapt up to the 2. Cor. 12. 2.
third heaven; or had the Reu. 21. 17.
Angels Reed, wherewith he measured the wall: I might say something to the
description of this City. But how can darkness speak of that light? or the
base Country of Earth describe the glorious Court of Heaven? Psalm. 87. 9.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God. Glorious Cities have been,
and are in the world. Rome was eminently famous; all her Citizens like so many
kings: yet was it observed, Illic homines more, that men did die there. But in
this City, there is no dying. Mors non erit vltra. Reu. 21. 4.
There shall be no more death. I will narrow up my discourse, to consider in
this City only 3. things.

The Situation. Society. Glory.

The Situation.
It is placed above, Gal. 4. Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem which is above is free, the mother of us all. Heaven is in excelsis.
Psalm. 87. 1.
His foundation is in the holy mountains. So was Jerusalem seated on earth, to
figure this City; built on the Quarrey of heaven, Dan. 2. On Sapphires,
Emeralds, and Chrysolites, Reu. 21. There is a heaven now over our heads, but
it shall Hebr. 1. 11.
wax old as a garment. It is corruptible, and so combustible. This City is
eternal; Mount Sion, never to be moved: a kingdom never to be shaken. We
are now under this lower heaven, then this shall be under us. That which is our
Canopy, shall be our Pauement.

The Society.
The King that rules there, is one Almighty God in three distinct persons. He
made this City for himself. Psalm. 16. 11.
In his presence is the fullness of joy, and pleasures at his right hand for
evermore. If he gave such a house as this world is, to his enemies: what may
we think, has he provided for himself, and his friends? But will GOD dwell
there alone? He is never alone: himself is to himself the best and most
excellent company. Nevertheless he vouchsafes a dwelling here to some
Citizens, and these are either Created so, Assumed, or Assigned.

1. Created Citizens are the blessed Angels; who from their first creation have
enjoyed the freedom of this City. They stand always in the presence of God:
they can never lose their happiness.

2. Assumed; those whose spirits are already in heaven. Hebr. 12. There Hebr.
12. 23.
are the spirits of just men made perfect. They are already in soul taken up,
and made free Denisons of this City.

3. Assigned; the Elect that live in the militant Church, waiting for the day
of their bodies Redemption; crying still, Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly. These
are Conscripti, Reu. 21. 27.
written in the Lambs book of life. Now though we are not already in full
possession; because our apprentiship of this life is not out; yet we are
already Citizens. Ephesians. 2. 19.
Ye are no more strangers and forreiners, but fellow Citizens with the Saints;
and of the household of God. And we have three happy privileges of Citizens.

1. Libertas; Freedom from the Law; not from obedience to it, but from the
curse of it. Praestemus quod possumus: quod non possumus, non damnabit. Let us
keep so much of it as we can: what we cannot keep, shall not eondemne us.
Liberty in the use of these earthly things: heaven, earth, air, sea, with all
their creatures, do us service. 1. Cor. 3. 22.
Whether things present, or things to come, all are yours: and ye are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods.

2. Tutela Imperij; The Kings protection, Psalm. 91. Angelis mandauit. Psalm.
91. 11.
He has given his Angels charge over us, to keep us in all our ways. Is
this all? No. verse. 4. He couers us with his feathers, and under his wings do
we trust: his truth is our shield and our buckler. Our dangers are many in
some places, and some in all places: we have Gods own Guard royal to keep
us. They Heb. 1. 14.
are sent from God to minister for their sakes, which shall be heirs of
salvation. I need not determine, whether every particular person has his
particular Angel. Saint Augustine has well answered, E^irid, cap. 59.
Quando hoc nesciatur sine crimine, non opus est vt definiatur cum discrimine.
Since our ignorance is no fault, let us not trouble our selves with curious
discussion. Bernard directs us a good use of it. Quantam Bern.
debet hoc tibi infer reuerentiam, afferre deuotionem, confer fiduciam. The
consideration of the guard of Angels about us, should put into our minds
reverence, into our hearts devotion, into our souls confidence.

3. Defensio Legis, the defensive protection of the Law. Christis our Advocate.
Romans 8. 33.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies. We are impleaded: Paul appeals to Caesar, we to Christ. The
Devil accuses us, we are far remote: behold, our Counselor is in heaven;
that will not let our cause fall, or be overthrown. 1. Ioh. 2. 1.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous.

Thus are we Citizens in present, shall be more perfectly at last. We have now
right to the City: we shall then have right in the City. We have now a
purchase of the possession, shall then have a possession of the purchase. Ioh.
17. 24.
Father; I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am, that they may behold my glory. This is our Saviors Will and Testament, and
shall not be broken.

The Company then adds to the glory of this City. We are loath to leave this
world for love of a few friends, subject to mutual dislikes: but what then is
the delight in the Society of Saints? where thy glorified self shall meet with
thy glorified friends, and your love shall be as everlasting as your glory.
There be those Angels that protected thee: those Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, that by doctrine and example taught thee: yea there is that
blessed Savior that redeemed thee. Often here with groans and tears thou
seek him, whom thy soul loves: lo, there he shall never be out of thy
sight.

The Glory.
The glory? Non mihi si centum linguae. If I had a hundred tongues, I was not
able to discourse thoroughly the least dram of that inestimable weight of
glory. The eye has seen much, the ear has heard more, and the heart has
conceived most of all. But 1. Cor. 2. 9.
no eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart apprehended the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. Augustine after a stand; In John Hom. 3.
Deus habet quod exhibeat. God has something to bestow on you. If I say, we
shall be satiate, you will think of lothing: if, we shall not be satiate, you
will think of hunger. But Ibi nec fames, nec fastidium: there is neither
hunger, nor lothing. Sed Deus habet quod exhibeat. No sooner is the soul
within those gates, but she is glorious. Similem sibi reddit ingredientem.
Heaven shall make them that enter it, like it self; glorious: As the air by
the Suns brightness is transformed bright. Quanta falici tas, vbi nullum
erit malum, nullum deerit bonum! How great is that blessedness, where shall be
no evil present, no good absent! This is a blessed City.

Men are ambitious here, and seek to be free of great Cities: and not seldom
buy it dearer then the Captain bought his Burgeship. But no such honor as to
be Denisons of this City: whereof once made free, how contemptibly they will
look at the vain endeavors of worldly men! Think, Beloved, yea know; how
sweet soever the gains of this lower City be: it is yet far short of the
gains of heaven. And you will one day say; There is no City to the City of
GOD. Where Reu. 21. 4.
shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain. Death with
all his Apparitors, that cite the whole world to his Court, sorrow, crying,
pain, shall be no more. Math. 10. 23.
They shall persecute you from City to City, says Christ: till at last we
come to this City, and then out of their reach.

O that this clay of ours should come to such honor! Well may we suffer it to
endure the Worlds tyranny, and to be afflicted by the Citizens thereof: alas,
we are but Prentises, and they will use us hardly till our years be out. When
that day comes, we shall be free possessors of this City.

You hear now the gate and the City, what should you do but enter? Pass
through the gate of grace; a holy and sanctified life; and you shall not fail
of the City of glory. Whither once entered, you shall sing as it is in the
Psalm, Sicut audi^imus ita et vidimus. As we have heard, so have we seen in
the City of our God. We see that now which was preached to us; yea and ten
thousand times more then ever could be uttered. You shall say to Christ, as the
Queen of Sheba to Solomon; 1. King. 10. 7.
I heard much of thy glory; but behold, the one half was not told me. You saw
Jerusalem before in a Map; now you shall walk through the streets, and
observe the towers and bulwarks; fully contemplate the glory. But my
discourse shall give way to your meditation. The joys are boundless,
endless: the Lord make us free of this City.

Amen.
SPIRITVALL EYE SALVE: OR, THE BENEFIT of Illumination.
EPHESIANS. 1. 18. The eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ^ou may
know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his
inheritance is in the Saints.
THE special grace that here Paul prays for his Ephesians, is Illumination.
wherein is described to us an Eye. Object. The eye is spiritual, the object
celestial. The Instrument is^gracious, the spectacle glorious. The eye
enlightened; there is the organ: the hope of Gods calling, and the rich
inheritance of the glorified Saints; there is the object.

The Eye is described by the Situation. Qualification.

The Site is the Understanding: the Qualification is Enlightened.

The Eye
Is the most excellent organ of sense. Saint Augustine applies Seeing to all
the senses. Hear and see, touch and see; and the Psalmist has, Taste and see
how gracious the Lord is. Other senses discern only things near them: this,
remote and distant objects. Some say the roundnesse of the Eye resembles the
Unity of the Deity; which is one and perfect: and the triangular sight, the
Trinity of persons. This is too curious: happy is that intellectual eye, whose
object is the blessed Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; whose delight is
good, yea God.

In a clear eye the looker sees his own image: so God in a sanctified
understanding sees a limited resemblance of his infinite self. And as some
Physicians say, that if looking in a sick man's eyes, they see their image,
there is hope of life: but the want of this resultance is held an argument of
instant death: whereby they give themselves a prognosticke sign, whether the
Patient will dye of that sickness, or recover it; by the reflection of his
eyes. But it is certain, if Gods image be not in the understanding, instat
mors animae, the soul is in danger: if it shine there, there is comfort of
life, yea life of comfort. Hence it is that the God of this world does so
strive to blind the minds of them that believe not; ne imago Dei* etc. that the
light of 2. Cor. 4. 4.
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of GOD, should not shine unto
them.

God has set two liddes, to defend the corporal eye from annoyances. So he
has given the understanding duas palpeb^; Faith and hope to shelter it. For
the eye is not more tender to the body, then the understanding is to the soul.
And therefore Satan seeks by all means to hurt it: either by offering it
violent blows, which the shield of Faith bears off; or by throwing dusts into
it, (gifts blind the eyes) which the other lidde of hope for better riches,
keeps out.

The Situation
Of this spiritual eye is in the Soul. God framing man's soul, planted in it
two faculties: the Superior, that is the Understanding, which perceives and
judges: the Inferior, that is the will, which being informed of the other,
accordingly follows or flies, chooses or refuses. The Scripture favoring the
simplest capacity, compares these two powers of the soul, to two known parts
of the body. The understanding to the Eye; the Affections to the Foot: the eye
directing, the foot walking. Every man is naturally borne blind and lame: as
Zedekiah captiuated to the King of Babylon; first they put out his eyes, and
then 2. King. 25. 7.
they lamed his feet with fetters of brass. So is every man by nature; and
therefore easily made a slave to the king of infernal Babylon, if the mercy of
Christ should not redeem him. This consideration reaches forth to us two
uses: the one of Instruction, the other of Reprehension.

1. This teaches us to desire in the first place, the Inlightning of our eyes;
and then after, the strengthening of our feet. So that sweet Prophet orders
his prayers, Psalm. 25. First Show me thy ways, O Lord: teach me thy paths.
Then Lead me in thy truth. First, clear my eyes, Psalm. 25. 4. 5.
then enable my feet, Psalm. 119. Make me to understand Psalm. 119. 27. 32
the way of thy precepts. And then I will run the way of thy Commandments.
He that would sail safely, must get a good Pilot, before good rowers. Swift
horses without a skillful waggoner, endanger more. He that labors for feet
before he has eyes, takes a preposterous course: for of the two, the lame is
more likely to come to his iourneyes end, then the blind. Could he run as
swift as Hazael, and outstrip the young Heart on the mountains; yet being
blind, he would hardly hitte the way to Heaven. There is but one way thither;
bypath innumerable: it is a thousand to one against him, that he misseth the
right. If he be set into it, yet there are so many blocks, rubbes, obstacles
put before him by the Devil, and the world; that he can no more go into the
true way, then he could discern it from the false. But if a man has eyes,
there is hope he will creep to heaven, though on lame feet. He sees where
Jerusalem stands, and has direction for the way; (as travelers in scroles;
from such a village to such a city, etc.) so the word of God prescribes his
journey; From Faith to virtue, from virtue to knowledge, from knowledge to
temperance, from temperance 2. Pet. 1. 5.
to patience, etc. till he comes to enter into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Hence we see, there is Verse. 11.
somewhat more hope of a vicious person, that has a good understanding; then of
an utterly dark and blind soul, though he walks upon zealous feet. Let them
know, that they will come to heaven without eyes, when the wicked come out of
hell without feet.

Which lets us see the kind love of the Popish Clergy to their people, and how
unfeignedly they desire their going to Heaven; when they pluck out their eyes,
and send them thither. So they may grope for it, as the Sodomites did for the
door of Lots house. That which they call the Genesis 19. 11.
Mother of Devotion, Ignorance; Augustine calls Pessima^ matrem, the worst
Mother. Pessimae matris Ignorantiae, pessimae itidem duae filiae sunt: scilicet
falfitas, et Dubietas: illa miserior, ista miser abilior: illa perniciosior,
ista molestior. There are two evil daughters of the most evil Mother,
Ignorance, Falsehood and Doubting: the former is more miserable, the latter more
pityable: that more pernicious, this more troublesome. Let them that plead so
impetuously, their Religion authentical from the Fathers, (not cum Patribus
reijci^r) read the opinion of a great Father, concerning a maine point of their
doctrine, Ignorance. Chrysostom says; Praecedit scientiae virtutis c^ltum:
knowledge Chrysostom. in Polil. li. 3. Nemo potest fideliter appetere quod ignorant:
et malum nisi cognitum sit, non timetur.
of virtue must ever go before devotion: For no man can earnestly affect the
good he knows not: and the evil whereof he is ignorant, he fears not. So
that true love to good, and hatred to evil, cannot occur to a heart nescient
of them both. For Scientia conscientiam dirigit, conscientia scientiam
perficit. Knowledge rectifies conscience, so well as conscience perfits
knowledge. Con must ever be in composition: and so kindly uniting knowledge to
devotion, there arises Conscience.

If they allow not then their people eyes, they may as well lame their feet;
and so send them like the Syrian band, in stead of Dothan, to Samaria. They
say, This is not the way to heaven, nor is this the City of life: follow me,
and 2. King. 6. 19.
I will bring you to the man (Jesus Christ) whom ye seek. But he led them to
Samaria.

2. This reprehends a common fashion of many Auditors. When the Preacher
begins to analyze his Text, and to open the points of doctrine, to inform
the understanding; they lend him very cold attention. That part of the Sermon
is spent in slumber; as if it concerned us not. But when he comes to apply his
conclusions, and to drive home the use of his inferences by application; then
they begin to rouse up themselves, and lend an ear of diligence. As if they
had only need to have their hearts warmed, and not to have their minds warned,
and enlightened with knowledge. But alas! no eyes, no salvation. Your affections
are stirred in vain, without a precedent illumination of your souls. You must
know to do, before you can do what you know. And indeed he that attends
only to exhortation, and not to instruction, seems to build more upon man's
zeal, then Gods Word. Both do well together: attend to the Doctrine, and
suffer also the Word of exhortation; that you may have both clear eyes, and
sound feet: those which God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

I come from the Situation, to the

Qualification
Of this spiritual eye: enlightened. For this blessing the Apostle prays to
the Iam. 1. 17.
Father of lights; from whom comes every good and perfect gift: from him, and
from him only, comes this grace of Illumination. Man's mind is not only dark,
but Ephesians. 5. 8.
darkness, till the Spirit of knowledge light on him, and lighten him. Though
2. King. 25.
Zedekiah was in Nebuchadnezzars Court, that great Monarch, newly deliuerd of
his monstrous ambition; to whom all the glories and pleasures of the world came
a gossiping: yet he saw none of this pomp and magnificence; his eyes were
wanting. So blind Judge. 16.
Samson among the merry Philistines, saw none of their rich apparel, costly
cheer, and glorious triumphs. When the natural man comes into the Temple,
among the Congregation of Gods Saints, his soul is not delighted with their
prayers, praises, psalms, and service: he sees no comfort, no pleasure, no
content in their actions. True, he does not, he cannot; for his understanding
is not enlightened, to see the hope of their calling, and the glorious riches
which the Spirit of grace and consolation sheds into them. He sees no whit
into the awful Majesty of God, filling all with his glorious presence, and
ruling all events with his providence; even disposing evil to his glory.
Nothing of the beauty, mercy, pity of his Savior, sitting at the right hand
of his Father: not his Highness being in heaven, nor yet his Nighnesse to his
brethren on earth. Nothing of Heb. 12. 22.
Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem; not of the
company of innumerable Angels; nor of the general assembly, and company of the
first borne which are written in Heaven; not of God, the Judge of all; nor of
the spirits of just men made perfect; nor of Jesus the Mediator of the new
Testament; nor the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of
Abel.

What more then a world of happiness does this man's eye not see! Hereupon we
call a mere fool a natural. The worldlings have esteemed, and misnamed
Christians Gods fools: but we know them the fools of the world. The greatest
Philosopher is but a sot to the weakest Christian: therefore Philosophy
(unbaptized with grace) is said to be monoculate, to have but one eye, and
that is of natural Reason; a left eye of the soul. But the Christian has two
eyes: the left eye of Reason, whereby he may see into the secrets of nature, as
far as the Philosopher: and the right eye of faith, which the other wanting
cannot conceive the mystery of godliness. This 1. Tim. 3. 16.
mystery to him, is but like a high candle to a blind man. God only then must
give Solomon wisdom; and to his Father, a knowledge above his Teachers. Iam.
1. 5.
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God. The first Character our
forefathers taught us, was Christ's Cross. Our first spelling lesson; In the
Name of the Father, etc. To teach us, that even all humane knowledge, much more
divine, is derived from Gods fountain. There are two reasons, why we must all
beg of God for our selves, as Paul did for his Ephesians, this grace of
Illumination.

1. Our spiritual blindness came upon us by Gods just curse for our sins.
As the Philistines put out Samsons eyes, for his many mischiefs done them: so
GOD on far greater cause blinded Adam, and his perpetual issue. He had pure
and good knowledge; but because his ambition was appetere prohibitum, to desire
that was forbidden: his punishment was perdere concessum, to lose that he had.
Now the same hand that laid on this penalty, must take it off. The blind men
in the Gospel, recouer'd not their sight till Christ came. They were as types
to us; to teach us that only the Spirit of Christ can restore our spiritual
eyes. Therefore of this Reave. 3. 18.
Spirit are we counseled to buy eye-salue, to anoint our eyes, that we may
see.

2. This original defect is increased by actual transgressions. We were borne
ignorant, we have made our selves blind; putting out even that remaining
spark of nature. We Phil. 3. 19.
mind earthly things: setting not only our Colos. 3. 2.
affections, but even fixing our whole knowledge on this World. And it is
impossible that man's eye should look on earth and heaven also at one instant.
It is a rule in Philosophy; Nothing receives any thing, but that is empty of
all other things of a contrary nature. The ear must be empty of all sounds,
the taste of all savors, the eye of all colors; before there can be
entertainment given to a new object. The smell possessed with Rue, cannot sent
the Rose: the taste infected with gall, imagines all morsels bitter: and a
green glass held before the eyes, presents all things looked on, green. So
if the souls eye be taken up with the gaudy vanities of this py'd world, it
cannot discern the things, that concern everlasting peace. The understanding
then must be withdrawn from earth, that it may contemplate heaven. This
confutes their practices, that have vowed a Monkish life, addicted to
speculation and eying of heaven; yet are perpetually raking in the mudde of the
earth to get money; with an impossibility of reconciling these two opposite
objects to their eyes at once. In vain they lift up ceremonial eyes of a
forced devotion; for the eye of their heart is fixed downwards: Unless they
have squint-eyed souls, that can look two ways at once. But I rather think,
that like watermen, they look one way, and row another: for he must needs be
strangely squint-eyed, that can at the same instant fasten one of his lights on
the light of glory, and the other on the darkness of iniquity. The riches above
and below are remote things; Quorum dum aliud contemplatim aspicimus, aliud
contemptim despicimus: whereof whiles we admire the one, we vilipend the
other. This blindness then being both hereditarie to our natures, (and
hereditary diseases are not easily cured) and, augmented by our wilful
disorders; can be taken away by no hand but Gods. John 9. 32.
Since the World began was it never heard, that any man (not man, but God)
opened the eyes of one that was borne blind; and had increased this caecitie by
his own accessiue and excessive wickedness.

He that would desire inspection into others blindness, had need of clear eyes
himself. Cast out the beam in thine own eye, that thou may pull out the
mote in thy brothers; says our Savior. Let us take with us then the eyes of
grace, that we have; that we may the better look into that blindness of
nature, we had. There is in this blind eye diseases and defects. The diseases
are double, so are the defects.

The Diseases.
1. The Cataract, which is a thickness drawn over the eye, and bred of many
causes: this especially, either from the rheum of vainglory, or the
inflammation of malice. From this eye there is no reflection, or returning the
own beams, whereby a man may contemplate himself. But even the optic
nerves, and the visory spirits are corrupted: the memory cannot reuolue, nor
the mind present it self, what it is; nec in se descendere tentat. This dark
mind is the vault, where Satan keeps his Seminary, and sits hatching a black
brood of lusts.

The means to expel this disease, is to take Gods Law into thy hand and
heart, and through that glass to look into thy self. Hagg. 1.
Consider your own ways in your hearts, says the Prophet.

Teipsum
Concute: tecum habita: te consule, dic tibi quis sis.

Plumbe-deepe into thy own breast: Isid. de sum. bon. lib. 1.
Animi tui abyssum intra. A man offends less, by searching sin with too
deep, then with too short an instrument. Though this be, says In meditat.
Abselme, grauis angustia; a hard exigent. Si me inspicio, ^ipsum non tolero;
si non inspicio, nescio. Si video, horror; si non videro, mors est. If I look
into my self, I cannot endure my self; if I look not, I cannot know my
self. If I see my self, there is horror: if I see not, there is death. This
inspection is difficult. Difficile est se nosse, sed beatum. It is a hard, but
a happy thing to know ones self. Private sins are not easily spied out.
Difficilius est inuenire, quam interficere; as Casar said of the Scythians. It
is harder to find them out, then to root them out. Innumerable sins are in
a man; if not in actual and ripe practice, yet in growing seeds. Qui indulget
vno vitio, amicus est omnibus. He that is partially indulgent to one sin, is
a friend to all. It is a pains well taken, to study thy self. How sweet a
rest does that night bring, whose sleep is prevented with a recognition of our
selves!

De consid.
Bernard teaches man a threefold consideration of himself: Quid, quis,
qualis fit. What by nature, who in person, what kind of man in conversation.
Which particulars when he casts up, he shall find in sum; Himself a
miserable sinner. Si cupis bonus fieri, primum creed quod malus fis. If thou
would be good, first know that thou art evil. Chrysostom amplifies this
self knowledge, by teaching a man to consider; what he is in himself, dust
Chrysostom. in tract. de symb. lib. 13. Quid Intra se Quid Infra se Quid Supra se
Quid Co^tra se Quid Ante se Quid Post se.
and ashes: what is within him; much wickedness: what above him, an offended
Justice: what below him, a burning lake: what against him, Satan and sin:
what before him, vain pleasure: what behind him, infallible death.

But alas! what is all this that has been said of the eye, if God enlighten
not that mental eye to see it? He must open our eyes, to behold the
wonderful things of his Law. Otherwise man's sight to these objects, is but as
oculus noctuae ad lumen solis. Spiritual joys he cannot perceive; and what
he conceiues of death and hell, he thinks of them senselesly like a beast,
or desperately like a Devil. If his conscience begins to wake, he sings her
asleep again. And as in some, the fuliginous vapors arising from the lower
parts of the body, blind the eyes: so in him the fumous euaporations of the
fleshes lusts, have caused absolute blindness. The spirit of God, with the
saving instrument of grace, can only take away this Cataract.

2. There is another disease, called the Pearl in the eye; a dangerous
disease, and hereof are all worldlings sick: for earthly riches is such a
pearl in their eye, that they cannot see the pearl of the Gospel, which the
wise Merchant sold all he had to purchase. By distrusting and distracting cares
of the world, this intellectual eye is not only depraved, but deprived of
light. Affectio mundi, infectio animi: our souls are affected, infected with
this contagion. We are easily inclined, and declined from our supernall bliss,
by doting love of these transient delights. And vbi amor, ibi oculus: the eye
follows the heart, with more diligence then a servant his Master. Now it is no
wonder if that eye be blind, which the Devil has dawbed up with the dirt of
this world! Covetousness is an Ingrosser, whersoeuer it dwells: and as it
would ingrosse the whole Universe to it unsatiate self, so it takes up the
whole soul, with all the affections and desires of it. It gives every member
and faculty presse-mony, and binds all their contention to get riches. It
leaves not so much as an eye for our selves, not a thought for God. Quicquid
Gregor. in mor.
de se intrinsecus agatur oblitus est animus, dum extrinsecus occupatur. Whiles
the mind is externally busied, it forgets what is done in it self, what shall
become of it self. This pearl then must be cut out of the worldlings eye,
with the sharp knife of repentance; otherwise he is likely never to see
heaven. For it may be well said to them, as the Philosopher answered to some,
that asked him curious questions of the world; whether it had a soul, whether
it were round, etc. Vos de mundo solliciti estis, and vestram immunditiem non
c^atis. You are busy examiners concerning the world, but idle neglecters of
your unclean selves. These are the Diseases: there is also a double defect in
this natural Eye.

1. It perceiues only natural and external things; qua ante pedes sunt;
which lie at their feet, 2. Pet. 1. For It cannot see a far off. It beholds
only the barque or 2. Pet. 1. 9.
rind; but not the inward virtue. It can perceive what thy riches are, thy
house adorned, thy lands tilled, thy grounds stocked: but not those spiritual
blessings, and celestial privileges, that belong to thee as thou art a
Christian. It judges the Cabinet by the Lether and cover, not by the costly
jewels in it. It may see Jobs outward affliction, not his inward consolation.
If God swells their garners with plenteous fruits, and fills their bones with
marrow, this they see: but the hope of Gods calling, the comforts of the
Gospel, the saving health of Jesus Christ, and the promises of eternal life,
they not see. The world is their circumference; other things Nec capiunt, nec
cupiunt; neque tenent manibus, nec cernunt oculis; they neither comprehend nor
covet; neither hold, nor behold them.

A beast has one kind of eye, a natural man two, a Christian three. The
beast has an eye of Sense, the natural man of Sense and Reason, the Christian
of Sense, of Reason, and of Faith. Each of these has his several objects,
several intentions. The eye of sense regards only sensual things: the eye of
reason only sensible and natural things: the eye of faith, spiritual,
supernall, and supernatural things.

The eye of sense does not extend to intelligible things, and matters of
discourse. Tell a bruit beast of Philosophy, and the conclusions of nature, he
understands you not. The belly of Sense has no ears for such instructions.
Let it be fed, nourished, have the appetite delighted: of further felicity it
has neither notion, nor motion. Nec noscit, nec poscit.

The eye of Reason sees further then that of Sense; and has (more then common
Sense) a rational and discursiue apprehension of intelligible objects. For the
bodies of creatures, the bruites see them as well as man, and perhaps some
better: but in these bodies he perceiues hidden virtues, obiectuall to the
scope of understanding, which the beast cannot see. I confess that many a man
is defective in the graduall ascents of reason. Tell a rusticke or mechanicke
that the Sun is greater then the whole earth, or that a little star is larger
then his car-wheele; and he derides thy boldness, and thinks thou would be
admired for telling alye. Though this by the eye of mature reason is discerned
perfect truth.

The eye of Faith sees further then both the former; for it looks into the
hope of our calling, and the glorious inheritance of the Saints. The Christian
has not only an eye of Sense common with beasts; nor an eye of reason common
with men; but also an eye of faith proper to his profession. Wherein he goes
beyond the natural man, further then the natural man goes beyond the beast.
The unregenerate liuesall his days in a mist: he cannot look up to heaven; in
comparison whereof that world he sees, is but a base moale-hill; and himself
is like a blind moale, digging in it. Yea in this very world, his own proper
element, how little does he truly perceive! There is no herb or flower he
treads on, that he truly knows. Yea he is a stranger at home, and is ignorant
of what is in his own bosom. But for things that concern a better world, he
has no insight. The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness unto 1. Cor. 2. 14.
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Those
things are incredible, impossible to him, which we build our faiths on. Happy
then are their eyes that see these things. In matters of the world our
simplicity moves pity, or makes sport: let it content us, that these losses are
requited by our spiritual knowledge, seeing further into better matters. That
wherein we are ignorant, is transient and contemptible: that which we know, is
glorious and eternal. The ignorance of the former shall not hinder our
blessedness; the knowledge of the other shall accomplish it.

2. The second defect in this eye is an in solid leuity: it is rouing, like
Dinahs, and ravished abroad; but wants selfinspection. Two things exceedingly
move men; Cicero. de or^. ^b. 3.
Similitude and Example. When men judge others very evil, they begin to think
themselves good. Nothing does sooner blind us then comparisons. He that would
mount to a high opinion of his own worth, by comparing it to the base
wickedness of another; Sen.
Perinde est, ac si quis ad clandos respiciens, s^am miretur velocitatem: is
like one that observing a Cripples lamenesse, wonders at himself that he is so
swift. The curious man goes abroad, Bern.
Et exterius omnia confiderat; qui sic interna despicit: and is so intentive
upon foreign businesses, that he forgets his own. They are common questions;
Quid ille fecit? What has he done? and Quid ille faciet? Ioh. 21. 21.
What shall he do? But not What have I done? not Acts 16. 30.
What shall I do that I might be saved? They are like Tailors, that have taken
measure of many men, never of themselves. Such a man does not smite his own
bosom with the Publican, but breaks his neighbors head with the Pharise. It
is good for a man to keep his eyes at home, and set them about the domestical
business of his own heart: lest at last Omnibus notus, ignotus moritur sibi;
he that lived known to all, dies in ignorance of himself.

I cannot leave this excellent Organ, the eye; till I have showed you two
things. 1. The danger of spiritual blindness. 2. The means to cure it.

Spiritual blindness shall appear the more perilous, if we compare it with
natural. The bodies eye may be better spared then the souls. As to want the
eyes of Angels, is far worse then to want the eyes of beasts. The want of
corporal sight is often good, not evil: evil in the sense, good in the
consequence. He may the better intend heavenly things, that sees no earthly to
draw him away. Many a man's eye has done him hurt. The sons of God Gene. 6.
2.
saw the daughters of men. David from the roof of his Palace saw Bethshabe.
Per oculorum beneficium intrat cordis veneficium. The lightning of lust has
scorched the heart through those windows. Malus oculus, malus animus. An evil
eye makes an evil mind. The Apostle speaks of eyes full of adultery: it is a
fearful thing to have an eye great with whoredom. And there be eyes full of
covetousness, lusting after the grounds and goods of other men: as Ahabs eye
was full of Nabaoths vineyard. But non tutum est conspicere, quod non licitum
est concupiscere. Let not thine eye be enamoured of that, which thy heart must
not covet. You see therefore, that sometimes the loss of corporal sight does
the soul good: and the eye of faith sees the better, because the eye of flesh
sees not at all.

Besides, the bodily blind feels and acknowledges his want of sight: but the
spiritually thinks that none have clearer eyes then himself. He that wants
corporal eyes, blesses them that see: this man derides and despises them.
Their blindness is therefore more dangerous, Qui suam ignorant ignorantiam;
that know not they are blind, as Laodicea, Reave. 3. This conviction Christ gave
to the Jews. Reave. 3. 17. John 9. 41.
If ye were blind, ye should not have sin: but now ye say, We see,
therefore your sin remains. The blind in body is commonly led either by his
servant, or his wife, or his dog: there may be yet some respect in these
guides. But the blind in soul is led by the world, which should be his
servant, is his traitor: or by the flesh, which should be as a wife, is his
harlot: or by the devil, which is a dog indeed, a crafty curre, not leading,
but misleading him. He that is blind himself, and led by such blind, or rather
blinding guides, how should he escape the rubs of transgression, or the pit
of destruction!

Now the means to clear this Eye, is to get it a knowledge of God, of our
selves. That the eye may be cured, this knowledge must be procured.

Now God must be known by his Works. Word. Spirit.

1. By his Works. The book of Nature teaches the most unlearned, that there
is a Deity. This may be called natural Theologic. For Romans 1. 20
his invisible things may be understood by his visible works. Praesentemque
refert qualibet herba Deum. Not a pile of grass we tread on, but tells us
there is a GOD. Job 12. 7. etc.
Ask the beasts and they will tell thee; the fowls of the air the fishes in
the Sea; the earth will declare unto thee, that the hand of the Lord has
wrought this. When an Eremite was found fault with, that he wanted books; he
answered, that there could be no want of books, when Heaven and Earth stood
before his eyes. Psalm. 90. 1.
The heavens declare the glory of GOD: and the firmament shows his handy
work. Day unto day utters speech: and night unto night shows knowledge.
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard. All these
creatures speak GOD; in whom is the act of all powers, and from whom the power
of all acts: whether thou have a carnal affection, filled with vanity; or a
curious head, filled with variety; or a Christian heart, filled with verity;
despise not the paedagogie and manuduction of the World, leading thee to know
God.

2. But this book reads only to us, (that ask An sit) Deus est; that there
is a God. If we ask further, Quis sit, Who this God is, or how to be
worshipped; it cannot expound it. It brings us only like that Act. 17. 23.
Athenian Altar, Adignotum Deum; To the unknown God. We must turn over a new
leaf, search another book to take out this lesson. Search the Scriptures; for
they give this testimony. So Zachary. Zach. 8. 23.
Ten men out of all languages of the Nations shall take hold of the skirt of
him that is a Jew; saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that GOD is
with you. In the former, the book is the World, the school Natures light;
the scholar man, quatenus homo; as he is man. But here the Book is the
Scripture, the School the light of grace, and the scholar Christian man, as he
is a Christian. There was the eye of Reason exercised; here of faith. There was
taught GOD in his creatures; here God in his Christ.

3. But this Scripturall knowledge (common to the wicked) is not sufficient;
there must be a spiritual knowledge: whereby, though he s^es not more then is
in the Word, yet he sees more then they, that see only the letter of the Word.
1. Ioh. 2. 27.
The anointing which you have received, teaches you all things. Call we then
earnestly upon the Spirit of Illumination for this knowledge. For it is not
obtained per rationem, sed per orationem; not by reason, but by prayers. Ephesians.
3. 18.
For this cause I how my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
That you may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ, which passes
knowledge.

Now we must learn to see our selves, and this selfecontemplation must be made
by a Natural glass by a Moral glass by a Spiritual glass.

1. Naturally, by looking into the constitution and composition of our own
persons; as Paul distinguishes us into 1. These. 5. 23.
Body, Soul, Spirit. For thy Body, it was not only Psalm. ^39. 15
fashioned beneath on the earth, but of the earth. Our first Parents were made
of the earth: of the earth was their meat: of their meat their blood: of
their blood their seed: of the seed our bodies. Corrupta et corrumpentia
corpora; bodies corrupt of themselves, and corrupting the souls. For thy
Soul, it is a real, spiritual, invisible, and indivisible substance;
diffused by God into thy body. Who by placing this soul in thy flesh, has set
thee in the midway, betwixt the bodilesse Spirits above, and the mindlesse
bodies below. This soul is preserved by neither element nor aliment, but by
him only that made her; and to whom, she rests not, till she returns. For
thy Spirit, it is called vinculum and vehiculum, a bond and a Chariot. It is a
bond to unite a divine and heavenly soul, to an earthly elementary body; both
these extremes meet friendly by this Tertium, a firmamentall Spirit. It is
called a Chariot, because it carries the souls faculties to all organs and
parts of the body, and that with wonderful speed.

2. Morally, by considering how frequently we have transgressed those virtues,
to which the very Heathen gave a strict obedience. Where is our justice,
temperance, patience? We have idle designs, and idler desires; and give way
to all evil that may be either thought or wrought: and what we dare not act,
we dare like. We loathe (like fond sheep) the good pastures of fit benefits,
and bleat after the brouse of vanities. Like erring Planets, we keep not the
ecclyptike line of virtuous mediocritie. As God has all good in himself, all
evil only in knowledge: so we on the contrary, have much good in knowledge,
all evil in our selves.

3. Spiritual knowledge goes yet further; even in medullas, et penetralia
cordis. It searches the heart; and if in that most inward Chamber, or in any
cabinet thereof, it can find an Idol, it brings it forth. It sees when the
torrent of time bears thee down the stream of custom; what faintness is in
thy faith, what coldness in thy zeal, when the awe of man gives the fear of God
a check-mate. It sounds the lowest depth of the Conscience; and spyeth
blemishes in the face of whitest innocence. So it brings the best soul down
on her knees; teaches her the necessity of humbleness; and puts this prayer
in her mouth; Lord be merciful to me a sinner.

We have now done with the Organ of Seeing; the understanding or Souls Eye:
let us come to the object to be seen, The hope of his calling; and the riches
of the glory of Gods inheritance in the Saints.

The Object
Is clear and transparent to a sanctified Eye. The Philosophers propound six
necessary occurrences to our perfect Seeing; and you shall see them all here
met.

1. Firmness or good disposition of the Organ that sees. A rolling eye
beholds nothing perfectly. A Dinahs eye is the prologue to a ravished soul.
This must be a composed eye, steadfastly settled on the divine object: saying
with David, My heart is fixed, O Lord, my heart is fixed. The proposed glory is
so infinite, that it may well take up the whole eye; for it shall one day take
up the whole man. Enter thou, good servant, into thy masters joy: it is too
great to enter into thee. This Object is so immense, that we cannot well look
besides it.

2. The Spectacle must be objected to the sight: the eye cannot pierce into
penetralia terrae, or sublimia coeli: nor can the understanding see into these
supernatural joys, unless the Lord object them to it. Hence it is that many
neglectfully pass by ((...) lumine lumen) the light, for want of eyes to
regard it. But God here produces the wardrobe of his glory to the sanctified
eyes; as if he said, Uenite and videte, Psalm. 46. Come, and see. So Moses;
Psalm. 46. 8. Exodus 14. 13.
Stand still, and see the salvation of God. So Christ to his Apostles. It is
given to your eyes to see these things, to others but by parables.

3. That there be a proportional distance betwixt the organ and the object:
neither too near, nor too far off. A bright thing held too near the sight,
confounds it: be it never so bright, if too far off, it cannot discern it.
God has sweetly ordered and compounded this difference. Those everlasting
joys are not close by our eyes, lest the glory should swallow us up: for
mortal eyes cannot behold immortal things; nor our corruptible sight see
steadfastly that eternal splendour. Who can see God, and live? And though you
say, it is the soul that sees; yet even this soul, whiles it is prisoned in
this muddy veil, or rather Iayle, the flesh, has by reason of the others
impotency and passiblenesse, a thick cloud cast between it self and glory.
1. Cor. 13. 12.
For now we see through a glass darkely: but then face to face. Now I know in
part, then shall I know, even as also I am known. The best eye upon earth
looks but through a glass, a lattice, an obscuring impediment. Now on the
other side, lest this object should be too far off, that the intellectual
eye could not reach it, behold, God has given it the first fruits; Romans 14. 17.
Righteousness, peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost; a prelibation
of glory. It sees the earnest of the Spirit, sealing us up to the day of
redemption; a pledge of those joys, which otherwise no eye has seen, no ear
heard, nor heart on earth conceived.

4. It is required that the objected matter be substantial; not altogether
diaphanous and transparent, but massy, and of a solid being. Otherwise the
sight cannot perceive, nor the mind well conceive, the nature which is so
subtle and sublimed: but intends it self still further, till it can
acquiescere in materiam visibilem; rest it self on some visible object. But
this Object here proposed, is no empty Chimera, or imaginary, tralucent, ayery
shadow, but substantial: the hope of Gods calling, and a glorious inheritance:
which though natures dull eye cannot reach, faiths eye sees perfectly. For Hac
est fides, credere quod non vides.

And the subject of this spectacle is by demonstration proved solid and
substantial: because* nothing but that can give this intellectual eye firm
content and complacency. How go the affections of man in a rolling and ranging
pace from one creature to another! now thy heart is set upon wealth; thou will
have it, though thou dig for it in visceribus both matris and filiorum; in
the bowels of the earth, and of the sons of the earth. Say wealth is come,
thou art then for honor: thy riches are a ladder, whereby thou would climb
to dignity. Dedecet diuitem esse ignobilem. Nobility gotten has not settled
thee: thou art traversing new desires. Thy lust presents thee a beauteous
paramour: unclean desires now fill up thy scene; and thou playest, like that
Germane, many parts thy self; a golden Ass, a proud Lion, a luxurious Goat.
Wealth and greatness commands thy pleasure; thy lust is answered: then thou
art for music, and so actest a fourth part; thou art thine own fiddler. Now
thy blood is to be heated with delicates; thou must be indulgent to thy throat
with lust-prouoking meats; and so playest yet another part, a Cater to
uncleanness. When all is done,

Non contenta quies; non est sedata libido.

When thou have thus wandered, and begged of every poor creature a scrap of
comfort, yet thou art but clawed, and cloyed with variety, with vanity; not
contented. It is al but one little crumme to one half dead of hunger. Could
thou pass over the vast Universe, from the conuexe superficies of heaven, to
the center of hell: yet the immense capacity, rapacity of thy desires will not
be satisfied.

Well then did Augustine confess: Fecisti nos ad te, and Conf. lib. 1. cap. 1.
inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te. O Lord, thou did make us
for thee; and our heart cannot be quiet till it rest in thee. Nothing but the
Trinity of persons in that one Deity, can fill the triangular concaue of man's
own heart. The fire flies to his sphere, the stone falls to his center, the
rivers run to the sea, as to their end and rest; and are but violently detained
in any other place. The needle touched with the Loadstone, stands ever
trembling and quiuering, till it enjoy the full aspect of the Northern Pole.
Thus the Lord is only our Center; the very life of satisfaction; full of
perfect and infallible comfort; and he alone can content the boundless
apprehension of this intellectual eye. All other are but shadows and
vanities, but this matter objected in my Text, satisfies. The world cannot, but
this can; the hope of Gods calling, and his glorious inheritance, etc.

5. Clearness of space betwixt the Organ and the object. For the interposition
of some thick and gross body, preuents the faculty of the Eye. The quickest
eye cannot see through hills; and a crasse cloud is able to hide the Sun from
us at noone day. On necessity, that we may behold with our understandings
eyes, this celestial object; the hope of our calling; there must be a removing
of all thick and impenetrable obstacles.

1. Some have whole mountains betwixt their eyes and heaven: the mountains of
vaineglory hinder their sight. They are ravished with the bravery of earth:
they think there is no heaven but at Court; no further scope of ambition, then
to be great in this world. If you tell them of the glory of Gods Inheritance
given to his Saints, alas, they believe not your prattle: they cannot see it.
They cannot indeed; for who can see through mountains?

2. Others, to make surer prevention against their sight of heaven, have rolled
the whole earth betwixt that and their eyes. These are the covetous, who are
rooting down to the Center. If you tell them of this hope, etc. they answer,
Non videmus nisi terram; we see nothing but earth. Well may they say so: for
what eyes can see through the vast and condensed body of the earth?

3. Others yet have interiected such obscure and pitchy clouds, between their
sight and this Sun of glory, that they cannot see. Whether of errors, that
darken the light of the truth: Or of affected ignorance, that blindes their
own eyes: Or of blasphemous Atheism; they will see nothing, but what they do
see. 2. Pet. 3. 4.
Where is the promise of his coming? Since the Fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. Nil noui
video; I see no new thing: it was so, and it is so. Non aliud videre patres,
aliudue nepotes Aspicient. Or of rude and crude impie^ies, which both bleare
their own eyes, and shadow heavens graces from them. Thus the Devil deals
with the^, as the Pharisees servants dealt with Christ: first they blind him,
and then buffet him, and bid bim prophecy Mark 14. 65
who smote him. First he puts out their eyes with their own iniquities, and
then leads them about to make himself sport. They cannot see the way to
bliss, they have blinded themselves; interposed such clouds betwixt them and
heaven, that this glorious light cannot shine unto them. There must be then a
clearer space: and this God grants to faith. Acts 7. 55. 56.
Stephen full of the holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the
glory of GOD, etc. Behold, I see the heavens open, and the Son of man
standing on the right hand of God. Though this be taken for more then a
spiritual sight; yet hence we have this comfort; that our eyes of Faith shall
see God now in Grace, and our eyes of flesh hereafter in glory.

6. Lastly, the object must be stable and firm, for if it move too swiftly, it
dazeleth the eye, and cannot be truly (according to the perfect form of it)
beholden. An oar in the river often seems to the passengers as if it were
broken by reason of the swift and violent motion of the water. An arrow cuts
the air with such quickness, that we can scarce discern it; which lying at
the mark is easily seen. God has therefore answered our desires, and fitted
our understandings with a stable object: which Paul calls an exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. A weight; substantial and permanent: not a light
transient matter, 2. Cor. 4. 17.
nor a swift voluble nature; but weighty. Therefore let us not look on the
things which are seen, but on the things Verse. 18.
which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the
things which are not seen are eternal. It is here called an Inheritance,
which none can take from us: that subtle Lawyer Satan, shall never be able to
pick cauils against it.

You must not expect, that I should enter into a particular resolution of our
objected comforts: I must reserve that to a more liberal time. Only now let
us set them in our meditation, and settle our selves to attain them. Contemn
we, condemn we the foolish choice of worldlings, in regard of our portion and
better part, never to be taken from us. Why should I dislike my gold, because
he preferres his copper? The least dram of these joys shall outwaigh all the
pleasures of earth. And as one torment in hell shall make the reprobate forget
all earthly vanities: so the least drop of this pleasure shall take from us the
remembrance of our former miseries. We shall not think on our poverty in this
world, when we possess those Riches: and forget our contemptible baseness,
when God shall give us that Glory of Saints. He shall not much remember the
days of his life, because God answers Eccl. 5. 20.
him in the joy of his heart. God give us to see these things now in grace,
that we hereafter may see them in glory.

Amen.
THE COSMOPOLITE: OR, WORLDS FAVOVRITE.
LVKE 12. 20. But God said unto him; Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be
required of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?
THIS is the Covetous man's Scripture; and both (like an vnflattering glass)
presents his present condition, what he is: and (like a fatal book)
premonstrates his future state, what he shall be. And because; as no man
would be thought of others, or will think himself a worldling; so nor apply
to himself the terror of this Text: therefore this Scripture does both
indigitate and single him out, with a Tu es h^mo; and when it has set himself
before himself, it tells him how he shall stand before the Tribunal of God:
with a lost name, with a lost soul, with a lost world, with a lost and never
to be recouer'd heaven.

We shall perceive more plainly the Cosmopolites fearful judgment, if we
take a precursory view of the Parables former passages.

First we have the Rich man, verse. 16. prospering in his wealth: not only in
the usurious gains, which his money, Prosperity permitted to the wicked.
fraud, oppression, or unjust dealing might get: but even in those things which
God by the hand of nature did reach forth to him. For his ground brought forth
plentifully. So deep a draught have the wicked often drunk in the common cup
of blessings. Their Bull gendreth and fails not: their Cow calueth and
casts not. They spend Job 21. 10.
their days in wealth. Yea, will you hear yet a larger exhibition? They are
not in trouble as other men, neither are Psalm. 73. 5. 7.
they plagued like others. There they have exemption from misery. Their eyes
stand out for fatness: they have more then heart could wish. There they have
accumulation of felicity.

Secondly, we have him caring what to do, verse. 17. Care keeps wealth company.
He had so much gain, so much grain; that his rooms could not answer the
capacity of his heart. What shall I do, because I have no room, where to
bestow my fruits? Care is the inseparable companion of abundance. Vna
recipiuntur diuitiae and solicitudo. They, to whom is given most wealth, are
most given to carking, sharking, and solicitous thoughtfulness, with a little
inuersion of our Saviors meaning; Where is much given, there is much, yea more
required. Those hearts whom the world has done most to satisfy, are least of
all satisfied: still they require more, and perplexe themselves to get it. A
reasonable man would think, that they who possess abundant riches, should not
be possessed with abundant cares. But care not for to morrow, says Christ.
Cuius enim diei spatium Chrysostom. in Math. 6.
te visurum nescis, quam ob causam illius solicitudine torqueris? Why should
thou disquiet thy self with thought of provision for that day, whose evening
thou art not sure to see?

Thirdly, we have his resolution; which in his purpose, has a double
succession (though no success) for their disposed order and places. This will
I do, verse. 18. what? 1. I will pull down my barnes, and build greater; and
there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods. He thinks of no room in
visceribus pauperum, in the bowels of the poor: which the Lord has proposed
to him, a fit receptacle of his superfluity. He minds not to build an
hospital, or to repair a Church; either in cultum Christi, or culturam
Christiani: to the worship of Christ, or education of orphans, or consolation
of distressed souls: but only respects Horreum suum, and Hordeum suum: his
Barn and his barley. The want of room troubles him: his harvest was so great,
that he is crop-sicke. The stomach of his Barn is too little to hold that
surfeit of corn he intends it; and therefore in anger he will pull it down, and
make it answerable to his own desires. 2. This he takes as granted, and upon
the new building of his Barn, he builds his rest, ver. 19. Then I will say to
my soul; Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry. He dreams his belly full, and now his pipes go:
he sings requ^em, and lullabies his spirit in the cradle of his barn. This
sweet news he whispers to his soul. Though he had wearied his body with
incessant toils, and made it a gally-slaue to his imperious affection: yet his
soul had been especially disquieted, and therefore he promises his soul
some ease. In this indulgent promise, there is a Preface, and a Solace.

1. The Preface assures his soul much goods, and many years; multas diuitias,
multos annos. He knew that a scant and sparing proffer would not satisfy his
boundless desires: there must be show of an abundant impletion. It is not
enough to have an ample rock or dista^e of wealth, unless a longeuall time be
afforded to spinne it out. Philoxenus his wish coupled with his pleasant viands
a long throat, (Crane-like); to prorogue his delight: for shortness does
somewhat abate sweetness. Rex horae, a king of one hour can scarce warm his
throne: it keeps a Christmass-lord flat, that he knows his end. If this man
had bin his own Lord, how excellent an estate would he have assured himself*
His Farm should have been so large, and his lease so long, that I doubt
whether Adam in Paradise had a greater Lordship, or Metbushalem a longer life.
The last of his desires is of the longest size: give him much goods, and much
time, abundance of joys, and abundance of days; and you hitte or fit the
length of his foot.

2. The Solace is a dance of four paces; Take thine ease, eat, drink, and
be merry. The full belly loves an easy Chair; he must needs join with his
laborious surfets the vacation of sleep. He has taken great pains to bring
death upon him; and now standing at his door, it hears him talk of ease. He
promises himself that, which he trauells to destroy, life: and even now ends
what he threatens to begin. So worldlings weary and wear out their lives to
hoord wealth: and when wealth comes, and health goes, they would give all for
life. O fools! in continual quest of riches, to hunt themselves out of
breath; and then be glad to restore all at once for recovery. The next pace
is, Eat: his bones must not only be pleased, but his belly. It is somewhat
yet, that this man resolves at last no more to pinch his guts: therefore what
before he was in their debt, he will pay them with the usury of surfets. He
purposes to make himself of a thin starueling, a fat Epicure; and so to
translate Parcum into Porcum. The third pace is, Drink: where gluttony is bid
vvelcome, there is no shutting out of drunkenness. You shall not take a Nabal,
but he plyes his gobblet, as well as his trencher. And this is a ready course
to retire himself from his former vexation; to drown his cares in Wine. The
last pace is a Leualto; Be merry: When he has got iunkets in his belly, and
vvines in his brain, what should he do, but leap, dance, revel, be merry,
be mad! After feasting, must follow jesting. Here be all the four passages:
he sleeps care away, he eats care away, he drinks care away, and now he sings
care away. His pipes be full, and they must needs squeak, though the name of
the good, yea the name of GOD be dishonored. But to such a madmerry scoffer
might well be applied that verse, which was sounded in the ear of a great
Rimer dying: Desine ludere temere, nitere propere surgere, de puluere. Leave
playing, and fall to praying: it is but sorry jesting with death. Thus his
dance was like Sardanapalus; Ede, bibe, lude: Eat, drink, and be merry: but
there is one thing marres all his sport; the bringing of his soul to
judgment. He promises a merry life, and a long life; but death says nay to
both. He gratifies his soul, and ratifies his state; but couzens himself in
all. It may be said of him, as King John of the fat Stagge dying; See how
easily he has lived, yet he never heard Mass. This was the sweet, but the
sour follows. Qui gaudebit cum mundo, non regnabit cum Hierom.
Christo. He rejoices with the World, but must not live in glory with Christ.

Thus far the Rich man acts; now comes in Gods part: which turns the nature
of his play, from Comike purposes to Tragike events. He behights all peace and
joy to himself; But God said; Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be taken
from the, etc.

The words contain an Agent, Patient, Passion, Question.

The Agent is God; But God said. The Patient is the rich Fool. The Passion.
This night shall thy soul be required of thee. The Question which God puts to
him, to let him see his folly; Then whose shall those things be which thou
have provided?

The Agent, God.
The Rich man was purposing great matters, but he reckoned without his host: he
resolves thus and thus; But God said to him. Hence two observations.

1. That the purposes of men are abortiue, and never come to a happy birth, if
God bless not their conception. Man purposes, and God disposes. The horse is
prepared to the battle, but the victory is of the Lord. It is a holy
reservation in all our purposes; Si Deo placuerit: If it shall please the Lord.
Iam. 4. 13.
Go to now ye that say, To day or to morrow we will go into such a City, and
continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain. Whereas ye know not
what shall be on the morrow. Ye ought to say, If the Lord will. For neither
tongue can speak, nor foot move, if the Lord shall eneruate them: as he did
Luke 1. 22.
Zaobaries tongue in the Temple, and 1. Kin. 13. 4.
Ieroboams arm, when he would have reached it out against the Prophet. In
vain man intends that, whereagainst God contends. Sisera resolves on victory,
GOD crosses it with overthrow. Yet thinks Sisera, Iael will succor me, Judge.
4. 17.
For there is peace between Iabin King of Hazor, and the house of Heber the
Kenite. No, even there ^he arm of the Lord is ready to encounter him; a
draught of milk shall be his last draught, and the hand of a woman shall kill
him, that has escaped the hand of an Army.

The Jews may say, We will fly away (...) swift horses. But God says, Your
Persecutors shall be swifter. Senacherib purposes to lick up Israel as the Ox
grass; and though he found the Land before him as an Eden, to leave it behind
him as Sodom; But God said, He shall go home without his errand: An hook in
his nostrils shall reine him back. Esa. 14. 13. 15.
The King of Babylon says in his heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will
exalt my throne above the stars of God: and I will be like the most High. But
God said, Thou shall be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit. H^d made
himself so sure of Christ, that rather then to fail of cutting off the
prophesied King, he slayes his own son: He might so, but he shall not touch
Gods Son. With what lavish promises do the Spaniards flatter themselves, when
they baptized their Navy with the name of Inv^nsible? England is their own,
they are already grasping it (warm with gore) in their clutches. But God said,
Destruction shall inherit their hopes: and the remainder of ruin shall be
only left to testify, what they would have done.

Men's thoughts promise often to themselves, Multa magna; many things, great
things: they are plotted, contrived, commenced; yet die like Ionah's Gourd,
when we should expect their refreshing: Quia non fort^it Deus, because God has
not blessed them. Ambition may rear turrets in emulation of heaven: and
vainglory build Castles in the air; but the former shall have no roof, as
the latter has no foundation. Philip threatened the Lacedaemonians, that if he
entered their Country, he would utterly extinguish them. They wrote him no
other answer but Si, If: meaning, it was a condition well put in, for he
never was like to come there. Si S I non esset, perfectum quidlibet esset. But
in the menaces of angry Tyrants, and purposes of hasty intenders, there is an
If, an included condition, that infatuates all. Let our lesson hence be this.

That our purposes may be sped with a happy success, let us intend in the
Lord, for the Lord. 1. Let us derive authority of our intentions from his
sacred Truth; which gives rules not only to live well, and to speak well, but
even ad been c^gitandum, to think well. It is a wicked purpose to fast till
Paul be killed; to wreake malice, to satifie lust. Inauspicious and without
speed are the intents, whose beginning is not from God. Let no purpose pass
current from thy heart, till God has set on it his stamp and seal of
approbation: Let his Word give it a Fiat: Whatsoever ye do, yea or intend to
do, let both action of hand, and thought of heart be all to Gods glory.

2. Let us in all our purposes reserve the first place for Gods helping hand.
John 15. 5.
Without me ye can do nothing, says Christ. But it is objected that Paul
spoke peremptorily to his Corinthians. 1. Cor. 16. 5.
I will come unto you when I shall pass through Macedonia. And David, Psalm. 66.
I will go to the house of the Lord. I answer, Cor tenet, quod lingua tacet:
they that had so much grace in their hearts, wanted not this grace; et noscere
et poscere facultatem Domini, to know and desire the Lords permission. You
shall never take men so well affected to good works, that do not implore Gods
assistance. Though they do not ever express in word, yet they never
suppress in thought, that reservation; If it please God, as Paul does
afterward in that place; 1. Cor. 16. 7.
If the Lord permit. If any will dare to resolve too confidently, patronizing
their temeritie from such patterns; as if their voluntates were potestates, let
them know that like Taylours, they have measured others, but never took
measure of themselves: that there is great difference betwixt a holy Propet or
Apostle, and a profane Publican.

2. Observe, that God now speaks so to the Covetous, that he will be heard: he
preaches another kind of Sermon to him then ever he did before: a fatal,
final, funeral Sermon, a Text of Judgment; This night shall they fetch away
thy soul. For this is Gods Lecture, himself reads it; But God said. He had
preached to the vvordling often before; and those Sermons were of three sorts.

1. By his Word. But cares of the world choke this Seed: the heart goes after
covetousness; even whiles the flesh sits under the pulpit. This is the devils
three-wing'd arrow, (wealth, pride, voluptuousness) whereby he nails the
very heart fast to the earth. It is his talent of lead, which he hangs on the
feet of the soul, the affections; that keeps her from mounting up into
heaven: with the printed beauty of this filthy Harlot he bewitcheth their
minds, steals their desires from Christ, and sends them a whoring to the hot
Stews of hell. Thus is Gods first Sermon quite lost.

2. By Judgments on others, whose smart should amaze him. For God, when he
strikes others, vvarnes thee, Tua res agitur, etc. When the next house is on
fire, thy cause is in question. God has smitten Israel, that Judah might
fear. Though Israel play the Harlot, yet let not Judah offend. Hos. 4. 15.
Ephraim is joined to Idols: let him alone. When the plague knocks at thy
neighbors door, it tells thee, I am not far off. Gods judgment on the Luke
13. 5.
Galileans, and men in Sil^e is thus applied by Christ, to draw others to
repentance, lest they likewise perish. But what if thousands fall on the
worldlings right hand, and ten thousands about him, he dreams of no danger:
his own gold gives him more content, then all this terror. The Devil has
hood-winked him with gain; and so carries him quietly (like a hooded hawke) on
his fist without baiting to hell. This Sermon is lost also.

3. By crosses on himself; and this Sermon comes a little nearer to him; for
it concerns his feeling. The first was objected to his ear, the second to his
eye, this last to his sense. But as the first Sermon he would not hear, the
next not see, so this he will not feel: Ier. 5. 3.
he is stricken, but he has not sorrowed. He imputes all to his ill luck,
that he loses the game of his worldly desires: he looks no more up to
heaven, then if there was none. Psalm. 10. 4.
God is not in all his thoughts. All these Sermons are lost.

But now God will be heard: He said; he spoke home; a word and a blow. He will
be understood, though not stood under. Uociferat, vulnerat: per dictum, per
ictum. This is such a Sermon, as shall not pass without consideration. So he
preached to Pharaoh, by frogs, flies, locusts, murraine, darkness: but when
neither by Moses vocal, nor by these actual lectures he would be melted, the
last Sermon is a Red Sea, that drownes him and his army. The Tree is bared,
manured, watered, spared in expectancie of fruits: but when none comes, the
last sermon is the Axe: it must be Math. 3. 10.
hewn^ down and cast into the fire. This kind of argument is unanswerable,
and cannot be euaded. When God gives the Word, innumerable are the Preachers:
if the lower voices will not be heard, death shall be feared. God knocks long
by his Prophets, yea Reu. 3. 20.
stands at the door himself; we will not open. But when this Preacher comes,
he opens the door himself, and will not be denied entrance. Romans 10. 21.
All the day long have I stretched forth my hands unto thee; manum
misericordiae, the hand of his mercy: it is not embraced. Now therefore he
stretches out manum Iustitiae, the hand of his Justice; and this cannot be
avoided. All that long Day is past, and now the worldlings Night comes. This
night shall they require thy soul. The Rich man must hear this Sermon; there
is no remedy. But GOD said. We are come from the Dooer, to

The Sufferer, or Patient;
And his title is, (...), Thou fool. What? If this had come from a poor
Tenants mouth, it had been held a petty kind of blasphemy. Is the rich man
only held the wise man, at all parts; and does God change his title with such
a contradiction? Is the worlds gold become dross? the rich Idol a fool? It
is even a maxim in common acceptance; He is wise, that is rich. Dives and
Sapiens are voces conuertibiles; Rich and wise are conuertible terms, imagined
to signify one thing. When the rich man speaks, all the people give
(bare-headed) silence and attention. As if no argument could euince such a
necessity, as the chief Priests to Judas; Tantum dabo: So much will I give
thee. Tantus valor in quatuor syllabis. Such force is Math. 26. 14.
there in four syllables, and but two words. It is not only eloquence, but
enchantment; and they that use it, prevail like Sorcerers; unless perhaps
they light upon (multis e millibus vnum) a Peter, Acts 8. 20.
Thou and thy money be damned together. If he that can plead by the strongest
arguments, be the wisest man, how does God call the Rich man Fool? If a man
should travel through all conditions of the World, what gates would not open
to the rich man's knock!

In the Church surely Religion should have the strongest force; yet riches
thrusts in her head even under Religions arm, and speaks her mind. Money once
brought the greatest Preacher of the Gospel, even the Author of the Gospel,
Christ himself, to be judged before an earthly Tribunal. Now the Servant is
not greater then his Lord: no wonder if money plays the rex still, and
disposes places to men of the greatest worldly (not the best heavenly) gifts.
For a gift prospers which way soever it goes. It were somewhat tolerable, if
money did only hinder us from what we should have; but it vvrings from us also
what we have.

In the Courts of Justice, Law should rule: yet often money ouer-rules law and
Court too. It is a lamentable complaint in the Prophecy of Esaias: Esa. 59. 14.
Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands a far off: for truth
is fallen in the street; and equity cannot enter. If there must be contention,
judgment should go forward; and is it turned backward? Justice should lay a
close ear to the cause of the distressed; and must it stand a far off? Truth
is fallen in the street. O the mercy of God! in the street? Had it fallen in
the wilderness, it had been less strange; but in the street, where every
body passes by, and no body take it up! miserable iniquity. Equity cannot
enter; what, not equity? Are they not called Courts of Equity? and must that
which gives them denomination, be kept out? Now all this peruersion, euersion
of Justice is made by money. This turns Amos. 5. 7.
Judgment to wormwood, poisons a good cause: or at least into vinegar; as
wine that stands long, becomes sour. And you are beholding to that Lawyer,
that will restituere rem, get you your right, though he does it cunctando; by
delays. There is many one of whom that old verse may be inuerted, Talis homo
nobis cunctando diminuit rem.

In the wars valor bears a great stroke, yet not so great as money. That
Macedonian Monarch was wont to say, He would never fear to surprise that City,
whose gates were but wide enough for an ass laden with gold to enter. How many
Forts, Castles, Cities, Kingdoms has that blown up, before ever gunpowder
was invented! I need name no more. What quality bears up so brave a head, but
money gives it the checke-mate! It answers all things, says Solomon. Eccl.
10. 19.
A feast is made for laughter, and wine makes merry: but Money answers all
things. By all this it appears, that Riches is the greatest wisdom: but we
must take out a writ, Ad melius inquirendum.

If wealth be wit, what means Christ here to call the Rich man Fool? yes,
good reason. 1. Cor. 1. 20.
God has made foolish the wisdom of this world. If God calls him so, he gets
little to have the world esteem him otherwise. 2. Cor. 10. 18.
Not he that commends himself, nor whom the world commends, is approved,
but whom the Lord commends. An ounce of credit with God, is worth a talent of
men's praises. Frustra commendatur in terris, qui condemnatur in coelis. The
world commends, but God condemns; which of these judgments shall stand?

I might here infer doctrinally, that all Covetous men be fools: and that
in his censure, that cannot deceive, not be deceived. but I should prevent the
issue of this Text, to say and show this now. I therefore content my self to
say it now, to show it anon. It may be cauill'd, that Folly is rather a defect
in the understanding, Covetousness in the affections. (For so they distinguish
the soul, into the intellectual and affectionate part.) How then is this
attribution of fool, proper to the worldling? The truth is, that the offense
of the will and affections does mostly proceed from the former error of the
mind. Our desire, fear, love, hatred, reflecting on evil objects, arise from
the deceived understanding. So there is a double error in the covetous man's
mind, that makes him a fool.

1. He conceiues not the sufficiency of Gods help; and therefore leaves him,
that will never leave his. He thinks Gods treasury too empty to content him:
he sees not his glory, and therefore will not trust him on bare promises. The
good man sweetens his most bitter miseries with this comfort: The Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance. But all Gods wealth cannot satisfy him. O nimis
Psalm. 16. 5.
auarus est, cui Deus non sufficit: He is vnmeasurably covetous, whom God
himself cannot satisfy. Here is one argument of his folly.

2. Having left God, who (rested on) would not have left him, he adheres to
the world which cannot help him. The mind of man, like the Elephant, must
have somewhat to lean upon: and when the Olive, Fig* tree, Vine are refused;
he must put Judge. 9. 15.
his trust under the shadow of the Bramble. When the Israelites had forsaken
the King of Heaven, they make to themselves a Ier. 7. 18.
Queen of heaven: Moses is gone, Exodus 31. 1.
up, make us gods which shall go before us. Admiratur mundum, reijciens
Dominum. He falls off from God, and falls in with the world. Here be both the
parts of his folly: Ier. 2. 13.
He has committed two evils; for saken the fountain of living waters, and
hewed himself a broken cesterne. We see the Patient; let us come to

The Passion or suffering.
This is the point of war, which my Text sounds like a Trumpet, against all
worldlings: This night shall thy soul be required of thee. Favor them in this,
and they think all well; but in this of all they must not be favored. This
suffering is aggrauated by four circumstances Quid. What; the Soul A quo, of
whom: of thee Quomodo, how: shall be required Qando, when; this night.



What.
The Soul, thy soul: not thy Barnes, nor thy croppe; neither the continent,
nor content: not thy gods, which thou hold dear; not thy body which thou
prizest dearer; but thy soul, which should be to thee dearest of all. Imagine
the whole conuexe of heaven for thy Barn, (and that were one large enough) and
all the riches of the world thy grain, (and that were crop sufficient:) yet
put all these into one balance, and thy soul into the other; and thy soul
out-waighes, out-values the world. What is the whole world worth to him that
loses his soul? The Soul is of a precious nature.

One in substance like the Sun, yet of diverse operations. It is confined in
the body, not refined by the body, but is often most active, when her layler is
most dull. She is a careful hous-wife, disposing all well at home; conseruing
all forms, and mustring them to her own serviceable use. The senses discern
the outside, the circumstance, the husk of things: she the inside, the
virtue, the marrow; resolving effects into causes; compounding, comparing,
contemplating things in their highest sublimity. Fire turns coals into fire:
the body concocts meat into blood; but the soul conuerts body into spirits;
reducing their purest forms within her dimensiue lines. In man's composition
there is a shadow of the Trinity. For to make up one man, there is an
elementary body, a divine soul, and a firmamentall spirit. Here is the
difference: In God there are three persons in one essence, in us three essences
in one person. So in the Soul there is a trinity of powers, vegetable,
sensitive, rational: the former would only be; the second be, and be well;
the third be, be well, and before ever well. O excellent nature, in whose
cabinet ten thousand forms may sit at once; which gives agitation to the body,
without whom it would fall down a dead and inanimate lump of clay. This Soul
shall be required.

Thy Soul which understands what delight is; and conceiues a tickling pleasure
in these covetous desires. But to satisfy thy soul, thou would not be so
greedy of abundance: for a little serves the body. If it have food to sustain
it, garments to hide it, harbor to shelter it, liberty to refresh it, it is
contented. And satietie of these things does not (reficere, sed interficere)
comfort, but confound it. Too much meat surfets the body, too much apparel
wearies it, too much wine drownes it: only Quod conuenit, conseruat. It is
then the soul that requires this plenitude, and therefore from this plenitude
shall the Soul be required.

Thy Soul, which is not made of a perishing nature, as the body; but of an
everlasting substance: And has by the eternity thereof a capablenes of moreioy,
or moresorrow: it must be ever in heaven, or euerin hell. This night must this
Soul receive her doom; thy Soul shall be required.

That Soul which shall be the bodies perpetual companion, saving a short
divorce by the hand of death in the grave: but afterward ordained to an
everlasting reunion. Whereas all worldly goods being once broken off by death,
can never again be recovered. The soul shall return to the body, but riches
to neither; and this Soul must be required.

This is a loss, a cross beyond all, that the worldlings imagination can give
being to. How differ the vvickeds thoughts dying, from their thoughts living!
In the days of their peace they forget to get for the soul any good. Either
it must rest it self on these inferior props, or despair of refuge. The eye
is not scanted of lustful objects, the ear of melodious sounds, the palate of
well rellishing viands. But the souls eye is not fastened on heaven, nor her
ears on the Word of God: her taste savors not the bread of life; she is
neither brought to touch, nor to smell on Christ's Vesture. Animas habent, quasi
inanimata vivunt: regarding their flesh, as that pamperd Roman did his; and
their souls as he esteemed his horse: who being a spruce, neat, and fat
Epicure, and riding on a lean scragling Jade, was asked by the Censors the
reason. His answer was, Ego curo meipsum, statius vero equum: I look to my
self, but my man to my horse. So these worldlings look to their bodies, let
who will take care of their souls.

But when this night comes, with what a price would they purchase again their
Souls, so morgag'd to the devil for a little vanity! Now curare non volunt,
then recuperare non valent. With what studious and artificial cost is the body
adorned, whiles the beggarly soul lies in totterd rags! The flesh is pleased
with the purest flower of the Wheat, and reddest blood of the grape, the soul
is famished. The body is allowed liberty, even to licentiousness, the Soul
is under Satan's lock and key, shackled with the fetters of ignorance and
impiety. At this nights terror, to what bondage, hunger, cold, calamity,
would they not subject their bodies; to free their souls out of that
friendlesse and endless prison! Why cannot men think of this before it be too
late? It will sound harshly in thine ear, O thou riotous or auarous worldling,
when this Passing Bell rings; Thy soul shall be required. If the Prince should
confiscate thy goods, which thou love so dearly, this news would strike cold
to thy heart: but here thy soul is confiscate. The devil prizeth this most:
he says, as the King of Sodom to Abraham, Da mihi animas, caetera sumetibi:
Give me the Soul, take the rest to thy self. Gene. 14. 21.


Of whom.
Of thee; that had so provided for thy soul in another place: for though
earth be a dungeon in regard of heaven, yet is it a Paradise in respect of
hell. This world was his selected and affected home; and from thence shall
death pluck him out by the ears.

If this news of the Souls requiring had come to a faithful Christian, he
would have welcomed it; and judged it only the voice of the Feast-maker,
finding him in the humble room of this base earth; Luke 14. 10.
Friend, sit up higher. Or that voice of heaven that spoke to John; Reu. 4.
(...).
Come up hither. Sit no longer in the vale of tears, but ascend the mountain
of glory. A trumpet calling him to Mount Tabor, where he shall be transfigured
for ever. This time would be to him, the non vltra of his joys and desires: he
fought all his combat for this, that he might 1. Pet. 1. 9.
receive the end of his faith, the salvation of his soul. He is content to
live here till God call him; but his Phil. 1. 23.
desire is to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Bonus vitam habet in
patientia, mortem in desiderio. He is patient to live, but vvilling to die. To
him Eccl. 7. 1.
the day of death is better then the day of his birth. Job Job 3. 3.
cursed the day of his birth. And Jeremy said, Iere. 20. 14.
Let not the day wherein my Mother bare me be blessed. But blessed is the hour
of death: Reu. 14. 13.
So says the Spirit; blessed are they that die in the Lord, for they rest from
their labors. Both Philosophers and Poets could so commend the happiness of
this time, that they thought no good man truly happy till it saluted him.
Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.


The Ethnikes ignorant of a better life future, honored this with great
solemnities, and kept prodigal feasts on their Birth-dayes; as Math. 14. 6.
Herod when he was served with the Baptists head for his second course. But
the Christians were wont to celebrate the funerals of the Martyrs; as if we
did then only begin truly to live when we die. For though the soul is gotten
when man is made, yet it is (as it were) borne when he dies: his body being
the womb, and death the Midwife, that delivers it to glorious perfection. The
good man may then well say, Ovid. Trist. 1. Eleg. 21.
Mors mihi munus erit, with a Poet; or rather, Phil. 1. 21.
Death shall be my advantage, with an Apostle. His happiest hour is, when In
manus tuas Domine, he can say, Into thy hands, Lord, I commend my soul. For
Anima no^ amittitur, sed praemittitur.

But this Of thee is terrible. Thou that never preparedst for death; were at a
league with hell, securely rocked asleep in the cradle of thy Barn, that did
put far away from thee the evil day, and given it a charge de non instando:
thou that cryedst Peace, peace, on thee shall come sudden destruction: thou
that said Soul be merry, to sorrow shall Thy soul be required. Thou that
never esteemedst thy soul so dear as thy wealth, but did set that after thy
stables, which might have been equal to Angels; Thy soul. Thou that were loath
to hear of death, as having no hope of future bliss; that would not give
thy possession on earth, for thy expectation in heaven: as that French
Cardinal, that said; He would not give his part in Paris for his part in
Paradise. Of thee shall a soul be required. This point is sharp, and makes up
his misery.

How. Required.
The original is (...), They shall require it. This is such a requiring, as
cannot be withstood. GOD requires thy obedience, thou deniest it: the poor
require thy charity, thou deniest it: the World requires thy equity, thou
deniest it. But when thy soul shall be required, there must be no denying of
that; it cannot be withheld. Who shall require this soul?

Not God; he required it in thy life, to sanctify it, and save it, thou
would not harken to him; now he will none of it. What should God doewith a
drunken, profane, covetous, polluted, sensual soul? He offered it the Gospel,
it would not believe; the blood of Christ, it would not wash and be clean: it
is foul and nastie, God requires it not. Or if he require it, it is to judge
and condemn it, not to reserve and keep it. Recusabit Deus iam oblatum, quod
negabas illi requisitum. God will refuse thy soul now offered, which thou
deniedst him vvhiles he desired.

Not heaven; those chrystalline walks are not for muddy feet, nor shall
lust-infected eyes look within those holy doors. Reu. 21. 27.
In no wise shall enter into that City any thing that defiles, or works
abomination. There is a room without for such, Chap. 22. 15. a black room for
black works. What should a worldling do in heaven? his heart so full of
envy and couetice, would not brook another felicity. If there be no gold
there, he cares not for coming at it. But he shall be fitted; for as he
requires not heaven, so heaven requires not him. It will spare him no place;
not that it wants room to receive him, but because his heart wants room to
desire it. 1. Cor. 6. 9.
The unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But because this
general menace does not terrify him, read his particular name in the bill of
indictment, ver. 10. Nor the Covetous. Heaven is for men of an heavenly
conversation. It was but Nebuchadnezzars Phil. 3. 20.
dream, Dan. 2. GOD will not set a golden head upon earthen feet; give the
glory of heaven, to him that loves nothing but the baseness of this world.

The Angels require it not; those celestial Porters, that carry the souls of
the Saints, as they did the soul of Lazarus, into the bosom of Abraham, have
no commission for this man's soul. This rich man might be wheeled and whirled
in a Coach, or perhaps Pope-like, be borne on men's shoulders; but the poor
beggar, whose hope is in heaven though his body on earth, that could neither
stand, go, nor sit, is now carried in the highest state, by the very Angels;
when the other dying, has no better attendance then devils.

And so if you ask, who then require his soul; since neither God, nor heaven,
nor the blessed Angels will receive it; why, devils: they that have right to it
by Gods just decree, for his unjust obedience. Gods justice so appoints it, for
his sins have so caused it, Satan chalengeth his due, his officers require
it. Thou have offended, oh miserable Cosmopolite, against thy great Sovereigns
Law, Crown, and Majesty; now all thou have is confiscate; thy goods, thy
body, thy soul. Thou, whose whole desires were set to scrape all together,
shall now find all scattered asunder: thy close congestion meets with a vvide
dispersion. Every one claims his own: the world thy riches, the worms thy
carkase, the devil thy soul. Lust has transported thine eyes, blasphemy thy
tongue, pride thy foot, oppression thy hand, covetousness thy heart; now
Satan requires thy soul. Not to give it ease, rest, or supply to the defects
of thy insatiate desires; no, dabit in cruciatum, he shall deliver it over to
torment.

When. This night.
In this dark Quando lie hid two fearful extremities; Sadness, and
Suddenness. It is not only said, In the night, but in This night.

1. In the Night; this aggrauates the horror of his judgment. The night is a
sad and uncomfortable time: therefore misery is compared to the Night, and joy
said to come in the Morning. Pray that your flight be not in the night, says
Christ to the Jews; as if the dismal time would make desperate their sorrow.
The night presents to the fantasy, which then lies most patient of such
impressions, many deceiving and affrightfull imaginations. Well then may a true
(not fantasied) terror work strongly on this wretches heart, whiles the night
helps it forward. All sickness is generally stronger by night, then by day:
this very circumstance of season then aggrauates his misery; making at once
his grief stronger, himself weaker.

But what if we look further then the literal sense; and conceive by this
night the darkness of his soul? Such a blindness as he brings on himself,
though the day of the Gospel be broke round about him. The cause of night to a
man, is the interposition of the earth betwixt him and the Sun. This
worldling has placed the earth, the thick and gross body of riches, between
his eyes and the Sun of righteousness. And so shine the Sun never so
clear, it is still night with him. There is light enough without him, but
there is darkness too much within him. And then darkness must to darkness;
inward to outward, as Christ calls it, utter darkness. He would not see
whiles he might, he shall not see when he would. Though he shall for ever
have fire enough, yet it shall give him no light: except it be a little
glimmering, to show him the torments of others, and others the torments of
himself.

2. This night, the sadness is yet increased by the sodainnesse. It will be
fearful, not only to be surprised in the night, but in that night when he
does not dream of any such matter; when there is no fear, nor suspicion of
apprehension. His case is, as with a man that having rested with a pleasing
slumber, and been fed with a golden dream; suddenly waking finds his house
flaming about his ears, his wife and children dying in the fire, robbers
ransacking his coffers, and transporting his goods, all lovers forsaking, no
friend pitying, when the very thrusting in of an arm might deliver him. This
rich man was long asleep, and been delighted with pretty wanton dreams, of
enlarged barnes, and plentiful haruests; (as all worldly pleasures are but
waking dreams) now he starts up on the hearing of this Soule-knell, and
perceiues all was but a dream; and that indeed he is everlastingly wretched.

The suddennes increases the misery. The rich man has no time to dispose his
goods, how shall he do with his soul? If in his health, wealth, peace,
strength; succored with all the helps of nature, of opportunity, preaching of
the Gospel, counsel of ministers, comfort of friends, he would not work out
his salvation: what shall he do when extreme pangs deny capablenesse to
receive them, and shortness of his time preuents their approaching to him? He
has a huge bottom of sin to vnrauell by repentance, which he has been
many years winding up by disobedience: now a great work, and a little time do
not well agree. This sudden call is fearful, This night shall thy soul be
required. Yet before I part from this point, let me give you two notes.

1. There is mercy in God, that it is hac nocte, this night; not this hour,
not this moment. Hac nocte was sudden, but hoc momento had been more
sudden; and that this larger exhibition of time is allowed, was Gods mere
mercy, against the worldlings merit. He that spared Nineveh many forties of
years, will yet allow her forty days. He that forbore this wretch many days,
receiving Jonas 3. 4.
no fruit worth his expectation, will yet add a few hours. God in the midst
of justice remembers mercy: much time he had received, and abused; yet he
shall have a little more. When the Lords hand is lifted up to strike him, yet
he gives him some lucida interualla monitionis, warning before he lets it
down. But let not the worldling presume on this: sometimes, not an hour, not
a minute is granted. Sword, Palsy, Apoplexy, Impostume makes quick dispatch:
and there is no space given to cry for mercy. But what if a paucity of hours
be permitted? ancient wounds are not cured in haste, the plaster must lie long
upon them. There was one man so saved, to take away desperation: and but one so
saved, to Vnuslatio in fine poenituit: vnus quidem vt null^s desperet; solus
autem, vt nullus praesumat.
bar presumption. Conversion at the eleventh hour is a wonder, at the
twelfth a miracle. All thieves do not go from the gallhouse to glory, because
one did; no more then al Asses speak, because God opened the mouth of one.
Flatter not thy self with hope of time. Nemo sibi promittat, quod non
promittit Euangelium. Let no man August.
promise himself a larger patent, then the Gospel has sealed to him.

2. The day of the wicked turns at last to a night. After the day of vanity,
comes the night of judgment. Now is the time, when the rich man's Sun sets;
his light and his delight is taken from him. His last sand is run out; the
clock has ended his latest minute, his night is come. His day of pleasure was
short, his night of sorrow is everlasting. Extremum gaudij luctus occupat.
Vexation treads on the heels of vanity. Man's life is compared to a Day.

This day to some may be distinguished into twelve hours. The first gives us
nativity; even in this hour there is sin; an original prauity, indisposition
to good, pronenesse to evil. Secondly, Infancy; God now protects the cradle.
Thirdly, Childhood; and now we learn to speak and to swear together; the sap
of iniquity begins to put out. Fourthly, Tender age, wherein toys and gawdes
fill up our scene. Fifthly, Youth: this is a madding, a gadding time. Remember
not the sins of this time, Psalm. 25. 7. Job 13. 26.
prays David: their remembrance is bitter, says Job. Sixthly, Our high noone.
God that could not be heard before for the loud noise of vanity, now looks for
audience, for obedience. Seventhly, This is full of cares and crosses; the dugs
of the world taste bitter; it is full time that this hour should weane us.
Eighthly, Brings us to a sense of mortality, we feel our blood decaying.
Ninthly, Our bodies go crooked and stooping, to put us in mind that they are
going to their original earth. Tenthly, We are even as dying: we do dye by
degrees: our senses first fail us, our eyes are dim like old Isaacs, our
ears deaf, our taste dull: our grinders are done, our stilts unable to
support us. Eleuenthly, We are a burden to our selves, to our friends: we long
for death, if any hope of a better life has possessed our hearts. The twelfth
hour it comes. Which of these hours pass over us without Gods mercies,
without our voluntary unthankfulness; unless those first hours wherein our
ignorance is incapable of such observance? All thy day long have I stretched
out my Romans 10. 21.
hands unto thee, says God. If none of these hours reclaim us, our day is
spent, and the night comes; that night wherein no man can work; actiuely to
comfort, Ioh. 9. 4.
though passiuely he work for ever in torment. I know, that God cuts many one
short of most of these hours, and often shuts up his daylight, before he
comes to his noone. But howsoever man pass from Infancy to childhood, from
childhood to youth, from youth to age: yet senectutem nemo excedit; none can be
more then old. Though tam senex nemo, quin putet se annum posse viuere; no man
is so old, but still he thinks he may live another year. And therefore
lightly the older, the more covetous; and Quo minus viae restat, eo plus
viatici qu^ritur: the less journey men have, the more provision they make.

God allows this liberal time to some: but what enemies are we to our selves,
that of all these twelve hours, allow our selves not one! Many post off their
conversion from day to day, sending Religion before them to thirty, and then
putting it off to forty; and not pleased yet to overtake it, promise it
entertainment at threescore: at last death comes and allows not one hour. In
youth men resolve to allow themselves the time of age to serve God: in age they
shuffle it off to sickness; when sickness comes, care to dispose their goods,
lothnesse to dye, hope to escape martyrs that good thought; and their
resolution still keeps before them the length of Gracious street at least. If
we have but the lease of a Farm for twenty years, we make use of the time
and gather profit. But in this precious Farm of Time we are so ill husbands,
that our Lease comes out, before we are one penniworth of grace the richer by
it. Take heed; it is dangerous trifling out thy good day, lest thou hear this
message in the evening; This night shall thy soul be required of thee: Then
whose shall those things be which thou have provided? This is the Question.



It were somewhat if thou might perpetually enjoy them thy self: if thou
could fetch down eternity to them. As those in the 49. Psalm; whose inward
thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling Psalm.
49. 11.
places to all generations: they call their lands after their own names. But
there is a Quamdiu, and a Quousque. How long! Hab. 2. How long? Thou that
lodest thy self with thick clay? How far! Esa. 14. How far? Thou that
Hab. 2. 6.
made the earth to tremble, and did shake the Kingdoms. Here is a Non
vltra to both: thy power is confined, thy time is limited: both thy latitude
and extention are brief'd up; heeres thy period; a full stop in the midst of
the sentence. (...). Whose shall those things be which thou have provided? He
that should read thy history (being ignorant of thy destiny) and find so
plentiful a happiness in the first page of the book: grounds so fertile,
cattle so prospering, house so furnished, possibilities stro^ king thy hopes,
hopes milking thy desires, desires dancing to the tune of thy pleasures;
promises of larger barnes, more opulent fruits; and all this with ease, yea
with hearts-ease: Soul be merry: and coming now to the end of the page, but
not of the sentence; turning over a new leaf, thinking there to read the
maturity and perfection of all, should find a blanke, an abrupt period, an
unlooked for stop, would surely imagine, that either destiny was mistaken, or
else some leaves were torn out of the book. Such a Cuius erunt haec omnia
would be a terrible dash in a story of happiness so fairly written, and
promising so good an Epilogue. But here is his end, you must read him no
further: He, whom you have seen Exodus 4. 13.
this day, you shall see him again no more for ever. Whose shall these things
be, O worldling? Were thy grounds as Eden, and thy house like the Court of
Iehoiakim: yet do thou think to reign, because thou closest thy self in
Cedar? no; Ier. 22. 15.
aduenit finis t^us; Thy end is come; Whose shall these things be?

It were something yet, if thy children might enjoy these riches. But there is
a man that has no child; yet is there no end of his labor, neither is his eye
satisfied with wealth. And he says not, For whom do I travel, and bereave
Eccl. 4. 8.
my soul of this good? The prodigal would be his own heir and Executor:
but this covetous man bequeaths neither legacy to himself, nor to any known
Inheritour. The other desires to see en end of all his substance: this man to
see only the beginning. He hunts the world full cry, yet has no purpose to
overtake it: he lives behind his wealth, as the other lives beyond it. But
suppose he* has children, and then though he famish himself to feed them
fat; though he be damned, yet if his son may be made a Gentleman, there is
some satisfaction. But this Cuius erunt is a scattering word, and of great
uncertainty. Whose shall they be? perhaps not thy childrens. They say, Happy is
that son, whose father goes to the Devil; but thou may go to the Devil,
and yet not make thy son happy. For men make heritages, but God makes heirs.
He will wash away the unholy seed, and cut off the generation of the wicked.
Solomon had a thousand wives and concubines, and consequently many children;
yet at last he wants one of his seed to sit upon the throne of David, or to
bear rule in Judah: Ier. 22. 30.
and S. Luke deriues Christ from Nathan the younger brother. For thus says God
of C^oniah, whom he calls Luke 3. 31.
Coniah; cutting short at once his name, his life, his hope of posterity. Write
this man childlesse. It often so falls out, that to a man exceeding wealthy, is
denied a fuccessour of his own loins. Let him have children, he is not sure
those children shall possess his riches. But those riches perish Eccl. 5. 14.
by evil travel: and he begets a son, and there is nothing in his hand.
A scatterer succeedes a gatherer: auari here is dissipans: the father loved the
world too well, and the son cares not for it. The sire was all for the rake,
and the son is all for the pitchforke. So Whose shall these be? even his that
will one day pity the poor. He will love the poor so well, that he will not
rest til he be poor with them for company. This is the portion of the wicked,
Job. 27. 13. 14.
and the heritage which oppressors shall receive of the Almighty. If their
children be multiplied, it is for the sword, and their offspring shall not be
satisfied with bread.

Children are a great plea for Covetousness, for Oppression. Art thou covetous
because thou have children? Remember to make Christ one of thy children. If
thou have one, make him the second: if two, make him the third; if three, the
fourth: how many soever thou have, let Christ be one; let the poor have a
childs part. This is the way to get a blessing to all the rest: when Christ is
made a brother to thy children, and has a legacy bequeathed him; he will
bless the portions of the other; the seed of the righteous shall not beg
their bread. It is a sweet Psalm. 37. 26.
verse of the Psalm, worthy of observation, as it is full of comfort. The good
man is ever merciful, and lends, and his seed is blessed. The world thinks,
the more a man gives away, the less should be left to his children: but the
Lord witnesses otherwise: let a man lend to the borrower, give to the beggar,
be merciful to the distressed, and this is the way to make his Seed blessed.
Charitable works do not hinder the childrens wealth, but further it: what thou
give to the poor, will be a sure vndecaying portion to thy posterity.
Duplicatum erit filijs iusti, quod iustus dedit filijs Dei. GOD will double
that to thy children, which thou have given to his children. Men flatter
themselves, and cousen their consciences, with a tolerablenesse of usury; when
moneys be put out for their childrens stocks. Alas, says a man, I can leave
my children but a little: but by that they come to age of discretion to use it,
it will be iollily increased. I may be quickly gone, and when I am dead, they
have no skill to employ it; I will therefore safe-bind it for them, by good
bonds with allowance of interest.

God often in the Scriptures has promised to be a Father of the fatherless,
and to provide for those, whom the Parents faith have left to his protection.
By this promise did Christ commend himself to his Disciples, Ioh. 14. 18.
I will not leave you Orphans: we translate it comfortless, the original is
Orphans, or fatherless children. Psa. 146. 9.
The Lord relieueth the fatherless, and the widow. You may read 2. Kin. 4.
that God would work a miracle; rather then a poor vvidow, with her two
fatherless children, should want. Has God made himself their Guardian, and
must their means be secured by usurious contracts? Surely GOD has just reason
to take this the most unkindly of all the rest. Leave not thy children the
inheritance of thy sin, turn not the providence of God from them by
iniquity, who has promised to protect them, if committed to him. Lo the wit
of a worldly man! he takes thought to make his children rich, and yet takes the
only course to undo them. No casualtie shall fall upon their stocks, (so they
plot) by an act of God or man: but here certain loss falls presently upon
their souls; and a final ruin shall impartially at last consume their
estates. For God will blast the stocks and branches, that are planted in the
moorish and muddy ground of usury. The dependence on God is abandoned, and how
justly may the Lord forsake them, that forsake him! Neither is this sin only
damnable to the Parents, but also dangerous to the children: who are by this
means dyed in the very wool of their youth, with the scarlet wickedness of
Usury.

There was a Devil, whom the Disciples of Christ could not cast out: and when
Christ expelled him, the Mark. 9. 21.
spirit tare the man, and he fell on the ground wallowing and foaming. Christ
then asked, How long is it ago since this came unto him? To which the Father
answered; Of a child. If Usury be hardly thrown out of the affections, the
wonder is little; seeing that devil has possessed him of a child. The new
mortar, wherein Garlike has been stamped, will not a great while lose the
smell. It is a fearful advantage, that thou give Satan over thy children,
when thou bring them up in Usury.

As much might be said for Oppression; thy depopulations pull down the
Country, that thou may build up thy posterity. Which way can thou turn
thine eyes from beholding the infatuation of such hopes? One generation is thus
raised up high; and the next comes down as low, even to contempt and beggerie.

But perhaps if thou have no children, yet thou have a brother. Eccl. 4. 8.
There is one alone, and there is not a second: yea, he has neither child nor
brother, yet is there no end of his labor. Say thou have a brother, yet is not
Christ thy brother in Heaven, dearer to thee then any son of thy mother? Is
not he that has adopted thee coheire to his eternal purchase, an inheritance
of glory, worthy of some part of thy earthly possessions? Never brother did so
much for thee as he has done. Nature made a man thy brother in thy Parents
blood; he made thee his brother by his own blood. Remember then his needy
brethren, and in him thine. He is nearest in blood, that is dearest in good:
but if thou have any faith, none did thee ever so much good as Christ. And to
take away all plea from the heart of uncharitableness, Christ calls the poor
his Brethren, affirms their releeuers Blessed, and inuites them to an
everlasting kingdom. Mat. 25. 40.
In as much as ye have done it to the least of these my brethren, ye have done
it unto me. But thou have a brother in the flesh: will thou therefore covet,
extort, oppress, and so go to hell for thy brother? It is ill done in any to
divert amorem fratris, in odium sui; the love of his brother into hate against
himself. Yet is not this all, but when thou have purposed most for thy
brother, God shall disappoint him of all. Whose shall these things be? no not
thy brothers. Eccle. 2. 26.
To the sinner the Lord gives travail, to gather and to heap up: but at last
he bestows that heap of treasure upon him that is good before God. Thou
bequeathest it to thy brother, but God dispose^h it to his children. But thou
have no brother; Yet thou have kindred and friends; and to help thy Couzens to
wealth, thou will cousen thy own soul. Alas! it is a mystery of knowledge,
to discern friends. Prou. 19. 4.
Wealth makes many friends: they are friends to the wealth, not to the
wealthy. They regard not Qualis sis, but Quantus: not how good thou art, but
how great. They admire thee to thy face, but inwardly consider thee only as a
necessary evil, yea a necessary devil: and when thou dyest, are ready to sing
thy soul a Dirige to hell. If thine eyes be ever opened, thou will hate such
suborners of bastard thoughts to thy heart: as a recovered man, having drunk a
loathsome potion in his sickness, does ever after hate the very cruze it was
brought him in. But say, thy friends stick truer to thee, and one holds thy
aching head, another runs for Physike, a third, by helping thee to change
sides, seeks to mitigate thy pains; yet still thou complainest of vnremedied
torments. Oh then had thou not better make the God of comfort thy friend;
who would neither be wanting in his presence, nor scanting in his consolations?

Worldly friends are but like hot water, that when cold weather comes, are
soonest frozen. Like Cuckooes, all Summer they will sing a scuruy note to thee,
but they are gone in July at furthest: sure enough before the fall. They
flatter a rich man, as we feed beasts, till he be fat, and then feed on him. A
true friend reprooues thee erring, though perhaps not suddenly. Iron is first
heat, then beaten: first let him be heat with due and deserved praise for his
good, then cool and work him with reprehension for his evil. As Nurses when
their children are fallen, first take them up, and speak them fair; and chide
or correct them afterward. These friends love not thy souls good, but thy
bodies goods: let them not carry away thy heart from Christ. But if thou so
resoluest, that these friends shall enjoy thy riches: yet God says, Cuius
erunt, whose shall they be? Thy kindred or friends shall not eat the grapes of
thy planted vineyard: no, a stranger shall eat thereof. Eccl. 6. 2.
God gives not thee power to eat thereof; no nor him thou desire; but a
stranger eats it. Dabitur digniori, it shall be given to one good in Gods
sight. Perhaps to such a man's posterity, whom thou now scornest. The Job 27. 17.
wicked heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay. They may
prepare it: but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the
silver.

Now see thy folly, O covetous Churl, whose desires were all set on a Nunquam
satis; Whose shall those things be? Not whom thou chusest, but whom God
appoints. Thy children are Gods charge, if thou will faithfully trust him
with them: otherwise, could thou bind thy lands, and bequeath thy goods;
settle thy whole estate, so sure as either strength of Law, or wit of Lawyers
can devise, yet Cuius erunt; whose shall these things be? Lo, now thou have
enough: thy head aches, thy conscience pricks, death requires thy body, Satan
thy soul: could thou not wish that thy Barnes had been less, and thy
charity more? That as GOD blessed thy store, so thou had returned some
liberal testimony of thankfulness to his Church and poor again?
Especially, when neither thy self, nor thy Assigns shall enjoy these things.
Whose shall they be?

All these particulars suruaied, give the covetous Cosmopolite three brands. He
is branded in his Soul, in his riches, in his good name. In his Soul, Thy
Soul shall be fetched away. In his riches, Whose shall these things be which
thou have provided? In his name, Thou fool^. Whereupon we may justly infer
this Conclusion; as the

Sum
Of all: that abundant wealth can bring no good, either to Soul, Body, or
Name. Man is said to have three lives; Spiritual, Corporal, and Civil, as
the Lawyers call it: the life of his good name. Neither to this, nor to the
life of his Soul or Body, can multitude of riches confer any good. This Text
shall prove it in all the particulars.

1. To the Soul can opulency procure no benefit. All Christians know that good
for the Soul is the passion and merits of Christ; faith to apprehend these;
repentance to mortify sins: sanctification to give us celestial lives; and
salvation to glorify our persons. But can any of these be bought with money?
Thou and thy money perish together, that think the gifts of God may be
purchased Acts 8. 20.
with money. God will not barter away his graces (as the Indians their gold)
for thy gawdes and rattles. He will not take the morgage of a Lordship for the
debt thou owe him. The smoke of thy sacrifice smells never the sweeter,
because thou art clothed in silks; or can sit down to tell thy
Michaelmasse thousands. Thy adulteries cannot be commuted for in heaven, nor
thy vsuries be answered by a fine before the Tribunal of the highest. Thou
may as soon and easily mount up to heaven with wings of lead, as by
feathers of wealth. Indeed they can do a man as much good in distress of
conscience, as to have his head bound with a wette cloth in a cold morning can
cure the headache. If wealth could keep a man from hell, how few rich men
would be damned? But he is not sanctior quiditior; nor is salvation vendible to
a full purse. The doctrine of Rome may affirm it; but the decree of God will
not afford it. This Cosmopolite had barnes and bars, but these cannot hedge
in his Soul; that is required.

2. To the body perhaps there is some more expectation of good; but no more
success. Thou art anguished; will thy wealth purchase health? Sleep is denied
thy senses, and after many changed sides and places, thou can find no rest:
go now, empty thy coffers, and try what slumber the charms and chimes of gold
can ring thee. Thy stomach loathes meat; all thy riches are not sufficient
sauce, to get thee an appetite. Could thou drink Cleopatra's draught, it
will not ease thy headache. The Physician will take thy money, and give thee
Physike: but what Physike will give thee infallible health?

But the rich man has a fire, when the poor sits cold: the rich an harbor,
attendance, and delicate provision, when the poor wants both house and home,
meat and money, garments and company. For though riches gather many friends;
the poor is separated from his neighbors. Prou. 19. 4.
No part of my Sermon has denied, but the competency of these earthly things
is a blessing: neither dare I infer, that the want of these is a curse; for the
best have wanted them, not the Savior of men himself excepted. But what is
this to abundance? Is not he as warm that goes in russet, as another that
russles and ruffles in his silks? Has not the poor labourer as sound a
sleep on his flocke-bed, or pad of straw, as the Epicure on his downebed, with
his rich curtains and couerings? Does not Quiet lie oftener in Cottages, then
in glorious manors? The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat
little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to Eccl. 5.
12.
sleep. And for a good appetite, we see the toyling servant feed sauourly of
one homely dish, when his surfeted master looks lothingly on his
farre-fetch'd, and dearebought dainties: sitting down to his second meal in a
quandary whether he should eat of his best dish or nothing: his stomach being
such a coward, that it dares not fight with a chicken. This Gentleman enuies
the happiness of his poor Hind, and would be content to change states with
him, upon condition he might change stomachs. It is not then the plenitude,
but competency of these things, that affords even the rich content. So that a
man's estate should be like his garment, rather fit then long: for too much
troubles him; and the satiety of these earthly riches does rather kill, then
conserve the Body.

3. The name perhaps has some hope of luxurious share in this abundance, and
thinks to be swelled into a Colossus; ouer-straddling the world. Indeed
here is the Center: for I persuade my self, few worldlings can propound to
themselves any well-grounded expectation of good to their souls, or help to
their bodies, by their accumulation of treasures. Only in his nomen potius
quam omen quaeritur; there is more hope of a great name, then of good content.
And now for the Name; what is the event? Come his riches ill, his credit is the
Commons curse. Populus sibilat, the world railes at him living: and when he
dies, no man says, It is pity; but It is pity he died no sooner. They shall
not lament for him, with Ah Lord, or Ah his glory. But he shall be buried
with the burial of an Ier. 22. 18. verse. 19.
Ass; that has lived the life of a Wolf. His glorious Tomb erected by his
enriched heir, shall be saluted with execrations: and the passengers by will
say, Here lies the Devils Promoter. Come his wealth well, yet what is Credit,
or how may we define a good Name? Is it to have a Pageant of crindges and faces
acted to a taffaty Iacket? To be followed by a world of hang-byes; and howted
at by the reeling multitude, like a bird of Paradise, stuck full of py'd
feathers? To be daubed over with court-morter, flattery; and set up as a Butte,
for whores, panders, drunkards, cheaters, to shoot their commendations at? To
be licked with a sycophants rankling tongue; and to have poor men crouch to
him, as little dogs use to a great mastiffe? Is this a good name? Is this
credit? Indeed these things may give him a great sound: as the clapper does to
a bell; makes it have a great sound, but the bell is hollow. They are empty
gulls, whose credit is nothing else but a great noise, forced by these lewd
clappers. A rich worldling is like a great Cannon, and flatterers praises are
the powder that charge him; whereupon he takes fire, and makes a great report;
but instantly goes off, goes out in stench. He may think himself the better,
but no wise man, no good man does: and the fame that is derived from fools, is
infamy.

That which I take to be a good Name, is this: Laudari a Land dignis; to be
well esteemed of in Christian hearts; to find reverence in good men's souls.
Bonum Sen. de Morib.
est laudari, sed praestat esse laudabilem. It is a good thing to be praised,
but it is a better to be praiseworthy. It is well that good men commend thee
in their consciences, but it is better when thy good conscience can commend
thee in it self. Happy is he, whose own heart does not condemn him. This
credit wealth cannot procure, but grace: 1. John 3. 21.
not goods, but goodness. The poorest man serving God with a faithful heart,
finds this approbation in sanctified affections, when golden asses go without
it. I confess, many rich men have had this credit, but they will never thank
their riches for it. Their greatness never helped them to this name, but their
goodness. They have honored the Lord, and those the Lord has promised that
he will honor. So that all the reputation which wealth can procure a man in
Gods judgment, is but Thou fool. In that parabolicall history, Luke 16.
mention is made of a rich man, but none of his name; as if it were unworthy to
stand in the Lords book. Here is all the credit of the wicked; their very
memories shall rotte; and their great Name shall either not be remembered, or
remembered with detestation.

Lo now the benefit of worldly wealth; and the brands which disfigure the
Soul, Body, Name of covetous men. For his Reputation, Folly challenges it:
for his riches, uncertainty deuoures it: for his Soul, Satan claims it. He
is gone in all respects; and now there is nothing left of him, but his infamy
in the thoughts of men, his goods in the keeping of the world, his body in the
prison of the grave, and his soul in the hand of hell. Abijt, he is gone: a
tempest has stole him away in the night; says Job. Job 27. 19.
The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he opens his
eyes, and he is not. Therefore it is said, Luke 16. There was a certain rich
man; Chrysostom.
Erat, non est, there was, there is not, he is now gone. Psalm. 37. 36. Luke 16.
19.
I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green
Bay tree. Yet he passed away, and l^e be is not: yea I sought him, but he
could not be found.

To conclude, it may yet be objected; that though much wealth can procure to
soul, body, or name, no good; yet it may be an antidote to prevent some evil,
or a medicine to rid them al of some malady. The insufficiency of such a
promise in riches, is punctually also confuted in this Text. For neither the
Rich man's Soul, body, nor estate is secured by his abundance. Infernal
spirits fetch his soul: temporal men possess his wealth: eternal censures
blast his good name: and the worms prey upon his carcass. What evil then can
riches either prevent or remove from man?

1. Not from the soul: all evil to this, is either Poenae, or Culpae; of
sin, or of punishment for sin.

For Sin, what vice is euacuated by riches? Is the wealthy man humbled by his
abundance? no, he is rather swelled into a frothy pride; conceiting himself
more then he is, or at least imagining, that he is either ((...)) or ((...),)
the man or some body. And as pride is radix omnis peccati; the root of all
sin; so riches is the root of pride, Diuitiarum vermis superbia, says S.
Augustine. When the sum of prosperity heates the dunghill of riches, there is
engendered the snake of pride. Wealth is but a quill, to blow up the bladder of
high-mindednesse. Saint Paul knew this inseparable consequence, when he
charged Timothy, to Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded. And do we think that the heat 1. Tim. 6. 17.
of malice will be slaked by riches? no, it is fired rather into combustion;
and now bursts forth into a flame, what before was forced to lie suppressed in
the embers of the heart. Is any man the more continent for his abundance? No.
Stat quaeuis multo meretrix mercabilis auro: whores are led to hell with golden
threads. Riches is a warm nest, where lust securely sits to hatch all her
unclean brood. From fullness of bread, the Sodomites fall to unnatural
wantonness. Ceres et Liber pinguescunt Venerem. Oppression is not abated by
multiplication of riches; but rather Longiorem and magis strenuam reddit manum;
gives it a longer and stronger arm. For as the poor cannot withstand, so the
rich will not restrain the tyranny of great oppressors. They covet fields, and
take them by violence: Mic. 2. 2.
how? Because their hand has power.

For Punishment, what security is in money? Does the Devil balke a Lorldly
house, as if he were afraid to come in? Dares he not tempt a rich man to
lewdnes? Let experience witness, whether he dare not bring the highest Gallant
both to sin and shame. Let his food be never so delicate, he will be a guest at
his table; and perhaps thrust in one dish to his feast, drunkenness. Be his
attendance never so complete, yet Satan will wait on him too. Wealth is no
charm to conjure away the Devil: such an amulet and the Popes holy water, are
both of a force. Inward vexations forbear not their stings, in awe of riches.
An evil conscience dares perplexe a Saul in his Throne, and a Judas with his
purse full of money. Can a silken sleeue keep a broken arm from aching? Then
may full Barnes keep an evil conscience from vexing. And does hell fire
favor the Rich man's limbs more then the poores? Has he any servant there,
to fan cold air upon his tormented joints? Nay, the namelesse Dives goes
from soft linen to sheets of fire, from purple robes to flames Luke 16.
of the same color, purple flames: from delicate morsels, to want a drop of
water. Herod, though a King on earth, when he comes to that smokie vault, has
not a cushion to sit on, more then the meanest Parasite in his Court. So
poor a defense are they for an oppressed Soul.

2. Nor from the body can riches remove any plague. The lightning from heaven
may consume us, though we be clad in gold: the vapors of earth choke us,
though perfumes are still in our nostrills: and poison burst us, though we have
the most virtuall Antidotes. What judgment is the poor subject to, from which
the rich is exempted? Their feet do as soon stumble, and their bones are as
quickly broken. Consumptions, Fevers, Gowtes, Dropsyes, Pleurisies, Palseys,
Surfets; are household guests in rich men's families, and but mere strangers in
cottages. They are the effects of superfluous fare and idleness; and keep their
Ordinary at rich men's tables. Anguish lies oftener on a Downe-bed, then on a
pallet: diseases wait upon luxury, as close as luxury upon wealth. These
frogs dare leap into King Pharaohs chamber, and forbear not the most
sumptuous palace. But money can buy medicines: yet what sick man would not
wish, that he had no money, on condition that he had no malady. Labor and
moderate diet are the poor man's friends, and preserve him from the
acquaintance of Master Doctor, or the surfeted bills of his Apothecarie. Though
our worldling here promises out of his abundance, meat, drink, and mirth:
yet his body grows sick, and his soul sad: he was before careless, and
he is now curelesse: all his wealth cannot retain his health, when God will
take it away.

3. But what shall we say to the Estate? Evils to that are poverty, hunger,
thirst, weariness, seruillitie: We hope wealth can stop the invasion of these
miseries. Nothing less: it rather mounts a man, as a Wrastler does his
combatant, that it may give him the greater fall. Riches are but a sheeld of
Wax, against a sword of power. The larger state, the fairest mark for
misfortune to shoot at. Eagles catch not after flies: nor will the Hercules of
ambition lift up his clubbe, but against these Giants. There is not in poverty
that matter, for a Great man's covetous fire to work upon. If Naboth had had no
Vineyard to prejudice the command of Ahabs Lordship, he had saved both his
peace and life. Violent winds blow through a hollow willow, or over a poor
shrubbe, and let them stand: whiles they rend a pieces Oaks and great Cedars,
that oppose their great bodies to the furious blasts. The tempests of
oppressing power meddle not with the contemptible quiet of poor Laborers, but
shake up rich men by the very roots; that their blasted fortunes may be fit
timber for their own building. Who stands so like an eyesore in the tyrannous
^ight of Ambition, as the wealthy? Imprisonment, restraint, banishment,
confiscation, fining, and confining are Greatnesses Intelligencers; instruments
and stairs to climb up by into rich men's possessions. Wealth has four
hindrances from doing good to the State.

1. God usually punishes our ouer-louing of riches with their loss. He thinks
them unworthy to be riualls with himself: for all height and strength of love
is his due. So that the ready way to lose wealth, is to love it. Et delectatio
perdet.

2. The greatness of state, or of affection to it, opens the way to ruin. A
full and large sail gives vantage to a Tempest: this pulled down, the danger
of the gust, and of shipwreck by it, is eluded: and it passes by with only
waves, roaring as if it was angry for being thus prevented. He that walks on
plain ground, either does not fall, or rises again with little hurt. He that
climbes high towers, is in more danger of falling; and if he fall, of breaking
his neck.

3. We see the most rich Worldlings live the most miserably; slaued to that
wealth, whereof they keep the key under their girdles. Esuriunt in popina, as
we say, they starve in a Cooks shop. A man would think, that if wealth
could do any good, it could surely do this good; keep the owner from want,
hunger, sorrow, care: No, even these evils riches do not avoid, but rather
force on him. Whereof is a man covetous, but of riches? when these riches come,
you think he is cured of his covetousness: no, he is more covetous. Though he
has received desiderium animi, yet he keeps still animum desiderij. The
desires of his mind granted, abolish not his mind of desires. So a man might
strive to extinguish the Lamp, by putting oil into it; but this makes it
burn more. And as it is with some, that thirstily drink harish and ill-brewed
drinks, have not their heat hereby allayed, but inflamed: So this worldlings
hot eagerness of riches is not cooled, but fired by his abundance.

4. That which makes a man easy to hit, makes also his wound grievous. The
Poet tells us, that when Codrus his house burns, (a little cottage in the
Forest) he Iuv^. Satyr. 4.
stands by and warmes himself at the flame: he knows that a few sticks,
straw and clay, with a little labor, can rebuild him as good a Tabernacle. But
if this accident light upon the Usurers house, distraction seizes him withal:
he cries out of this Chamber, and that chest, of his Closet and Cabinet, of his
bonds and morgages, money and plate; and is so much the more impatient, as he
had more to lose.

In a word, here is all the difference betwixt the rich and poor: the poor
man would be rich while he lives, and the rich would be poor when he dies. For
it is small grief to leave hunger, cold distress, bondage, hard lodging, and
harder fare: but to forsake full Barnes, full purses, music, wine, iunkets,
soft beds, beauteous women, and these lust-tickling delights; and to go with
death to the Land of forgetfulness, this is the terror.

I end then as Paul concludes his counsel to rich men, Lay up for your selves
a good foundation against the 1. Tim. 6. 19.
time to come, that you may lay hold on eternal Life.

THE BAD LEAVEN: OR, THE CONTAGION OF SIN.
GALAT. 5. 9. A little Leaven leaueneth the whole lump.
THIS Epistle was written with St. Paul's own hand: chap. 6. 11. Ye see how
large a letter I have written unto you with my own hand. It is for quality
excellent, for quantity large. He wrote not so long an Epistle to any other
Church with his own hand. Indeed he wrote a letter to Philemon with his own
hand, verse. 19. I Paul have written it with mine own hand: but it was short. He
wrote longer Epistles to the Romans and Corinthians, but not with his own
hand, but by Scribes. We have cause therefore to regard it more: as his pains
were greater in writing, so let our diligence be greater in observing.

The maine purpose of it is to discover: 1. That ill conjunction of Moses and
Christ, the ceremonies of the Law, with the sanctimony of the Gospel. 2. The
free Grace and Justification by the blood of Christ without the works of the
Law. In this the Galatians had received a beginning, but now had admitted a
recidiuation. For this cause the Apostle chides, verse. 7. Ye did run well:
who did hinder you that you should not obey the Truth? Where there is a
Concession, and a Conviction: a step; and a stop. The Concession or Step, ye
did run well. The Conviction or Stop; Who did hinder you that you should not
obey the truth?

In the former he compares Christianity to a race: all men must first be
viatores in this valley of tears, before they can be Assess^res, and sit with
Christ in his kingdom of glory. Only as it agrees with a Race in many things;
as labor, it is no idle thing to be a Christian; shortness, it is a Race, the
perplexity is recompensed with the breuity: continuance, the runner must hold
out the last step, if he will obtain the prize. So there are some
differences. 1. In other races many run, only one winnes the goal: but in
this all that run faithfully, shall reign triumphantly. Though they cannot
run so fast as others, nor so far as others; yet even they that came at the
eleventh hour into the Vineyard, received they penny, so well as they that
came at the third. For the Lord regards not Quantum, but ex quanto: not how
much, but how well. What ever hour they are called, let them spend the
aftertime in a zealous diligence. 2. In other races one hinders another, but in
this journey one helps another. The more the merrier: no envy or grudging,
either in the way or the goal. Dispar gloria singulorum, sed communis latitia
omnium. There may be different glory of some, yet there is a common joy of
all. Every good man is a spur to his brother. Peter and John ran to Christ's
Sepulcher: John out-ran Peter unto the grave, Peter out-went John into the
grave. But we run together unto Christ's Throne; some come before, some after,
all meet in the Communion of Saints. 3. In other races the runner obtaines a
prize that shall perish; all the runners here get an incorruptible crown.
They run for a little prize, a little praise; we for eternal glory. Run
we then cheerfully; behold, a kingdom lies at the stake. God give us all
eyes of faith to see it, and hearts of obedience to run to it, through the
power of Jesus Christ.

In the latter the Apostle may seem to put a superfluous question; Who did
hinder you? For there are many adversaries. As first Satan, the General of that
damned crew that hinder our passage to heaven. Paul excuses himself to the
Thessalonians: 1. These. 2. 18. Zach. 3. 1.
We would have come unto you once and again, but Satan hindered us. Zach. 3.
Joshua the high Priest stood before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan stood at
his right hand to resist him. Where God has his Church, Satan has his
chapel. So also wicked men; such as have taken the Devils oath of Allegiance.
What the Devil cannot do immediately by himself, he does mediately by his
Instruments. To err Humanum, is the weakness of a man; but to seduce
diabolicum, is the part of a Devil. It is ill to play the woman, worse to play
the beast, worst of all to play the Devil. But what special hinderers the
Apostle means, we shall have precise occasion in some future passages to
demonstrate.

Only I must not omit, that the Apostle gives a direct resolution by way of
negation, verse. 8. This persuasion com^eth not of him that calls you. God is
no ways the Author of error and sin. He that wills the death of no sinner, will
not lead him into the ways of destruction. Indeed he suffes Satan to temptal,
but to a diverse purpose: the good to try them, the reprobate to destroy them.
The temptations of the godly are for their instruction; of the wicked for their
destruction. James tells us, that Iam. 1. 17.
every good gift comes down from the Father of lights: is it evil? it comes
not from God. The Apostle telling the Ephesians of lusts, blindness,
wantonness, obstinacy; concludes piercingly, Non sic didicistis Christum.
Ephe. 4. 20.
Ye have not so learned Jesus Christ. Art thou perverted? thou never learned
this of Christ. Iam. 1. 13.
Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God, for God tempts no
man. In him we live, move, and have our being. A Gentile Poet sung it, a
Christian Act. 17. 28.
Apostle sanctified it, all the creatures in heaven and earth cry Amen unto it.
Life is his, whether we live well or ill: motion is his, whether we lift up
our hands to prayer or murder: but the prauity and corruption of these is none
of his. Is any part of body, or power of soul depraved? This comes not from
him that calls us. What is then the cause of sin?

I answer, properly nothing: it has indeed a deficient cause, but no
efficient cause. It is a defect, privation, or orbity of that God made; the
thing it self he never made. Will you ask what is the cause of sickness? I
answer, the destitution of health. If what is the cause of darkness; the absence
of the Sun: if of blindness, the deficiency of seeing. What is the cause of
silence? no cause: there are causes of speech, organs, air, etc. take away
these, what follows but silence? you see the light: who ever saw darkness?
you hear speech: who ever heard silence? Man forsook grace: sin came in at
the backedore. It is a bastard brought into Gods house by stealth. Woe to them
that shall root their filthiness in the deity. If they be seduced, to cry,
Iere. 4 10.
Lord, thou have deceived us. No, destruction is of thy self, O Israel; in me
is thy (...). We have all gotten this sin from Adam; Mulier quam tu, etc. The
woman which Thou gave me; as if GOD had given him a woman to tempt him. Haec
est ruina maxima, Deum putare causam ruinae: This is the greatest destruction
that can be, to charge God with the cause of our destruction. No, O Father of
heaven, be thou justified, and the faces of all men ashamed. Let us look home
to our own flesh; from thence it comes that destroys. Me, me, adsum qui
feci. The Lord put not only this confession in our mouths, but this feeling
in our hearts; that all our evil comes from our selves, all our good from
Jesus Christ.

Of him that called you: He has called you to liberty, will you entangle your
selves in new bondage? who pitties him that being redeemed from prison,
wilfully recasts himself into it? Or that saved from the fire, will run into
it again? Art thou Titio ereptus, and yet have a mind to be burned? He has
called you not to the ceremonies, but to their Antitype; not to those legal
Lambs, but to that Evangelical Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
world. Will you be directed by Lamps, when the Sun is risen? no, he has
called you to the truth and comforts of the Gospel; obey that call: And then
he that has persuaded you to virtue, by calling you to grace, shall crown you
with eternal glory.

Now one argument whereby the Apostle deterres them from blending Iudaisme with
Christianity, is derived from the danger of corrupting the doctrine of the
Gospel: A little Leaven leaueneth the whole lump. One ceremony of the legal
rites observed with an opinion of necessity, sowreth all that sweetness of
redemption that comes by Christ. This Divine Aphorism may thus logically be
resolved; into a Predicate, Subject, and Copula. The Predicate, leaven: the
Subject, lump: the Copula, leaueneth. Or thus there is a thing Active; Leaven.
Factiue, sowreth Passive, the lump.



But because the whole speech is allegorical, let us first open the metaphor
with the key of proper analogy; and then take out the treasure, such
observations as may be naturally deduced from it. Most properly our Apostle by
leaven understands false doctrine, and by lump the truth of the Gospel: so
the sense is this; one heresy infects a mass of truth. Or if we restrain it
to persons, by leaven he means false Teachers, and by lump the Church of
Galatia: and so a teacher of the bondage to the Law, sowres the liberty of the
Gospel. verse 2.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. Or if yet we will look upon it with more general view, we may by
leaven understand sin, by lump man, by leauening Infection. Here are three
respondences, and all worthily considerable.

First taking leaven for false Doctrine, so we find in the new Testament four
sorts of leauens, Math. 16. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the
Sadduces; there be two of them; the Pharisaicall, and the Sadducean leauens.
Math. 16. 6.
Mark. 8. Beware of the leaven of Herod, there is the third. The fourth is my
Text, the leaven of mingling Mosaicall Mark. 8. 15.
ordinances with Christ's Institutions. It will not be amiss to take a
transient view of these Leauens: for though former times had the originals, we
have the Counterpaines: we have parallel leauens.

1. To begin with the Pharisees; to these I may well liken our Seminaries; one
egg is not liker another. Even a Jesuit wrote in good earnest, Non male
comparari Pharisaeos Catholicis; Papists are fitly compared to the Pharisees.
Whether he spoke it ignorantly or unwittingly, or purposely; I am sure Caiphas
never spoke truer when he meant it not. Shall we take a little pains to confer
them? The Pharisees had corrupted, yea in a manner annulled the Law of God by
their Traditions: and for this Math. 15. 6.
Christ complains against them. Now for the Papists, this was one of their
Tridentine decrees; With the same reverence and devotion doc we receive and
respect Traditions, that we do the books of the old and new Testaments.
Shut thine eyes and hear both speak, and then for a wager which is the
Pharise, which the Seminary? Indeed to some traditions we give locum, but locum
suum; a place, but their own place. They must never dare to take the wall of
the Scripture.

Again, the Pharisees corrupted the good Text with their lewd Glosses. The law
was, that no Leper might come into the Temple; their traditionall Gloss was,
that if he were let down through the roof, this was no offense. As that
drunkard, that having for sworn going to a certain Tavern, yet being carried
thither every day on men's shoulders, thought he had not broken his oath. Their
Sabbath days journey was a thousand Cubits; their Gloss understood this
without the walls, and walking all day through the city no sin. The Papists
are not behind them in their foul interpretations, not shaming to call that
sacred Writ a nose of wax, formable to any construction. Paul subscribes his
two Epistles to the Thessalonians thus; Missa fuit ex Athenis; a Papist cries
out strait, Here Is a plain text for the Mass. Psalm. 8. Omnia subiecisti
pedibus eius; Thou have put all things under Psalm. 8. (...).
his feet: This is spoken of the beasts subjection to man: their Gloss
construes it of men's subjection to the Pope. So Esa. 49. They shall bow down
to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet.
Here Esa. 49. 23.
says their Gloss, is a plain proof for kissing the Popes feet. Our Savior
says; Mat. 18. 3.
Except ye become as little children, ye shall not enter the kingdom of
heaven: Hereupon Saint Francis commands one Massaeus to tumble round on the
earth like a little child, that he might enter. If thy foot offend thee, says
Christ, out it off. Hereupon when the penitent confessed to S. Anthony that he
had kicked his mother, he urged him with that Text: the man went and cut off
his foot, but S. Anthony (honestly to make him amends) set it on again. Were
these not goodly constructions? So the new elected Pope in his solemn Lateran
Procession, must take copper money out of his Chamberlaines lap, and scatter it
among the people, saying, Act. 3. 6.
Silver and gold have I none, but such as I have I give unto you. And is not
this a probable truth, a praise-able bounty? Seven years penance is enjoined
to a deadly sin; because Miriam was separated seven days for her leprosy;
and God says to Ezekiel, chap. 4. I have given thee a day for a year. Oh
genuine and most neighbourly concording of Scriptures! When Gods word subjects
Priests to Kings, their Gloss subjects Kings to Priests, at least to Popes.
But as when they determined to kill the Emperor Henry the seventh, that they
might be sure to poison him, they stuck not to poison their own God in the
Sacrament. So purposing to tear the honor, and deface the majesty of Kings,
they first offer violence to the sacred word of God. In these damnable Glosses
it is hard to decide; whether Pharise is beyond Papist, or Papist beyond
Pharise. But Dum haec male construunt, seipsos male destruunt. Their evil
construction of the Scriptures brings a worse destruction to themselves. They
make that serve the turn of their policy, which God meant to serve the turn
of his glory.

The Pharisees cleaued to the letter, but despised the Spirit: so do Papists.
Hoc est corpus must be materially there: for this they wrangle, fight, burn
the contradicters; yet few of them care to find it spiritually there. Dabo
claues, I will give thee the keys; therefore none can enter heaven except the
Pope open the doors. Whereas Peter's two keys, one of knowledge, the other of
power, are fitted to two locks, Ignorance, and Induration. But we know who
keeps the keys, and lets in many thousands to heaven without the Popes leave.
Reu. 3. 7.
These things says he that is holy and true, he that has the key of David,
he that opens, and no man shuts, that shuts, and no man opens. Some
of the Rabbis affirmed that God requires two things concerning his law,
Custody and Work: custody in heart, work in execution. The Pharisees thought
it enough to have it in their frontlets, not in their hearts. So the Romist
has his opus operatum; prayers numbered on beads, fastings, pilgrimages, etc.
and then cries like Saul; 1. Sam. 15. 13
Blessed be thou of the Lord; I have performed the commandment of the Lord.

The Pharisees justified themselves by their works, and would not stick to say
of the Law, All this have I kept from my youth. Do not the Papists so? do
they not climb to salvation by their own works, and justify themselves? Those
thought it not only easy to fulfill the Law, but possible to do more then
they were bound to. They thought it not worth thanks to perform what they were
bidden. Gods Law was too little for their holiness. They plied God with
unbidden oblations, gave more then they needed, then was commanded. I pay
tithes of all, said that Pharise: of all? it was more then he needed. If God
would have a Sabbath kept, they ouer-keepe it: let a house be on fire, that day
they would not quench it. And what other is the boasting opinion of the
Romanists? it is nothing with them to content God, they can earne him,
supererogate of him. Yea these Jewish Papists have done more then enough for
themselves, many good works to spare for others: this they call the Churches
Treasure, and they sell them for ready money. But Christ taught us all to say,
We are unprofitable servants; intimating, that do what we can, yet God is a
loser by the best of us.

To omit the miserable penances of the Pharisees, pricking themselves with
thorns, and wounding their flesh with whips; wherein it is not possible for a
Papist to go beyond them. If the misvsing, macerating, lacerating their own
bodies be a means to come into heaven, surely the Pharisees should enter far
sooner then the Papists. Yet were those kept out, and shall these enter? Mat.
5. 20.
Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven. The people were so
besotted on them, that they thought if but two men should go to heaven, the
one must be a Scribe, the other a Pharise. But here was strange news; neither
of them both shall come there. So the Papists think, that if but two men be
saved, one must be a Friar, the other a Jesuit. He that should say, neither
of them both was likely to speed so well, should have the whole multitude stare
upon him for such a Paradoxe.

The Pharisees bragged much of Moses Chair; just so do our Papists of Peter's
Chair. The Pharisees justified it that there was no error in theirs: the
Papists affirm that there is no possibility of error in theirs. The Pharisees
thundered against the poor people, Ioh. 7. 49.
This people who knows not the Law, are cursed. So the Pope thunders his
curses and excommunications against us: but (we bless God) his thunder cannot
reach us. I would other places had no more cause to fear his thunder. Then
would they answer him, as Gregory the fourth was answered, when he purposed
peremptorily to proceed against Lewys le Debonayre; the French Bishops answered
in flat terms; Si excommunicaturus veniret, excommunicatus discederet: If he
came to excommunicate, he should be sent back excommunicated.

The Pharisees compassed Sea and Land to make Proselytes; Mat. 23. 15.
and when they had made one, they make him twofold more the child of hell then
themselves. Do not our Seminaries so? Yes they are Compassers too, like their
grand Master. Job. 2. much like those Circulatores, and Circumcelliones, a
limb of the Donatists. They creep into Ladies houses, I had almost said into
their Chambers: the Pursuiuant in modesty has forborne the Gentlewomans bed,
and missed him. Confession and Penance are the principal wheels, whereupon
the Engine of their policy runs. By the first they find out men's secret
inclinations; by the other they heap riches to their Tribe. They will not lead
a Nouice into the maine at first, to make him believe the Popes infallibility
of Judgment, authority to decrowne Kings, to make Scripture no Scripture, and
no Scripture Scripture, etc. This meat is too tough, it will not down:
therefore they court his affections with pleasing delights, smooth semblances,
and moderate constructions; as near to the religion from which they would
pervert him, as possibly may be afforded. So by degrees they gain him, God and
the Truth loses him. In their own Countries, places of freedom, they vizour
their hearts, in England they vizour their faces too.

The Pharisees made difference of oaths. Mat. 23. 16.
Whosoever shall swear by the Temple, it is nothing: but whosoever shall
swear by the Gold of the Temple, he is a debtor. Ye fools and blind: for
whether is greater, the gold or the Temple that sanctifies the gold? That was
their doctrine, this was Christ's reproof. So the Papists have their
distinctions betwixt a material and a formal oath: one to bind the
conscience, the other not. Out of such an unlucky copulation of fraud and
malice, was that monstrous stigmatike Equivocation engendered. A damned egg,
not covered by any fair bird, but hatched as the Poets feign of O sprayes,
with a thunderclap. A mere bastard, whosoever was the Father, Jesuits keep
the child, and bring it up as their only darling. But they have their Bulls of
dispensation for it: fit, they should all speed, as some did once with their
bulls. Two Seminaries came into England with their two Bulls, but being
apprehended, those two Bulls called in a third Bull, which was Bull the
hangman, to dispatch them both.

Lastly, the Pharisees used to Mat. 23. 14.
devour widows houses, and for a pretense to make long prayer. It is evil to
devour a man's house, worse to devour a widows house, worst of all when their
lips seemed to pray, to be chewing that morsel. Jerusalem had never worse
Pharisees then Rome: these were mere bunglers to the Jesuits. The new Pharisees
have made very Proselytes and Novices of the ancient.. A widows cottage filled
the pauch of an old Pharise. Large Patrimonies and fair revenues will not
stop the throat of the Jesuit. They devour the Land as Pharaohs lean kine,
and yet look hunger-starued still. You shall have them first fall in with the
wife, as the devil did with Eve: but they cousen the husband of his
inheritance, as the devil couzoned Adam. Even other Orders among them, cry
shame upon the Jesuits: they prole away all with a face of sad piety and
stern mortification. Forgive my unseasonable prolixitie; you see one dangerous
Leven.

2. The next is the Leven of the Sadduces: hear their doctrine, Math. 22. They
say there is no resurrection. Act. Math. 22. 23. Acts 23. 8.
23. The Sadduces say there is no resurrection, neither Angel, nor spirit. I
would we had no matches for them, but we have too many; that either deny
futurum aliquid post mortem, that any further thing is to be done or suffered,
or enjoyed after death: or else affirm faeliciter fore vniuersis, that every
man shall be happy. They have studied reasons against the Resurrection. The
flesh turns into rottenness, rottenness to dust, etc. But St. Aug. cuts them
off with reason: Qui potuis formare nouum, non poterit reperare mortuu^? He
that could make man of nothing, surely can revive him of a small thing.
Facilius est restituere, quam constituere: It is far easier to repair then
to prepare. They tell us, Eccl. 9. 4.
It is better to a living dog, then a dead Lion: which is true among beasts,
like themselves: but among men a dead beast is better the^ a living Atheist.
Like dogs they bark at heaven, but they cannot bite it: it is out of their
circumference. Though they build up reasons and treasons like Babel; yet they
prove but Confusion. They would pull God out of his Throne, if it were
possible: but he is safe enough out of the reach of their malice, else it had
gone ill with him before this. Their song is; 1. Cor. 15. 32.
Let us eat and drink, (they think of no reckoning to pay) for to morrow we
dye. They promise to morrow, yet kill themselves to day. This is their song, but
the Holy Ghost adds the burden: Heb. 9. 27.
After death comes the Judgment. It is appointed unto men once to dye; to
all men once, to Atheists twice, for there is a second death. Their first death
makes way to their last Judgment. They are in some respect worse then the
Devil; he knows and acknowledges a Deity; these say, There is no God. Iam.
2. 19.
The devils believe and tremble; these have neither faith nor fear. The devil
quakes at the day of Judgment; these deride it. Math. 8. 29.
Art thou come hither to torment us before th^ime? There Is their terror. Where
is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep, all things
continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation. There Is their
derision. The devils say, Acts 19. 15.
Jesus we know: these are like that doubting spirit, Si filius Dei, Mat. 4. 6.
If thou be the Son of God; as if they made question whether he was so or
not. Strange ^euen the father of sins comes short of his sons: and there
be Atheists upon earth when as there are none in hell. But they profess some
religion among us; it may be so; but they fit and square it to their own
humors: as that Giant dealt with his guests, for all whom he had but one bed;
if they were too short for it, he racked them out longer; if too long, he cut
them shorter.

But Insculptum est omnibus esse Deum: it is written in all hearts by the pen
of nature that there is a God. It is not possible to get out these indeleble
characters. Say what they will, they would give much to be sure that the
Scripture was not true. The discourse of reason confutes them. Job 12. 7.
Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee: the fowls of the air, and
they shall tell thee. Who knows not in all these, that the hand of GOD has
wrought this? Praesentemque refert qualibet herba Deum. The little pile of
grass tells us, there is a God that made it. Besides, they have a conscience
within them, Gods deputy in the soul, which will speak for the Maker and
Master, and be heard too. Qui negat esse Deum, mihi negat, et tibi, non sibi.
He that denies there is a God, denies it to me, and to thee, but never to
himself. You may sooner pull his heart out of his breast, then this conception
out of his heart. Thus is their leven tossed back into their own teeth: they
will not now acknowledge this; they shall one day feel this. Oculos quos culpa
clausit, poena aperiet: the eyes which Atheism has shut, damnation shall
open. This is a cursed Leven.

3. The next Leven is that of the Herodians: here crafty and dissembling
hypocrites might be thought their fittest and most suitable paralells: because
Christ calls Herod a Fox. Luke 13. 32.
Go and tell that Fox. But the Herodians were rather noted for profane
fellows; and so we must seek out other matches. Such as carry in their
gestures a tepidity of religion, a looseness of life: that turn the grace of
God into wantonness: and make that which brings salvation to all, a means of
confusion to themselves. This disease is Interius, within: and quickly becomes
Interitus, a violent destruction. Professed Atheists, and open Heretics, are
through the manifestation of their malice prevented: these are bosom Serpents,
that sting in silence. Aristotle says, that Extreme is less hurtful, which
is nearest to the medium, and does communicate with it in something.
Prodigality is less noxious then Avarice, because it has this common with
liberality, to give: which the other has not. Fiery zeal is dangerous: by
this Paul Act. 22. 4.
persecuted Christ, by this the Jews Romans 10. 2.
crucified Christ. But profane coldness is worse, because it is further from
the mean, which is zeal in religion.

By these wretches lewdnes among us, the Romish adversaries take advantage to
slander our Religion. They say our Profession is a doctrine of liberty, that we
preach for faith, and against works: but Wisdom is justified of ^er children.
Thus we preach, Romans 2. 9.
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil: but glory and
peace to every man that works good. And 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
every man that has hope in Christ, purifieth himself. And this is Iam. 1. 27.
Pure religion, and undefiled before God; to visit the fatherless and widows
in their affliction, and to keep our selves unspotted from the World. Our
faith is not an (...), imagined in the brain; but an (...), seen in our life.
We teach that Justification and Sanctification are inseparable friends. If men
will not be reformed, we conceal not from them Gods renuntiation; Reu. 22. 11.
If any man will be filthy, let him be filthy still. Our dissolute conversation
cannot annihilate the truth of our doctrine. Howsoever the Samaritan, not the
Jew, relieved the wounded man, yet the Jews religion was true, and not the
Samaritans. How polluted soever we are, yet their hands are not clean enough
to take up stones against us. If they rejoice and triumph in men's wickedness,
they profess imitation of the devil in a cursed mirth. Good Christians have
learned to Ezekiel. 9.
mourn for abominations, not to laugh at them. To return to those dissolute
wretches; they sing not with the Church a Tenebo t^ Domine, Cant. 3. 4.
I held him, and I would not let him go: all their delight is in a Nunc
dimittis, they are glad to be gone. It were not amiss if we were well rid of
them, being thus incorrigible. 1. Cor. 5. 7.
Purge out therefore the old leven, that ye may be a new lump. What leven the
Apostle there means, he declares ver. 13. Put away from among your selves that
wicked person. When Jonah was cast out of the Ship, the Sea ceased from her
raging: when Zimri was slain, the plague stayed: when Baal was destroyed,
Israel had peace. If these cursed Levens of Superstition, Atheism, and
Profaneness were purged, how sweet a lump would the Church of England be! We
cannot hope it, yet let us pray for it; Miserere Deus, cleanse us from these
levens for the merits of thy Son our blessed Savior Jesus Christ.

4. There is a fourth Leven, to which Saint Paul has principal respect in
this place; and that is the mixing of Law with Gospel; I mean Ceremonial and
legal rites with the truth of Jesus Christ. This leven might well die in
forgetfulness, and have molded away, if there had not been a late generation
of Thraskites to devour it as bread. They must abstain from Swines flesh, and
from blood, and that upon conscience to the Ceremonial law. But he that thus
abstaines from blood and flesh, the flesh and blood of Christ shall do him no
good. What is this but to lick up the Galatians vomit? to swallow that hard
and indigestible leven, which Saint Paul took so much pains about, to get out
of their stomachs. But let it sleep with them in the dust: it is dead and
buried, let us not disquiet the grave to revive it.

Now to the second way of considering these words, taking leven personally, for
Leueners, false Teachers, indeed Heretics: I will only note two things, one
of doctrine, another of discipline. For doctrine out of my Text, that they
sour the whole lump: for discipline, that therefore the Church should
restrain and correct them.

The leven of Heresy spreads far. 2. Tim. 2. 17.
Their word will eat as does a canker; or a Gangrene. (...), is an Option, or
Election, of (...), to make choice. A laudable word at first among
Philosophers, taken for a right form of learning. In Divinity it is a word of
disgrace, and intends a stubborn deuiation from the received Truth. It is more
then Error. Aug. Errare possum, Haereticus esse non possum. I may err, I
cannot be an Heretic. Qui sua pestifer a dogmata defendere persistunt,
h^retici sunt. They that wilfully go on to maintain their pestilent opinions,
are Heretics. It has the right property of a Gangrene, it frets as it goes;
vires acquirit eundo: Heresies in the soul are like vlcera depascentia in the
body, they eat up the parts about them.

Of this God is the deficient cause, who suffers it. 1. In respect of the
wicked, that their just condemnation might not be hindered. 2. These. 2. 11
For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should b^leeue a
lie. 2. In regard of the faithful, that their tentation might assure them
Gods: 1. Cor. 11. 19.
There must be heresies, (or schisms) that they which are approved, may be
made manifest among you. With this premonition God prepared Israel, that when a
false Prophet or Dreamer should come unto them, Deuteronomy. 13. 3.
God does prove you, to know whether you will love the Lord with all your
heart. For this cause are Heresies, Tertul.
Vt fides habendo tentationem, haberet etiam probationem; that faith admitting
a trial, might receive an approuall.

Of this Satan is the efficient cause: the father of lies never loved the
Father of Truth. Wicked and perverse men are the isntrumental causes: they are
so ouer-vvise, that the curdle of their wit procures a breaking out into
faction. Cum discipuli veritatis non erunt, magistri erroris sunt. Refusing to
be the scholars of Truth, they become the Schoolemasters of error. So the
precedent cause in such, is self-love, the cause that grows out of the other,
and nearer to the maine effect (or rather defect) is disco^tent. If the Church
forget the^m in dealing her legacies of preferment, they will tear her bowels
for it. If their mother pleases not their humors with an expected indulgence,
they will be so bold as kick her sides. Pride steps in for a third cause:
unless I forget her place, for she disdaines an inferior room; and yet of
all sins, as none presumes higher, so none is thrust lower, even Esaias 14. 15.
to the bottomless pit. Saint John does witness thus much of Diotrephes. John
3. Epist. verse 9.
I wrote unto the Church, but Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence
among them, receives us not. He is called by Beda, Haeresiarcha superbus.
Hypocrisy must needs be admitted for a fourth motive to heresy. Applause must
be had, if not by being good, yet by seeming so. Omnes haeretici sunt
hypocrit^, says Ierom, Every heretic is an hypocrite. Like Vipers they never
come to light, but with some rupture to the womb of their mother.

Thus heresy creepes in at a little hole, but infects, infests the whole
house: like a plague that comes in at the windows; and then propagates it
self beyond all measure. Seen.
Erroris non est finis: there is no termination of error. Therefore the only
way to refute heresies, is to fetch them back to their original. H^reses ad
sua principia refer, est refell^re. If you can reduce them to their first,
you see their last. As if a man would dry up a stream, he cannot do it in the
maine; but goes first to the Springhead, stops up that: the river will fail of
it self.

As in the bodily Gangrene the part affected grows tumid and cadauerous, the
color fades and becomes blackish: So in the spiritual, the mind grows tumid
and swelling: Colo. 2. 18.
Vainly puffed up with a fleshly mind: the fair color of profession gone:
Phil. 3. 18.
vvalking as enemies to the cross of Christ. We know how the heresy of Arrius
did spread, when totus orbis ingemuit factum se videns Arrianum: the whole
world groned, feeling it self made (not Christian, but) Arrian. There was a
long disputation about two words; little differing in sound, much in sense,
(...), and (...). The Arrians holding Christ like God in substance; the
orthodoxe Christians holding him one with God in substance. O the world of ink
and blood that was spent about this! The Pope rose by degrees: first above
Bishops, then above Patriarchs, then above Counsels, then above Kings, then
above Scriptures, now last of all above GOD himself. So the Apostle speaks of
Antichrist: 2. These. 2. 4.
He exalts himself above all that is called God. From so poor a beginning
he has risen prettily for his time. Thus Popery crept up in the dark: like a
thief putting out the lights, that it might more securely rob the house.
Whiles it broched opinions, that like to sweet wines pleased the palate, it led
many liquorish affections to hell; not unlike the Butcher, who claws the Ox
till he cuts his throat. Thus the leven of heresy spreads.

But the Church must take care lest it spread too far: Let them alone in quiet
(yet what quiet can they have that disturb themselves?) and then 2. Tim. 3. 13.
Evil men and seducers will wax worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived. Augustine says of Arius his schism in Alexandria; Una scintilla
fuit: That it was at first but a little spark: but because not, Statim
suppressa, totum orbem eius flamma populata est: the flame of it sindged the
whole world, not being extinguished in time. The kindling fire is easily
quenched: when it possesses the Town, it rages and rangeth like a tyranny,
scorning the offers of suppression. Romans 16. 17.
Now therefore, I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine that ye have learned, and avoid them. The
malice of an heretic, Aug.
Uel dolenda tanquam hominis, vel cauenda tanquam hostis, vel irridenda tanquam
imprudentis: is either to be lamented, as a man's, or avoided, as a foes, or
derided, as a fools. When proud Marcion said to Polycarpus, Non me agnoscis?
Do thou not know me? Yes, replied that good Saint; Agnosco te Primogenitam
Satanae: I acknowledge thee the devils eldest son. If it prove an incurable
Gangrene, Ense recidendum, ne pars syncera ^rahatur; cut it off to save the
rest. Pereat vnus potius quam vnitas. Better lose one of the whole, then the
whole for one. It is Hippocrates maxim: Quae ferro non curantur, ignis curet:
where the knife can do no good, fire must. How-euer heretics escape fire
temporal, let them beware fire eternal. For our-selues, bless we God, that
has cleared the way of truth among us; and thrust this leaven out of our
coasts. Whiles the plague rode circuit in our streets, we prayed: when it
ceased, we praised God. No plague so dangerous as Heresy: whiles that ranged
in our Church, as Syluius said of ruinated Constantinople, O miseram vrbis
faciem! So we of our Church, O miseram Ecclesiae faciem! This leprosy gone,
she is now fair in the eyes of her Beloved: Christ now kisseth her lips, and
for this, let us kiss the feet of Jesus Christ. A little leven, leueneth the
whole Lump.


Now let us resolve this Allegory another way: and conceive By Leven, Sin.
Lump, Man. Leuening, Infection.



In effect; a little sin makes the whole man in body and soul, unsavory to
the Lord. For method in proceeding; first, we will view the Metaphor, the
Similitude of sin to leven: then examine how a little of this can sour the
whole lump. The similitude holds in many respects, albeit one be here
principally intended, the sowring quality; yet may the rest be justly
considered.

1. Leven is not bread, but the corruption of that which makes bread. Sin is
not a created quality, but the corruption of a created quality. God made not
sin: Who then? the devil begot it on man's lust: Eccles. 7. 29.
This I have found, that God made man upright: but they have sought out many
inventions: Tricks enough to make themselves miserable. That which rottenness
is in the Apple, sowrenesse in the Wine, corruption in the flesh, such is sin
in the Soul: Fetida qu^dam qualitas, a thing never good since it took being,
only usurps the place of good, and occupies the seat where a happy and
perfect quality stood. It is like a Iehoiakim that sits in the Throne of a
Josiah: as that bad son of so good a father 2. King. 23. 35
gave the silver and the gold of the Temple to Pharaoh Necho: so this, gives
the endowments of nature, of reason, of affection, to the black Prince of
darkness. Or as the Pope pretends, that he sits in the chair of Peter* yet
what that blessed Saint attributed to Christ; Act. 3. 12.
Why marvel ye at this? or why look ye so earnestly on us? as if we by our
own power or holiness had made this man to walk. Act. 4. 10.
Be it known to you, that by the name of Jesus of Nazareth, whom ye
crucified, this man now stands whole before you. This the Pope attributes to
relics and blocks: there is no disease, but he has appointed some puppet to
cure it. Prohpudor? quis, cui? Such is the practice of sin: the bounty of God
Hos. 2. 8.
gives corn, and wine and oil, multiplies silver and gold; and even these,
sin gives to Baal. It is depranatio boni, and depriuatio boni: one is active,
the other passive: the latter a necessary consequent of the former. It depraues
our power of obedience to God actually; it depriues us of Gods good grace and
blessing passiuely. The one is inseparable to the other: For he that forfeits
Bonum vnde, shall lose Bonum inde. They that spoil that grace whence they
might do good, shall lose that glory whence they expect good. The first breach
of one Law took away all power to keep any: and by it we are disabled to all.

2. The very same substance of meal that would make bread, by addition of salt
becomes leven: The very same work that might be good and acceptable to God,
by addition of our prauity becomes evil. Thus the best actions of an
unjustified person, are so leuened with his own corruption, that God abhorres
them. Esaias 1. 14.
Your new Moons and your appointed Feasts my soul hates: they are a trouble
to me, I am weary to bear them; when ye make many prayers, I will not hear
you. What is the reason? Your hands are full of blood. Even sacrifices and
supplications (good services in their own nature) are made displeasing by the
leven of sin: Esaias 66. 3.
He that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man; he that sacrifices a Lamb,
as if he cut off a dogs neck. Sacrifices God commanded, and often commended:
yet victimae impiorum: the oblations of the wicked are abominated. Non
speciosalaus in ore peccatorum. Praise becomes not the mouth of a sinner.

Every unregenerate man Claudicat in rectis, halts in the straitest path. Omnia
naturalia bona polluta, omnia supernaturalia amissa; His portion of natural
good is defiled; but of supernatural good all share is vanished. Peccaui, was
David's voice, after his sinful Arithmeticke: the same was Judas his voice,
after his damned treason. Similis sonus, non sinus; there was the same sound,
but not the same heart. Esau wept as much after the loss of the blessing, as
Peter after the denial of his Master: Similes lacrimae, non animae: like
tears, but unlike souls. The Pharise went to Church so well as the Publican:
but the Publican came home rather justified then the Pharise. The Pharisees
threw bounteously into the Treasury: the poor widow two Mites: yet Christ
commends the poorer gift, for the richer charity. That work which seems the
same, In identitate operis, yet differs much Ratione agentis, in respect of the
workers. Many Heathen excelled us in moral virtues, yet the ignorance of
Christ did shut heaven against them. Aug.
Vae tibi, Aristoteles: laudaris vbi non es, and damnaris vbi es: Woe to thee,
O Aristotle, who art commended where thou art not, and condemned where thou
art: yea even in a justified man's works, though pure from the Spirit, yet
passing through his hands, there is some tang of this leven, enough to keep
them from being meritorious. Look then well both to the justification of thy
person, and the sanctification of thy works. Thou indeed confessest sin to
be damnable, but it would grieve thee to go to hell for thy good deeds. Though
a man should give all his goods to the poor, yet wanting Faith and Love, he
may for his charity go to the devil. Pray then, that thy defects may be
supplied by Christ; Ephesians. 5. 2.
Who gave himself a sacrifice for us to God of a sweet smelling savor:
perfuming us with the pleasant odor of his merits.

3. By Leven sowred we make rellishable bread for the use of man: so by the
vngodly's most cursed sins God will advance his glory. Will Pharaoh harden
his heart? I will get me honor upon him, says God. That Leven of malice which
so wred the souls of those Brethren against poor Joseph, the Lord made use of
to his glory. From that ungracious practice he raised a pedigree of blessings.
Otherwise there had been no provision in Egypt, no bread to spare for Israel,
no wonders wrought by Moses, no Manna from heaven, no Law from Sinai, no
possession of Canaan. So from the vnnaturallest murder that ever the Sun
beheld, yea, which the Sun durst not look upon; God glorified himself in
saving us. The Oppressor impouerisheth the righteous; God sees and suffers: and
from his villainy effectuates their good, by taking away those snares to save
their souls. The Lord will glorify himself in the vessels of destruction:
and the groans in hell shall honor his Justice, so well as the songs in heaven
honor his mercy. How much better is it to glorify God in faithfulness, that
will preserve thee: then in wickedness, which will destroy thee!

4. A man cannot Mat. 4. 4.
Live by bread only, much worse by Leven. No man can live for ever by his
righteousness and good works, much less by his sins. Sin is no
nourishment to the soul: unless as some Mithridates-like have so inured their
bodies to poison, that Venenum nutrit; even venime does batten them: so others
their souls to sin, that they cannot keep life without it. And indeed we
say of some things, that they nourish sickness, and feed death. Omne simile
nutrit simile: inward corruption is fed and maintained by outward action.
Couetice in Judas is nourished by filching his masters money. Murder in Ioab is
hartned and hardened with blood. Theft is fatted with booties: pride with gay
rags: usury battens by extortion: Sacrilege by Church-robbing. Ambr.
Pascitur Libido conuiuijs, nutritur delicijs, vino accenditur, ebrietate
flammatur. Banketting is the diet of lust, Wantonness her Nurse, Wine kindles
a heat in her blood, and Drunkenness is the powder that sets her on fire.
Thus sin feeds upon this leven: but with the same success that Israel upon
quails: they fatted their carcasses, but made them lean souls.

Though this leven pass the swallow, yet sticks in the stomach: sin may be
devoured, but lies heavy on the conscience: Prou. 20. 17.
Bread of deceit is sweet to a man: but his mouth shall be filled with gravel.
Job 10. 15.
It may be sweet in his mouth, but it is the gall of Aspes in his bowels.
Putrid meat is apt to breed and feed worms, so this Leven the worm of
conscience: when they once come to feel it work, then ready to cry, This is
my death: unless God give them a good vomit of repentance, to put it off
their souls, and the sober diet of sanctification to amend and rectify their
lives.

5. Lastly, Sin and leven are fitly compared for their sowrenesse. There is a
Leven sharp and sour, but sanatiue. Math. 13. 33.
The Kingdom of heaven is like unto leven. But this leven here is far
sowrer, yet has nothing but death in it. It is sour to God, sour to Angels,
sour to Saints, sour to the sinner. Sin is sowrer then any Leven.

1. Sour to God, who hates nothing but sin. He made man, and man made sin:
He loves his own creature, but he hates man's creature. Sin is sowrer to him
then the devil: For, Non odit peccatum Diaboli cansa, sed Diabolum peccati
causa: He hates not sin for the devils sake, but the devil for sins sake.
It is so sour to him, that for one sin h^e plagued a world of men: how will
he plague one man for a world of sin! So sour, that he could relish no man
for it, till he had killed it in the sides of Jesus Christ. We are all so
sour, that but for this sweetning and perfume, we could never have been
endured. The Scripture, for our understanding, ascribes senses to God: and we
find every sense displeased with sin.

1. It is offensive to his smelling: He tells the Jews that their sins did
stink in his nosthrils. So did the old World offend him, that he washed and
sowsed in a deluge: and then after Noah's sacrifice, is said to Genesis 8. 21.
Smell a savor of rest. For this cause they had their Altar of Incense; and
God commanded a Perfume to be made to him. Exodus 30. 34.
The Lord said to Moses, Take unto thee sweet spices, Stacte, and Onicha, and
Galbanum, with pure frankincense: and thou shall make it a Perfume, pure and
holy. Both signified that we all stunke by nature, and are only perfumed by
the Incense of Christ's prayers and righteousness.

2. It is offensive to his Tasting: Esaias 5. 2.
I looked (after all my pains and kindness) for good grapes, and the Vine
brought forth wild grapes. When he comes to taste the vintage of our sins,
they are sour grapes. Amos 5. 7.
Ye turn judgment into wormwood: Justice is pleasant unto the Lord, but
injury bitter as wormwood. So the Jews served Christ, in stead of wine they
gave him vinegar to drink. He turned their water into wine, they turn his wine
into vinegar. Good works of faith and obedience are that Cant. 7. 9.
best wine, which we should give our Beloved: that goes down sweetly, causing
the lips of those that are asleep, to speak. But evil deeds are sour to his
palate.

3. It is offensive to his Feeling: so sharp, that the Spear, Thorns, Whips,
and Nails, were blunt to it: Our iniquities were so heavy to his sense, that
he plains himself burdened under them, Amos 2. 13.
as a Cart is pressed with sheaues. The Lord of heaven lay groueling on the
earth: and as if he were cast into a furnace of his Fathers wrath, sweating
drops of blood. They are so harsh still to his feeling, that he challenges
Saul for wounding himself. Act. 9. 5.
Why strikest thou me? Saul strikes at Damascus, Jesus Christ suffers in heaven.

4. It is offensive to his Hearing. Genesis 16. 20.
The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, because their sin is very grievous.
Our dissensions and quarrels are as iarring in Gods ears: as if diverse
distracted Musicians should play upon diverse bad Instrument so many several
tunes at one time. The confusion of sins brought the confusion of languages:
Gods ear could not endure the distraction of their hearts, therefore their own
ears shall not distinguish the dissonance of their voices. The cry of blood
and oppression makes so grievous a noise to heaven, that vengeance must only
quiet it. Our murmurings, our oaths, blasphemies, slanders, are like the
croking of frogs, howling of dogs, and hissing of serpents in Gods hearing.

5. It is offensive to his Seeing. Ier. 2. 22.
Though thou vvash thee with Nitre, yet thine iniquity is marked before me,
says the Lord. Our oppressions are like running ulcers, our adulteries as most
sordid and filthy things. Esa. 64. 6.
The Prophet compares it to the most feculent defilement, and loathsome
turpitude, that can be uttered. Hab. 2. 13.
Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil: and can not look on iniquity.
O let us abhor that filthiness, which will turn the face of God from us.
Neither are they displeasing only to his senses, but grievous to his mind.
Esa. 7. 13.
Is it a small thing for you to grieve men, but you will grieve God also? It is
dangerous to anger him, that can anger all the veins of our hearts. It was the
Prophet Esay's complaint of Israel: Esa. 63. 10.
They rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit. Yea they are offensive to his very
soul. Esa. 1. 14.
Your new Moons and appointed feasts, my soul hates. This he protests
against recidiuation, Heb. 10. 38. If any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. This is an emphaticall speech, and an argument of Gods hearty
detestation. Psalm. 11. 5.
The wicked, and him that loves violence his soul hates. Therefore he is
said to bend his Soul to revenge. Ier. 5. 9.
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?

2. Sour to the Angels: for if they Luke 15.
rejoice at our conversion, then they grieve at our peruersion. How sour is
that sin, which brings grief unto the thresholds of joy! They blush at our
falls, rejoice at our integrity. Hebr. 1. 14.
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth for them who shall be the
heirs of salvation? Let us then feast them with integrity, not with the leaven
of iniquity.

3. Sour to the Saints: the Church is our Mother, and she laments to see any
child of her womb auerse from goodness. Therefore as a loving Mother, whose
husband was slain for the safety of her self and children; if she sees any
child transgress the rules, and break her husbands Testament; she tells them
of their Fathers kindness: she describes his deadly wounds and ghastly looks:
and to make their facts more odious, she shows some garment of his embrued
with blood. So the Church often offers to our considerations, how Christ her
dear Love and Lord was betrayed, condemned, crucified: tells us, our sins
have done this; that they were the Judas betraying, the Herod mocking, the
Pilate condemning, the Longinus wounding, the band of Jews re-crucifying
Christ. Now as D^do adiur'd departing Aeneas; Per ego te has lacrymas, etc. Per
si quid vnquam Dulce fuit nobis, horum miserere laborum. So our Mother entreats
us, (yet entreating is too low a phrase for a Mother) per talem cruorem, per
tantum amorem; by so precious blood, and by so gracious love, to sin no more;
at least to abhor such precipices of sin; and forbear (as it were) to choke
him with such cursed Leauens.

4. Sour to the sinner himself: for it ever leaves behind it a sting of
conscience. It may taste pleasing and palatable at first, but Leven is not
sowrer at last. Perhaps our judgments may be out of taste; as men in fevers:
or Satan (that crafty Apothecary) has mingled the potion cunningly: yet though
saporem amisit, venenum retinet: poison is poison though it come in a golden
cup. Esaus pottage went down merrily, but the loss of his birthright was a
bitter farewell. Whatsoever service sin does us, it shows us but an
ill-fauoured trick at the last. It brings us to the door of Terror, and then
bids us shift for our selves. It is like Lysimachus his draught of cold water,
that refreshes him for a moment, and captives him for ever. By Salomons rule,
vexation is intailed to vanity A hedgehogge must dwell in Babylon: a pricking
Conscience Eccl. 1.
in a profane breast. Ier. 4. 18.
Thy way an^ thy doings have procured these things unto thee: this is thy
wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine heart. Solomon
has the like promotion: Eccl. 11. 9.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, etc. but know that for all these things
God will bring thee into judgment. The verse begins with pleasure, but ends
with terror. Sin will be sour at the last.

The Allegory thus opened, the special treasure or Instruction remains yet to
be drawn out. We perceive what the Leven signifies, and what the Lump. Now
we must consider the relation betwixt modicum and totum: a little Leven, and
the whole lump. A little Leaven leueneth the whole lump.

A little sin infecteth a great deal of righteousness. Iam. 2. 10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all. He has broken T^tam Legem, though not Totum Legis. I speak not here
of the absolutely (dissolutely) wicked: whose life is like Elreds reign; Praua
in principio, peior in medio, pessima in vltimo: bad in the beginning, worse in
the midst, worst of all in the end. But of those that have some good measure of
grace, and stand in the state of adoption: yet may admit of Paul's prayer, 1.
These. 5. 23.
to be sanctified throughout. And upon good reason: for there is an universal
corruption, therefore should be an universal sanctification. That young man,
that professes himself to have kept the Commandments; (and Christ began to
love him) yet there was a little leven spoiled all, Covetousness. Vnum restat,
one thing was vvanting; Mat. 19. 21.
Sell that thou have, and give to the poor. No, he was costiue, and could not
abide such a purge. Herod, though he heard many Sermons of John's preaching
gladly, (and it is some good thing to hear Sermons with joy) yet the leven of
Herodias marred all. Gal. 6. 6.
Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches him in
all his goods. This was the Apostles Canon; an ordinance that will kill where
it lights; yet a world of arguments has been invented to stop it up. We
will give of charity; but any thing of duty? yes, of duty. Well, we will give
somewhat of duty: but part of all? yes, part of all. Put out this (...) and we
will compound with you: though we take away a talent of your duties, we will
return a mite of benevolence.

I will tell you a tale: a Seignior came with his servant to one of our Ladies
Images: (no matter which, for they do not scant her of number.) he threw in
an angel of gold; the humble picture in gratitude made a curtsie to him. The
servant observing, and wondering at her Ladyships plausible carriage, purposed
with himself to give somewhat too, that he might have a curtsie. So he puts
into the basen six pence, and withal takes out his masters angel: the Image
makes curtsie and seems to thank him still. It is common with this City to
take away the Cleargies angel, and to lay down six pence in the stead: yet
look they for curtsie too, but I think no honest man will give them thanks.

This little leaven undoes all goodness. Deuteronomy. 5. 33.
You shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God commands you. All?
put out in omnibus, in All, and we will say something to it. But as Deus
remittit omnia peccata, aut nulla. God forgiues all sins, or none: so we must
faithfully resolve against all sins, or we repent of none. As is Gods
remission, such must be our contrition. Every man is an Adam, a good conscience
his Paradise, lust the forbidden fruit: one lust is able to turn him out of
all his comforts. Have thou kept thy hands from injury? yet if thy tongue have
offended, thou shall be judged of thy idle words. Suppose thou have preserved
Castitatem linguae, sobriety of speech (yet Iam. 3. 2.
if any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man) but thy thoughts
have welcomed a pleasing lust, those thoughts have leuend thy soul. Eccles.
12. 14.
For God will (not only) bring every work into judgment, but every secret
thought, whether it be good or evil. Men have brought that opinion into a
proverb; Thought is free: no, thy Thought is Gods bond-slaue. As thou can
not think a good thought but by his suggestion, so nor an evil thought but by
his permission. If but thy thought harbor this leven, the whole lump is
sowred. Actions men see, thy thoughts only God and thy self. Ille liber inter
accusatores, quem propria non accusat conscientia. That man needs fear no
accusers, that is freed from the condemnation of his own conscience. There are
six motives that infer and enforce a caution of little sins.

Little sins are dangerous; because they are Mortalia, they are deadly.
Plurima, they are numerous. Insensibilia, not easily felt. Materialia
maximoru^; they are the materials or seeds of gross sins. Maximas inficiunt
virtutes, they leven the best virtues. Facilius perdunt, they more cunningly
destroy the soul.

1. Minima mortalia; even the least offense is mortal in it own nature,
culpable of transgression, and liable to malediction. Romans 6. 23.
The wages of sin is death. It was a strange gloss of Haymo upon that Text:
Hoc non de omnibus peccatis intelligendum est, sed de criminalibus. This is not
meant of all sins, but only of such as are criminal: such (says he) as S.
John speaks of; 1. John 5. 16.
There is a sin unto death, I say not that thou should pray for it. So S.
Paul's indefinite speech of all sins, he restraines to S. John's particular
sense of one sin; that sin (which shall never be forgiven) against the Holy
Ghost. For otherwise if St. John should intend it of all criminal sins, then
it would follow that we should not pray for heretics, adulterers, homicides;
which were directly cross to the rule of charity. Certainly Paul in that
general rule admitted of no exception; it is an Aphorism wherein no sober
judgment can find distinction. The Apostle thought of no venial, when he
called all mortal. The wages of sin (not of this or that sin, as
sacrilege, robbery, blasphemy, etc. but of sin, any sin, every sin:
though men deem it triuiall, they shall find it mortal) is death.

I know there is a just distinction of sins, of greater and less. Purity
and equality of all transgressions is an idle dream. It was a worse murder to
kill Zachariah at the Altar, then Uriah in the field. To steal Sacra de Sacro,
holy things out of a holy place, is worse theft then to steal profana de
profano, common things out of a profane place. The difference of the
punishments manifests a difference of the sins. As in heaven one star
excells another star in glory: so in hell, one firebrand exceeds another in
burning; though all feel the fire hot enough. Christ tells the Pharisees, that
they make their Proselite Mat. 23. 15.
twofold more the child of hell then themselves. Math. 11. 24
Tolerabilius erit Sodomae: It shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the day of
Judgment, then for Capernaum: and yet the Sodomites were then in hell. They
that devour widows houses under the color of long prayers, Luke 20. 4.
shall receive greater damnation. As they have been more wicked, they shall be
more wretched. This distinction of sins we take up and justify: yea we
dare go further, and say there are some sins mortal, and some venial, but
not in their own nature. The difference is not ratione Peccatorum, sed
Peccantium; not in respect of the sins, but of the Sinners. To the faithful
and penitent all sins are venial: to the unbelievers and impenitent, all
sins are mortal. It is misericordia remittentis, not natura transgressionis;
the mercy of the forgiuer, not the quality of the sin, that makes it venial.
All transgressions are mortal in themselves, and by repentance all venial in
Christ. The least sin legally considered, is mortal: the greatest sin
Euangelically considered, is pardonable.

This difference we approve: yea we say, that small sins are more easily
pardoned: and great sins, when they are remitted, are more hardly remitted.
For certainly offenders are more or less punished, accoding to the quality of
the offense. An eye with an eye, but blood with blood, and life with life. Yet
still say we not, that a sin is in it own nature venial. For even the least
is (...), 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
the transgression of the Law. It is for the doctrine of Rome, to lessen sin,
and to extenuate punishment: and that for two reasons. First that they might
please the people with some liberty: and next, that hereby they might build up
their Purgatory. For they assign mortal sins to hell, and venial to that
purging fire. They offer herein a double wrong, both to their own modesty,
and to Gods mercy. To their own modesty, for they extenuate their faults in
sinning: to Gods mercy, for they disparage his goodness in forgiving. They
affirm that sins of omission, weakness, forgetfulness, and ignorance, be
Praeter legem Dei, but not contra legem Dei: that they be Besides the Law of
God, not Against the law of God. This doctrine, like the Prou. 5. 3.
lips of that strange woman, drop as an hony-combe, and are smooth as oil.
But their ver. 4.
end is bitter as worme-wood, sharp as a two-edged sword. This is a dangerous
delusion; for hence they come so to neglect those less sins, that Peccata
minima, be at last thought Nulla. As they have certain Orders among them,
Friars Minorites, Friars Minim's, and then Nullani, Nullans. So sin bates and
dwindles, from a Minorite or less sin to a Minim or least sin, and from a
Minim to a Nullan, to be no sin at all. Thus Incipit esse licitum, quod folet
esse publicum. The commonnesse takes away the haynousnesse: from being
generally practiced, it comes to be universally allowed.

Every sin is committed against God, Psalm. 51. 4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned. Look upon the infinite Majesty
offended, and by that judge the quality of thy offense. There be sins of
weakness, sins of ignorance, and sins of malice. Those of weakness, are
said to be committed against God the Father, whose special attribute is Power.
Those of Ignorance against God the Son, whose special attribute is wisdom.
Those of malice against God the Holy Ghost, whose special attribute is love.
Whether then they be of weakness, of ignorance, or of malice, they offend
either the Power of God, or the Wisdom of God, or the Love of God: therefore
acknowledge Secundum magnitudinem Dei, magnitudinem peccati: confess the least
sin great and bad, that has offended a Majesty so Great and Good.

2. Minima plurima, sins less heinous, are the most numerous. Many littles
make a mickle. Small drops of rain commonly cause the greatest floods. Quo
minus violentum, eo magis perpetuum: the less violence, the longer
continuance. The drisling sleete, that falls as it were in a mist, fills the
channels, they swell the rivers, the ouercharged rivers send forth their
superfluous waters over the containing banks: now the meadows are polluted,
the Corne-fields spoiled, the Cattle drowned; yea even houses, and towns, and
inhabitants endangered; and firm continents buried under a deluge of waters.
Many little sands gathered to an heap, fail not to swallow a great Vessel.
De paruis grandis aceruus erit. You have Eagles, Hawks, Kites, and such great
fowls of rapine, flying always alone: but the sparrowes and pigeons, that
devour the grain, by innumerable troops. There were not more grievous plagues
to the Egyptians, then came by the contemptiblest creatures: as frogs, lice,
flies, locusts: by reason of the monstrous swarms, Exodus 10. 15.
covering the face of the earth, and darkning the Land, and devouring the fruit
of the whole Country. Yea even killing the people, that there was no remedy
found for their life. Thus great destruction arises from little causes:
therefore, Non contemnenda quia parua, sed metuenda quia multa. Let us not
despise our sins because they are little, but fear them because they are
many, says Augustine. The small drops of sin, continually falling, have
drowned many souls. As they have been our Arms to fight against GOD, so God
will make them his Armies to confound us. Timenda ruina multitudinis, etsi non
magnitudinis. Let us fear them for their number, though we slight them for
their nature.

A pace is but a little space of ground; yet a thousand paces make a mile, and
many miles bring to hell. Si negligis quia non pessima, caueas quia plurima. If
they be not the worst, they are the most: and is it not all to one purpose,
whether one Goliath, or a thousand Philistims overcome thee? The bird brings so
many little strawes as makes up her nest: the reprobate so many little sticks,
as makes up his own burning pile. Augustine says, there is in Sin both
weight and number. Et si non timeas quando expendis, time quando numeras. Judge
them by tale, and not by weight. Put a wanton speech, a loose gesture into the
balance, (though Christ found it heavy, and every soul shall, for whom he did
not bear it, yet) it is censured vix culpa, a little faulting, a little
failing: so little, that were it less, it were nothing. But now leave thy
Geometry, and come to Arithmetike: begin to number thy vvanton works, and
unchristian gestures, and carnal thoughts; now lo, they come in by troops
and herds, thicker then the frogs into Egypt, miraris numerum: thou stand
amazed at their number, and now cryest, Miserere mei Deus; Lord have mercy on
me a most wretched sinner. Yet when thy recognition has done the best, and thy
memory represented those swarms of sins to thy conscience, thy view is as
far short, as will be thine answer: neither can extend ad millesimam, vel
minimam partem. Thou have not seen one of a thousand. Psalm. 19. 12.
Who can understand his errors? O Lord, cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

Thus it is not Trutina, but Scrutinu^, that will teach thee the danger of
these little sins. Thou did never st^ale thy neighbors goods by breaking
into his house, therefore pleadest not guilty to that Law, Thou shall not
steal. Examine, thou shall find past from thee so many covetous wishes, as
make up a robbery. Thou art no swearer, yet through the door of thy lips have
escaped out so many idle words, as being put together will make up a blasphemy.
Thou never made the member of Christ, a member of a harlot by uncleanness:
yet thou have given indulgence to as many lustful thoughts and desires, as
being summed, will make up a great adultery. I fear that many who have
forborne the forbidden bed, have yet by their lusts scatteringly and
forgetfully admitted, framed up an adultery as great as David's. Some that have
made a conscience of grand oaths, and impudent blasphemies; yet have
eiaculated so many loud, lewd, and false attestations, as have conflated a
blasphemy no less impious then Rabshakeh's. A tradesman disdaines to lie,
abhorres to oppress: yet has uttered so many commodities of dissimulations,
concealements, false warrantings, cunning frauds, as make up an oppression
equal to Ieconiah's. A Protestant abhominates sacrilege, and downright
robbing the Church: yet has so long been bold to make use of this
Impropriation: or if in a meaner condition, with his Compositions, Customs,
detinies, legal alienations, leasses and fines, as make up a sacrilege not
inferior to Achan's. Put my money to Interest? No, says another, I defy all
usurious contracts: yet by his pawnes, morgages, forfets, couznages, and such
tricks known best to GOD his Judge, the Devil his Enginer, his Scriuener, and
himself, he puts down unconverted Zaccheus for usury. Oh the incredible
souls lost in the Labyrinth of these unsuspected, (and in their imagination
justifiable) sinners!

3. Minima Insensibilia; these little sins are not so easily felt, therefore
most pernicious. If a man has died his hand in blood, irrequieta conscientia;
a peacelesse conscience haunts him with vnceslant vexation: let him hate his
brother, this little murder he feels not. The devil like a roaring Lion is
soon heard: forming himself to a fox, his insinuation is not perceived. He
rores in monstrous iniquities, in treason, murder, sacrilege, oppression:
these be thundering sins, that will waken the soul if it be not lethargiz'd.
But creeping like a silent Fox, he deuoures the grapes without disturbance.
Cant. 2. 15.
Take us the Foxes, the little foxes: for they spoil the Vines. If Satan hew
at the timber, and knock at the foundation of the house, we hear the noise,
and preserve the building. They are those small Teredines, little sins, that
in sensibly eat it to dust, and it is ruined ere we are aware. So long as
Sin comes not in thunder, it never wakens men: if it do not enter into
Theomachie, and denounce open war against GOD, they make but a tush of it. To
abuse the good creature is nothing, so long as they are not drunk: to give
nothing to the poor is no sin, so long as they take not from the poor: to
sleep out the Sermon is but a little drowsinesse, all is well so long as they
break not the Sabbath in absence from Church. These and such like are the
common thoughts, and so triuiall an estimate they bear of these sins, that
they think God should do them wrong to call them to any reckoning for them.

Thus they sow sins, as that enemy did tares, here a little, and there a
little: but grown up, the whole field was ouergrowne with them. A sin that
cannot be committed, Sine grands corruptione sui, graui laesione proximi, magno
contemptu Dei: without his own notorious deprauation, his brothers grievous
oppression, Gods manifest contempt and provocation; this quickly amazeth a man,
and he starts back from the devils first offer. If the devil at first had
come to Judas, here is a hundred pieces, betray thy Master: none, he was not yet
hardened enough in villainy: let Satan first work him to hypocrisy, then to
covetousness, and lastly he shall prevail him with him for treason too. He
might refuse a hundred pieces before, now he will take thirty.

When that good Prophet wept upon Hazael, he asked; Why weepeth my Lord? He
answered, Because I 2. King. 8. 13.
know the evil that thou will do to the children of Israel. Their strong helds
will thou set on fire, slay their young men with the sword, dash their children
against the stones, and rip up their women with child. He replied, What, is thy
servant a dog, that I should do this great thing? He thought it impossible,
that the devil should ever work him to so horrid a mischief. But he did it:
ambition brought him to a kingdom, a kingdom brought him to tyranny,
tyranny to insolence, insolence not only to oppression of his own, but to
invasion of other Countries: among which Israel felt the smart, in the burning
of her Cities, and massacring her Inhabitants. Thus by degrees he was wrought
to this selfe-incredited mischief: as impossible as at first he judged it, at
last he performed it. Doubtless there be some that would shudder at the
temptation to perjury: yet pedetentm, by insensible steps they arrive at it:
by lying they come to swearing, by swearing to forswearing. If the Usurer had
an oppressed man's widow, and orphans lying and crying at his doors, perhaps
shame, if not remorse, would seize on him: but let him exact, inhaunce,
oppress, excoriate the Commonwealth, and not hear it in a public clamor,
he never wincheth for the matter. A fact that looks at the first blush horrid
and intolerable, is presently either avoided, or within some modest limits
restrained: but another Dum paruum creditur, securius in vsu retinetur: the
opinion of paruitie abates the opinion of prauitie: that which is weakly
censured, is strongly retained. Our officious lies, soothing adulations,
amorous wishes, wanton songs, scoffing at Ministers, censuring of Sermons;
being reproved, we laugh them out. But these laughing sins, will be one day
found crying sins. And if we cry not to God for mercy by repentance, they
shall cry to God against us for vengeance.

4. Minima materialia maximorum: little sins are the materaills of great
sins. The seeds of all sins are naturally in us: not so much as treason,
homicide, perjury, but are in us Quoad potentiam, yea Quoad naturam et
propensionem: there is in our nature a procliuitie to them. Now the heart is so
apt ground to produce and mature these Innata mala, inbred seeds to actualls,
that without the preventing Grace of GOD we cannot avoid them. Thou art a
Christian, and fear not that ever thou should apostate into the denial of
thy Savior: yet let me say thou have the materials of this sin within thee,
timorousness and self-love. Thou say, Sure I shall never be a drunkard,
that belluine folly shall never apprehend me: yet thou have the materials of
this within thee, and that naturally and hereditarily from thy first
Grandmother Eve: a sweet tooth in thy head, a liquourish appetite to delicate
meats, and intoxicating wines.

Thou can not be a traitor, nor admit of conspiracy against thy Sovereign,
yet the material of this wickedness is within thee. That which we call
Gunpowder, is made of the falt and fatter earth: in the ground are the
materials, which when Art has concocted, chym'd, prepared, charged, and
discharged, it ouerturnes towers and towns, forts and cities. We were once too
near justifying by a woeful experience the violence of it: but the goodness
of our good Lord Jesus auerted it. So in thy earth, thy heart, there is this
salt and spumy matter, the mineral of treason; unless the reason of a man,
and Religion of a Christian keep it from eruption. Thou art resolved never to
think highly of thine own worth, yet thou have the seed of pride within thee:
thou art naturally (as Luther said) borne with a Pope in thy belly: there is the
material, to be too well affected to thy own doings It is impossible, thou
think, for thee to be made an usurer, now thou have no money: yet thou have
the seed of usury within thee; and Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia
crescit: all the sons of Adam love earth too well. Who shall ever persuade thee
to bow down before an Idol? yet a dainty feast persuades thee to worship
thine own belly: this is no Idolatry. It was but a little Cloud, that Eliahs
servant saw, 1. King. 18. 44.
rising out of the sea like a man's hand: yet it portended a great shower. Sin
seems at first like a little cloud, but it prognosticates a deluge of ensuing
wickedness. The careless Gallant by many trifles often fetched, runs so far in
the Mercers books unawares, that he cannot endure to hear of a reckoning.
These little arrerages, taken up on trust, runs our souls so deep into Gods
debt, that if the blood of Christ do not pay it: though we be sold wife and
children, and all we possess; Math. 18. 25.
non habenius vnde, we can never discharge it.

5. Minima peccata maximas in ficiunt virtutes: a little sin infects a great
deal of righteousness. The Leprosy infected the garments, and the very walls
of the house; but Sin has infected wood and wool, and walls, earth, air,
beasts, plants, and planets: and stuck a scarre on the crystal brow of
nature it self. Romans 8. 22.
For we know that the whole creation groneth, and trauelleth in pain together
until now. If the great world groan for man's sin, shall not the little
world, man, groan for his own sin? Send a little temptation in at the ear,
or eye; it will not rest working, till it run like poison to the heart. David
let in a little leven at his eye, it quickly wrought to his heart, gangrened to
adultery, to blood; hardly cured.

A little Coliquintida spoils all the broth: a spotte in the face blemisheth
all the beauty. 2. King. 5. 1.
Naaman the Syrian is plentifully commended: He was captain of the host, a
great man with his master, and honorable, because the Lord by him had given
deliverance to Syria: he was also a mighty man of valor: but he was a Leper.
This same But marres all; But he was a Leper. So in the soul, one vice
disgraceth a great deal of virtue. When he was cured and converted by Elisha,
first he is charitable, offers gold and garments, but he excepts bowing in the
house of Rimmon: he is devout, and begs earth for sacrifice, but excepts
Rimmon: he is religious, and promises to offer to none but the Lord, but he
excepts Rimmon. This little leven, this But Rimmon, sowred all. Eccl. 10. 1.
Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking
savor. The Apothecaries unction is a thing praised in the Scriptures,
compounded of many excellent simples, made (not so much for medicine, as) for
Odor: yet the flies of death putrify it. So does a little folly him that is
in reputation for Wisdom and Honor.

When one commended Alexander for his noble acts, and famous atchieuements;
another objected against him, that he killed Calisthenes. He was valiant, and
successful in the wars: true, but he killed Calisthenes. He overcame the
great Darius: so, but he killed Calisthenes. He made himself master of the
world: grant it, but still he killed Calisthenes. His meaning was, that this
one unjust fact poisoned all his valorous deeds. Beware of sin, which may
thus leven the whole lump of our soul. Indeed we must all sin, and every
sin sowres: but to the faithful and repentant Christian it shall not be
damnable. Romans 8. 1.
There is no damnation to them that are in Jesus Christ. There is in all
corruption, to most affliction, to none damnation, that are in Christ. Our
leven has sowred us, but we are made sweet again by the all-perfuming blood
of our blessed Savior.

6. Minima peccata facilius destruunt: the least sins are the most fatal to
men's destruction. Anima est tota in toto: so that if the toe aches, the head
feels, the eye lets fall a tear, the very heart mournes. So let but the eye
lust, the soul is in danger to be lost. Mors per fenestras, faith the Prophet.
Ier. 9. 21.
Death comes in at the windows, then enters into the Palaces, to cut off the
children without, and the young men (...) the streets. Is it but an unclean
thought? Mors in illa; as the children of the Prophets cried Mors in olla:
there is death in it, and for it. A dram of poison diffuseth it self to all
parts, till it strangle the vital spirits, and turn out the soul from her
Tenement. Iam. 3. 5.
How great a matter a little fire kindles! It is all one whether a man be
killed with the prick of a little thorn, or with the he wing of a broad
sword, so he be killed. We have seen a whole arm impostumated with a little
prick in the finger: if Satan can but wound our heel, (as the Poets faigne of
Achilles) he will make shift to kill us there; even from the heel to send
death to the heart. Therefore Christ calls Hatred murder, a wanton eye adultery:
besides the possibility of act, they are the same in the intention of heart.
The hornet is a little fly, yet it stings deadly.

I know that heavier sins shall have a heavier weight of punishment: yet is
the least heavy enough to sink the soul to the bottomless pit. Greater
fury of iniquity shall have the hotter fire, but O let us never feel the heat
of one. A little leake sinkes a great vessel. Pope Marcelline being accused
for Idolatry, answered for himself; I did but cast a few grains of Incense
into the fire; that was little or nothing. Yes, it was manifest offering to
Idols, is that nothing? Christ would not obey Satan in his minimis: he would
not answer his desire in the smallest suit he could request; Mat. 43.
of turning stones into bread, even vvhiles he was so hungry as forty days
fasting could make him. Teaohing us to deny Satan in his best motions; lest
custom of having them granted make him so impudent, as to take no repulse in
his greatest temptations.

This is the Devils method of working, as it is in the first Psalm: Blessed is
the man that has not walked, etc. First he gets a man to walk a turn or two
with him in sin, as it were to confer and debate the matter. After some
walking, lest he should be weary, he preuailes with him to stand in the way of
sinners; after admission of the thought, to commission of the act. Lastly, he
persuades him for his ease to fit down in the seat of the scornful; falling
to despise God, and deride all goodness. Thus he brings him from walking to
standing, from standing to sitting still: and this is limen inferni, the very
threshold of hell. We judge of sin, as of the Sun; little because far off:
yet indeed it is bigger then the earth. The nearer we come to the sense of
iniquity, the greater it appears. Was it such a sin for Adam to eat a
forbidden Apple? Yes, the greatness is remonstrable in the event, it brought
destruction upon himself and his posterity. Is it such a heinous offense for
David to know the number of his people? Do not Princes make good their
Muster-books by such a Quare, and numeration? The plague witnessed the
greatness of it, and himself cries, Peccaui, 2. Sam. 24. 17
I have done wickedly. Look on the least sin in Satan's false glass, and it
seems contemptible: behold it in the true glass of Gods Law, and it appears
abominable. The Devil stands betwixt wicked men and their sins all their
life: but places their sins betwixt heaven and themselves in death: writes
them in Text letters on the Curtains, that their amazed souls cannot choose
but read them. Thus he that led them living by sin to presumption; now drives
them dying by sin to desperation.

Satan seems modest, and will be contented with a little, when he can get
no more: he will play at small game, before he sit out. Will thou not cut
throats? yet quarrel and appoint fields: not so, yet hate thine enemies: not
profess hatred, yet watch occasions to hinder his good: if thou will not
iniure his estate, yet at least scandalize his good name. He will take little,
rather then nothing. The Israelites in the Desert had no rich and costly
sacrifices to offer to Number. 25. 2.
Baal Peor. They had not such store of beasts, but the oblations to God took
them up. I cannot see what they should have fit for this sacrifice to Baal,
except Manna and water: (too good for the Devil) but he ^s content with this.
Yet it is evident that they committed Idolatry. 1. Cor. 10. 7.
Neither be ye Idolaters, as were some of them: as it is written, The people
sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Rather then want their
custom, Satan will take such as they had. Will Naaman worship God? yet let him
worship Rimmon too: no, he will not do so, yet let him bow to Rimmon: no, nor
so much: yet let him 2. Kin. 5. 18.
bow before Rimmon: the Devil is glad of this, where he can get no more. Thus
Pharaoh minceth and limits with Moses concerning the dismission of Israel. Gods
charge was; Let my people go three days journey in the wilderness, to
celebrate a feast to the Lord. Now Exodus 8. and 10. chap.
mark how Pharaoh would compound it. First Sacrifice to God in this land: no,
says Moses, we must go into the wilderness. Then says Pharaoh, If there be
no remedy, Go, and go to the wilderness, and sacrifice to your God; but go
not far: nay, we must go three days journey. Then Pharaoh; Go ye the men,
but leave your children behind you: nay we must go old and young, sons and
daughters. Then Pharaoh; Go ye men, women, and children, so far as your feet
can measure in three days: but your flocks and your herds shall be stayed:
nay, we will not leave a hoof behind us. So when the Devil perceiues no
remedy, he falls to indenting with niggardly grants and allowances.

Somewhat has some savor; give him at least a thought, a word, a look (as Lots
wife) and it something pleases him. Among the Heathen they used to join
together Epula and Sacrificia: with solemn sacrifices to their gods, solemn
bankets among themselves. So the Apostle delivers the custom of the Moabites,
1. Cor. 10. 7. In the midst of their Idolatry, they sat down to eat and
drink. So the Psalmist writes of that cursed commixtion of Israel with Moab;
that they had Idolatrous feasts. Psalm. 106. 28.
They joined themselves to Baal-Peor: and did eat the sacrifices of the dead.
One nation had a custom in these superstious feasts, to sacrifice to their
Idol Capita, some Noble men's heads according as it fell to their lots, together
with their hearts and their livers. It came to the turn of the Kings special
favorite, thus to lose his life: the King resolving both to keep the custom,
yet to save his friend, objected that God was no murderer, nor delighted in the
blood of men. That if he were a God, he was certainly good, and goodness
stood not in the desire of his own creatures destruction. Therefore in stead
of the man's head, he offered the head of an onyon: and for blood, heart, and
livers of men, all these of birds or beasts. The Devil must be pleased with
this: he saw that this little homage was some acknowledgement of his
sovereignty.

Satan can hold a man's soul in by a little, as a bird that hangs in the net by
a claw. Perhaps shame and fear keeps some from eruption into scandalous
things: the appearance is vizarded, the affection is not mortified. Like an
Eunuch, he does not beget palpable and gross turpitudes: yet has a lust,
itch, and concupiscence: this little serves the Devils turn. Satan would keep
away the light of the Truth from a man; well, he is so seated that he will
have it; by knowledge he seems to cast out Satan. Yet if he can but insinuate
into his affection, this little cord will pull him in again with ease. Must he
lose the Sconce of thy understanding? Let him hold the Cittadell of thy
desires: this little gate will let him in at his pleasure.

I draw to conclusion; let this teach us all to make a scrutiny in our souls,
and seriously to repent of this little leven. Little in quantity, great in
quality: little in estimation, powerful in operation. Little in the sight of
men, judging, by outward appearance, great in the sight of God judging in
truth. Lot said of the City of Zoar; Genesis 19. 20.
Is it not a little one? and my soul shall live: thou say of thy sin; Is
it not a little one, and why should my soul die? A little Posterne opened, may
betray the greatest City. Jonathan tasted but 1. Sam. 14. 43
a little honey on the top of his wand, and hardly he escaped death for it. A
little leaven makes the head heavy, and the heart sick. Eschew this little,
if thou would be great in heaven. Mat. 5. 19.
For whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments, he shall be
called least in the kingdom of heaven. Minimus, that is indeed Nullus: the
least there, because he shall not be there at all. Let no tang of corruption
come to thy least part, if thou desire to preserve body and soul 1. These. 5.
23.
blameless to the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Repentance must be to all dead works: sanctification takes liberty in no
sin. Nullum peccatum retinendum spe remissionis. No evil must be reserved
under the hope of forgiveness. God gave a Law, but no dispensation for any
breach of it: his General rules have no exceptions, unless it please the
Divine Oracle to dispense with it. Thou shall not worship an Idol: no, not to
save my life? Not to save life, as those three servants of God professed to
Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 3. 18.
If the God we serve will not deliver us, yet we will not serve thy gods, nor
worship thy golden image. Thou say, Minimum est, it is little: but in
minimis fidelem esse, magnum est: to be faithful in a little, is no little
virtue. Luke 19. 17.
Well done, good servant: thou had been faithful in a little, therefore I will
make thee ruler over much. He that is not careful in a little, is not to be
trusted for more. If any man will corrupt his conscience for a pound, what
would he do for a thousand? If Judas will sell his Master for thirty pence,
about some 22. shillings of our money; what would he have sold for the
Treasury? God never gave a Non obstante for sin. The Pope indeed gives Bulls
and Indulgences, and Pardons for cursed works before their perpetration: but
God never allows leave to do ill. The Pope says, Kill an heretical King.
God says, Touch him not: woe to that soul who takes the Popes word, before
the Lords word. God charged a Prophet, that 1. King. 13. 9.
he should eat no bread, nor drink water in Bethel. Another Prophet came;
saying, Verse. 8.
An Angel spoke to me (blessed Angels speak truth: nay more, he spoke) by
the word of the Lord. Bring him back, that he may eat bread, and drink
water. He did so, but mark the event: returning home, Verse. 24.
a Lion slew him by the way. Believe not a man, believe not a Pope, believe not
a Prophet, believe not an Angel against the word of the Lord.

Let us refuse iniquity in what extenuation of quantity, or color of quality
soever it be offered us. For sin is like a bemired dog; if it fawnes on us, it
fowls us. And the least sin is like a little leake in a ship, which if it
be not stopped, will sink the whole vessel. The Frenchmen have a military
Proverb; The loss of a nail, the loss of an Army. The want of a nail
loses the shoe, the loss of a shoe troubles the horse, the horse
indangereth the rider, the rider breaking his rank molests the company, so
far as to hazard the whole Army. From slender and regardlesse beginnings,
grow out these fatal and destructive effects. The doors are shut, the thief
cannot enter: a little boy is put in at the window, and he opens the door for
the great thief; so the house is robbed. A charm is cast in at the window,
eye, or ear; that quickly unlocks the door of the heart, till all the rooms
be ransak't, not a piece of virtue, or one gemme of grace left.

Pompey marching to the wars, requested to lodge his Army in a certain
City, by whose borders he must needs pass: the Governor answered that he
would not trouble his City with so numerous and dangerous a guest. Pompey then
desired but entertainment and relief for his sick soldiers, who were
perishing for want of succor: the Governor thought, sick men could do them
no mischief; this was granted, they admitted. Being there a while, they
recovered their health, opened the gates to the rest, so became strong enough
to take the City. If Satan cannot get leave for his whole Army of lusts, yet
he begs hard for his weak ones, as sins of infirmity: but those sickly
soldiers soon get strength to surprise the soul.

The trees of the Forest held a solemn Parliament, wherein they consulted of
the innumerable wrongs which the Axe had done them: therefore made an Act, that
no tree should hereafter lend the Axe a helm, on pain of being cut down. The
Axe travels up and down the Forest, begs wood of the Cedar, Oak, Ash, Elm,
even to the Poplar; not one would lend him a chip. At last he desired so much
as would serve him to cut down the briars and bushes; alleging that those
shrubs did suck away the juice of the ground, hinder the growth, and obscure
the glory of the fair and goodly Trees. Hereon they were content to afford him
so much; when he had gotten his helm, he cut down themselves too. These be
the subtle reaches of sin; give it but a little advantage, on the fair
promises to remove thy troubles; and it will cut down thy soul also.
Therefore Obsta principijs: trust it not in the least. Consider a sin (as
indeed it is) a crucifying of Christ; will thou say, I may crucify Christ a
little? I may scourge his flesh, wound his side, pierce his heart a little?
What man loves the Lord Jesus, who would either say it, or do it? Consider thy
falling into sin, a hurling of thy self down from some high pinnacle: will thou say, I may break my neck a little? Consider it a casting thy self into
unquenchable fire; will thou say, I may burn my soul and body a little! As
suffering we think the least misery too great, so sinning let us think the
least iniquity too great. So avoiding also little sins, we shall find great
favor with Jesus Christ.

Amen.
FAITHS ENCOVRAGEMENT.
LVKE 17. 19. And he said unto him, Arise, go thy way; thy faith has made
thee whole.
THESE words were spoken by our Savior Christ to the penitent and faithful
Leper. For induction I will observe two remarkable circumstances, preceding my
Text. First, that Christ did mend him, and then commend him: he did purge him,
and praise him.

1. He mended him, curing first his body, then his soul. His body of the
Leprosy, a disease not more loathsome to endure, then hard to cure. The
difficulty of healing it, appears by the answer of the King of Israel, upon
the receipt of the King of Syria's letters: 2. King. 5. 7.
Am I God, to kill and make alive, that this man does send unto me, to recover
a man of his Leprosy? intimating that only God is able to cure the Leprosy.
His soul of the spiritual Leprosy: and this was the perfection of health.
For this cure the Prophet so earnestly prays; Sana animam; Psalm. 41. 4.
Lord, be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.
This is a supernatural cure, fit only for the great Physician of souls to
perform: the more difficult, Quo minus in natura sit, quod profit: because
nature has no influence in her stars, no minerals in her earth, no herbs in
her garden, that can heal it.

2 He commends him: of all the ten cleansed, verse 18.
there are none found that returned to give glory to God, save this stranger.
God had his Tithe there, whence he might least expect it. Now what does Christ
commend him for? For his thankfulness, for his humility, for his faith: why
these graces were Christ's own; does he praise him for that himself had given
him? Yes, this is Gods custom; Sua dona coronat; he crowns his own graces,
he rewards his own gifts. Which teaches how we should understand Reward in
the Scripture. Mat. 20. 8.
Call the laborers, and give them their hire. Mat. 10. 42.
Whosoever gives a cup of cold water to a Disciple, shall not lose his reward.
This hire and reward, is not the stipend of our labors, but of Gods love. He
gives us the good of grace, and then rewards it with the good of glory. It is a
reward Secundum quid, a gift simpliciter. Compare eternal life to the work,
looking no farther, it is a reward. Mat. 5. 12.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. But examine the
Original from whence it proceeds, then it is the gift of God. Romans 6. 23.
Eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ. He is said to Exodus 20.
6.
Show mercy to them that keep his Commande^ents: the very keeping the
Commandments is not merit, it has need of mercy. Lo thus the Lord gives
grace, then praises it, blesses it, rewards it. Christ cloatheth his Spouse
with his own Psalm. 45. 8.
garments, the smell of Myrrh, Alloes, and Cassia; A white robe of his perfect
righteousness imputed; with his golden merits, and inestimable Jewels of
graces; and then praises her; Cant. 4. 7.
Thou art all fair, my Love: there is no spot in thee. When God made the
world, with all creatures in it, he beheld it, and Euge bonum; behold, it is
exceeding good: so when he makes a Christian (Maiorem, meliorem mundo) and
has furnished him with competent graces, he turns back and looks upon his
own workmanship; Ecce bonum, it is exceeding good: he forbeares not to
commend it.

Now what does he specially commend in this converted Leper? his praising of
God. The Leper prayseth God, God praises the Leper. He prayseth in his
praising two things; the Rightnesse, and the Rareness. 1. The Rightnesse, that
he gave praise to God; directed it thither where it was only due. He returned
to give glory to God: non mihi sed Deo, says Christ: not to me, but to God.
Perhaps his knowledge was not yet so far enlightened, as to know him that
cured him, to be God: therefore bestowed his praise where he was sure it
should be accepted, where only it is deserved; on God. I seek not my own
praise, says Jesus, but mittentis, the praise of him that sent me. Ioh. 8. 54.
If I honor my self, my honor is nothing. 2. The Rareness, and that in two
respects. 1. That he alone of ten, blessed God, God had but his Tenth: it is
much if the tenth soul go to heaven. The godly are so rare, that they are set
up Esaias 8. 18.
for marks, and signs and wonders; as if the world stood amazed at them. 2.
That he only was the Stranger; a Samaritan.

Many great virtues were found among the Samaritans; Faith, Charity.
Thankfulness: First, Faith; John. 4. 39.
Many of the Samaritans of that City believed on him. Secondly, Charity; It
was the Samaritan that took compassion on the man wounded between Jerusalem
and Jericho. The Priest and the Leuite passed by him without pity, but the
Samaritan Luke 10. 34.
bound up his wounds. Thirdly, Gratitude exemplified in this Samaritan Leper:
none of the Jews gave God praise for their healing, but only the Samaritan. It
was strange that in Gentiles should be found such virtue, where it was least
looked for. Mat. 8. 10.
Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel. The
least informed did prove the best reformed. Samaritan was held a word of
reproach amongst the Jews; as appears by their malicious imputation to
Christ. Ioh. 8. 48.
Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil? They were
esteemed as dogs: Mat. 15. 26.
It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs. And at
the first promulgation of the Gospel, the Apostles received a manifest
prohibition; Mat. 10. 5.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any City of the Samaritans
enter ye not. It was therefore rare to reap such fruits out of the wild
Forest, cursed like the mountains of Gilboa; 2. Sam. 1. 21.
Let there be no dew, neither rain upon you, nor fields of offerings. To be
good in good company is little wonder: for Angels to be good in heaven, Adam in
Paradise, Judas in Christ's College, had been no admirable matter: to apostate
in these places so exemplary of goodness, was intolerable weakness. But for
Abraham to be good in Chalde, Noah in the old world, Lot in Sodom: for a man
now to be humble in Spain, continent in France, chaste in Venice, sober in
Germany, temperate in England; this is the commendation. Such a one is a Lilly
in a Forest of thorns, a handful of wheat in a field of cockle. Let me not
here omit two things, worthy my insertion, and your observation.

1. Gods judgment and man's do not concur: the Samaritans were condemned of
the Jews, yet here nine Jews are condemned by one Samaritan. They that seem
best to the world, are often the worst to God: they that are best to God, seem
worst to the world. When the Moon is lightest to the earth, she is darkest to
heaven: when she is lightest to heaven, she is darkest to the earth. So often
men most glorious to the world, are obscurest to the divine approbation: others
obscure to the worlds acknowledgement, are principally respected in Gods favor.
Man would have cleared the Pharise, and condemned the Publican, when they both
appeared in the Temple together; the one as it were in the Quire, the other in
the Belfrey. But Christ's judgment is, that the Publicane Luke 1^. 14.
departed rather justified. The Jews thought, that if but 2. men in the world
were saved, the one should be a Scribe, the other a Pharise: But Christ says,
neither of them both shall come there. Luke 13. 28.
You shall see others in the Kingdom of heaven, and you your selves thrust
out. Some like the Moon are greater or less by the Sun of men's estimation.
Samuel was mistaken 1. Sam. 16.
in Eliab, Abinadab and Shammah: for the Lord had chosen David. Isaac preferred
Esau, but God preferred Jacob: and made the father give the blessing to that
son, to whom he least meant it. All this iustifies that, Esaias 55. 8.
my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, ^aith the
Lord.

2. Learn we here from Christ, to give men their due praise to them that
deserve praise. God ^akes of vices with commination, of virtues wit^ ^endation.
Let us speak of others sins with grief, of their good works with praise
and joy. Of others sins with grief: so did S. Paul. Phil. 3. 18.
Many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they
are enemies of the cross of Christ. So David: Psalm. 119. 136
Rivers of waters ru^ down mine eyes, because men keep not thy Law. Our
Savior wept over apostate Jerusalem: he wept over the people, beholding them
as scattered sheep without a shepherd. Who can forbear weeping to see souls
muffled and misse-led by ignorance: like the babes of Niniuch, not able to
distinguish the right hand from the left? Alas, there are innumerable souls,
that know not their own estate; O pity them. Because thou will not hear
this, my soul shall weep in secret for thy pride.

But let us mention others virtues and good actions with praise. It is the
argument of a sullen and proud disposition, not to commend them that do well.
Yet there is no ointment so sweet, but there will be some Eccl. 10. 1.
dead flies to corrupt it. There be certain dogs that will bark at the
Moon: Critickes, that spend the larger part of their time seeking knots in a
bulrush. The Snow is not so white, but there is an Anaxagoras to make it
black. It was Gods commendation of Job, that, Job 1. 8.
there was none like him in the earth: he had no fellow, yet the devil pickes
quarrels, and inuenteth slanders against him. Traducers of their brethren, I
call not Damones, but Damonis agunt: I do not say they are devils, but they do
the work of devils.

This mischief of deprauing, has also infected the Church: Many a Preacher
thinks his own glory eclipsed, if the next Orb be lightened with a brighter
Star. Hence they fall to faulting and inueighing; as if there were no way to
build up their own credites, but by the ruins of another disgrace. God does
otherwise; Luke 16. 8.
The Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had done wisely. Though he
had many faults, yet Christ praises him for what was worthy praise: his
policy. S. Paul found gross errors in the Corinthians; 1. Cor. 11. 17.
In this I praise you not, that you come together, not for the better, but for
the worse. But wherein they did well, he commends them, ver. 2. I praise you
brethren, that you remember me in all things. Thus Ezekiel commends Daniel, a
Prophet of his own time, and thought it not any derogation from himself.
Ezekiel. 28. 3.
Behold, Art thou wiser then Daniel? As Solomon says of beggars: A poor man
oppressing Prou. 28. 3.
the poor, is like a sweeping rain which leaves no food behind it. So a
Minister disparaging a Minister, is a breach, whereby the devil comes out; and
many souls go into hell. Now to the words: Arise, go thy way; thy faith has
made thee whole.

The verse may be distinguished into a Pasport, and a Certificate. Arise, go
thy way, there is the Pasport: Thy faith has made thee whole, there is the
Certificate. He gives him first a Dismission, leave to depart: then a
Testimony, or Assurance, both to certify the Church actually, that he was
cleansed of his leprosy; but especially to certify his own conscience that
he was converted, and that the faith of his soul brought health to his body.
In the Pasport, or Dismission, there are two words considerable: Surge and
Vade; Arise, Go: Surge ad incipiendum, vade ad perficiendum. First, let us
speak of them secundum sonum, then secundum sensum. First, according to the
History, then according to Mystery. Allegories are tolerable when they be
profitable: Nor can it be much from the Text, by occasion of those two words
spoken to the ears of the Lepers body, to instruct your souls how to Arise
from the Seat of Custom, the couch of sin: and to Go on in the way of
salvation.

Arise.
The Leper casts himself down, and Christ bids him arise. Humility is the
Gentleman Usher to Glory. God (that sends away the rich empty from his gates)
loves to Luke 1. 53.
fill the hungry with good things. The air passes by the full vessel, and
only fills that is empty. This is the difference between the poor and
beggars: both agree in not having, differ in craving. The proud are Pauperes
Spiritus, the humble are, pauperes spiritu: Math. 5. 3.
Blessed are (not the poor spirits, but) the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven. Such as felt their wants, sought, and besought God for
supply. Luke 3. 5.
Every Valley shall be filled, and every Mountain be brought low. The lowly
mind shall be exalted, the high-towring ambitious shall be thrown down. How
should God say to the Merchant that glories in his wealth, to the Usurer that
admireth his moneys, to the Gallant, that wonders that his good clothes do
not prefer him: Arise! alas, they are up already, they were never down. A
dwarf in a great throng seeming low on his knees, was bidden by the Prince to
stand up: alas, he was before at his highest. God cannot be so mistaken, as to
encourage their standing up, who never yet had the manners to cast themselves
down. Descendite vt ascendatis ad Deum: cecidistis enim ascendendo contra eu^.
Aug.
Descend, that ye may rise up to God: for you have fallen by rising up against
God. He that is a Mountebanke, must level himself even with the ground: if
humbleness has once thrown him down, and brought him on his knees, he shall
hear the Patron and pattern of humbleness, comforting him with a Surge;
Arise.

The guest that sets himself down at the lower end of the Table, shall hear
the Feast-maker kindly remove him; Luke 14. 10.
Friend, sit up higher. If Hester fall at Asuerus feet, he will take her by
the hand, and bid her arise. When Luke 5. 8, 10.
Peter fell down at Jesus knees, saying, Depart from me, I am a sinful man, O
Lord: He presently was raised up with; Fear not, from henceforth thou shall
catch men. Zacheus is gotten up on high to see Jesus; see him he may with his
eye of flesh: but he must descend, that he may see him with his eye of faith.
Luke 19. 5.
Come down, Zacheus; this day is salvation come to thy house: Descend to the
ground, that thou may be raised above the clouds. Pride even in good things,
Non ditio, sed perditio; is no argument of possession, but destruction. The
haughtie-minded looks always beyond the mark, and offers to shoot further
then he looks; but ever falls two bows short, humility and discretion: who
is heard to say with Paul, 1. Tim. 1. 15.
Quorum ego sum primus; I am the chief of sinners: such an humble confession
scarce heard of: But Christ had given him a Surge, on his former humbling:
Arise, and bear my name before Gentiles and Kings, etc. Let us all thus cast
our selves down in humility, that the Lord may say to us in mercy, Arise.

G^e.
This was the word of Dismission, wherewith Christ sends him away. Though he
were healed, therein had his hearts desire; what could he expect more of
Christ? why is he not gone? No, he has not yet his Vade, he will not go till
he is bidden. He found such sweetness in the Lord Jesus, that could you blame
him though he were loath to depart? From another man's house, we say, after some
small tarrying, Let us save our credites, and go before we are bidden: but from
the Lord let us not depart without a dismission. The hearts of the people were
so set on Christ, that he was feign to send them often away, Mat. 14. 22. He
sent the multitudes Mark. 6. 45.
away, Math. 15. 39. He sent the people away. As Simeon, that Swanne, which
sung his own funeral: Nunc dimittis; Lord, now thou let thy servant
depart in peace.

This makes to the shame of their faces, that without other cause then of
weariness, waywardness, or wantonness, will not tarry for their Discedite,
but depart the Church without the blessing: they will not stay till Christ bids
them Go. They venture therein wretchedly and dangerously, if they could so
conceive it, to depart without the Peace of God. It is an usual complaint of
man in distress; Quare direliquisti me, Domine? Why have thou forsaken me, O
Lord? God justly answers, Quare direliquisti me, Home? Why did thou forsake
me first, O man? Would you needs depart when you should not? you therefore
shall depart when you would not. Discedite, Math. 7. 23.
Depart, indeed a woeful reiection. Math. 25. 41.
Depart from me, ye cursed: why cursed? good reason, you would not tarry for a
blessing. Thus is God even with the wicked, Recedistis a me, recedam a vobis:
You left me, I therefore leave you. Will you go without bidding? Abite, get you
gone. He that will go into captivity, let him go. Deus prior in amore,
posterior in odio. God loved us before we loved him, he does not actually hate
us, till we first hate him. Nunquam deserit, nisi cum deseritur: He forsakes
not us, till we forsake him: no man can take Christ from thy soul, unless
thou take thy soul from Christ. God complains of the Jews, that they had
left him: Ier. 2. 13.
My people have forsaken me. Forsake thee, O Lord, living Father of mercies,
and God of all comfort? Ier. 18. 14.
Will a man forsake the snow of Lebanon, and the old flowing waters that come
from the Rocks? If any will do so, then hear the curse: Ier. 17. 13.
O Lord, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they
that depart from thee shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken
the Lord, the fountain of living waters. But let them that cleave to the Lord,
hear the blessing, Heb. 13. 5.
I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Let us hang on the mouth of God for
decision of all our doubts, direction of all our ways: like the Centurions
servants, Math. 8. 9.
Going when he bids us, coming when he calls us, doing what he commands us. At
his Word let us arise and go on earth; at his Call we shall arise and go to
heaven. He that obeyes the surge in grace, shall have the surge in Glory: He
that goes in the ways of Holiness, shall go into the courts of Happiness.
He Psalm. 126. 6.
that goes forth weeping, bearing with him precious seed, shall come again
rejoicing, and bring his sheaues with him. Math. 25.
They that have done well, shall go into everlasting life.

Thus much of these two words, as they belonged to that person, the Leper: Now
let us usefully apply them to our selves. First, let us observe from this

Arise,
1. It is Christ that gives the Surge which reuiueth us: we can never stir
from the seat of impiety, till he bids us Arise. Ioh. 6. 44.
No man can come to me, except the Father draw him. The Spirit of Christ must
draw us out of the black and mirie pit of iniquity; as Ier. 38. 13.
Ebedmelech drew Jeremy out of the dungeon: We cannot arise of our selves;
Nature has no foot, that can make one true step toward heaven: Ioh. 3. 6.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: not fleshly in the concrete, but
flesh in the abstract. We cannot speak, unless he open our lips. God says to
the Prophet, Esaias 40. 6.
Cry. What shall I cry? the Spirit must give the word; All flesh is grass,
etc. We cannot stand, unless he gives us feet: Ezekiel. 2. 1.
Son of man, stand upon thy feet: alas, he cannot, but ver. 2. The Spirit
entered into me, and set me upon my feet. We cannot see except he gives us
eyes. Intelligite, insipientes, Be wise, O ye fools: Alas, they cannot: but
Da mihi intellectum, do thou, O Lord, give them wisdom. Romans 12. 2.
Be ye not conformed to this world, but transformed by the renewing of your
mind, that you may prove, etc. There are first two verbes Passive, then an
Active: to show that we are double so much Patients, as we are Agents. Being
moved, we move. Acta fit actiua voluntas: when God has inclined our will to
good, that will can then incline us to perform goodness.

If we cannot speak without lips from him, nor walk without affections from
him, nor see, except he give us eyes; then neither can we arise except he
takes us by the hand: as Peter took the Act. 3. 7.
Creeple, and lift him up, and immediately his feet and ancle bones received
strength. If the spirit of our Lord Jesus give us a Surge, our lame souls
shall grow strong and lively in the nerves of graces, we shall Arise and walk;
leaping, and singing, and praising God.

2 We must arise, for we are naturally down. By nature a man 1. Ioh. 5. 19.
lies in wickedness: Romans 6. 4.
by grace he rises to newness of life. Nature and Religion are two opposites:
I mean by nature, corrupted nature; and by Religion, true Religion: for
otherwise, the accepting of some Religion, is ingraffed to every Nature. It is
Nature, to Ephesians. 2. 1.
be dead in sins: it is Religion, to be Romans 6. 2.
dead to sin. It is Nature, to be Tit. 1. 16.
Reprobate to every good work: Religion, to be Tit. 3. 1.
ready to every good work. It is nature, to be a Lover of ones self, 2. Tim.
3. 2. Religion, to deny ones self, Luke 9. 23. It is nature for a man to Phil.
2. 21.
seek only his own profit: Religion, to Gal. 5. 13.
Serve others by love. Nature esteems 1. Cor. 1. 21.
Preaching, folly: Religion, the power of God to salvation. There are two
lights in man as in heaven, Reason and Faith: Reason, like Sara, is still
asking; How can this be? Faith, like Abraham, not disputes, but believes.
There is no validity in Moral virtues: Civil men's good works are a mere
carkase, without the soul of Faith.

They are like that Roman, that having fortunately slain his three enemies,
the Curiatij: coming home in triumph, and beholding all the people welcome him
with acclamations, only his sister weep, because he had slain her love: he
embittered his victories with the murder of his own sister. Carnal men may
do glorious deeds, flourish with brave atchieuements: but they mar all, by
killing their own sister, the dear soul. Thus we are down by Nature, Grace
can only help us up, and make us arise. If you ask how Nature has dejected
us: how we came originally thus depraved: I answer, We know not so well how we
came by it, as we are sure we have it. Nihil ad pr^dicandum notius, nihil ad
intelligendum secretius: Nothing is more Aug.
certainly true to be preached, nothing more secretly hard to be understood.
Therefore, as in case of a Town on fire, let us not busily enquire how it came,
but carefully endeavor to put it out. A Traveler passing by, and seeing a man
fallen into a deep pit, began to wonder how he sell in: to whom the other
replied; Tu cogita quomodo hinc me liberes, non quomodo huc ceciderim quaeras:
Do thou, good friend, rather study how to help me out, then stand questioning
how I came in. Pray to Christ for this Surge: Libera nos Domine, we are
naturally down, do thou, O Lord, graciously raise us up.

3. We must Arise before we can Go. First arise, then go thy way, says
Christ. He that is down, may creep like a serpent, cannot go like a man. Thou
art to sight with cruel enemies; Not flesh and blood, but Ephesians. 6. 12.
Principalities and Powers, wicked spirits in high places: Thou will perform
it poorly whiles thou art along on the ground: The flesh will insult over thee
with vndenyed lusts. Quicquid suggeritur, caeteris aggeritur: there is not a
sinful motion suggested, but it is instantly embraced, and added to that
miserable dunghill of iniquity. And is not this wretched, to have Chams curse
upon thee, to be a slave to slaves? The world will hold thy head under his
girdle, whiles he tramples on thy heart: thou shall eat no other food then he
gives thee; he will feed thee with bribes, vsuries, injuries, periuries,
blasphemies, homicides, turpitudes: none of these must be refused. The devil
will tyrannize over thee: thou can hardly grapple with that great Red Dragon,
when thou art mounted like Saint George on the back of faith; Alas, how
should thou resist him, being down under his feet? Arise therefore, and Ephesians.
6. 13.
take the whole armor of God, that you may both Stand, and Withstand.

Arise, lest God coming, and finding thee down, strike thee lower. From him
that has not, shall be taken away that he seemed to have. Pauper vbique
tacet, is a Proverb more plentifully true in a mystical, then temporal
poverty. We say, Qui iacet in terris, non habet vnde cadat: he that lies on
the ground, has no lower a descent to fall to: yes, there is a lower place.
Judas found a lower fall then the earth, when he departed In locum suum, Act.
1. 25.
into his own place. Such was that great Monarchs fall, Esaias 14. 12.
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer? how art thou cut down to the
ground? This was a great descent, from heaven to earth. But, ver. 15. Thou
shall be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit: This was a greater
descent, from heaven to hell. We esteem it a great fall (ceremonially) from a
Throne to a Prison: and the devil meant it a great fall (locally) from the
Pinnacle to the ground: But there is Abyssus inferna, a lower precipice. David
begins a Psalm of prayer, De profundis; Psalm. 130.
Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord. But there is a depth of
depths; and out of that deep there is no rising. Arise now, lest you fall into
that deep then.

Arise, for if thou will not, thou shall be raised. Si non surrexeris volenter,
suscitaberis violenter. If thou refuse to rise willingly, thou shall be rowsed
against thy will. If thou will not hear the first Surge, which is the
Ministers voice; thou shall hear the last Surge, which is the Archangels
voice. Dicis, Surgam, thou say, I will rise; but when! Modo Domine, modo:
Anon Lord, all in time. Will not this be a silly excuse at the day of
Judgment, I will rise anon? Thou must rise 1. Cor. 15. 52.
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trumpe. Though thou cry
to the Reu. 6. 16.
Mountains, Fall on me, and to the Rocks, Hide me: yet Nulla euasio, thou
must arise and appear. There are two voices that sound out this Surge: one
Evangelical, and that is of mercy; yet we drown this, as Italians do thunder;
by Drums, Bells, Cannons. The other Angelical, and that is of Justice, a voice
impossible to be avoided. This is that last Sermon, that all the world shall
hear: Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.

Arise; let us now raise up our selves from corruption of soul, that we may
one day be raised from corruption of body; They that will not rise, their
souls must, must, and carry their bodies to judgment. This world was made
for man, not man for this world: therefore they take a wrong course that lie
down there. He that lies down when he should arise and go, shall rise and
go, when he would lie down. He that sleeps in the cradle of security all
his life, sins soundly without starting: when he once starts and wakes, he
must never sleep again. The devil and mischief are ever watching: and shall
man, whom they watch to hurt, sleep? He that would deceive the devil, had
need to rise betimes. The Lion is said to sleep with one eye open, the Hare
with both: the worldling with both eyes of his soul shut. He never rises
till he goes to bed: his soul wakens not, till his body falls asleep on his
deathbed: then perhaps he looks up. As sometimes they that have been blind
many years, at the approaching of death have seen: (whereof Physicians give
many reasons) so the deathbed opens the eyes of the soul. Indeed at that time
there is possibility of waking, but hazard of rising. That poor winter-fruit
will hardly relish with God. Miserum incipete viuere, cum definendum est. It is
wretched for a man then to begin his life, when he must end it. It is at the
best but morosa et morbosa panitentia; a wearish and sick repentance: whereas
God requires a Romans 12. 1.
quick and lively sacrifice; this is as sick as the person that makes it. This
indeed is not a Conversion, but a Reuersion, or mere refuse.

To raise the secure from their unseasonable, unreasonable sleep, God does
ring them a peale of five Bells.

1. The first Bell is Conscience: this is the trebble, and does somewhat
trouble: especially if the hand of GOD pulls it. Many think of their
consciences, as ill Debtors do of their Creditors; they are loath to talk with
them. Indeed God is the Creditor, and Conscience the Seriant, that will meet
them at every turn. It makes a syllogisticall conclusion in the mind: Reason,
like David, draws the sword, and Conscience, like Nathan, knocks him on the
breast with the hilts. David made the Proposition, The man that has done this,
shall dnee the death: Nathan the Assumption, 2. Sam. 12.
Thou art the man: Conscience the Conclusion, Therefore thou must die. If you
hear not, yea feel not the sound of this bell, suspect your deadness of
heart: for that City is in danger, where the Alarme-bell rings not.

2. The second Bell is the Stint, or certain to all the rest; Uox Euangelij,
the voice of the Gospel. This Bell of Aaron is so perpetually rung amongst us,
that as a knell in a great mortality, (quia frequens, non terrens) so common
that no man regards it. Indeed, if some particular clapper ring melodiously to
the ear, we come to please that rather then the soul. Luxurient wits think
the Scripturephrase gross: nothing delights them but a painted and
meretricious eloquence. There are some that will not hear this Bell at all:
like Jeroboam, they will not travel to Jerusalem for a Sermon, but content
themselves with a Calfe at home. Others look that the Preachers tongue should
incessantly walk, but let their own hearts lie still. Thus often our Lecturer
shall preach, we will give the hearing when we list. Thus many Ministers come
to a Parish with their bones full of marrow, veins full of blood: but all is
soon spent, and the people never the better. We ring, but you do not rise.

3. The third Bell is the Mean; and this is Suspiria gemitusque morientium;
the cries and groans of the dying. Another Passing Bell is thy warning-bell.
Death snatcheth here and there about us, thousands on our left, ten thousands
on our right: yet as if we had a Supersedeas, or Protection against it, we
neither relent nor repent. Our security is argued of the more madness,
because we have so common motions and monitions of death. Yet Nonerimus memores
esse necesse mori. How horrible is it to be drunk in a charnell house? As
Christ spoke, Let the dead bury the dead: So we bring to the Church dead bodies
with deader souls. Forma, favor populi, feruor inuenilis, opesque,
Surripuere tibi noscere quid sit homo.
We confess our selves mortal, yet we live as if death had no quarrel
against us. This Bell is the Mean, but it is too mean to wake us.

4. The fourth Bell is the Counter-tenor: vox pauperum, the cry of the poor.
This bell rings loud, either to us for mercy, or against us for cruelty. Let
us know, that if it cannot waken us, it shall waken God aganst us. Iam. 5. 4.
Their cries are entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Set not thy
soul in danger of the peoples curse: by inhauncings, ingrossings, oppressions,
etc. But thou say they are wicked men that will curse, and God will not
hear the wishes of the wicked. I answer, it is often seen that the curse of
the undone waster, lights upon the head of the undoing Usurer. The imprecation
of one evil man may fall upon another: God so suffers it, not because he
cursed thee, but because thou have deserved this curse. Let this Bell make
Oppressors arise to show mercy, that God may rise to show them mercy.
Otherwise the poor man is ready to pray, Psalm. 7. 6.
Arise, O Lord, in thine anger; lift up thy self, because of the rage of our
enemies: awake for us to the judgment thou have commanded. Yea, though they
pray not for it, God will do it. Psalm. 12. 5.
For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise, says the Lord. I will set him in safety from him that puffs at it. If
this Bell sound mournfully to thee for bread to the hungry, arise to this sound,
as that neighbor rose at midnight Luke 11. 8.
to relieve his importunate friend. If it cannot waken thy covetous soul to
show mercy to Christ tempore suo, in his time of need; nor will Christ arise to
show mercy to thee tempore tuo, in thy time of need.

5. The last Bell is the Tenor, the Bow-bell; able to waken all the City. But
though that material Bell can teach us when it is time to go to bed, yet
this mystical bell cannot teach us the time to arise. This is the abuse of the
creatures: Iam. 5. 3. Haba. 2.
The rust of the gold cries against the hoorder: the stone out of the wall
against the Oppressor: the corn and wine against the Epicure. This is a roaring
and a groaning Bell. Romans 8. 22.
The whole creature groans, and trauells in pain under us. This is the
creatures ordinary Sermon: Accipe, read, cave; use us without abusing; return
thankfulness without dissembling; or look for vengeance without sparing. They
seem to cry unto us: We desire not to be spared, but not to be abused:
Necessitati subseruire non recusamus, sed luxui: we would satisfy your
natural necessity, not intemperate riot. We are the nocent creatures, that
cause their innocence to become miserable. And but that the Divine providence
restraines them, it is marvel that they break not their league with us; and
with their horns, and hoofes, and other artillery of nature make war upon
us, as their unrighteous and tyrannical Lords.

Let some of these Bells waken us: lest as God once protested against Israel,
that seeing they would not when it was offered, therefore they should never
enter into his rest: Hebr. 3.
so a renuntiation come out against us; If any will be filthy, let them be
filthy still: if they will not arise, they shall lie still Reuc. 22.
for ever. If this peale cannot effect it, yet God has four things more to
rouse us.

1. A Goad, that pricks the skin, and smarts the flesh; Affliction: he has
Crosses and Curses; those gall, these deeply wound: they are able to make any
but a Pharaoh arise. It was affliction that wakened David: It is good for me
that I was troubled. The Leprosy brought Naaman to the Prophet; the Prophet
brought him to God. It is strange, if bloody sides put not sense into us. Yet
such was the obduracy of Israel; Iere. 5. 3.
Thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed: thou have consumed them,
yet they refused to return. Insensible hearts! Esaias 9. 13.
The people turns not to him that smites them: neither do they seek the
Lord of Hosts. Have thou been wounded, and will thou not be wakened? beware
lest God speak to thy soul, as in another sense Christ did to Peter; Mark.
14. 41.
Sleep on now, and take thy rest.

2. He has to rouse us Thunder of heavier Judgments: perhaps the light
scratches which some adverse thorns make, are slightly reckoned; scarce change
countenance for them. But he sleeps soundly, whom thunder cannot wake. Humanas
motura tonitrua mentes. When God thundered that menace in the cares of Nineveh,
it waked them. Let Absolon fire Ioabs barley fields, and he shall make him rise.
Shake the foundations of the Prison, and 2. Sam. 14. Acts 16.
the stern layler will rise a converted Christian; Sirs, what shall I do to
be saved? This thundering of judgments should cleanse our air, awaken our
sleepy minds, purge our unclean hearts. Amos 3. 8.
If the Lion roar, who will not fear? If the Lord thunder, what man will not
be afraid?

3. He has an Ordnance to shoot off, Death. Statutum est omnibus mori. It is a
Statute Law of heaven, an Ordinance from the Court of Justice, Every man shall
die. When this Canon is discharged at thy paper-walls, then let thy soul rise,
or never. The shooting off this Ordinance made Belshazzar stagger before he
was drunk. Dan. 5. 6.
His knees smote one against another, when that fatal hand wrote his destiny
on the wall. Indeed most do slumber on the Couch of health, they are quiet, no
sickness stirs them: they are at a covenant with the grave: Sed cito finitam
datur istam cernere vitam. Praeceps mortis iter: Death makes a headlong
progress. This Ordinance carries death in the mouth: it is an even hand that
shootes; one that will never miss the mark: let this rouse us.

4. God has a Trumpet to sound. 1. These. 4. 16.
The Lord shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangell, and with the Trumpe of God. Altisona, grandisona Tuba: the lowdest
Instrument of war; every ear shall hear it. As it was in the days of Noah,
and Lot; Luke 17. 30.
So shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed. From eating and
drinking, building and planting, buying and selling, marrying and dancing,
shall this Trumpe call them. It shall fetch the Drunkard from his Ale-bench,
the Harlot from her luxurious bed, the Epicure from his riotous table, the
Usurer from his Charnell house of men's bones, and beasts skins, his study: now
Surgendum est vndeque; there must be an universal rising. Well, let us waken
before this last Trumpets last summons, lest then we rise only to judgment,
and be judged to lie down again in torments. God long expects our rising;
Quanto diutius nos expectat vt emendemus, tanto districtius iudicabit si Bern.
neglexerimus. With how much patience he waits for our neglected conversion;
with so much vengeance he will punish our continued rebellion. The Lord of his
mercy, give us the first resurrection to Grace, that we may enjoy the Rising to
Glory. Arise, and

Go.
Being got up, it is not fit we should stand still, we must be going. The maine
work was to raise us; now we are up, I hope an easy matter will set us a
going. And to help forward our journey, let our meditations take along with
them these three furtherances; the Necessity, the Conueniency, the End. The
Necessity, we must go: the Conueniency, how we must go: the End, whither we
must go.

1. The Necessity, all that have hope of heaven, must be going. The servants of
God under the Law, Exodus 12. 11. the sons of God under the Gospel, Ephesians. 6.
15. are commanded to have their Feet shod: to witness their preparation of
Going. God does not only charge Eliah with a Surge, 1. King. 19. 5.
Arise; but also with a Vade, ver. 7.
Go. The sitting bird is easily shot; so long as she is flying in the air,
the murdering piece is not leuelled at her. There were two principal occasions
of David's sin, Otium and Oculus: Idleness and his Eye. The one gives Satan
opportunity, the other conueniency to iniect his temptation. Otia si tollas,
periere Cupidinis arcus. David, have thou nothing to do? Come, walk with me
on thy Palace roof, I will show thee beauty; a snare able to take a Saint. It
is necessary therefore to be going; for so we are not so fair a mark for Satan.
Adam, so long as he was at his work in the Garden, was safe enough: when he
became lazy, and fell a dallying with Eve, Satan shot him. It was Ieromes
counsel to Rusticus; Be ever doing, vt quando diabolus veniat, inueniat
occupatum: that when the Devil comes with his business, he may find thee at
thine own business. So thou shall answer him knocking at thy door; I am
busy; I have no time to talk, with you, Satan. Do you think the Devil could
be so sure to meet his friends at the Theater, Tavern, Brothell-house; but
that mistress Idleness sends them thither? Yea by this he takes a worldling
by the hand at Church: well met; you are so full of business all the week,
that you break your sleeps, cannot take your rest: come, here be two Sermons
on the Sunday, sleep out them. The Sabbath seems tedious to some, they have
nothing to do? Nothing? Alas, they know not a Sabbaths days work. To pray,
to hear, to read, to meditate, to confer, to visit, to pray again: is all
this nothing? Because they labor not in their worldly calling, they think
there needs no labor about their Christian calling: the working out their
salvation they hold no pains; indeed they take no pains about it. If they
did perform these duties, they should find the right spending the Sabbath, not
Nullum laborem, sed alium: not no labor, but another kind of labor then ever
they conceived. And this not Opus taedij, sed gaudij. Think on that sweet
vicissitude of works and comforts; And Breue videbitur tempus tantis variet
atibus occupatum: that time must needs seem short, that is spent in such
variety of delights. It was the principal of those three faults, whereof Cato
professed himself to have so seriously repented. One was, passing by water,
when he might go by land: another was, trusting a secret to a woman: but the
maine one was, spending an hour unprofitably. How many hours, not only on
common days, but even upon the holy Sabbath, that concerns the business of
our souls, have we unprofitably lauished, and yet never heartily repented
them?

2. The Conueniencie; if we Go, we must have feet. All our Preaching is to
beat the bush, put you from your couerts, and set you a going: but now Quitus
pedibus? on what feet must you go? The Foot is the Affection or Appetite,
says S. Augustine. Eo feror, quocunque feror: that carries me, vvhither soever
I go. The foot moves the body, the affection moves the soul. The regenerate
soul has three principal faculties, as the natural body has three
semblable members: the eye, hand, and foot. In the soul the Eye is Knowledge,
the Hand is Faith, the Foot is Obedience. The soul without knowledge is like
Bartimeus, blind: without faith, like the man with a withered hand: without
obedience, like Mephibosheth, lame.

True Christians are not Monopodes, one-footed: the Apostle speaks in the
plural number, of their feet. Ephesians. 6. 15.
Stand, having your Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace.
He meant not corporal feet: the soul must therefore have spiritual feet,
like the bodies, for Number, Nature.



For Number, the body has two feet, so has the Soul: Affection and Action,
desiring and doing. The former, that puts forward the soul, is a hopeful
affection. One said, Hope is a foot; Pes Spes: but hope is rather a nerve that
strengthens the motion of this foot, then the foot it self. The latter is
Action, or operative obedience; that rightly walks in the blessed way of
holiness. Psalm. 40. 8.
I desire to do thy will, O my God; there is the foot of affection. Psalm. 119.
32.
I will run the way of thy Commandments; there is the foot of action. Verse. 40.
I have longed after thy precepts; there is the foot of desiring: Verse. 59.
I turned my feet unto thy testimonies; there is the foot of obeying.

For nature, they are fitly compared to feet, and that Ratione Situs for
Placing Transitus Passing.

For Site or placing, the feet are the lower parts of the body, so are
affections of the soul. The head is the directer, the foot the carrier: the
feet help the head, the head guides the feet. The understanding and
affection, are like the blind man and the lame: the lame has eyes but no
feet; the blind has feet but no eyes. But whiles the blind carries the
lame, and the lame directs the blind, both may come to their iourneyes end. The
understanding sees well, but of it self cannot go; the Affection is able to
go, but of it self cannot see: let the one direct well, the other walk after
that direction, and they will bring the soul to heaven.

For Transition or Passing, as the feet corporally, so these spiritually,
move and conduct the man from place to place. Indeed none can come to the John
6. 44.
Son, unless the Father draw him: but when he has given us feet, he looks
we should go. He that has ears to hear, let him hear: he that has hands,
let him work: he that has feet, let him go. Hence is that exhortation; Iam.
4. 8.
Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. In this foot-manship there is
Terminus a quo recedimus, Terminus ad quem accedimus, motus per quem
procedimus: From the ways of darkness, from the wages of darkness: to the
fruition of light, to the counersation in light. From darkness exterior,
interior, inferior. Outward; this land is full of darkness, fraught operibus
tenebrarum, with the works of darkness. Inward, Ephesians. 4. 18.
Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, and because of the blindness of their
heart. Outer darkness, that which Christ calls Mat. 22. 13.
(...): or lower darkness. Jude verse. 6.
He has reserved the Lost angels in ever lasting chains under darkness.
Unto light external, internal, eternal. Outward Light; Psalm. 119. 105.
Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Inward light;
Psalm. 51. 6.
In the hidden parts thou shall make me to know wisdom. Everlasting Light,
Dan. 12. 3.
They shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and as the stars for
ever and ever. Blessed feet that carry us to John 1. 8.
That light which lightneth every man that comes into the world: and to the
beams of that Sun, which Luke 1. 79.
gives light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: happy
feet, they shall be guided into the way of peace. Look to thy foot
wheresoever thou treadest: beware the gardens of temporal pleasures: Est
aliquid quod in ipsis flori^ angat. It is worse going on fertile ground, then
on ba^: the smooth ways of prosperity are slippery, in rough ^fflictions we
may take sure footing. Let your feet be ^od, says Paul; your affections
restrained: bar lust of her vain objects, turn her from earth to heaven.
Set her a traveling, not after riches, but graces. Keep the foot of desire
still going, but put it in the right way, direct it to everlasting blessedness.
And this is

3. The End, whither we must go, to perfection. Thou have done well, yet go
on still. Nihil praesumitur actum, dum superest aliquid ad agendu^: nothing is
said to be done, whiles any part remains to do. No man can go too far in
goodness. Nimis iustus, et nimis sapiens potes esse, non nimis bonus. Thou
may be too just, thou may be too wise, but thou can never be too good.
Summae religionis est, imitari quem colis. It is a true height of religion, to
be a follower of that God, of whom thou art a worshipper. Come so nigh to God
as possibly thou can, in imitation, not of his power, wisdom, majesty, but
of his mercy. 1. Pet. 1. 16.
Be holy, as the Lord is holy. Luke 6. 36.
Be merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful. The going on forward to
this perfection, shall not displease him, but crown thee. Give not over this
going, until with Saint Paul thou have quite 2. Tim. 4. 7.
finished thy course.

Aim at perfection, shoot at this mark, though thou cannot reach it. When the
wrestling Angel said to Jacob, Genesis 32. 26.
Let me go, for the day breaks; he answered, I will not let thee go except
thou bless me: happy perseverance! Cant. 3. 4.
When I caught him whom my soul loved, I held him, and would not let him go.
O sweet Jesus, who would let thee go? Qui tenes tenentem, apprehendentem
fortificus, fortificatum Bern.
confirmas, confirmatum perficis, perfectum coronas. Thou that hold him that
holds thee, that strengthenest him that trusts thee, confirmest whom thou
have strengthened, perfectest whom thou have confirmed, and crownest whom thou
have perfected. In the behalf of this continuance, the Holy Ghost gives those
exhortations; Hold fast, Stand fast. Reu. 3. 11.
Hold that thou have, that no man take thy crown. The same to the Church of
Thyatira; Tene quod habes, Reu. 2. 25. Gal. 5. 1.
Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. It is an ill
hearing, Verse. 7.
Ye (not do, but) did run well. The Prophet in his threnes weeps, that Lam.
4. 5.
they which were brought up in scarlet, embrace dunghils. It is just matter of
lamentation, when souls which have been clad with zeal, as with scarlet,
constantly forward for the glory of God, fall to such Apostacy, as with Demas
to embrace the du^ghil of this world, and with an auarous hausture to lick up
the mudde of corruption.

Joseph had a coat reaching down to his feet: our religion must be such a
garment, neither too scant to cover, nor too short to continue ad vltimum, to
the last day of our temporary breath. Reu. 2. 10.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life:
this crown is promised to a good beginning, but performed to a good ending.
Strive to Ephesians. 3. 18.
comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height. If we can comprehend with the Saints, not only the height of hope, the
depth of faith, the breadth of charity, but also the length of continuance, we
are blessed for ever. Even the tired horse, when he comes near home, mends his
pace: be good always, without weariness; but best at last: that the nearer
thou come to the end of thy days, the nearer thou may be to the end of
thy hopes, the salvation of thy soul. Omnis coelestis Curia nos expectat,
desideremus eam quanto possumus desiderio. The whole Court of Bern.
heaven waits for us, let us long for that blessed society with a hearty
affection. The Saints look for our coming, desiring to have the number of the
elect fulfilled: the Angels blush when they see us stumble, grieve when we
fall, clappe their vvings with joy when we go cheerfully forward: our
Savior Christ stands on the battlements of heaven, and with the hand of help
and comfort wafteth us to him. When a noble Soldier in a foreign Land has
achieved brave designs, won honorable victories, subdued dangerous
adversaries; and with worthy Chiualry has renowned his King and Country: home
he comes, the King sends for him to Court, and there in open audience of his
Noble Courtiers, gives him words of grace, commends and (which is rarely
more) rewards his Valor, heaps dignities, preferments, and places of honor
on him. So shall Christ at the last day, to all those Soldiers that have
valiantly combated and conquered his enemies; in the sight of heaven and earth,
audience of men and Angels, give victorious wreathes, crowns and garlands,
Revel. 7. 9.
long white robes, to witness their innocence, and Palms in their hands, to
express their victory: and finally he shall give them a glorious kingdom to
enjoy for ever and ever.

Now yet further to encourage our going, let us think upon our company. Four
sweet associates go with us in our Iourny; good Christians, good Angels, good
works, our most good Savior Jesus Christ.

1. Good Christians accompany us even to our death. If thou go to the Temple,
they will go with thee. Esaias 2. 3.
Many people shall say, Come and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to
the house of the God of Jacob. If thou say, Nehem. 2. 17.
Come, let us build up the walls of Jerusalem: they will answer, Ver. 18.
Let us rise up and build. So when Joshua protested to Israel; do what you
will, Josh. 24. 15.
but as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord: they ecchoed to him; Ver.
16. 18.
God forbid that we should for sake the Lord, to serve other gods: we also will
serve the Lord. Thou can not say with Elias, Romans 11. 3.
I am left alone; there be seven thousand, and thousand tho^sands, that never
bowed their knee to Baal.

2. Good Angels bear us company, to death in our guarding, after death in our
carrying up to heaven. Angelis mandauit; Psalm. 91. 11.
He has given his Angels charge over us: There are malicious devils against
us, but there are powerful Angels with us. That great Majesty whom we all
adore, has given them this commission. Heb. 1. 14.
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who
shall be heirs of salvation? An Angel counsels Hagar Genesis 16.
to return to her Mistress; an Angel accompanies Jacob in his journey; an
Angel feeds Elias; an Angel 1. King. 19.
pluckes Lot out of Sodom. Gaudent Angeli te conuersum Genesis 48. Origin.
illorum sociari consortijs. The Angels rejoice at our conversion, that so
their number might have a completion.

3. Good works bear us company: Good Angels associate us, to deliver their
charge; good works to receive their reward. Though none of our actions be
meritorious, yet are none transient, none lost. They are gone before us to the
Courts of joy; and when we come, they shall welcome our entrance. Virtutis
miseris dulce sodalitium. What misery soever perplexeth our voyage, virtue, and
a good conscience are excellent company.

4. Lastly, Jesus Christ bears us company. He is both Via and Conuiator; Ioh.
14. 6.
the way, and companion in the way. When the two Disciples went to Emaus, Luke
24. 15.
Jesus himself drew near, and went with them. If any man go to Emaus, which
Bernard interprets to be Thirsting after good advice; he shall be sure of
Christ's company. If any man Math. 5. 41.
entreat Jesus to go a mile, he will go with him twain. None can complain
the want of company, whiles his Savior goes along with him. 1. Ioh. 1. 3.
Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
There we find two Persons of the blessed Trinity, our Associates, the Father
and the Son: now the Holy Ghost is not wanting. 2. Cor. 13. 13.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion (or
fellowship) of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen.

Go we then comfortably forward, and Psalm. 107. 30.
God will bring us to our desired Haven. But Pauci intrant, pauciores ambulant,
paucissimi per^nt. Few enter the way, fewer walk in the way, fewest of all
come to the end of the way; their salvation. Men think the way to heaven
broader then it is: But Math. 7. 14.
strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few
there be that find it. All say, they are going to glory, but the greater
number take the wrong way. A man somewhat thicke-sighted, when he is to pass
over a narrow bridge, puts on spectacles to make it seem broader: but so his
eyes beguile his feet, and he falls into the brook. Thus are many drowned in
the whirle-poole of sin, by viewing the passage to heaven only with the
Spectacles of flesh and blood: They think the bridge broad, so topple in.
Happy eyes that well guide the feet, and happy feet that never rest going,
till they enter the gates of heaven. Thus much for the Pasport: now we come to

The Certificate.
Thy faith has made thee whole. Wherein Christ does comfort and encourage the
Leper. First, he comforts him, that his faith was the means to restore health
to his body: then thereby he encourages him that this faith increased, would
also bring salvation to his soul.

I might here observe, that as faith is only perceived of God, so it is
principally commended of God. The Leper glorified God, and that with a loud
voice; there was his thankfulness: he fell down at Christ's feet, there was
his humbleness. The ears of men heard his gratitude, the eyes of men saw his
humility: but they neither heard, nor saw his faith. But how then, says Saint
James, Iam. 2. 18.
Show me thy faith? Himself answers, By thy works. It cannot be seen in
habitu, in the very being; yet may easily be known in habente, that such a
person has it. No man can see the wind as it is in the proper essence; yet by
the full sails of the ship one may perceive which way the wind stands. The
sap of the tree is not visible, yet by the testimony of leaves and fruits we
know it to be in the tree: Now Christ sees not as man sees: man looks upon the
external witnesses of his gratitude and humility, but Christ to that sap of
faith in the heart, which sent forth those fruits. Thy faith has saved thee.

The words distribute themselves into two principal and essential parts: The
Means, Thy faith. Effects, Has made thee whole.



The means is partly Demonstratiue; Faith; partly Relative, Thy faith. The
Quality and the Propriety: the Quality of the means, it is Faith; the
Propriety, it is (not another, but) Thy faith.

Faith.
This is the demonstratiue quality of the means of his healing. But what was
this Faith? 1. There is a faith that believes veritatem historiae, the truth of
Gods word: This we call an Historical Faith; but it was not this faith. Act.
26. 27.
King Agrippa, beleeuest thou the Prophets? I know that thou beleeuest. 2.
There is a faith that believes Certitudinem Promissi, the certainety of Gods
promises: that verily is persuaded, God will be so good as his word: that he
will not break his covenant with Israel, nor Psalm. 89. 33.
suffer his faithfulness to fail unto David: yet applies not this to it
self: but it was not this faith. 3. There is a faith that believes Potestatem
Dicentis, the Majesty and Omnipotency of him that speaks: so the devil,
that God is able to turn Math. 4. 3.
Stones into br^d: so the Papist, that he can turn bread into flesh, and cause
one circumscribed body to supply millions of remote places at once: But it was
not this faith. 4. There is a faith believes se moturam Montes, that it is able
to 1. Cor. 13. 2.
remove Mountains: a miraculous faith; which, though it were specially given
to the Apostles, Mark. 16. 17.
In my name shall they cast out devils, take up Serpents, cure the sick by
imposition of hands; say to a Tree, Luke 17. 6.
Pluck thy self up by the roots, and plant thy self in the sea, and it shall
obey them: yet reprobates also had it; for even they that are cast out with a
Discedite a me, plead this; Math. 7. 22.
In thy name have we cast out devils, and done many wonderful works. But it
was not this faith. 5. There is a faith that believes to go to heaven, though
it bend the course directly to hell: that thinks to arrive at the Jerusalem of
blessedness, through the Samaria of profaneness: a presumption: but it was
not this faith. 6. There is a faith that believes a man's own mercy in Jesus
Christ, and lives a life worthy of this hope, and becoming such a prosession:
and it was this faith that our Savior commends.

When Samuel came to anoint one of the sons of Iesse, Eliab was presented to
him, and he said, 1. Sam. 16. 6.
Surely the Lords Anointed is before him. He was deceived, he might have a
goodly countenance and a high stature: but it was not he: Then passed by
Abinadab; nor is this he: then Shammah; nor is this he: Then seven of his
sons were presented; The Lord has chosen none of th^se. Be here all, says
Samuel? Iesse answered, No, the youngest is behind, and he keeps the sheep.
Then said Samuel, Send and fetch him, for we will not sit down till he come.
When he was come, he Ver. 12.
was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look on:
And the Lord said, Arise, and anoint him, for this is he. If we should make
such a quest for the principal Grace: Temperance is a sober and matronly
virtue, but not she: Humility in the lowest is respected of the Highest, but
not she: Wisdom is a heavenly grace, similisque creanti, like the Maker, but
not she: Patience a sweet and comfortable virtue, that looks cheerfully on
troubles, when her breast is red with the blood of sufferance, her cheeks are
white with the pureness of innocence, yet not she: Justice has a hand
spotless as the brow of heaven, a heart transparant as Crystal, a
countenance able to daunt temptation it self, yet not she: Charity is a lovely
virtue, little innocents hang at her breasts, Angels kiss her cheeks; Cant. 4.
3.
Her lips are like a thread of scarlet, and her speech is comely, her Temples
are like a Pomegranate within her looks; all the ends of the earth call her
blessed: yet not she. Lastly Faith appears, beautified with the robe of her
Saviors righteousness, adorned with the jewels of his graces, and shining in
that fairness which he gave her: Iam Regina venit, now comes the Queen of
Graces: This is she.

Now as Faith excells all other graces, so there is a special degree of faith
that excells all other degrees. For every faith, is not a saving faith. The
King of Syria commanded his Captains, y Fight neither with small nor great,
save p 1. King. 22. 31
only with the King of Israel. How should they know him? By his Princely
attire, and royal deportment. Perhaps they met with many glorious personages,
slew here and there one; none of them was the King of Israel. Setting upon
Iehoshaphat, they said, Surely this is the King of Israel; no, it was not. One
drew a bow at a venture, smote a man in his Charet, and that was the King of
Israel. The faith that belieues Gods Word to be true, is a good faith, but not
Illa fides, that saving Faith. The faith that believes Christ to be the worlds
Savior, is a true faith, but not that faith. The faith that belieues many men
shall be saved, is vera fides, non illa fides, a true faith, but not that
faith. The faith that believes a man's own soul redeemed, justified, saved by
the merits of Jesus Christ; not without works answerable to this belief: this
is that faith. That was the King of Israel, and this is the Queen of Isra^:
all the other be but her attendants.

There is Fides Sentiends, Assentiendi, and Appropriandi: a man may have the
first, and not the second: he may have the first and second, and yet not the
third: but if he have the third degree, he has all the former. Some know the
truth, but do not consent to it: some know it, and assent to it, yet believe
not their own part: they that believe their own mercy, have all the rest. As
meat digested turns to juice in the stomach, to blood in the liver, to spirits
in the heart: so faith is in the brain knowledge, in the reason assent, in the
heart application. As the child in the womb has first a vegetative life, then
a sensitive, last a rational. So faith, as mere knowledge, has but a
vegetation: as allowance, but sense: only the applying and apportioning the
merits of Christ to the own soul by it, this is the rational, the very life
of it.

But thus we may better exemplify this Similitude. The vegetative soul is the
soul of plants, and it is a true soul in the kind, though it have neither
sense nor reason. The sensitive soul is the soul of beasts, a true soul;
includes vegetation, but is void of reason. The rational soul is the soul
of man, a distinct soul by it self, comprehends both vegetation and sense,
having added to them the perfection of reason. So there are three kinds or
degrees of Faith. 1. To believe there is a God; this is the faith of Pagans,
and it is a true faith, though it neither believe the Word of God, nor mercy
from God. 2. To believe that what God says is true: this is the faith of
devils and reprobates, and a true faith; including the faith of Pagans, and
going beyond it; yet it apprehends no mercy. 3. To believe on God, to rely upon
his mercy in Christ, and to affie their own reconciliation; this is the faith
of the Elect; comprehends both the former, yet is a distinct faith by it self.

This faith only saues; and it has two properties. 1. It is a repenting
faith: for Repentance is Faiths Usher, and deawes all her way with tears.
Repentance reads the Law and weeps. Faith reads the Gospel and comforts.
Both have several books in their hands; Poenitentia intuetur Mosem, Fides
Christum. Repentance looks on the rigorous brow of Moses, Faith beholds the
sweet countenance of Christ Jesus. 2. It is a working faith: if it work not,
it is dead: and a dead faith no more saues, then a painted fire warmes. Faith
is a great Psalm. 45. 14.
Queen, her clothing is of wrought gold: the virgins her companions that
follow her, are good deeds: Omnis fidelis tantum credit, quantum Greg.
sperat and amat: and quantum credit, sperat, and amat; tantum operatur. A
Christian so far believes, as he hopes and loves: and so far as he
belieues, hopes and loves, he works. Now as Moses is said to Hebr. 11. 27.
see him that is invisible, because he saw his back-parts: and as when we see
the members of the body moving to their several functions, we know there is a
soul within, albeit unseen: so faith cannot be so invisible, but the fruits
of a good life will declare it.

Thus by degrees you see what is the right saving faith. As a Lapidary that
shows the buyer an orient pearl; and having a little fed his eye with that,
outpleaseth him with a Saphyre; yet out-values that with some Ruby or
Chrysolite: wherewith ravished, he does lastly amaze him with a sparkling
Diamond transcending all. Or as Drapers show diverse clothes of excellent
colors, yet at last for a Masterpiece exceed all wi^h a piece of Scarlet. So
there are diverse virtues like Jewels, but the most precious Jewel of all is
Faith: And there are diverse degrees of faith, as diverse colored clothes; but
the saving faith is arrayed in the Scarlet robe, has dipped and died her self
in the blood of her Savior Jesus: yet is she white, pure white as the snow of
Lebanon: so are all that be washed in that red fountain. Reu. 7. 14.
They have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.

Thy Faith.
This is the property of that faith that healed him; his own faith. But how
could Christ call it His faith, when as faith is Gods gift? It is indeed Datum,
so well as mandatum. Commanded, 1. John 3. 23.
This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son
Jesus Christ. So also given, Phil. 1. 29.
To you it is given in the behalf of Christ to believe on him. And John 6. 29.
This is the work (so well as the will) of God, that ye believe on him whom he
has sent. But this is not given without means, as the woman of Tekoah said to
David; 2. Sam. 14. 14.
GOD does devise means. What Is that? Romans 10. 17.
Faith comes by hearing. Now when God has given a man Faith, he calls it his;
Thy faith; for what is freer then gift? So the Prophet calls it their own
mercy; Ion. 2. 8.
They that wait on lying vanities, for sake their own mercy. As the water in
the Cesterne is said to be the Cesternes, though it have it from the fountain.

But yet how does Christ call it his faith? had he a faith by himself? Ephesians. 4.
5.
There is one faith: therefore not more his, then others. In regard of the
Object upon whom our faith reflects, there is but one faith: in regard of the
subject wherein faith resides, every one must have his own faith. There is no
salvation by a common faith: but as all true believers have one and the same
faith, so every true believer has a singular and individual faith of his
own. Thy faith: thine for two reasons; to distinguish his Person from common
men. Faith from common Faiths.



1. To distinguish his person from others: the Nine had not this Faith. They
believed not, but thou beleeuest. Thy faith; this declares him to be out of the
common road. Exodus 23. 2.
Thoushalt not follow a multitude to do evil: that B^llua multorum capitum
must not lead thee. Some were devoted to Christ, but Mark. 2. 4.
they could not come nigh him for the prease. It was the multitude that Luke
18. 39.
rebuked the blind man's prayers. As a river leads a man through sweet meadows,
green woods, fertile pastures, fruit-loden fields; by glorious buildings,
strong Forts, famous Cities; yet at last brings him to the salt Sea: So the
stream of this world carries along through rich commodities, voluptuous
delights, stately dignities, all possible content to flesh and blood: but after
all this brings a man to death, after death to judgment, after judgment to
hell.

Hear one of the Romists authentical pleas for their Church falls to the
ground, universality. They plead Antiquity; so a homicide may derive his
murder from Cain. They plead unity: so Pharisees, Sadduces, Herodians combined
against Christ. They plead universality: yet of the ten Lepers but one was
thankful. The way to hell has the greatest store of passengers: Company is
good, but it is better to go the right way alone, then the broad with
multitudes. It is thought probably, that at this day Mahometisme has more
under it then Christianity; though we put Protestant, and Papist, and Puritan,
and Separatist, and Arminian; and all in the scale to boot: and that mere
Paganism is larger then both. Where many join in the Truth, there is the
Church: not for the many's sake, but for the Truths sake. Saint In Psalm. 3 9.
Augustine teaches us to take Religion, not by tale, but by weight. Numbers
make not a thing good, but the weight of truth. Some are so manerly, that they
will not go one step before a great man; no not to heaven. Many say with
Hushai, 2. Sam. 16. 18
Whom the people, and all the men of Israel choose, his will I be. But they
leave out one principal thing, which Hushai there put in as the prime
ingredient; Whom the Lord chooses: they leave out the Lord. But Joshua was of
another mind: Josh. 24. 15.
Choose youwhat gods soever you will serve; I and my house will serve the Lord.
The Inferior Orbs have a motion of their own, contrary to the greater: good
men are moved by Gods Spirit, not by the Planetary motions of popular
greatness. Let us prize righteousness highly, because it is seldom found. The
pebles of the world are common, but the pearls of graces rare. The vulgar
stream will bring no vessel to the land of peace.

2. To distinguish his faith from the common faith. Thine; another kind then
the Pharisees faith. To believe the Word, but traditions withal, vera fides, non
pura fides; is a true, but not a pure faith. To believe the Mayor of the
Gospel, not the Minor, Vera, non sana fides; is a true, not a sound faith. To
believe a man's own salvation, how debauchedly soever he lives, nec vera, pura,
sana, nec omnino fides; is neither a true, pure, sound faith, nor indeed a
faith at all: but a dangerous presumption. To believe thy own reconciliation
by the merits of Christ, and to strengthen this by a desire of pleasing God; is
a true, found, saving faith: and this is Fides tua, Thy Faith.

Whosoever will go to heaven, must have a faith of his own. In Gedeons Camp
every soldier had his own pitcher: among Salomons men of valor, every one
wore his own sword: and these were they that got the victories. The five wise
Virgins had every one oil in her own lamp: and only these enter in with the
Bridegroom. Another eating of dainty meat makes thee never the fatter.
Indeed many have sped the better for other men's faith: so the Centurions
servant was healed for his masters sake. Mat. 8. 13.
As thou have believed, so be it done unto thee. But for the salvation of the
reprobates; Ier. 15. 1.
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, says the Lord, yet my mind could
not be toward, such people. Ezekiel. 14. 14.
Though Noah, Daniel, and Job interceded, yet they should deliver but their
own souls by their righteousness. Pious men's faith may often save others
from temporal calamities: but it must be their own faith that saues them from
eternal vengeance. Lut^ was wont to say, There is great Divinity in Pronounes.
Thy faith. One bird shall as soon fly with another birds feathers, as thy
soul mount to heaven by the wings of another faith. It is true faith, and thy
faith: true with other men's faith, but inherent in thy own person that saues
thee. True, not an empty faith; Nuda fides, nulla fides. De fide and oper. c.
23.
Inseparabilis est bona vita a fide, imo vero ea ipsa est bona vita, says
Augustine. A good life is inseparable from a good faith; yea a good faith is a
good life. So Irenaeus; To believe, is to do Gods will. Thine, therefore we
say Credo, not Credimus; I believe, not we believe. Every man must profess,
and be accountant for his own faith. Thus much of the Means; now to

The Effect.
Has made thee whole, or saved thee: It may be read either way; It has saved
thee, or It has salued thee. First, of them both jointly, then severally.

Faith is the means to bring health to body, comfort to soul, salvation to
both. I call it but the means; for some have given it more. Because the
Apostle says, that Abraham obtained the promise Romans 4. 13.
Through the righteousness of faith: therefore say they, Fides ipsa Iustitia;
Faith is righteousness it self. But let S. Paul answer them, and expound
himself: I desire to Phil. 3. 9.
be found in Christ, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ, (whose is that?) the
righteousness which is (not of us, but) of GOD by Faith. Thus faith is said to
save us, not of it self: the hand feeds the mouth, yet no man thinks that the
mouth eats the hand, only as the hand conueyes meat to the body, so faith
salvation to the soul. We say the Ring stancheth blood, when indeed it is not
the Ring, but the stone in it. There are many that make faith an almighty
Idol; it shall save: but thus they make themselves idle, and trust all upon
nothing. That faith is a meritorious cause of justification; this a doctrine
that may come in time to trample Christ's blood under feet.

Now these speeches rightly understood; Faith adopteth, faith justifies, faith
saves; are not derogatory to the glory of God, nor contradictory to these
speeches, Christ adopteth, Christ justifies, Christ saves. One thing may be
spoken of diverse particulars in a different sense. God the Father adopteth, the
Son adopteth, the holy Spirit adopteth, Faith adopteth: all these are true,
and without contrariety. They be not as the young men that came out of the two
armies before Ioab and Abner: 2. Sam. 2. 16.
every one thrust his sword into his fellows side, and fell down together. But
like David's Psalm. 133. 1.
Brethren, dwelling together in peace. God the Father adopteth as the Fountain
of adoption; God the Son as the Conduit; God the holy Ghost as the Cesterne;
Faith as the Cock whereby it runs into our hearts.

Faith brings justification, not by any special excellency it has in it
self, but only by that place and office which God has assigned it: it is the
condition on our parts. So the Apostle instructed the Iailour, Acts 16. 31.
Believe ^n the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thy house. Gods
ordinance gives that thing the blessing, which it has not in the own nature.
If Naaman had gone of his own head, and washed himself seven times in Jordan,
he had not been healed: it was Gods command that gave those waters such purging
virtue. If the Israelites stung with these fiery serpents in the Desert, had of
their own devising set up a brazen Serpent, they had not been cured: it was
neither the material brass, nor the serpentine form, but the direction of
God which effected it. It was not the Statue, but the Statute, that gave the
virtue. So Faith for it own merit brings none to heaven, but for the promise
which the God of Grace and Truth had made to it.

In common speech we say of such a man; His Lease maintains him: is there any
absurdity in these words? No man conceiues it to be a parchment lined with a
few words, accompanied with a vvaxen Labell, that thus maintains him: but that
House or Land, or rents so conveyed to him. So Faith saves: I ascribe not this
to the Instrument, but to Jesus Christ whom it apprehends, and that inheritance
by this means conveyed.

But now would thou know thy self thus interessed? look to thy faith, this
is thy proof. If a rich man die, and bequeath all his riches and possessions
to the next of blood; many may challenge it, but he that has the best proof
carries it. To Christ's Legacy thou layest claim, look to thy proof: it is
not, Mat. 7. 22.
Lord, Lord, I have prophesied in thy Name: nor, Luke 13. 26.
We have feasted in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets: but
Mark. 9. 24.
I believe, Lord, help my unbelief; and then thou shall hear, Be it unto
thee according to thy faith. And this a little faith does, if it be true.
There is a faith like a grain of mustard seed; small, but true: little, but
bite it, and there is heat in it: faith warmes where ever it goes. In a word,
this is not the faith of explication, but of Application, that is dignified
with the honor of this conueyance.

Has made thee whole. Faith brings health to the body. There was a Math. 9. 20.
woman vexed with an uncomfortable disease twelve years, Mark. 5. 26.
she suffered many things of Physicians; some torturing her with one medicine,
some with another, none did her good, but much hurt, Luke 8. 43.
She had spent all her living upon them, and herein, says Erasmus, was bis
misera: her sickness brought her to weakness, weakness to Physike, Physike
to beggary, beggary to contempt. Thus was she anguished in body, vexed in
mind, beggerd in estate, despised in place, yet faith healed her. Her wealth
was gone, Physicians given her over, her faith did not forsake her, Math. 9. 22.
Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. There was a
woman bowed down with a spirit of infirmity Luke 13. 11.
eighteen years; yet loosed: there was a man bedrid John 5. 5.
eight and thi^ty years, a long and miserable time, when besides his corporal
distress, he might perhaps conceive from that, Eccl. 38. 15. He that sins
before his Maker, let him fall into the hand of the Physician; that God had
cast him away, yet Christ restored him.

Perhaps this Leprosy was not so old, yet as hard to cure; yet faith is able
to do it; Thy faith has made thee whole. But it was not properly his faith,
but Christ's virtue that cured him: why then does not Christ say, Mea virtus,
and not Tua ^ides: My virtue, not thy faith has made thee whole? True it is,
his virtue only cures, but this is apprehended by man's faith. When that
diseased woman had touched him, Mark. 5. 30.
Jesus knew in himself that virtue had gone out of him, and he turned him
about in the prease, and said, Who touched my clothes? Yet speaking to the
woman, he mentions not his virtue, but her faith; Mark. 5. 34.
Daughter, thy faith has made thee whole. Faith in respect of the Object, is
called in Scripture, Gala. 3. 22.
The faith of Jesus Christ: in respect of the subject wherein it is inherent,
it is my faith, and thy faith. Thy faith has made thee whole.

Has saved thee: made whole, not thy body only, that is but part, the worst
part: but thy soul also, Totum te, thy whole self: saved thee. The other nine
had whole bodies, this tenth was made whole in soul too; saved. The richest
Jewel Christ left to his Church, is Salvation. Romans 10. 1.
My he^rts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved.
Not their opulencie, not their dignity, not their prosperity, was Saint Paul's
wish; but their Salvation. If the devils would confess to us the truth, they
would s^y, The best thing of all is to be saved. That rich man would feign send
this news out of hell; Luke 16. 18.
Let Lazarus testisi^ to my brethren, lest they also come into this place of
torment. The te^timony of salvation was blessed news, from the mouth of him
that gives Salvation, Jesus Christ. The vessel of man's soul is continually in
a Tempest, until Christ enter the Ship, and then follows the calm of
peace.

It is remarkable, that God gives the best gifts at last. Christ gave this
Leper Ver. 14.
health: bonum, this was good: For Vita non est viuere, sed valere: It is more
comfortable to die quickly, then to live sickly. He gave him a good name, Ver.
18.
that he returned to give glory to God; melius; this was better. But now lastly
he gives him salvation, Ver. 19.
Thy faith has saved thee; Optimum this is best of all. Vltima optima.

Has God given thee wealth, bless him for it: has he given to thee health,
bless him for it: has he given thee good reputation, bless him for it: has
he given thee children, friends, peaceable days; bless him for all these. But
has he given thee Faith? especially bless him for this: he has given thee
with it, what we beseech his mercy to give us all, Salvation in Jesus Christ.

I conclude, there is a faith powerful to justify the soul by the
righteousness of Jesus Christ: but it never dwelt in a bosom that lodges
with it lust and dissoluteness. Gala* 2. ^7.
If while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves are found sinners,
is therefore Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid. Which verse may not
unfitly be distinguished into four particulars. Quod sit, Si sit, An sit,
Absit. There is a Concession, a Supposition, a Question, a Detestation. 1. The
Concession, Quod sit; that is so: he takes it granted that all true Christians
seek their only Justification by Christ. 2. The Supposition Si sit; if it be
so, that in the mean time we are found sinners. 3. The Question or
discussion, An sit; is it so? is Christ therefore the Minister of sin? 4. The
Detestation, Absit, God forbid.

Where let us behold what the Gospel acquireth for us, and requires of us. It
brings us liberty: the Law gendereth to bondage: and that, says Aquinas,
Quantum ad Affectum, and Quantum ad Effectum. 1. The Law begets an affection of
fear, the Gospel of Love. Romans 8. 15.
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but the spirit of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father. Breuissima and apertissima du^rum*
Testament^rum differentia, Ti^or and Aug.
Amor. There is a short and easy difference betwixt the old Testament and the
new; Fear, and Love. 2. The Law brought forth only servants, the Gospel
sons. Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem above is free, which is the mother of us all. Libera, quod liberata,
free because she is freed. For John 8. 36.
if the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed.

This it brings to us, it also challenges something of us; Gal. 5. 13.
that we use not our liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve
one another. All things are free to us by faith, yet all things serviceable by
charity. Vt simul stet seruitus libertatis, and libertas seruitutis: that the
service of Luther.
liberty, and liberty of service, might stand together. A Christian for his
Faith is Lord of all, for his love servant to all. That therefore we might not
abuse our freedom, nor turn the grace of God into wantonness; the Apostle,
after the reins given, pulls us in with the Curb: though justified by Christ,
take heed that we be not found sinners: a check to ouer-iocund looseness, a
correctiue not so much libertatis, as liberatorum; of our freedom, as of our
selves being freed. In vain we plead that Christ has made us Saints, if our
own evil lives prove us sinners. Indeed, as God covenants by the Gospel to
remit our sins, so we must condition by the law to amend our lives. For that
faith to which the promise of Justification and eternal life is made, is a
faith that can never be separated from charity. Wheresoever it is, there is
love joined with it, bringing forth the Phil. 1. 11.
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise
of God. This is that faith to which 2. Cor. 1. 20.
all the promises of God are yea and Amen in Christ to the glory of God by us.

The Lord that has made them Yea and Amen in his neuer-failing mercies, make
them also Yea and Amen in our euer-beleeuing hearts, through our blessed
Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
THE SAINTS MEETING, OR Progress to Glory.
Ephesians. 4. 13. Till we all meet in the unity of the faith, and of the
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
stature of the fullness of Christ.
THe first word of the Text, is a gate to let in our considerations, to
contemplate this goodly city which indeed is like Jerusalem, a city of (...)
Psalm. 122. 4^
of the Lord, unto the (...): to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. And
when we are in, let us number and ponder the towers and powers of it: for every
pin and pinnacle shall afford us comfort. But we must first pass by this
Portall; Until: and this very entrance will give us two observations.

1. Teaches us, that God has ordained the Ministry of the Gospel to last to
the end of the world. Christ has given Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Teachers: To perfect the Saints, and to edify his body: to continue Till we
all meet in the unity of faith etc. So was his promise after his Charge.
Math. 28. His charge, Go teach all nations: his promise; Lo I am with you
always, unto the end Mat. last chap. last verse.
of the world. God will send Shepheardes, till every lost sheep be brought to
the folds of peace. The Ministers voice shall sound, till it be overtaken by
the Archangels Trumpe. The ministration of the Law had an end; but there is
none to the ministration of the Gospel, before the end of the world. Hereof
may be given a double excellency to the Gospel: and prelation above the Law.
It is more Gracious. Glorious.



1. The Gospel is more gracious. 2. Cor. 3. 6.
God has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but
of the Spirit: for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life. The proper
office of the Law was to threaten, terrify, condemn. Lex non damnans est
ficta and pictalex, says Luther. That law that does not condemn, is a fained
and a painted law. But the power of the Gospel is to convert, and save. Esa.
61. 1.
The Lord has anointed me, (says the Prophet in the person of Christ) to
preach good tidings unto the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim
liberty to the capti^es, and the acceptable year of the Lord, to comfort all
that mourn. The law was called the Ministration of death; but the Gospel,
like John Baptist points us to Christ a Savior; Ioh. 1. 29.
Behold the Lamb^ of God, t^king away the sin of the world. The law menaced
death; but the Gospel assures us; Romans 8. 1.
There is no damnation to them which are in Christ. When the law, like a stern
Seriant, arresteth thee; Pay that thou owe; the Gospel produces an
acquit^ance, ^ealed in the blood of Jesus; and says to thy faith, All is
paid. Quod lex operum minando imper^t, lex fidei credendo impetr^t. What the
law of Aug.
works commanded threatening, the new law of faith obtains by believing.

2. The Gospel is also more glorious: and that both in regard of the
Countenance, and Continuance. For beauty more glorious: because it is more
honorable to be the messenger of mercy and life, then to be the minister of
terror and death. A deathsman is accounted base, but their feet are
beautiful that bring tidings of peace and pardon. 2. Cor. 3. 9.
If the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more does the ministration
of righteousness exceed in glory. For Continuance; Moses glory is done away;
but the glory of Moses his Lord remains for ever. Ioh. 1. 17.
The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Christ Jesus. The type
is vanished, banished; but the substance abides ever. 1. Cor. 13. 10
When that which is perfect comes, that which is in part is done away. There
was a second Testament to succeed the first; but after the second shall succeed
none. So that if any man shall wilfully and finally euacuate to himself the
virtue of this new Covenant, Heb. 10. 26.
there remains no more sacrifice for his sins. Therefore the Apostle
concludes; 2. Cor. 3. 11.
If that which is done away, was glorious; much more that which remains is
glorious. The blood of Christ does mystically run fresh to the end of the
world; therefore the Gospel must be preached, that this blood may be applied.
The Gospel is that Star that must bring us to Christ: therefore shall shine
till our souls come to him in glory. The very subject of the Gospel is
everlasting life: therefore it shall not leave us, till it has brought us
thither.

2 This Until gives matter of exhortation; instructing us to wait with
patience for this blessed time; to be content to stay for Gods Until. It is a
sweet mixture of joy in trouble, the certain hope of future ^ase. Thou art
captiued, thou shall be freed: thou art persecuted, shall triumph: thou art
fought against, shall reign: thou art derided, but thou shall shine in glory.
Only quietly expect this Until. Heb. 10. 37.
Yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. But
Until this recompense of reward comes, ye have need of patience. Labor not a
violent extrication of thy self; abide and wait Till we all meet in the
unity of faith, etc.

We are got through the gate, let us now enter the City: werein we shall find
fi^e principal Passages or Streets What; there shall be a ^ting. Who; We, yea
we All; all the Saints. Wherein; In Unity; that unity; (...). Whereof; Of the
Faith and knowledge of Gods Son. Whereunto; To a perfect man, Unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.



What; Mee^e.
The meeting of friends is ever comfortable. Act. 28. 15.
When the brethr^n heard of us, they came to meet us as far as Appi^ forum:
whom when Paul saw, he thanked God and to^ke courage. They have sullen and
tetricall spirits, whom the sight of good friends cannot cheer. Fraternum vere
(...). Psalm. 133. 1.
Ec^ qu^m bonum, etc. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity* Some things are good but not pleasant; as
afflictions; they are not sweet yet pro^table Psalm. 119. 71.
It was good for me that I have be^e afflicted* that I might learn the
statutes. Other things are pleasant but not good: The wicked take delight in
sin, which s^ayeth the soul. But this is both Bonum, and Iu^undum; good and
pleasant also.

There is a threefold meeting of the godly.

1 In this life, with their souls in their bodies. 2 After death, of their
souls without bodies. 3 At the last day, of both together in glory.
1. In this life; and here the communis terminus of their meeting is Gods
house. Where always Christ himself is one of the number. Math. 18. 20.
Wheresoever two or three of you be gathered together in my name* I will be in
the midst of you. But to have his blessed society, we must not only bring our
bodies, but our minds with them. Quomodo erit Christus in medio nostrum, ^i
nobiscum non erimus? How should Christ be with us if we be not with our selves?
Plus valet consonantia voluntatum qu^m vocum. The harmony Bern.
of our voices is not so pleasing to God, as of our hearts. This is the
happiest meeting in this world. The denial of this comfort made the soul of
David sick, Psalm. 42. 2. 10
cast down and disquieted within him. And his reuiuall was, that he might
Psalm. 43. 4.
go unto the altar of God, unto God his exceeding joy. Indeed the ungodly
think not thus: they are more delighted with the tabernacles of Meshek and the
tauernes of K^der. In the 2. of Luke, when Joseph Luke 2. 44.
and Mary had lost Jesus, coming from Jerusalem; they sought him among their
kinsfolk and acquaintance. But they found him not till they came to Jerusalem;
and there he was in the Temple. The children of God, when they seek Christ,
find him not in the world, among their kindred and friends in the flesh; but in
Domo Dei, in the house of God. It is dangerous to be absent from these holy
meetings, least we miss of our Saviors company. God did not promise to meet
thee here; thou usurer at the Bank, thou drunkard at the alehouse, thou
sluggard on thy unseasonable couch; but at the Church. Christ comes to appear
to us, and we are gone; some about our farms of covetousness, others about
carnal pleasures. In vain we seek God if not in his right Vbi, where he has
promised to be found. Fugienti bonum consortium, obuenit corruptum and
corrumpens sodalitium. He that eschewes Christian meetings, shall be met
withal, either by the Devil when he is lazy, or by the Devils friends when he
is busy.

2. When death shall manumit and set free our souls from the prison of the
body, there shall be a second meeting. Many have come from east and from west,
far remote in place, and have met with Abraham and Isaac, and the holy
Patriarchs, which lived long before them in this world, in the kingdom of
heaven. So already in Heb. 12. 23.
Mount Sion are the Spirits of just men made perfect. The purer part is then
glorified, and meets with the triumphant Church in bliss. This meeting exceeds
the former in comfort. 1. In respect that our miseries are past, our conflict
is ended, and tears are wiped from our eyes. The very release from calamity
is not a little felicity. So Austin meditates of this place negatiuely. De
symb. lib. 3.
Non est ibi mors, non luctus: etc. There is no death nor dearth, no pining nor
repining, no sorrow nor sadness, neither tears nor fears, defect nor lothing.
No glory is had on earth without grudging and emulation; in this place there is
no envy. Idem de vita aeterna.
Non erit aliqua inuidia disparis claritatis, quum regnabit in omnibus vnitas
charitatis. None s^all malice another glorious clearness, when in all shall
be one gracious dearness. God shall then give rest to our desires. In our
first meeting we have Desiderium quietis: in this second Quietem desiderij.
Here we have a desire of rest, there we shall have rest of desire. 2. In
regard, that we shall see God; behold him whose glory fills all in all. This
is great happiness: for Psalm. 16. 11.
in his presence is the fulness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures
for ever. We shall not only Heb. 12. 24.
meet with the spirits of just men made perfect, but also with him that made
them just and perfect; Jesus the mediator of the new covenant: even God
himself.

3 Our last meeting, which is called the General assembly and Church of the
first borne written in heaven is the great meeting, at the end of the world.
When our reunited bodies and souls shall possess perfect glory, and reign
with our Savior for ever. When as no mountain or rock shall shelter the
wicked from doom and terror; so no corruption detayne one bone or dust of us
from glory. 1. These. 4. 17
We shall be caught up together in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air,
and so shall we be ever with the Lord.

Who; We.
There is a time when the elect shall meet in one universality. Though now
wear scattered all over the broad face of the earth; dispersed and distressed;
yet we shall meet. There is now a Communion of Saints 1. As of all the members
with the Head; all have interest in Christ. For he is not a garden flower,
private to few; but the Cant. 2. 1.
Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the valleys; common to the reach of all
faithful hands. So Jude calls this our Iud. ver. 3.
common salvation. 2. So of one member with another: even of the Church
triumphant with this militant. They sing Hosanna's for us, and we Halleluia's
for them: they pray to God for us, we praise God for them. For the excellent
graces they had on earth, and for their present glory in heaven. We meet now
in our affections, to solace one another, and serve our God: there is a mutual
sympathy between the parts. 1. Cor. 12.
If one member suffer, all suffer with it. But this meeting shall be void of
passion, and therefore needless of compassion; though love shall remain for
ever.

This Instruction is full of comfort. We part here with our parents, children,
kindred, friends: death breaks off our society; yet there shall be a day of
meeting. 1. These. 4. 18
Comfort one another with these words. Have thou lost a wife, brother, child;
you shall one day meet: though not with a carnal distinction of sex, or
corrupt relation which earth afforded. No man carries earth to heaven with him:
the same body but transfigured, purified, glorified. There shall be love
hereafter, not the offals of it. A wife shall be known, not as a wife; there
is no marriage, but the Lambs. Thou shall rejoice in thy glorified brother,
not as thy brother according to the flesh, but as glorified. It is enough, that
this meeting shall afford more joy, then we have knowledge to express.

This gives thee consolation dying; with grief thou leauest those, thou
dearly love. Yet first thou art going to one, whose love is greater then
Ionathans; that gave his life to redeem thee. And well pondering the matter,
thou art content to forsake all, to desire a dissolution, that thou may be
with Christ. Yet this is not all; thou shall again meet those, whom thou now
departest from; and that with greater joy, then thou have left in present sorrow.

This comforts us all: if it be a pleasure for friends to meet on earth, where
Satan is still scattering his troubles of dissension; what is it to meet in
heaven, where our peace is free from distraction, from destruction! where if
there be any memory of past things, meminisse iunabit; it shall rather delight
us, to think of the miseries gone, and without fear of returning. It is some
delight to the merchant, to sit by a quiet fire, and discourse the escaped
perils of wrackes and storms. Remove then your eyes from this earth; whether
you be rich, for whom it is more hard; or poor, for whom it is easier: and
know, it is better living in heaven together, then on earth together. So then
run your race, that in the end you may meet with this blessed society; the
Congregation of Saints in glory.

We, yea All we.
In this world we must never look to see an universal Church; but at that
general day we shall All meet. In heaven there are none but good: in hell
none but bad, on earth both good and bad, mingled together. I confess, that
the Church militant is the Suburbs of heaven, yea called the Kingdom of
heaven; because the King of heaven gouernes it by his celestial laws; but
still it is but heaven upon earth. In Gods floor there is chafe mixed with
the wheat: in his field cockle with corn: in his net rubbish with fish: in his
house vessels of wrath with those of honor. The Church is like the moon,
sometimes increasing, sometimes decreasing: but when it is at the full, not
without some spots. Now this mixture of the ungodly is suffered for two
causes; either that themselves may be converted, or that others by them may be
excercised. Omnis malus aut ideo Aug.
viuit vt corrigatur: aut ideo vt per illum bonus excerceatur.

1. For their own emendation, that they may be converted to embrace that good,
which they have hated. So Saul a persecutor becomes Paul a professor. Mary
Magdalen, turpissima meretrix fit sanctissima mulier; a putrified sinner, a
purified Saint. Zacheus, that had made many rich men poor, will now make many
poor men rich; when he had paid every man his own; (and that now he judged
their own, which he had fraudulently got from them) Luke 19. 8.
Behold half my goods I give to the poor. The thief after a long lewd life,
has a short happy death; and goes from the Cross to Paradise. If these had
been rooted up at the first, Gods Garner had wanted much good wheat. He that is
now cockle, may prove good corn.

2. For the exercise of the godly. For the reprobate do not only fill up the
measure of their sins; that so not 2. These, 2. 11.
believing the truth, they might be damned for their unrighteousness; making
their condemnation both just and great. But they serve also for instruments to
exercise the faith and patience of the Saints. Babylon is a flaile to bruise
the nations, at last it self shall be threshed. They are but the rubbish,
where with the vessels of honor are scowred: the vessel made bright; the
scowring stuff is thrown to the dunghill. They are Apothecaries to make us
bitter potions, for the recovery of our spiritual health: but so that they
cannot put in one dram more then their allowance: and when they come to be
paid for their bills, they find the sum total their own vengance. They are
like shepherds dogs, that serve to hunt the lambs of Christ to the
sheepfolds of peace, but their teeth are beaten out, that they cannot worry us.
Fr^mit lupus, tremit agnus; the wolf rages, and the Lamb quaketh, but Luke
12. 32.
fear not little flock; he is greater that is with you, then all they that
are against you. Illorum malitia, est ve^ra militia: their malice is your
warfare; but Romans 8. 37.
in all you shall conquer. They shall make you better, not worse. Hence let us
learn.

1. Not to fly from the Church, because there are some wicked men in it. Non
propter malos boni sunt deserend^, sed propter bonos mali sunt tolerandi.
Forsake not the good Aug.
because of the evil, but suffer the evil because of the good. when we can
brook no imperfection in the Church, know then Aduersus Anabaptist. art. 2
Diabolum nos tume^acere superbia, that the Devil does blow us up with pride;
says Calvin. I hold the Church, says Augustine; full of both wheat and chafe:
I better whom I can, whom I cannot I suffer. Fugio paleam, ne hoc sine non
aream, ne nihil sim. I avoid the chafe, least I become chafe: I keep the
floor, least I become nothing. Iam. 3. 2.
We sin all in many things: and many in all things: let us fly from all
sins, not from all sinners; for 1. Cor. 5. 10.
then we must go out of the world; out of our selves. But I believe the holy
catholic Church; I believe it, though through the shadow of infirmities I
cannot see it. Intelligit fides, quae non vides. If it was perspicuous to
sense, there was no place to faith, no use or exercise of believing. But here
2. Cor. 5. 7.
we walk by faith, not by sight. All the glory of the Kings daughter is Intus,
within. Psalm. 45. she is glorious within. wretched are they that forsake her,
and when they speak of her, bless themselves that they are fled Psalm. 45. 14.
out of Babel. Blind fools, that will not know Jerusalem from Babel. Their
fault is the more heinous for two causes. 1. They seemed our most zealous
professors: and a lewd servant is easilyer brook'd then an undutiful son. 2.
They know so much, that their own conscience tells them; Ignorance cannot
excuse their separation. An ignorant injury is in more hope, both of amends
and mercy. All their hot urging, was our purging; not from our vices, but our
good order: which when they could not effect, they purged themselves out of our
company. And their very malice did us good; for I am sure, we have been ever
since the cleaner.

They send us word of many unreformed, uncensured evils among us, for which
they separate. It cannot be denied, it cannot be avoided, but that among so
many millions of men there will be some lepers: but what? must their uncleanness
needs infect all? Aug. Ep. 48.
Certe nullius crimen inficit nescientem. Let me not participate of their
sin, not shun the Church because they are in it. yea, I am commanded to
come, though they be there. If a man will come unworthy, the sin is his: but
if I come not because he comes, the sin is mine. God says to the wicked
guest, How cammest thou in hither? not to the prepared, How came you in with
such a guest? His fault cannot dispense with my duty: nor shall my duty be
charged with his fault. But our evils are innumerable; I would to God they
were less: yet I am sure the Gospel is fair, though our lives be foul: Our
profession is good, though many men's conversation be full of evil. And yet the
number of our evils is somewhat abated by their absence: we cannot complain
of all evils, whiles we want them. To the unclean, they say; all things are
evil; yet they are content to take some evil from us. They will eat
victuals, yea and eat them up; as if for anger, rather then hunger. They will
purse up our moneys; take advantages of their forfeted bonds; and plead a
providence in it; their own providence they mean: and so, though not pray
with us, yet pray upon us. If all our things be evil, I perceive they love
some of our evil. Let them go: they from us, not us from our selves. But
rather

2. Seeing there are wolves among the Lambs, let us be wise to save our
selves, and patient to suffer others. The good are for thy comfort, the wicked
for thy exercise: let thy life be good, to the consolation of the one, and
conviction of the other. Greg. Mor. 1
Non valde laudabile est, bonum esse cum bonis, sed bonum esse cum malis. For
as it is a wretched fault not to be good among the good: so it is a worthy
praise to be good among the evil. Math. 5. 16.
Let your light so shine, that others may glorify God for your good; and be 1.
Pet. 3. 16.
ashamed of their own evil. You are the light of the world; if there be any
dimnesse in your shining, the whole Country is full of snuffers. In the Temple
were 1. King. 7. 50
golden snuffers; we have not many of those, to make us burn brighter: but
base stinking ones, that would rather put us out.

3. Let us abhor wicked societies, knowing that they shall be conuented
again in hell. There must be some acquaintance with them, must be no
familiarity. A meare commerce with them is not utterly in it self unlawful,
but dangerous. Factum licitum prohibetur, propter vicinitatem illiciti. Thou
had better lose a good bargain at a worldlings hand, then purchase some of
his wickedness. The second Chariot of Egypt taught Joseph to swear by the life
of Phara^h. Let them see thy good life, hear thy gracious words: thy true
detestation, and wise reprehension of their wickedness. Gods servants would
have all serve their master, that they might have the more company with them
to heaven. But let thy Psalm. 16. 3.
delight be with the Saints on earth, and with those that excel in virtue. Let
us meet now in synceritie, that herafter we may meet in glory. Psalm. 119. 63.
I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and keep thy precepts. Death
may break off for a while this gracious meeting, but our glorious second
meeting shall triumph over death: it shall be General; it shall be eternal.

Wherein; In the unity.
A perfect unity is not to be expected in this life; it is enough to enjoy it
in heaven. Indeed the Church is ever but one. There are threescore Cant. 6. 8.
Queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins without number: My dove, my
undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her mother. Though a kingdom
have in it many shires, more Cities, and innumerable Towns; yet is it self
but one; because one King gouernes it, by one law. So the Church though
universally dispersed, is one kingdom; because it is ruled by one Christ, and
professes one faith Ephe. 4. 5.
There is one body, one spirit, one Lord, one faith. So much Unity now.

But that unity which is on earth may be offended, in regard of the parts
subiectuall to it. What family has not complained of distraction? What
fraternity not of dissension? What man has ever been at one with himself?
1. Cor. 11. 19
There must be divisions, says Paul: are and must be, by a kind of necessity.
But there is a twofolde necessity. One absolute and simple: God must be just;
a necessity of infallibility. The other exhypothesi, or of consequence; as
this, there must be heresies. Satan will be an adversary, man will be proved;
a necessity upon presupposition of Satan's malice, and man's wickedness. But
woe unto them by whom offenses come: we know not the hurt, we bring by our
divisions. Zach. 8. 19
Thus says the Lord of Hosts. Zach. 8. Love the truth, and peace. Some love
peace well, but they care not for truth. These are secure worldlings: let them
alone in their sins, and you would not wish quieter men. Pacem quaerunt,
Pietatem fugiunt: they seek peace, but they fly righteousness: as if they
would disvnite those things which God has joined together, righteousness and
peace. Righteousness and peace shall kiss each other. Others love truth well,
but not peace. Let them fabric a Church out of their own brains, or rather a
discipline to manage it; and they will keep within verges of the maine truth.
They cannot be content to have good milk, but they must choose their spoone to
eat it with. They are wanton children, and worthy the rod of correction: let
them be whipped, only discipline may mend them.

I would our eyes could see, what hurt the breach of unity does us. Scilurus
his arrows taken singly out of the sheafe, are broken with the least finger:
the whole vnseuered bundle fears no stresse. We have made our selves weaker,
by dispersing our forces. Even the encouraged Atheist walks to Church in the
lane of our divisions; and is still no less an Atheist, then the devil was a
devil when he Job 1. 6.
stood among the sons of God. It is the nature of our controversies to fight
peremptorily at both ends, whiles truth and piety is left in the middle, and
neglected. Whiles men have contended about the body of Religion, some have
thought it quite dead: as no doubt Moses body was, when the Jude ver. 9.
Archangell disputed with the Devil about it. As one said of his Donatists;
Betwixt our Optat. cont. Parm.
Licet, and your Non licet, many souls stagger: and excuse their irresolution
by our want of peace. Indeed this is euentually one good effect of many
controuerted points; the way is cleansed for others, though not for themselves.
Thieves falling out, true men come by their goods. Two flints beaten together,
sparkles out fire: and by the wrestling of two poisons, the health is
preserved. So are some united to the truth, by these divisions of peace. But
others are more unsettled: they condemn all for the dissension of some: our
comfort is, God does not so. The divisions of a few, and that about the husk
of Religion, Ceremony; cannot redound to the condemnation of a whole Church.
In Gods judgment it shall not; we must care little, if in theirs. Do not we
know, that Satan by his good will, would allow us neither Truth nor Peace? but
if we must have one, will he not labor to detain the other? If he can keep
us from Truth, he cares not much to allow us peace. The wicked have security,
the devil lets them alone. What fowler sets his ginnes for tame birds, that
will come gently to his hand? But if we embrace the truth, then have at our
peace. Shall the Prince of darkness be quiet, when his Captives break loose
from him? The good are soonest tempted. Inuidia fertur in magnos. It was the
king of Syria his command to his 32. captains; 1. King. 22. 31.
Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel. It is
the Devils charge to his soldiers; fight against none, but the godly, that
fight against me. David was safe among his sheep, and Moses leading a private
life. No man lays snares for his own birds; nor the Devil for such as 2. Tim.
2. 26.
are taken captive by him at his will. But pax conscientiae is bellum Satanae:
and this just war is better then an unjust peace.

Let all this give condemnation to peace-haters, and commendation to
peace-louers. There are some quite gone, not diverse but adverse to us; with
these war, and no peace: for they have no peace with Christ. Sinews cut in
sunder can never be knitte, nor can there be Integralis vnitas in solutione
continui. They will be gone, let them go. I would we were as well rid of all
those, whose souls hate unity. The Christians of of the first age were nether
Albinians, nor Nigrians: Tertull.
the report of faction was scarce heard. Athanasius, on whose shoulder our
mother the Church leaned, in her sharpest persecution to take her rest;
rejoiced, that though the adversary hate was violent, the love of brethren was
sound. Peter was commanded to put up his sword, even when Christ was at his
elbow, to heal the greatest wound he could make: why do we smite and hurt,
that have not such means of cure? King Richard the holy warrior having taken
a Bishop in coate-armour, in the field; was requested by the Pope (calling him
his Son) to release him. The King sent not him, but his coat to the Pope;
and asked him; An haec esset Filij sui tunica? whether this was his sons
coat: alluding to the coat of Joseph, which his brethren brought to their
Father. The ashamed Pope answers; Nec ^ his Sons ^ undertakes, wit ^
conscience prepares, scrup^ ^, and Peace suffers. And now (...) ^hey (...),
(...) (...) vnum, but (...); not to (...) out (...) ^ake their malice on, but
to dissolve and undo the united strength of all. ^her the sce^r must stoop to
the miter, or no peace.

Between the roots of Judah and Leui, by Moses law, the separations and
distances were (...) ^de, that neither need to cross another walk, nor (...)
^clipse another dignity. The rod of Mose^ was once (...) serpent, to give
terror: (...) of (...) was preserved; not in campo (...), in a (...) of wa^e
and sedition; but Testimony tabernaculo; sprow^ng forth green leaves of Truth,
and sweet blossoms of Peace. Well let our enemies cry; Non Pacem petimus
Superi, date gentibus iram.
Our voice be for Peace. Nulla salus bello, Pacem te poscimus omnes*
Peace was that last and rich Jewel, which Christ departing to his Father,
leaft his Spouse for a legacy. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto
you. This Peace be with us for ever. Ioh. 14. 27.


Whereof.
This unity has a double reference. 1. to Faith. 2. to Knowledge. And the
Object to both these, is the Son of God.

Of the faith.
Faith is taken 2. ways: either passiuely, or actiuely Vel pro ^o Quo
creditur. Quod creditur. Either for that whereby a man believes, or for that
which a man believes. So it is used both for the instrument that apprehends,
and for the object that is apprehended.

If we take it for the former, we may say there is also an unity of faith; but
by distinction. Faith is one Ratione obiecti, non ratione subiecti: One in
respect of the Object on which it rests, not one ^n respect of the Subject in
which it resides. Every man has his own faith; every faith rests on
Christ. The just shall live by his own faith. Nulla fides pro te, nisi quae in
te. Every man must see with his own eyes, reach with his own hand, have Math.
25. 9.
oil ready in his own Lamp, that he may enter in with the Bridegroom. He
must labor in the vineyard himself, that would have the penny: he shall not
have another pay. It is a happy perfection of faith, when we shall all
believe in one Christ, after one manner. Not one with a Grecian faith, another
with a Roman, a third with an Arrian, a fourth with an Anabaptisticall; but
all meet in the unity of one holy Catholic faith.

But if we rather take it Pro obiecto quod creditur, for Christ in whom we have
believed, we shall all meet in the unity of those joys and comforts which we
have faithfully expected. Some believed before the law, some under the law,
others under the Gospel: all shall meet in the unity of faith: 1. Pet. 1. 9.
Receiving the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls. Whether some
believed in Christ to come, or others in Christ already come, or we in Christ
come and gone to glory: Venturus and venit, diuersa sunt verba, eadem fides; To
come, or come, are diverse words, but there is but one faith. Ephe. 4. 5.
One Lord, one Faith.

Now since faith must bring us to our Beloved, and by that we shall come to the
Son of God, how precious should it be unto us! Let the great worldlings
possess their preposterous wishes; Epicurus his pleasure, Alexander his
honor, Midas his gold. Be our delight, desire, prayer, O Lord ^ncrease our
faith: I believe, Lord help my unbelief. There is nothing more honorable,
more rich, more pleasant, then to be a true believer: for against this no evil
on earth, no devil in hell shall be ever able to prevail.

Of the knowledge.
That knowledge which we now have is shallow in all of us, and dissonant in
some of us. There is but one way to know God, that is by Jesus Christ: and but
one way to know Christ, and that is by the Gospel. Yet there are many that go
about to know him by other ways; they will know him by traditions, images,
revelations, miracles, deceivable fables. But the Saints shall meet in the
unity of the knowledge of the Son of God: there shall be union and perfection
in their knowledge at that day.

But it is objected, that Paul says; 1. Cor. 13. 8.
knowledge shall vanish away. The manner, not the matter of our present
knowledge shall vanish: we shall not know by schools, tutors, or arts in
heaven: so the manner of knowing cease. But the matter remains: for Ioh. 17.
3.
this is eternal life to know God. Now we know Christ in some manner and
measure here; but through a window or lattesse. Cant. 2. 9.
My beloved looks forth at the window, showing himself through the lattesse.
Thus the Apostle 1. Cor. 13. 12.
Now we see through a glass darkely, but then face to face. When a man sees a
map of Jerusalem, wherein is presented the Towers and Bulwarks, he presently
conceiues what manner of City it is: but imperfectly; as a man that only
reads the description of foreign Countries: but when he comes thither,
beholds all the streets, palaces, beauty, and glory, he esteems his former
knowledge poor, in respect of his present satisfaction. We are now pilgrims,
and know no more of our celestial Country, then we can see through the
spectacles of faith, in the glass of the Scriptures. In this map we read
Jerusalem above described to us: a city of gold, whose Reu. 21. 18.
walls are Jasper, and her foundations Crystal. We read, that this 1. Cor. 15.
54.
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality. That
there is blessedness in the fountain; joys in show beautiful, in sense
wonderful, in weight excessive, in dignity without comparison, and in
continuance without end. And that in Christ we are chosen before all worlds, to
be Burgesses of this incorporation.

But when we shall have white garments put on our backs, and palms in our
hands; and Reu. 3. 21.
shall sit with him in his throne, feasting at his table of glory: we shall
then say as that noble Queen to Solomon: 1. Kin. 10. 7.
It was a true report of thy glory, O king; that I heard before; but now lo I
see, one half was not told me. As worldlings about a purchase, enquire what
seat, what delight, what commodities are appertinent to it; except like that
fool in the Gospel, they will buy first, and see afterward. So we may
sweetly consult of our future happiness, without curiosity, without
presumption: like those that never yet were at home, now after much hearsay
traveling thitherwardes, we ask in the way; what peace, what delight, what
content will be found there: and how much the benefit of our standing house
transcends our progress!

There are three things bu^yed about Christ; Faith, Hope, and sight. By the two
former we now live without the latter: by the latter we shall then live without
the former. 2. Cor. 5. 7.
Now we live by faith, not by sight: then we shall live by sight, not by faith.
But for our faith, the world would tread us down: for 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
this is the victory that ouercomes the world, even our faith, But for our 1.
Cor. 15. 19.
hope, we were of all men most miserable: the worldlings were far happyer. When
these two have done their offices, sight comes in. 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
We are now the sons of God, it does not appear yet what we shall be: but
we know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him: for we shall see
him as he is. Here is the benefit of sight. These three are like 3. members of
the body, the hand, foot, eye. Faith, like the Hand, lays unremoved hold on
Christ, Hope, like the Foot, walks toward him in an holy expectation,
patiently enduring all wrongs, in hope of sweet issue. Sight, which belongs to
the Eye, shall fully apprehend him, when it is gloryfied. In this bright
knowledge we shall all meet.

Our present knowledge shall be excelled by our future, in 5. differences.

1. In quality: this is an abstracted knowledge of Christ absent, that a
plenary knowledge of Christ present. Ex abstractiua fit intuitiua notitia. The
light of a lamp vanishes, when the glorious sun appears. Melanct.
If our knowledge were mundus eruditionis, a world of learning, yet is it but
eruditio mundi, the learning of the world; of narrow bounds in regard of the
knowledge in heaven.

2. In quantity; even that we know now, shall be known then in a greater
measure. The orbs, elements, planets, plants; the herbs of the field, parts
of our own bodies we know now; but alas weakly in regard of that perfection
which this future life shall give us. Indeed the Christian, for his own saving
health, knows so much as is able to make him everlastingly blessed: for he
knows Christ his Savior, and that is eternal life. But then he shall know
him in a higher measure, and perfectly see those things, now vnconceaueable.
Paul 2. Cor. 12. 4.
heard unspeakable words in his rapture above, which below he confesses not
possible for man to utter.

3. In perfection or maturitie. Our knowledge here grows from degree: there
it shall be one and the same, receiving or requiring no augmentation. Psalm. 84.
7.
They go from strength to strength: how long? till they appear before God in
Sion.

4. In continuance. Earthly knowledge is momentany, all skill in tongs and arts
is like the authors, mortal, and shall come to an end. The most famous Artists
have often either met with a derogate name, or been buried in oblivion. The
study of Christ is only eternal, and shall not be abrogated, but perfected:
we shall know then, as we are known.

5. In unity; various, dissonant, and not seldom repugnant is humane
knowledge: indeed not worthy the name of knowledge; for it is Opinion. Man is
contrary to man, yea man to himself: this same vnum sentire 1. Pet. 3. 8.
to be of one mind, is difficult, if not impossible to be found. Though we
aim our knowledge at one mark, yet some shoot on the right hand, some on the
left; some short, and others shoot over; having a 1. Cor. 8. 1.
knowledge that puffs up. Whose learning has in it some poison, if it be let
go without the true correctiue of it. But at this expected day, we shall all
meet in an unity of knowledge.

Of the Son of God.
That eternal Son of God, who in the fullness of time became for us the
Son of man, shall then be more clearly known to us. We now believe his truth
of perfection, we shall then see his perfection of truth. We shall brightly
apprehend the inconceivable mystery of him: who is Filius Dei sine matre,
filius hominis sine patre: the Son of God without mother, the son of man
without father.

If any ask, whether our knowledge shall extend no further then to Christ our
Savior. There is no doubt, but as we know our elder brother set in his throne
above all the powers of heaven, so we shall also know the rest of our
fraternity. Love is a grace that never fades, and therefore shall have
knowledge to make way before it. We shall love the Saints, I may infer we
shall know them. Math. 17. 4.
Peter knew Moses and Elias on the Mount, whom yet before he never saw: why
then should we not know them in heaven! and if them, why not other of our
glorified friends! If nothing but that which is earthly, and savors of
corruption shall cease, and fall off like Eliah's mantle; then knowledge must
needs remain, being a divine grace, pure and everlasting as the soul. But
seek we to know the Son of God here to be our Savior; and without doubt
hereafter we shall know him to be our glorifier.

Whereunto.
To a perfect man. Before he speaks in the plural number of a multitude, We
shall All meet: noweby a sweet kind of Solaecisme he compacts it into the
singular; all into one. We shall All meet to a perfect man. Here lie three
notes, not to be balked.

1. This shows what the unity of the Saints shall be; one man. Here they are
sometimes said to have Act. 4. 32.
one heart, one soul; there they shall be one man. That not a carnal,
corruptible, sinful man, for he may dissent from himself, but a perfect man.
Not materially, for there shall be distinct bodies and souls still; as here,
but metaphorically in regard of the neuer-iarring harmony. Oh sweet music,
where the symphonie shall exceedingly delight us, without division, without
frets.

2. The whole Church is compared to a man: we have often read it compared to a
body, here to a man. As in other places to a 1. Cor. 12. 27 Ephe. 4. 16.
Body, cuius Cap^ est Christus; whose Head is Christ; so our Apostle here. ver.
16. speaks of our growing to the Head which is Christ. So in this place to a
Man, cuius anima est Christus, whose soul is Christ. Now the soul in the body
increases not augmentatiuely, but secundum vigorem, transfusing into the body
her vertuall powers and operations more strongly. Christ is ever the same. Heb.
13. Jesus Christ yesterday, Heb. 13. 8.
and to day, and the same for ever. In this soul there is no mutation; but the
Col. 2. 19.
body increases with the increase of God. For as Christ increases the
strength of his grace in us, so we grow to perfection.

3. Full perfection is only reserved for heaven, and not granted till we meet
in glory; then shall the Church be one perfect man. We may be now Aug. in Ioh.
80.
mundi, says Aug. clean, yet still mundandi, to be cleansed. Not so perfect,
but still glad of mercy. Our purity is not in facto, but in fieri; inchoate;
not finished though begun. All our righteousness consists in the not
imputation of our sins. Psalm. 32. 2.
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity. Summa perfectio
imperfectionis confessio. Our greatest cleanness is the free acknowledging our
vileness. The other immunitie shall be when there are no passions in men, no
lusts capable of sin: now it is well if we live without scandal: without
eruption, though not without corruption. Non sine culpa^ed sine querela. And so
the commendation of Luke 1. 6.
Zachary must be understood; which calls him righteous, walking in all the
commandments of the Lord, blameless. He lived blameless in the worlds eye,
not in the Lords. Psalm. 130. 3.
If thou should mark iniquity, O Lord, who shall stand? Especially when
his eye of justice only shall look upon it. Aug. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 13.
Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutiatur. Woe to
the most commendable life of man, if mercy be removed when it is examined.
It is enough to prove Zachary a sinner, in that he was a Priest. For it was
imposed on the Priest first Heb. 7. 27.
to offer for his own sins, and then the sins of the people: which had
been needless, if the Priest had not been guilty of sin, and liable to
condemnation.

The justification of David seems to rise higher Psalm. Psalm. 17. 3.
17. Thou have tried me, and shall find nothing. What! has God tried him, the
searcher of the hearts, that sees into all the inward cabbins, and hidden
concaues of the soul! and shall he find nothing! not great impieties, not
less infirmities? nothing! This phrase seems general, yet is not totally
exclusive; nothing against Saul, no treachery or injustice against the Lords
anointed. So it is by Euthymius, and must be restrictiuely considered.
Otherwise David had many sins: original, Psalm. 51. 5.
I was conceived in sin: actual and public, in slaying not a Philistine,
but an Israelite, an Israelite his subject, his honest and worthy subject; and
that by the sword of the uncircumcised; and yet more by a wile, sending for him
home, and making him drunk. And to ripen this blister, he adulterizeth with
his wife: he has had many wives, robbes his poor neighbor of his singular
comfort, only wife. These were apparent, unjustifiable impieties; which makes
him fall to a Psalm of mercy. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me:
heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.

These were known to the world; no doubt diverse others were known to his own
heart; and yet more, which neither the world nor his own heart knew: Psalm. 19.
5.
who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my secret faults.
Yet in the matter of Saul, thou can find nothing. As Bishop Latimer once
said in his Sermon before King Edw. 6. For sedition, me thinks for ought I
know, if I may so speak, I should not need Christ. David was no traitor, but
David was an adulterer. He was in many personal faults an offender: but as a
subject he was a good subject; as a King, an excellent Prince.

No less is the praise of Job; Job. 2. 3
a perfect and upright man; none like him in the earth. Which yet is not to be
taken for a positive, but comparatiue commendation. There was none like him in
that part of the earth: and he was perfect in regard of those vicious times.
Hear himself speak; Job. 9. 2.
How shall a man be just with God? and ver. 28. I know that thou will not hold
me innocent. Let then the Pelagian drink never so deep in this justifying cup
of their own righteousness; and let the Papist as deeply pledge him: yet
perfection is reserved for another world, when we shall meet to a perfect man.
Here we may have it partially, there gradually: here so much as belongs Ad
viam, to our way. Phil. 3. Let us, as many as are perfect, be thus minded:
there only Phil. 3. 15.
that is proper Ad patriam, to our country: ver. 12. not as though we were
already perfect; but following after, etc. Let us, 1. be humble in
acknowledging our own wants and sins; who cannot to God contending with us,
Job 9. 3.
answer one of a thousand. De quadrup. debito.
Nec millessimae, nec minimae parti, says Bern. 2. Labor to perfection, Phil.
3. 13.
in forgetting those things which are behind, and reading forth unto those
things which are before. 3. Comfort our endeavoring hearts with this sweet
encouragement; we shall one day meet to a perfect man.

To the measure of the stature
The word (...), before translated Age, is now better by our New, and according
to Beza, Stature. If any will here ground, that in heaven we shall live in that
measure of Christ's age and stature, wherein he dyed, I subscribe not, but am
silent. It is not safe wading without a bottom. Only thus much: there shall
be nothing wanting to make our glory perfect: and whether you conceive the 33
year of a man's age, to be the beauty and complete perfection, I dispute not.
This implies a spiritual stature, whereunto every Saint must grow. Whence
infer.

1. That we must grow up so fast as we can in this life; 2. Pet. 1. 5.
joining to faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, etc. We must increase our
talents, enlarge our graces, shoot up in talenesse, grow up to this stature.
For Gods family admits no dwarfes: stunted profession was never found. If the
sap of grace be in a plant, it will shoot out in boughs of good words, and
fruit of good works; always expected the winter of an afflicted conscience.
If a table and consumption take our graces, they had never good lungs, the true
breath of Gods Spirit in them.

2. God will so ripen our Christian endeavors, that though we come short on
earth, we shall have a full measure in heaven. We have a great measure of
comfort here, but withal a large proportion of distress: there we shall have
a full measure, heapen and shaken, and thrust together, and yet running over;
without the least bitterness to distaste it. This is a high and a happy
measure.

Regard not what measure of outward things thou have, so thou get this measure.
Trouble not thy self with many things, this one is sufficient, the better
part, the greater measure, never to be lost or lessned. Open both thine eyes of
Reason and Faith, and see first the little help that lies in great worldly
riches. Ier. 17. 11.
As the partrich sits on eggs and hatcheth them not: so he that gets
riches and not by right shall leave them in the (...) of his days, and at his
end shall be a f^e. A bird that steals young ones from other birds, and
tenderly nourishes them, is mocked for her motherly kindness when they are
fligge. Even now she had many running after her, by and by they give her the
slip, and are all gone: pleasures, delights, riches are hatched and brooded by
the wicked as their own. But when God, at whose command they are, calls them
away, they take them to their heels; like fugitives they are gone, and no
officer can bring them back. The rich man may shut up his wealth for a season;
but as a bird in a cage, if it spy a hole open, it is gone, and flies far
enough beyond recovery; towering like an Prou. 23. 5.
Eagle, even up toward heaven. were thy measure never so ample, as full as his
Barnes. Luke. 12. yet but a night, a piece of a night, and all is gone. Job.
^8. 13. 14.
The first borne of death shall devour his strength, says Bildad: and it
shall bring him to the King of terrors. what help is in weakness? never talk
of helping thee with fine flower, and the best grapes, and the richest
excrements of worms, silken garments: thou will one day say, this is no
succor. No: that is succor which will help thee in anguish of thy soul, and
distress of thy consience; calm the troubles of thy spirit, and heal the
wounds of thy broken heart, when the horror of death, and terrors, of sin,
sharpened with a keen edge of Gods Justice shall beseege thee: now let the
thing be praised that can help thee. No measure of earthly things can give
thee ease; but this measure of grace, that shall bring thee to the full measure
of glory. Grow thou as high in this world as Jonas gourd: a worm shall smite
thee, and thou shall wither. Grow up to this stature of Christ, so fast as thou
may, and so far as thou can: and what is here wanting to thy holy
endeavors, God shall make up with his happy mercies.

Of the fullnes of Christ. Adulti Christi.
It is not meant the full growth of Christ in the flesh: which was as other
children. Luke 2. The child grew, Luke 2. 40.
and waxed stronger. We read him a babe sucking, at 12. years old disputing,
at 30. preaching, and about 33. dying. His increasing was not habitualiter, sed
effectualiter. But here we must consider Christ as Head of his Body the Church;
and so said to have mensuram staturae adultae, the measure of full stature,
when his body is Perfected: now some predestined members of this Body are yet
unborn; which must concur to the perfection, and making up of this stature
of the fulness of Christ. Whence we have a sweet and comfortable observation
offered us.

Till the church be fully gathered together, there is Obseru.
in some sort a want to the perfection of Christ. But we must consider Christ
two ways; Personally, and mistically. Personal or abstractiuely in himself,
he is not only perfect, but perfection it self. Colos. 1. For it pleased the
Father, that in him should all fulness dwell. And. Colos. 1. 19. 2. 9.
chap. 2. In him dwells (not passes by) the fulness (not a good reasonable
measure; and this not only a sufficient fullnes, but) all the fulness (not
of any created nature, but) of the Godhead (and that not fantastically, but)
bodily. Mistically, or in relation to his Body the Church: 1. Cor. 12. 27.
now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And Christ's will
is, that Ioh. 17. 24.
where he is, his members may be there also. So that till the whole Body be
gathered to the Head, the head is in some sort not perfect. And in this sense
may that Cant. 3. be understood. Behold King Solomon with the Crown, wherewith
Cant. 3. 11.
his mother crowned him in the day of his espousalls. where the Church is said
to set a Crown on Christ's head; as if his full and perfect coronation were not
come till the day of his espousalls and marriage in heaven, when his whole
Church shall be crowned together with him. Time was that the other Ioh. 20. 6.
Disciple out ran Peter to the Sepulcher, and Peter out went that other
Disciple into the sepulcher: but at this day, 1. These. 4. 15
they that are alive shall not prevent them that sleep. For Heb. 11. 40.
God has provided better for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect. We shall all go together to glory.

What a treasure of joy and comfort is here opened us! Our Savior so loves
us, that he thinks not himself perfect without us. Psalm. 144. 3.
What is man, O Lord, or the son of man, that thou soreckonest of him? Thou
have Saints the spirits of just, blessed and obedient Angels, thy own
infinite self to delight thee; Quid opus vermiculo? What need have thou of a
worm? What am I, O Savior, that thou should not think thy self perfect
without me? Well may this sweeten all our poverty, misery, disgrace and
ignominy, that the world casts upon us. A great Gallant blusheth to see thee
take acquaintance of him, looks upon thee betwixt scorn and anger, thinks
himself disparaged by thy company: be content, the God of heaven and earth
thinks himself not perfect without thee. He that can break thy contemners to
pieces, respects thee. Thou art unworthy of the favor of Jesus Christ, if
thou can not content thy self with it, without the worlds.

What a terror shall this be to the wicked, to see those men crowned Kings with
Christ, to whom they disdained to give notice in the world. Dives looks with
pitiful eyes on glorified Lazarus, who once lay at his gates without the
releese of crummes. It shall be no small aggravation to the vngodly's torments,
to say of the Saint, Wisd. 5. 3. 5.
This was he whom we had some times in derision, and a proverb of reproach. We
fools accounted his life madness, and his end without honor. Now he is
numbered a mong the children of God, and his lot is among the Saints.

I conclude.
Every Saint shall enjoy this full measure of glory: there shall be no
scanting, no limitation. None shall complain of lack: there is the fountain,
drink thy fill; there is the heap, take as much as thou will. There shall be
in all an equality, though not of quantity, yet of proportion: which arises
not from the object, wherein is plenitude; but from the subject, which is not
alike capable. A vessel thrown into the sea can be but full; another is but
full, though it contain a greater measure. Every one shall possess this
fullness; and being full there is no want, therefore no envy. But let us take
no thought, who shall sit highest in this kingdom, with the sons of Zebedee:
it is enough that we shall be crowned kings. Trouble not thy self for order,
only strive for admission. We cannot desire to be more then blessed. Let us
get into the City of glory, and let God appoint us a room.

Here we see the great difference betwixt this life and the next. In this life
we grow up to our full Stature; and then we decrease till we decease; we
decline and die. In the other, we come at first to a perfect stature, and so
continue for ever. We are here subject to sorrows and sins; the first
grievous to us as we are men, the other as we are good men: lo we shall one
day be freed, be perfect. It is a sweet meditation that fell from a reverend
Divine; that many vegetable and brute creatures do exceed men in length of
days, and in happiness in their kind; as not wanting the thing they desire.
The Oak, the Raven, the Storke, the Stagge fill up many years, in regard of
whom man dies in the minority of childhood. This made the Philosophers call
Nature a Stepdame to man, to the rest a true mother. For she gives him least
time, that could make best use of his time; and least pleasure, that could best
apprehend it, and take comfort in it. But here divinity teaches and reaches
a large recompense from our God. Other creatures live long, and then perish to
nothing; man dies soon here, that hereafter he may live for ever. This
shortness is recompensed with eternity. Do thou blame Nature, O
Philosopher, for cutting thee so short that thou can not get knowledge! Open
thine eyes: perfect knowledge is not to be had here, though thy days were
double to Methushalems. Above it is. Bless God then rather for thy lives
shortness: for the sooner thou die, the sooner thou shall come to thy desired
knowledge. The best here is short of the least there. Let no man blame God for
making him too soon happy. Say rather with the Psalmist; My soul is a thirst
for the living God: O when shall I come to appear in the glorious presence of
the Lord? who would not forsake a prison for a palace, a tabernacle for a
City, a sea of dangers for a firm land of bliss; the life of men for the
life of Angels? In the bed of this joy let me repose your souls for this time;
meditating of that eternal glory, whereof you shall have a perfect and full
measure, thinking that the full coronation of your Savior carries for you; and
lifting up your eyes of sorrow from the valley of tears, to the mount Sion of
blessedness, whereon the Lamb of GOD stands to gather his Saints about him
to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of his own fullness. To which
place himself for his own merits and mercies sake in due time bring us.

Amen.
PRESVMPTION running into DESPAIR.
Revel. 6. 16. They said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us
from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb.
THis verse may be distinguished into Error. Terror.

The error of the reprobate, the terror of the Judge.

Their error is manifested in their Invocation: in which we may observe To
what; Mountains and rocks. For what To fall on them. To hide them.



Thus their amazed error and ignorance is expressed in their Prayer. For the
terror, the Judge is described by his Omniscience; from the face of him that
sits on the Throne. Omnipotence; from the wrath of the Lamb.



Every circumstance serves to aggrauate their folly, and desperate fear. 1.
They fear God, but too late. 2. They open their lips to confess the
invincible power of Christ: before they were either dumb in silence, or
blasphemous in contumelies. 3. They pray to the Mountains and rocks, which
hear not. 4. To fall on them, which they dare not. 5. To hide them, which they
cannot. 6. They beg to be concealed from him that is all eye; from the face
of him that sittes in the Throne. 7. To be protected from him that is all
power; from the wrath of the Lamb.

Before we come to their Error, and matter of their invocation, let us examine
two things.

What they were. did.

The Persons.
Thus amated with error, and amazed with terror, are described in the
precedent verse. The Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men,
and the chief captains, and the mighty men, the bond, and the free, hid
themselves in the dens and rocks of the mountains. The greatness of man,
when it comes to encounter with Obser.
God, is weakness and vanity. Is the reprobate a king? the crown on his head
is not thunder-proofe: lift he his scepter never so high, there is a scepter of
justice shall smite it down.

Is he Great in his country, that (as they write of the Sea about the castle
of Mina) the current goes ever with the wind of his will: be he never so high,
there is one higher then he, and the highest of all regards it: and Eccle. 8.
5.
will subject it.

Is he Rich? were he the eldest son of Mammon, and sole heir to all the
usurers in the world, can his gold save him? Is vengeance afraid to strike his
vessel, because his sails be of silk, and it is ballaced with refined aure?
Shall he buy out his damnation with coin? No; the Samuel of heaven will never
take bribes.

Is he a Chief Captain? Be his looks never so stern, his speech never so
imperious, impetuous; he may command here, and go without. Were he General of
Xerxes army, yet he shall find the words of the Psalm truth: Man is not saved
by the multitude of an Heast.

Is he mighty? were he as Alexander thought himself, till he saw his own
blood, the Son of Jupiter Hammon; yet woe to man when he shall wrestle with
his maker. Proud worm, he may dare to lift up his head, but shall quickly be
trodden into slime. When the Lord of hoastes is angry, whose wrath shakes the
earth, and burns to the bottom of hell; who shall proudly without confusion
look him in the face? Silly Giant of men, that thou should dare to grapple,
to parle, yea so much as to look at God! Lo greatness!

Time was, when if a friend in the Court shall say to thee, as Elisha to the
Shunamite. What is to be done for 2. King. 4. 13.
thee? Would thou be spoken for to the King, or to the Captain of the host;
It would have seemed as high a gratifying, and ratifying of his love to thee;
as thou could have desired, or he expressed. What favor will it be at this
day, to be spoken for to all the Kings of the earth, great men, rich men,
mighty Captains? Alas they have need to be spoken for themselves. The greatest
Potentate, if reprobate, has now his honor laid in the dust; and from a
public Throne, he creepes into a hole. As ambitious Herod received his pride
and glory (with derogation to God; Vox Dei.) in a Theater: so now his shame and
confusion is in the sight of the whole world; of good and bad Angels, of good
and bad men. Zenacherib in his ruff could once say; Esa. 37. 13.
Where is the King of Hamath, and the King of Arphad; the King of the City of
Sepharvaim, Zena, and Iuah? But now where is the King of Ash^r? Thus Job. 12.
19. 21.
Godleadeth Princes away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty. For their
wickedness he powers contempt upon Princes. Then shall be manifest the
irresistable power, and unblameable justice of God: Esa. 40. 22. 23.
Who sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as
grasshoppers: stretching out the heavens as a curtain, and spreading them as a
tent to dwell in. He brings the Princes to nothing, and makes the Judges of
the earth as vanity.

What privilege then does these inferior authorities bring with them? That the
bondsman should thus strive to be free: the freeman to be mighty: the mighty
to be a chief Captain: the chief Captain to be rich: the rich to be great:
the great to be Kings: till in their opinion nil restat quod praestat, nothing
remains to be aspired to. Whereas to these men, Omnia in praesenti parua, in
fine nulla, post finem mala: all is for the present little: for Vt Luna, sic
sublunaria: as the moon it felfe, so all things under it are subject to
ecclipses and changes. In the end they are nothing; death when the game is
done, shuffling King and Pawn into one bag. After the end found evil
things; for and perduntur and perdunt: they are both lost themselves, and make
lost their owners.

These so popular wonders, the terror of slaves, and mirror of fools, on whom
the eye of the world was fixed with admiration; are glad to hide themselves in
holes. where are you, ye great men; that were so ambitions of fame, and made
humane praise stand in competition with conscience; as if it were the better
mistres and worthy of more servants? alas, glad to be shrouded in holes. your
Greatness now wishes it self so little, that it might not be seen. You
insatiate covetous, that never ceased joining house to house, land to land; and
possessing whole countries, yet whined for lack of elbow-roome: lo, you shall
at this day be glad of a hole; a dark hollow cave in a rock for your parlour:
or more glad if you might be dissolved into nothing.

They said.
We have described the Persons, What they were: let us see what they did. They
said: They open their lips to confess the invincible and inevitable power of
Christ. whence derive we two observations.

1. The sense of present misery takes away Atheism. Before their mouths were
either shut by silence, or opened by blasphemies; possessed either with a dumb
or a roaring devil. God was not in all their thoughts: or Psalm. 10. 4.
if in their thoughts, not in their lips: or if in their lips, but to his
dishonor; not named but in their oaths. Now lo, they speak, and make a
desperate acknowledgment of that power, they erst derided. The day of judgment,
when it comes, shall find no Atheist. What those degenerate creatures would not
believe, they shall see: they would not acknowledge their maker, they shall
find their Judge: and cry to the mountains, Fall one us, etc.

Consider this, Psalm. 50. 22.
ye that forget God, lest you be torn in pieces when there is none to deliver
you. You may forget him during your short pleasure, you shall remember him for
ever in torture. Proceed to Psalm. 139. 20
speak of him wickedly, and like enemies to take his Name in vain; you shall
one day fall low before his footestoole, not with a voluntary but enforced
reverence. You that have denied God on earth, the first voice that shall come
from your lips, shall be a hopeless acknowledgment of his majesty.

2. The saying that comes from them is desperate: whence note, that in Gods
just punishment Desperation is the reward of Presumption. They that erst feared
two Presumption running into Despair.
little shall now fear too much. Before they thought not of Gods Justice, now
they shall not conceive his Mercy. Consciences, that are without remorse, are
not without horror. It is the kindness which presumptuous sin does the heart
to make it at last despair of forgiveness. They say.

Behold, God accuses not, they accuse themselves. God loves to have a sinner
accuse himself: and therefore sets his deputy in the breast of man: which
though it be a neuter when the act is doing, is an adversary afterward. The
conscience is like the poise of a clock: the poise being down, all motion
cease, the wheels stir not: wound up, all is set on going. Whiles
conscience is down, there is no noise or moving in the heart; all is quiet:
but when it is wound up by the justice of God, it sets all the wheels on
working: tongue to confess, eyes to weep, hands to wring, breast to be beaten,
heart to ache, voice to cry; and that, where mercy steps not in, a fatal cry;
to the hills, Fall on us, and hide us.

Sin, and judgment for sin, make the most cruel men cowardly. Tyrants
whose frowns have been death; oppressors that have made their poor Tenants
quake at their looks; now tremble themselves: and would change firmnes with an
aspine leaf. They that care not for the act of sin, shall care for the
punishment. Tumidi faciendo, timidi patiendo. Nero that could not be tired in
cutting throtes, is soon weary of his own torment. They that have made others
weep, shall desperately howl themselves. Cain, that durst kill the fourth
part of the world at a blow, even his own brother; dares afterward not look
a man in the face, lest he Genesis 4. 14.
should be slain. Who durst be more impudently bold with God then Judas, when
he betrayed his only Son to murderers? yet after the treason who more
cowardly then Judas? he becomes his own hangman. The curse that follows sin
makes Presumption it self to shudder. But what madness is it, not to complain
till too late. If our foresight were but half as sharp as our sense, we
should not dare to sin. The issue of wickedness would appear a thousand times
more horrible, then the act is pleasant.

Let this teach us now to think of the Justice of God as well as his mercy,
that herafter we may think of his mercy as well as his Justice. The mercy of
God is abused to encourage lewdnes: and wretched men by Christ's merits are
emboldned to commit that, for which he dyed: but so men may run with mercy
in their mouths to hell. They that in life will give no obedience to the law,
shall in death have no benefit by by the Gospel. When they gave themselves
over to lying swaring, coveting etc. they were wont to cry, Mercy, mercy: now
lo, they feel what those sins are, and cry nothing but Justice, Justice;
they cannot think on mercy. They that have abused mercy, must be quitted
with vengance. The good now sing; With thee, O Lord, is mercy; therefore thou
shall be feared. The reprobates sing at last, with thee O Lord, is judgment;
with thee is storm and tempest, indignation and wrath, confusion and vengence,
and therefore art thou feared.

These necessary occurrences, thus considered; let us pass to their
Invocation, wherein is exemplified their Error. Here we must observe To what,
For what, they call.

To what.
They are Mountains and rocks; unreasonable, yea insensible creatures: whence
we may deduce two inferences; a negative, and an affirmative.

1. Negatiuely; it is clear, that they have no acquaintance with God,
therefore know not how to direct their prayers unto him. If their trust had
been in God, they needed not to fly to the M^aines. So David sweetly. Psalm.
11. Ia the Lord put I my trust: how Pal. 11. 1.
then say you to my soul, Fly as a bird to your mountain? It is Gods charge.
Psalm. 50. 15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble: and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. But, Romans 10. How shall they call on him, in whom they have not
Romans 10. 14.
believed? Or believe in him they have not known? and how should they know him
but by his word? Alas those mutual passages, and intercourse of means they
have ever barred themselves. They would neither suffer God to trouble them by
his word, nor would they offer to trouble him by their prayers. Psalm. 14. 4.
They will not call upon him, nor will they hear him calling upon them.

Therefore as those that never were in the company of God, they know not how
to address themselves to him; but rather to rocks and mountains. As
extremity discerns friends; Vere amat, qui miserum amat: so it distinguishes
a man in himself. A sudden disturbance gives a great try all of a Christians
disposition. For as in a natural man at such an affrightment, all the blood
runs to the heart, to guard the part that is principal: so in a good man at
such an instance, all the powers and faculties run to the soul, to save that
which is principal. The blood and spirits strive to save the life of the
body: faith and hope to save the life of the soul. So that at the sudden
assault of some danger, a man shall best judge of his own heart. It may be
at other times a dissembler; for man's heart is false, who can know it? yet at
such time it will manifest it self, and cannot deceive.

If God has been our familiar friend, and accustomed helper; danger does not
sooner salute us, then we salute him by our prayers. The first thought of our
hearts is Jesus Christ: the first voice of our lips is Peter's on the sea in
such an extremity; Math. 14. 30.
Lord save me: our faith is reposed on his wonted mercy and protection; We
know whom we have believed. Daniell calls on GOD, ere he falls to the Lions;
this stoppes their mouths.

The wicked in such misery, are either heavy and heartlesse, as Nabal; whose
1. Sa. 25. 37.
heart dyed within him, and he became as a stone. Or desperate as Julian,
throwing his blood up into the air, with a blasphemous confession. Or sottish,
as these here; running to the mountains, unprofitable, impossible helps. When
the blow of vengeance strikes the covetous, he runs to his counting house; if
his bags can give him no succor, he is distracted. If any broken reed be
their confidence, in these ouerwhelming woes, they catch drowning hold of that;
so they and their hopes perish together. There are some whose tongues are so
poisoned with blasphemy, that in an unexpected accident, the very first breath
of their lips is a curse, or an oath. As if they would swear away destruction,
which every ungodly speech draws on nearer. If these men had been
acquainted with God in fair weather, they would not forget him in a storm.
But they that will have no familiarity with God in peace, shall have him to
seek in extremity.

When therefore some sudden peril has threatened thee with terror, note
seriously how thou art affected. Though the danger came unlooked for, let it
not pass unthought of: but as thou blessest God for delivery, so examine the
good or ill disposednesse of thine own heart. If thou find thy self
courageous and heavenly minded, on thy confidence in God; take at once
assurance of thy faith and Gods mercy. He that now stood by thee, will never
leave thee. If otherwise, lament thy sins which darken thy souls way to the
mercie-seate; and beseech Jesus Christ to store thy heart with better comforts.
If thy treasure be in heaven, and thy soul has been used to travel often
thither; when danger comes, it knows the way so well, that it cannot miss it.

2. Affirmatively this presents a soul amazed with fear and folly. They call
to the Mountains, that can neither hear nor answer. When the world was
destroyed with water, men climbed up to the tops of the Mountains: when it
shall be dissolved with fire, they will desire the holes of the rocks, and to
lie under the hills. The mountains are but swellings of the earth, and the
rocks are surd things; that have no ears: can they hear? or if they hear,
can they answer? or if they answer, can they save? when the graves must
vomit up their dead, shall the rocks conceal the living? Those five Kings
could not be hid in the cave of Josh. 10. 17.
Makkedah from Joshua; and shall any cave hide from Jesus?

Whiles guilt and fear consult of refuge, how vain shifts they imagine! Adam
would hide his disobedience in the bushes: Saul his rebellion in the crowd of
the people. So the hood-winked fool seeing no body, thinks no body sees him.
Helpless euasions! when 1. Kin. 1. 50.
Adoniah heard the trumpets sounding at Salomons coronation, he quaked and fled
to the horns of the Altar. When the ungodly shall hear the Archangels Trumpe
proclaiming the coronation of Christ, they have no Sanctuary, (they never
loved it in all their lives) but fly to the rocks and mountains.

The grave is a dark and privative place: yet as a prisoner that comes out of
a sordid and stinking dungeon, into the open air for his trial in a desperate
cause, had rather keep the prison still. So these reprobates newly raised from
the earth, cry to it to receive them again; glad to remain (though not on the
face of it with pleasure) in the bowels of it with rottenesse and solitude;
rather then in the open light to come before the judgment seat of Christ. The
grave is a drowne-bed to hell. They suddenly start out of their sleep, and
meet with ghastly amasednesse at the mouth of their sepulchers: beholding on the
one side sins accusing, on another side hellish fiends vexing; an anguish'd
conscience burning within, heaven and earth without; above them the countenance
of an angry Judge, below them a lake of unquenchable fire; round about howling
and bitter lamentations: no marvel then if at the worlds end they be at their
wits end; and cry to the mountains, Fall on us.

Let all this declare to men the vanity of their worldly hopes. God is the
Preserver of men, not hills and rocks. The rich man is brought in upon a
Praemunire, can his gold acquit him in this Star Chamber? The Epicure thinks
to drown sorrow in lusty wines: the oppressor mistrusts not the power of his
own hand: the proud refugeth his troubled heart in his trunkes: the lustful
in his punkes: what is this but running to rocks and mountains? Thus madly
do men commit two errors. Ier. 2. They forsake the creator which would never
forsake them; and adhere to the creatures, which can Ier. 2. 13.
never help them. O Lord; the hope of Israel; all that forsake thee shall be
ashamed; and all that dep^t from thee shall Ier. 17. 13.
be written in the earth. Now at this day perhaps they would seek to the
Lord: but they are answered; Go^ to the gods whom ye have served. Lo then of
these gods they shall be weary; as in the 2. of Esaias. where these Esa. 2. 20.
very words of my Text are deliuerd. ver. 19. They shall go into the holes of
the rocks, etc. it is immediately added; In that day a man shall cast his Idols
of silver, and his Idols of gold, which he made for himself to worship, (...)
the moules and to the battes. Even the spiritual Idolater, the Covetous, shall
throw his Images, golden or silver shrines for the Diana of his avarice; his
damned coin to combustion, with a vae, Woe unto it, it has lost my soul. As
the sick stomach lothes the meat, whereof it surfetted.

Well, let us leave invocation to these Rocks, worldly refuges: and remember
that there is one to be called on, who is only able to defend us: a
spiritual, holy and happy Rock, Jesus Christ. David often calls God his Psalm.
18. 2. and 28. 1.
Rock and his refuge. A rock that bears up the pillars of the world. Deuteronomy.
32. 31.
Their Rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges. He
that builds his house of assurance on this Math. 7. 24.
rock, shall stand immovable to wind or weather: he needs not the shelter of
mountains; for he shall stand like Psalm. 125. 1.
Mount Sion, that a hides fast for ever. They that despise him, shall find him
a Rock also: Math. 21. 44
if they fall on it they shall be broken: if it fall on them, it will grind
them to powder. He is a Stone, the Stone, the Psalm. 118. 22
head-stone of the corner; cut out of the Quarrey of heaven Dan. 2. 45.
without hands. Of whom we are made 1. Pet. 2. 5.
living stones. He is strong without all things: all things weak without him:
trust in him, and you shall have no need to fly to rocks and mountains.

For What
The benefit that they would have the Rocks and the Mountains do them, is to
Fall on them, and hide them. Whence we derive three observations. 1. Despair
is ever wishing for death: often impatiently snatching at it in this world; but
when the last day comes, so greedily longing for it; that to be sure of it,
they desire the mountains to dispatch them. Death by the wicked is now most
feared; death at the last shall be the thing most wished: They shall desire
death, and shall not find it. They that sit in the warm nest of riches,
hatching up their brood of lusts, quake at the hearing of death. There are some
fear to die, others not so much to die as to be dead. The former are cowardly,
the other unbelieving souls. Some fear both, to whom nothing in life then
life is more desirable. But when th^s last extremity comes, m^ricupiunt, they
desire to die. And that death, like a merciles executioner, might not have too
many strokes at their lives, they beg help of the Mountains: that they
might be thoroughly dispatched at once, without need of a second blow. Cain at
his arraignement for his brother would needs live: God grants it; as if it were
too much favor for him to die. But he yields it for a curse; as if he heard
his prayers in anger. He lives, but banished from God, carrying his hell in his
bosom, and the brand of vengeance in his forehead. God reiects him, the earth
repines at him, and men abhor him. Lo now Cain would die: himself now
wishes the death he feared, and no man dares pleasure him with a murder. As
Nero in the like case; Nec amic^m, nec mimicum h^beo; I have neither friend nor
enemy: or as Sau^ found in his Armor-bearer, not 1. Sam. 31. 4.
a will to kill him, though he had a will to be killed by him. Death these
reprobates feared, and only death is now desired. They cry to the mountains;
Fall on us. 2 Observe, that rocks and mountains are far lighter then sin.
Zachary compares it to a Talent of lead: Zach. 5. Esa. 21.
Esaias calls it a Burden. Such a weight bore our Savior, that he groned under
it. I am pressed under you, as a cart Amo. 2. 13.
is pressed that is full of sheaues. The wicked that like Babel-builders think
to aspi^e to heaven by multiplying of earth, would be glad if ^umulitumuli;
their bodies might be buried under their heaps of wealth, where their souls
had been buried long before. But what is a load of earth, a mountain huger
then Aetna, under which Jupiter was said subter fulminare Gigantes; what is the
whole massy body of the earth to the weight of sin?

Think of it ye Theomachor, that strive in your rebellions imponere Pelio^
Ossae: ye rapacious covetous, that load your selves with thick clay: you lay
heavy burdens on the poor, heavier on your own consciences. Sin Hab. 2.
may seem light for a season; as a pack made up, but not assayed with one of
your fingers: when Satan shall lay it on you, it will break your backs. You
bear it now like cork and feathers: at that day you shall judge it heavier
then rocks and mountains.

Now in contempt of law and Gospel, honesty, and conscience, earth and
heaven; they call to pride, ambition, blasphemy, ebrietie, luxury,
oppression, Fall on us and cover us; wearing pride as a chain, and covering
themselves with cruelty as with a garment. Si^ lies at the door, Psalm. 73. 6.
and they have no sense to take it up. The devil puts his shoulders under the
weight, and thus supported they feel it not. But when Gods justice shall
reprove them, and set their sins in order before their (...); yea impose
Psalm. 50. 21.
them on their weak and yielding consciences; how different will their cry
be* (...) f^ll (...), ^ockes cover us. The swearer saying to these heavy
creatures, you are lighter then my oaths* the ^uetous, you are not so
ponderous as my oppressions, the adulterer, the whole earth is a gentle
pressure ^o the burden of my lusts.

Custom in sin obstupefies a ^sense: and still like that Roman Milo, his
strength e^creasing with his burden: he that first carried sin a wanton
Calfe, can at last bear it a goaring Ox* Menlocke up their iniquities, as the
usurer his money, in a Chest; where the light of reproof may not find them
out. They pack all their iniquities upon H^, that will bear them for none but
His. Or reserve them to an hours repentance; setting them a day of cancelling,
but they break it: as if their last breath could dispell and scatter them all
into air. But alas, sins then are found heauiest of all: and here like
malefactors pressing to death, they cry out for more weight, the accession of
rocks and mountains to dispatch them* Loath they are to come before the
Judge, therefore would be pressed to death by these ponderous and massy
creatures.

The mountains have not been more barren, then they of goodness: the rocks
not so hard as their hearts. The cross of Christ has been held too heavy;
repentance too troublesome a guest for their houses: faith and obedience have
been cast off as poor friends: all godlynes too weighty; now rocks and hills
are light. Christ's yoke was not for their shoulders, Satan's must: His law might
not be borne it was so heavy; his wrath must be borne, and that is heauyer. Oh
then thrice blessed they! whose sins God binds up in a bundle, and sinkes
them in the whirlepoole of forgetfulness; that they may never be imposed; for
they are too Genesis 4. 13.
heavy to be borne.

3. Observe that before these wicked were Lords of nations and Countries; (for
they are said to be Princes, Captains, Conquerors; rich men) now they would be
glad of one to hide them. Of all their dominions they beg but the barrenest
parcel, a rock or mountain: and that to do them a poor office, to conceal
them. How much does man's avarice and ambition covet here; how little contents
him hereafter! In death the wickedest Potentate must be content with a grave:
after death he would be content with a grave still; yea glad, if in the bottom
of a mountain he might be hidden.

Hear this ye covetous, that join house to house, and land to land; by
disioyning the societies of men: as if you would leave the whole earth to your
babes. Excutit Sen.
natura redeuntem, sicut intrantem. Nature shall as strictly examine your going
out, as it did your coming in. Nonne telluris tres tantum cubiti te expectant?
do Basil.
not only three cubits of ground allotte themselves to receive you? Only a
grave remaynes; and all you that boast of your great lands, shall at that day
say, haec terr^ mea, and terra tua: this is all my land, this is all thy land:
even so much room as thy dusts will take up; and all the remainder of mighty
Hercules, will scarce fill a little pitcher. A little quantity of ground has
nature proportioned thee, distst thou possess as much as ever the Tempter
showed Christ. When certain Philosophers intentiuely beheld the Tomb of
Alexander; says one: Heri fecit ex auro thesaurum; body aurum ex Alphons.
eo facit thesaurum. Yesterday he treasured up gold, to day gold treasures up
him. Another; Yesterday the world did not content him; to day ten cubits
contain him. Socrates carried Alcibiades bragging of his lands to a map of
the world, and bad him demonstrate them: Alcibiades could not find them: for
alas, Athens it self was but a small and scarce discernable point. A wiser man
spoke otherwise of his lands. O Ager, quam multorum fuisti and eris! nunc meus,
and postea mescio cuius. O Land, how many men's have thou been and shall be!
now mine, and herafter I know not whose. So little ground contents us when we
are dead.

But when the wicked shall rise again, would it not serve them still with all
their hearts? Had they not rather lie in rottenness then combustion? Were not
a cold grave more welcome, then a hot furnace? Yes; rather had they be dead
without sense, then alive in torment. Now they beg not a city, though a
little one as Zoar: not a house, though poor and bleake as Codrus his: not an
open air, though sharp and irksome; scorched with the Indian Sun, or
frossen with the Russian cold: there is no hope of these favors. Give them but
a mountain to fall on them, and a rock to hide them, and they are highly
pleased. Here is a strange alteration for the wicked; When they shall go from
a glorious mansion to a loathsome dungeon: from the table of surfeit to the
table of vengeance: from fawning obseruants to afflicting spirits: from a bed
of down to a bed of fire: from soft linen and silken couerings, to wish a
rock for their pillow, and a mountain for their couerlet. Nay, and yet they
that commanded so far on earth, cannot command this piece of earth, to do
them such a kindness. They could in the days of their pride speak
imperiously enough; this land is mine, this town is mine: as Naball said,
Shall I take my meat and my drink etc. but now they feel, it was none of
theirs; not one hole must shelter them, not one hillocke do them service.

Nothing helps when God will smite: mountains and rocks are no defense when
God pursues. Do thou think to reign because thou cloathest thy self in
Cedar? What, is Cedar against thunder? GOD has a Ier. 22. 15.
hand that can strike through Forts, Rocks, and Bulwarks. The seuenfold walls
of Babylon cannot defend the Tyrant within them. The heavens melt at the
presence of the Lord: if he touch the mountains, they smoke for it. The
offspring of the revived world offer to build a Tower, whose top might reach
to Heaven. What security could be in it? Are not things nearer to heaven more
subject to the violences of Heaven; lightning, thunder, and those higher
inflammations? Feriunt summos fulgura montes. In se magna ruunt, summisque
negatum est stare diu. God soon made it a monument of their folly and his
power. He gives confusion of their voices and their work at once. When God
reigned from heaven that greatest shower, that ever the earth did or shall
sustain, you know their shifts. They think to ouer-climbe the judgment; and
being got up to the highest mountains, look down with some hope on the
swimming valleys. When the water began to ascend up to their refuged hills, and
the place of their hope became an Island, lo now they hitch up higher to the
tops of the tallest trees; till at last the waters overtake them half dead
with hunger and horror. The mountains could not save them in that day of
water, nor shall the mountains in this day of fire. It is not then the defense
of forts or ports, the secrecy of caves or graves, the bottome-burroughes of
hills, or vaultie dens of rocks; not a league with all the elements of the
world, beasts of the earth, stones of the street, that can secure them.

Be hidden they cannot, what should they then wish but death: they that once
trembled to die, do now more quake to live: they would be glad of a
riddance, and kiss the instrument of their annihilation. They would prise and
embrace it as the best happynes that ever saluted them, if like beasts they
might perish to nothing. Here they envy the storke, stagge, raven, oak for
long life, and chide nature for their own shortness. But at this day they
would change with any flower, though the continuance thereof were not so much
as Ionah's Gourds: and think not to be, was to be happy. The pangs of the
first death, are pleasures, in respect of the second.

But what hope is there of their security or refuge in mountains; when ver.
14. The very heaven shall depart So Esa. 34. 4.
a s^rowle that is rolled up together, and every mountain and Island shall be
moved out of their places. Heaven is expansum tanquam linteum, and diducta
la^ina; but shall then be folded up like a garment; whose beauty is not Hebr.
1. 12.
seen: or rolled together like a volume, whose large contents are as it were
abridged: not that the matter of the world shall be quite abolished. For as we
say now of grace; Adolet non abolet naturam gratia: so we may say of glory:
Perficit non perdit mundum gloria. Corruption shall be taken away, not all the
matter that was corrupted. But if all things be thus narrowly searched, how
shall the ungodly hope to lie hidden?

We have now considered the horror of the Reprobates; let us look to the
Judge, from whom they desire to be hidden. From the presence of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb. In whom we find an
omniscience, and an omnipotence. which circumstances the time allows me but to
mention. First for his all knowing Wisdom.

From the face.
It was ever the fashion of guiltines, to fly from the presence of God. Adam
had no sooner sinned, but he thrusts his head in a bush. Sins inevitable effect
is Shame. Though impudence bear it our for a time. Ier. 6. They were not
ashamed when they had committed abomination: yet they shall one day bear the
reproach of Ier. 6. 15. Chap. 31. 19.
their sins, and be ashamed, yea even confounded. Shame must come; either
first to repentance. Romans 6. what Romans 6. 21.
fruit had you then in those things, whereof you are now ashamed: or at last in
vengeance; let them be ashamed that transgress Psalm. 25. 3.
without a cause. Let this teach us how to judge rightly of sin, that drives
us from the face of God.

But does not the glory of the Lord fill all the earth? Whither then shall they
go from his face: whither fly from Psalm. 139. 7.
his presence? we shall find the Prophet concluding in that Psalm; that there
is neither heaven, nor hell, nor uttermost part of the sea; nor day nor night,
light nor darkness, that can hide us from his face. Our sitting, lying down,
rising up, the words of our tongues, ways of our feet, thoughts of our heart,
our reins, bones and mothers wombes, wherein we lay in our first informitie,
are well known to him. Let us not flatter our selves, as if we would pluck
out the eye of knowledge; God hides his face, he will never see Psalm. 10. 11.
us. For there is neither couch in chamber, nor vault in the ground; neither
bottomes of mountains, nor holes of rocks; neither secret friend, nor more
secret conscience; neither heaven nor hell that can conceal us.

Of him that sits.
Christ now sittes in glory. Whiles he was on earth how little rested he! He
dearly earned that voice, before he heard it; Sit thou at my right hand: now
behold he sittes. Good rest is the reward of good labor: the week of our
days spent, we shall have an eternal Sabbath; enter into Gods rest; Apoc. 14.
rest from our labors. Have thou labored, thou shall have ease: have Heb. 3.
11. Reu. 14. 13.
thou traveled in the ways of grace, thou shall sit on the seat of glory.

On the throne.
Christ at this day shall appear in his true Majesty: on earth he would not
be crowned; the reason of his refusal was; my Kingdom is not of this world;
now he sittes in his Throne. He has a Kingdom here, but it is secret in the
conscience: then it shall be conspicuous; sitting in his Throne. His majesty
has been despised; but now Bring those mine enemies that would not Luke 19.
27.
have me reign over them, and slay them before me.

Thus differs Christ's first coming and his second. Then in humility, now in
glory: then with poor shepherds, now with mighty Angels; then the contempt
of nations, now the terror of the world: then crowned with thorns, now with
majesty: then judged by one man, now judging all men: then in a cratch, now in
a Throne. You see his All-knowledge; now for his Almightines.

From the wrath.
The wrath of Christ is his Justice: Attribuitur ira Deo per effectum. As man
offended seeks revenge: so when God executes judgment, it is called his wrath.
But passion in us, perfection in him. He has long been provoked; give him now
leave to stricke. You that made so light to trample his blood under your
sensual feet, shall now find what his wrath is. Let us now think of this
wrath, that we may escape it. The commination Chrise.
of hell does not less commend Gods providence, then the promise of heaven.
Nisi in^ntata esset gehenna, o^es in gehennam C^beremur. Now or never is this
wrath to be escaped: therefore, Kiss the Son least he be angry, and so ye
perish from the way; if his wrath be kindled, Psalm. 2. 12.
yea but a little, Blessed are all they that put their trustin him.

Of the Lamb.
Christ was called a Lamb in his passion; so here in his coming to judgment;
not that he should suffer any more; but to show that the same Lamb that was
slain shall give sentence on his murderers. The Father judges no man, but
has committed all judgment unto the Ioh. 5. 22. 27. So act. 17. 31. and Reu.
1. 7.
Son. And has given him authority to execute judgment, because he is the
son of man. It shall aggrauat their vexation, that the Lamb who offered his
blood for their redemption, shall now censure them for despising. He that would
have been their mediator to pray for them, and their advocate to plead for
them, must now be their Judge to sentence them. The Lamb that saves the
sheep on the right hand, shall cast off the goats on the left. The Lamb they
have contemned, by this Lamb they shall be condemned. Woeful men, whom the
wrath of the Lamb lights on: for he shall give them an Ite maledicti. What
shall then become of them, but to knock at the gates of heaven whiles those
gates are standing, and cry for ever to God but to no purpose!

I have no will to end with a terror; yet no time to sweeten your thoughts
with those comforts which faith might suck from this last word the Lamb. I
say no more: the godly shall find him a Lamb indeed; as willing now to save
them, as before to suffer for them. He has purchased, promised, and prepared a
kingdom: and they shall Reign mith him that sittes on the Throne, and with
the Lamb for evermore. To whom be eternal glory.

Amen.
MAJESTY IN MISERY OR The power of Christ even dying.
MATH. 27. 51. And behold, the veil of the Temple was rent in twain, from the
top to the bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent: and the
graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept, arose.
IN the lowest depth of Christ's humiliation, GOD never left him without some
evident and eminent testimony of his divine power. He hangs here on the cross
dying, yea dead; his enemies insulting over him, whereis now his God? If he be
able to save us, let him save himself. He bears not only the wrath of God,
but even the reproach of men. Yet even now shall his Divinity appear, and
break like a glorious Sun through these clouds of misery: he rents the
veil, shakes the earth, breaks the stones, raises the dead.

These two verses stand gloriously adorned with four miracles.

1. The veil of the Temple was rent in twain. You will say perhaps, the
substance of it was not so strong, but an easy force might rend it. But ver.
50. Christ was dead before, or dyed at that very instant. It was above nature,
that a dying, yea a dead man, crucified in so remote a place from it, should
rend the veil within the Temple.

2. The earth did quake. Say the veil was of less substance, yet the huge
body of the earth will try a man's strength. In vain should silly man contend
with that, which shall devour him. He cannot move the earth, the earth shall
remove him; from walking alive on it, to lie dead in it. Behold the power of
Christ; Terram mouet; he makes the vast body of the earth to tremble.

3. The rocks rent. Will any yet say, natural causes can shake the earth?
then let their malicious cavil be choked with this third miracle beyond
exception; he breaks the stones; not little stones, but huge massy rocks.

4. Lastly to stop the mouth of all adversaries to his divine power; he rayseth
up the dead. Suscitare mortuos esepulchro, is only proper to God. Psalm. 49. 7.
9.
No man can give a ransom to God for his brother, that he should live for
ever, and not see corruption. How much less when he is dead, recover him to
life again. Here was the finger of God. Now to proceed in order with the
miracles.

1. Miracle.
The Veil of the Temple, etc. This Veil was the partition betwixt the Sanctum
Sanctorum, and the Sanctum; as it might be the upper part of the Quire. Heb. 9.
7.
Into this went the high Priest alone once every year, not without blood,
which he offered for himself, and for the errors of the people. By the renting
this Veil were many things presignified.

1. This serves for a confirmation of that Christ spoke on the Cross; It is
finished. The renting of the Veil does actually echo to his words, and
indeed fulfils them. Here is an end put to all the Sacrifices and Ceremonies
of the law. In the new Testament one only real and royal Sacrifice, Christ
crucified. This was that object whereto all those legal rites looked; and to
them all there is now given a Consu^tum est. So that now Coremonia mortua, Lex
mortifera: Ceremonies are dead, and the typical law deadly. Nouum Testamentum
latet in veteri, Vetus patet in nouo. The Gospel lay hidden under the law, the
law is complete in the Gospel. Gala. 4. 9.
Now after that you have known God in his Gospel, how turn you again to the
weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto you desire again to be in bondage? Gods
service is now simple and plain; Ioh. 4. 23.
in spirit and truth.

Christ is said to be the end of the law: the morrall law he kept himself
syncerely, and satisfied for us soundly. The Ceremonial was referred to him,
performed of him, fulfilled in him, extinguished by him. They had all Vig^ a
Christo, relationem ad Christum, consummationem in Christo. He gave them their
beginning, he has also given them their end. The Veil rent, to witness the
cancelling of that rituall obligation. Christ has blotted out the handwriting
of ordinances that was against Colos. 2. 14.
us, nailing it to his Cross. That moment was their last gasp; they expired
with Christ. But d^d all Ceremonies then utterly die? No: some were typical
prefiguring Christ: those are dead. Some are for decency and order, adminicula
deuotionis, these are not dead. The law of Jewish ceremonies is abolished: but
some must be retained. Christ came not to dissolve order. Men consist of bodies
as well as souls; and God must be served with both: now bodies cannot serve
God without external rites: the Spouse of Christ cannot be without her
borders and laces. On necessity there must be some outward obseruances; but
thus qualified. That they be for number few, for signification plain, for
observation simple: far from ostentation, farther from superstition. Christ
his Spouse must not flaunt it like an harlot, but be soberly attired like a
grave matron. Ceremoniae quasi care moniae, wants a carendo; as it were
ordained to supply the defects of our nature. Because we could not serve God in
that simplicity we ought, therefore we have these helps. Hence it is, that
the nearer to perfection, the fewer ceremonies; as it were the more light, the
less shadow. In the law were abundant ceremonies, in the Gospel far fewer, in
heaven none at all.

This condemns the Church of Rome for a glorious Harlot, because she loads
her self with such a heap of gaudy ceremonies: and their mass for mere
Idolatry, which they believe to be a real propitiatory Sacrifice of Christ,
made by the Priests for the sins of quick and dead. This is to build up the
veil here rent in pieces, and to accuse Christ of falsehood in his Consummatum
est. Is an end put to them, and shall they still retain them, yea obtrude them
as principal parts of Gods service; yea worship them, yea bind men's
consciences to them on pain of damnation? Therefore they are liable to
Augustines censure; who calls such Impios sepulturae viol^tores; Diggers into
the graves of the dead for putrified and rotten relics. Yea to the Judgment
of God; who says, If ye be dead with Christ Colos. 2. 20. 22.
from the rudiments of the world: why, as though living in the world, are ye
subject to Ordinances? after the commandments and doctrines of men? They will
say, Dicit Papa, sanxit Concilium; thus says the Pope, thus decrees the
Council: but we, Dixit Dominus, non Donatus: we hear what the Lord says,
in his Scripture concerning the law of ceremonies.

2. The second thing signified by the renting the veil is this. The holy of
holyes figured the third heaven; where GOD shows himself in glory and
majesty to his Saints. Salomons Temple had in it three Courts; an utter
court whereinto the people were admitted: an inner Court wherein only the
Priests and Levites entered: an inmost of all, whereinto the high Priest alone,
and that but once a year; and this was called Sanctum Sanctorum. So there is a
threefolde Heaven: Coelum elementarium, Stellatum, Gloriosum. First the
Elementarie heaven, wherein are clouds, winds, rain, dew: and the birds are
called the birds of heaven, that is of this elementarie heaven. The second is
the Starrey heaven: So the Sun is said to Psalm. 19. 6.
go from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it. The last
is the Glorious, heaven, the habitation of God himself: and this was signified
by the Holy of holyes. The veil signified the flesh of Christ: the renting of
the veil, the crucifying of Christ: by this is made an entrance into that
Sanctum Sanctorum, the heaven of glory. So expressly. Heb. 10. Having
therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Heb. 10. 19.
blood of Jesus; By a new and living way which he has consecrated for us,
through the veil, that is to say, His Flesh. Heaven gate was shut up by our
sins; none but our highest and holiest Priest had passage there: but he rent
the veil, suffered his body to be torn by death, that he might give us an
entrance. Paul speaking of the legal use of that Holiest place in the Temple,
says thus. Heb. 9. The holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the
Holiest Heb. 9. 8.
of all was not yet made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet
standing. But now by Christ his renting the veil, Patet alti ianua Coeli, the
way of salvation is opened. Let this reach forth to us two comforts.

1. There is no fear to be shut out of heaven, if thou have faith in Christ:
for to thee is the veil rent, the separation is abolished, Christ is
crucified. For So, says Saint Peter, 2. Pet. 1. 11.
an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly, into the everlasting
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Indeed to unbelievers and
hypocrites, to worldly wolves and luxurious goats the veil is up still. How
should they enter the Sanctum sanctorum, that never approached the Sanctum? How
shall they see the glory of God, who would never entertain the grace of God?
No: to these there are inaccessible bars, and Cherubims with flaming swords,
to forbid their entrance. But to every good and faithful Servant the veil
is taken away; and Christ says; Math. 25. 21.
enter thou into the joy of the Lord.

2. By this means we have in this world a free access to the Throne of grace
by our prayers: the veil and separation of sin and wrath is rent asunder by
Christ, and a clear way made for our supplications. The Propitiatory and
Mercie-seate, the Cherubims of glory shadowing it, the very presence of God,
were within the Holiest: and the people might not approach it, but stood
without a far off: Our Savior has torn away this veil, and opened our
petitions a free passage to the Seat of mercy in heaven. Having such an high
Priest over the house of God; (says Paul immediately after the clearing our
way through the veil) Heb. 10. 22.
Let us draw near with a true-heart, in full assurance of faith, etc. We see
how far our prerogative excelles that of the Jews. They were servants, we
are sons, and cry Abba Father: they had Priests, we are Priests: they had a
bar, to us that veil is rent away. Heb. 4. 16.
Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of grace, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. This is singular comfort,
that poor subjects may be sure of access to the King with their petitions;
yea more, be heard in all their desires: yea most of all, have an Advocate at
the Kings right hand to plead their cause. But then remember the Psalmists
caution. Psalm. 66. 18.
If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Let the
servants of Baal cry never so loudly, if lewdly; their prayers are not heard.
To the cries of unfaithful sinners the veil is up still; and like a thick
cloud reuerberates and beats back their orisons; that they cannot ascend to
the Throne of grace. Only faith makes a free passage, and a clear conscience
has a clear voice, that can pierce heaven.

3. The breaking down of this veil did make the Holiest and the other part of
the temple all one. Whereby was signified, that of two was made one, Jews and
Gentiles one Church. Ephe. 2. 14.
He is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall
of partition between us. So that now those, the Jews called dogs, eat the
bread of the children; yea they are the children: and Genesis 9. 27.
Iaphet is persuaded to dwell in the tents of Sem. She is also Beloved that was
hated; even the Church of the Gentiles is the Spouse of Christ. The veil that
hindered, Paul calls the Ephe. 2. 15.
Law of commandments, contained in ordinances: this he abolished for to make
in himself, of twain, one new man. Heaven gate is no wider open to a Jew,
then to a Grecian. Gal. 6. 16.
In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision,
but a new creature. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on
them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God: The Sum of the Gospel, as of the
world, is not confined to lighten Judea only, but shines universally. There is
not one privilege, wherein the Gentile has not as frank a share, as the Jew:
the sons of Hagar are adopted the sons of God; and the free Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem above is the mother of us all. All this did our blessed Savior
work for us by renting the veil; Ephe. 2. 16.
That he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain
the enmity thereby.

Oh then let us keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Christ
has made us at one, let us not make our selves twain. The veil is rent, why
set we up new; schisms in doctrine, iarres in conversation? The bill of
diuorcement is cancelled: let us love our husband Christ, and for his sake
every man his brother. Let us set up no more vailes, least we do it with the
curse of building more Iericho's. There is no bond so sure as Religions; no
ligaments so strong, as faith and a good conscience. Wretched man, that
breakest these t^es, and rentest thy self from them to whom thou art by
Christ united: A mothers, yea a Fathers blessing forsakes thee: and thou
buildest up a new veil, which thou must look for no more Christ's to come rent
asunder.

4. The renting of the veil teaches us; that when men sin rebelliously
against God, no prerogative shall do them good. The Temple was one of their
principallest privileges, their glory, their crown. Ier. 7. 4.
The Temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord. It was a figure of the Church
militant as Solomon the builder was a figure of Christ. For this Temples sake
God often spared them. So Daniel prays; Dan. 9. 17.
Cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, that is desolate. Yet when they
fall away from God, and crucify their Messiah, this prerogative helps not.
For here Gods own hand rents the veil, and after gives the whole fabric a
spoil to the Gentiles. Mala. 2. 2.
If ye will not hear, if ye will not lay it to heart, I will send a curse upon
you, I will curse your blessings: yea I have cursed them already, because you
do not lay it to heart. It lies in man's sin, to make God curse his very
blessings: and to punish the nocent in the innocent creatures.

We see the way, how we may loose Temples, and peace, and Gospel, and all
privileges; by running the courses of disobedience. Who can number the
blessings we have enjoyed by the Gospel? Let us beware, least our ungracious
and ungrateful lives rob us not of that, with all the appertinent comforts.
They that have traveled the Belgicke Provinces, can witness the miserable
footsteps of war, and the tyranny of desolation. Churches and Cities have no
more monuments, but the ruined foundations to testify that they were. Sin made
way for blood and massacre; Idolatry pulled down those walls, which otherwise
the most sacrilegious hand should have forborne. If there had been no enemy
to raze them, they would have fallen alone, rather then covered so blasphemous
impiety under their guilty roofes. Psalm. 122. 7.
Peace is within our walls, and prosperity within our palaces; blessed for
ever be our God of peace for it. Yet we have a subtle adversary, Sacrilege,
that incroacheth sore upon us, and Psalm. 83. 12.
has taken many of Gods houses in possession. We cannot say, Psalm. 74. 8.
They have burnt up all the Synagogues in the land: but they have done very
wickedly to the Lords Sanctuaries. The walls stand, and it is well if in many
places they do so: but there is not a Leuite to feed the people; alas, how can
there when there is nothing left to feed a Leuite? Covetousness would do as
much hurt with us, as war has done with our neighbors: it would, but I
trust in the Lord Jesus, it shall not. Though they have rent away Gods right,
Mala. 3. 8.
Tithes and offerings: they shall never rent away Gods Truth and Gospel: rent
themselves from it indeed they are likely to do.

5. Lastly, The Veil was rent. By renting the part God did threaten the
subversion of the whole. If he spare not the Holy of holyes, then much less
the rest. Ezekiel. 9. When God had commanded; Slay utterly old and young, maids
and children; he adds withal, And begin Ezekiel. 9. 6.
at my Sanctuary. If God begin at his Sanctuary, he will not fail to end with
the rest: if that shall not escape being profaned, how much less houses built
for riot and disorder, pride and ambition! If the Temple of prayers, then
surely the dens of thieves. Ier. 25. 29.
For lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my name, and
shall ye go unpunished? says God to the Heathen. If the sacredst things
defiled by Idolatry shall be subverted, never think that your fair houses
shall stand, when they are made couerts of oppressions, and convents of
superstition! when the better things are not favored, the worst have small
hope. So Peter reasons; 1. Pet 4. 17.
If Judgment shall begin at the house of God, what shall be the end of them
that obey not the Gospel? If the strong Cedars in Lebanon be rooted up, woe to
the rotten-rooted poplars. If the dragons tail swoope stars from heaven,
what shall become of squalid earthy vapors? The Temple was one of the worlds
greatest wonders; as curious a workmanship as six and thirty years could
make it: it wanted not the art of man, yea the blessing of heaven was added to
it. Yet now lo, Etiam periere ruinae; this goodly building by sin was brought
to ruin, yea even the very ruins are perished. Shall then your Forts and
Palaces, worldlinges Paradises: full of rapine, empty of charity; stand
against all weathers and storms of judgment? No, stone shall fall after
stone; and ruin shall one day tell the passengers, as GOD threatened of
Jerusalem; Here stood a goodly Manner, a sumptuous edifice, a royal Palace.
Or if they fall not down in themselves, they shall fall to the owners; whose
iniquities have defiled them.

God punishes by certain degrees; first he rents the veil, then rents away
the Temple: As by David's hand he first rent Saules garment, and then rent away
his kingdom. God at first touches men lightly; in their goods, quiet, health:
if these stir not to repentance, he proceeds against the whole 1. Cor. 3. 16.
Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? If you set up in this Temple
Idols, lusts, and evil affections, God first rents the veil, touches you
with some gentle afflictions: but if you still continue to make this Temple a
den of thieves, the Temple it self will be destroyed.

You have heard the first miracle, the renting of the veil. As the Jews were
wont to rend their garments Theophyl.
when they heard blasphemy against God: so it may seem the Temple tore his
garments, rent his veil in pieces, when it heard those execrable blasphemies
against the Son of God.

2. Miracle.
The earth did quake. The Philosophers have given diverse natural causes of
earthquakes: as by hot and dry exhalations shut up in the bowels of the
earth, and laboring for vent resisted by the earths solidnes, there ensues
terrae motus, a shaking of the earth, etc. But this was an extraordinary
earthquake; for it happened exactly at the very instant of Christ's death.

It might be to set forth the glory of the new Testament, and to vindicate it
from inferioritie to the old. The law was both given and renewed with an
earthquake. Given. Exodus 19. to the hand of Moses. The whole Exodus 19. 18.
mount quaked greatly. As at the giving mount Sinai, so at the renewing mount
1. Kin. 19. 11
Horeb quaked. As Eliah stood upon the Mount, there passed by a strong wind,
and after the wind an Earthquake. So when the Lord of the Gospel dyed, the
earth shook: that 2. Cor. 3. 9.
the ministration of righteousness might not be less glorious, then the
ministration of death. This miracle shall give us a threefolde instruction.

1. To consider the fierceness of Gods wrath against sins and sinners. For
God by shaking the earth did no less then threaten the utter subversion of
those desperate and bloody wretches. Corah and his confederates were swallowed
up of the earth, for rebelling against Moses the Lords servant. Hebr. 10. 29.
Of much how sorer punishment were these worthy, that had crucified (not the
servant, but) the Son of God! If the mercies of God had not bin greater then
their iniquities, they had not escaped.

By this we see how able God is to punish sinners: he shows what he can do;
it is his mercy, that he forbeares. Some of these were to be converted,
therefore concussi, non excussi; moved not removed, shaken but not destroyed.
Ostendisti populo grauia, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 60. 3.
Thou have showed thy people hard things. Showed, not imposed: shook the rod,
not laid it on. This forbearance of God Romans 2. 4.
should lead us on to repentance: if not, it is but the forerunner of
vengeance. Though now by moving the earth he scare and spare these Jews, yet
after the earth spued them out, as an offense to her stomach. O obstinate
hearts, that quake not, when the senseless ground quakes that bears so
unprofitable a burden. Cannot the earth admonish thee? it shall devour thee. Si
non m^nebit. mouebit. If the almighties hand stirring it, has not stird thee
to repentance; a Sextons hand shall cover thee with moulds; a weak shaker
shall do it. Think when God moves the earth, he preaches to thy soul: if
thy heart (so little in comparison of that great vast body) will not tremble,
know God has one thing that shall shake thee to pieces; death.

2. The nature of sin is here considerable; so heavy that it makes the very
earth to quake. The Jews sins were such a burden, that the earth could not
bear them without trembling. The earth is fixed, and stands fast says the
Psalmist; as the Center of the world: it is strange that to be moved; even so
strange is the cause that moves it. It must needs be a monstrous weight of
iniquity, that totters the earth on her foundations. But why is the earth so
quiet now? Do not innumerable wretches daily crucify Christ; by their oaths,
blasphemies, and rebellions in his head; by their persecutions and oppressions
in his members? Is not his word derided, his Sacraments despised, his good
creatures abused? Why does not the earth shrink and shake at these horred
impieties? Be still: he that holds his hand from miracles, will not hold it from
plagues: They are for borne, not forgiven. God keeps silence, but he sleeps
not: the earth may spare them, but Psalm. 73. 19.
Desolation in a moment shall swallow them. To the Jews the earth moved, and
they stood still: to these the earth shall stand still, and themselves shall be
moved.

3. There is nothing on the earth that is not moveable, if the earth it self
be moveable. Psalm. 104. 5.
God has laid the foundations of the earth that it should not be moved. Yet
so, that he who laid it, can shake it. If the earth, then whatsoever Job 9. 6.
He shakes the earth out of her place: and the pillars thereof tremble.
is built upon it. 2. Pet. 3. 10.
The earth shall be burnt, says Peter. What alone? no, the earth with the
works that are therein shall be burnt up. The works of men's hands, the works
of their brines, their very thoughts shall perish. Heb. 12. 27.
The Lords voice shook the earth, and he has said, yet once again I will
shake not the earth only, but also heaven. O blessed place that is not subject
to this shaking: whose joys have not only an amiable countenance, but a
glorious continuance. The things that are shaken shall be removed, but the
things that are not shaken remain for ever. All the terrors of this world
move not him that is fixed in heaven. Impauidum ferient ruinae. Psalm. 125. 1.
They that put their trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, which cannot
beremoued, but abides for ever. But the Tabernacles and hopes of the wicked
shall perish together. 1. Ioh. 2. 17.
For the world passes away, and the lust thereof: but he that does the will
of God abides ever. Whereon says August. Quid vis? Vtrum amare temporalia,
and transire cum tempore! an amare Christum, and viuere in aeternum? Whether
will thou love the world, and perish with it? or love Christ, and live for ever?

3. Miracle.
The rocks rent. A wonderful act, to break stones and rend rocks. This
gives us two observations.

1. This did foresignifie the power and efficacy of the Gospel, that it
should be able to break the very rocks. As the death and passion of Christ
did cleave those solid and almost impenetrable substances: so the publishing of
his death and passion shall rend and break in pieces the rockie hearts of men.
So John Baptist said; Math. 3. 9.
God is able of stones to raise up children unto Abraham. The hearts of
Zaccheus, Mary Magdalene, Paul, were such rocks; yet they were cleft with the
wedge of the Gospel. This is that Rod of Moses, able to break the hardest
Rocks; till they gush out with floods of penitent tears. This is Ieremies
hammer, powerful to bruise the most obdurate hearts. The blood of the Goat
sacrificed, of force to dissolve Adamant. There is power in the blood of Jesus,
to put sense into stones. Blessed are you, if you be thus brokenhearted for
him, whose heart was broken for you. For Psalm. 51. 17.
the broken heart the Lord will not despise.

2. Observe the wonderful hardness of the Jews hearts. The stones rent and
claue in sunder at the cruel death of Jesus: but their hearts more stony then
stones, are no whit moved. They rend not their garments, much less their
hearts: when as the earth rent the Stones her bones, and the rocks her ribs.
The flints are softer then they: the flints break, they harden. They still
belch their malicious blasphemies, the rocks relent: the stones are become men,
and the men stones. O the sencelesnesse of a hard heart: rocks will sooner
break, then that can be mollified. Even the hardest creatures are flexible to
some agents: flints to the rain, iron to the fire, stones to the hammer: but
this heart yields to nothing; neither the showers of mercy, nor the hammer of
reproof, nor the fire of Judgments: but like the stithy, are still the harder
for beating. All the plagues of Egypt cannot mollify the heart of Pharaoh. It
is wondrously unnatural, that men made the softest hearted of all, should be
rigidiores lupis, duriores lapidibus; more cruel then wolves, more hard then
stones. I would to GOD all hard-heartednesse had dyed with these Jews; but it
is not so. How often has Christ been here crucified; in the word preaching
his Cross to your ears, in the Sacraments presenting his death to your eyes;
think, think in your own souls, have not the stones in the walls of this
Church been as much moved? God forbid our obdurateness should be punished as
theirs was: since they would be so stonyhearted, Jerusalem was turned to a
heap of stones; and the conquering Romans dashed them pitifully against those
stones, which they exceeded in hardness.

Here let the wicked see their doom: the stones that will not be softened,
shall be broken. There is no changing the decree of God, but change thy nature,
and then know thou art not decreed to death. Stony hearts shall be broken to
pieces with vengeance: do not strive to alter that doom, but alter thy own
stony heart to a heart of flesh, and so prevent it in the particular. Wolves
and goats shall not enter into heaven: thou may pull stars out of heaven
before alter this sentence; but do it thus. Leave that nature, and become one
of Christ's sheep, and then thou art sure to enter. No adulter^ nor covetous
person, says Paul, 1. Cor. 6. 9.
shall inherit the kingdom of heaven: this doom must stand; but not against
thee, if thou be converted. Such were Ver. 11.
ye, but ye are washed, etc. You are not such. Had the Jews ceased to be
stones, they had been spared. God will root thorns and briars out of his
vineyard: if thou would not have him root out thee, become a Vine: and bring
forth good grapes. God threatens to break the hairy sealpe of him that goes on
in sin; yet may thou ward this blow from thy self; Go no further on in
sin. When God comes in judgment to visit the earth, to shatter rocks, and
break stones in pieces; thou have a heart of flesh, mollified with repentance.
Let the earth quake, and the rocks tear; thy faith has saved thee; go in
peace.

4. Miracle.
The graves were opened, and many bodies of Sanits which slept, arose.
Concerning this two questions are moved.

1. Where their souls were all this while before. I answer, where the
scripture has no tongue, we should have no ear. Most probably thus: their
souls were in heaven, in Abraham's bosom; and came down to their bodies by
divine dispensation, to manifest the power and Deity of Christ.

2. Whither they went afterward. I answer by the same likelihood, that they
died no more, but waited on the earth till Christ's resurrection; and then
attended him to heaven. But these things that are concealed, should not be
disputed. Tutum est nescire quod tegitur. It is a safe ignorance, where a man
is not commanded to know. Let us then see what profitable instructions we can
hence derive to our selves. They are many, and therefore I will but lightly
touch them.

1. This teaches us, that Christ by his death has vanquished death, even in
the grave, his own chamber. That giant is subdued, the graves fly open, the
dead go out. This bears ample witness to that speech of Christ. Ioh. 11. 25.
I am the resurrection and the life: he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live. The bodies of the Saints, what part of the earth or
sea soever holds their dusts, shall not be detayned in prison; when Christ calls
for them: as the members must needs go, when the Head draws them. He shall
speak to all creatures, Reddite quod deuorastis: restore whatsoever of man you
have devoured: not a dust, not a bone can be denied. The bodies of the Saints
shall be raised, says August. In Enchirid.
Tanta facilitate quanta faelicitate: with as much easynes, as happynes. Sen.
epist. 36.
Desinunt ista, non pereunt: mors intermittit vitam, non eripit. Our bodies are
left for a time, but perish not: death may discontinue life, not conclude it.
Intermittit^, non interimitur: it may be paused, cannot be destroyed.

2. Observe, that all the dead do not rise, but Many, and those Saints. The
general resurrection is reserved to the last day: this a pledge or earnest of
it. Now who shall rise with this comfort? none but Saints: as here Christ takes
no other company from the graves, but Saints. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16
The dead in Christ shall rise first. Christ is called Coloss. 1. 18.
The first borne from the dead: He has risen, and his shall next follow him.
Every man in his own order; 1. Cor. 15. 23.
Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming.
Worms and corruption shall not hinder: he that said To Corruption, thou art my
mother: and to the worms, you are my brethren and sisters: said also, I know
that my Redeemer lives, and one day with these eyes I shall behold him. The
wicked shall also be raised, though with horror, to look upon him whom they
have pierced. But as Christ did here, so will he at the last, single out the
Saints to bear him company.

3. This shows the true operation of Christ's death in all men. We are all
dead in our sins, as these bodies were in their graves: now when Christ's death
becomes effectual to our souls, we rise again and become new creatures. From
the grave of this world we come into the Church, the holy City. But thou
complainest of the deadnes of thy heart: it is well thou complainest; there is
some life or thou could not feel the deadness. Ioh. 5. 25.
The hour is coming and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear it shall live. If this word has raised thee
from death, and wrought spiritual life in thy heart, thou shall perceive it by
thy breathing, words glorifying God; and by thy moving, in the ways, and to
the works of obedience.

4 Observe that these Saints which arose, are said to have Slept. The death of
the godly is often called a Sleep. So it is said of the Patriarchs and Kings
of Judah, they slept with their fathers. So Paul says, they 1. Cor. 15. 18
sleep in Christ. The Coffin is a couch; In quo mollius dormit, qui been in
vita laborauit, wherein he takes good rest, that has wrought hard in the
work of his salvation before he went to bed. Foelix somnus cum requie, requies
cum voluptate, voluptas ^um aeternitate. It is a sweet sleep that has peace
with rest, rest with pleasure, pleasure with euerlastingnes. So the godly
sleep, till the Sound of a Trumpet shall waken them, and then eternal glory
shall receive them.

5. Lastly observe that Jerusalem is called the Holy city, though she were at
this time a sink of sin, and a debaushed harlot. Either as some think, that
she is called holy, because she was once holy. So Rahab is called the harlot,
because she was a harlot. Simon is termed the Math. 26. 6.
Leper, for that he was a leper: and Math. 10. 3.
Matthew the Publican, for that he was a Publican. Or else she was called holy
for the covenants sake; in regard of the Temple, sacrifices, service of God;
and of the elect people of God that were in it. Whence we may infer, how
unlawful it is to separate from a Church because it has some corruptions. Is
apostate Jerusalem that has crucified her Savior, called still the holy
City: and must England that departs in nothing from the faith and doctrine
of her Savior, for some scarce discernible Imperfections be rejected as a
foedifragous strumpet? But there be wicked persons in it: what then? She may
be still a holy City. Recedatur ab iniquitate, non ab iniquis. Let us depart
from sin, we cannot run from sinners.

Thus we have considered the Miracles; let us now look into the causes,
wherefore they were wrought.

These may be reduced into five. In respect of The Sufferer dying. The
Creatures obeying. The Jews persecuting. The Women beholding. The Disciples
forsaking.

1. In regard of Christ; to testify not only his Innocence, but his
Majesty. His Innocence, that he was as Pilates wife acknowledged, a Math.
27. 19.
Just man. His Majesty as the Centurion confessed, Math. 27. 54.
Seeing the earth quake and the things that were done; Truly this was the
Son of God. He seemed a worm, no man: the contempt and derision of the
people, forsaken of his confidence: in the midst of all God will not leave him
without witnesses; but raises up senseles creatures as Preachers of his
deity. Est aterni filius, qui illic pendet mortuus. He that hangs there dead
on the Cross, is the Son of the eternal God. Rather then the children of
God shall want witnesses of their integrity, God will work miracles for their
testimony.

2. In regard of the Creatures, to show their Obedience to their Creator: they
are not wanting to him, that gave being to them. These demonstrate, it was
their Lord that suffered; and that they were ready to execute vengeance on his
murderers. The heaven that was dark would have rained fire on them: the earth
that quaked, shook them to pieces: the rocks that rent, tumbled on them: and
the graves that opened to let out other prisoners, have swallowed them quick.
They all waited but his command to perform this revengefull execution. Who
shall now dare to persecute Christ in his members? The stones are thy enemies,
the earth gapes for thee, hell it self enlarges her jaws: if the Lord but
hiss to them, they are suddenly in an uproar against thee. Go on in your
malice ye raging persecutors: you cannot wrong Christ, no not in his very
members, but you pull the fists of all creatures in heaven, earth, and hell
about your ears: flies from the air, beasts from the earth, poison from
sustenance, thunder from the clouds; yea at last also (though now they help
you) the very devils from hell against you. All creatures shoot their
malignancie at them, that shoot theirs at Christ.

3. In respect of the Jews, his enemies; to shame and confound them. The
rocks and graves are moved at his passion, not they. Lapides tremunt homines
fremunt. The stones rent, the huge earth quakes with fear; the Jews rage with
malice. We see how difficult it is to mollify a hard heart: harder then to
remove a mountain, raise the dead, cleave a rock, shake the whole earth. It
is a great mryacle to convert a wicked man; greater then rending of rocks.
Moses rod stroke a Rock thrice and did it: ministers have stroke men's rocky
hearts three hundredth times, and cannot. The graves sooner open, then the
sepulchers of sin and darkness: the vast earth sooner quakes, then men's
hearts at Gods judgments.

4. In respect of the women that stood by; that their faith might be confirmed.
For seeing him on the Cross, at their mercy, whose bowels never knew the
softnes of such a nature: exposed to all the tyranny of their hands and tongs:
hands that like cruel Chirurgions searched every part of his blessed body:
tongues that ran nimbly through all the passages of obloquie, till they had
overtaken reproach it self, and cast it on him: His body at the full will of
the tormenters, and his soul not without intolerable terrors; as they might
judge by strange speech that came from him; My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? Does man triumph over him, and does God forsake him? This might
breed in their hearts a suspicion: either that he was a deceiuer, or else
utterly cut off. To stifle this doubt in the very birth, he shakes the earth,
and rends the rocks; that as they knew him dying Hominem v^rum, so they might
perceive him doing these miracles not Hominem merum; but the everliving God.
These wonders; blow the spark of their faith, almost dying with Christ; and
root in their hearts a deep and infallible persuasion of their Savior.
Something there is to keep the faith of the elect from quenching, though Satan
reign on it showers of discomforts. Though no object greets the eye of flesh
but discouragement yet there is a secret Sp^it within, that will never suffer
the faith to fail.

5. In regard of the Disciples; to shame and convince them for leaving him,
Christ had said before, Luke 19. Luke 19. 40.
Si hitacerent, loquerentur lapides. If these (speaking of his Disciples)
should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out. Lo, this saying
is here come to pass: the Disciples hold their peace, the stones speak: they
forsake Christ, the rocks proclaim him. Such a shame is it for Apostles and
ministers of Christ to hold their peace; that if they be silent, the very
stones shall preach against them. The walls, windows, pauements of Churches
shall cry out against such Pastors, that undertake the office of a sheep-heard,
and feed Christ his flock with nothing but air. And even you that come to
hear; if no remorse can be put into your hearts at the relation of our
Saviors death: if you have no feeling of his sorrows, no apprehension of
these mysteries, no repentance of your sins, no emendation of your lives;
know that the very seats whereon you sit, the walls of your Temples, the very
stones you tread on, shall bear witness against you.

Now the Lord Jesus, that at his death brake the Rocks; by the virtue of his
death break our rocky hearts; that being mollified in this life they may be
glorified in the life to come. Grant this O Father for thy mercies sake, O
Christ for thy merits sake, O holy Spirit for thy names sake: To whom three
persons, one only wise and eternal God, be glory and praise for ever.

Amen.
THE FOOL And His Sport.
PROVE. 14. 9. Fools make a mock at sin.
THE Proverbs of Solomon are so many select aphorisms, or divinely moral
Says, without any mutual dependence one upon another. Therefore to study a
coherence, were to force a marriage between unwilling parties. The words read
spend themselves on a description of two things: the Fool, and his Sport. The
Fool is the wicked man: his Sport, pastime, or babble is Sin. Mocking is the
medium or connection, that brings together the Fool and Sin: thus he makes
himself merry; they meet in mocking. The fool makes a mock at sin.

Fools.
The fool is the wicked: an ignorant heart is always a sinful heart: and a
man without knowledge, is a man without grace. So Thamar to Ammon under his
rauishing hands; 2. Sam. 13. 13
Do not this folly. If thou do it, Thou shall be as one of the Fools in
Israel. Ignorance cannot excusare a toto; wilful not a tanto. 2. These. 1. 8.
Christ shall come in flaming fire rendering vengeance to them that know not
God. The state of these Fools is fearful. Like hooded Hawks, they are
easily carried by the Infernal Falconer to hell. Their lights are out, how
shall their house escape robbing? Ier. 4. 22.
These Fools have a knowledge, but it is to do evil. They have also a
knowledge of good, but not scientiam approbationis: they know, but they refuse
it. So God justly quites them: for though he know them ad scientiam, he will
not know them ad approbationem. But gives them a Discedite, nescio vos. Math.
7. 27.
I know you not: depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

A man may be a Fool two ways; by knowing too Little Much.

1. By knowing too little; when he knows not those things, whereof he cannot
be ignorant, and do well. 1. Cor. 2. 2.
I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. But every man says he knows Christ. If men knew Christ his love
in dying for them, they would love him above all things: how do they know
him, that love their money above him? Nemo vere nouit Christum, qui non vere
amat Christum. No man knows Christ truly, that loves him not syncerely. If
men knew Christ, that he should be Judge of quick and dead, durst they live so
lewdly. Non nouit Christum, qui non odit peccatum. He never knew Christ, that
does not hate iniquity. Some attribute too much to themselves, as if they
would have a share with Christ in their own salvation. Nesciunt and Christum
and seipsos: they are ignorant of both Christ and themselves. Others lay too
much on Christ, all the burden of their sins, which they can with all
possible voracitie swallow down, and blasphemy vomit up again upon him. But
they know not Christ, who thus seek to divide Aquam a sanguine, his blood from
his water; and they shall fail of justification in heaven, that refuse
sanctification upon earth.

2. By knowing too much; when a man presumes to know more then he ought. His
knowledge is apt to be pursie and gross, and must be kept low. Romans 12. 16.
Mind not high things, says the Apostle. Festus slandered Paul, that Act. 26.
2^
much learning had made him mad. Indeed it might have done, if Paul had bin
as proud of his learning, as Festus was of his honor. This is the 1. Cor. 8. 1.
knowledge that puffs up. It troubles the brain, like undigested meat in
the stomach: or like the scumme that seeths into the broth. To avoid this
folly, Paul fortbids us to Romans 12. 16.
be wise in our own conceits. Whereof I find woe readings; Be not wise in your
selves; and Be not wise to your selves.

Not in your selves; conjure not your wit into the circle of your own secret
profit. We account the simple Fools, God accounts the crafty Fools. He that
thinks himself wise, is a Fool ipso facto. It was a modest speech that fell
from the Philosopher. Sen. ep. 13.
Si quando fatuo delectari volo, non est mihi long quaerendus; me video.
Therefore Christ pronounced his Woes to the Pharisees; his doctrines to the
people. The first entry to wisdom, is Scire quod nescias: to know thy
ignorance. Sobriety is the measure for knowledge, as the Gomer was for Manna,
Curiosity is the rennet, that turns our milk into curds.

Not to your selves; Prou. 5. 16.
Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, says the wisest king: communicate thy
knowledge. Math. 5. Christians must be like lights, that wast Math. 5. 15.
themselves for the good of those in Gods house. Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te
scire hoc sciat alter. He that will be wise only to himself, takes the ready
way to turn fool. Non licet habere priuatam, ne priuemur ea. The closer we
keep our knowledge, the likelier we are to loose it. Standing water soon
puddles; the gifts of the mind, if they be not employed, will be empaired.
Every wicked man is a fool by comparing their properties.

1. It is a Fools property Futuranon prospicere, to have no foresight of
future things. So he may have from hand to mouth, he sings care-away. So the
grasshopper sings in harvest when the Ant labors: and begges at Christmasse
when the Ant sings. The wicked takes as little care what shall become of his
soul, as the natural fool what shall become of his body. Modo Potiar, says
the Epicure: Let me have pleasure now; Eccl. 9. 4.
It is better to a living dog then to a dead Lion. They do not in fair
weather repair their house against storms: nor in time of peace provide
spiritual armor against the day of war. They watch not; therefore the day
of the Lord shall come upon them as a thief in the night, and spoil them of
all their pleasures. The maine business of their soul is not thought of; nor
dream they of an Audite, till they be called by death away to their reckoning.

2. It is a Fools property to affect things hurtful to himself. Ludit cum
spinis; he loves to be playing with thorns. Neither yet Quod nocuit, docu^t;
has that which hurt him, taught him caution, but he more desperately desires
his own mischief. The wicked do strongly appropriate to themselves this
quality. Cum illis ludunt, quae illis laedunt: they love to dally with their
own vexation, who else would do at on the world; and houer like waspes about
the galley-pot, till for one lick of the honey they be drowned in it! What is
your ambition, O ye world-affecters; says August: but to be affected of the
world? what do you seek, but Confess. lib. 3.
per multa pericula peruenire ad plura? per plurima ad pessima? but through
many dangers to find more; through easier to find the worst of all? Like that
doting Venetian, for one kiss of that painted harlot, to live her perpetual
slave? The world was therefore called the Fools Paradise; there he thinks to
find heaven, and there he sells it to the devil. Noxia quaerunt improbi; Prou.
7. 23.
they have as a bird to the snare: the devil does but hold vanity as a sharp
weapon against them, and they run full breast upon it. They need no enemies; let
them alone, and they will kill themselves. So the envious pines away his own
marrow: the adulterer poisons his own blood: the prodigal lauisheth his own
estate: the drunkard drownds his own vital spirits. Wicked men make war
upon themselves with the engines of death.

3. It is a Fools property to prefer trifles and toys, before matters of
worth and weight. The fool will not give his babble for the kings Exchequour.
The wicked preferres bodies of dust and ashes to their souls of eternal
substance: this sin corrupted and time-spent world, to the perfect and
permanent joys of heaven: short pleasures to everlasting happiness: a puff of
fame before a solid weight of glory. What folly can be more pitiable: then to
forsake corn for acornes: a state of immortality for an apple, as Adam did: a
birthright with all the privileges for a mess of pottage, belly-cheare, as
Esau did: a kingdom on earth, yea in heaven too, for asses as Saul did: all
portion in Christ for bacon, as the Gergesites Math. 22.
did: a royalty in heaven, for a poor Farm on earth as the bidden guest did.
This is the worldlings folly. Villa, bones, vxor etc.

Mundus, cura, caro caelum clausere vocalis. To esteem grace and glory less
then Farms, oxen, wives: manna then onions, mecrie then vanity: God then
Idols. They may be fitly paralelld with the Prodigal. He Luke 15.
forsook 1. His Fathers house for a strange country: these the Church, Gods
house, for the world; a place wherein they should be strangers: and wherein I
am sure, they shall not be long dwellers. 2. His Fathers inheritance for a bag
of money: so these will not tarry for their heritagein heaven, but take the
bags which Mammon thrusts into their hands on the present. Who but a Fool will
refuse the assured reuersion of some great Lordship, though expectant on the
expiration of three lives: for a ready sum of money not enough to buy the
least stick on the ground? This i^ the worldlings folly, rather to take a
piece of^ p-coine in hand, then to trust God for the inualuable mass of glory.
3. He forsakes his loving friends for harlots, creatures of spoil and rapine:
so these the company of Saints. For the Sons of Beliall: those that sing
praises, for those that roar blasphemies. 4. Lastly the bread in his Fathers
house, for husks of beans: so these leave Christ the true bread of life, for
the draffe which the swine of this world puddle in. Here is their Folly to
fasten on transient delights, and to neglect the pleasures at the right hand of
God for evermore. Psalm. 16.


4. It is a Fools property, to run on his course with precipitation. Yet
can he not out-runne the wicked: whose 2. King. 9. 20.
driving is like Iehu's the son of Nimshi: he drives as if he were mad. As if
he had received that commission, salute no man by the way. Prou. 27. 12.
The wise man sees the plague and hides himself, but the fool runs on
and is punished. He goes, he runs, he flies; as if God that rides upon the
wings of the wind should not overtake him. He may pass a pace, for he is
benefited by the way: which is smooth, without rubbes: and down a hill, for
hell is a bottom. Facilis descensus Auerni. Have might be good Prou. 15. 24.
if the may were good, and good speed added to it. But this is Cursus
celerrimus praeteruiam. He needs not run so fast: for numquamsero ad id
venitur, a quo nunquam receditur: the fool may come soon enough, to that
place, from whence he must never return. Thus you see the respondencie of the
spiritual to the natural Fool, in their qualities. Truly the wicked man is a
Fool: so Solomon expounds the one by the other. Eccl. 7. Be not overmuch
wicked, neither be thou foolish: why should thou Eccl. 7. 17.
die before thy time?

Fools. Observe, this is plurally and indefinitely spoken. The number is not
small; Stult^rum plena sunt omnia. Christ's flock is little; but Satan's
kingdom is of large bounds. Plurima possima; vile things are ever most
plentiful. Wisdom flies like the Rail, alone: but fools, like Partridges,
by whole coueys. There is but one Truth, but innumerable errors. Which should
teach us

1. Not to follow a multitude in evil. In civil actions it is good to do as
the most; in religious, to do as the best. It shall be but poor comfort in
hell, Socios habuisse doloris. Thou pleadest to the Judge; I have done as
others: the Judge answers; And thou shall speed as others.

2. To bless God, that we are none of the many: as much for our Grace, whereby
we differ from the fools of the world; as for our Reason, whereby we differ
from the fools of nature.

Now as these fools are many, so of many kinds. There is the Sad fool, and
the Glad fool: the Haughty fool, and the Naughty fool.

1. The Sad or melancholy fool is the Envious; that repines at his brothers
good. An enemy to all Gods favors, if they fall besides himself. A man of
the worst diet; for he consumes himself; and delights in pining, in repining.
He is ready to quarrel with God, because his neighbors flock escape the
rotte. He cannot endure to be happy, if with company. Therefore envy is
called by Prosper; Lib. 3. de virtut. and vitijs.
De bono alterius tabescentis animi cruciatus: the vexation of a languishing
mind, arising from another welfare. Tantos Inuidus habet iustae poenae
tortores, quantos inuidiosus habuit laudatores. So many, as the envied has
praisers, has the envious tormentors.

2. The Glad fool, I might say the Mad fool, is the dissolute; who rather
then he will want sport, makes goodness it self his Minstrell. His mirth is
to fully every virtue with some slander; and with a ^est to laugh it out of
fashion. His usual discourse is filled up with boasting Parentheses of his old
sins: and though he cannot make himself merry with their act, he will with
their report; as if he roued at this mark, to make himself worse then he is.
If repentance do but proffer him her service, he kickes her out of doors: his
mind is perpetually drunk; and his body lightly dies, like Anacreon, with a
grape in his throat. He is stung of that serpent, whereof he dies laughing.

3. The Haughty fool is the ambitious: who is ever climbing high Towers, and
never forecasteth how to come down. Up he will, though he fall down headlong.
He is weary of peace in the Country, and therefore comes to seek trouble at
Court: where he haunts great men, as his great spirit haunts him. When he
receives many disappoyntments, he flatters himself still with success. His
own fancy persuades him, as men do fools, to shoot away another arrow,
thereby to find the first: so he loses both. And lastly, because his pride
will admit of no other punisher, he becomes his own torment: and having at
first lost his honesty, he will now also loose his wits; so truly becomes a
fool.

4. The Naughty fool is the Covetous. This is the Folly that Solomon saw
under the Sun. You heard before of a merry fool; but the very fool of all
is the auarous: for he will loose his friends, starve his body, damn his
soul, and have no pleasure for it. So says the Prophet. Ier. 17. 11.
He shall leave his riches in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a
Fool. He wastes himself, to keep his goods from wast: he eats the worst
meat, and keeps his stomach ever chiding. He longs like a fool, for every
thing he sees; and at last may habere quod voluit, non quod vult: have what he
desired, never what he desires. He fears not the day of judgment; except for
preue^ting the date of some great obl^gatio. You would think it were petty
treason to call a rich man fool; but he does so that dares justify it. Luke
12. Thou Luke 12. 20.
fool, this night shall they fetch away thy soul from thee: then whose shall
those things be which thou have provided?

We have anatomized the Fool, let us behold his Sport. He makes a mock at
sin.

The Fathers call this Infimum gradum, and Limen inferni; the lowest degree of
sin, and the very threshold of hell. It is Seeds pestilentiae, the Scorners
chair. Psalm. 1. 1.
Psalm. 1. wherein the ungodly sittes, blaspheming God and all goodness. Nemo
fit repent pessimus. No man becomes worst at first. This is no sudden evil.
Men are borne sinful, they make themselves profane. Through many degrees
they climb to that height of impiety. This is an extreme progress, and
almost the iourneys end of wickedness: Improbo laetari affectu. Thus Abner
calls fighting a sport. 2. Sam. 2. 14.
Let the young men arise, and play before us. Phil. 3. 19.
They glory in their shame, says the Apostle; as if a condemned malefactor
should boast of his halter. Fools make a mock at sin.

We shall the more clearly see, and more strongly detest this senseles
iniquity, if we consider the object of the Fools Sport; Sin.

1. Sin, which is so contrary to goodness: and though to man's corrupt nature
pleasing, yet even abhorred of those sparks and cinders, which the rust of sin
has not quite eaten out of our nature, as the Creation left it. The lewdest
man, that loves wickedness as heartily, as the devil loves him; yet has some
obiurgations of his own heart: and because he will not condemn his sin, his
heart shall condemn him. The most reprobate wretch does commit some
contraconscient iniquities: and has the contradiction of his own soul, by
the remanents of reason left in it. If a lewd man had the choice to be one of
those two Emperors, Nero or Constantine; who would not rather be a Constantine
then a Nero? The most violent oppressor that is cruel to others, yet had
rather that others should be kind to him then cruel. The bloudiest murderer
desisires that others should use him gently, rather then strike, kill, or
butcher him. Nature it self prefers light to darkness: and the mouth of a
Sorceresse is driven to confess, Video meliora, proboque. The most rigid
usurer, if he should come before a severe Judge, would be glad of mercy;
though himself will show none to his poor bondmen. In been viuendo requiem
natura fateri.


Cogitur. It is then first a contra-naturall thing to make a mock at sin.

2. Sin, which sensibly brings on present judgments Ioh. 5. 14.
Thou art made whole: sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee. Sin
procured the former, and that was grievous; 38. years bedridden: Sin is able
to draw on a greater punishment; Least a worse thing come unto thee. If I
should turn this holy book from one end to the other; if I should search all
Fathers, yea all writers whether divine or human; I should euince this
conclusion; that Sin hales on Judgment. Pedisequis sceleris supplicium. If
there be no fear of impiety, there is no hope of impunitie. Our Machiauellian
Politicians have a position: that Summa scelera nicipiuntur cum periculo,
peraguntur cum praemio: the greatest wickedness is begun with danger, gone
through with reward. Let the Philosophers stop their mouths: Scelus aliquis
tutum, nemo securum tulit. Some guilty men have been safe, none ever secure.

This every eye must see. Let adultery plead that nature is encourager and
directer of it; and that she is unjust to give him an affection, and to bar
him the action: yet we see it plagued. To teach us that the sin is of a greater
latitude, then some imagine it: unclean, fedifragous, perjured. Broad
impudence, contemplative Bauderie, an eye full of whores are things but iested
at: the committers at last find them no jest, when God powers vengance on the
body, and wrath on the naked conscience.

Let drunkenness stagger in the robes of good fellowship; and shrowdit self
under the wings of merriment; yet we see it have the punishment, even in this
life. It corrupts the blood, drownes the spirits, beggars the purse, and
enricheth the carcass with surfets: a present judgment waits upon it. He that
is a thief to others, is at last a thief also to himself; and steals away
his own life. God does not ever forbear sin to the last day; nor shall the
bloody Ruffian still Psalm. 55. 23.
escape but his own blood shall answer some in present, and his soul the
rest eternally. Let the Seminary pretend a warrant from the Pope to betray and
murder Princes; and build his damnation on their tetricall grounds; which have
Parum rationis, minus honestatis, Religionis nihil; Little Reason, less
Honesty, no Religion. Yet we see, God reueales their malicious stratagems, and
buries them in their own pit. Piercies head now stands Centinell, where he was
once a Pioner.

If a whole land flow with wickedness, it escapes not a deluge of vengeance. For
England; have not her bowels groaned under the heavy pestilence? If the plague
be so common in our mouths, how should it not be common in our streets? With
that plague wherewith we curse others, the just God curses us. We shall find
in that Imperial state of Rome, that till Constantines time almost every
Emperor dyed by treason or massacre: after the receiving of the Gospel, none
except that reuolter Julian: Let not sin then be made a sport or jest, which
God will not forbear to punish even in this life.

3. But if it bring not present Judgment, it is the more fearful. The less
punishment wickedness receives here, the more is behind. God strikes those here,
whom he means to spare hereafter; and corrects that son which he purposes
to save. But he scarce meddles with them at all, whom he intends to beat
once for all. The Almond tree is forborne them, who are bequeathed to the
boiling Pot. There is no rod to scourge such in present; so they go with
whole sides to hell. The purse and the flesh scapes, but the soul pays for
it. This is Misericordia puniens, a grievous mercy: when men are spared for a
while, that they may be spilled for ever. This made that good Saint cry; Lord
here afflict, cut, burnt, torture me; Vt in aeternum parcas; Aug.
that for ever thou will save me. No sorrow troubles the wicked, no disturbance
embitters their pleasures: But remember says Abraham to the merry-liu'ed rich
man, Luke 16. 25.
Thou were delighted, but thou art tormented. Tarditas supplicij grauitate
pensatur: and he will strike with iron hands, that came to strike with leaden
feet. Tuli, nunquid semper feram? no; their hellfire shall be so much the
hoter, as God has been cool and tardy in the execution of his vengeance.
This is a Judgment for Sin that comes invisible to the world, insensible to
him on whom it lights. To be Romans 1. 28. 2. 5.
given over to a reprobate mind; to a hard and impenitent heart. If any thing
be vengance, this is it. I have read of plagues, famine, death come temperd
with love and mercy: this never but in anger. Many taken with this spiritual
lethargy sing in Tauernes, that should howl with dragons: and sleep out
Sabboths and Sermons, whose awaked souls would rend their hearts with anguish.
Fools then only make a mock at sin.

4. Sin that shall at last be laid heavy on the conscience: the lighter the
burden was at first; it shall be at last the more ponderous. The wicked
conscience may for a while lie a sleep: but Ierom.
Tranquilitas ista tempestas est: this calm is the greatest storm. The
mortallest enemies are not evermore in pitched fields, one against the other:
the guilty may have a seeming truce, true peace they cannot have. A man's debt
is not paid by (...) bring: even while thou sleep, thy arrerages run on. If
thy conscience be quiet without good cause, remember that Cedat iniustissima
pax iustissimo bello: a just war is better then unjust peace. The conscience
is like a fire under a pile of green wood, long ere it burn; but once kindled
it flames beyond quenching. It is not pacifiable whiles sin is within to vex
it: the hand will not cease throbbing so long as the thorn is within the
flesh. In vain he strives to feast away cares, sleep out thoughts, drink
down sorrows; that has his tormentor within him. When one violently offers
to stop a sourse of blood at the nostril, it finds a way down the throat
not without hazard of suff^cation. The stricken dear runs into the thicket,
and there breaks off the arrow: but the head sticks still within him, and
rankles to death. Flitting and shifting ground gives way to further anguish.
The unappeased conscience will not leave him, till it has showed him hell; nor
then neither. Let then this Fool know, that his now feared conscience shall be
quickened: his deathbed shall smart for this. And his amazed heart shall rue
his old wilful adiournings of repentance. How many have there raued on the
thought of their old sins; which in the days of their hot lust they would
not think sins. Let not then the Fool make a mock at sin.

5. Sin, which has another direful effect, of greater latitude; and
comprehensiue of all the rest. Diuinam incitat iram. It prouokes God to anger.
The wrath of a king is as messengers of death; what is the wrath of the king of
kings. Hebr. 12. 29.
For our God is a consuming fire. If the fire of his anger be once thoroughly
incensed, all the rivers in the South are not able to quench it: What pillar of
the earth, or foundation of heaven can stand, when he will wake them? He that
in his wrath can open the jaws of earth to swallow thee, sluice out floods from
the sea to drown thee, rain down fire from heaven to consume thee; Sodom,
the old world, Corah, drunk of these wrathful vialls. Or to go no further,
he can set at jar the elements within thee, by whose peace thy spirits are
held together: drown thee with a dropsy bred in thy own flesh: burn thee
with a pestilence begotten in thy own blood: or bury thee in the earthly grave
of thy own melancholy. Oh it is a fearful thing, to fall into the hands of
the living God. It is then wretchedly done, thou Fool, to jest at sin that
angers God, who is able to anger all the veins of thy heart for it.

6. Sin, which was punished even in heaven. Angeli detruduntur propter
peecatum. 2. Pet. 2. God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down
to hell. It 2. Pet. 2. 4.
could bring down Angels from heaven to hell; how much more men from earth to
hell! If it could corrupt such glorious natures, what power has it against
dust and ashes! Art thou better or dearer then the Angels were? Do thou
flowt at that which condemned them? Go thy ways, make thy self merry with
thy sins; mock at that which threw down Angels. Unless God give thee
repentance, and another mind, thou shall speed as the lost Angels did. For God
may as easily cast thee from earth as he did them from heaven.

7. Sin, which God so loathed, that he could not save his own elect because
of it, but by killing his own Son. It is such a disease, that nothing but
the blood of the Son of God could cure it. He cured us by taking the receipts
himself which we should have taken. He is first cast into a Sweat; such a
sweat as never man but he felt; when the bubbles were drops of blood. Would
not sweating serve? he comes to incision, they pierce his hands, his feet, his
sides; and set life it self abroach. He must take a potion too, as bitter as
their malice could make it; compounded of vinegar and gall. And lastly he must
take a stranger and stronger medicine then all the rest; he must die for our
sins. Behold his harmles hands pierced for the sins, our harmefull hands
had committed. His undefiled feet, that never stood in the ways of evil,
nailed for the errors of our paths. He is spitted on, to purge away our
uncleanness: clad in scornful Robes to cover our wickedness: whipped, that
we might escape everlasting scourges. He would thirst, that our souls might be
satisfied: the Eternal would die, that we might not die eternally. He is
content to bear all his Fathers wrath; that no pang of that burden might be
imposed upon us: and seem as forsaken a while, that we by him might be
received for ever. Behold his side become bloody, his heart dry, his face
pale, his arms stiff; after that the stream of blood had ran down to his
wounded feet. O think if ever man felt sorrow like him; or if he felt any
sorrow but for Sin.

Now is that Sin to be laughed at, that cost so much torment? Did the
pressure of it lie so heavy on the Son of God, and does a son of man make
light of it? Did it wring from him sweat, and blood, and tears, and
inconceivable groans of an afflicted spirit; and do thou O fool, jest at
it? Alas that which put our infinite Redeemer God and man, so hard to it; must
needs swallow up and confound thee, poor sinful wretch. It pressed him so
far that he cried out to the amasement of earth and heaven; My God, My God,
why have thou forsaken me? Shall he cry for them, and shall we laugh at them?
Thou mockest at thy oppressions, oaths, sacriledges, lusts, frauds; for these
he groaned. Thou scornest his Gospel preached, he wept for thy scorn. Thou
know not, O fool, the price of a Sin: thou must do, if thy Savior did
not for thee. If he suffered not this for thee, thou must suffer it for thy
self, Passio aeterna erit in te, si passio Aeterni non erat pro te. An
eternal passion shall be upon thee, if the Eternals passion were not for thee.
Look on thy Savior, and make not a mock at Sin.

8 Lastly Sin shall be punished with Romans 6. 23.
Death: you know what death is the wages of it: not only the first, but the
Reu. 20. 6
second death. Inexpressible are those torments: when a reprobate would give
all the pleasures that ever he enjoyed, for one drop of water to cool his
tongue. Where there shall be unquenchable fire to burn, not to give light;
save a glimmering; Isid. Lib. 1. de Sum. Bon.
ad ag grauationem, vt videant vnde doleant: non ad consul^ionem, ne videant
vnde gandeant: to show them the torments of others, and others the torments of
themselves.

But I cease urging this terror; and had rather win you by the love of God,
then by his wrath and Justice. Neither need I a stronger argument to dissuade
you from sin, then by his passion that dyed for us being enemies. For if the
agony, anguish, and heart-bloud of Jesus Christ shed for our sins, will not
move us to repentance, we are in a desperate case. Now therefore I fitly leave
Paul's adiuration, so sweetly tempered in your bosoms: commending that to your
consciences, and your consciences to God. Romans 12. 1.
I beseech y^ brethren, by the mercies of God that ye present your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto GOD.

THE FIRE OF CONTENTION OR The trouble that follows the Gospel.
Lvk. 12. 49. I come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if it be
already kindled?
BEfore I run upon Division, (and yet Division is the subject of my Text; and
for methods sake I must use some division in my discourse) I must let you
understand, what this Fire is that is sent; and how innocent our Savior is
that sends it.

1. There may be Dessention betwixt the good and the good: and hereof is the
Devil the author. It is the Enemy that sowes those Tares. This is one of the
abominations that the Lord abhors: Prou. 6. 19.
A false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows discord among brethren.
God is never the immediate cause of that, which he abominates. 1. Cor. 11. 16
If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God. To clear Christ and his Gospel from causing this; the tenor
of all Scriptures admonishes us with Saint Peter. 1. Pet. 3. 8.
Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous.

Unity is the badge of Christianity: we are all the members of one body. 1.
Cor. 12.
The eye cannot say to the hands, I have no need of you, etc. We are all stones
of one building, therefore must not jar one with another, least we ruin the
whole house. Christ says, that a kingdom divided cannot stand. The Soldiers
would not divide the unseamed coat of Christ: far be it from us to rent his
body. There are three grounds of love; virtue, pleasure, profit. Virtue all
consent to be the surest and best. That then which is grounded on the best
virtue, is the best unity: and this is Faith. Love issuing from Faith is a
bond able to tie God to man, man to God: and therefore man to man. This knot is
tied so fast, that the powers of hell cannot undo it. All other unities, but
the Communion of Saints may be broken.

There is no peace so indissoluble, as the peace of faith. So contrarily there
is no Contention so violent and raging, as that is enflamed by erroneous
Religion. Lib. 2. Ep. 8.
Cyprian writes of Nouatus, that he would not so much as allow his own Father
bread whiles he lived, nor vouchsafe him burial being dead: that he spurned
his own wife, and killed his own child within her body. O the unmatchable
cruelty, that some men's religion, (if I may so call it) has embloudied them
to! What treasons, conspiracies, massacres, did or durst ever show their black
faces in the light of the Sun, like to those of Papists; all vizarded under
pretended Religion? The Pope has a Canon, called Nos sanctorum Predecessorum,
etc. We observing the statutes of our holy Predecessors, do absolve those
that are bound by fidelity and oath to persons excommunicated from their
oaths; and do forbid them to keep their fealty toward them, Quousque ipsi
ad satisfactionem veniant: till they come to yield satisfaction. What malicious
stratagems against suspended Princes, have not been kindled from this fire?
Against what nation has not this Canon shot the fury? Yea the more to
embolden subjects to such pernicious attempts, the Pope makes them believe that
the very Apostles take their parts. For so it is manifest by the form of
Gregory's sentence; that he commands S. Peter and S Paul, as if they were his
bailifs errant, to execute the writtes of his pontifical and privative
authority.

Malice in humor is like fire in straw, quickly up, and quickly out: but
taking hold of conscience, like fire in steel; Quod tarde acquisiuit, diu
retinet; what was long in getting, will be longer in keeping. Religion is the
greatest enemy to religion; the false to the true. Tertull.
Fauos etiam vespae faciunt: waspes also make combs, though in stead of honey
we find gunpowder. Of dissension among professors of the Gospel, Christ is
not author: he never gave fire to burn his Church. Yet he has his hand in it
1. Cor. 11. 19.
There must be heresies among you that they which are approved may be made
manifest. He draws good out of evil; and makes a good Shall of the evil
must: so raising a virtue from a necessity. From contentions begot by Satan,
he so sweetly works, that the profession of his but darkely glowing before,
shall be made to shine brightly. In Q. Mary's time, when persecution wrung the
Church, Martyrdom gave a manifest approbation of many (unknown) Saints. The
virtues of diverse had bin less noted, if this fiery trial had not put them to
it. Gods glory and power are more perspicuous, in strengthening his against
their enemies, then if they had none. Christ came not to send this fire; yet
he wisely tempers it to our good.

2. There may be Dissension betwixt the wicked and the wicked; and hereof also
is Satan author. He sets his own together by the ears, like cocks of the
game to make him sport. Hereupon he raised these great Heathen wars, that in
them millions of souls might go down to people his lower kingdom. Hereupon
he draws ruffian into the field against ruffian: and then laughes at their
vainly spilt blood. All the contentions, quarrels, whereby one evil neighbor
vexes another; all slanders, scoldings, reproaches, calumnies, are his own
damned fires. Thus sometimes the ungodly massacre the ungodly, oppressors
devour oppressors. Esa. 19. 2.
I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they shall fight every
one against his brother, and every one against his neighbor; City against
city, and kingdom against kingdom. The Pharisees against the Sadduces: the
Turk against the Pope: the Transgressour against the transgressour.
Covetousness shall be against prodigality: baseness against pride: temeritie
against dastardie. The drunkard spils the drunkard, the thief robbes the
thief: Proditorisproditor: the Traitor shall be betrayed, and the cosener shall
be cheated. Esa. 9. 21.
They shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm; Manasseh, Ephraim; and
Ephraim, Manasseh. It is impossible, that any true peace should be amongst the
wicked, whiles they want the soalder that should glue them together, faith.
Agreement in evil is not peace, but conspiracy. Wicked men's combining
themselves may be a faction, no unity, no amity: for they have but metum and
noxam conscientia prosoedere: terror and guilt of conscience for their league.
But some may question; does not Satan in setting reprobates against reprobates,
overthrow his own kingdom? I answer.

1. The Devil is politic, and will not divide his subjects, when by their
holding together he may divide the Church. So the Pharisees though they hate
the Sadduces; and the Herodians that despise them both: Math. 22. 16. 23.
shall all join forces shake and take hands against Christ. Papists are
enemies to Truth, Schismatics to Peace; yet both the Church: which suffers, as
her Savior did, in medio ini^orum, in the midst of adversaries; not only to
her now, but at other times also to themselves. Herod and P^te, were of enemies
reconciled friends, that their united rancours might meet against Jesus. The
Jews and the Lystrians, so diuersely religion'd, the devil can make agree, to
stone Paul. Act. 14. 19.
Thus Satan holds them under colors and pay, whiles they can do him any
service: but when they can no longer vex others, he falls to vexing of them:
and enrageth their thirst to one another blood, when they have done quaffing
the blood of the Saints.

2. The Devil in raising seditions and tumults among his own, intends not the
destruction, but erection of his kingdom. Perhaps his forces on earth are
weakened, but his Territories in hell are replenished: wherein he takes himself
to reign most surely. For Satan, during a man's life, knows not certainly,
whether he belongs to God, or to him. Predestination is too mystical and
secret a book for his condemned eyes to look into; and repentance has often
stepped in betwixt old age and death: frustrating the hopes of Satan. Therefore
he hastens a wicked man, with what speed he can, to hell; for till he came
within those smoakie gates, Satan is not sure of him; he may start out of his
clutches. For this cause he precipitates witches with much suddenness to their
ends: whom, one would think, he should let live, that they might do more
mischief. No; such is his malicious policy, he would be sure of some: and
rather take one soul in present, then hazard all on the vain hope of more
gains.

3. There is a Dissension between the wicked and godly; nor yet is Christ the
proper and immediate cause of this. For Romans 12. If it be possible, as much as
lies Romans 12. 18.
in you, live peaceably with all men.

4. There is an Emnitie betwixt Grace and Wickedness; a continual combat
between sanctity and sin: and this is the Fire that Christ came to send. He
is to some a living stone, whereupon they are built to life: to others a stone
of offense, whereat they stumble to death. Now because the local seat of
holiness on earth is in the hearts of the Saints; of wickedness in the Devil and
his Iustruments: therefore it follows, that the evil will persecute the good,
and the good may not partake of the vices of the bad. 2. Cor. 6. 16.
What agreement has the temple of God with Idols! Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you. Out of the Egypt of this world has God called
his Sons. We are forbidden all fellowship with the unfruitful works of of
darkness; not altogether with the workers: 1. Cor. 5. 10.
For then we must needs go out of the world. It is commanded Ierem 15. that
the precious be separated from the vile: yet Ier. 15. 19.
so that they may return to the good, though the good may not turn to them.
It is good for the good to sunder themselves from the incorrigible wicked; as
being the first stayre of the ladder that leaves the earth; and sets the first
step of our journey to heaven. God in his eternal decree separated the elect
from the Reprobate: in his Vocation, he sequesters them from nature and sin.
When he executes particular judgment, he takes Israel from the Tabernacles
of Corah: when he will give the general, he will sever the Sheep from the
Goats.

Christ then, who is the Esa. 9. 6.
Prince of Peace, causes not quarrels between man and man, as they are
creatures; but betwixt goodness and evil, as they are contrary natures. That
the sons of Beliall hate the sons of God, Christ is not the cause, but the
occasion. For when the Gospel separates us from the world, the world then
bends his malicious forces against us. So that Peace in sin. Ver. 51. Christ
came not to send; but Peace of conscience. Phil. 4. The peace of God, which
passes all understanding, etc. Which because the wicked Phil. 4. 7.
will not embrace, therefore Ver. 52. 53.
Five in one house shall be divided: the Father against the Son, and the
S^nne against the Father, etc. The Gospel does not otherwise work this
division, then the Law is said to Romans 7. 7.
make sin; because it made sin known. Or the Sun is said to cause
mothes, because it causes their appearance. Let Paul continue a Pharise, and
the Pharisees will love him: convert he to a Christian, and they will hate him.
Whiles we live after the world, we have peace with the world, none with God:
when we are turned to Christ, we have peace with God, none with the world.

This ground laid, we will consider, for the better exposition of the words
five circumstances.

The Fire. Fuel. Kindlers. Smoke. Bellows.

Wherein we shall find Christ's willing, and the fires kindling. Who wills
goodness to his chosen, which he is sure, will enrage the wicked to their
persecution. The cause thus given, the fire is left to be kindled by others.
For though Non sine Deo patimur, yet non a Deo petimur. The instruments of our
affliction will be found ungodly; who, though they plead, we have done the will
of the Lord, shall go to hell for their labor.

The Fire.
Is discord, debate, contention, anger, and hatred against the godly. Every man
is composed of four elementall humors, whereof one is Choler, resembled to
Fire. In whom this Choler is most adust, and puissant, they are usually most
hot, furious, fiery. But I speak here of nature; for grace can alter nature,
and purge this corruption. Regeneration is the best physic to purge Choler.
Many medicines has Philosophy prescribed against this spiritual disease; but
in vain. The Philosophers servant could scoff his Master: He inueighes
against anger, writes volumes against it, and ipse mihi irascitur; and yet he
is angry with me. Only grace can (more then give rules) give power to master
this madness. Fire and Contention have some resemblances.

1. Debate is like Fire; for as that of all elements, so this of all passions,
is most violent. The earth is huge, yet we walk quietly on it; it suffers our
ploughes to rend up the entrals of it; to teach us patience. The air is
copious, yet admits our respiration. The waters boystrous, yet sail we upon
them, against them. But Fire, especially getting the upper hand, is
unmercifully raging: it left nothing behind, to witness the former happynes of
Sodom. The worlds last destruction, shall be by 2. Pet. 3. 12.
Fire: and God uses that, of all elements, to express the very torments of
hell; adding Reu. 21. 8.
Brimstone to it. To this is the anger of God likened; Hebr. 12. 29.
Our God is even a consuming fire. So does debate exceed all passions: floods
of correction, can quench the turbulent an fiery spitit which is Iam. 3. 6.
set on fire of hell. Only one extreme may drive out another; as we hold our
burnt finger to the fire, by a new heat to extract the former. Math. 3. 11.
So the fire of grace only must draw out the Fire of debate; or send it to the
everlasting ver. 12.
fire to purge it.

2. Contention is like Fire; for both burn so long, as there is any exustible
matter to contend against. Only herein it transcends fire: for fire begets not
matter, but consumes it; debate begets matter, but not consumes it. For the
wicked study cause of contention, as 1. King 20. 3. 5. 7.
Benhadad against Ahab 1. king 20. So when the Pope could find no just
exception against Frederick the Emperor; he quarreled with him for holding
the wrong stirrup; when the great Prelate should mount his palfrey; and thought
he might easily mistake, for Emperors are not used to hold stirrops, yet he
was persecuted almost to excommunication, for it. It is woeful dwelling amongst
debatefull men, whose souls hate peace: that are (...), Romans 1. 3.
without natural affection; which Paul makes a reprobates mark: striking all
that stand in their way; and not ceasing to burn, till all matter cease to
feed them. Solomon discribes such with a fiery comparison. First. ver. 17. he
calls him a Busi-body he passes by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to
him: Prou. 26.
he thrusts himself into impertinent business; and is like one that takes a
dog by the ears; which he can neither hold, nor well let go. ver. 18. He
notes his politic villainy. As a madman, who casts firebrands, arrows,
and death; and says, Am I not insport? he scatters abroad mortal mischiefs
under the color of jest. And ver. 20. lest the fire should go out, he
administers fuel himself. Where no wood is, there the fire goes out. ver.
21. when he has kindled this flame, he strives to spread and disperse it; and
is as coals to burning coals, and wood to the fire. The words of a
talebearer are wounds, and they go down into the innermost parts of the
belly. They penetrate and cruciate the most tender and sensible places.

3. As a little spark grows to a great flame so a small debate often proves a
great rent. Iam. 3. 5.
Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles. The wind at first a small
vapor, yet gets such strength in going, that it ouer-turnes trees and towers.
Ecclus. 28. 14.
A backbiting tongue has pulled down strong cities, and overthrown the
houses of great men. War is compared to fire. Numb. 21. A fire is gone out of
Heshbon, and a flame from the city of Sihon: it has Numb. 21. 28.
consumed Ar of Moab, and the Lords of the high places of Arnon. But contention
runs like wildfire; so furious a pace, that nothing but blood can extinguish
it.

4. As fire is prouerbially said to be an ill master, but a good servant: so
Anger where it is a Lord of rule is a Lord of mis-rule; but where it is subdued
to reason, or rather sanctified to grace, it is a good servant. That anger is
holy, that is zealous for the glory of God.

This is Division; a raging fire: and able, whether it take hold of civility
or religion, of Burse or Church, to overthrow the common good of both.

For civility, the breaking of relatiues, is the ruin of substantives. We
stand not of our selves, but upon reference. Want of justice in magistrates, of
instruction in governors, of obedience in subjects, of charity in neighbors,
destroys the common wealth. Some gather thus much from the fifth Commandment,
by good consequence. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be
long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. For if Princes rule well
and subjects obey well; if masters command right, and servants do right: if
Parents instruct children in the fear of God, and children obey parents in
that fear; this happy harmony shall preserve the land. If this relation, and
reciprocal duty be neglected, all runs to ruin: and the blessing of long
life shall be with-drawne. For it is not fit they should have long life, that
rebel against those from whom they had, and by whom they hold their life.

Begin with the least ascendently. The overthrow of a house is Division. When
the husband and wife draw not euenly in the yoke; when the one brings fire and
the other has no water to-quench it: when the children are refractarie, the
servants wasters; there must needs be a decay of this family. Whereof
consists a City, but of many households? If the particulars be ruinated, what
will become of the general? When the members are gone where is the Body? If
the Magistrates are unjust, the people disobedient, if one profession quarrel
with another, and deny mutualitie: the head refusing to give guidance, the
eyes their sight, the feet to walk, the hands to work; the body of that
City dissolues. The dissolution of cities and towns, must needs ruin the
Kingdom. When the members fell out with the stomach, that it devoured all, and
took noe pains; hereon the eye would not see for it, nor the hand work for
it, nor the foot walk for it, etc. so the stomach wanting meat, the eyes,
hands, feet, and all members faint and languish. Tributes and subsidies are but
the dues and duties of the members to the Prince; who, as the stomach, returns
all to their welfare and benefit.

Dissension in religion does no less hurt, does more. It diuides a house.
Here. Ver. 52. Five in one house shall be divided: two against three, and three
against two. And Math. 10. A man's foes shall be they of his own household.
Math. 10 36.
It diuidesa city. How many cities have been destroyed by their own mutinous
distractions, whom foreign invasions could not subdue! It diuides a
Kingdom; whereof France has long been a bleeding witness: neither has
England been insensible. Ac velut in magno populo, cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, saeuitque animis ignobile vulgus: Virg.

Iamque faces and saxa volant, furor arma ministrat.


It overthrows propinquitie: the mutual succor of lending, borrowing,
giving, relieuing is lost. Yea it ouerturnes Nature it self, setting Math. 10.
35.
children at variance against their own parents. There are three very near;
Superior, equal, inferior; Parent, wife, children: Ver. 37.
yet we must separate from them, rather then from Jesus Christ. Yea it is
enough to extirpate all; Regem, legem, gr^gem; Prince, law and people. No
wonder then, if the busy devil seeks so studiously to kindle this fire!
Eccl. Hist.
So Eusebius observes; The subtle Serpent, when persecutions gave the Church
breathing space, began to vex her with her own divisions.

The Fuel.
Whereon this fire works, is the good Profession of the godly. So the rulers
against Dan. 6. 4.
Daniell in causa Dei sui: because of his Religion. Psalm. 59. The mighty are
Psalm. 59. 3.
gathered against me, not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord. They
persecuted us, not because they find evil in us, but because they cannot find
evil in us. They run and prepare themselves against me, without my fault.
Without fault? it is fault enough in their judgment, because we serve the
Lord. 1. Pet. 4. 4.
They speak evil of us, because we run not with them to the same excess of
riot. If we will not communicate with their vicious customs, we shall
participate of their raging cruelties. Against Israel, yea because it is
Israel, do they consult: Psalm. 83. 4.
Come let us cut off them from being a Nation: that the name of Israel may be
no more in remembrance. For this cause was the Babilonian fire kindled against
those three servants of God; and the same cause moved mystical Babylon to
burn our Martyrs in England. If they would have turned to Idols and Images,
the fire had been put out. We would not, could not yield to their
superstitions, therefore the Fire burned.

But that which is the occasion of evil, cannot be perfectly good. Indeed that
simply and of it self causes evil, is evil it self. But that may be good,
which indirectly and by consequence, in man's corrupt nature occasioneth it. The
Gospel, and integrity of professing it, is not the efficient but accidental
cause; or rather properly no cause, but an occasion of this feud. The bright
Sun, shining on mudde and filth, is said to cause stench: yet is not the Sun
the true cause, but the former putrefaction of the subject reflected on, when a
corrupt vapor comes into the fiery region, it is soon enflamed. Their
rancorous filth had line quiet, as mucke in a dunghill, had not the Sun of the
Gospel, shone on it, and stirred it, now howsoever the Gospel is not the
direct cause of this, yet surely the occasion. For Athens is quiet enough till
Paul comes: and till Christ is borne, Jerusalem is hushed in peace. Many
parishes stick not to say, we had rest and security enough before: but now
since preaching came in, and the Pulpets have been warmed, there is nothing
but disturbation and unquietness. How else could this Text be true, that Christ
came to send fire on the earth? The deluge of sin was universal, and the
waters of iniquity stood untroubled, and all was a Mare mortuum: but when
Christ puts fire to this water, no marvel if they wrestle. The devil stirs
not till God rowse him; as the wild boar sleeps till he be hunted. Let
darkness cover men's impieties, and their slumber is vnmolested: produce them
to the light and they cannot endure it. The vlcerous side full of dead flesh,
feels not till you touch the quick. But let Elias tell Ahab of his
Idolatries, John Baptist Herod of his lusts; and then, Thou art mine enemy.
The ungodly may pretend other causes, but this is the true one. The Pope
refused to confirm an Archbishop Math. Paris.
elect, when no insufficiency could be found against him, only because of his
age: not considering, that himself being older did manage a greater place. But
if the Archbishop was able to travel to Rome and back again to England, sure
he was able to have sat in the Chair of Canturbury. Age was the exception;
but the truth was the Archbishops honesty; that he carried not with him to
Rome a golden bottle to quench the Popes thirsty soul: as many others d^d, who
returned home with as much wit as they went forth, but not with so much money.
Such was the Popes pretense against Reimundus the good Earl of Toulouse, that
he was an Heretic: but when his just purgation and justifying of himself
would not pacify his unmerciful Holiness; Act. and. Mon. page 273.
nor get peaceable possession of his own lands: it was evident to all eyes,
that the Popes desire was not so much to have the Earl part from his Heresy,
as from his Heritage. Persecutors plead castigation of errors, but they mean
subersion of truth.

But great peace is prophesied to the Gospel. Esa. 11. The Wolf shall dwell
with the Lamb; and the Leopard lie Esa. 11. 6.
quietly by the kidde etc. And Mica^. 4. They shall beat their swords, into
plowshares, and their spears into pr^ing Mic. 4. 3.
hooks: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they
learn war any more. I answer, God will either restrain the fury of these
savage beasts, and turn Esaus threats into mildnes when he meets Jacob. Psalm.
2. 4.
He that sittes in heaven laughes at their combinings. Or many Tyrants shall
be converted to the faith of Christ; subiecting their Crowns, and laying down
their Scepters at the feet of the Lamb. Or it may intend that outward
universal peace which was through all the world, when Christ was borne in the
days of Augustus. But most specially that peace of conscience, and Communion
which shall be among the Saints; who shall lay aside all querelous differences,
and be made one by the blood of Jesus.

But when the Gospel came to us in Queen Elizabeth's days of so blessed
memory, we also had much peace. We had with Gloria in excelsis Deo, sung also
Pax in terris. The iron gates of war were shut up; and the long tossed Arc
of our Church had an Olive branch of flourishing peace bestowed on it. The fury
of an Adversary was not known; but Righteousness and peace kissed each other.
Yet was not this peace without great Fires.

1. There was a great fire of Anabaptisme; a gross, perverse, and sottish
sect, that had washed off their Font-water, as unclean: and thought it not
enough to run out of Babylon, unless they ran also out of themselves, out of
their wits. This combustion could not be well quenched; only we were happily
rid of it by the shifting ground. For when the flames were suppressed in
England, they burst out beyond Sea.

2. There was a great fire of Brownisme; an Ignis fatuus, fastening on abundance
of crude and squalid matter, could not easily be extinguished. It was blown up
with the Bellows of pride; and because it might not have the own swinge, it
fell to direct railing. They say the Church of England may be their mother, but
is none of Gods wife: why do they not call her plain Whore? For such is a
mother that has children; and no husband. But these the whiles are brave Sons,
who care not to prove themselves bastards, that their mother may be noted for
an Harlot. But the shame be their own, Integrity hers; who has not defiled
her bed, though they have shamed her womb. But whiles they call her Saint
John's Beast in the Revelation; let them beware, least they prove themselves
Saint Paul's Beast; to the Phil. chap. 3. ver. 2. Dogs. Surely God never will
leave peaceable spirits in England, to go dwell with railers at Amsterdam.

3. There was a raging fire of the Papists; who to mainetaine their spiritual
fire of superstition, made use of material fireto set a whole land in
combustion. How unspeakable were their treasons against that gracious
Princess: which yet if we gather up into one volume, we shall find their last
equalling all; which should have been a fire, a fire indeed; such a one as
hell it self could only belch out. But bless we our God, that with sweet
showers of mercy rayned it out.

These fires have been kindled in a Land of peace, though many tears have
been showred upon them, and earnest prayers sent up to heaven, for their
quenching. Yea, and will be still, so long as that crowne-shorn generation can
transport their burning quils into England; and their great Antichrist, the
Successor not of Peter, but of Romulus, sits on that fiery Chair. So long as
he is suffered to tyranize over nations, to depose Kings, and dispose
Kingdoms: who prays Peter and Pope Hildebrand in his second excommunication
of Henry Emp.
Paul, (as if they never had taught subjects to obey their Sovereigns) to
eradicat and cast out an Emperor from his royalty. Whereupon he conferred the
Empire upon Rodolphus, with this blasphemous verse. Petra dedit Petro, Petrus
diadem^ Rodolpho.
All Kingdoms were to Peter given by Christ:
And Peter may dispose them as he list.


But as Cardinal Benno affirms, that when this Hildebrand would needs solmnly
excommunicate the Em perour, his Chair burst in pieces, being but newly made
of suff^cient timber: so if it were thoroughly broken to fitters never (like
Jericho) to be rebuilded then (and not till then) Princes may reign in peace.
From all this we may observe.

1. That this fire was kindled in Christ's time, and has burned ever since. For
if this rage stroke at the head, it will not favor the members. If the saucy
Devil durst meddle and encounter with the Captain, he will not fear to set
upon a mean soldier. Remember, says Christ the word that I said unto you,
The servant is not greater then the Lord: if they have persecuted Ioh. 15. 20.
me, they will also persecute you. We cannot expect that immunitie, which our
Savior never found. In the securest and most quiet state of the Church we have
found this: that sedition has trod on the heels of peace; and persecution
been borne into the world, with the feet forward for have.

2. That the godly must maintain this fire; for there must be in them no
deficiencie of fuel. They must hold fast integrity, though this be the
matter whereupon this fire works. No peace must be had with them, that have
no peace with God: I deny not peace in civil affairs, but in conforming our
manners to theirs. For righteousness must not yield to iniquity: Christ must
be borne, and being borne must reign, though Math. 2. 3.
Herod rage, and the Devil foame, and all Jerusalem be troubled at it. 1. Sam.
5. 3.
Dagon must yield to the Arc, not the Arc to Dagon: the ten Tribes come to
Judah, not Judah go to them: Ishbosheth to David, not David to Ishbosheth.

The Gospel must be preached though hell break out into opposition: and we
must keep faith and a good conscience, though persecutors print in our sides
the marks of the Lord Jesus.

3. That the fruit of the Gospel is so far from allowing carnal peace, that
it gives Dissension. It has ever been the destiny of the Gospel to bring
commotion, trouble, and wars; though no doctrine teaches so much peace.
Math. 10. I came not to Math. 10. 34.
s^nd peace, but a sword. Not that the Gospel of it self causes wars; for
it makes peace between God and man, man and man, man and his inward soul:
but it ouerturneth the tables of the money changers, spoileth the Bank of
usurers, will not let Herod keep his Herodias, bars Demetrius of his
idolatrous shrines, pulls the cup from the mouth of the drunkard, denounces
confusion to the oppressor, vnuizardeth painted hypocrisy, and discouers the
ugly face of fraud to the world; therefore it has enemies, even to the
effusion of blood, and endeuourd extirpation of all that profess it. So that
partly this proceeds from our own corruption; that cannot endure the light,
because our deeds are evil; and partly from the malice of Satan, who by the
growth of the Gospel loses his Jurisdiction. For look how much ground
Christianity gettes, that bloody infernal Turk loses. So that neither can
the Devil so vncontrollably lead men to quiet damnation; neither can the evil
heart be so securely evil. For the Gospel informs the understanding, the
understanding tells the conscience, and the conscience will not spare to tell
men their wickedness. Though Gods hand forbeares to strike outwardly, the
conscience smites inwardly; and the former unjust peace is broken by a new just
war. Men shall by this means know hell before they salute, it and discern
themselves in that broad way that leads to damnation. Safe they may be, they
cannot be secure. Thus the Gospel begets all manner of enemies, foreign,
civil, domestical. Foreign, the Devil who now makes apparent his horns,
as if it were high time to bestirre himself. He sees, he cannot lead souls
to his black kingdom in a twine-threed, as he was wont without reluctancie:
he must clap irons upon them, and bind them with his strongest tentations.
Civil, the world which erst ticed us on, as a bait does the fish, not knowing
that there is a hook so near the jaws we took it for a kind and familiar
friend; but now it is descried and described for a very adversary. Domestical,
thy own bosom is disquieted, and thou must muster up all the forces of thy
soul, to take the Traitor that lurkes within thee, thy own flesh. This is a
near and a dear enemy, yet we must fight against it, and that with a will to
subdue it; denying our selves, and forsaking our delighted lusts and pleasures.
The godly must be feign to sit, like the Nightingale, with a thorn against
their breast. If they escape conflicts abroad, they are sure to have them at
home: and if foreign and professed adversaries should give over their
invasions, yet this domestical rebel, lust, must with great trouble be
subdued. After which spiritual combat, our comfort is that in the end the
victory shall be ours. Ecclus. 28. 22.
It shall not have rule over them that fear God, neither shall they be burnt
with the flames thereof. Hence we learn five useful lessons.

1. That we have need of Patience: seeing we know that the law of our
Profession binds us to a warfare; and it is decreed upon that all that will
live godly in Christ, shall suffer persecution. When Fire, which was the God of
the Chaldeans, had devoured all the other wooden deity, Canopis set upon him a
Caldron full of water, whose bottom was full of holes artificially stopped with
wax: which when it felt the heat of that furious Idol, melted and gave way to
the water to fall down upon it, and quench it. The water of our patience must
only extinguish this Fire: nothing but our tears moderation and sufferance
can abate it. But this patience has no further latitude, then our proper
respect: for in the cause of the Lord we must must be jealous and zealous.
Ieron. ad vigil.
Meam iniuri^m patienter tuli, iniuriam contra Sponsam Christi far non potui.
Our own injuries we must bury in forgetfulness, but wrongs to the Truth of
God, and Gospel of Jesus Christ, we must strive to oppose and appease.
Patience is intolerable, when the honor of God is in dangerous question.
Otherwise we must consider, that by troubles God does try and exercise our
patience. Ideo Deus misit in terram bonam separationem, vt mal^m rumperet
coniunctionem. Therefore God sent on earth a good separation, that he might
dissolve an evil conjunction.

2. That we must not shrink from our profession, though we know it to be the
fuel that maintains this fire. Daniell leaves not his God, though he be
showed the Lions; nor those three servants their integrity and abomination of
the Idol, though the heat of the fire be septupled. Let the Pope spue out his
execrations, interdictions, and maledictions (for his holy mouth is full of
curses) yet keep we our faith: it is better to have the Pope curse us, then
God. His curse is but like Domitians thunder: if you give care to the crackes
and noise, it seems a terrible and hideous matter, but if you consider the
causes and effects, it is a ridiculous jest. Revolt not from the Gospel, from
thy faith and innocence, and though he curse, the Lord will bless. Balaam
could say; Quomodo maledicam ei, cui non maledixit Dominus? How shall I curse
him, whom the Lord has not cursed? Rash and headlong judgment hurts not the
person de quo temere iudicatur, against whom it is denounced; but him that so
indiscreetly judges. Qui conantur per iram aliena coereere, gra uiora
committunt. To correct other men's errors in anger, is to commit a greater error
then theirs. Let not the thunders of malignant opposers disharten thy zeal
Hebr. 10. 38.
The just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, my soul shall have
no pleasure in him.

3. That we think not much of the troublous fires, that are thus sent to wait
upon the Gospel. He that gave us that blessed Covenant, meant not that we
should stick at these conditions. It is enough to have this Passover though
we eat it with sower herbs: to enjoy the Lilly, though among thorns. Let
the Jews fret and Devils run mad; and many give ground to these persecutions:
yet say we with Peter. Ioh. 6. 68.
Master, whether shall we go from thee? thou have the words of eternal life.
He is unworthy of Gods favor, that cannot go away contented with it, unless
he may also enjoy the favor of the world. It is enough to have the promise of
a Crown, albeit we climb to it by the Cross. The ancient Christians used to
have Crucem Coronatam pictured, a Cross with a Crown on the top of it. Toll
crucem, si vis et babere coronam. Their Hieroglyphicke taught men to attain
the Crown; by bearing the Cross. Though the friends and factours of hell
compass us round, yet we have heaven within us, would we have it within us,
and without us too? that is only the privilege of glory. Cannot Paul endure
the 2. Cor. 12. 9.
thorns and buffets of Satan? Let him quiet his heart with Gods encouragement.
My grace is sufficient for thee. It is enough to have the Phil. 4. 7.
peace of God, which passes all understanding, though we lack the (ill
conditioned) peace of the world. Murmr not that the world denies her wanton
solace^, to tickle thee with vain pleasures: thou have the Romans 14. 17.
joy of the holy Ghost. God is thy portion. Though the lot fall short in
earthly means, wealth and worship: yet he is well for a part, that has God
for his portion. Content thy self; this fire must go with the Gospel; and
thou art unworthy of the immortal gold of grace, if thou will not endure it to
be tried in the Fire 1. Pet. 1. 7.
Your faith is much more precious then gold that perishes, though it be tried
with fire: and shall be found at last to praise, and honor, and glory, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ.

4. That we esteem not the worse of our Profession, but the better. It is no
small comfort, that God thinks thee worthy to suffer for his Name. This was
the Apostles joy (not that they were worthy, but) that Act. 5. 41.
they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ. He refused not to be our
Savior for the shame he was put to: he brooked a purple robe to cover his
white innocence; his face, which is worshipped by the Angels in heaven, to be
spit on; his soul in the midst of all his unutterable pangs, to be derided and
iested at; some wagging their heads, others moving their tongues to blasphemy:
and if the manner of death could add to his ignominy, he suffered the most
opprobrious: yet says Paul, for our sakes, Hebr. 12. 2.
he endured the Cross, and despised the shame; this, all this shame, that he
might bring salvation to us, and us to salvation. And shall we be ashamed of
his profession; that was not ashamed of our protection? If we be, we have
read his judgment; He will be ashamed of us before his Father in Heaven. The
King does not cast away his Crown, though it be the occasion of many treasons.
Loose not thy hope and hold of a royal Inheritance, because this Title has
many enemies. He was never worthy to wear a wreath of victory, that
cowardlike ran out of the bloody field. The unthrifty soul is justly
starued, that will not reap and gather his corn, because there be thistles
amongst it. He never knew how precious a metal gold is, that will rather
throw away his oar, then take pains at the furnace. It is pity that ever the
water of Baptism was spilt upon his face, that forsakes the Standard of
Christ, because he has many enemies. Israel had never gotten that promised
Canaan, had they been afraid of the sons of Anak. It is honor enough to be
a Christian though others that are contemptible do cast contempt upon it. Our
Savior has armed us with a sweet prediction. Ioh. 16. 33.
These things have I spoken unto you, that in me you might have peace: in the
world you shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world.

5. Seeing the fuel is our integrity; and this they specially strike at; let
us more constantly hold together: confirming the Communion of Saints, which
they would dissolve. Let us more strongly fortify our unity, because they so
fiercely assault it: and cling faithfully to our Head, from whom their
sacrilegious hands would pull us, Ioh. 6. 68.
Lord, whether shall we go from thee? thou have the words of eternal life.
Where those words are found, woe be to us if we are not found. Multitudo
inimicorum corroboret vnitatem a micorum. Let not brethren fight with
themselves, whiles they have enough foreign enemies. It is enough that foes
strike us; let not us strike our friends. No nor yet part with our friends and
Christ's, because some adversaries are scattered among them. What though the
miscellane rabble of the profane: as the Brownists term them, be admitted
among us: shall the lewdnes of these disanull Gods Covenant with his? Yes say
they: this is their mercy: Gods is more. He still held Israel for his, when
not many in Israel held him for theirs. The desert was a witness of their
mutinous rebellion against Psalm. 10. 6.
God and his Minister; yet the pillar of protection by day and night left them
not. Moses was so far from rejecting them, that he would not endure that God
should reject them, though for his own advantage. In all companies there will
be evil intruders: Satan among the Angels, Saul among the Prophets, Judas
among the Apostles, Nicholas among the Deacons, Demas among Professors. Yet
though Thiatira retains a Iezebell, the good are commanded but Reu. 2. 24.
to hold their own.

But we reserve the ceremonies of a superstitious Church: but we reserve no
superstition in those ceremonies. We have both abridged their number, and
altered their nature. As it was a pains not amiss undertaken of late, to
reduce the feast of Christ's nativity, as near to the right Quando and period
of time, as art and industry could devise: by taking up the loose minutes
which in tract of time, and multiplication of degrees, had drawn out a wider
distance by certain days, then was congruent to the first Calendar. So has
our Church so near as she could abridged the rank superfluities, and
excrescent corruptions, which the Traditionall ceremonies, and ceremonial
Traditions of Rome had brought in, (and thereby removed her, from that
neerenes to her Savior, which she formerly enjoyed) striving to reduce her
self concerning Ceremonies; for their number to paucitie, for their nature to
purity, for their use to significancie.

Separate we not then from the Church, because the Church cannot separate from
all imperfection. But keep the Apostles rule. Ephesians. 4. 15.
Follow the truth in love: not only the Truth, but the truth in love. Diverse
follow the truth, but not truly.

1. Some there are that embrace the truth, but not all the truth: those are
Heretics. 2. Some embrace the truth, but not in unity; and those are
Separatists. 3. Others embrace the truth in unity and verity, but not in
heart: and those are hypocrites.
Therefore the Apostle so often urges it: Be ye all of one mind: have the
same affection. As children of one house have most usually one and the same
education: so all Gods children must be like affected to God, to Christ, to the
Church, and one to another. To God in obedience and piety, to Christ in faith
and synceritie, to the Church in peace and unity, to their own sins in
hatred and enmity, to one another in love and charity. Employing the graces
of God bestowed on us, to the edification and consolation of others: spending
our selves, like torches, to give others light. A Christian, though he be the
freest man of all, yet he is servant to all: to Christ for himself, to others
for Christ: Gal. 5. 13.
serve one another in love. Let this affection of unity be increased by
considering three inconveniences of dissension.

1. A great advantage is given to the enemy. They boast the goodness of others
errors, whilst we agree not in our truth. They take opportunity to shuffle in
their counterfeit coin, whiles we consent not in our gold; I say not so much
for the weight or pureness of sub stance, as for the fashion. Is it not a shame
for the children of God to dissent, when the children of hell are at peace? It
is a military principle; Tempt not an enemy, by giving him the advantage. What
is this, but to harten their malignant opposition to assault us, when they spy
in the City a Breach? Qui vnionem rumpit, vnitatem ruit: He that dissolues
the union of parts, overthrows the unity of the whole.

2. Sin by this means steals up: nor is there an advantage given only to
our adversaries of Rome, but to our enemies of hell. Wickedness is a crafty
thief; which spying a town on fire, and all hands laboring to quench it,
takes his advantage of booties; and what others redeem, he steals. Whiles we
are busy about this Fire, the devils factors come abroad, like Nicholas
Clerks, and steal away souls. Whiles so many disagree about Christ's
descending into ^ell, Satan gathers many thither.

3 Our souls by this means often become (...), and gather corruption for want
of scowring them by repentance. Whiles we are careful and curious about mint
and cummin, Justice and Piety go away neglected. We at once grow hot in
contention, and cold in devotion. The fire of the Altar goes out whiles this
fire of sedition is fewelled. It was the comparison of a worthy Divine. The
means whereby the sheepheards take the Pelican, is to lay fire near her nest:
which she, in a foolish pity to save her young ones, offers to flap out with
her wings, and so is burned her self. So many in a fond compassion to quench
this fire, burn their own wings, rather then help others. If our ashes could
quench it, we should not grudge them: but since it increases with
part-takings, let us either quench it with our tears, or by our prayers move
God to put it out. Howsoever neglect we not the estate of our own souls; nor
suffer our hearts ouer-growne with the rust of corruption, or moss of
security. So thou may be like the gold-finer that is all day purifying of
metals, till himself be reezed, smooted, and soiled all over. Take heed,
thou may be so long about the fire, till thou be made black with the smoke.

We have brought together the Fire, and the Fuel; now we must look for
Kindlers.

The Kindler.
Of this fire is principally Satan: it is he that brings the fuel of good
men's sanctity, and the fire of evil men's iniquity together; and so begets a
great flame. This he does perform either by his Instruments, or by himself.
He is the great Bustuarie himself, and has other deputed inflamers under him.

Sometimes immediately by himself. Reu. 12. That Reu. 12. 4.
great red Dragon, with seven heads and ten horns, and seven Crowns on his
heads: stands before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to devour
her child so soon as it was borne. When he perceived that the Great Light
(Christ) was come into the world, by throwing down his oracles of darkness, he
begins to bustle and howsoever he speeds, he will fight two or three bouts with
him, in a monomachie or duel, person to person. He durst not trust this
battle to an instrument, or fight by Attorney: Per alium desperate; quod etiam
per se fieri dubitat.
this fire he will kindle himself. As proud as he is, rather then he will
hazard the escaping of a soul from his black kingdom, he will in his own
proper person take the pains, to hamper him with his strongest temptations.

Sometimes by his instruments, which are many thousands: for if we compare
numbers: he has more helpers on earth to kindle this fire, then Christ has
servants to put it out. Therefore he is called the God of this 2. Cor. 4. 4.
world: where sub nomine mundi are meant mundani, worldlings. Reu. 12. He is
said to deceive the whole world. Reu. 12. 9.
He labors to deceive all that are in the world, but he does deceive all that
are of the world. It was he that stirred up covetousness in the Sabeans, and
covetousness stirred up their hearts against Job. He incenseth Haman, and Haman
Ahashueroch against the Jews. He provoked Judas, and almost all Judah against
Jesus. He kindles malice in their hearts that kindle these damnable fires: and
shall burn in unquenchable fire for his labor. It is he that provoke the
Magistrate to tyranny, the people to disobedience and treachery, the learned
to heresy, the simple to security, all to rebellion and impiety. Men little
think, whose instruments they are, and whose business they go about, when
they put their finger in this fire. It is the devil, that puts slander in their
tongues, malice in their hearts, and mischeefein their hands: whereby they
labor either seducere or abducere, to corrupt men's souls, or to cut their
throats. For Satan's whole intent is to draw men a cultu Dei debito, ad cultu^
suimet indebitum; from worshipping the God of light, to worship Rupert.
him that is an Angel of darkness. Oh that men would consider what eternal
fire is prepared for them, by whom this mystical fire is kindled!

Now Satan kindles two sorts of fires; General, or special. And either of
these is double. The general are extended either to error, or terror.

1. He kindles the fire of open war. He is the great general of that army.
Psalm. 2. that do band themselves against the Lords anointed. The Dragon and
his angels fight against Michael and his Angels: There is no fighting against
Reu. 12.
the Saints, but under his colors. He was the captain in that Parisia^
massacre; the Pilot to that invincible navy: 88. He is the great master of the
inquisition: the grand Cair of all confederacles abroad; the Machiauell of all
conspiracies at home. There was no treason, but was first hammered in his forge
and took the damned fire from his breath. The Pope has bin his applauded
Instrument many years, to kindle these belluine and Belial fires.
Innumerableseditions of wars have bin sent from the enginous study of his
holy breast to vex Christian Emperors and kings: wherein continually the Pope
gave the battle, but the Lord gave the victory: and that where his vicar
least intended it Hildebrand (Hell-brandrather) promised Rodolphus, whom he
incensed against his liege-Emperour Henricus, assured conquest: but it seems
the Bishop had small power in heaven, whatsoever he pretended on earth: for
Rodolphus his overthrow gave Henricus direct proof to the contrary. It
appears in a certain letter of Benno to the Cardinals, that this Hildebrand
preaching in the Pulpit did so promise and prophecy the death of Henricus,
that he bid his auditors no more to take him for Pope, but to pluck him from
the Altar: if the said Henry did not dye, or were not dejected from his
kingdom, before the feast of Saint Peter then next ensuing. But the event
proved the Pope a liar in the Pulpit; and therefore I hope took from him all
impossibillitie of lying in Cathedra, Indeed he labored tooth and na^le, by
policy and sorcerie, by his friends and fiends to ^ect this: innumerable were
the plots of his treason. One among the rest is obseruable in the letter of the
said Cardinal Benno. that he had hired a villain, observing the place in the
Church where the Emperor used to pray, to carry up to the roof of the Church a
great number and weight of stones; with purpose to let them fall down on the
Emperors head at his devotion, and to knock out his brains* but the traitor
being busy to remove a stone of an unwonted hugenes to the place, the planke
whereon he stood broke; down they come both to the floor of the Church, and
the stone (for it seems his own impiety made him the heavier to fall first
to his center) fell on him, and quashed him to pieces.

But what speak I of their particular treasons? a private treachery was but
like the French Torney at Chalons. Parvum bellum; a little war: we areto
consider their great Fir^s, which they have kindled in the Christion world:
when the Princes would never have broke mutual peace had not the Devil set on
the Pope, and the Pope set on them to this eger contention. But lightly as Mars
and money made them Popes; so Mars and Symonie held them rich Popes. And now
through Satan's help they have brought it about; that as at first no Pope
might be chosen without the Emperor, so now no Emperor must be chosen
without the Pope. Both the swords are their claim; and they will have them
both, or they will lift them up both against the deniers: and where the sword
spiritual may not be admitted, they will make way for it with the sword
temporal. It is fit, they say, that they should bear temporal rule, that
follow nearest to God: but the Pope and his Clergy follow nearest to God:
therefore are the fittest men to rule. It is answered, if God behere taken for
that God, which S. Paul speaks of, the Belly: they follow nearest indeed. From
the other and only Phil. 3. 19.
true God, they are far enough. If they were not, they would use only
spiritual war against the kingdom of Satan; and not meddle with temporal
war against the kingdoms of Christian Princes. Plead what they can from the
wrested Scriptures, and misunderstood Fathers; yet Frustra Apostolica
authoritas pratenditur, vbi Apostolica Scriptura contemnitur: in vain is
Apostolic authority pretended, where Apostolic Scripture is despised, or
perverted. Non cripit mortalia, qui regna dat coelestia. That God warrants not
the taking away of earthly kingdoms, that gives the kingdom of heaven.

2 The second general fire he kindles, is error and Heresy; a burning river
of poison: that Cup of abomination, which he reaches out to the world in the
hand of that great Babilonian Whore. To maintain this fire, he calls Counsels,
enacts laws, teaches many Parliaments the promulgation of bloody Statutes:
and whereas other laws of Princes (tending to the ruin of iniquity) are ever
neglected, those that are made against Christians, have been most severely
executed. And least the Devil in this should appear like himself, the Prince
of death and darkness; heesits thundering in the Popes mouth like an Angel of
light, and so directs him; that under In Dei nomine: Amen; he unmercifully
condemns his brother. So that the usurpation of a divine dispensation, must
burn the poor members of Christ at the fiery stakes. Now this fire he
kindles by two malicious courses.

1. By obscuring the light of the Gospel from men's eyes; and hartning their
affection to darkness. So that the children of the night have so doted upon
Ignorance, that they hate and persecute all the means and messengers of
illumination. Shine the Sun never so bright, the Papists will see by nothing
but Candlelight. Therefore it may be, they are permitted tapers, torches, and
candles, to content their carnal devotion; that they might not spiritually
desire the Light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the image of
God. 2. Cor. 4. 4.
And if ever their caliginous minds spy the least glimmering of zeal, or
feel a little turning from their former impieties; the shrine, picture, or
Image of some Saint has the glory of their conversion. A very block shall
have the praise, rather then God. But we can hardly believe, they are
converted from darkness to light, that fetch their illumination out of a stone.
It is recorded, that at Amesbary, when Queen Alinor the wife of King Henry, 3.
Lay there; a man Act. and Mon. page 355. ex. Chron. Rob. Amesburiensis.
that fained himself to have been long blind, came to her, and told her that
he had now his sight restored aagaine at the tomb of King Henry her deceased
husband. The mother easily believed it; but her son Ed^rd the first knowing
this man, that he had been ever a dissolute wretch and vile impostor,
diswaded her from giving faith to it: protesting that he knew so well the
justice of his Father; that if he were living, he would sooner pull out both
the dissemblers eyes, then restore sight to any one of them. So certainly
those Saints, to the virtue of whose dead bones these hypocrites attribute the
glory of their conversion and enlightening; would (if they were living) rather
say these men had no eyes of grace at all, then that any light was given them
out of their dead dusts, or painted resemblances. This is Satan's first
project, to cast a thick cloud of invincible ignorance, between men's eyes and
the clear Sun.

2. By hindering all those that have a commission to preach it. Zach. 3. He
showed me Joshua the high Priest Zach. 3. 1.
standing before the Angel of the Lord; and Satan standing at his right hand
to resist ^m. A door is opened, but there are many adversaries: says ^he
Apostle. Will you hear the principal adversary? We would have come unto you
(even 1 Thessalonians. 2. 18.
I Paul) once and again: but Satan hindered us. The good minister has no
adversary in his calling, but he is of the devils raising. And herein he is
either a wolf or a fox; effecting this either by open prevention, or secret
peruersion.

1 Openly he opposes not only his Principalities infernal, but also Powers
terrestrial against it. What preacher ever began to sing with a clear
breast, the songs of Sion; for many hundred years under the Popes reach: but
instantly, Pope, Cardinals, Friars, Devils cursed him with belles and candles,
and were ready to burn him in flames! Saeuit mundus, cum oftenditur immundus.
The world is mad, that his dominion and damnation should be spoken against.

2. Secretly he hinders the free preaching of the Gospel, by corrupting their
hearts that are deputed to that office. And this he effects by infusion of
these four hellish ingredients: Heresy against truth: Schism against peace:
Popularitie against simplicity; and couetice against Charity.

1. He poisons some hearts with heretical points of doctrine; which being
lightly most pleasing to the flesh, are drunk with thirsty attention. Heresy
is (thus defined) humanosensu electa, Scripturae sacrae contraria, palam docta,
pertinaciter defensa: begot of man's brain, contrary to the holy Scriptures,
openly taught, and peremptorily defended. By this, so far as the flesh in man
preuailes against the Spirit, Satan preuailes against the truth. So that if
they must needs have any of the pure gold of Gods word, it shall be so
sophisticated, adulterate, and mingled with the dross of humane Traditions,
that they shall not be able to perceive or receive it.

2. Those whom he cannot corrupt against truth, he incenseth against peace.
Division shall accomplish that mischief, which error failed in. Whom he
cannot transport to Rome, he ferries over to Amsterdam. He will either keep
men on this side the truth, or send them beyond it. Error on the right hand
shall cast away souls, if error on the left cannot. Some run so far from
Babylon, that they will not keep near Jerusalem: as men that run so eagerly
from a Lion, that they refuge themselves in the hole of a Serpent. The
Schismaticke meets with the Romanist, in superstition another way. Thus Quibus
nequit tollere veritatem, negat permittere vnitatem: It he cannot deprive us of
truth, he will not permit us peace.

3. By persuading men to be temporisers, and to catch at the favors of great
men. Thus when a Preacher must measure his Sermon by his Lords humor, the
truth of the Lord of Hoasts is smoothered. Against oppression he dares not
speak, because it is his Lords fault: not against pride because it is his
Ladies: not against riot, because it is his young Masters: nor against
drunkenness because they favor it whom his Great-one favors. He must not
meddle with those ulcers, which he sees to stick on his Patrons conscience.
That were the way to loose both present benefit, and future benefice; he dares
not do it. Whiles he is their servile chaplain, he must learn Turkie-worke;
to make thrum'd cushions of flattery for their elbowes. It seems, it was not
Gods business that such a one made himself Minister for; but his own or
worse. He has three Masters: he serves his Lord, he serves himself, he
serves the Devil; which of these will pay him the best wages? Thus if Satan
can neither take away the truth, nor peace, yet he labors against simplicity:
that for fear of men, and hope of men's, they forbear to speak against
wickedness. What his kingdom loses one way, it recouers another.

4. By infecting their hearts with covetousness, and extending their desires
to an insatiable wealth. With this pill he poisoned Demas; and Judas before
him, and thousands after him. The Chair of Rome is filled with this
pestilence. England has found it, though many Princes will not find it. When
the revenues of the Crown amounted not to half the Popes yearly taxes. But we
are well eased of that unsupportable burden: Edward the 3. begun it, for he
first made the Praemunire against the Pope: and our succeeding Christian Princes
have quite thrown him out of the saddle. God did not make his law so long, but
man might easily remember it; comprising it all in ten Commandments. But the
Pope has curtalled it, and made it far shorter; abridging the ten
commandments into two words; Da pecuniam Give money. And for this the whole
law shall be dispensed with. Experience has still proved, that money was the
Apostolical arguments of Rome. An Emperor paid for his absolution 120000.
ounces of gold: a dear reckoning for those wares, that cost the Pope nothing.

In the reign of Hen. 3. The Pope required the tenths of all the moueables in
England, Ireland, and Wales: and Ex Math. Parisiens.
because he feared, that such moneys could not be speedily enough collected, he
sent over many usurers into the land, which were then called Caursini: who
would lend money to those of the Clergy that wanted, but on so unreasonable
extortion, that the debtors were still beggared. So that what by his violent
exaction, and subtle circumuention by his own usurers (for all they had was
the Popes money) he desired only the tenth part, but he got away also the
other 9. And indeed the Pope had reason to maintain usury, for usury maintained
the Pope. Neither is this infection bounded up with that Bishop, but dissipated
among all his Clergy. Not so much as the very Mendicant Friars, that profess
wilful poverty, but have a wilful desire to be rich. They have more holiness
in their hands, then in their hearts: their hands touch no money, their hearts
covet it. But the great Belphegor sometimes gives them a purge. Whereupon said W.
Swinderby; If the Pope may take from the Act. and Mon. page 454.
Friars to make them keep Saint Frances rule; why may not the Emperor take
from the Pope, to make him keep Christ's rule? But whosoever gets, the poor
Laity loses all. There was a book called Poenitentiarius Asini, The Asses
Confessor; wherein is mentioned this Fable. The wolf, the fox, and the ass
come to shrift together, to do penance. The wolf confesses himself to the
fox, who easily absolueth him. The fox does the like to the wolf, and
receives the like favor. After this the ass comes to confession, and his
fault was, that being hungry he had taken out one straw from the sheafe of a
Pilgrim to Rome; whereof he was heartily repentant. But this would not serve,
the law was executed severely upon him, he was slain and devoured. By the
wolf is meant the Pope: by the fox his Cardinals, Jesuits, Priests: these
quickly absolve one another, how heinous ever their offenses were. But when the
poor Ass, that is the Laity, comes to shrift, though his offense be not the
weight and worth of a straw; yet on his back must the law be severely
executed; and the holy Father the wolf makes a great matter of it. Immensum
scelus est, iniuria quam peregrin^,
Fecesti, stramen surripiendo sibi.


O the insatiable gulf of that Sea! God grant, that none of that infection
ever come over amongst the ministers of the Gospel. There is nothing more
absurd, then that those which teach others to seek the kingdom of heaven, and
to despise the world; should be found to embrace the world with the neglect of
heaven.

These are the general fires this malicious Incendiary kindles. There are also
too particular and special, which he enflameth in private men's hearts: whereby
he prepossesseth them with a prejudicial dises^mation of the Gospel, for
causes either direct, or oblique. Directly for it self, or obliquely and by
consequence for private ends.

1. First he begets in a man's mind a dislike of the word for it self. This
man esteems preaching but folly: he sees no good it does, to have one
prattling an hour or two in a Pulpit. He is a parishioner to two parishes: to
the Congregation he lives with, Quoad corpus; to the Synagogue of Satan, Quoad
animam. 1. 1. Cor. 1. 18.
Cor. 1. The preaching of the Cross is to them that perish, foolishnes: but
unto us which are saved it is the power of God. It is horrible when man, dust
and ashes, mere folly; shall censure the Wisdom of God. Let them have their
wills, be it in their account folly; yet it pleases Ver. 21.
God by the foolishnes of preaching to save them that believe. And without this
they must live in error, and die in terror: hell fire will make them change
their opinions.

2. Others are wrought to hate it only for second and simister respects. The
Masters of that Damsel Act. Act. 16. 19.
16. Possessed with a spirit of divination, seeing the hope of their gains
gone, brought Paul and Silas to scourging; and never left them, till they saw
them in prison. When Demetrius perceived the ruin (not so much of the Ephesian
Act. 19. 24.
Diana, as) of his own Diana, gain and commodity in making of silver
shrines; he sets all Ephesus in a tumult. The loss of profit or pleasure by
the Gospel, is ground enough of malice and madness against it. Cannot a
tyrant be bloody, cannot an oppressor depopulate, an usurer make benefit of
his money, a swearer brave with blasphemies, a drunkard keep his
tavern-session but the Pulpets must ring of it? Down shall that Gospel come,
if they can subject it, that will not let them run to hell untroubled. Non
turbant Evangelium, ^um ab Evangelio non turbentur: let them alone, and they
will let you alone. But if you fight against their sins with the sword of the
Spirit, they will have you by the ears, and salute you with the sword of
death. You see the fires that the Devil Kindles. It is objected.

1. Satan knows that he can do nothing but by the permission of God. Ans.
Therefore not knowing Gods secret will, who are elect, who reprobate, he
labors to destroy all. And if he perceive, that God more especially loves
any, have at them to choose. If he can but bruise their heels, O he thinks
he has wrought a great spite to God.

2. He knows that though with his tail he can draw stars from heaven,
discover the hypocrisy of great Professors; yet he cannot wipe the name of one
soul out of the book of life, which the Lamb has written there. Answ. It is
the Devils nature to sin against his own knowledge. Contra scientiam
peccabit, qui contra conscientiam peccavit.

3. He knows, he shall receive the greater damnation, and the more aggravated
torments. And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented
Reu. 10. 20.
day and night, for ever and ever. Ans. He sins always with purposed malice of
heart, proudly against God, and blasphemously against the holy Ghost: though he
receive the smart himself.

We perceive now the Fire, the Fuel, and the Kindler; let us look to The
Smoke.

There goes lightly a Smoke before this Fire. Reu. 9. Reu. 9. 2.
He opened the bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the
smoke of a great furnace, and the Sun and the air were darkened by reason
of the smoke of the pit. And there came out of the smoke, Locusts upon the
earth, When we see smoke we conclude their is fire. Christ will not quench the
smoking flax; for the smoke Genesis 19. 28.
without shows a spark of faith within. When Abraham saw the smoke of the
country going up as the smoke of a furnace. He knew that the fire was begun
in Sodom. This smoke is the sign of persecution ensuing: and it is either
Public or Private Public is two fold.

1. The threatening of Tyrants; this smoke came out Act. 9. 1.
of the mouth of Saul. Act. 9. And Saul yet breathing out threatenings. Such
were the Romish vaunts of the Spanish ships: but God quenched that fire in
water; and it was but a smoke. He that could forbid the fire to Dan. 3. 25.
burn, can also forbid the smoke to become a (...). Only the massacre at
Paris was a fire without a smoke unless it be smoke enough (as indeed it is) for
Papists to live among Protestants.

2. Security is a public Smoke: when men cry Peace, peace; this is the
smoke of war. The careless lives of the old world and Sodom, were
portentuous smoakes of their enkindled destruction. Our secure and deadharted
conuersations are arguments of the like to us. God both auert that, and convert
us. We feast revel, dance, sin, and sing like swannes the prognostickes of our
own funerals. We are not circumspect to look up on those, which watch us with
the keen eyes ofmalice our sleep^ gives themhope and our selves danger.
Neglect of defense hartens on a very coward enemy. Our comfort only is; He
that keeps Israel does not slu^ber nor sleep, Psalm. 121. 4.
The private Smoke, particularly laid to a Christian, is a gentler and more
soft te^tation. But if this Smoke prevail not, Satan coms with a fiery trial.
Ifhe cannot pervert Io seph with his tempting mistres, a kind smoke: he will
try what a Iayle can do. If the devil can draw thee to his purpose with a
twine thread, what needs he a Cable rope! If Sampson can be bound with green
withes, the Philistines need not seek for iron chains. But Satan knows, that
some will not, like Adam and Esau be won with trifles: that some will stick
to Christ whiles the weather is fair, and there is peace with the Gospel; yet
in time of Math. 13. 21
persecution start away. When he comes with tempests and floods, then the house
not built on a rock, Math. 7. 17.
falls. If our foundation be straw and stubble, we know this fire will consume
it: but if gold, it shall rather purge and purify it.

He will not go about, that can pass the next way. If a soft puff can turn
thee from Christ, Satan will spare his blustering tempests: if a smoke can do
it, the fire shall be forborne. If Io^ could have been brought to his bow,
with killing his cattle, servants, children; perhaps his body had been
favored. So that after gentle temptations look for storms; as thou would
after smoke fire. Inure thy heart therefore to vanquish the least, that thou
may foil the greatest: let the former give thee exercise against these
latter; as with wooden Wasters men learn to play at the sharp. Be thy
confidence in him that ever enabled thee; and affie his promise, that will not
suffer thee to be tempted above thy strength. Only handle this weapon with
more heedfull cunning: and when thou perceiuest the dallyings of the Devil,
play not with his baits. Corrupt not thy conscience with a little gain, so
shall thou withstand more. Think the easiest tentations a Porcpose before a
tempest, smoke before fire, signs and prodigies of a fearful conflict to
come.

There remains nothing now to be considered but the Bellows; that help to
maintain this fire.

The Bellows
Are double; Passive and Active. Some blow because they cannot, others because
they will not avoid it.

1. The Passive Bellows are the godly; for they must have no peace with
wickedness; No fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. We must
love their persons, Ephe. 5. 11.
and pray for them as Christ for his crucifiers. But if they will not be
converted, if they cannot be suppressed, we may desire either their conversion
or confusion: as God wills none to perish as a creature, but as a sinful
creature; not of his own making, but of their own marring. So we must hate
not virum, but vitium; reproving and condemning evil works, both by our lips
and lives; though our good conversation be the passive Bellows to blow this
fire.

2. The Active are the wicked; who do profoundly hate the good, in regard of
both their actions and their persons. To this their own forwardness is helped
by the devils instigation. If thou blow the spark it shall burn: if thou
spitte upon it, it shall be quenched: and Ecclus. 28. 12.
both these come out of thy mouth.

But all men love good naturally. No, not all: for some have not only
extinguished the flames of religion, but even the very sparks of nature in
their hearts.

But some wicked men have loved the godly: True, but not for their actions, not
for their persons, not of their own natures. But 1. either because God snafles
the horses and mules, and curbes the malicious rage of Tyrants. Or 2. conuerts
them to the faith and obedience of his truth; as he took Saul from his raging
cruelty, and made him ready to die for him, whose servants he would have
killed: so turning a Wolf into a Lamb. Or 3. else they love the good for some
benefit by them: and therein they love not them, so much as themselves in them.
So Ahashuerosh loved Hester for her beauty; Nebuchadnezz^, Daniel for his
wisdom: (...), Joseph because his house prospered by him: and for this cause
did the former Pharaoh affect him.

But otherwise with bloud-red eyes, and faces sparkling fire they behold us; as
Haman did Mordecai. They plot like Machiauels, rail like Rabshace's, and
conspire like Absolons. These are the Devils Bellows here, to blow quarrels
among men: and shall be his bellows in hell to blow the fire of their eternal
torments. A man that is great both in wealth and wickedness, cannot be without
these bellows, Intelligencers, Informers, Tale-bearers. Let these seditious
spirits understand their employment; they are the Devils bellows; and when
their service is done, they shall be thrown into the fire.

I conclude* All this trouble and calamity shall be but upon the earth: so
says our Savior. I came to send fire on the earth: In heaven shall be no
distraction to break our peace. We should be too well affected to the world,
if it had this privilege and exemption: but in vain we seek it, where it is
not to be found. In heaven only we shall find it, in heaven only let us seek
it. Here we may have desideriu^ pacis, but there only pacem desiderij: here
the desires of peace, there peace of our desires. Now then the Peace of God
which passes all understanding, Phil. 4. 7.
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.

Amen.
THE CHRISTIANS WALK OR The Kings highway of Charity.
EPHESIANS. Chap. 5. Ver. 2. Walk in love, as Christ also has loved us; and has
given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savor.
OUR blessed Savior is set forth in the Gospel, not only a Sacrifice for
sin, but also a direction to virtue. He calls himself the Truth, and the
Way: the truth in regard of his good learning the way in respect of his good
life. His Actions are our Instructions, so well as his Passion our Salvation.
He taught us both Faciendo, and Patiendo; both in doing, and in dying.

Both sweetly propounded and compounded in this verse. Actiuely he loved us:
Passiuely he gave himself for us. And so is both an ensample for virtue, and
an offering for sin. He gave himself, that his Passion might save us: he
loved us, that his Actions might direct us. Walk in love, as Christ, etc.

We may distinguish the whole verse into a sacred Canon. Crucifixe.

The Canon teaches us What: the Crucifixe, How.

In the Canon we shall find A Precept It is partly Exhortatory Precedent
Exemplary.

The Precept, Walk in love: the Precedent or Pattern; As Christ loved us. The
Precept holy, the Pattern heavenly. Christ bids us do nothing to others, but
what himself has done to us: we cannot find fault with our example.

The Crucifixe has one maine stock: He gave himself for us. And two
branches, not unlike that crossepeece whereunto his two hands were nailed. 1.
An offering or Sacrifice. 2. Of a sweet smelling savor to God.

To begin with the Canon, the method leads us first to the Precept; which shall
take up my discourse for this time. Walk in love. Here is 1. The Way
prescribed. 2. Our Course incited.


The way is Love: our Course Walking.

Love is the Way.
And that an excellent way to heaven. Our Apostle ends his 12. Chapter of the
1. Corin. in the description of many spiritual gifts. Apostleship,
Prophesying, Teaching, 1. Cor. 12. 28.
Working of Miracles, healing, speaking with tongues. All excellent gifts; and
yet concludes. Ver. 31. ^ut covet earnestly the best gifts: And yet show I unto
you a more excellent Way. Now that excellent, more excellent Way was Charity:
and he takes a whole succeeding Chapter 1. Cor. Chap. 13.
to demonstrate it: which he spends wholly in the praise and prelation of Love.

I hope, no man, when I call Love a Way to God, will understand it for a
justifying way. Faith alone leaning on the merits of Christ, does bring us into
that high Chamber of Presence. Love is not a Cause to justify, but a Way for
the justified. There is difference betwixt a Cause and a Way. Faith is Causa
iustificandi: Love is Via iustificat^. They that are justified by faith, must
walk in Charity. For Faith works, and walks by love. Faith and love are
the brain and the heart of the Soul: so Gal. 5. 6.
knit together in a mutual harmony and correspondence, that without their
perfect union the whole Christian man cannot move with power, nor feel with
tenderness, nor breath with true life. Love then is a path for holy feet to
walk in. It is A Clear Way A Near Way A Sociable Way.

Clear.
There be no rubbes in Love. Nec retia tendit, nec laedere intendit. It neither
does nor desires another harm: it commits no evil; nay, 1. Cor. 13. 5.
it thinks no evil, says our Apostle. For passive rubbes, it Prou. 19. 11.
passes over an offense. It may be moved with violence, cannot be removed from
patience. 1. Pet. 4. 8.
Charity couers a multitude of Sins: says Peter: Prou. 10. 12.
All sins, says Solomon. Couers them partly from the eyes of God, in praying
for the offenders: partly from the eyes of the world, in throwing a cloak over
our brothers nakedness: especially from it own eyes, by winking at many wrongs
offered it. 1. Cor. 13. 4.
Charity suffers long: the back of love will bear a load of injuries.

There be two graces in a Christian, that have a contrary quality. The one is
most stout and stern: the other most mild and tender. Love is soft and gentle;
and therefore compared to the Colos. 3. 12.
bowelles. Viscera Misericordiae. Faith is austere and courageous, carrying
Luthers motto on the Shield. Cedo nulli, I yield to no enemy of my faith. So
said our precious Jewel; I deny my living, I deny my estimation, I deny my
name, I deny my self: but the Faith of Christ, and the Truth of God I cannot
deny. But love is mild, longsuffering, merciful, compassionate; and so has a
Clear way to peace.

Near.
Love is also a very near way to blessedness; and as I may say, a short cut
to heaven. All Gods law was at first reduced to ten Precepts. The laws of
nations, though they make up large volumes, yet are still imperfect: some
statutes are added as necessary, others repealed as hurtful. But the law of
God, though contained in a few lines, yet contains all perfection of duty to
God and man. There is no good thing that is not here commanded: no evil thing,
that is not here forbidden. And all this in so short bounds, that those ten
precepts are called but ten Words. Yet when Christ came he abridged this Law
shorter, and reduced the Ten into Two. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart: and thy neighbor as thy self. S. Paul yet comes after and
rounds up all into one. God reduces all into Ten, Christ those ten into
Two; Paul those two into one. Romans 13. Love is the fulfilling of the Rom 13. 10
law. Which is Contr. Morcion. Lib. 5.
Compendium, non dispendium legis; says Tertullian: an abridging, not
enervating of the law of God. So Augustine, God in all his law De doctrine.
Christ. Lib 3. Cap. 10.
Nihil praecipit nisi Charitatem, nihil culpat nisi cupiditatem: commands
nothing but Love, condemns nothing but lust. Yea it is not only the
Complement of the Law, but also the Supplement of the Gospel. Ioh. 13. Novum
mandatum; A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love Ioh. 13. 34.
one another. All which makes it manifest, that Love is a Near way to heaven.

Sociable
It is also: for it is never out of company; never out of the best company. The
delight thereof is with the Saints that are in earth, and with the excellent.
The Psalm. 16. 3.
two maine objects of Envy are Highness, and Nighnesse: the envious man
cannot endure another above him, another near him: the envious man loves no
neighbor. But contrarily love does the more heartily honor those that are
higher, and embrace those that are nigher: and cannot want society, so long as
there is a Communion of Saints. Love is the way you hear; our

Course is Walking.
As clear, near, and sociable a way, as love is, yet few can hit it: for of
all ways you shall find this least traveled. The way of Charity, as once did
the Ways of Sion, mournes for want of passengers. This path is so uncouth and
unbeaten, that many cannot tell, whether there be such a way or not. It is in
their opinion, but Via serpentis; the way of a serpent on the earth, or of a
bird in the air; which cutteth the air with her wings, and leaves no print or
tract behind her. But some Chim^ra, or mathematical imaginary point; an Ens
rationale, without true being. Viam dilectionis ignorant; as the Apostle says,
Uiam pacis; The way of Romans 3. 17
peace they have not known.

Others know there is such a way, but they will not set their foot into it.
Their old way of malice and covetousness is delightful; but this is Ard^a and
praerupta via, a hard and a harsh way. Indeed Artis tristissima ianua nostrae:
the entrance to this way is somewhat sharp and unpleasant to flesh; for it
begins at repentance for former uncharitableness. But once entered into this
Kings highway, it is full of all content and blessedness; Adlaetos ducens per
gramina fluctus.

Walk in Love.
He does not say, talk of it, but walk in it. This precept is for course, not
discourse. Love sittes at the door of many men's lips, but has no dwelling in
the heart. We may say truly of that charity; it is not at nome. A great man
had curiously engraven at the gate of his Palace, the image of Bounty, or
Hospitality. The needy Travelers with joy spying it, approach thither in
hopeful expectation of succor. But still silence or an empty Echo answers
all their cries and knockes: for hospitality may stand at the gate, but there
is none in the house. One among the rest (his hungry trust thus often abused)
resolves to pluck down the Image. With these words; If there be neither meat
nor drink in the house, what needs there a Sign? Great Portals in the
Country, and colored Post^s in the City, promise the poor Beggar liberal
relief; but they are often but Images: Muta and ^utila signa; dumb and lame
signs: For Charity is not at home: only the shadow without Spe^illectat
ina^i gives fair and fruitless hopes.

We are too much wearied with these shadows of Charity. Ambrose makes two
parts of Liberality; Benevolence Offic. lib. 1. cap. 30.
and Beneficence. Many will share the former, but spare the latter. They will
wish some thing, but do nothing. They have open mouths, but shut hearts: soft
words, but hard bowels. To these S. John gives advise Let us not love in word,
nor in tongue, but in 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
deed and in truth. Opposing works to words, verity to vanity. Verbal
complements are not real implements: and with a little inuersion of the
Philosophers sense; The belly has no ears. The starued soul delights not to
hear Charity, but to feel it. Oculate mihi sunt manus: the poores hands have
eyes; what they receive, they believe. The gowtie usurer has a nimble tongue:
and though he will not walk in love, he can talk of love: for of all members
the tongue Postrema senescit; waxes old last. Let a distressed passenger come
to some of their gates, and he shall have divinity enough, but no humanity;
wholesome counsel, but no wholesome food. They can afford them exhortation,
but not compassion; charging their ears, but in no wise ouer-charging their
bellies. They have scripture against begging, but no bread against famishing.
The bread of the Sanctuary is common with them, not the bread of the Buttery.
If the poor can be nourished with the Philosophical supper of good moral
sentences, they shall be prodigally feasted: but if the bread of life will not
content them, they may be packing. But says S. James; If you say to the poor,
Depart in peace, be warmed, be filled: yet Iam. 2. 16.
give them nothing needful to the body, your devotion profits not; neither
them, nor your selves. There is difference betwixt breath and bread, between
wording and working, between mere language, and very sustenance.

The Apostle charge us to walk, not to talk of love: One step of our feet,
is worth ten words of our tongues. The actions of pity do gracefully become
the profession of piety. It is wittily observed, that the ouerprecise are so
thwartingly cross to the superstitious in all things, that they will scarce
do a good work, because an Heretic does it. That whereas a Papist will
rather loose a penie then a Paternoster: these will rather give a Paternoster
then a penny. They are devout and free in any thing, that touches not their
purses. Thus with a show of spiritual counsel, they neglect corporal
comfort: and overthrow that by their cold deeds, which they would seem to
build up by their hot words. That the poor might well reply; More of your
cost, and less of your counsel would do far better.

Walk in Love.
Do not step over it, nor cross it, nor walk besides it, nor near it, but
walk in it. The doctrine in full strength directs us to a constant embracing
of Charity. The whole course of our living, must be loving: our beginning,
continuance, end, must be in Charity. Two sorts of men are here specially
reprouable. Some that seem to Begin in Charity, but end not so. End in
Charity, that never walked so.



Some have had apparent beginnings of love, whose conclusion has halted off
into worldliness, whiles they had little, they communicated some of that
little: but the multiplying their riches, has been the abatement of their
mercies. Too many have verified this incongruent and preposterous observation;
that the filling their purses with money, has proved the emptying their hearts
of Charity. As one observes of Rome; that the declination of piety, came at
one instant with the multiplication of metals. Even that Clergy, that poor
cared only to feed the flock; once grown rich studied only to fill the
paile. Ammianus Marcellinus says of them, that Matronarum oblationibus
ditabantur, they were enriched by Ladies gifts. And heruepon, together with
that unlucky separation of the Greek head from the Latin body, the Empire
began to dwindle, the Popedom to flourish. Now plenty is the daughter of
prosperity, ambition of plenty, corruption of ambition. So Diuitiae veniunt,
Relligioque fugit. Religion brings in wealth, wealth thrusts out Religion.

To this purpose, and to prevent this ready evil, was Gods charge by the pen
of David. Psalm. 62. 10.
If riches increase, set not your heart upon them. For till they increase,
there is less danger. But says one; Societas quaedam est, etiam nominis,
vitijs and diuitijs. Wealth and wickedness are near of kin. Nimia
bonorumcopia, ingens malorum occasio. Plenty of goods, lightly occasions
plenty of evils. Goodness commonly lasts till goods come: but dition of state;
alters condition of persons. How many had been good, had they not been great!
And as it was said of Tiberius; He would have made a good subject, was a very
ill King: so many have dyed good servants, that would have lived bad masters.
God that can best fit a man's estate here, that it may further his salvation
hereafter; knows that many a man is gone poor up to heaven, who rich would
have tumbled down to hell. We may observe this in Peter; who being gotten into
the High Priests Hall, sits him down by the Mark. 14. 54.
warm fire, and forgets his master. Before Peter followed Christ at the hard
heels, through cold and heat, hunger and thirst, trouble and wearines; and
promises an infallible adherence. But now he sittes beaking himself by a
warm fire, his poor Master is forgotten. Thus his body grows warm; his
zeal, his soul cold. When he was abroad in the cold, he was the hotter
Christian; now he is by the fireside he grows the colder. Oh the warmth of
this world, how it makes a man forget Christ! He that wants bread, pitties them
that be hungry: and they that want fire have compassion of the poor cold and
naked: but the warmth and plenty of the world starues those thoughts. When the
Princes are at ease in Sion, they never Amo. 6. 6.
grieve for the affliction of Joseph.

Whilst usury can sit in furs; ambition look down from his lofty turrets:
lust imagine heaven in her soft embracings; Epicurisme study dishes and eat
them: pride study fashions and wear them: the downe-troden poor, exposed to
the bleakeayre, afflicted, famished, are not thought on. So easily are many
that begun in love, put by riches out of the way: and made to forbear Walking
in Charity, even by that which should enable their steps. Thus avarice breeds
with wealth, as they speak of toads that have been found in the midst of
great stones. Though the man of mean estate, whose own want instructs his
heart to commiserate others, say thus with himself; If I had more goods, I
would do more good: yet experience iustifies this point, that many have changed
their minds with their means: and the state of their purse has forspoken the
state of their conscience. So they have Gal. 3. 3.
begun in the charity of the Spirit, and ended in the cares of the Flesh.

Every man has a better opinion of himself, then to think thus. As Hazael
answered Elisha; when the good Prophet told him with tears, that he should
burn the cities of Israel with fire, slay the inhabitants, rip up the women
with child, and dash the infants against the stones 2. King. 8. 13.
Am I a dog that I should do this horred thing? So you will not think, that
being now mean, you relieve the distressed; if you were rich, that you would
rob, spoil, defraud, oppress, impouerish them. O you know not the
incantations of the world. It is a Pipe, that (beyond the Sirens singing) makes
many sober men run mad upon it. I have read of an D. White. Sermon. at the
Spittle.
exquisite musician, of whom it was reported, that he could put men into
strange sittes and passions, which he would as soon alter again with varying
his notes: enclining and compelling the disposition of the hearer to his
strains. There was one, that would make trial how he could affect him;
daring his best skill to work upon his boast^d composedne^ and resolution. The
Musician begins to play; and gave such a Lacrymae, so sad and deep a lesson
that the man fell into a dumpish melancholy; standing as one forlorn, with his
arms wreathed, his hat pulled over his eyes, venting many mournful sighs.
Presently the Musician changes his stroke into mirthfull and lusty tunes: and
so by degrees into ligges, crotchets, and wanton airs: then the man also
changes his melancholy into spritely humors, leaping, and dancing, as if he
had bin transformed into air. This passion lasting but with the note that
moved it; the Musician rises into wild raptures, maskes and Anticks. Whereupon
he also rises to showting, holloing, and such frantic passages, that he grew
at last stark mad. Such a charming power, said a worthy Divine, has the
music of money and wealth, and such fittes it works in a man's heart. First
it takes him from peaceful setlednes, and from great content in his little, and
puts him into dumps; a miserable carking thoughtfullnes, how to scrape together
much dirt. Next when he has it, and begins with delight to suck on the dugges
of the world; his purse, his barnes, and all his, but his heart, full: he falls
to dancing, and singing requiems; Luke 12. 20.
Soul take thine ^ase, eat, drink, and be merry. Then shall his table
standfull of the best dishes, his cup of the purest wine, his back with the
richest robes: and he conceits a kind of immortality in his coffers: he
denies himself no satietie, no surquedrie. But at last the worlds
bedla^-musicke puts him into frenzi^: he grows rampant. Runs into
oppressions, extortions, depopulations, rapes, whordomes, murders, massacres:
spares not blood or friendship, authority nor v^ssalage, widow nor orphan,
Prince nor subject: Nec (...), nec Ar^; neither poor man's co^tage, nor
Churches altar, Yea, if the Common wealth had but one throat, as Nero wish ed
of Rome, he would cut it. O the vnpacifiable madness, that this worlds music
puts those into, which will dance after his Pipe. For this cause says our
Apostle, continue in the Charity thou have begun; Walk in love Gal. 5. 7.
Ye did run well, who did hinder you? Does wealth keep you from charity? ver.
8.
This persuasion comes not of him that calls you. God never meant when he
gave you riches, that you should then begin to be covetous. He did not for this
purpose show new mercy to you, that you should take away your old mercies from
his.

There are other, that seem to end in Love, who never all their days walked
in this heavenly path. They have a will lying by them, wherein they have
bequeathed a certain legacy to the poor; something to such a Church, or such
an Hospital. But this will is not of force till the testator be dead, so that
a man may say, though the will be ready, yet to will is not ready with the^:
for God shall not have it, so long as they can keep it. These can wish with
Balaam, to dye Christians, but they must live Pagans. Having raised thousands
out of their sacrilegious and inhospitable Impropriations; they can bestow the
dead hope of a little mite on the Church. In memorial whereof the heir must
procure an annual recitation; besides the monumentall sculpture on the Tomb.
Be his life never so black, and more tenebrous then the vaults of lust, yet
said a Reverend Divine, he shall find a black prophet, for a black cloak,
that with a black mouth, shall commend him for whiter then snow and lillies.
Though his unrepented oppressions, vnrestored extortions, and bloud-drawing
vsuries, have sent his soul to the infernal dungeon of Satan; whose
parishioner he was all his life; yet money may get him cannonizd a Saint at
Rome, and robe him with spotles integrity and innocence. So diverse among
them, that lived More Latronu^ yet in death affected Cultum martyrum. Hence
Epitaphs and funeral orations shall commend a man's charity, who never all his
days walked two steps in Love.

But it is in vain to write a man's charity in a repaired window; when his
tyrannous life is written in the bloody and indeleble characters, of many poor
men's ruin and overthrow. Nor can the narrow plaster of a little poor
benevolence, hide and cover the multitude of gaping wounds, made by extortion
and unmercifulness. No, God hates the Sacrifice of robbery: 1. Psalm. 16. 4.
their drink offerings of blood will I not offer; said David. The oblation
that is made up of the earnings of the poor, is an abomination, offending Gods
eye, and provoking his hand. First restore the lands and goods of others,
injuriously or vsuriously gotten: let not an unjust penny lie rotting on thy
heap and heart: and then build Hospitals repair ruined holy places, produce
the fruits of mercy, walk in Love. Otherwise it is not smooth marble, and
engraven brass, with a commending epitaph; that can any more preserve the name
from rotten putrefaction, then the carcass. But for all that, the memory shall
stink above ground, as the body does under it. It is a desperate hazard, that
a wicked man by a charitable will shall make amends for all: whereas commonly an
usurers Testament is but a Testimony of his lewd life. There is small hope,
that they end in charity who would never walk in Love.

There be others that cannot walk in Love, through a double defect, either of
eyes, or of feet. Some have Feet, but want eyes. Eyes, but want feet.



1. Some have the feet of affections, but they lack eyes; and so cannot descry
the true and perfect way of Love. Indeed no man can find it without God Psalm.
25. 4.
Show me thy ways, O Lord; teach me thy paths. For it is he that directs 1
Ver. 8.
sinners and wandrers to the way. These want him, that should Esa. 48. 17.
Lead them by the way that they should go. They think that by building up a
ladder of good works, their souls shall on meritorious rounds climb up to
heaven. They cannot distinguish between Viam regni, and causamregnandi. They
suppose, if they relieve Seminaries, fast Lents, keep their numbredorisons,
pro digally sacrifice their bloods in treasons for that Roman Harlot; this is
via dilectionis; the way of Love. So the silly servant, bidde^ to open the
gates, set his shoulders to them, but with all his might could not stir them
whereas another comes with the key, and easily unlocks the^. These men so
confide^t in their good works, do but set their shoulders to heauen-gates:
alas! without comfort: for it is the key of faith that only ope^s them. These
have nimble feet, forward affections, hearts workeable to charity, and would
Walk in Love if they had eyes. Therefore Let us prayfor them. Psalm. 143. 8.
Cause them to know the way, O Lord, wherein they should walk.

2. Other have eyes, but they want feet: they understand the way of love, but
they have no affection to walk in it. They know that false measures, forsworn
valuations, adulterate wares, smooth-checked circumuentions, painted cosenages,
malicious repinings, denied succors; are all against Love. Noscunt and
poscunt. They know them, but they will use them. They know that humblenes,
kindness, meekenes, patience, remission, compassion, giving and forgiving;
actual comforts, are the fruits of Love. Norunt and nolunt, They know it, but
they will none of it. These know but walk not in Love. It is fabled, that a
great king gave to one of his subjects, of his own mere favor, a goodly
city; happily replenished with all treasures and pleasures. He does not only
freely give it, but directes him the way; which keeping, he should not miss
it. The rejoiced subject soon enters on his journey, and rests not till he
comes within sight of the City. Thus near it, he spies a great company of men
digging in the ground: to whom approaching, he found them casting up white and
red earth in abundance. Wherewith his amazed eyes growing soon enamoured, he
desires a participation of their riches. They refuse to join him in their
gains, unless he will join himself in their pains. Hereupon he falls to
toyling, digging and deluing, til some of the earth falls so hea uie upon him,
that it lames him; and he is able to go no further. There he dies in the sight
of that City, to which he could not go for want of feet: and loses a
certain substantial gift, for an uncertain shadow of vain hope.

You can easily apply it. God of his gracious favor, not for our deserts,
gives man his creature a glorious City: even that whose Reu. 21. 19.
foundations are of Jasper, Saphyre and Emerald etc. He does more, directes him
the way to it; Go on this way, Walk in love. He begins to travel, and comes
within the sight of heaven: but by the way he spies worldlings toyling in the
earth and scraping together white and red clay; silver and gold, the riches of
this world. Hereof desirous, he is not suffered to partake, except he also
partake of their covetousness, and corrupt fashions. Now Mammon sets him on
work, to Effodiun^r opes irritameta malorum. Metam.
dig out his own damnation: where after a while this gay earth comes
tumbling fo fast upon him, that his feet be maimed, his affections to heaven
lost: and he dies short of that glorious City, which the king of heaven
purchased with his own blood, and gave him. Think of this, ye worldlings; and
seeing you know what it is to be charitable, put your feet in this way; Walk
in Love.

There be yet others, whose whole course is every step out of the way to God;
who is Love; and they must walk in Love, that come unto him.

1. There is a path of Lust: they err damnably, that call this the way of
Love. They turn a spiritual grace into a carnal vice: and whereas Charity
and Chastity are of nearer alliance then sound; these debauched tongues call
uncleanness Love. Adultery is a cursed way, though a much coursed way for a
whore is the highway to the Devil.

2. There is a path of malice, and they that travel it, are bound for the
Enemy. Their evil eye is vexed at Gods goodness: and their hands of desolation
would undo his mercies. Other men's health is their sickness, others weal their
woe. The Jesuits and their bloody Proselyts are pilgrims in this way. We know
by experience the scope of their walks. Their malice was strong, as Sauire in
saxa; but they would turn Jerusalem in aceruum Lapidum; into a heap of
stones. Yea such was their rage: that Nil reliqui fecerunt, Vt non ipsis
elementis fieret iniuria; they spared not to let the elements know the madness
of their violence. They could not draw fire from heaven, (their betters could
not do it in the days of Christ on earth) therefore they seek it, they dig
it from hell. Flectere cum nequeunt Superos, Acheronta movebunt. Here was a
malicious walking.

3. There is a counterfeit path; and the Travelers make as if they walked in
love, but their love is dissimulation. It is not dilectio vera, true love,
which S. Ioh. speaks 1. Ioh. 3. 18.
of. nor dilectio mera, as Luther; not a plaine-hearted love. They will cosen
you unseen, and then like the whore in the Proverbes, wipe their mouths, and
it was not they. Their art is Alios pellere aut tollere; to give others a wipe
or a wound: and Iudas-like they salute those with a kiss, against whom they
intend most treason.

4. There is a way directly cross to love: which neither obeyes God, for love
keeps the commandments; nor comforts man, for love has compassion on the
distressed. These have feet swift enough, but Romans 3. 5.
swift to shed blood. Destruction and misery are in their ways. They are in
2. King. 25. 7.
Zedechiahs case: both their eyes are put out, and their feet lamed with the
captive chains of Satan; so easily carried down to his infernal Babylon.

These are they that Mic. 2. 2.
devour a man and his heritage. Therefore Christ calls their riches, not
(...), but (...); things without them, as if they had swallowed them down into
their bowels. The phrase is used by Job Luke 11
Job. 20. 15.
He has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again: God shall
cast them out of his belly. When this vomit is given them, you shall see
strange stuff come from them. Here the raw and undigested gobbets of usury;
there the mangled morsels of bloody oppressions: here five or six impropriate
Churches, there thousand acres of decayed tillage: here a whole casket of
bribes, there whole houses and patrimonies of undone orphans; here an Enclosure
of commons, there a vastation of proper and sanctified things. Rip up their
conscie nces, and this is the stuffing of their hearts.

These walk cross to the Cross of Christ; as Paul says, they are Enemies,
cursed Phil. 3. 18.
walkers. Whereupon we may conclude with Bernard. De considerat. Lib. 1.
Periculosa tempora iam non instant, sed extant: the dangerous times are not
coming, but come upon us. The cold frost of indevotion is so general, that
many have benu^med joints; they cannot walk in love. Others so stiff and
obdurate, that they will meet all that walk in this way, and with their
turbulent malice strive to iustle them out of it. Therefore David prays: Psalm.
104. 4.
Preserve me from the violent men, that have purposed to overthrow my goings.
Let us then upon this great cause, use that deprecation in our Let any. From
pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy; from envy, hatred, malice and all
uncharitableness; Good Lord deliver us.

I am loath to give you a bitter farewell, or to conconclude with a menace. I
see I cannot, by the times leave, drink to you any deeper in this cup of
Charity. I will touch it once again, and let every present soul that loves
heaven, pledge me. Walk in love

The way to life everlasting is love; and he that keeps the way is sure to
come to the end. 1. Ioh. 3. 14.
We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.
For this are the works of mercy, charity piety, and pity so much commended
in the Scriptures, and by the Fathers, with so high titles: because they are
the appointed way, wherein we must walk, and whereby we must work up our own
salvation. Therefore the Apostle claps in the neck of good works; 1. Tim. 6.
19.
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life. Thereby we lay the ground of
salvation in our consciences and take assured hold of eternal life. He that
goes on in love, shall come home to life.

This comforts us; not in a presumption of merit, but in confident knowledge,
that this is the way to glory: wherein when we find our selves Walking, we are
sure we are going to heaven: Psalm. 138. 5.
and sing in the ways of the Lord: Great is the glory of the Lord. Now
therefore Colos. 3. 12.
Put on (as the elect of God, holy, and beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness,
humblenes of mind, etc. As you claim any portion in those gracious blessings,
Election, Sanctification, and the love of God; as you would have the sweet
testimony of the Spirit, that you are sealed up to the day of Redemption: Put
on mercy, kindness, meeknes, long suffering: let them be as robes to cover you
all over. Yea bowels of mercies; let them be as tender and inward to you as
your most vital parts. Lay forbearance and forgiveness as dear friends in your
bosoms. Depart from iniquity: for Prou. 16. 17.
the high way of the upright is to depart from evil: and he that keepth his
way, preserves his soul. And Colos. 3. 14.
above all these things put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness;
Walk in love. Gal. 6. 16.
And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

Amen.
LOVES COPY OR The best Precedent of Charity.
EPHE. 5. 2. As Christ loved us.
WE distinguished the whole verse into a Canon, and a Crucifixe. The Canon
consisted of a Precept, and a Precedent. Love is the Subject: and it is both
commanded and commended. Commanded in the Charge, which you have heard.
Commended in the Example, which you shall hear. I determined my speech with
the Precept; Walk in love. The Precedent or Pattern remains to be propounded
and expounded; As Christ loved us. Every word is emphaticall: and there be
four, signifying four several natures.

Here 1 As is a word of 1 Quality 2 Christ 2 Majesty 3 Loved 3 Mercy 4 Us 4
Misery.

Two of these words be Vincula or Media; that join and unite other things;
Sicut and Dilexit: As and Loved. As directs our love to God and Man, by the
exemplified rule of Christ loving us. Walk in love to others, As Christ loved
us. Loved is that blessed reconciling nature; whereby Gods good Greatness
descends to our bad baseness; and the Just gives to the unjust Salvation. For
what other nature but Mercy, could reconcile so high Majesty, and so low
Misery!

As
According to Zanchius his observation on this place, is a note of Quality,
not Equality; of Similitude not of Comparison. We must love others As Christ
loved us; As; for the manner, not for the measure. His Cant. 8. 6.
love was strong as Death; for to the death he loved us. It was a bright and
clear fire; many matters could not quench it; yea water and blood could not put
it out. Ioh. 3. 16.
God so loved the World: so freely, so fatherly, so fully; as no tongue can
tell, no heart think. Ephe. 3. 19.
The love of Christ passes knowledge. To think of equalling this love, would
be an impossible presumption. Our love is inconstant, weak; a mingled, and
often a mangled love, mingled with self love, and mangled with the wounding
affections of the world. Our love is feign, his strong: ours ficle, his
constant: ours limited, his infinite. Yet we must follow him so fast as we
can, and so far as we may; Walking in love, as he loved us.

His Walking in love was strange and admirable: he took large steps; from
heaven to earth, and from earth to heaven. As Bernard on that speech of the
Church concerning her Beloved. Cant. 2. 8.
Behold! he comes leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills. He
leaps from heaven to the Virgins womb, from the womb to a manger, from the
manger to Egypt, from Egypt to Judah, from thence to the Temple, from the
Temple up to the Cross, from the Cross down to the grave, from the grave up
to the earth, and from the earth up to the highest glory. And he shall yet have
another leap, from the right hand of his Father to judge quick and dead.

These were great iumpes, and large paces of love. When he made but one stride
from the clouds to the cradle, and another from the Cradle to the cross, and a
third from the cross to the crown. To come from the bosom of his immortal
father, to the womb of his mortal mother, was a great step. From the lowest
hell, or depth of his humiliation; to the highest heaven or top of his
exaltation was a large pace.

We cannot take such large steps, nor make such strides. These leaps are beyond
our agilitie, our ability. Yet we must follow him in love; stepping so far
as we can, and walking so fast as we may. Follow we carefully and cheerfully;
though non passibus aequis. The Father, that takes his young son into the field
with bows and shafts, and bids him shoot after him, does not expect that the
child should shoot so far as he, but so far as he can. Though we cannot
reach Christ's mark, yet 2. Cor. 8. 12.
If there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, not
according to that he has not. Now this particle

As, is not barely similitudinary, but has a greater latitude: and serves To
Confine the Measure of our Imitation. Define Matter Refine Manner

1. This Sicut Confines
Our imitation, and limits it to that circumference, which the present rule or
compass gives it. We may not follow Christ in all things, but in this thing;
Love, As he loved us. Our imitation has a limitation, that it may not
exorbitantly start out of the circle. There are special works, which God
reserues to himself; and wherein he did never command or commend man's
following: but rather strikes it down as presumption. His Power, his Majesty,
his Wisdom, his Miracles, cannot without a contumacious ambition be aimed at.
When Lucifer aspired to be like God in Majesty, he was thrown out of heaven.
When Adam contended to be like God in knowledge, he was cast out of Paradise.
When Nebuchadnezzar arrogated to be like God in Power, he was expulsed his
kingdom. When Simon Magus mounted to be like God in working Miracles, and to
fly in the air, he was hurld down, and broke his neck. God must not be
imitated in his Finger, in his Arm, in his Brain, in his Face; but in his
Bowels. Not in the Finger of his Miracles; nor in the Arm of his Power; nor in
the Brain of his Wisdom; nor in the Face of his Majesty; but in the Bowels
of his Mercy. Luke 6. 36.
Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful. And says Paul; Col. 3.
13.
Put on the Bowels of mercy; as Christ put them on: Forbear, forgive; Walk in
Love; As he loved us. Neither Angel nor Man did ever, or shall ever offend,
in coveting to be like God in Love, Grace, Mercy, Goodness. So that this Sicut
excludes his Miracles, and directs us to his Morralls. Walk in Love, (...) etc.

2. This Sicut Defines.
What our Love should be; As Christ was to us. Now his love to us had an
infinite extention; and is past the skill of men or Angels to describe. Yet
because this is the perfect Copy of our imitation; and the infallible Rule
whereby we must square our Charity; I must according to my shallow power wade
a little into this infinite and boundles Sea. I will only note four sweet
streams of life in his Love. It was Holy Sine Merits. Hearty Mode. Kind
Despect^. Constant Defect^.

1. Holy.
The Love of Jesus to us was Sancta and sanctificans dilectio: a Love holy
formaliter, in itself: and holy effectiue, in making those holy on whom it was
set. He gave himself to us, and for us: and gave us a faith to receive and
embrace him. Sine quo nec dil^cti, nec diligentes fuissemus. Without whom we
neither could have received love, nor returned love. Now his love did not only
extend to our bodies health, but to our souls bliss. So he loved us, that he
saved us.

Our love should likewise be holy and whole: desiring not only our brothers
external welfare; but much more his internal, his eternal blessedness. He
that pitties not a famished body, deserves justly the name of an unmerciful
man: but he that co^passionates not an afflicted conscience, has much more a
hard heart. It is an usual speech of compassion to a distressed man; Alas poor
Soul: but this same, alas poor Soul, is for the most part mistake^. Neither
the pittier, nor the pitied imagins the soul pittiable. Very humanity
teaches a man to behold an execution of thieves and traitors with grief:
that men to satisfy their malicious or covetous affections, should cut off
their own lives with so infamous a death. But who commiserates the endangered
Soul, that must then ventor and enter on an eternal life or death?

The story of Hagar with her Son Ishmael, is set down by so heavenly a pen,
that a man cannot read it without tears. She is Genesis 21. 14.
cast out of Abraham's house with her child that might call her Master father.
Bread and water is put on her shoulder, and she wanders into the wilderness: a
poor relief for so long a journey, to which there was set no date of
returning. Soon was the water spent in the bottle: the child cries for drink,
to her that had it not; and lifts up pitiful eyes, every glance whereof was
enough to wound her soul: vents the sighs of a dry and panting heart; but
there is no water to be had; except the tears that ran from a sorrowful
mothers eyes could quench the thirst. Down she lays the child under a
shrubbe: and went as heavy as ever mother parted from her only son: and sat
her down upon the earth, as if she desired it for a present receptacle of her
grief, of her self: a good way off, says the Text, as it were a bow-sho^e
that the shrickes, yellings, and dying groans of the child might not reach her
ears: crying out; Let me not see the death of the child. Die she knew he must:
but as if the beholding it would rent her heart, and wound her soul; she
denies those windows so sad a spectacle; Let me not see the death of the
child. So she lift up her voice and wept. Never was Hagar so pitiful to her
Son Ishmael, as the Church is to every Christian. If any son of her womb
will wander out of Abraham's family, the House of Faith; into the wilderness of
this world; and prodigally part with his Ion. 2. 8.
own mercy; for the gaudy transient vanities thereof. She follows, with
entreaties to him, and to heaven for him. If he will not return, she is loath
to see his death: she turns her back upon him, and weeps. He that can with
dry eyes, and unrelenting heart, behold a man's Soul ready to perish, has not
so much passion and compassion, as that Egiptian bondwoman.

2. Hearty.
The love of Christ to us was hearty; not consisting of shows, and signs, and
courtly complements; but of actual, real, royal bounties. He did not
dissemble live to us, when he dyed for us. Exhibitio operis, probatio amoris.
He pleaded by the truest and undeniable argument, demonstration. I love you:
wherein? I give my Life for you. Tot ora, quot vulnera; tot verba, quot
verbera. So many wounds, so many words to speak actually his love: every
stripe he bore gave sufficient testimony of his affection. His exceeding rich
gift, shows his exceeding rich love. This heartines must be in our Love; both
to our Creator, and to his Image.

1. To God: so he chalengeth thy love to be conditioned; with thy Heart, with
all thy heart. And this says Christ, is Primum and Maximum mand^tum Math. 22.
38.
the First and the greatest Commandment. The first; Marlorat.
Quasi virtualiter centinens reliqua; as mainely comprehending all the rest.
For he that loves God with all his heart will neither Idolatrize, nor
blaspheme, nor profane his Sabboths; no nor wrong his creatures. The greatest;
Aretius.
as requiring the greatest perfection of our love. This then must be a hearty
love; not slow, not idle, but must show it self Et properando, and operando:
in ready diligence, in fruitful and working obedience. There are many ^otent
to love God alitle, because he blesses them much. So Saul loved him for his
kingdom. These love God Pro seipsis, not Prae seipsis; For themselves, not
before themselves. They will give him homage, but not fealty: the calves of
their lips, but not the calves of their stals. If they feast him with
venison, part of their Imparked Riches, which is dear to them: yet it shall be
but rascal dear, the trash of their substance: they will not feast him with
the heart, that is the best dear in their Park.

2. To man: whom thou art bound to love as thy self: where say some, As is but
a Tam, not a T^ntum. As thy self, not As much as thy self: As for the manner,
not for the measure. But this is certain; true love begins at home; and he
cannot love another soundly, that primarily loves not himself. And he that
loves himself with a good heart, with the same heart will love his brother:
Jacob. de Vorag. in Luc. 10. Sermon. 2.
In qu^ seipsum, and propt^r quod seipsum: In that manner, and for that cause
that he loves himself. This then commands the same love, if not the same
degree of love, to thy brother, that thou bear to thy self.

This hearty love is hardly found. More is protested now then in former times,
but less done. It is wittilyob served, that ye old manner of saluting, was to
take and shake one another by the hand: now we lock arms and join breasts,
but not hearts. That old hand full was better then this new armefull. Our
cringes and complementall bowings promise great humilitic: but the smootherd
venime of pride ^es within. We have low looks and lofty thoughts. There are
enough of those Psalm. 28. 3.
Which speak peace to their neighbors, but mischief is in their hearts.
Whose smooth habites do so palliate, and ornamentally cover their poison; as
if they did preserve mud in Crystal. The Romans usually painted Friendship,
with her hand on her heart: as if she promised to send no messenger out of the
gate of her lips, but him that goes on the hearts arrand. Now we have studied
both textures of words, and pretextures of manners, to shroud dishonestie. But
one ounce of real charity is worth a whole talent of verbal. He loves us
best, that does for us most. Many Politicians, (and the whole world now runs
on the wheels of policy) use their lovers as ladders, their friends as
scaffolds. When a house is to be erected, they first set up scaffolds, by which
they build it up: the house finished, down pull they the scaffolds, and throw
them into the fire. When the covetous or ambitious man has his turn served by
others; either for his advancing or aduantaging; for gain or glory: he puts
them off with neglect and contempt. The house is built, what care they for the
scaffold? The feate is wrought, let the wise and honest helpers be imprisoned or
poisoned, sink or swim, stand or perish. Nay it is well, if they help not
those down, that helped them up.

3. Kind.
The Apostle makes Col. 3. 12.
Kindness one essential part of our love; deriuing it from Christ's example:
who was Kind to us, both in giving us much good, and forgiving us much evil.
And God commends, yea commands the inseparable neighborhood of godliness
and brotherly kindness. 2. Pet. 1. 7.
Add to your godliness brotherly kindness. For there is no piety toward God,
where there is no kindness to our brother. Now Christ's kindness to us consisted
in 2. excellent effects Corrigendo. Porrigendo.

1. In correcting our errors, dir^cting and amending our lives. Non minima
pars dilectionis est, reprehendere dilect^m, It is no small part of kindness,
to reprove him thou love. Therefore God says; The shall reprove thy brother;
and not hate him in thy heart. A loving man will chide his erring friend: and
he that does not, hates him in his heart. Aug. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 22.
Sic vigilet tolerantia, vt non dormiat disciplina. So let patience watch, that
discipline sleep not. This was David's desire. Psalm. 141. 5.
Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness: and let him reprove ^e, it
shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head. Our Savior took
this course, but he was pitiful in it: not Math. 12. 20.
breaking the bruised re^d, nor quenching the smoking flax. He was not
transported with passion, but moved with tender compassion, and merciful
affection. Mark. 6. 36.
He was moved with compassion toward the people, seeing them as sheep without
a shepherd. Psalm. 103. 13.
As a Father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him.
And children are Vicera parentum, says In Epist. Paul. ad Philem.
Jerome: the very bowels of the parents. Therefore his bowels earned within
him, when he saw the weakly blind led by the wilfully blind, and he instructed
them. It is no small mercy in a Father, to correct his erring child.

This is one office of love almost quite forgotten in the world. Our eyes and
ears are conscious of many horridsinnes, whereof we make also our souls
guilty by our silence. Like Cameleons, we turn to the color of our company.
Oppressions that draw blood of the Commonwealth, move us not. Oaths that
totter the battlements of heaven, wake us not. O where is our kindness! whilst
we do not reprove, we approve these iniquities. Greg.
He is conscious of secret society, that forbeareth to resist open iniquity.
Thou say, it is for loves sake thou sparest reprehension: why, if thou love
thy friend, thou will gently rebuke his faults. If thou love thy friend never
so dearly, yet thou oughtst to love truth more dearly. Let not then the truth
of love prejudice the love of truth.

2. In (...), reaching ^orth to us his ample mercies: 1. Tim. 6. 17.
Giving ^ichly ^l things to enjoy. Where the Apostle describes Gods bounty;
that he Gives Freely. Fully. Universally. Effectually.



1. Freely; he gives without exchange: he receives nothing for that he gives.
Ungodly men have honor, wealth, health, peace, plenty: their bellies are
filled with his treasure, and they do not so much as return him thanks. His
Sun shines, his rain falls on the unjust and ungrateful man's ground. Man
when he gives, and respicit and recipit gratitudinem; both expects and accepts
thanks, and a return of love: God has not so much as thanks. For the good,
they are indeed grateful: but this Gratia grati is Gratia gratificantis: God
gives them this grace, to be thankful: and they may bless him, that he
stirs them up to bless him.

2. Fully and richly, as becomes the greatest King. A Duke at the wedding Feast
of his daughter, caused to ^e brought in thirty Courses; and at every Course
gave so many gifts to each guest at the Table, as were Dishes in the Course.
And I have read of a Queen, that feasted her guests with wines brewed with
dissolved precious stories; that every draught was valued at a hundred crowns.
Here was royal entertainment; but this was but one Feast. Such bounty
continued would quickly consume the finite means of any earthly Prince. Only
God is Ep^. (...). (...).
rich in mercy: his treasury fills all the world, without emptying, yea
empairing or abating it self.

3. Universally; all things. The king has his Crown, the great man his
honor, the mighty his strength, the rich his wealth, the learned his
knowledge, the mean man his peace: all at his Gift. He opens his hand wide, he
sparseth abroad his blessings, and filles all things living with his
plenteousnesse.

4. Effectually: he settles these gifts upon us. As he gave them without
others, so others without him shall never be able to take them away. As he
created, so he conserueth the virtues; strength in bread, and warmth in
clothes; and gives wine and oil their effectiue cheerfulness.

Be ^ou so kind as this holy and heavenly pattern, not aiming at the measure
which is inimitable, but leuelling at the manner which is charitable. Like Job,
who used not to Job 31. 17.
eat his morsels alone: neither to deny his bread to the hungry, nor the
fleece of his flock to the cold and naked. Let thy stock of kindness be
liberal, though thy stock of wealth be stinted. Give Omni petenti, though
not Omnia petenti; as that Father excellently.

4. Constant.
For with Christ is no variablenes, Iam. 1. 17.
no shadow of change. But Ioh. 13. 1.
Whom he once loves, he loves for ever. Fickleness is for a Laban, whose Genesis
31. (...).
countenance will turn away from Jacob: and his affection fall off with his
profit. I have read of two entire friends, well deserving for their virtues;
that when the one was promoted to great wealth and dignity, the other
neglected in obscurity: the preferred, though he could not divide his honor,
yet shared his wealth to his old companion. Things so altered that this honored
friend was falsely accused of treachery, and by the blow of suspicion thrown
down to misery: and the other for his now observed goodness raised up to a
high place where now he requites his dejected friend with the same courtesy:
as if their minds had consented and contended to make that equal, which their
states made different. O for one dram of this immutable Love in the world!
Honors change manners: and we will not know those in the Court, who often fed
us in the country. Or if we vouchsafe to acknowledge them as friends, we will
not as Suitors. Hereon was the verse made. Quisquis in hoc mundo cunctis vult
gratus haberi:
Det, Capiat, Quaerat, Plurima, Pauca, Nihil.


He that would be of worldly men well thought:

Must always Give, Take, Beg, Much, Little, Naught. Men cannot brook poor
friends. This inconstant charity is hateful; as our English phrase
premonisheth; Love me Little, and Love me Long.

3. This Sicut Refines
Our love; Walk in love, as Christ loved us. Where As is not only
similitudinary, but causall. Love because Christ loved us: for this cause, as
after this manner. Which serves to putrify our love, to purge it from 1. John
4. 19.
corruption, and to make it perfect. Dilectio Dei nosfacit and diligibiles and
diligentes: both such as God can love, and such as can love God. For it is the
love of Christ to us, that works a love to Christ in us. A man will ever love
that medicine, that has freed him from some desperate disease. Christ's Love
has healed us of all our sores and sins: let us honor and love this
medicine, compounded of so precious simples, water and blood. And let us not
only affectionately embrace it our selves, but let us inuit others to it
Psalm. 66. 16.
Come and harken all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done
for my soul.

Christ.
I have been so punctual in this word of Quality, that I can but mention the
rest. The word of Majesty is Christ; who being almighty God, coequall and
coeternall with the Father and the Spirit; took on him our nature: and was
factus homo, vt pro homine pacaret Deum. God was made man, that for man he
might appease God. Thus did so great a majesty stoop low for our love; Non
exuendo quod habuit, sed induendo quod non habuit: not by loosing what he had,
but by accepting what he had not; our miserable nature. Bern. Tract. de
diligendo Deo.
Ipse dilexit nos and Tantus and tantum, and gratis tantillos and tales. He
that was so great loved so greatly, us that were so poor and unworthy freely.

Loved
Is that word of Mercy, that reconciles so glorious a God to so ungracious
sinners. The cause which moved Christ to undertake for us, was no merit in us,
but mere mercy inhim. He Loved us, because he loved us: in our Creation when
we could not love him: in our Redemption, when we would not love him. Loved us,
notbutthat he loves us still. But the Apostle speaks in this time, to
distinguish the love wherewith he now loves us, from that whereby he once
Loved us. Romans 5. 10.
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by his death: much
more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. Though it be also true,
that Ier. 31. 3.
from everlasting he Loved us.

Us
Is the word of Misery: Us he loved, that were so wretched. The word is
indefinite; Us, all us. Us be we never so unworthy: All us, be we never so
many.

1. Us that were unworthy of his love, from whom he expected no correspondence.
That he loved the blessed Angels was no wonder, because they with winged
obedience execute his hests Psalm. 103. 20.
and do his word. Yea that he loved his very reason-lesse and insensible
creatures, is not strange: for Psalm. 148. 8.
fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind and tempest fulfill his word. But
to love us, that were weak, ungodly, sinners, enemies. Romans 5 weak, no
strength to deserve: ungodly, no piety to procure: sinners, no righteousness to
satisfy: enemies, no peace to atone: for we hated him, and all his Math. 10.
22.
ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. To love such us, was an
vnexpectable, a most merciful Love. He that wanted nothing, loved us, that
had nothing. Immortal eternity loved mortal dust and ashes. O if a man had
Ora mill fluentia melle, yea the tongues of Angels, he could not sufficiently
express this love. Ioh. 3. 16.
So God loved the world: Mundum immundum, the unclean world; that not only
not Ioh. 1. 10.
received him; but even crucified and killed him.

2, All of us, without acception of persons. This is the Ioh. 1. 29.
Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. The Gospel proclaims
an universal Si quis; Whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Qui
seipsum excipi^ se ipsum decipit. He that excepts himself, beguiles his own
soul. Hence I find three inferences, obseruable, which I will commend to your
consciences, and your consciences to God.

Dilecti diligamus. Dilectos Diligentes

1. We are loved our selves, therefore let us love. He that bids us love, loved
us first Ioh. 15. 12.
This is my Commandment, that ye love one another. Why? As I loved you. Non
aliud iussit, quam gessit: he charge us with nothing in precept, which he
performed not in practice. Therefore Si tardi su^us ad ^andum, non tardi simus
ad redamandum. Though we have not been forward to love first, let us not be
backward to return love. Dilecti diligite 1. Ioh. 5. 11.
If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. Magnes amoris amor: and
the sole requital which God requires for his rich love, is our poor love;
that only may love him, but have nothing to give him, that is not his.

2. They are beloved whom thou art charged to love. He that bids us love
others, loves them himself. It is fit we should love those whom Christ loves.
If thou love Christ, thou art bound to love others, because he loves them: yea
with that very same love, wherewith he loves thee. Therefore Dilectos diligamus.

3. They also love God, whom God commands thee to love. The love of Christ is
so shed abroad into all Christian hearts, that they unfeignedly affect Jesus
their Savior. They love him, whom thou love, therefore love them. It is fit,
we should love them highly, that love God heartily. Therefore Diligentes
diligamus.

Thus you have heard Loves Walk, or Race: now then says Paul; So run that
you may obtain. I will end with an Apologue, an Epilogue, a Parable. Charity,
and certain other her riualls, or indeed enemies would run a race together.
The Prize they all ran for, was Felicity; which was held up at the Gaoles
end by a bountiful Lady, called Eternity. The runners were Pride,
Prodigality, Envy, Covetousness, Lust, Hypocrisy, and Love. All the rest were
either diverse or adverse, neighbors or enemies to Charity. I will,
Herald-like, show you their several equipage; how they begin the Race and end
it.

1. Pride, you know, must be foremost; and that comes out like a Spanyard, with
daring looks and a tongue thundering out braues: mounted on a spritely Iennet
named Insolence. His Plumes and Perfumes amaze the beholders eyes and
nosthrils. He runs as if he would overthrow Giants and Dragons: yea even the
great Red-Dragon, if he encountered him: and with his lance burst open heaven
gates. But his Iennet stumbles, and down comes Pride. You know how wise a king
has read his destiny; Pride will have a fall.

2. The next is Prodigality; and because he takes himself for the true
Charity, he must be second at least. This is a young Gallant, and the horse
he rides on, is Luxury. He goes a thundering pace, that you would not think it
possible to overtake him: but before he is got a quarter of the way, he is
spent, all spent; ready to beg of those, that begd of him.

3. Envy will be next, a lean meager thing, full of malicious mettle, but
has almost no flesh. The horse he rides on is Malcontent. He would in his
journey first cut some thousand throats, or powder a whole kingdom, blow up a
State; and then set on to heaven. But the hangman sets up a Galowse in his way,
whereat he runs full butt, and breaks his neck.

4. Then comes sneaking out Co^eteousnes; a hungerstaru'd usurer, that sells
wheat, and eats beans: many men are in his debt, and he is most in his own
debt: for he never paid his belly and back a quarter of their dues. He rides
on a thin hobbling Jade called vnconscionablenes which for want of a worse
stable he lodges in his own heart. He promises his soul to bring her to
heaven: but tarrying to enlarge his barnes, he lost opportunity and the prize
of salvation: and so fell two bows short; Faith and Repentance.

5. Lust has gotten on Loves cloak, and will venture to run. A leprous
wretch, and riding on a trotting beast, a hee-goate; was almost shaken to
pieces. Diseases do so crampe him, that he is feign to sit down with Vae
misero: and without the help of a good Doctor or a Surgion, he is like never
to see a comfortable end of his journey.

6. Hypocrisy is glad that he is next to Charity; and presumes that they two
are brother and sister. He is horsed on a halting hackney (for he does but
borrow him) called Dissimulation. As he goes, he is offering every man his
hand, but it is still empty. He leanes on Charities shoulder, and protests
great love to her: but when she tryes him to borrow a little money of him for
some merciful purpose; he pleads, he has not enough to serve him to his
iourneys end. He goes forward like an Angel, but his trusted horse throws him,
and discouers him a Devil.

7 The last named, but first and only that comes to the prize at the goales
end, is Charity. She is an humble virtue, not mounted as the other racers, but
goes on foot. She spares from her own belly, to relieve those poor Pilgrims
that travel with her to Heaven. She has two Virgins that bear her company;
Innocence, and Patience. She does no hurt to others, she suffers much of
others; yet was she never heard to curse. Her language is blessing, and she
shall for ever inherit it. Three celestial Graces, Glory, Immortality, and
Eternity, hold out a Crown to her. And when Faith and Hope have lifted her up
to heaven, they take their leaves of her; and the bosom of everlasting Mercy
receives her.

A CRVCIFIXE OR A Sermon upon the Passion.
EPHESIANS. 5. 2. He has given himself for us, an offering and a Sacrifice to God
for a sweet swelling savor.
THis latter part of the verse is a fair and lively Crucifixe, cut by the hand
of a most exquisite caruer: not to amaze our corporal lights with a piece of
wood, brass, or stone curiously engraven, to the increase of a carnal
devotion. But to present to the eye of the conscience, the grievous Passion,
and gracious compassion of our Savior Jesus Christ; Who gave himself for us,
etc. This Crucifixe presents to our eye seven considerable Circumstances Who,
Christ. What, Gave. Whom, Himself. To whom, To God. For whom, For us. After
what manner, An offering and Sacrifice. Of what effect. Of a sweet savor.



The points, you see, lie as ready for our discourse, as the way did from
Bethanie to Jerusalem: only fail not my speech, nor your attention, till we
come to the Iourneys end.

Who.
The Person that gives is Christ: the quality of his person does highly
commend his exeeding love to us. We will ascend to this consideration by 4.
stairs or degrees and descend by 4. other. Both in going up, and coming
down, we shall perceive the admirable love of the giver. Ascendently.

1. We will consider him Hominem; a man. Ioh. 19. 5.
Behold the man, says Pilate. We may tarry and wonder at his lowest degree;
that a man should give himself for man. Romans 5. 7.
For scarcely for a righteous man will one die. But this man gave himself for
unrighteous man to die; not an ordinary, but a greevous death, exposing
himself to the wrath of God, to the tyrranie of men and Devils. It would
pity our hearts to see a poor dumb beast so terrified, how much more
Hominem, a man, the Image of God!

2 The second degree gives him hominem innocentem, an Innocent man. Pilate
could say. Luke 23. 14
I have found no fault in this man. No nor yet Herod. No nor the Devil, who
would have been right glad of such an advantage. So Pilates Wife sent her
husband word. Math. 27. 19.
Have thou nothing to do with that just man. So the Person is not only a man,
but a just man, that gave himself to endure such horrors for us. If we pity
the death of malefactors, how should our compassion be to one Innocent!

3. In the third degree, he is not only Homo, a man; and Iustus homo, a good
man; but also Magnus homo a great man: royally descended from the ancient
Patriarchs and Kings of Judah. Pilate had so written his Title, and he would
answer* not alter it; Quod scripsi, scripsi. And what was that? Ioh. 19. 19.
Jesus of Nazereth, the King of the Jews. Now as is the Person, so is the
Passion: the more noble the giver, the more excellent the gift. That so high a
King would suffer such contempt and obloquie to be cast upon him; when the
least part of his disgrace had been too much for a man of mean condition!
That a Man, a Good man, a Great man bore such calumny, such calamity for our
sakes; here was an unmatchable, an unspeakable love.

4. This is enough, but this is not all: there is yet a higher degree in this
Ascent: we are not come to our full Quantus. It is this; he was Plus quam homo,
more then man: not only maximus hominum, but mator hominibus; the greatest of
men, yea greater then all men. Not mere filius hominis, but vere filius Dei: he
was more then the Son of man, even the Son of God. As the Centurion
acknowledged Mark. 15. 39.
Truly this man was the Son of God. Here be all the four stairs vpwardes;
a Man, a Harmeles man a Princely man; and yet more then man, even God himself.
Solomon was a great king; but here is a Greater then Solomon. Solomon was
Christus Domini; but here is Christus Dominus: he was the anointed of the
Lord; but this is the Lord himself anointed. And here all tongues grow dumb;
and admiratio seals up every lip. This is a depth beyond sounding. You may
perhaps drowsily hear this and coldly be affected with it; but let me say,
Principalities and Powers, Angels and Seraphins stood amazed at it.

We see the Ascent; shall we bring down again this consideration by as many
stayres?

1. Consider him Almighty God taking upon him Man's nature: this is the first
step down wards Ioh. 1. 14.
The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. And Gal. 4. 4.
God sent forth his Son made of a woman. And this was done Aug. Epist. 120.
Naturam suscipiendo nostram, non mutando suam: by putting on our nature, not
by putting off his own. Homo Deo accessit, non Deus a serecessit. He is both
God and man, yet but one Christ: one not by confusion of substance but by
unity of person. Now in that this Eternal God became man, he suffered more,
then man can suffer either living or dead. That man should be turned into a
beast, into a worm, into dust, into nothing; is not so great a disparagement
as that the glorious God should become man. Phil. 2. 6. 7.
He that thought it not robbery to be equal with God, was made in the
likeness of man. He that is Hebr. 1. 4.
more excellent then the Angels, became lower then the Angels, that he might
advance us as high as the Angels. Even the brightness of Gods glory takes on
him the baseness of our nature: and he that laid the foundations of the
earth, and made the world, is now in the world made himself. This is the first
descending degree.

2. The second stayre brings him yet lower. He is made man: but what Man? Let
him be universal Monarch of the world: and have fealty and homage
acknowledged to him from all kings and Emperors, as his viceroyes: Let him
walk upon Crowns and scepters, and let Princes attend on his Court: and here
was some Majesty, that might a little become the Son of God. No such matter.
Indust formam serui; Phil. 2. 7.
He took upon him the form of a servant. He instructs us to humility by his
own example Math. 20. 28.
The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister. Esa. 43. 24.
O Israel, thou have made me to serve with thy sins. He gave himself for a
Minister, not for a Master; ad seruitutem, non ad dominationem. He that is Gods
Son, is made man's servant. Proudly blind, and blindly poor man, that thou
should have such a servant, as the Son of thy maker. This is the second
step downwards.

3. This is not low enough yet. I am a worm no man; says the Psalmist in his
Person. Yea the shame of men, and contempt of the people. He is called. Psalm.
Psalm. 24. 7.
24. the King of glory. Be ye open ye everlasting doors, and the King of
glory shall come in. But Esa. 53. He Esa. 53. 3.
is despised and rejected of men: we hid as it were our faces from him: he was
despised, and we esteemed him not. O the pity of God, that those two should
come so near together, the King of glory, and the shame of men. Quo celsior
maiestas, eo miserior humilitas. Thus says the Apo stle, he made himself of
no reputation. He that requires Phil. 2. 7.
all honor as properly due to him, makes himself (not of little, but) of no
reputation. Here was deiection; yea here was reiection. Let him be laid in his
poor cradle, the Bethlemites reject him; the manger must serve, no room for
him in the Inn. Yea Ioh. 1. 11.
He came to his own, and his own received him not. All Israel is to hot for
him; he is glad to fly into Egypt for protection. Come he to Jerusalem?
which he had honored with his presence, instructed with his Sermons, amazed
with his miracles, wet and bedewed with his tears* they reject him. I would,
and ye would not. Comes he to his kindred? they deride and traduce him, as if
they were ashamed of his allia^ce. Comes he to his Disciples? Ioh. 6. 66.
They go back and will walk no more with him. Will yet his Apostles tarry
with him? So they say ver. 6. 8. Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the
words of eternal life. Yet at last one betrays him, another forsweares him,
all forsake him: and Jesus is left alone in the midst of his enemies. Can
malice yet add some further aggrauation to his contempt? Yes, they crucify
him with malefactors. The quality of his company, is made to increase his
dishonor. In medio Latronum, tanquam Latronum immanissimus: In the midst of
thieves, as it were the Prince of thieves; says Luther. He that thought it no
robbery to be equal to the most holy God, is made equal to thieves and
murderers; yea tanquam Dux; as it were a Captain amongst them. This is the
third step.

4. But we must go yet lower. Behold now the deepest stayre, and the greatest
reiection. Affligit me Deus Lement. 1. 12
the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger Esa. 53. 10.
It pleased the Lord to bruise him: he has put (...) to grief. No burden
seems heavy, when the comforts of God help to bear it. When God will give
solace, vexation makes but idle offers and assaults. But now to the reiection
of all the former, the Lord turns his back upon him as a stranger: the Lord
wounds him as an enemy. He cries out; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? How could the Sun and stars, heaven and earth stand, whiles their maker
thus complained! The former degree was deep; he was crucified with evil
doers; reckoned amongst the wicked. Yet thieves fared better in death then he.
We find no irrisio, no insultation, no taunts, no invectiues against the^. They
had nothing upon them but pain; he both contempt and torment. If scorn and
derision can vex his good soul, he shall have it in peales of ordinance
shot against him. Even the basest enemies shall give it: Jews, Soldiers,
Persecutors yea suffering malefactors spare not to flowte him. His blood cannot
appease them with out his reproach. But yet the disciples are but weak men, the
Jews but cruel persecutors the Devils but malicious enemies: all these do
but their kind, but the lowest degree is; God forgets him, and in his feeling
he is forsaken of the highest. Weigh all these circumstances, and you shall
truly behold the Person, that gave himself for us.

What
We come to the Action, Dedit. Giving is the argument of a free disposition.
Ioh. 10. Ioh. 10. 17. 18.
I Lay down my life. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self.
I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. He that gives
life to us, gave up his own life for us. He did not sell, set, let, or lend,
but give. Oblatus est, quia ipse voluit. He was offered, because he would be
offered. No hand could cut that stone from the quarrey of heaven: no violence
pull him from the bosom of his Father; but Sua misericordia, his own mercy:
he gave. Cant. (...). 8.
He comes leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills. He comes with
willingness and celeritie: no humane resistance could hinder him; not the
hillockes of our lesser infirmities, not the mountains of our grosser
iniquities, could stay his merciful pace toward us.

He gave his life; who could bereave him of it? To all the high Priests armed
forces he gave but a verbal encounter; I am he: and they retire and fall
backward. His very breath dispersed them all. He could as easily have commanded
fire from heaven to consume them, or vapors from the earth to choke them. He
that controlles Devils, could easily have quailed men. More then twelve Legions
of Angels were at his beck; and every Angel able to conquor a Legion of men.
He gives them leave to take him; yea power to kill him: from himself is that
power, which apprehends himself. Even whiles he stands before Pilate scorned,
yet tells him; Thou could have no power against me, nisi datam desuper;
unless it were given thee from above. His own strength leads him, not his
adversaries. He could have been freed, but he would not. Constraint had abated
his merit: he will deserve, though he die.

The loss of his life was necessary, yet was it also voluntary. Quod amittitur
necessarium est, quod emittitur voluntarium. Therefore he gave up the Ghost. In
spite of all the world he might have kept his soul within Ambro.
his body; he would not. The world should have bin burnt to cinders, and all
creatures on earth resolved to their original dust; before he could have been
enforced. Man could not take away his Spirit, therefore he gave it. Otherwise
if his Passion had been only Operis, and not voluntatis; material and not
formal; it could not have been meritorious, or afforded satisfaction for us.
For that is only done well, that is done of our will.

But it is objected out of Hebr. 5. that he offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto Hebr. 5. 7.
him that was able to save him from death. Hence some blasphemers say, that
Christ was a coward in fearing the natural death of the body. If he had so
feared it, he needed not to have tasted it. Christ indeed did naturally fear
death; otherwise he had not bin so affected as an ordinary man. Yet he
willingly suffered death, otherwise he had not been so well affected as an
ordinary Martyr. But he prays thrice; Let this cuppasse. Divines usually
distinguish here: the Sententiaries thus. That there was in Christ a double
humane or created will: the one voluntas vt natura; a natural will; the other
voluntas vt ratio, a reasonable will. Christ according to his natural will
trembled at the pangs of death; and this without sin: for Nature abhors
all destructive things. But in regard of his rational will, he willingly
submits himself to drink that cup. Not as I will O Father, but as thou will.
Aman, says Aquinas, will not naturally endure the lancing of any member: yet
by his reasonable will he consents to it, for the good of the whole body:
reason masters sense, and cutting or cauterizing is endured. So Christ by the
strength of his natural will feared death: but by his Reason perceiving, that
the cutting, wounding, crucifying of the Head, would bring health to the whole
Body of his Church; and either he must bleed on the Cross, or we must all
burn in hell: behold now he willingly and cheerfully gives himself an
offering and Sacrifice to God for us.

But was it a mere temporal death that our Savior feared? No, he saw the
fierce wrath of his Father, and therefore feared. Many resolute men have not
shrunk at a little: diverse Martyrs have endured strange torments with
magnanimity. But now when he that gave them strength, quakes at death; shall
we say he was a Coward? Alas! that which would have overwhelmed man, would not
have made him shrink: that which he feared, no mortal man but himself ever
felt. Yet he feared. The despair of many thousand men was not so much, as for
him to fear. He saw that which none saw, the anger of an infinite God. He
perfectly appre hended the cause of fear; our Sin and torment. He saw the
bottom of the Cup; how bitter and dreggish every drop of that vial was. He
truly understood the burden, which we make light of. Men fear not Hell,
because they know it not. If they could see through the opened gates, the
insufferable horrors of that pit; trembling and quaking would run like an ague
through their bones. This insupportable lode he saw: that the sponge of
vengeance must be wrung out to him; and he must suck it up to the last and
least drop. Every talent of our iniquities must be laid upon him, till as a
cart he be laden Amo. 2. 13.
with sheaues. And with all this pressure he must mount his Chariot of death,
the Cross; and there bear it, till the appeased God gave way to a Consummatum
est; It is finished.

The Philosopher could say, that Sapiens miser magis est miser, quam stultus
miser: a wise man miserable, is more miserable then a fool miserable; because
he understands his misery. So that our Saviors pangs were aggrauated by the
fullness of his knowledge. No marvel then if he might justly take David's words
out of his mouth; Thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind. This
thought drew from him those tears of blood. His eyes had formerly wept for our
misdoings: his whole body now weeps; not afaint dew, but he swett out solid
drops of blood. The thorns, soourges, nails fetched blood from him; but not
with such pain as this Sweat. Outward violence drew on those: these the
extremity of his troubled thought. Here then was his cause of fear. He saw
our everlasting destruction, if he suffered not: he saw the horrors which he
must suffer to ransom us. Hinc illae lachrymae: hence those grons, tears,
cries, and sweat: yet his love conquered all. By nature he could willingly have
avoided this cup: for loves sake to us he took it in a willing hand. So he had
purposed, so he has performed. And now to testify his love, says my Text, he
freely Gave.

Whom?
Himself. This is the third circumstance, the Gift; Himself.

Not an Angel: for an Angel cannot sufficiently mediate between an immortal
nature offended, and a mortal nature corrupted. The glorious Angels are
blessed, but finite and limited: and therefore unable to this expiation. They
cannot be so sensibly Heb. 4. 15.
touched with the feeling of our infirmities; as he that was in our own
nature; in all points tempted like as we are, sin only excepted.

Not Saints; for they have no more oil then will serve their own Lamps. They
have enough for themselves, not of themselves; all of Christ: but none to
spare. Fools cry, Give us of your cyle. They answer, Math. 25. 9.
Not so, least there be not enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them
that sell, and buy for your selves. They could not propitiate for sin, that
were themselves guilty of sin; and by nature liable to condemnation. Wretched
Idolaters, that thrust this honor on them against their wills: how would they
abhor such sacrilegious glory!

Not the riches of this world. 1. Pet. 1. 18.
We were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold. Were the
riches of the old world brought together to the riches of the new world; were
all the mineral veins of the earth emptied of their purest metals: this pay
would not be current with God. It will cost more to redeem souls Psalm. 49. 67.
They that trust in their wealth, and boast in the multitude of their riches:
Yet cannot by any means redeem their brother, nor Give to God a ransom for
him. The servant cannot redeem the Lord. God made a man master of these
things: he is then more precious then his slaves.

Not the blood of Bulls or Goats. Hebr. 9. Alas, those legal sacrifices were
but dumb shows of this tragedy, the mere figures of this oblation;
mystically presenting to their faith, that Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world. This Lamb was prefigured in the sacrifices of the law,
and now presented in the sacraments of the Gospel: slain indeed from the
beginning of the world Who had power. Prodesse, to profit us; before he had
Esse, a being himself. None of these would serve.

Whom Gave he then? Seipsum, Himself; who was both God and man: that so
participating of both natures, our mortality, and Gods Immortality, he might
be a perfect Mediator. Aug. Confess. Lib. 10. cap. 43
Apparuit igitur inter mortales peccatores and immortalem iustum, mortalis cum
hominibus, iustus cum Deo. He came between mortal men and immortal God,
mortal with men, and just with God. As man he suffered, as God he satisfied:
as God and man he saved. He gave himself; Se Totum Himself Wholly Solum Only

1. All himself, his whole Person, soul and body. Godhead and manhood. Though
the deity could not suffer, yet in regard of the personal union of these two
naturs in one Christ, his very passion is attributed in some sort to the
Godhead. So Act. 20. It is called the blood of God. And 1. Cor. 2. 8. The Lord
of glory is said Act. 20. 28.
to be crucified. The Schools distinction here makes al plain: He gave Totum
Christum, though not Totum Christi: All Christ, though not All of Christ. Home
non valuit, Deus non voluit. As God alone he would not, as man alone he could
not make this satisfaction for us. The Deity is impassible; yet was it
impossible without this Deity for the great work of our salvation to be
wrought. If any ask how the manhood could suffer without violence to the
Godhead; being united in one Person: let him understand it by a familiar
comparison. The Sunne-beames shine on a tree; the axe cuts down this tree, yet
can it not hurt the beams of the Sun. So the Godhead still remains
unharmed, though the axe of death did for a while fell down the manhood.
Corpus passum est dolor and gladio. Anima dolor non gladio. Diuinitas nec
dolor nec gladio. His body suffered both sorrow and the sword: his soul
sorrow not the sword: his Deity neither sorrow nor the sword. Deitas in
dolente, non in dolor. The Godhead was in the Person pained, yet not in the
pain.

2. Himself only; and that without a Partner Comforter.

1. Without a Partner, that might share either his glory, or our thanks: of
both which he is justly jealous. Christi passio adiutore non eguit. The
sufferings of our Ambr.
Savior need no help. Upon good cause therefore we abhor that doctrine of
the Papists: that our offenses are expiated by the passions of the Saints. No,
not the blessed Virgin has performed any part of our justification, paid any
farthing of our debts. So sings the Quire of Rome. Sancta virgo Dorothea, tua
nos virtute bea, cor in nobis novum crea. Wherein there is pretty rhyme, petty
reason, but great blasphemy: as if the Virgin Dorothy were able to create a
new heart within us. No; 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
but the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. His blood, and his
only. O blessed Savior, every drop of thy blood is able to redeem a
believing world. What then need we the help of men? How is Christ a perfect
Savior, if any act of our redemption be left to the performance of Saint or
Angel? No, our souls must die, if the blood of Jesus cannot save them. And
whatsoever witty error may dispute for the merits of Saints; the distressed
conscience cries, Christ, and none but Christ. They may sit at Tables and
discourse, enter the Schools and argue, get up into the Pulpits and preach;
that the works of good men is the Churches treasure, given by indulgence, and
can give indulgence; and that they will do the soul good. But lie we upon
our deathbeds, panting for breath, driven to the push, tossed with tumultuous
waves of afflictions, anguished with sorrow of spirit; then we sing another
song: Christ and Christ alone: Jesus and only Jesus: Mercy, mercy: pardon,
comfort for our Saviors sake. Act. 4. 12.
Neither is there salvation in any other: for there is none other Name under
heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

2. Without a Comforter: he was so far from having a sharer in his Passion,
that he had none in compassion; that (at least) might any ways ease his
sorrows. It is but a poor comfort of calamity, Pity; yet even that was
wanting. Lam. 1. 12.
Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? Is it so sore a sorrow to Christ,
and is it nothing to you? a matter not worth your regard, your pity? Man
naturally desires and expects, if he cannot be delivered, eased; yet to be
pitied. Job. 19. 21.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends: for the hand of God
has touched me. Christ might make that request of Job, but he had it not:
there was none to comfort him, none to pity him. It is yet a little mixture
of refreshing, if others be touched with a sense of our misery; that in their
hearts they wish us well, and would give us ease if they could: but Christ has
in his sorest pangs not so much as a Comforter. The Martyrs have fought
valiantly under the banner of Christ, because he was with them to comfort
them. But when himself suffers, no relief is permitted. The most grievous
torments find some mitigation in the supply of friends and comforters. Christ
after his monomachie or single combat with the devil in the desert, had
Angels to attend him. In his agony in the garden an Angel was sent to comfort
him. But when he came to the maine act of our redemption, not an Angel must be
seen. None of those glorious spirits may look through the windows of heaven;
to give him any ease. And if they would have relieved him, they could not. Who
can lift up, where the Lord will cast down? What Surgeon can heal the
bones, which the Lord has broken? But his mother, and other friends stands by,
seeing, sighing, weeping. Alas! what do those tears, but euerease his sorrow?
might he not justly say with Paul. Act. 21. 1^.
What mean ye to weep, and to break mine heart? Of whom then shall he expect
comfort? Of his Apostles? Alas they betake them to their heels. Fear of their
own danger drownes their copassion of his misery. He might say with Job;
Miserable comforters are ye all. Of whom then? The Jews are his enemies, and
vie vnmercifullnes with devils. There is no other refuge but his Father, No,
even his Father is angry: and he that once said; Math. 3. 17.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; is now incens^d. He hides
his face from him, but lays his hand heavy upon him; and buffets him with
anguish. Thus Solus patitur: he gave himself, and only himself, for our
redemption.

To whom?
To God; and that is the fourth circumstance. To whom should he offer this
sacrifice of expiation, but to him that was offended? and that is God. Against
Psalm. 51. 4.
thee, thee only have I sinned; and done this evil in thy sight. Luke 15. 21.
Father I have sinned against heaven, and in thy sight. All sins are
committed against him: his justice is displeased, and must be satisfied. To
God: for God is angry, with what, and whom? with sin and us, and us for
sin. In his just anger he must smite; but whom? In Christ was no sin. Now
shall God do like Annas or Ananias. Ioh. 18. 22.
If I have spoken evil, says Christ, bear witness of the evil: but if
well, why smitest thou me? So Paul to Ananias Act. 23. 3.
God will smite thee thou whited wall: for Sit thou to Judge me after the
Law, and command me to be smitten contrary to the Law? So Abraham pleads to
God Genesis 18. 25.
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Especially right to his Son?
and to that Son which glorified him on earth, and whom he has now glorified in
heaven? We must fetch the answer from Daniels Prophecy Dan. 9. 26.
The Messiah shall he cut off, but not for himself. Not for himself? For whom
then? For solution hereof we must step to the first point; and there we shall
find.

For Whom;
For us. He took upon himour person, he became surety for us. And lo, now
the course of Justice may proceed against him. He that will become a Suertie,
and take on him the debt, must be content to pay it. Hence that innocent Lamb
must be made a Sacrifice: and 2. Cor. 5. 21.
he, that know no (...) in himself, must be made sin for us; that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. Seven times in three verses does the
Prophet Esaias Esaias. 53. 4. 5. 6.
inculcate this. We, Our, us. We were all sick, grievously sick; every
sin was a mortal disease. Quot Vitia, tot febres. He heals our
infirmities, says the Prophet: Chryso.
he was our Phisician; a great Physician. Magnus Venit medicus, quia magnus
iacebat agrotus. The whole world was sick to death, and therefore needed a
powerful Physician. So was he; and took a strange course for our Cure. Which
was not by giving us physic, but by taking our Physic for us. Other
patients drink the prescribed potion; but our Physician drunk the potion
himself, and so recovered us.

For us. Ambr. De Fid. ad Great. Lib. 2. cap. 3.
Pro me doluit, qui pro se nihil habuit quod doleret. He suffered for me, that
had no cause to suffer for himself. O Domine Jesus, doles non tua, sed vulnera
mea. So monstrous were our sins, that the hand of the everlasting Justice was
ready to strike us with a fatal and final blow: Christ in his own person
steps between the stroke and us; and bore that a while, that would have
sunk us for ever. Aug. de Doctrine. Christian. Lib. 1. c^p 14.
Nos immortalitate male vsi sumus, vt moreremur; Christus mortalitate been vsus
est, vt viueremus. We abused the immortality we had to our death: Christ used
the mortality he had not to our life. Dilexit nos; he loved us; and such us,
that were his utter enemies. Here then was love without limitation, beyond
imitation. Unspeakable mercy, says Bernard; that the king of eternal glory
should yield himself to be crucified, Sermon. de quadruplici debito.
Protam despicatissimo vernaculo, immo vermiculo: for so poor a wretch, yea a
worm and that not a loving worm, not a living worm: for we both hated him
and his; and were dead in sins and trespasses.

Yea for All us; indefinitely: none excepted that will apprehend it faithfully.
The mixture of Moses Perfume is thus sweetly allegorized Exodus 30. 34.
God commands him to put in so much frankincense as Galbanum, and so much
Galbanum as frankincense. Christ's Sacrifice was so sweetly temperd: as much
blood was shed for the peasant in the field, as for the Prince in the Court.
The offer of salvation is general: whosoever among you ^areth God, and works
rightousnes; to him is the word of this salvation sent. As there is no
exemption of the greatest from misery, so no exception of the least from
mercy. He that will not believe and amend, shall be condemned be he never so
rich: he that does, be he never so poor shall be saved.

This one point of the Crucifixe, For us requires more punctual meditation.
Whatsoever we leave unsaid, we must not huddle up this. For indeed this brings
the Texthome to us, even into our consciences, and speaks effectually to us
all: to me that speak, and to you that hear; with that Prophets application,
Thou art the man. We are they, for whose cause our blessed Savior was
crucified. For us he endured those grievous pangs for us that we might never
taste them. Therefore say we with that Father Aug. d^sancta virginit. cap. 55
Toto nobis figatur in cord, qui totus pro nobis fixus in cruce. Let him be
fixed wholly in our hearts who was wholly for us fastened on the Cross.

We shall consider the uses we are to make of this, by the ends for which
Christ performed this. It serves to Save us. It serves to Move us. It serves to
Mortify us.

1. To save us. This was his purpose and performance^l he did, all he suffered,
was to redeem us. Esa. 53. 5.
By his stripes we are healed: by his Sweat we refreshed: by his sorrows we
rejoiced: by his death we saved. For even that day, which was to him Dies
Luctus, the heauiest day that ever man bore; was to us Diessalutis, 2. Cor. 6.
2.
the accepted time, the day of salvation. The day was evil in respect of our
sins and his sufferings: but eventually in regard of what he paid, and what
he purchased; a good day, the best day; a day of joy and Iubilation.

But if this Salvation be wrought for us, it must be applied to us; yea to
every one of us. For that some receive more profit* by his passion then
others, is not his fault* that did undergo (...), but theirs that do not
undertake it; to apply it to their own coscience^ But we must not only believe
this Text in gross; but let every one take a handf^ll out of this sheafe, and
put it into his own bosom. So ^rning this F^r us into For me. As Paul. Gal. 2.
Gal. 2. 20.
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
Blessed faith, that into the plural Us puts in the singular soul. Me. Se
dedit pro me. Every one is a rebel, guilty and convicted by the supreme Law;
death waits to arrest us, and damnation to receive us. What should we do but
pray, beseech, cry, weep, till we can get our pardon sealed in the blood of
Jesus Christ: and every one find a sure testimony in his own soul, that
Christ gave himself for me.

2. This should move us: was all this done for us, and shall we not be stirred?
Lam. 1. 12.
Have ye no regard? Is it nothing to you, that I suffer such sorrow as was
never suffered? All his agony, his cries, and tears, and groans, and pangs
were for us: shall he thus grieve for us, and shall we not grieve for our
selves? For our selves I say; not so much for him. Let his passion move us to
compassion, not of his sufferings, (alas our pity can do him no good) but of
our sins which caused them. Luke 23. 28.
Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for
your children. For our selves: not for his paeynes* that are past, but for our
own that should have been, and (except our faith settes him in our stead*)
shall be. Shall he ^eepe ^o us, for us, and shall we not mourn? Shall he
drink so deeply to v^ in this cup of sorrow, and shall we not pledge him?
Does the wrath of God make the Son of God shri^ke o^t; and shall not the
servants for whom he suffered t^mble? Hieron. in Math.
Om^s creatura compatitur Christ^ (...). Every creature seems to suffer with
Christ. Sun, earth, rocks, sepulchers: Solus miser (...) non compatitur, pro
quo solo Christus patitur. Only man suffers nothing, for whom Christ suffered
all. Does his passion tear the Uaile, rent the stones, cleave the rocks,
shake the earth, open the graves; and are our hearts more hard then those
insensible creatures, that they cannot be penetrated? Does heaven and earth,
Sun and elements, suffer with him, and is it nothing to us? We, wretched men
that we are, that were the principals in this murder of Christ: whereas Judas,
Caiphas, Pilate, Soldiers, Jews, were all but accessaries and isntrumental
causes. We may seek to shift it from our selves, and drive this heinous fact
upon the Jews: but the exe^utioner does no^ properly k^l the man. (...)
peccatum (...) est. Sin, our sins were the murderers. Of us he suffered, and
for us he suffered: unite th^se in your thoughts and tell me if his passion
h^th no^ cause to move us.

And yet so obdurate are our hear^s; that we cannot endure one hours
discourse of this great business. Christ was many hours in dying for ^s, we
cannot sit one hour to hear of it. O that we should find fault with heat or
cold in harkning to these heavenly ^isteries; when he endured for us such a
(...), such a sweat, such agony; that through his flesh and skin he sweat
drops of blood. Does he weep tears of gorebloud for us, and cannot we weep
tears of water for our sel^es? (...) how would we die for him, as he dyed
(...) we are w^ry of hearing, what he did for us*

3. This should (...) (...) Christ delivered (...) to death for ou^ (...),
(...) us from death, and (...). H^ (...) de^troy the devil, but to 1. Ioh. 3.
8.
(...). Neither does he take only from (...) (...), the ^. 8. 1^
power to condemn^ (...) but (...) (...), the ^ Romans 6. 6. 12.
power to rule and (...) (...) Chri^ death, as it answers the Iusti^ of (...)
for (...), so it must kill in (...) the will of (...). Christ in ^ll parts
suffered, that ^e in all parts might (...) mortified. His ^fferings were so
abundant, that men c^not know the^r number, nor Angels their nature, neither
(...) nor Angels their measure. His Passion ^ound an end, our thoughts cannot.
He Suffered At all times In all places In all senses In all members In body and
soul also All for Us

1. At all times: in his childhood by poverty and Herod: in the strength of
his days by the powers of earth, by the powers of hell, yea even by the powers
of heaven. In the day he lackes meat, in the night a pillow. Even that holy
time of the great Passover is destined, for his dying. When they should kill
the Paschall La^be in thankfulness, they slay the Lamb of God in wickedness.
They admire the shadow, yet condemn the substance. All for us; that all times
might yield us comfort. So the Apostle sweetly 1 Thessalonians. 5. 10.
He dyed for us, that whether we wake or sheep, we should live together with
him.

2. In all places: in the cradle by that Fox: in the streets by reuilers: in
the mountain by those that would have thrown him down headlong: in the
Temple by them that Ioh. 8. 59.
to^ke up stones to cast at him. In the high Priests hall by buffe^rs, in the
garden by betrayers: by the way laden with his cross. Lastly in Caluary, a
vild and stinking place, among the bones of malefactors, crucified. Still all
for us; that in all places the mercy of God might protect us.

3. In all Sense^. For his taste, lo it is ^icted with gall and vinegar; a
bitter draught for a dying man. His touch felt more; the nails driven into his
hands and feet: and in those places wounded lies the greatest pain, being the
most sinewy parts of the body. His Ears are full of the blasphemous
contumelies, which the savage multitude belc^ed out against him. Not him, but
Barabbas, they cry to Pilate; preferring a murderer before a Savior. Will you
read the speeches obiectuall to his hearing! See Math. 27. ver. 29. 39. 42.
44. 49. In all consider their blasphemy, his patience. For his Eyes, whether
can he turn them without spectacles of sorrow? The dispight of his enemies on
the one side showing their extremest malice: the weeping and L^menting of his
mother on the other side; whose tears might wound his heart. If any Sense were
less afflicted it was his Smelling: and yet the putrified bones of Caluarie
could be no pleasing savor.

Thus suffered all his Senses. That Taste that should be delighted with the wine
of the vineyard, Cant. 7. 9.
that goes down sweetly, is fed with vinegar. He looks for good grapes,
behold Esa. 5. 4.
Sower grape^: he expects wine, (...) receives vinegar. That Smell that should
be refre^hed with the odor^ferous sent of the Cant. 6. 2.
beds of spices, the piety of his Saints; is filled with the stence of
iniquities. Those hands that sway the Scepter of the heauen^* (...) faineto
carry the Reed of Repr^, and end^ the ^ailes of death. Those eyes that were as,
a Reu. 1. 14.
(...) of Fire; in respect of whom the very Sun was darkness, must be hold the
afflicting objects of shame and tyranny. Those ^ares, which to delight, the
high Quorillers of heaven sing their (...) notes, must be wearied with the
taunts and (...) of blasphemy.

And all this for us: not only to satisfy those sins which our Senses have
committed; but to mortify those senses, and prese^e them from those sins.
That our eyes may be no more full of adulteries, nor throw covetous looks on
the goods of our brethren. That our ^ares may no more give so wide admission
and welcome entrance to lewd reports, the incantations of Satan. That sin in
all our senses might be done to death: the poison exhausted, the sense purified.

4. In all members. Look on that blessed Body conceived by the Holy Ghost, and
borne of a pure Virgin: it is all over scourged, martyred, tortured, manacled,
mangled. What place can you find free? Caput Angelic^ Bern.
spiritibus tremebundum densitat^ spinarum pungitur: facies pulchrapr^ filijs
hominum Iud^orum sp^t is det^rpatur: Oculi (...) sole in (...) caligantur etc.
To begin at his head: that head which the Angels reverence is crowned with
thorns. That face, which is Psalm. 45 2.
fairer them the sons of men, must be odiously spit on by the filthy Jews.
His hands that made the heavens, are extended and fastened to a cross. The feet
which tread upon the necks of his and our enemies, feel the like smart. And
the mouth must be buffe^ed, which Ioh. 7. 46.
spoke as never man spoke.

Still all this for us. His head bled for the wicked imaginations of our heads.
His face was besmeared with spittle, because we had spit impudent blasphemies
against heaven. His lips were afflicted, that our lips might henceforth yield
sauoury speeches. His feet did bleed, that our feet might not be swift to shed
blood. All his members suffered for the sins of all our members: and that our
members might be no more ser uants to sin: but Romans 6. 19.
servants to righteousness, unto holiness. Hieron.
Co^sp^i voluit; vt nos Lauaret: velari voluit, vt velamen ignorantia a
mentibus nostris (...): in capite percuti, vt corpori sanitatem restitueret.
He would be polluted with their spettle, that he might wash us: he would be
blindfolded, that he might take the veil of ignorance from our eyes. He
suffered the head to be wounded, that he might renew health to all the body.

Six times we read, that Christ shed his blood. First when he was circumcised:
at eight days old his blood was spilt. 2. In his agony in the garden; where
he swett drops of blood. 3. In his scourging, when the merciles tormentors
fetched blood from his holy sides. 4. When he was crowned with thorns: those
sharp prickles raked and harrowed his blessed head, and drew forth blood. 5.
In his crucifying; when his hands and feet were pierced, blood gushed out. 6.
Lastly after his death Ioh. 19. 34.
One of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side and forthwith came there
out blood and water. All his members bled, to show that he bled for all his
members. Not one drop of this blood was shed for himself: all for us; for his
enemies, persecutors, crucifiers, our selves. But what shall become of us, if
all this cannot mortify us? How shall Romans 6. 8.
we live with Christ, if with Christ we be not dead? Dead in deed unto sin,
but living unto righteousness. As 2. King. 4. 34.
Elisha revived the Shunamites child: he lay upon it; put his mouth upon the
childs mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands, and
stretched himself upon the child, and the flesh of the child waxed warm: So
the Lord Jesus, to recover us that were dead in our sins and trespasses,
spreads and applies his whole Passion to us: lays his mouth of blessing upon
our mouth of blasphemy: his eyes of holiness upon our eyes of lust: his hands
of mercy upon our hands of cruelty: and stretches his gracious self upon
our wretched selves, till we begin to wax warm, to get life, and the (holy)
Spirit returns into us.

5. In his Soul. All this was but the outside of his Passion; Ioh. 12. 27.
Now is my Soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father save me from this
hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. The pain of the body is but
the body of pain; the very soul of sorrow is the sorrow of the soul. All
the outward afflictions were but gentle prickings in regard of that his soul
suffered. Pro. 18. 14.
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity: but a wounded spirit who can
bear? He had a heart within that suffered unseen, unknown anguish. This
pain drew from him those Heb. 5. 7.
strong cries, those bitter tears. He had often sent forth the cries of
compassion: of passion and complaint not till now. He had wept the tears of
pity, the tears of love; but never before the tears of anguish. When the
Son of God thus cries, thus weeps, here is more then the body distressed;
the soul is agonized.

Still all this for us. His Soul was in our souls stead: what would they have
felt, if they had bin in the stead of his. All for us; to satisfaction, to
emendation. For thy drunkenness and pouring down strong drinks, he drunk
vinegar. For thy intemperate gluttony, he fasted. For thy sloth, he did
exercise himself to continual pains. Thou sleep secure, thy Savior is
then waking, watching, praying. Thy arms are inured to lustful embracings,
he for this embraces the rough Cross. Thou deckest thy self with proud
habiliments, he is humble and lowly for it. Thou ridest in pomp, he iourneys
on foot. Thou wallowest on thy down beds, thy Savior has not a pillow. Thou
surfei^est, and he sweats it out; a bloud^ sweat. Thou fillest and swellest thy
self with a (...) of wickedness; behold incision is made in the Head for thee;
thy Savior bleeds to death. Now judge, whether this point (For us) has not
derived a near application of this* Text to our own consciences. Since then
Christ did all this for thee and me, pray then with Medit. cap. 1.
August. O D^ Ies^; da cordi (...) t^ de^derare, (...) q^rere, qu^rendo inuen^,
i^enien do (...), am^do (...) redempta (...) ^rare. Lord give me a heart to
desire thee, desiring to seek thee, seeking to find thee, finding to love
thee, loving no more to offend thee.

There are two maine parts of this Crucifixe yet to handle. I must only name
them; being sorry that it is still my hap to trouble you with prolixitie of
speech.

6. The next is the Manner; An offering and Sacrifice. His whole life was an
Offering, his death a Sacrifice. He gave himself often for us an
Eucharisticall oblation, once an explator^ Sacrifice. In the former he did for
us all that we should do: in the latter he suffered for us all that we should
suffer. 1. Pet. 2. 24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his own (...) on the tree. Some of the
Hebrews have affirmed, Paul. Tagius. cap. 4.
that in the fire which consumed the legal Sacrifices, there always appeared
the face of a Lion. Which mystery they thus resolve, that the Lion of Judah
should one day give himself for us, a perfect expiatory Sacrifice. Thus Heb.
9. 26.
Once in the end of the world, has he appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himself.

7. The last point is the Effect; Of a sweet smelling savor. Here is the fruit
and efficacy of all. Never was the Lord pleased with sinful man till now.
Were he never so angry, here is a pacification, a sweet savor. If the whole
world were quintessenced into one per^ume, it could not yield so fragrant a
smell. We are all of our selves putida and putrida cad^vera; dead and stinking
carkases, the pure nostrels of the most holy cannot endure us: behold the
per^ume that sweetens us, the redeeming blood of the Lord Jesus. This so filles
him with a delightful sent, that he will not smell our noisome wickedness.

Let me leave you with this comfort in your bosoms. How unsavory soever our
own sin^ have made us, yet if our hand of faith lay hold on this Saviors
censor, God will sent none of our corruptions; but we shall smell sweetly in
his nostrels. Be^d for all. O dear Jesus, Mori deb^, and tusolvis: (...)
peccavi^us, and tu ^uis. Opus sine exemplo gratia sine merito, ch^as sine ^do.
We should die, and thou payest it, we have offended, and thou art punished. A
mercy without example, a favor without merit, a love without measure.
Therefore I conclude my Sermon, as we all shut up our prayers, with this one
clause; Through our Lord Jesus Christ. O Father of mercy accept our Sacrifice,
of Prayer and Praise, for his Sacrifice of pain and merit; even for our Lord
Jesus Christ his sake. To whom with the Father and blessed Spirit be all glory
for ever.

Amen.
THE GOOD POLITICIAN DIRECTED.
MATTHEW. 10. 16. Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves.
OV^ of every creature (simply considered) there is some good to be learned.
The divine Du Bartas. 1. day. 1. Week. fol. 6.
Poet sweetly. The World's a School, where in a general si^rie,
God always reads dumb l^ctures of his glory.


It is a three leau'd book, Heaven, Earth, and Sea: and every leaf of this
book, every line of every leaf, every creature in this universe, can read to
man, for whom they were made, a Divinity lecture. In a speaking silence they
preach to us that Deity, which made both them and us, and them for us. Secul^m
Speculum: the world is a glass, wherein we may behold our Creators Majesty.
From the highest Angel to the lowest worm, all instruct us somewhat. For one
and the same almighty hand, that made the Angels in heaven, made also the
worms on earth. Aug. Soliloq. cap. 9.
Non superior in illis, non inferior in istis.

Besides this general lecture, they have all their particular school. Prou.
6. 7.
Solomon sends us to the A^t to learn Providence. Esa. 1. 3.
Esaias to the Ox, to learn thankfulness Many beasts do excel Man in many
natural things. Nos aper auditu praecellit, a^anea tactu,
Vultur odoratu, Lynx visu, simia gustu.


The Bore excels us in hearing, the spider in touching, the Vulture in
smelling, the Lynx in seeing, the Ape in tasting. Some have observed, that the
art of curing the eyes was first taken from the Swallows. The E^gles have
taught us architecture: we received the light of Phlebotomie from the
Hippopotamas. The Egyptian bird Ibis first gave to Physicians knowledge, how to
use the Glister. The Spider taught us to Weaue. Here the Serpent instructs us
in Policy, the Dove in simplicity.

Now we are fallen among Serpents, stinging serpents, enemies to man: can we
fetch away any good from them? Yes, those very venomous and malicious creatures
shall afford us Documenta, not Nocumenta: they shall teach us, not touch us. I
may say of them, as it is said of the Jews. Hosts sunt in cordibus,
suffragatores in codicibus. They are our enemies in their hearts, our friends
in their books. The malice of Serpents is mortal, their use shall be vital.
So it may, so it shall, if our sobriety keep the allowed compass. For our
imitation is limited and qualified. We must not be in all points like Serpents,
nor in all respects like Doves; but in some, but in this; Be ye wise as
serpents, harmless as doves. Perhaps other uses might be accommodated. As the
Serpent might teach us how with wisdom to dwell below on the earth: and the
Dove with wings of innocence to fly up to heaven above. We may in earthly
matters keep a serpentine and winding motion, but to heaven with the Dove we
must have a strait course. But I confine my self to the pith of the Text, and
our Saviors meaning. Be wise as Serpents, innocent as Doves.

The words may (not unfitly) be distinguished into a Perhibition. Cohibition:

as it were the Raines, and the Curb. The Perhibition, allowance, or Raines;
Be wise as serpents. The Cohibition, correctiue, restraint, or Curb; Be
harmless as Doves.

They must go hand in hand without disjunction. United they are commodious,
parted dangerous. There is a necessity of their union to our peace: divide
them, and you loose your selves. Wit without innocence will offend others:
Innocence without wit will not defend our selves. Prudentia sine simplicitate
malitia: simplicitas sine prudentia stultitia. Wit without innocence is
wickedness: innocence without wit is foolishnes. Whosoever has the one and
wants the other, must needs be either guilty of folly, or of dishonestie.
Least we be too crafty, and circumuent others, let us keep the innocence of
the Dove: least we be too simple, and others circumuent us, let us keep the
wisdom of the Serpent.

Let us first see from the Serpent, how we should be wise: and then go to the
Dove for innocence. Six principal Lessons of Wisdom the Serpent may teach
us.

1. Their first policy is by all possible means to defend their head. If they
must encounter with danger, they expose their whole body to it; but howsoever
they will safeguard their head. They write of them, that though all a serpents
body be mangled, unless his head be cut off, (which he cunningly hides) by a
kind of attractiue power and vigor one part will come to another again.

This is to us a singular document of Wisdom, to look well to our Head.
Christ is our Head; and the sinews and nerves that knitte us to him, is our
Faith and Hope: let us preserve these indanted, indamaged. We fight against an
enemy, that seeks especially to wound us there. He strikes indeed at every
place: he has, says Jerome, no^ina mill, mill nocendi arts: therefore Paul
charge us to Ephe. 6. 11.
Put on the whole armor of God, that we may be able to stand against all the
w^les of the Devil: but especially the head. Ver. 16. 17.
Above all take the shield of Faith, and the Helmet of salvation: save the
Head. Protect all parts, if it be poss^le: let not oppression wound thee in the
hand, nor blasphemy in the tongue, nor wantonness in the eye, nor covetousness
in the heart: but howsoever shield thy head: loose not thy hope of salvation,
thy faith in Jesus Christ.

Homo qui habet se, habet totum inse; said the Philosopher. He that has
himself, has all in himself. But ille habet se, qui habet Christum, and ille
habet Christum, qui habet fidem. He has himself that has Christ, and he has
Christ that has faith. Whatsoever you loose, loose not this: though you loose
your loves, though you loose your lives* keep the faith. Job. 13. 15.
I will trust in thee, though thou kill me, says Job. 2. Tim. 4. 7.
I have kept the faith, says Paul; though Gal. 6. 17.
I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. If insatiate death be let
alone, to cut us into pieces with the sword, to grind us into the mawes of
beasts, to burn us in the fire to ashes: yet so long as our head Christ is
safe, he has the Serpents attractiue power to draw us to him. Ioh. 17. 24.
Father, I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I am. The
more we are cut off, the more we are united: death, whiles it strives to take
us from him, sends us to him. Keep faith in the Head. With what mind soever
Seneca wrote it, I know to good use I may speak it. Malo mihi successum
deesse, quam-fidem. I rather want success, then faith. Fidem qui perdidit, nil
habet vltra quod perdat. He that has lost his faith, has nothing else to
loose. But it is the Lord, that preserues the head. Psalm. 140. 7.
O God the strength of my salvation: thou have covered my ^ead in the day of
battle.

2. The next Policy in Serpents is to stop their ^ares against the noise of
the charmers. This is one of the similitudes which the Psalmist gives between
the wicked and Serpents. Psalm. 58. 4. 5.
Their poison is like the poison of a Serpent: they are like the deaf adder
that stops hor ^are. Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers,
charming never so Wisely. This charming as they write, was invented in the
Eastern countries, where they were pesterd with abundance of serpents. Which
music the Serpent hearing, wisely distrusting his own strength* thinks it
the surest course to stop his ^ares. This he does by couching one ^are close to
the ground and covering the other with his voluminous tail.

The incantations of this world are as often sung to us, as those charms to
the Serpents: but we are not so wise as Serpents to avoid them. Sometimes a
Siren sings us the charms of lust; and thus a weak woman overcomes him that
overcame the strong Lion.

Lenam non potuit, potuit superare Leaenam.
Quem fera non valuit vincere, vicit hera.
Says the Epigrammatist. Prou. 7-22-
He goes after her straight way: though ver. 27-
her house^ the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death. Sometimes
Satan comes to us like a gold-finch, and whistles us a note of usury, to the
tune of ten in the hundred; we are caught presently, and fall a dancing after
his pipe. Sometimes like Alecto, he charms us a Madrigall of revenge for
private wrongs: instantly we are caught with malice, destruction sits in our
looks. Not seldom he comes to a man with a drunken caroll (lay thy penny to
mine, and we will to the wine) he is taken suddenly; he runs to it though he
reeles from it. He sings the slothful a Dormi secure and he will sleep,
though his 2. Pet. 2. 3.
damnation sleeps not. Yea there are not wanting, that let him sing a song of
blasphemy, they will swear with him. Let him begin to rail, they will libell
with him. Let his incantation be treason, and they will answer him in
gunpowder. Yea let him charm with a Charm, a witless, senceles sorcerie; and
if a tooth aches, or a hog groans, they will admit it, admire it. Of such folly
the very serpents shall condemn us.

But as open ^ar'd as men are to these incantations of the Devil and sin;
let the musical bells of Aaron be rung, the sweet songs of Sion sung, they
will not listen: they will not be charmed, with all our cunning. So that we
shall be faint to send them to the Judgment seat of God, with this scrole on
their forheads; Noluerunt incantari: Lord, we have done our best; but this
people would not be charmed.

3. Their third Policy. They fly men's society, as known enemies; and rather
choose a wilderness; seeking peace among briars and thorns. And may they not
herein teach us, with Moses, Hebr. 11. 25.
rather to choose affliction in a wilderness with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season. Much has bin, and may be said, to
lessen men's dotage to the world; and yet one word I must add; Non quia vos
nostra sperem prece posse moveri.

Did ever any of you know what the peace of conscience, and joy of the holy
Ghost is? whiles that comfort and iubilation dwelt in your heart, I ask you
how the world stood in your sight? Stood it not like a deformed witch, devils
sucking on her breasts; a shoale of ugly sins sitting like screechowles on
her head; blood and massacres besmearing her face; lies, blasphemies, periuries
waiting at her back; extortion and oppression hanging on her arms; wickedness
and wretchedness filling both her hands; the cries, groans, and imprecations
of widows and orphans sounding in her ears; heaven thundering vengance on her
head; and the enlarged gates of the infernal pit yawning to entertain her.

Is this your Paramour, O ye worldlings? Is this the beauty you hazard a soul
to get? O munde immunde; evil favored world, that thou should have so many
lovers! August.
Ecceruinosus est mundus, and si^ amatur: quidsi perfectus esset? Quid for^osus
faceret, quum deformis sic adoratur? If the world being ruinous so pleases
men, what would it do if it were sound and perfect? If it were fair and
beauteous how would we dote on it, that thus love it deformed? But how rare a
man is he, Ambr. in Psalm.
Qui nihil habet commune cum seculo! that has no communion with this world!
That retires himself, like the Serpent; and does not intricate his mind in
these worldly snares! who does not watch with envy, nor travel with avarice,
nor clime with ambition, nor sleep with lust under his pillow*

But for all this Vincet amor mundi: money and wealth must be had, though men
refuse no way on the left hand to get it. We may charge them Nummos propter
Deum expendere, to lay out their wealth for Gods sake: but they will Deum
propter nummos colere, worship God for their wealths sake. We say let the world
wait upon religion: they say, let religion wait upon the world. You talk of
heaven and a kingdom; but Tutius h^ c^lum, quod br^uis ^ca tenet. That heaven
is surest, think they, that lies in their coffers. As those two Giants bound
Mars in chains, and then sacrificed to him: so men first coffer up their
wealth, and then worship it. Or if they suffer it to pass their lock and key,
yet they bind it in strong chains and charms of usury to a plentiful return.

Enough is a language they will never learn, till they come to hell: where
their bodies shall have enough earth, their souls enough fire. There are four
aduerbs of quantity: Parum, Nihil, Nimis, Satis. Little, nothing, Two much,
Enough. The last that is the best is seldom found. The poor have Little: the
beggar nothing: the rich two much: but Cui satis? who has Enough? Though they
have too much, all is too little; nothing is enough. Quid satis est* si Roma
parum? What is enough, if all Rome be too little; said the Lucan.
Poet. But the world it self could not be enough to such. Aestuat infoelix
angusto limite mundi. The covetous man may habere quod voluit, nunquam quod
vult, he may enjoy what he desired, never what he desires: for his desires
are infinite. So their abundance, which God gave them to help others out of
distress* plungeth themselves into destruction: as Pharaohs Chariot drew his
master into the sea. In the Massilian sea, says, Bernard, scarce one ship of
four is cast away: but in the sea of this world scarce one soul of four
escapes.

4. Their next Policy. When they swim, though their bodies be plunged
down, yet they still keep their head above the water. And this lesson of
their wisdom I would direct to the Riotous, as I did the former to the
Covetous. Which vicious affections, though in themselves opposite: (for the
covetous think Prodigum Prodigium, the Spender a wonder: and the prodigal
think Parcum Porcum, the niggard a hog) yet either of them both may light
his candle at the lamp of the Serpents wisdom: and learn a virtue they have
not.

Though you swim in a full sea of delights, yet be sure to keep your heads
up for fear of drowning. It is natural to most sensit^e crea^res to bear up
their heads above the floods: yet in the stream of pleasures foolish man
commonly sinkes. If I had authority, I would here bid Gluttony and
Drunkenness stand forth; and hear themselves condemned by a Serpent. If the
belly have any (...) let it hears and not suffer the head of the body ^ch
(...) the head of the soul Reason, to be drowned in a puddl^ of riot.
Multafercula, multos (...). Many dishes many diseases. Gluttony was ever a
friend to (...). But for the throa^s indulgence. Paracelsus for all his
Mercury had dyed a beggar. Intemperance lies most commonly sick on a down
bed; not on a padde of straw. Ay me's, and groans are soonest heard in rich
men's houses. Gowtes Pleurisies, dropsies, fevers, surfets, are but the
consequents of epicurisme.

Qu^ nisi diuitibus nequeunt conting^re (...). Horat. lib. (...). Satyr. 4.

A Divine Poet morrally.

We seem ambitious, Gods whole work to vndo^.

Of nothing he made us, and we strive two,

To bring our selves to nothing back: and we

Do what we can, to do it as soon as he.

We complain of the shortness of our lives, yet take the course to make them
shorter.

Neither is the corporal head only thus intoxicate, and the senses drowned in
these deluges of riot: but Reason the head of the Soul, and Grace the head of
Reason is over whelmed. Rarum (...) ^ine vitio (...) convitio. Reuellers and
Reuilers are wonted companions. When the belly is made a Crassus, the tongue is
turned into a Caesar, and taxes all the world. Great feasts are not without
great danger. They serve not to suff ce nature, but to nourish corruption. Luke
2. Joseph and Mary went up to Jerusalem to the feast with Jesus: a Luke 2. 4^.
but there they lost Jesus. Twelve years they could keep him, but at a feast
they lost him. So easily is Christ lost at a feast. And it is remarkable there.
ver. 46. that in the Temple they found him again. Jesus Christ is often lost
at a banquet: but he is ever found in the temple Ver. 12.
Jude speaks of some, that feast without fear. They suspect not the loss of
Christ at a banquet. But Job. 1, 5.
Job feared his children at a feast. It may be my sons have sinned, and
cursed God in their hearts. Let us suspect these riotous meetings; lest we do
not only swim, but sink. Let us be like the Dear, who are ever most
fearful at their best feeding. d Let us walk h^nestly as i^ the d^y: not in
ri^ting and drunkenness, d Romans 13. 13.
that were to feast the world: not in chambering and want^esse, that were t^
feast the flesh: not in strife and envying, that were to feast the devil.

I know therebe some, that care not what be said against eating, so you meddle
not with their drink. Who cry ou^ like that German, at a great Tourneament at
Court, when all the spec^ors were pleased: Valiant L^di (...): farewell that
sport, where there is no drinking. I will say no more to them; but that the
Serpents he^d keeps the upper hand of the waters, but d^nke g^ts the upper
hand of their heads. How (...) is this: Sobrij serpents, (...) homines! Sober
serpents, and drunken men. The Serpent is here brought to t^ch v^ wisdom: and
to be sober, is to be wise. The Philosoph^r so deriues wisdom in his
Ethick's. (...) ^st quasi (...). Or as another, quia (...).

5. The fifth instance of their wisedo^ propounded to our imitation, is
vigilancie. They ^eepe little: and then l^ast, when they suspect the (...) of
danger. A pr^dent wo^ ou^ following: Ephesians. 5. 15.
See that ye walk circ^spectly; not (...) fo^les, but as wise Eccl. 2. 14. The
wisemans eyes are in his head.
Carry your eyes in your own^ heads; no^. Like those (...) in a box. Nor, lik^
a (...) Prince, that is not suffered to see but through (...) spect^es. Be
watchf^l, says our S^iour: yo^ (...) not wh^ hour your master will come. 1.
Pet. 5. 8. B^ (...), b^ vigil^nt: because your aduersa^y the Devil, a^ a
roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he ^ay devour.

Th^se are two m^ine motives to watchfullnes. First our Landlord is ready to
come for his rent. Secondly our enemy is ready to assault ou^ fort. And let me
add; the Ten^ we dwell in is so weak and ruinous, that it is (...) ready to
drop down about our ears. He that dwell^ in a rotten (...) house, dares
scarce sleep in a tempestuous night. Our bodies are earthly decayed, or at
least decaying Tabernacles: every little disease like a storm, totters us.
They were indeed at first strong cities: but we then by sin made them forts
of rebels. Whereupon our o^ended Liege sent his Sariant death, to arrest us of
high treason. And though for his mercies sake in Christ he pardoned our sins,
yet he suffers us no more to have such strong houses: but lets us dwell in
thack'd cottages* paper walls, mortal bodies.

Have we not then cause to watch; least our house, whose Job. 4. 19.
foundation is in the dust, fall; and Math. 7. ^7.
the fall thereof be great? Shall we still continue sine ^etu, perhaps sine
motu dormitantes? It is a fashion in the world to let Leases for three lives:
as the Divine Poet sweetly. So short is life, that every Tenant strives,
In a torn house or field to have three lives.


But God lets none for more then one life: and this expired, there is no hope
to renew the lease. He suffers a man sometimes to dwell in his T^nement Psalm.
90. 10.
threesc^re and ten years; sometimes fourscore: till the house be ready to
drop down, like mellow fruit. But he secures none for a month, for a moment.
Other farmers know the date of their leases, and expiration of the years: man
is merely a Tenant at will; and is thrust often sedibus adibus, at less then
an hours warning.

We have then cause to watch. Cant. 5. 2.
I sleep, but mine heart waketh: says the Church. If temptation do take us
napping, yet let our hearts wake. Mark. 14. 37.
Simon, Dormis? Sleep^st thou, ^eter? Indeed there is a time for all things:
and sometimes sleep and rest is Dabile and Laudabile; necessary and
profitable. But now Simon, when thy Lord is ready to be given up into the hands
of his enemies, when the hour and power of darkness is instant, when the
great work of salvation is to be wrought; Simon sleep thou? Thou that have
promised to suffer with me, can thou not watch with me? Quomodo morieris, qui
sp^ctare and expectare nonpotes? Beloved, let us all watch; that Jesus, who was
then when Peter slept, ready to suffer: is now, though we all sleep, ready to
judge quick and dead.

6. The last general point of Wisdom we will learn from them, is this. As
they once a year slip off their old coat, and renew themselves: so let us
cast off the old man, and Jude. ver. 23.
the garment spotted of the flesh (more speck led with lusts then the skin of
any Serpent) and Ephesians. 4. 24.
be renewed in our mind, to serve God in the holiness of truth.

The Grecians have a fabulous reason of this renouation of serpents. Once
mankind strove earnestly with the Gods by supplication, for Perpetual youth.
It was granted; and the rich tr^sure being lapped up, was laid upon an Ass to
be carried among men. The silly beast being sore thirsty came to a fountain
to drink: the keeper of this fountain was a Serpent; who would not suffer the
Ass to drink, unless he would give him his burden. The Ass, both ready to
faint for thirst, and willing to be lighted of his lode, condiscended. Hereby
the Serpent got from man perpetual youth. Indeed the serpent changes his age
for youth, and man his youth for age. And the Ass for his punishment, is more
tormented with thirst then any other beast. The serpent may thus get the start
of a man for this world; but when he dies, he dies for ever; life never
returns. But we shall put off, not the skin, but this mortal body: and so
be clothed with im^ortalitie and eternal life above: we shall be young again
in heaven. 2. Cor. 5.


Only death adds to our strength: nor are we grown:
In stature to be men, till we are none.
Let this answer the Poet. Anguibus exuitur tenui cum pelle vetustas:
Cur nos angust a condition su^us? Tibullus.

Why do serpents repair themselves, and man decay? The answer is easy and
comfortable when there shall be new heavens and new earth, we shall have new
bodies. They have here new bodies, and we old bodies: but there we shall have
new bodies when they are no bodies.

But to our purpose. They write that the Serpent gets him to some narrow
passage, as between two sticks, and so slips off his skin. And this is
called Sp^lium serpentis, or v^rnatio serpentis. If we would cast off our old
coat, which is corrupt according to deceitful lusts, we must pass through a
Math. 7. 13.
narrow gate; as it were two trees; faith and repentance. Heaven is called Reu.
21.
new Jerusalem: you cannot creep through those new doors with your old sins
on your backs. Be no Gibeonites: God will not be cossened with your old
Garments. Put them off, says Paul: put them off, and cast them away: they are
not worthy mending. None are made of Satan's slaves, Gods sons; but they must
put off their old liuerie, which they wore in the Devils service; the
cognizance of Mammon. 2. Cor. 5. 17.
Let him that is in Christ be a new creature. Old things are passed away:
behold, all things are become new. I saw, says S. John, Nouum Coelum etc. a
new heaven, and new earth. For whom provided? for new creatures.

Envy this ye worldlings, but strive not in your lower pompes to equal it.
Could you change robes with Solomon. and dominions with Alexander, you could
not match it. But quake at your doom, ye wicked (...). 3^. 33.
Top^ is ord^ed of old. Old hell for old sinners. But which way might a man
turn his eyes to behold this Renouation. Nil ^i vid^, nil n^ui audio. The hand
is old, it extorts: the tongue is old, it swears. Our vsuries are still on
foot to hunt the poor: our gluttonies look not leaner: our drunkenness is
thirsty still: our security is not waked. Old Idols are in our inward and
better temples. Our iniquities are so old and ripe; that they are not only alb^
ad messem, white to the harvest: but even sicca ad ignem, dry for the fire.

Not only Serpents, but diverse other creatures have their turns of renewing.
The Eagle renews her bill, says the Prophet: our Grandmother earth becomes
new: and to all her vegetative children the Spring gives a renouation. Only we
her ungracious Sons remain old still. But how shall we expect hereafter new
glorified bodies, unless we will have here new sanctified souls? Gal. 6. 15.
16
In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor (...); but a new
creature. And as many as w^lke according to this rule, peace be on them, and
mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

I have taught you, according to my poor meditations, some Wisedo^ from the
Serpent. Augustine gives 6. or 7. other instances, worthy your observation, and
imitation; which I must pesse over in silence. The (...) chalengeth some piece
of my discourse: for I dare not give you the Raynes, and let you go without
the Curb. And yet I shall hold you a little longer from it: for as I have
showed you some good in Serpents, that you may follow it: so I must show you
some evil in them, that you may eschew it. The vicious and obnoxious
affections of Serpents, have more followers then their virtues. These instances
are of the same number with the former.

1. The Serpent, though creeping on the dust, has a lofty spirit; reaching
not only at men, but even at the birds of the air. And here he is the
Ambitious man's emblem. He was bred out of the dust, yet he catches a^
Lordships and honors: ransackes the City, forredges the Country, scowres it
through the Church; but his arrand is to the Court. He is the maggot of pride,
Stultus in solio, Simia in tecto.
begot out of corruption: and looks in an office, as the Ape did when he had
got on the robes of a Senator.

2. Their flattery or treachery: they embrace, whiles they sting. They lie in
(...) green grass, and under sweet flowers, that they may wound the
suspectlesse passenger. Here I will couple the Serpent with the Flatterer; a
humane beast, and of the two the more dangerous. And that fitly; for they write
of a Serpent, whose sting has such force, that it makes a man die laughing. So
the fla^erer tickles a man to death. Therefore his tears are called Crocodile
lacrimae; the Crocodiles tears. When h^ weeps, he wounds. Every frown he
makes, gives his Patron a vomit: and every candle of commendation a purge. His
Church is the Kitchen, his tongue is his Cater; his young Lord his God; whom at
once he worships, and worreys. When he has gotten a lease, he does no longer
fear his master: nay more, he fears not God.

3. Their ingratitude; they kill those that nourished them. And here I rank
with Serpents those prodigies of nature, unthankful persons. Seneca says they
are Se^. epist. 48.
worse. Venenum qu^d serpents in alienam pernici^m proferunt, fine s^
continent. No^ ita vitium ingr^itudinis continetur. The poison which a Serpent
casts out to the danger of another, he retains without his own. But the vice
of ingratitude cannot be so smoothered. Let us hate this sin, not only for
others sake, but most for our own.

4. Their voracitie; they kill more then they can eat. And here they would be
commended to the Ingrossers: who hoord more then they can spend, that the poor
might st^ue for lack of bread. Such a man (if he be not (...) a Serpent, a
Devil then man) makes his Almanacke his Bible: if it prognosticate rain on
Swithi^s day, he loves and believes it beyond the Scripture. Nothing in the
whole Bible pleases him, but the story of Pharaohs dream; where the seven
lean Kine did eat up the seven fat ones. He could wish that dream to be
true every year; so he might have grain enough to sell. He cries out in his
heart for a dear year, and yet he is never without a dear year in his
belly. Solomon says, the people shall curse him: and I am sure God will not
bless him: but he fears neither of these so much as a cheap year.

5. Their hostility and murderous minds: they destroy all, to multiply their
own kind. And for this I will bring the depopulator to shake hands with
serpents. For he cannot abide neighbors. If any man dwells in the Town besides
himself, how should he do for elbow room? There are too many of these
Serpents in England: I would they were all exild to the wilderness; where they
might have room enough, and none to trouble them, except of their own
generation, Serpents. They complain eagerly against our negligence in
discovering new parts of the world: but their meaning is to rid this land of
Inhabitants. They have done their best, or rather their worst: when as in my
memory from one town in one day were driven out above threescore souls:
harbourlesse, succourlesse, exposd to the bleake air and unmerciful world:
besides those that could provide for themselves. But the Lord of heaven sees
this: the clamours of many poor debtors in the Dungeon, of many poor
laborers in the field, of many poor neighbors crying and dying in the
streets, have entered the ^ares of the Lord of hoasts, and he will judge it.
Psalm. 10. 14.
Thou have seen it, for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to requite it: the
poor commits himself unto thee, thou art the helper of the f^herlesse.

6. Lastly, their en^itie against Man, whom they should reverence* which we
sorely found, and cannot but think of, quoti^s (...) ^picati p^i: as often as
we remember that ^ieapple. Aelia^s and Pl^e report, that when a serpent has
killed a man, he can never more cover himself in the earth: but wanders up and
down like a forlorn thing: the earth disdaining to receive into her bowels a
man murderer. The male does not acknowledge the ^ale, nor the female the male,
that has done such a deed. Since therefore they rebel against Man whom they
should honor let me yoke with them Traitors, Seminaries, and Renegates, that
refuse allegiance to their Lieges and So^algnes. Will they say* (...) Prince
may loose Ius regni, the right of his kingdom, per (...) regnandi, by reigning
with injustice and (...)? and so they are absolved of their obedience? But how
haps it that the Scripture never knew this distinction? Saul though guilty of
all sins against the first Table yet exsolo (...) ^is ch^ctere, might not be
deposed: but David calls him Christum Do^, the Lords Anointed. If the Prince be
an offender, must they punish? Who gave them that authority? No ^cit (...) in
(...), quod Deum expect^ (...). It is eno^gh for him, that he look for God to
be his Judge. O but when the Popes excommunication thund^rs, it is no sin to
decrowne Kings. So super st^tiously they follow the Pope, that they forsake
Christ; and will not give C^sar his due. They are the fire brands and
bustuaries of Kingdoms; Serpents hidden in Ladies and Gentlewomens chambers:
in a word* long spoones for traitors to feed with the Devil.

You see also now Quid (...). There is poison in Serpents now told you, leave
that: there is Wisdom to be learned from Serpents before showed you, study
that. Every vice you nourish, is a venomous stinging serpent in your own
bosoms. If you will have hope of heaven, expel those Serpents. I have read of
a contention between Scotland and Ireland, about a little Island: either
chalenging it theirs. It was put to the decision of a Frenchman: who caused to
be put into the Island living Serpents. Arbitrating it thus; that if those
Serpents lived and prospered there, the ground was Scotlands: if they died,
Irelands. If those serpentine sins, lusts, and lewdnes, live ^d thrive in
your hearts, Satan will challenge you for his dominion. If they perish and die
through mortification, and by reason of the pure air of Gods holy Spirit in
you, the Lord seals you up for his own inheritance.

I have given you the Raines at large: let me give but one pull at the Curb,
and you shall go. The Cohibition is, Be harmless as Doves. In Doves there be
some things to be eschewed, many things to be commended: one thing to be
followed. The Dove is a timorous and faint hearted creature. Hos. 7. 8.
Ephr^ is like a silly Dove, without heart. Be not ye so. In Doves there are
many things commendable; but I will but name them, regarding the limits of both
my Text and Time.

1. Beauty* By that name Christ prayseth the beauty of his Spouse. Thou art
fair my L^e, my Dove, etc. Cant. 4. 1.
Thou ^ast Doves (...) within thy l^kes. And the Church prayseth her Savior.
Cant. 5. 12. and 1. ^5.
His eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the rivers of water, washed with milk,
^d fitly set; as a precious stone in the foil of a Ring. A white dove is a
pleasing sight, but not like a white soul.

2. Chastity. Nescit adu^erij fla^am inte^erata Columba. The Dove knows not
the luxurious pollution of an adulterate bed. Who ever saw Dove sick of that
lustful disease. Happy body that has such continency: and blessed soul
which shall be 2. Cor. 11. 2.
presented a pure virgin to Jesus Christ. Reu. 14. 4.
They are virgins; and follow the Lamb whether s^euer he goes.

3. Fruitfulness. Most months in the year they bring forth young. The
faithful are in this respect Doves: for faith is ever pregnant of good works,
travels with them, and on all occasions brings them forth.

4. Amity. They love their own mates; not changing till death give one of
them a bill of divorce. G^mit ^urtur: the turtle groans when he has lost his
mate. Nature teaches them, what Reason above nature, and Grace above Reason,
teaches us; to rejoice with the wives of our youth.

5. Unity. They live, feed, fly by companies. Many of them can agree quietly
in one house. Even teaching us, Psalm. 133. 1.
how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. That as
we have Ephe. 4. 4.
one hop^, so to have Act. 4. 32.
one heart. Therefore the holy Ghost came down Math. 3. 16.
in the likeness of a Dove, of all birds: and it was the Genesis 8. 9.
Dove that would not leave Noah's Arc.

But these are but circumstances; my C^nter is their Innocence. Bern. in die
Purific.
Columba simplex est animal, fell caret, rostro non l^dit. Other fowls have
their talons and beakes, whereby they gripe and devour, like usurers and
oppressors in a Commonwealth. The Dove has no such weapon to use, no such
heart to use it. They write that she has no gall; and so free from the
bitterness of anger. Talem Columbam audi^imus, non talem hominem. We have
heard of such a Dove, not of such a Man. Who can say, he has innocent hands,
and a simple heart? Indeed none perfectly in Gods sight: yet some have had, and
may have this in part, by the witness of their own consciences. Samuel could
challenge the Israelites to accuse him; 1. Sam. 12. 3.
Whose ^xe have I taken? Whom have I defrauded? Of whose h^d have I received
any bribe? And Job sweetly; My heart shall not condemn me for my days. Job
31. 21. etc.
If I have lift up my hand against the fatherles let it be broken. If I
rejoiced at the destruction of him that hated me. (For that is true Innocence,
says Augustine, quae nec inimico nocet; that hurts not our very enemy. If my
land cry against me, or the furrows thereof complain. Let thistles grow in
stead of wheat, and cockles in stead of barley. How few amongst us dare thus
plead! So David. O Lord, thou know mine innocenc^.

O blessed testimony. This is Munus a^eneus, a wall of brass about a man. Sen.
In (...) sper^re bonum, nisi innocens, n^ potest. To hope for good in the
midst of evils, no man can but the Innocent. He goes fearlesse of danger,
though not secure. Impauidum ferient ruinae. Greg. in Mor
Ne^ suspectus est pa^, quod se non (...) fecisse. He cannot look to suffer
that wrong, which he knows he has not done. Innocence* says Chrysoft. is
free in servitude, safe in danger, joyful in bonds. Cum humiliatur, erigitur:
^um pugnat, vincit: cum occiditur, coronatur. When it is cast down, it is
raised up: when it fights, it conquers: when it is killed, it is crowned.

This is that ^elesnes which must be joined with the Serpents Wisdom. So Paul
to his Romans. Romans 16. 19.
I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple concerning evil.
This is an excellent mixture, says Gregor. In locum.
Vt simplicitatem (...) ast^ia* serpentis instrueret: vt serpentis astut^
simplicitas colu^ ^emperaret. That the wisdom of the Serpent might instruct
the simplicity of the Dove: that the Doves simplicity might temper the
Serpents policy. So ^eda on the first of Job. Job is said to be simple and
upright: simple in innocence, upright in discreet equity. Simplex quia alijs
non l^dit, rectus quia se ab alijs non corrumpi (...). Simple in that he did
not hurt others, upright in that he suffered not himself to be corrupted by
others. Ierom. ad Rust.
Non mul^um distat in vitio, aut decipere, aus decipiposse. There is small
difference in that vice, which either deceiues. or may be deceived. The one is
weakness, the other wickedness.

This is that grace, to which the gates of heaven stand open, Innocence. But
alas* where shall the robbers and workers of violence appear?

What shall become of the usurer? No creature in heaven or earth shall testify
his innocence. But the sighs, cries, and groans of undone parents, of beggard
widows and Orphans shall witness the contrary. All his money, like Hemp
seed, is sowed with curses: and every obligation is written on earth with ink
and blood, and in hell with blood and fire.

What shall become of the Encloser of Commons? Who shall plead his innocence?
Hedges, ditches, fields, Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas. Iuven. sat.
2.
and towns; the weeping of the poor, the very lowings of beasts shall
witness against him.

Where shall fraud, cosenage, racking of rents, injury, perjury, mischief
appear? You may conceal your craft from the eyes of man; defraud the
minister, beguile your neighbor, impouerish the Commonwealth, unperceived,
unpunished: but know that the Lord will not hold you innocent.

I conclude; Make you the picture of Innocence, and hang it in your houses:
but especially draw it in the table of your hearts. Let it be a Virgin fair
and lovely, without any spot of wrong to blemish her beauty. Let her garments
be white as snow, and yet not so white as her conscience. Let the tears of
compassion drop from her eyes, and an Angel holding a bottle to catch them.
Let her weep, not so much for her own afflictions, as for the wickedness of
her afflicters. Let the ways be milk where she sets her foot, and let not
the earth complain of her pressure. Let the Sun offer her his beams, the
clouds their rain, the ground her fruits, every creature his virtue. Let the
poor bless her: yea, let her very enemies be forced to praise her. Let the
world be sommoned to accuse her of wrong, and let none be found to witness it.
Let peace lie in her lap, and Integrity between her breasts. Let religion
kiss her lips, and all Laws reverence her. Patience possess her heart, and
humility sit in her eyes. Let all Christians make her the precedent of their
lives; and study the doctrine that her mouth teaches. Let the Angels of
heaven be her guardians; and the mercy of God a shield of defense unto her.
Let her tread upon injury, and stamp the Devil and violence under her feet.
Let her greatest adversaries, Oppression and Hypocrisy, fly from her
presence. Let rapine, malice, extortion, depopulation, fraud, and wrong, be as
far removed from her, as hell is from heaven. Let the hand of mercy dry her
eyes, and wipe away her tears. Let those glorious spirits lift her up to the
place of rest. Let heaven add to her beauty, Immortality set her in a throne
of joy, and Eternity crown her with glory. Whether may all her children
follow her, through the blood and merits of that most innocent Lamb Jesus
Christ.

Amen.
THE WAY HOME.
MATTHEW. 2. 12. And being warned of God in a dream, that they should not
return to Herod, they departed into their own Country another way.
WHen these Wise men had presented to Christ their gifts; (which indeed he
first gave them; for the earth is his, and the fullness thereof: yet) he
rewards them. They emptied their Treasures of Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense.
and he filled the treasure of their hearts with heavenly graces.

For their Gold, he returns them pure wisdom. They were called Wise men
before; but their wisdom was infernal, downwards to hell, perhaps
consulting with Devils. Now he gives them Iam. 3. 17
Wisdom from above, pure and refined as gold.

For their Frankincense, he purges them of their former superstitious
Idolatries, from sacrificings to Satan: and instructs them to whom frankincense
is due, and all other offerings of piety; to their Creator and Savior.

For their Myrrh, he gives them Charity, a true love to him, that so truly
loved them; and for his sake a love to others. They made then a blessed
exchange with Christ; when for Gold, Frankincense, Myrrh, they received
Wisdom, Devotion, Charity.

Now to testify how highly the Lord favored them, he speaks to them in a
dream, and reveals his mind for the safety of his Son; that they should not
return to Herod. And to witness how truly they served the Lord, they gave
obedience. They departed into their own country another way.

The whole may be distinguished into An Informing into a word Performing work

God gives the word, the Magi do the work. God does inform, and they
perform. He instructs, and they execute. He gives direction, they
obedience. His word, informance, instruction, direction is. He warned them in a
dream, that they should not return to Herod. Their work, performance,
pliable obedience.

They departed into their country another way.

In the direction or monition Informing are considerable these three
circumstances: The Men, Wise men, Magicians. Manner, In a dream. Matter, That
they should not return to Herod.



The Persons to whom God gave this admonition, are expressly called Wise men.
Some say, they were also Great men. If so, then was this revelation made
Potentibus. Petentibus.



1. To great men. It is the opinion of some, that these magi were kings: and
that the Evangelist in calling them wise men, gave them a more honorable
title, then if he had called them kings. So Ludolphus says, that Magus was in
those days more noble then Magnus. But we must know, who they are that thus
style them: Friars and Jesuits, such as can by no means endure the
superiority of Princes. That are Derisores hominum maxim potentu^. Hereon some
of them have mooted strange problemes able to fill whole volumes. An Sacerdotes
Regibus praeferendi. Whether Priests be not above kings. But still the
conclusion is against Princes. Some more moderate on that side have confessed
them not Reges, but Regulos, little kings, petit Princes. Like those one and
thirty kings, that conspired against Iosu. 12. 24.
Iosuah. Or those fifty that met at Troy. There is a kind of king in France,
whom the common people call, Le Roy Dlynetot. But that these were but three in
number, and kings in power, it may be painted in a popish window, is not in
Catholics bible, therefore needs not be in a Christians creed.

2. Howsoever these Magi were Potentes, or no, they were Petentes. Though they
were great men, yet they humbly seek the greatest of men, yea the great God,
Jesus. And behold, graciously the Lord offers himself to their search:
according to his infallible promise, that he will be found out of all that seek
him Leo. in Loc.
Dedit aspicientibus intellectum, qui praestitit signum: and quod fecit
intelligi, fecit inquiri. So he offers himself to all faithful searchers. But
we cannot find him we seek, unless he find us first: Luke 19. 10.
that came to seek and to save that which was lost. We seek in vain, unless
we seek him: and we seek him in vain, unless he find us. Fulgent.
Nos ad se quarendum suscitat-se ad inveniendum porrigit. He stirs up our
hearts to seek him, and offers himself to be found. There was never faithful
heart sought the Lord Jesus, but he found him whom his Cant. 3. 1.
soul loved. His patience might be excercised, his fidelity tried, his desires
extended, by Gods hiding himself for a season. In the night of obscurity,
security, ignorance, he may miss him. ver. 1. Though he enquire among the
deepest Philosophers, and honestest worldlings. ver. 2. he may not find him.
But. ver. 3. the watchmen will bring him to him: yea ver. 4. Christ himself will
appear in gracious mercy. He may say for a while, as the Poet of Anchises.

Quaregio Christum? quis habet locus? Illius ergo Venimus. Aenead. 6.
Where is Christ! in what country may I find him? But the Lord Jesus will
reveal himself: yea meet Luke 15.
him half way, as the merciful father met his unthrifty Son when he
returned. We shall conclude with joy: Ioh. 1. 41. 45.
We have found the Messiah: even him of whom Moses in the Law, and the prophets
did write, Jesus of Nazareth.

You hear the Persons to whom this admonition was given: the next Circumstance
is

The Manner. In a dream.
I might here enter into a cloudy and confused discourse of Dreams, till I
brought you all asleep. But I love not to fetch any bowtes, when there is a
nearer way. Herein I may say with Augustine. Ad Evodium. ep. 100. and de Ciuit.
Dei. cap. 20.
I would to God I could discern between dreams.

Some are Natural. Preternaturall. Supernatural.

1. Natural: and such arise either from Complexion Affection

1. From complexion or constitution. The Sanguine has merry dreams: the
mela^choly sorrowful dreams the Choleric dreams of fire, and such turbulent
thoughts: the Phlegmatic, of rain, of floods; and such warry objects. And as
these elementall humors do abound in a man, the dreams have a stronger force,
and more violent perturbation.

2. From Affection: what a man most desires, he soonest dreams of. Omnia quae
sensu voluuntur vota diurno, Claudian. in Praef. Lib. 3.

Tempore nocturno reddit amica quies.
Venator defessa toro dum membra reponit.
Men's tamen ad siluas and sua lustra redit.
Gaudet amans furto: permutat nauit a merces:
Et vigil elapsas quarit a^arus opes.


So Augustine. Lib. de spiritu and anima. cap. 25.
S^ nascitur ex studi^s praeteritis. what man desires in the day, he dreams in
the night. The hunters mind is in the forest, whiles his wearied bones are
reposed on a soft bed. The soldier dreams of batteries, assault^,
encounters: the Lawyer of quirkes and demurres: the citizen of tricks and
frauds: the musician of crotchers, the Seminary of equivocations. The glutted
Epicure dreams of dainty dishes and fat morsells. The thirsty drunkard dreams
of his licour, Esa. 29. 8.
and behold he drinks; but awake, his thirst is not satisfied. The usurer
dreams of his trunckes, and that he is telling his gold: and starts, as if
every rat were a thief breaking in upon him. The timorous dream that they are
flying before ouertaking danger. The Lustful imagines his desired embracings.
The angry that he is fighting killing, spoiling. The secure, that they are
wilstling, singing, dancing. The ielous man dreams of his wives errors, when
she lies chastely by his side. The ambitious, that he is kissing the kings hand,
and mounted into the saddle of honor. The ouercharged mind dreams of his
employment. Eccl. 5. 3.
For a dream comes through the multitude of business. 2. Preternaturall:
and these are either Ad Errorem Terrorem

Whereof the first is wrought by Satan Permittente Deo God suffering it. The
second by God mediante Diabolo, Satan being a mediate instrument.

1. There are Dreams for Error, wrought by the mere illusion of Satan: whom
God once suffered to be a lying Spirit in the mouth of 400. Prophets. He
working upon man's affections, inclinations, and humors, causes in them such
dreams, as seduce them to wickedness, and induce them to wrechednes. They write
of one Amphiaraus, an Argiue Soothsayer, that by a dream he was brought to
the Theban voyage; where Hiatu terrae absorbetur; he was swallowed up of the
earth. Genesis 40. 16.
So Pharaohs Baker was encouraged to hopeful error by a dream. So was that
monstrous host of Midian overthrown by a Dream of a Judge. 7. 13.
Barley cake, that hit a Tent, and overwhelmed it: which was interpreted the
Sword of Gideon.

2. For Terror. Job says, that Deus terret per somnia, and per visiones
horrorem incuiit. God strikes terror into the hearts of the wicked by Dreams.
As a Malus genius is said to appear to Brutus the night before his death: or
as the face of Hector was presented to Andromache. Polydore virgil records the
dream of that bloody tyra^t, Richard 3. that in a dream the night before the
battle of Bosworth field, he thought all the devils in hell were haling and
tugging him in pieces: and all those whom he had murdered, crying and shricking
out vengeance against him. Though he thinks this was more then a dream. Id
credo non fuisse somnium, sed conscientiam seeleru^ He judged it not so much a
dream, as the guilty conscience of his own wickedness. So to Robert Winter,
one of the powder-traytors, in a dream appeared the ghastly figures and
distracted visages of his chief friends and confederates in that treason; not
unlike the very same manner, wherein they after stood on the pinnacles of the
Parliament house.

3. Supernatural; such as are sent by divine inspiration, and must have a
divine interpretation, Such were the dreams of Pharaoh expounded by Joseph:
the dreams of Nebuchadnezzar declared by Daniel. Of these were two sorts.

1. Some were mystical: such as those two kings dreams; and Pharaohs two
officers: whose exposition is only of God. So Genesis 40. 8.
Joseph answers; Are not interpretations of the Lord? So Nebuchadnezzar to
Daniel. Dan. 4. 18.
Thou art able, for the spirit of the holy God is in thee. The Sorcerers and
Astrologers dearly acknowledged their ignorance Dan. 2. 13.
with their lives. Thus Pharaoh may dream, but it is a Joseph that must
expound it. It is one thing to have a representation objected to the fantasy:
another thing to have an intellectual light given to understand it.

2. Others are demonstratiue: when the Lord not only gives the dream, but
also withal the understanding of it. Such were Daniels dreams, and these
Wisemens, and Joseph's in this chapter. Wherein was a Vision and Pro uision: a
vision what to do: a provision that no harm might come to Jesus. These
dreams were most specially incident to the new Testament: when God at the very
rising of the Sun, began to expel the shadows of dark my steries. Act. 2.
17.
And it shall come to pass in the last days (says God) I will power out of
my Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy, and
your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams. Now
the Sun is gotten up into the midst of heaven the Gospel into the full
strength, these shadows vanish: the more light, the less shadow.

So that now to expect revelation of things by dreams were to entreat God to
lend us a candle whiles we have the bright Sun. The superstitious Papists are
s^ill full of these dreams: and find out more mysteries in their sleep, then
they can well expound waking. The Abbot of Glastenbury, when Ethelwold was
Monk there, dreamt of a tree, whose branches were al covered with Monks
cowles: and on the highest bough one cowle that ouertop'd all the rest: which
must needs be expounded the future greatness of this Ethelwold. But it is most
admirable, how the Dominicke Friars make shift to expound the dream of
Dominickes mother; which she had when she was with child of him: that she had
in her womb a wolf with a burning torch in his mouth. Say what they will, a
wolf is a wolf still: and that order has ever carried a burning torch to
scorch their mother, the Church. But there is no dream of theirs with out an
interpretation, without a prediction. And if the event answer not their
foretelling, they expound it after the event. If one of them chance to dream
of a green garden, he goes presently and makes his will. Or if another dream
that he shakes a dead friend by the hand, he is ready to call to the Sexton for
a grave; takes solemn leave of the world, and says he cannot live.

Beloved, God has not grounded our faith upon dreams nor 2. Pet. 1. 16.
cunningly devised fables; but on the holy Gospel, written by his servants in
books, and by his spirit in the tables of our hearts. They that will believe
dreams and Traditions above Gods sacred word, let them hear and fear their
judgment. 2. These. 2. 11.
For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a
lie. That they all might be damned who believe not the truth, but had pleasure
in unrighteousness. Banish from your hearts; this superstitious folly, to
repose any confidence expectant on dreams.

But if you desire to make any use of dreams, let it be this. Consider thy
self in thy dreaming, to what inclination* thou art mostly carried: and so by
thy thoughts in the night, thou shall learn to know thy self in the day. Be
thy dreams lustful? examine whether the addictions of thy heart run not after
the byas of concupiscence. Be they turbulent, consider thy own contentious
disposition. Be they reuengefull, they point to thy malice. Run they upon
gold and riches, they argue thy covetousness.

Thus God may be said to teach a man by his dreams still; non quid erit, sed
qualis est: not what shall be, but what he is. Not future events, but present
condition may be thus learned. Neither day nor night scapes a good man without
some profit: the night teaches him what he is, as the day what he should be.
Therefore said a Philosopher, that all waking men are in one common world: but
in sleep every man goes into a world by himself. For his dreams do signify
to him those secret inclinations, to which he thought himself a stranger,
though they were home-dwellers in his heart. Even those fancies are speaking
images of a man's disposition. And as I have heard of some that talk in their
dreams, and then reveal those secrets, which awake they would not have
disclosed. So may thy dreams tell thee when thou wakest, what kind of man thou
art. The hypocrite dreams of dissimulation: the proud woman of paint and
colors: the thief of robbery and booties* the Jesuit of treasons. Let them
ask their very sleep, quale^ sint; what manner of men they ar^. For so
lightly they answer temptations actually waking, as their thoughts do
sleeping. Thus only a man may make good use of his dreams.

Here let us observe, that God does sometimes draw men to him suis ipsorum
(...); by their own delights and studies. No doubt these Magi were well
acquainted with dreams: it being amongst Ethnickes and Peripatetickes a
special object of divination. Therefore there is a book bearing the name of
Aristotle; De diui^ne p^r somnium. Many ^ors these men had swallowed by
dreams; now behold, in a dream they shall receive the truth. So God called
them by a Star, whose profession was to rely too much on the Stars.
Chrysolog. hom. 6. in Math.
Quare per Stellam? vt per Christum ipsa materia erroris, fieret salutis
occasio. Why by a Star? that through Jesus Christ the very matter of their
error might be made a means of their salvation. Per (...) ill^s vocat, qu^
famil^ria illis cons^tudo fecit. God calls them by those things, which custom
had made familiar to them. They that are stung with Scorpions, must be cured by
the oil of Scorpions. Thus God allures men to him, as Fishermen (...), with
such baits as may be somewhat ag^ble to them. Paul is occasioned by the Act.
17. 23.
Al^ (...) the vnknow^ God, to make known the true God, the (...) Jesus. Does
David love the Sheepe-folds? he shall be a Shepherd still. Ps^. 78. 71.
From following the e^s great with young, he brought him to feed Jacob his
people, and Isr^ll his ^ritance. Does Peter love fishing? he shall go a
fishing still, though for more noble creatures; to catch soule^. Do these
Magicians love Stars and Dreams, behold a Star and a Dream shall instruct
them in the truth of God. Old Is^ takes occasion by the smell of his Sons
garments, sauouring of the field, to pronounce a spiritual blessing. Genesis 27.
27.
The smell of my Son is as the smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed.
Jerome notes of Amos, that he begins his Prophecy with roaring. Am. 1. 2.
The Lord shall roar from Sion. Because he being a field-man, kept the woods,
where he was wonted to the roaring of Lions. Iudaei signa quaerunt? Do the
Jews seek a sign.? Why Christ will there even among them work his Miracles.
Does Augustine love eloquence? Ambrose shall catch him at a Sermon. Romans 8. 28.
All things shall work to their good, that are good: Omnia, etiam peccata. All
things, even their very sins, says Augustin^. (...) in his Essays writes,
that a libidinous gentleman sporting with a Courtezan in a house of sin,
chanced to ask her name; which she said was Mary. Whereat he was stricken with
such a remorse and reverence, that he instantly not only cast off the Harlot,
but amended his whole future life.

Well-beloued, since this is Gods mercy, to allure us to him by our own
delights, let us yield our selves to be caught. What scope does thy addiction
level at, that is not sinful, which Gods word does not promise and afford?
What delight can you ask, which the Sanctuary gives not? Love you hunting?
learn here to hunt. Cant. 2. 15.
the Foxes, the little Cubbes, those crafty sins sculking in your bosoms.
Would you dance? let your hearts keep the measures of Christian joy; and
leap, like John the Baptist in Elizabeth's womb, at the salvation of Jesus.
Delight you in running? Paul sets you a race. 1. Cor. 9. 24.
So run that ye may obtain. You shall have good company. D^id promises,
that he Psalm. 119. 32.
will run the way of Gods commandments. Peter and John will run with you to
Jesus. Love you Music? Here are the Bells of Aaron still ringing; the treble
of Psalm. 101. 1.
Mercy, and the tenor of Judgment; Leui's Lute, and David's Harp. There are
no such songs as the songs of Sion. Would you be merry? Phil. 4. 4.
Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say rejoice. If ever you found joy
like this joy; Romans 14. 17.
the peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost; back again to the world.
Love thou dainty cheer? here be the best cates, the body and blood of thy
Savior, the bread of life: no hunger after it. Will thou drink much. Cant. 5.
1.
Drink my wine and my milk: drink, yea drink abundantly, O Beloved. Bib^e
and (...): as the original imports; drink, and be drunken with loves: pledge
the health that Christ begun; even asauing health to all nations. Are you
ambitious? there is no preferment like that to be had here, in the Court of the
King of Kings. David judged it no little thing to be Son in law to a King:
but what is it then to be a King? Desire you stately buildings? Alas, the
whole world is but a Cottage, a poor transient Tabernacle, to the Ioh. 14. 2.
Mansions promised by Christ. Lastly, are you covetous? Yet I need not ask
that question, but take it as granted. Why then here is gold; more precious
then that of Arabia, or of Hauilah: rust or thief may distress that; this is
a treasure can never be lost. What should I say more? What can win you? Which
way soever your desires stands, God does allure you. The best things in earth
or in heaven are your bait. With these does the Lord seek you; not for any
need that he has of you, but for your own salvation. When the fairest of all
Beloueds does thus woo us, let him win us: and espouse us to himself in
grace, that we have the plenary marriage in glory. You see the Manner of their
Warning.

The Matter.
That they should not return to Herod. Why not to Herod? Because the Lord now
lets them see his hypocrisy. For howsoever he pretended. Ver. 8. to come and
worship him; yet he intended not seruire, but s^uire: not to honor him, but to
murder him. He calls the Wisemen privily, as if he quaked at the propagation of
this news, for it came upon him like the pangs of death. He commands them to
inquire de infant, not de rege; of the babe, not of the King; for that title
galled him to the heart. That I may worship him. Dirum facinus tingit color
pietatis. It is a monstrous wickedness, which he would die in the colors of
godliness.

The Lord does disappoint the purposes of Tyrants: though their Bows be bent,
and their swords whet^ed, yet the mark shall be removed: and they shall rather
wound themselves, then their hated object. Though they be Psalm. 7. 14.
great with child of iniquity, and conceive mischief, yet they shall bring
forth but falsehood. Though those Jews had bound themselves Act. 23. 12.
under a curse, neither to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. Yet if
they had kept their vow, they had fasted to death. Though Sennacherib purposed
to swallow up Jerusalem at a morsel; yet the Lord mocked his menaces. Esa. 37.
33.
He shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor cast a bank
against it.

Herod made himself sure of Christ, but the Lord deceived him again and
again. First he stroke him with extreme sottishnes: that learning by the Wise
men the birth of Christ, yet (though the matter in his thought touched his
Crown) he sends none of his Courtiers with them under pretense of gratifying
them: which might so have seized on that innocent Lamb; and not worshipped,
but worrey'd him. But the Lord so confounded his wits with the spirit of
giddines, that the Magi go alone. Next, now that his bloody hopes depend upon
their return, behold they are sent home another way. So that Ver. 16.
he saw that he was mocked. Herod mocked the Wisemen, and God shall direct the
Wisemen to mock Herod. He pretended to adore, whom he did abhor: and they
do eum vulp^ vulpinara; beguile the Fox: yea rather ^vicula lupum fallit: the
Lamb deceiues the Wolf. Simplicity goes beyond subtletie. A cane non magno
saepe tenetur aper. Here was Herod's folly, that he would not suffer the King
of the whole world, to be King in Jury: that in fear of a Successor, he would
kill his Savior. Nay further: for fear of a strange heir, he killes his own
heir. Which occasioned Augustus to say, that it was better being Herod's Hog
then his heir. Here then see his cruelty: if his strength cannot take Jesus,
he will try his cunning: and last when his cunning fails, he falls to open
violence again: sending forth men of war. Thus when Tyrants fail in their
Politicians Rhetoric, they fall to the Carters Logic.

You see the Informance, let us look upon their Performance. They departed
into their own Country another way. All which (wanting time to prosecute the
history) I will apply to our selves. Their course home, shall teach us a
course to our home: even to heaven and glory. Wherein I desire to observe these
Circumstances Our selves naturally lost: Our finding of Christ. Our charge not
to return to Herod: But to go to our own Country; And that by another way.



1. Let it be granted, that we have all wandered from the way of life. Esa. 53.
6.
All we like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own
way. I would to God, every one would sentire, feel this in particular; and not
only consentire, consent to it in general. Math. 9. 13.
I am not come to call the righteous, says Christ, but sinners to repentance.
And Luke 15. he leaves the hypocritical (...) to their own high-conceited
purity, and seeks the lost sheep. We may here pawse, and wonder, at our
misery, at his mercy. We were so lost, that we could never find him: ^e is
so good, that he sought and found us Inuenit non quaerentes, non p^rdet inue^s.
He found v^ not seeking him, being found he will not loose us. Math. 11. 28.
Come to me all that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.
The proud sinner who does not find his sin; the careless, who does not feel
his sin; is not called. Only sentsentibus morbum promittitur medicina.
Health is promised to those that feel their sickness.

2. Christ calls us, but how shall we come? Behold he sends us a Star for
direction, his holy Word. Ioh. 6. 68.
Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. Would you
come to him that is vita, the life? You must come by him that is via, the Way.
It is he Quo eundem, whether we would go: it is he Qua eundem, by which we
must go. To his word then let us come with an honest heart: not to sleep, not
to carpe, not to gaze: but to observe attentively, to remember faithfully, and
to practice obediently, what is there taught us. Neither must God only for his
part afford us a Star for guidance; but we must also for our part bring feet
to walk to him. These are three.

1. Contrition* a heart truly sorrowful for our former iniquities. He that is
cast down by repentance, shall be raised up with joy. It is not possible to
walk to God without this foot. He that goes to heaven, must wash his steps
with tears. And he that has this foot, shall make large paces to glory.
Though he has long lingered, he will now have: as the malefactor stepped by this
foot from the Cross to Paradise.

2. Faith. Sorrow may cast down too fast, too far. Though the head have leave
to ache, yet let not the hand of faith be wanting to hold it. Though the eye be
blubbred with tears, yet must it look through all that water to the clear
Sun, Jesus Christ. When the Law has done the office in making thy sin
manifest; thank it, and take thy leave of it: as thou would do of a friend
that has done thee a good turn, but now grows troublesome. Put Moses behind
thee, says Luther: and fix thine eyes upon Christ; that Ioh. 1. 29.
Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. Without this foot thou
shall step short of comfort. Faith must bring thee to the fountain of that 1.
Ioh. 1. 7.
Blood, which shall wash away all thy sins.

3. Obedience: this foot must be continually used: all the days of thy life
must thou travel in the ways of God with this foot. It knows and keeps
Celeritie, Integrity, Constancy.

Celeritie. Psalm. 119. 32.
I will run the way of thy commandments. It makes have, knowing that God
will not be pleased with halting obedience: or with that zeal, that only
goes a Parliament-pace. The Creeple was carried to the Temple: God loves not
such limping zeal, that is Act. 3.
carried to Church on two Crutches, Law and Custom: but that which with Peter
and John, runs to the place where Christ is. But it is God, that Psalm. 18. 33.
makes our feet like the feet of hindes.

Integrity: it turns not to the right hand, nor to the left, but goes
straight on: Heb. 12. 18.
running with patience the race that is set before it. Therefore says the
Apostle. ver. 13.
Make straight paths for your feet, least that which is lame be turned out of
the way: for all false ways the Lord does utterly abhor. Psalm. 12. (...).
The wicked walk on every side: they have circular goings, on every side of
the truth, but the true way they cannot find. But Integrity is not so light
heeld, to skip out of the way of righteousness, at every dog that reproachfully
barks at it, nor at every Siren that temptingly would call it aside. The
Devil, with all his force of terror or error cannot seduce it.

Constancy: it is ever traveling, though through many hindrances. It has a
heavy load of flesh to burden it, and make every step tedious, yet it goes.
Cares for family, troubles of contentious neighbors, frowning of great
adversaries, malicious turbulencie of the world; all offer to stay it, but it
goes on. As if it had received the Apostles Commission, Salute none of these
Remora's by the way; it rests not till it see the salvation of God. The Lord
Psalm. 56. 13.
delivers the feet from falling, that it may walk before God in the light of
the living.

3 We must not return back to Herod. Why not to Herod? He was a fit type of
the Devil: and they that are recovered and escaped from him, should not fall
back into his clutches. The Devil is like Herod, both for his subtletie and
cruelty. The Herod's were all dissemblers, all cruel. There was Herod
Ascalonita, Herod Antipas, and Herod Agrippa: all cruel in the butchering of
Gods Saints. Ascalonita necat pueros, Antipa Iohannem,
Agrippa Iacobum, mittitque in carcere Petrum.
Ascalonite makes an earnest show of zeal to Christ: but he desired not
subijcerese Christ^, sedsib^ Christum: not to become subject to Christ, but to
make Christ the sub iect of his fury. Antipas seemed to love John the Baptist,
but he suffers a dancing foot to kick off his head. The cruelty of the other
Herod was monstrous. He slew all those whom he could suspect to issue from the
line of David: all the Infants of Bethlem under two years old, at one
slaughter. He slew his kindred, his sister, his wife, his son. He cut the
throats of Joseph. Antiq. Lib. 17. cap. 8.
many noble Jews, whiles he lay on his death bed. Yea made it in his will,
that so soon as ever the breath was out of his body, all the sons of the
nobler Jews shut up into a safe place, should be instantly slain to bear him
company. By this means he resolved, that some should lament his death, which
otherwise would have bin the cause of great joy. A wretched Testament, and fit
for such a devil to make.

That Devil we are charged not to return to, exceeds this both in subtletie
and cruelty: even as much as a father may his Son. Herod was not so perfect
a Master of his art. The wise men deceived Herod; he must be a wise man indeed
that ouer-reaches Satan. Herod was a bungler to him: he trusted to instruments
to destroy Christ; the Devil looks to that business himself. He can
transform himself into an Angel of light: and rather then not draw men to
hell, he will dissemble a love to heaven. He will speak good, that he may
work evil: and confess the truth, that thereby he may procure credit to
greater falsehood. He can stoop to the reprobate, like a tame horse till they
get up and ride him: but when he has them on his back, he runs post with them
to hell.

When he has thus excercised his policy, will he spare his power? when his
Foxes part is done, he begins his Lions. Blood, massacre, destruction are his
softest embraces: horror and amazement are the pleasures of his Court: kill,
kill, burn, burn, is the language of his tongue; to those miserable wretches,
which must ever be burning, never consumed; ever killing, and never die. Oh
then let us never return to Herod, nor venture on his mercy. The poor bird,
that has escaped the hawks talons, is careful to avoid his walk. The
strayed Lamb, fallen into the wolfes cave and delivered by the Shephard, will
no more straggle out of the flock. If the Lord Jesus has sought and brought
us to himself by the Star of his Gospel, let us no more go back to Herod:
flying the works of darkness, and serving the living God with an upright heart.
Indeed they that are truly freed from his servitude, will never more become
his vassalls. Many seem escaped, that are not. If the adulterer return like
the 2. Pet. 2. 22.
Hog to the mire, and the drunkard like the Dog to his vomit; it is likely
that they love Herod well, for they go back to him. The minister may desire
to Romans 15. 16.
offer them up a living sacrifice to the Lord; but like wild beasts, they
break the rope, and will not be sacrificed. But we Luke 1. 74.
being delivered by Christ out of the hands of our enemies, must serve him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

4. We must go to our own Country. In this world we are but strangers:
though perhaps we think too well of these vanities, yet they are but foreign
things, we have another home. We may be ravished with this earth, as Peter
with Tabor, Bonum hic; it is good being here: but if we look up to that
heaven which is our Country, Mundi calcamus inutile pondus. Behold, the very
outside is fair: the outmost walls are beautified with glorious lights every
one as a world for greatness, so a heaven for goodlinesse. All those spangles
be as radiant stones, full of Luster; pure gold to the dross of earthly
things. What may we then think there is within?

Yea whatsoever the wicked think, yet this world is but the through-fare: and
it is not their home neither, though indeed they have their portion in this
life. It is said of Judas going to hell, that Act. 1 25.
he went to his own place: therefore that, and not this, is their own
country; as sure as they think themselves of this world. In heaven there is
all life, no death: in hell all death, no life: on earth men both live and die;
passing through it as the wilderness, either to Egypt or Canaan. This earth as
it is between both, so it prepares us for both: and sends every one to their
own country; eternal joy, or everlasting sorrow.

He that here dies to sin, shall hereafter live in heaven: he that lives in
sin, shall hereafter die in hell. All soiourne, either with GOD, feeding on
his graces, or with Satan surfe^ing on his iniquities. They that will have
Satan for their host in transgression, shall afterward be his guests in
perdition. But they that obey God as their master, shall also have him their
father, and that for ever.

Contemn we then this world: what though we have many sorrows here, and a
still succession of miseries: we are not at home. What stranger looks for kind
usage amongst his enemies? As well might the captive Jews expect quiet among
the Babilonians. Thou art sure of a country wherein is peace. In that heaven
the wicked have no part, though here much pleasure. When thou considerest this
truly, thou would not change portions with them. Let it be comfort
sufficient, since we cannot have both, that we have by many degrees the better

Their own country. Heaven is our own country. 1. Ours, ordained for us by
God the Father. Mat. 25. 34.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom. 2. Ours, purchased for
us by God the Son. Heb. 10. 19.
We have boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus. 3. Ours
sealed to us by God the holy Ghost. Ephesians. 4. 30.
The Spirit of God seals us up to the day of redemption. Romans 8. 16.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God.

Ours thus, though we are not yet fully entered into it. Habemus ius ad rem,
nondum in re. We are ver. 17.
heirs to it, though now we be but wards. Our minority bids and binds us to
be as servants. The heir as long as he k Gal. 4. 1.
is a child differs nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all. When we
come to full years, a perfect growth in godlynes, in mensuram staturae adulti
Christ's, Ephesians. 4. 13.
to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ, we shall have a
plenary possession.

It is ours already, not in re, but in spe; as Aug. Our common Law
distinguishes between two manner of freeholds. A freehold in deed when a man
has made his entry upon lands, and is thereof really seized. A freehold in
law, when a man has right to possessions, but has not made his actual entry.
So is this Country ours: ours Tenore iuris, though not yet iure tenoris: ours
in the inheritance of the possession, though not in the possession of the
inheritance. To this country, our country, let us travel: and that we may do
it the better,

5. The last circumstance shows us how; Another way, we must change the whole
course of our inordinate conversation, and walk another way: even the Kings
highway to Paradise. Eusebius. Emissen. Hom. 1. de Epiph.
Immutatio vi^, emendatio vitae. The changing of the way, is the amending of
our life. Repentance must teach us to tread a new path. To man truly penitent,
Optimus portus est mutatio consi^y: The best haven is the change of his life:
1. King. 13. 9.
not to turn Tertull.
again by the same way that he came. Thus must we renounce our own wills, and
old ways: and being made new creatures, take new paths. So Gregory. o We
departed from our country by pride, disobedience, doting on visible delights,
and pleasing the lusts of the flesh: we must therefore return by humilu^e,
obedience, contemning the world, and condemning the flesh. Quia Paradisi
gaudijs per delectationem recessimus, ad h^c per poenitentiam, tanquam per
nouam viam, reuoca^ur. We that departed from Paradise by sin, must return
thither, by a new way, Repentance. Have thou walked in lust? take another way;
by purity and chastity. Did thou travel with pride? there is another way
to heaven, humility. Mat^. 5. 3.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Were
thou given to avarice? there is a new way to heaven; by charity. Ye have fed
me hungry etc. Math. 25.
therefore come ye blessed. Did thou trudge with contention, and molesting
thy neighbors with suits? this is the way to Westminster hall, there is
another way to heaven. Math. 5. 9.
Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called the children of God.
Did thou trade in usury? this is the way to the Exchange: thou must exchange
this way if thou will come to glory. Have thou forredged with oppression? Thou
must with Zaccheus seek out another way. Luke 19. 8.
If I have taken any thing from any man by false dealing, I restore him
fourefold. Let the drunken epicure, malicious repiner, seditious incendiary,
dissembling hypocrite, unjust oppressor, leave their wretched paths: and seek
another way to happiness. God give us all grace to find this way of Repentance,
that we may come at last to our own Country, peace and rest with Jesus
Christ.

Amen.
SEMPER IDEM OR The Immutable mercy Of Jesus Christ.
HEBR. 13. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.
BY the name of Jehovah was God known to Israel; from the time of the first
mission of Moses to them, and their manumission out of Egypt: and not before.
For says God to Moses Exodus 6. 3.
I appeared unto Abraham, and unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, by the Name of God
Almighty; but by my Name JEHOVAH was I not known to them. This (I Am) is an
eternal word, comprehending three times; that was, that is, and is to come.

Now to testify the equality of the Son to the Father, the Scripture gives
the same Eternity to Jesus, that it does to Jehovah. He is called Alpha and
Omega, Primus and nouissimus, the First and the Last: which is, which was, and
which is to come. Revel. 1. and here the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever. Therefore he was not only Christus Dei, the Anointed of God; but
Christus Deus, God himself Anointed. Seeing that Eternity which has neither
beginning nor ending, is only peculiar and proper to God.

The words may be distinguished into a Center Circu^ference Mediate

Line, referring the one to the other. The immovable Center is Jesus Christ.
The Circumference that runs round about him here, is Eternity: Yesterday, to
day and for ever. The Mediate line referring them is. (...), The same* Jesus
Christ the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

The Center is Jesus Christ.
Jesus was his proper Name, Christ his appellatiue. Jesus a name of his nature,
Christ of his Office and dignity; as Divines speak.

Jesus a Name of all sweetness. Bern. in Can.
Mel in ora, Melos in a^re, iubilus in cord. A reconciler, a Redeemer, a
Savior. When the conscience wrastles with Law, Sin, Death; nothing but horror
and despair without Jesus. He is Ioh. 14. 6.
the way, the Truth, and the Life: without him Error, Me^dacium, Mors. Si
scribas, non placet, nisi legam ibi Iesum: says Bernard. If thou writest to
me, thy letter does not please me, unless I read there Jesus. If thou
conferrest, thy discourse is not sweet, without the name of Jesus. The blessed
restorer of all, of more then all that Adam lost* for we have gotten more by
his regenerating grace, then we lost by Adams degenerating Sin.

Christ is the Name of his Office: being appointed and anointed of God, a
King, a Priest, a Prophet.

This Jesus Christ is our Savior: of whose names I forbear further discourse,
being unable, though I had the tongue of Angels, to speak ought worthy ^anto
Nomine, Tanto Numine. All that can be said, is but a little: but I must say but
a little in all. But of all names given to our Redeemer still Jesus is the
sweetest. Over, says Bern. are names of Majesty, Jesus is a name of mercy.
The Word of God, the Son of God, the Christ of GOD, are titles of Glory:
Jesus a Savior, is a title of grace, mercy, redemption.

This Jesus Christ is the Center of this Text: and not only of this, but of
the whole Scripture. The Sum of Divinity is the Scripture: the Sum of the
Scripture is the Gospel, the Sum of the Gospel is Jesus Christ. In a word,
Nihil continet verbum Domini, nisi verbum Dominum. There is nothing contained
in the word of God, but God the Word.

Nor is he the Center only of his Word, but of our rest and Peace. 1. Cor. 2.
(...).
I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. Thou have made us for thee. O Christ; and our heart is unquiet till
it rest in thee. It is natural to every thing appettere centrum, to desire the
Center. But Col. 3. 3.
our life is hid with Christ in God. We must needs amare, where we must
animare. Our mind is where our pleasure is, our heart is where our treasure is,
our love is where our life is: but all these, our pleasure, treasure, life, are
reposed in Jesus Christ. Thou art my Portion, O Lord, says David. Take the
world that please, let our Portion be Christ. Mat. 19. 27.
We have left all, says Peter, and fellowed thee: you have lost nothing by it,
says Christ; for you have gotten me. Nimis auarus est, cui non sufficit
Christus. He is too covetous, whom Jesus Christ cannot satisfy. Let us seek
this Center, says In Io^an.
August. Qu^ramus inueniendum, quaeramus inuentum. Vt inveniendus qu^ratur,
paratus est: vt inuentus qu^ratur, immensus est. Let us seek him, till we
have found him: and still seek him when we have found him. That seeking we
may find him, he is ready: that finding we may seek him, he is infinite. You
see the Center.

The referring Line proper to this Center, is Semper Idem.

The same. There is no mutabilitie in Christ: Iam. 1. 17.
no variablenes, nor shadow of turning. All lower lights have their
inconstancy; but in the Father of lights there is no changeablenes. The Sun
has his shadow; the the Mal. 4. 2.
Son of righteousness is without shadow: that turns upon the Dial, but
Christ has no turning. Ioh. 13. 1.
Whom he loves, he loves to the end. He loves us to the end; of his love there
is no end. Tempus crit consummandi, nullus consumendi misericordiam. His mercy
shall be perfected in us, never ended. ^sa. 54. 8.
In a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a moment: but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy upon thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. His wrath
is short, his goodness is everlasting. Ver. 10.
The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed: but my kindness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says
the Lord, that has mercy on thee. The mountains are stable things, the hills
steadfast: yet hills, mountains, yea the whole earth shall totter on the
foundations; yea the very 2. Pet. 3. 10.
heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat;
but the Covenant of God shall not be broken. Hos. 2. 19.
I will betroth thee unto me for ever; says God. This marriage-bond shall
never be canceld; nor sin, nor death, nor hell shall be able to divorce us.
Six and twenty times in one Psalm. 136.
Psalm that sweet singer chants it: His mercy endures for ever. Jesus Christ
the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

As this meditation distilles into our believing hearts much comfort, so let it
give us some instructions. Two things it readily teaches us; a Diswasiue
caution. Perswasiue lesson.



1. It diswades our confidence in worldly things because they are inconstant.
How poor a space do^ they remain (...), the same! To prove this, you have in
the first of Judges. Ver. 6. a Jury of threescore and ten Kings, to take their
oaths upon it. Every one had his throne, yet there lickes crumbs under another
Kings table: and shortly even this King, that made them all so miserable, is
made himself most miserable. Solomon compares wealth to a wild foul. Prou.
23. 5.
Riches make themselves wings, they fly away, as an Eagle toward heaven. Not
some tame house-bird or a hawke that may be fetched down with a lure, or found
again by her bells: but an Eagle, that violently cuts the air, and is gone
past recalling.

Wealth is like a bird: it hops all day from man to man, as that does from tree
to tree; and none can say, where it will roust or rest at night. It is like a
vagrant fellow, which because he is big boned and able to work, a man takes in
a doors, and cherishes; and perhaps for a while he takes pains: but when he
spies opportunity, the fugitive servant is gone, and takes away more with him
then all his service came to. The world may seem to stand thee in some stead
for a season, but at last it irreuocably runs away, and carries with it thy
joys; thy gods, as Rachell stole Labans Idols: thy peace and content of heart
goes with it, and thou art left desperate.

You see how quickly riches cease to be the same: and can any other earthly
thing boast more stabillitie? Honor must put off the robes when the play is
done: make it never so glorious a show on this worlds stage, it has but a
short part to act. A great name of worldly glory is but like a peale rung on
the bells: the Common people are the clappers: the rope that moves them is
popularitie: if you once let go your hold and leave pulling, the clapper lies
still, and farewell honor. Strength, though like 1. Kin. 13. 4.
Jeroboam, it put forth the arm of oppression, shall soon fall down
withered. Beauty is like an Almanacke: if it last a year, it is well. Pleasure
like lightning: ^ritur, moritur: sweet, but short: a flash and away.

All vanities are but butter-flies, which wanton children greedily catch for:
and sometimes they fly besides Anselm. meditat.
them, sometimes before them, sometimes behind them, sometimes close by them;
yea through their fingers, and yet they miss them: and when the have them,
they are but butterflies; they have painted wings, but are crude and squalid
worms. Such are the things of this world, vanities, butter-flies. Vel sequendo
labimur, vel assequendo l^dimur. The world it self is not unlike a Hartechoke:
nine parts of it are unprofitable leaves, scarce the tithe is good: about it
there is a l^ttle picking meat, nothing so wholesome as dainty: in the midst
of it there is a coare, which is enough to choke them that devour it.

O then set not your hearts upon these things: calcanda sunt, as Jerome
observes on Act. 4. They that sold their possessions, brought the prises, and
laid them down Act. 4. 35.
at the Apostles feet. At their feet, not at their hearts: they are fitter to
be trodden under feet, then to be waited on with hearts. I conclude this with
Augustine. Ecce turbat mundus, and amatur: quid si tranquillus esset? Formoso
quomodo h^reres, qui sic amplecteris soedum? Flores eius quam colligeres, qui
sic a spinis non reuocas manu^. Quam confideres ^terno, qui sic adh^res caduco?
Behold, the world is turbulent and full of vexation, yet it is loved; how would
it be embraced if it were calm and quiet? If it were a beauteous Damsel how
would they dote on it; that so kiss it being a deformed stigmaticke. How
greedily would they gather the flowers, who will not forbear the thorns? They
that so admire it being transient and temporal; how would they be enamoured
on it if it were eternal? But 1. Ioh. 2. 17.
the world passes, and God abides. Heb. 1. 11. 12
They shall perish, but thou remainest: they all shall wax old as does a
garment: and as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed:
but thou art The Sam^, and thy years shall not fail. Therefore 1. Tim. 6. 17.
trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God. And then Psalm. 125. 1.
they that trust in the Lord; shall be as M^unt Sion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever. Jesus Christ the Sa^ yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

2. This persuades us to an imitation of Christ's Constancy. Let the stablenes
of his mercy to us, work a stablenes of our love to him. And howsoever like
the lower Orbs, we have a natural motion of our own from good to evil: yet
let us suffer the higher power to move us supernaturally from evil to good.
There is in us indeed a reluctant flesh; Romans 7. 23.
a Law in our members warring against the Law of our mind. So August.
confesses. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 10.
Nec plane nolebam, nec plane volebam. And Eg^ era^ qui volebam, ego qui
nolebam. I neither fully granted, nor plainly denied: and it was I my self,
that both would, and would not. But our ripeness of Christianity must
ouergrow fluctuant thoughts.

Irresolution and vnsteddines is hateful, and unlike to our master Christ, who
is ever The Same. Iam. 1. 8.
A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. The inconstant man is a
stranger in his own house: all his purposes are but guests: his heart is the
Inn: if they lodge there for a night, it is all; they are gone in the morning.
Many motions come crowding together upon him: and like a great prease at a
narrow door, whiles all strive, none enter. The Epigrammatist wittily. Omnia
cum facias, miraris cur facias nil:
Posthume, rem solam qui facit, ille facit. Marul. ^pigr. lib. 3.



He that will have an oar for every man's boat, shall have none left to row
his own. They, says Melancton, that will know aliquid in omnibus, shall
indeed know nihil in toto. Their admiration or dotage of a thing is extreme
for the time, but it is a wonder, if it out-liue the age of a wonder, which is
allowed but nine days. They are angry with Time, and say the times are dead,
because they produce no more innouations. Their inquiry of all things is not
Quam bonum, but Quam novum! They are almost weary of the Sun for continual
shining. Continuance is a sufficient quarrel against the best things: and the
Manna of heaven is loathed, because it is common.

This is not to be always the same, but never the same: and whiles they would
be every thing, they are nothing: but like the worm Pliny writes of,
multipoda; that has many feet, yet is of slow pace. A while you shall have
him in England, loving the simple truth: anon in Rome groueling before an
Image: soon after, he leaps to Amsterdam: and yet must he still be turning,
till there be nothing left but to turn Turk. To winter an opinion is too
tedious: he has bin many things; what he will be, you shall scarce know, till
he is nothing.

But the God of Constancy would have his to be constant. Steadfast in your
faith to him. Colos. 1. Continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not
moved away from Colos. 1. 23.
the hope of the Gospel. Steadfast in your faithfulness to man, Psalm. 15. 4.
promising and not disappoynting. Do not aliud stantes, aliud sed^tes: least
your changing with God, teach God to change with you. Ambr. in luc. lib. 5.
Nemo potest tibi Christum ^uferre, ^isi t^ illi auferas. No man can turn
Christ from thee, unless thou turn thy self from Christ. For Jesus Christ the
same yesterday, etc.

We come now to the Circumference; wherein is a distinction of three times;
Past, Present, Future. Tempora mutantur: the times change, the Circumference
wheels about; but the Center is the same for ever.

We must resolve this Triplicitie into a Triplicitie. Christ is the same
according to these three distinct terms, three distinct ways.

Obiectiue, in his Word. Subiectiue, in his Power. Effectiue, in his gracious
Operation.
Obiectiuely.
Jesus Christ is the same in his word; and that Yesterday in Preordination. To
day in Incarnation. For ever in Application.

Yesterday in Preordination.
So Saint Peter in his Sermon tells the Jews, that Act. 2. 23.
he was delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God. And in
his Epistle; that 1. Pet. 1. 20.
he was verily preordained before the foundation of the world. Revel. 13. He is
called the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Prius Reu. 13. 8.
pr^fuit, quamfuit. His Prophets did foretell him, the Types did prefigure him,
God himself did promise him. R^tus or do Dei: the decree of God is constant.

Much comfort I must here leave to your meditation. If God preordained a
Savior for man, before he had either made man, or man marred himself: (as Paul
to Timothy; 2. Tim. 1. 9.
he has saved us according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus before the world began.) then surely he meant that nothing should
Romans 8. 39.
separate us from his eternal love in that Savior. Quos (...) increatos,
rede^it perditos, non deseret redemptos. Whom he chose before they were
created, and when they were lost redeemed, he will not forsake being sanctified.

To day in Incarnation.
Gal. 4. 4.
When the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
Woman. Ioh. 1. 14.
The word was made flesh: which was, says Emissenus, Hom. 2. de Nati^. Christi.
Non deposita, sed seposit^ maiestate. Thus he became younger then-his Mother,
that is as eternal as his Father. He was Yesterday God before all worlds, he
is now made man in the World. Eusebius. Emiss. vbi supra.
Sanguinem, qu^m pro matre ^btulit, antea de sanguine matris accepit. The blood
that he shed for his Mother, he had from his Mother. The same Eusebius* on the
9. of Esaias acutely. Esa. 9. 6.
Unto us a child is borne, unto us a Son is given. He was Datus ex
Diuinitate, natus ex virgin. Datus est qui erat; natus est qui non erat. He
was Given of the Deity, Borne of the virgin: He that was given, was before: he
as borne, was before. Donum dedit Deus ^quale sibi, God gave a gift equal to
himself.

So he is the same yesterday, and to day, obiectiuely in his Word. Idom qui
velatus in veteri, reu^latus in none. In illo praedictus, in isto praedicatus.
Yesterday prefigured in the Law, to day the same manifested in the Gospel.

For ever in Operation.
He does continually by his Spirit apply to our consciences the virtue of his
death and passion. Ioh. 1. 12.
As many as receive him, to them gives ^e power to become the Sons of God,
even to them that believe on his Name. Heb. 10. 14.
By one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. This is
sure comfort to us: though he dyed almost 1600. years ago, his blood is not
yet dry: his wounds are as fresh to do us good, as they were to those Saints
that beheld them bleeding on the Cross. The virtue of his merits is not
abated, though many thousand hands of Faith have taken large portions out of
his treasury. The river of his Grace, which makes glad the city of God,
runs over the banks, though infinite souls have drunk hearty draughts,
and satisfied their thirst. But because we cannot apprehend this for our selves
of our selves; therefore he has promised to send us the Ioh. 14. 17.
Spirit of truth, who will dwell with us, and apply this to us. for ever. Thus
you have seen the first Triplicitie; how he is the Same Obiectiuely in his
Word. Now he is Subiunctiuely in his Power the Same; and
that Yesterday, for he made the world. To day, for he gouerns the world. For
ever, for he shall judge the world.



Yesterday in the Creation.
Ioh. 1. 3.
All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made. Col. 1. 16.
By him were all things created that are in heaven, and that are in earth,
visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers: all things were created by him, and for him. All
things; even the great and fair book of the world; of three so large leaves,
Coelum, Solum, Salum; Heaven, Earth, and Sea. The Prophet calls him Esa. 9. 6.
the Everlasting Father: Daniel, Dan. 7.
Ancient of days. Solomon says that, Prove. 8. 22.
the Lord possessed him in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
So himself told the unbelieving Jews: Ioh. 8. 58.
Before Abraham was, I am.

We owe then our selves to Christ for our creation, but how much more for our
redemption? Bern. de dilig. Deo.
Si totum me debeo pro ine facto, quid addam iam pro me refecto? In primo opere
me mihi dedit: in secundo se mihi dedit. If I owe him my whole self for making
me, what have I left to pay him for redeeming me? In the first work he gave my
self to me, in the second he gave himself to me. By a double right we owe him
our selves: we are worthy of a double punishment, if we give him not his own.

To day in the Governing:
He^. 1. 3.
He vpholdeth all things by the word of his power. He is Paterfamilias; and
disposes all things in this universe, with greater care and p^ence, then any
house-holder can menage the bu^nesse of his private family. He leaves it not,
as the Carpenter having built the frame of a house, to others to perfect it;
but looks to it himself. His Creation and Providence is like the Mother and
the Nurse: the one produces, the other preserves. His creation was a short
providence, his providence a perpetual creation. The one sets up the frame of
the house, the other keeps it in reparation.

Neither is this a disparagement to the Majesty of God, as the vain Epicures
imagined, curare minima, to regard the least things: but rather an honor,
curare infinita, to regard all things. Neither does this extend only to
natural things, chained together by a regular order of succession: but even to
casual and contingent things. Oftentimes cum aliud volumus, aliud agimus; the
event crosses our purpose. Which must content us though it fall out otherwise
then we purposed, because God purposed as it is fallen out. It is enough that
the thing attain the own end, though it miss ours: that Gods will be done,
though ours be crossed.

But let me say; Mat. 6. 26. 28
Has God care of fo^les and flowers, and will he not care for you, his own
Image? Yea let me go further; Has God care of the wicked? Does he power down
the happy influences of heaven on the Mat. 5. 45.
unjust man's ground? And shall the faithful want his blessing? Does he
provide for the Sons of Beliall, and shall his own children lack? He may
give meat and raiment to the rest, but his bounty to Benjamin shall exceed.
If M^b his Wash-pot taste of his benefits, then Judah the signet on his finger
cannot be forgotten. The King gouernes all the Subjects in his Dominions, but
his servants that wait in his Court, partake of his most Princely favors. God
heales the sores of the very wicked: but if it be told him, Ioh. 11. 3.
Lord, he whom thou love, is sick (...) enough, he shall be healed. The
wicked may h^ ^utward blessings without inward, and that is Esau's pottage
without his Birthright: but the elect have inward blessings though they want
outward, and that is Jacobs inheritance without his pottage.

For ever, because he shall judge the world. Act. 17. 31.
GOD has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that M^n whom he has ordained. Romans 2. 16.
In the day that God shall judge the secrets of m^n by Jesus Christ. Let the
wicked flatter themselves, that all is but talk of any coming to Judgment:
non aliud videre patres aliudve n^ p^tes aspic^nt: all is but terriculamenta
nutricum, mere scar-babes. Scribar^m pe^ mendaces: they have written lies;
there is no such matter. But when they shall see that Lamb, Re^. (...). 7.
whom they have pierced and scorned, Reu. 6. 16.
they shall cry to the mountains and rocks, Fall upon us and cover us. Now
they flatter themselves with his death: mortuus est, he is dead and gone: and
Mortuum Caesarem quis ^etuit? Who fears even a Caesar when he is dead? But
Reu. 1. 18.
he that was dead, lives: behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen. Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, and for ever. Qu^sitor sc^erum veniet, vindexque reorum.

Here is matter of infallible comfort to us. Luke 21. 28.
Lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws nigh. Here we are imprisoned,
martyred, tortured: but when that great Assise, and general goale-deliuery
comes; M^s non ^rit vltra: Reu. 21. 4.
there shall be no more death, nor sorrow; but all tears shall be wiped from
our eyes. 2. These. 1. 6. 7.
For it is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you. And to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels. We shall then find him
the S^: the same Lamb that bought us, shall give us a venit^ beati; Come ye
blessed, receive your kingdom. Reu. 22. 20.
Surely I come quickly, A^on. Even so, Come Lord Jesus.

Effectually in his Grace and Mercy; so he is the* Same Yesterday to our
fathers. To day to our selves. For ever to our children.



Yesterday to our Fathers.
All our Fathers, whose souls are now in heaven, those Spirits of just men
made perfect. Hebr. 12. were, as Heb. 12. 24.
the next words intimate, saved by Jesus the mediator of the new Covenant, and
by the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abell.
Whether they lived under Nature, or under the Law, Christ was their
expectation; and they were justified credendo in venturum Christum; by
believing in the Messiah to come. So Luke 2. Simeon is said to wait for the
consolation of Luke 2. 25. and ver. 38.
Israel.

To day to our selves.
His mercy is everlasting: his truth endures from generation to generation.
The same gracious Savior, that he was Yesterday to our Fathers, is he To day
to us, if we be to day faithful to him. All catch at this comfort, but in
vain without the hand of Faith. There is no deficiencie in him, but is there
none in thee? Whatsoever Christ is, what art thou? He forgave Mary Magd. many
grievous sins; so he will forgive thee if thou can shed Mary Magdalens
tears. He took the malefactor from the Cross to Paradise; thither he will
receive thee if thou have the same faith. He was merciful to a denying
Apostle: challenge thou the like mercy if thou have the like repentance. If we
will be like these, Christ assuredly will be ever like himself. When any shall
prove to be such a sinner, he will not fail to be such a Savior.

To day he is thine, if to day thou will be his: thine to morrow, if yet to
morrow thou will be his. But how if dark death prevent the morrowes light? He
was Yesterday, so were thou: he is to day, so art thou: he is to morrow, so
perhaps may thou not be. Time may change thee, though it cannot change him.
He is not (but thou art) subject to mutation. This I dare boldly say; He that
repents but one day before he dies, shall find Christ the same in mercy and
forgiveness. Wickedness it self is glad to hear this: but let him be
faithful on his part, as God is merciful on his part: let him be sure that he
repent one day before he dies: whereof he cannot be sure except he repent every
day. For no man know^ his last day. Latet vltimus dies, vt obseruetur omnis
dies. Therefore (says Augustine) we know not our last day, that we might
observe every day. Psalm. 95. 7.
To day therefore hear his voice.

The have lost yesterday negligently, loosest to day wilfully, and therefore
moist loose for ever ineuitably. It is just with God, to punish two days
neglect, with the loss of the third. The hand of faith may be withered, the
spring of Repentance dried up, the Eye of Hope blind, the Foot of Charity
lame. To day then hear his voice, and make him thine. Yesterday is lost, To
day may be gotten, but that once gone, and thou with it; when thou art dead and
judged, it will do thee small comfort, that Jesus Christ is the S^e for ever.

For ever to our Children.
He that was yesterday the God of Abraham, is to day ours, and will be for
ever our childrens. As well now Luke 2. 32.
the light of the Gentiles, as before the glory of Israel. I will be the God
of thy seed, says the Lord to Abraham. Luke 1. 50.
His mercy is (...) them that fear him, fr^ generation to generation.

Many parents are ^ollicitously perplexed, how their children shall do when
they are dead. Yet they consider not, how God provided for them when they were
children. Is the Lord (...) shortened* Did he take thee from thy mothers breasts;
and wh^ thy ^arents for sooke thee, as the Psalmist says, became thy Father?
And cannot this experie^ced mercy to thee, persuade thee, that he will not for*
sake thine? Is not Jesus Christ the s^ yesterday, and to day, and for ever? I
have been young, says Psalm. (...)
David, and (...) now old: yet have I not s^ne the right^s forsaken: (that is
granted; nay) nor his seed begging bread.

Many distrustful Fathers are so carking for their posterity; that whiles
they live, they starve their bodies, and hazard their souls, to leave them
rich. To such a Father it is said justly. Di^ es h^di, pauper i^psque tibi.
Like an ouer-kind Hen, he feeds his Chickens, and famisheth himself. If
usury, circumuention, oppression, extortion, can make them rich, they shall
not be poor. Their folly is ridiculous: they fear least their children
should be miserable, yet take the only course to make them miserable. For they
leave them not so much heirs to their goods, as to their evils. They do as
certainly inherit their Fathers sins, as their lands. Job. 21. 19.
God lays up his iniquity for his children: and (...) ^fspring shall wa^ a
^sell of b^d.

On the contr^ry. Psalm. 37. 26.
The good (...) and l^ndeth: and his seed i^ bl^ssed. That the worldling
thinks shall make his posterity poor, God says shall make the good man's
rich. The Exodus 20. 6.
Precept gives a promise of mercy to Obedience; not only confined in
himself, but extended to his s^d, and that even to a ^sand generations. Trust
the Christ with thy children: when thy friends shall (...), usury (...) no
dat^, oppression be condemned to hell, thy self ro^en to dust, the world it
self turned and burned into Cinders* still Jesus Christ is the same Yesterday,
and today, and for (...). Now then. Reu. 1. (...) Grace and Pea^ are from him
Which is, and Which Reu. 1. 4.
(...), and Which is to come. So Glory and (...) him, Which i^, Which was, and
Which is to come: even to Jesus Christ the sa^ Yesterday, and today, and for
e^r.

GODS BOVNTIE OR The blessings of both his hands.
Prove. 3. 16. Length of days is i^ her right hand: and in her left hand,
riches and honor.
BY Wisdom, here the consent of Diuin^ understands the Son of God, the
Savior of Man. In the first to the (...) 1. Cor. 1. 24.
he is called the Wisdom of God. Col. 2. 3.
In (...) are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.

Wisdom is formerly commended for her Beauty, here for her Bounty. Length
of days is in her right hand; in her left riches and honor. Conceive her a
glorious Queen sitting in (...) throne of M^iestie, and ^lling her children
about her, to the participation of those riches, which from everlasting she
had decreed them.

Not to travel far for distribution, the parts of this Text are as easily
distinguished, as the Right hand from the Left. Here be two Hands, and they
contain two sorts of treasures. The Right hand has in it Length of days: the
Lest, riches and honor.

The right hand
Is upon good reason preferred; both for it own worth whereby it excelles, and
for the worth of the treasure which it contains. It has ever had the dignity
as the dexterity.

Length of days
Is the treasure it holds. This cannot be properly understood of this mortal
life: though the sense may also stand good with such an interpretation. Prou.
9. 11.
For by me, says Wisdom, thy days shall be (...): and the years of thy
life shall be increased. Wisdom is the mother of abstinence, and abstinence
the Nurse of health. Whereas voluptuousness and Intemperance, (as the French
Proverb has it) Digges the own g^e with the teeth.

But all a man's Wisdom cannot keep him still alive. Eccl. 2. 16.
The wise man dies, as the fool, says Solomon. And the Father of Solomon
excludes it from having power to keep a man. Psalm. (...). (...)
That he should live still for e^r, and not see ^rruption. Me^ushalem lived
nine hundred sixty and nine years; yet he was the Son of E^ch, who was the
son of ^ared, who was the son of (...), who was the son of Cainan, who
was the son of (...), who was the son of Seth, who was the son of A^, who
was the son of dust. The best constitutions, that communicate in the sanguine
of the Rose, and Snow of the Lilly, have this parentage; they are the sons
and daughters of dust.

This (...) (...) i^ not (...) to the Poles, nor are these days measured by
the Sun in his Zodiac: all is pitched above the Wheel of changeable
mortality. It is Eternity that fills the Right hand of Wisdom.

Length of days. Days for the Claritie. Length for the Eternity.

Days.
Man's life in this world is called a Day: a short day, a sharp day. Short, for
instat vesper: it is not sooner morning, but it is presently night. The Sun
of life quickly sets, after it is once risen. Sharp; for misery is borne with
life, brought up with life, and to the good dies with life: to the wicked
remains in death. Like Hippocrat^ twins, inseparable in their beginning,
process, end. So that aged Patriarch to Pharao. Genesis 47. 9.
My days have been few and evil, So. Job. Job. 14. 1.
Man is of few days, and many troubles. Petrarch.
Animal ^vi breuissimi, solicit^dinis infinitae. And Paul calls it Ephe. 6. 13.
the evil day. It is somewhat to comfort, that though it be sharp, Evil: yet
it is but short, a Day. Ephe. 5. 16.
Redeem the time, for the days are evil. But howsoever Semper mali dies in
seculo, yet semper boni dies in Domino: as In Psalm. 33.
Augustine sweetly. Though the world has always evil days, yet God has
always good days.

And this Day shall have no night. Nox non erit illic. Reu. 21. 25.
There shall be no night. The Sun that inlightens it; cannot be ecclipsed.
Ver. 23.
That city has no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon, to shine in it:
for the Glory of God does lighten it, and the Lamb is the light of it. No
clouds shall draw a veil of obscurity over it. Here the light of the Sun
darkens the Moon, and the Moon obscures the luster of the Stars: Sometimes
half the earth is in light, the rest in darkness.

But in these Days, Albeit 1. Cor. 15. 41^
there is one glory of the SVNNE, another of the MOON, and another of the
STARS; and one star differs from another star in glory: yet the light
of one increases the light of another: and the glory of one, is the glory of
all. Aug. Medit. cap. 25.
Dispar est glo^ (...), sed (...) Latitia omnium. So in sum, here we live but
a short day; Give us this day our daily bread. But in that world we shall have
Days, and those good days, and great days; days of eternal length, for
they shall have no night.

Length.
As the glory is clear for the Countenance, so it is long for the
Continuance. Nullus erit defectus, nullus ^erminus. There shall be (...)
charit^, chara ^rnitas Gods eternal decree to choose v^ in Christ had no
beginning, but it shall have an end: when the elect are taken up to glory. The
possession of this decreed Inheritance shall have a beginning, but no end 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17
We shall ever be with the Lord. Gods mercy in both has neither beginning
nor end; for it is from everlasting to everlasting.

Here then is both the Countenance; it is a clear day: and the Continuance, it
is of length; the very same Length that Euerlastingnesse it self. Hezekiahs
day was a long day, when 2. King. 20. 11
The shadow of the sun went ten degrees backward in the dial of Ab^.
Iosuah had a long day; when the Sun stood still in Gibeon, and the Moon in
the valley of (...). Josh. 10. 14.
And there was no day like that before it, or after it. But both these days
had their nights; and the long forbearing sun at last did set. Here the days
are so long, that it shall never be night. You see the clearenesse and the
length: both are expressed. Dan. 12. They that be ^ise, shall shine as the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteous^es, as the Dan. 12. 3.
stars; there is the Claritie: and that for ever and ever, there is the
Eternity.

There is nothing made perfectly happy, but by Eternity; as nothing but
eternity can make perfect misery. Were thy life a continued scene of
pleasures, on whose stage grief durst n^uer set his unwelcome foot: were the
spoil of Noah's Arc the cates of thy table: had thou king Salomons wardrobe
and treasury: Did the west Indie send thee all her gold, and the East her
spices: and all these lying by thee whiles a late succession of years without
car^, snowes white upon thy head: thou we^ ever indulgent to thy self, and
health to thee. Yet suddenly there comes an impartial Purseuant, death; and
he has a charge to take thee away (...) de (...), bathing thy self in thy
delights. Alas; what i^ (...) thy glory but a short play, f^ll of mirth till
the last act, and that goes off in a tragedy. Could thou not have made
death more welcome, if he had found thee lying on a padde of straw, feeding on
cr^s and water gruell? Is not thy pain the more troublesome, because thou wast
well? Does not the end of these temporary joys a^ict thee more, then if they
had never been? Only then eternity can give perfection to pleasure: which
because thi^ world cannot afford, let us reckon of it as it is, a mee^e Through
(...): and desi^ our Home, wh^ we shall be happy for (...).

In her Left hand, riches and honor.
The gift of the right hand is large and eternal, of the left* short and
(...). Yet you see, I am short in the long part, give me leave to be long in
the short part. Herein we have many things considerable.

1. That Riches and Her are God^ gifts. 2. That all are not so, but some: and
therefore it is necessary for us to learn, whether God gave unto us that
riches and honor which we have. 3. That albeit they are his gifts, yet but the
gifts of his left hand. 4 That wealth and worship are for the most part
companions; for both those gif^ lie in one and the same hand.
1. Riches and honor are God^ gifts, therefore i^ themselves not evil. Sunt
Dei (...), ^rgo i^ se bona. Says Augustine* Ep. 70. ad Bonif.
Ne p^tentur ^a, (...) and (...) b^na, (...) and ^lis. That they may not be
thought evil, they are given to good men: that they may not be thought the
best good, they are given also to evil men. A rich man may be a good man, and
a poor man may be wicked. Christ sanctified (...) as well as (...); and that
in his (...) Life Death.



1. In his Birth: he sanctified Pouerti^, when hi^ chamber of presence was a
Stable, his cr^dle a manger, his royal robes course rags. He sanctified
Ric^, when he rec^ed of the wise men preciou^ (...) Mat. (...). 11.
G^ld, Frankincense, and Mirth, Que (...) ipsissi^ ^la, dedignatus ess^t. Which
if they had been simply evil, he would not have accepted.

2. In hi^ Life: he sanctified (...) when he was maintained (...), having no
garment to put on; and the good women kept him by their contributions. He was
glad to borrow an Ass colt, when he was to ride: and to angle for mon^y in the
sea, when he paid tribute. And ((...) if he wanted a bed) to complain; Mat. 8.
20.
The Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests: but the Son of
(...) has not wh^re to rest his head. He sanctified Riches, when he called
Luke 19. 2.
Zaccheus a wealthy usurer, and raised John. 11.
Lazarus a wealthy citizen, had his Ioh. 12. 6.
S^d which gave alms to the distressed, and bo^ his p^se. And like a Prince,
feasted thousands at one banquet.

3. In his Death. He sanctified P^ertie, when he had not a Grave of his own,
but was buried in another man's Luke 23. 53.
Sepulcher: nay, not a sheet to wrappe him in, but was beholding to another
for his linen. And even dying converted a poor malefactor on the Cross by
him. He sanctified Riches, when he accepted the kindness of Joseph, (whom
Matthew calls a Mat. 27. 57.
rich man, Mark an Mark. 15. 42.
honorable) for his sepulture: and Ioh. 19. 39.
Nichodemus his costly unction, even an hundredth pound weight, mixed with
myrrh, and aloes.

Though riches be to some pernicious; a fuming wine which turns their brains:
yet to others they are a vessel, wherein they may with more speed sail to
heaven: though no compass, star, or cause, to bring them thither. Others are
called by David, ^iri diuitiarum, Men of riches: because they possess not
their riches, but their riches have subiugated them. We have a kind of presage,
though we conceive it not, in saying of such a one; He is a man of wealth. The
speech signifies him a slave to his riches: the wealth is not the man's, but the
man the wealths.

But otherwise a rich man may be a good man: for wickedness is not bound to
wealthinesse, as heat is to fire: and arrogancy or lewdness may be incident
to poverty and baseness. Pauper superbus: a poor man proud, was one of
Cyprians twelve abuses. A rotten log will yield as much saw-dust, as a piece of
good timber: and a peasant ill nurtured, is also ill natured. A great gentleman
will show more humble courtesy, then a thrashing hind, or a toiling ploughma^.
Hagar was but a Gipsee, a bondwoman yet was her excellent mistres Sara Genesis 16.
4.
despised in her eyes. As Ier^m reproved the Monks. Quid facit sub t^ica
p^nitentis regimus animus? So not seldom a ^sset coat shrowds as high a
heart, as a silken garment. You shall have a pal^rie cottage send up more
black smoke, then a goodly manor. It is not wealth therefore, but vice that
excludes men out of heaven.

The Friars and Jesuits have very strongly and strangly backbited Riches: but
all their railing on it is but behind the back: secretly and in their hearts
they love it. When they are out of the reach of eyes, then Gold is their Sun
by day, and silver their Moon by night. Some of them for enforced want, like
the fox dispraise the grapes they cannot reach. Or as Eusebius notes of
Licinius the Emperor; that he used to rail at learning, and to say, nothing
worse became a prince, because himself was illiterate. So they commend nothing
more then Poverty, because they are, and must be poor, against their wills.

Others of them find fault with Riches, whereof they have great store; but
would that none should covet it beside themselves. So the cosening Epicure made
all his fellow guests believe, that the banquet was poisoned; that all they
refusing, he might glut himself alone. These often cheat themselves, and
work their own bane: whiles they so beat off others from the world, and
wrappe themselves up in it to their confusion. The fox in the fable, with
diverse other beasts, found a rich booty of costly robes and jewels. He
persuades the Lion that he needs not trouble himself with them, because he is
king, and may command all at his pleasure. He tells the Stagge, that if he
should put them on, they would so molest him that he could not escape the
huntsmen. For the Boar, he says they would evil fauouredly become him: and
the wolf he shuffles off with the false news of a fold of Lambs hard by,
which would do him more good. So all gone he begins to put on the robes
himself, and to rejoice in his lucky fraud. But instantly came the owners, and
surprised him: who had so pus^led himself in these habiliments, that he could
not by flight escape: so they took him, and hanged him up.

The subtle foxes, Jesuits and Friars diswade kings from coveting wealth,
because of their power to command all: and Great men, because it will make them
envied and hunted after for their trappings. Country men it will not become
they say: and all the rest, that it will hinder their journey to heaven. So in
conclusion they drive all away, and get the whole world for their master Pope,
and themselves. But at last these foxes are caught in their own noose: for the
devil finds them so wrapped and hamperd in these ornaments, and their hearts
so besotted on money and riches, that he carries them with as much ease to
hell, as the chariot drew Pharaoh into the red sea.

For us beloved, we teach you not to cast away the bag, but covetousness.
Non facultatem, sed cupiditatem reprehendimus. We bid you use the world, but
enjoy the Lord. And if you have wealth Luke 16. 9.
make you friends with your riches: that they (so made friends by your
charity) may receive (and make way for) you into everlasting habitations. It
is not your Riches of this world, but your riches of grace, that shall do your
souls good. Not my wealth, nor my blood, but my Christianity makes me noble:
quoth that noble Martyr Romanus. And though the Philosopher merrily, when he
was asked whether were better, wisdom or Riches, answered, Riches: for I have
often, said he seen poor wise men at rich fools doors; but never rich fools
at poor wise men's doors. Yet wealth may be joined with wisdom, goodness
with greatness. Mary and Martha may be sisters: righteousness and riches may
dwell together.

Chrysostom on that aphorism of Christ, Mat. 6. 24.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon observes: that he does not say, Ye cannot
have God and Mammon; but ye cannot serve God and Mammon: for he that is the
servant of God, must be the master of his wealth. The Lord Jesus is able to
sanctify and save the rich man's soul as well as the poores: and to send poor
Lazarus into the bosom of rich Abraham. Where consider not only Aug. in Psalm.
51.
Qui sublatus, but Quo sublatus. Poor, but good Lazarus, is carried into Rich,
but good Abraham's bosom: to signify that neither Poverty deserves heaven,
nor Riches hell. Diuitiae non iniquae, sed iniquis. Riches are not unrighteous,
but to the unrighteous. Nec culpabile est habere ista; sed harere istis. It is
not a sin to have them, but to trust them.

As much might be said for Honor. It is the Lord that aduanceth. 1. Sam. 2. 30.
Those that honor me, I will honor says God. It is God, says Job, that
puts on the kings girdle that fastneth his honor about him. Promotion
comes neither from the East, nor from the West: nor from North, nor South:
but only from the Lord. Hence it follows that Great men may be good men: yea
hence it should follow, that great men ought to be good men.

They may be good. Christ had his faithful followers even in Cesars family.
De Consid. Lib. 4.
Bernard indeed complained, that the Court is wont to receive good men, but to
make them bad men. Bonos facilius recipere, quam facere: and Plures illic
defecisse bonos, quam profecisse malos. The Court does sooner take good men,
then make good men. There more good are perverted to evil, them evil converted
to good. Yet in the Court of Pharaoh was a good Joseph: in the Court of Darius
a good Daniel in the Court of Ahashuerosh a good Mordecai. Neither is it ever
true that, Quo quis corruptior moribus, and corrumpentior muneribus; the more a
man is corrupt with vices, and corrupting with bribes, so much the more set by.
The Pharisees objection is sometimes false. Ioh. 7. 48.
Have any of the Rulers believed on him? They may be good; yea

They must be good. For they are unprinted Statutes whereout every man reads
his duty. They are Legis factores, and therefore should not be Legis
fractores. Aristotle calls them Loquentes Leges; speaking Laws. In feriours
often set their eyes, to supply the place of their ears; and rather look to
see their duetyes, then to hear it. All should live by Precept, but most will
live by Precedent. A Superior therefore should teach men, to take the measure
of his greatness, by his goodness. These two should be of an even length, of an
equal pace. If honor out-runnes honesty, it will hardly be overtaken. Let
such a one appear to the people as he would have them be: and be himself such
a one as he appears. A great Person is like a great hill; which gives a fair
prospect, but is subject to the lightning and thunder of censures.

2, But it may here be objected, that if Riches and Honor be GODS gifts, then
is he the giver of Judas his wealth, and Hamans honor. Perhaps you would here
learn, whether your riches and honors come from God or no: your demand is
requisite, and I will strive to give you satisfaction.

First for Riches.
If they come from God, they are Honestly gotten. Justly disposed. Patiently
lost.

1. They are well gotten: for God is not the Patron of unjust gains. He can
bless a man well enough without the help of the Devil. There are many that
will have wealth though they go a fishing for it, either with Habakkuks Hab. 1.
15.
net, or Ophni's book. They do not only trouble the waters for it, but they
bloody the waters; fetch it out of the bowels and life-bloud of the poor. This
is not from God, nor will he bless it. But Mica. 1. 7.
as it was gathered of the hire of a harlot, so it shall return to the hire of
a harlot.

It is easy for that man to be rich, that will make his conscience poor. He
that will defraud, forsware, bribe, oppress, serve the time, use, abuse all
men, all things, swallow any wickedness; cannot escape riches. Whereas he,
whose conscience will not admit of advancing or aduantaging himself by
indirect means, sits down with contented Poverty. But Bonus non cito e^sit
dives: a good man seldom becomes rich on the sudden. Wealth comes not
easily, not quickly to the honest door. Neither let us envy the gravel, that
sticks in the throat of injustice. For he that will swallow the bait, which
hangs on the Line of another man's estate, shall be choked with it. Of riches
let us never desire more, then an honest man may well bear away. Mallem me
miserum sanctum quam prosperum peccatorem. I had rather be a miserable Saint,
then a prosperous sinner. When the raising of thy roof, is the rasing of
another foundation. Hab. 2. 11.
The stones shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it. Thus ^on accipimus data, sed arripimus prohibita: we take not
things with a beggars hand, but with a Tyrants: they are not Gods gifts, but
our felonies.

For this cause Riches are called Bona fortunae; the goods of fortune: not that
they come by chance, but that it is a chance if ever they be good. Hab. 2. 6.
Vaeac cumulanti non sua. And Ver. 9.
Woe to him that coueteth an evil covetousness to his house. We think the
oppressors avarice evil only to the houses of the oppressed: but God says,
it is most evil to his own. Whether fraud or force bring in unjust gain, it
is as a coal of fire put in the thatch of his house.

And to show that God is not the giver of this, he powers a curse upon it;
that often they who thus desire most wealth shall not have it: the world being
to them like a froward woman, the more woed, the further off. Esa. 33. 1.
Woe to thee that spoylest, and wast not spoiled: when thou shall cease to
spoil, thou shall be spoiled. And Habac. 2. 8. Because thou have spoiled many
nations, all the (...) of the people shall spoil thee and thou shall be for
booties unto them. Many a great fish in the sea of this world, deuoures
another: and instantly comes a greater, and deuoures him. As that Sueton. in
vita vespas.
Emperor suffered his Officers to be like spunges, sucking up the goods of the
comminaltie: and being once full, he squeased them into his own coffers. Genesis
41. 21.
Pharaohs lean kine, that devoured the fat, were yet themselves never the
fatter.

Philip was wont to say, that an ass laden with Gold, would enter the gates of
any city: but the golden lode of bribes and extortions shall bar a man out
of the City of God. All that is so gotten, is like quick silver; it will be
running. If the Father leave all to his son, yet the son will leave nothing
for his son, perhaps nothing for himself: never resting till. Quodcumque
profunda
Traxit auaritia, Luxu peiore refundat. Claudian.



Until he has thrown abroad all with a forke, which his father got together
with a rake Nahu. 2. 12.
The lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and filled his holes with
prey, and his denns with rauine. But I will be against thee, says the Lord:
and the sword shall devour thy young Lions. The father plays the Lion for his
whelps, oppresses and consumes the poor: but his young Lions, which he so
prouides for, shall be destroyed. Non habet euentus sordida praeda bonos. Ov.
Amor.



We have seen huge hills of wealth, like mountains of ice, thus suddenly
thawed as wax, with the heat of Luxury. But Parum iusto, Psalm. 27. 16.
a little that the righteous man has, is better then the riches of many
wicked. For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: the strength of their
state shall be confounded. Their wealth is not Gods, therefore he takes no
charge of it. But the Riches of the good, is the riches of God, and he will
prosper it.

2. These riches are well disposed or used. Piety not lust, rules them. He
whom Gods blessings has made rich, gives God his part, man his part, and
keeps the thirds to himself. He returns part.

1. To God: it is reason that he who gives all should have part of all. And
because thou should not grudge it, he chalengeth but a little part, but the
tenth part, wretched men, that will not give him one, that gave them ten. As
Pilates wife sent her husband word; Mat. 27. 19.
Have thou nothing to do with that just man: meddle not with Gods portion;
lest a voice come to thee, as to Abimelech, Genesis 20. 3.
Thou art but a dead man. This was good Jacobs resolution; Genesis 28. 22.
of all that thou shall give me, I will sure: ly give the tenth unto thee. Go
too now ye that say, the Gospel has no law for Tithes; and that they were
merely ceremonial. Jacob paid them under nature: they are therefore
unnatural men that deny them. You can find no law commanding your payment, but
you shall find a law condemning your non payment.

What can then be pleated for our accursed Impropriations? Did the heavenly
Wisdom ever give you those riches? Show us your Patent, and we will believe
you. If ever God did convey his own portion to you show us his hand and seal
for it. Where did ever Jesus pass away his royal prerogative, or acknowledge
any fine before a Judge; that you say, Haec nostra sunt; these are ours? What
money did, you ever pay him for them? where is your acquitance? Show your
discharge. O but you plead prescription! If you were not past shame, you would
never dare to prescribe against the eternal God. Nullum tempus occurrit Regi:
the king of heaven had these from the beginning, and will you now plead
prescription? You may thus undo the poor Minister in these terrene Courts,
but your plea shall be damned in the Courts of God. We can produce his act and
deed, whereby he separated Tenths to himself: have you nothing to show, and
will you take away his inheritance? Go to, you have a Law, and by your own
law this proceeding is intolerable. You say, you hold them by your law, by your
law you shall be condemned.

Perhaps you think to make amends for all, for you will increase the stipend
of the vicar. When the Father has gotten thousands by the sacrilegious Impro
priation, the Son perhaps may give him a Cowes grass, or a matter of forty
shillings per annum. Or bestow a little whiting on the Church, and a wainscote
seat for his own worship. Yea more; he may chance to found a little
Almeshouse, and give twelve pence a piece a week to six poor people. O this
oppressor must needs go to heaven, what shall hinder him? But it will be, as
the byword is, in a Wheelebarow: the fiends, and not the Angels will take
hold on him.

For is it not a great piece of charity, to get five hundred pound a year
from God and to bestow twenty marks a year on the poor? When David providing
for the Temples building, saw how bountifully the Princes and people offered;
he gives solemn thanks to God, acknowledging that they had all received this
first from him. f For all things come of thee, and of thine 1. Chro. 29. 14
own have we given thee. The original is, of thine hand. What here the left
hand of God gave to them, their right hand returns to God. They did not as our
Churchsackers and ransackers do; rob God with the right hand, and give him a
little back with the left: take from him a pound, and restore him a penny. Well
you would know whether God has given you your wealth; and he says, whatsoever
you have gotten by Tenths was none of his giving: and, besides everlasting
malediction, it shall make your posterity beggars.

2. The second rule of using our riches well, is (when God has his own, in
the next place) tribuere cuique suum: to render every man his due. If they be
Gods gifts, they must be disposed with justice. This is double; Commutatiue,
and distributive Justice. The one Arithmeticall, the other Geometrical.
Arithmeticall is to give every one alike: Geometrical is to give every one
according to his deserts. 1, Cum res adaequaturrei. 2. Cum res adaequatur
personae. There are two rules for him that would be just: a negative, and an
affirmative rule. 1. The negative. Tobit. 4. 15.
Do that to no man which thou would not have done to thy self. Quod tibi
non vis, alterine facias. 2. The affirmative. Mat. 7. 12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. Not
what every man out of his disordered passions would have another do to him:
but what in his composed and deliberate judgment he approues done to himself,
let him do that to others. Would thou be relieved? Relieve. Would thou
borrow? lend.

If I should follow this point of just distribution, as a mark to discern of
your riches whether they are Gods goods or not; how distasting would my speech
be! How few of your houses are filled with those treasures only, which the
heavenly wisdom here disperseth! How little of them is found to come in Gods
name! It may be some of your wealth was given you of God; but your evil usage
alters the nature of it; and it can no more properly be ascribed to him. It is
hard to draw this circumstance into a square: it is so confused in your
actions, that I cannot tell how to find a method for it in my discourse. You
may make your riches none of Gods blessings, by using them ill in respect of
others, especially three ways.

Or Detinendo debita, by detaining things due to others Extrudendo vilia, by
putting forth base things for good. Corru^pendo vtilia, by corrupting with good
things others.

1. By detaining those things that are due to others: and these are either
Debts Promises.



1. Debts. Romans 13. Romans 13. 8.
Owe no man any thing, but to love one another. Indeed there must be some
owing, as there must be some lending: without this mutual commerce we are
worse then Savages. But we must pay again. Psalm. 37. 21.
The wicked borrows, and pays not again. Debt is not deadly sin when a
man has no means, but when he has no meaning to pay. There must be votall
restitution, if there cannot be actual. Restore Quoad affectum. thought you
cannot Quoad effectum. 2. Cor. 8. 12.
For if their be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not. God reckons that as done which a
man Bern.
vere voluit, tamet si non valuit adimplere; faithfully would, though not fully
could accomplish.

There are that will restore some, but not all: to this they have Posse, but no
velle: let the creditors be content with one of four. But this little detinie
is great iniquity. For a mite is debt, as well as a million. Tam, though not
Tantum: so good a debt, though not so great a debt. And Mat. 25. 23.
he that is faithful in a little, shall be made ruler over much.

What shall we then say of their goods, that break, and defraud others? Come
they from Gods hand, or from the devils? Surely Satan's right hand gave them,
not Gods Left. Haec mea sunt, says the Devil: meae diuitie, mei diuites.
These are mind, my riches, and my rich men. O that men would see this damnable
sin! me thinks their terrified consciences should fear, that the bread
they eat should choke them; for it is stolen; and stolen bread fills the
belly of gravel. They should fear the drink they swallow should poison them;
being the very blood of good householders, mixed with the tears of widows and
orphans. The poor creditor is often undone, and glad of bread and water:
whiles they like hogs lurking in their styes, fat and lard their ribs
with the fruit of others labors. They rob the husband of his inheritance,
the wife of her dowry, the children of their portions: the curse of whole
families is against them.

And if this sin lie upon a great man's foul, he shall find it the heauyer,
to sink him lower into perdition. They are the Lords of great lands, yet live
upon other men's moneys: they must riot and revel, let the poor commoners pay
for it. They have their Protections: their bodies shall not be molested, and
their Lands are exempted: what then, shall they escape? no, their souls shall
pay for it. When the poor creditor comes to demand his own, they rail at
him, they send him laden away, but with ill words, not good money. In the
Country they set laborers on work, but they give them no hire. Tut they are
Tenants, vassalls: must they therefore have no pay? Yet those very Landlords
will bate them nothing of their rents. But the riches so had, are not of Gods
giving, but of the Devils lending; and he will make them repay it a thousand
fold in hell.

2. Promises are due debts, and must not be detained. If the good man promise,
though to his own hurt, Psalm. 15. 4.
he changes not. Indeed now Promissis dives quilibet esse potest: men are rich
in promises, but they are poor in performance. More respect is had to
commodity, then to honesty. Men have their euasions to disanull their
promises: either they aequiuocate, or reserve; or being urged plead for
getfullnesse. But the truth is, they have sufficient memory, but not
sufficient honesty. It is said that a good name is the best riches; Qua semet
amissa, postea nullus eris. But what care they for a name, so long as they save
their money? Iu^en. Satyr. 1.
Quid enim saluis infamia nummis?

A Pilate could say, Quod scripsi, scripsi; Ioh. 19. 22.
What I have written, I have written: and shall not a Christian say, Quod
dixifaciam, what I have promised, I will perform? Hence it comes that there is
so little faith in the world: that scriueners have so much work, that the
proverb runns in every bodies mouth; Fast bind, fast find: that there is no
hope of good deeds, but Sealed and delivered: that there is more trust to men's
seals, then to their souls. For the Law of God holds us not so fast, as the
laws of men. There is more awe of judgment in the common Pleas, then of a
sentence of condemnation in the Court of heaven. The Sheriff is altogether
feared, not God: their is no dread of any Execution but his. Is the wealth thus
detained, in your own consciences, Gods blessing? deceive not your own
souls. God requires us to be just in all our words, as righteous in all our
ways. A Christians word should be as current as his coin. Thus you see this
first circumstance of Injustice taxed. Therefore Prou. 3. 27.
Withhold not good from them to whom it is due; when it is in the power of thy
hand to do it.

2. By putting forth base things for good. The Prophet Amos speaks of some,
that Chap. 8. 6.
sell the refuse of their wheat the basest wares: neither do they sell them
for base, but for good. If half a score lies, backed with as many oaths, will
put off their vile commodities, they shall not lie upon their hands. Not upon
their hands, I say; though upon their consciences. Before aequo
Laudat venales, qui vult extrudere merces. Hor. lib. 2. ep.



Their rule for themselves is Vincat vtilitas; for others Caveat emptor. Either
they will show you one thing, and sell you another: and this cosenage has
longer arms then all other tricks, and over reaches them. Or they will
conceal the insufficiency of the wares; and for this cause they darken their
shops, lest the light should reveal their works of darkness. Ioh. 3. 19.
They love darkness more then light: let them take heed, least it be unto
them according to their desires: least as they have brought hell into their
shops, so their shops send them into hell.

Or if the commodity be discerned bad, you must have that or none. If your
necessity forces you to buy, it shall force you to buy such base stuff. This
is a grievous sin in all professions, especially amongst Apothecaries:
because with their injustice may be also mixed a spice of murder. But you will
say, we compel none to buy our commodities: we but show them, and make the
price. But it is craft tendere plagas, etsi agitaturus non sis: to lay snares,
though you drive not men into them. Or be it what it will, yet rather then
refuse your money, they will protest to give you the buying. Yea rather then
fail, they will sell it you cheaper, then before they swore it cost them.

Quis metus aut pudor est properantis auari? What, sell cheaper then they buy?
How should they then live? Iuv. Sat. 14.
The answer is easy, they live by their lying.

Now does this wealth come on Gods name? is this the blessing of Heaven? Which
of your consciences dare think so? Saint Augustine speaks of a certain De
Trin. lib. 13. cap. 3.
Iester, that undertook to tell the people what they all did most desire.
Multitudes came to hear this: to whose expectation he thus answered. (...)
vultis emere, and chare vendere: You would buy cheap, and sell dear. And this
is every man's desire, that desires to be rich, more then to be just.

3. By making others bad with his goods: and here we may fitly proceed to the
condemnation of Bribery. Deuteronomy. 16. 19.
A gift blinds the eyes of the wise. They that see furthest into the Law, and
most clearly discern the causes of justice, if they suffer the dusts of bribes
to be thrown into their sight, their eyes will water and twinkle, and fall at
last to blind connivence. It is a wretched thing, when Justice is made a
Hackney, that may be backed for money, and put on with golden spurs, even to
the desired iourneys end of injury and iniquity.

If the party be innocent, let his cause be sentenced for his innocencies
sake: if guilty, let not gold buy out his punishment. If the cause be
doubtful, the Judge shall see it worse, when he has blinded his eyes with
Bribes. But the will of the giver does transfer right of the gift to the
receiver. No, for it is not a voluntary will. But as a man is willing to give
his purse to the theife, rather then venture his life or limb: so the poor
man gives his Bribes, rather then hazard his cause. Thou say, the thief
has no right to the purse so given: God says, nor thou to the Bribe.

And this is sinful in a Iusticer, though he pass true Judgment on the cause:
but much more accursed, when for this he will condemn the cause he should
allow, or allow the cause he should condemn. To justify the wicked, and
condemn the innocent, is alike abomination to the Lord. Far be from our
souls this wickedness; that the ear which should be open to complaints, is
thus stopped up with the eare-waxe of partiality. Alas poor truth, that she
must now be put to the charges of a golden eare-picke, or she cannot be heard.

But to show that these riches are not of Gods giving, his anger is ho^e
against them. Job. 15. 34.
Fire shall consume the Tabernacles of Briberie. The houses or tabernacles, the
^hambers, hals, offices, studies, Benches; a Fire shall consume them. They may
stand for a while, but the indignation of the Lord is kindled; and if it once
begin to burn, all the waters in the South are not able to quench it. These
Riches then come not of Gods blessing: but I pray that Gods blessing may be
yours, though you want those Riches. Time, that severe moderator, charge me
silence: and I rather choose abruptly to break off my discourse, then
immodestly to abuse your tried patience. The Lord send us the gifts of his Left
hand at his own good pleasure, but never deny us the blessings of his Right,
for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
The second Sermon.
PROVE. 3. 16. Length of days is in her right hand: and in her left hand,
riches and honor.
WE are looking into the left hand of Wisdom: and there have found. 1. that
Riches and Honor are GODS gifts. 2. That every man's riches and honor are not
so; that the mouth of wickedness might be stopped. Therefore to satisfy our
own consciences, that they are Gods blessings to us, I observed that they must
be. 1. honestly gotten. 2. justly disposed: and that by rendering sincerely that
which is due. 1. to God. 2. to Man. 3. to our selves. Duties to others ended my
former discourse, I must now begin at

Our selves.
The third act of disposing our Riches well, when God has his portion, and Man
his portion; is to take the thirds to our selves. It is Gods will that with the
wealth he has given thee, thou should refresh and consolate thy self.
Psalm. 23. 5.
Thou preparest a table before me, thou annointest my head with oil, my cup
runs over. Wherefore has God spread a table before thee, but that thou
should eat? Wherefore given thee a cup running over, but that thou should
drink? If thou have Psalm. 104. 15.
wine, make thy heart glad: if oil, let thy face shine: if bread, strengthen
thy spirits. Wear thy own wool, and drink the milk of thy own flocks. It
is a blessing which the Lord gives to those that fear him; Psalm. 128. 2.
Thou shall eat the labor of thine own hands: happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee. But a curse to the wicked; that they shall plant
vineyards, and not taste the fruit thereof. The riches that God truly gives,
man truly enioyes. Eccl. 5. 19.
Every man to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has given him power
to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labor: this is
the gift of God. Now a man may take from himself this comfort in abusing his
wealth; and this many ways? especially four: to Superstition, Malice, Riot,
Misery.



1. By spending them upon works of Superstition, to the dishonor of God. And
this is a high degree of ingratitude; When God has given them a sword to
defend themselves, and they turn the point of it upon his own breast. So God
gave Israel sheep and oxen, and they offer them up to Baall. Many in England
are beholding to God for great revenues, lands, and Lordships; and they
therewith maintain Jesuits and Seminaries, his professed enemies. These use
their riches as the Israelites did their eare-rings and jewels: God gave them
for their own ornament, and they turn them to an Idol.

2. By malice, in abusing them to unnecessary quarrels and contentions of Law;
to the hindrance of Gods peace and their neighbors welfare. When men will put
out one of their own eyes, to put out both their neighbors: Nay both their
own, for one of his. Thus what they get by the happiness of foreign peace,
they spend in civil wars. How unnatural is it for one hand thus to beat
and wound another! Either of them gets a shell: You know who goes away with the
meat.

3. By riot. Quicquid dant, dant vel veneri vel ventri. They spend more upon
the Tavern, then upon the Tabernacle: at the house of plays, then at the
house of praise: more upon their own hounds, then upon Gods poor children.
Julius Caesar seeing women carry little Dogs under their arms, asked if they
had no children. God asks you, that give your bread to dogs, if he has no
children for your charity. But they answer all, as the wicked in the 12.
Psalm. Psalm. 12. 4.
Our tongues are our own. They stop the mouth of all exhortation to frugall
courses, with It is my own: a man may spend his own as he list: I wast none
of your goods: and what has friend in private, or preacher in public to do
with it? But they shall find one day, that they were but Stewards, that these
Riches were but entrusted to them, and they shall give a strict account.
Nothing is properly a man's own, but Peccata sua, his sins. Thy sins are
thine own, thy riches Gods.

4. By miserable niggardice, in forbearing to take his own portion; and so
becomes his own consumption. No marvel if such a miser starve others, when
he famisheth himself. Such a one is the worst vermin the land bears:
another vermin seeks but to feed it self; but he hoording up his grain
feeds many thousands of them. Let him beware, least they also at last devour
himself. As that Germane Bishop, that having great store of corn in a
grievous famine, Act. and Mon. page 185.
refused to sell it to the poor, and suffered the Rattes to eat it. But by
the ^ust judgment of God, the Mise and Rats which he fed with his grain, did
also feed upon him; albeit he built a Tower in the midst of the river Rheine
to avoid them; which the Germans call still Rattes Tower. How shall they which
slander heaven with pretended dearths, be admitted as friends to that place
which they have belyed!

You see how these riches must be gotten, how disposed; honestly gotten, justly
dispensed; now it follows also in the next place, that they must be

3. Patiently lost: When God gives riches to the good, he gives them also a
heart to trust in himself: in himself I say, not in them. 1. Tim. 6. 17.
Trust not in uncertain Riches, but in the living God; who gives us
abundantly all things to enjoy. He gives abundantly, but he forbids trust
in that abundance. He commends riches to us, as a great man does a servant to
his friend; work him, but trust him not: put labor to him, not confidence in
him. Wealth may do us good service; but if it get the masterie of our trust,
it will turn tyrant, Termagant; we condemn our selves to our own galleys.

To the godly riches are never so dear, but they can be content to forgo
them. They receive them at Gods hands with much thankfulness, and they loose
them with much patience. When God takes ought from us, he does us no wrong.
Retrahit sua, non abstrahit nostra: Greg. in Mor.
he does but take back his own, not take away ours. So Job. Job. 1. 21.
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away. The Lord gives, therefore
he may take away. Yea faith says; Lord, take all, so thou give me thy self.
Mat. 19. 27.
We have left all, and followed thee; says Peter. Nos sequamur Christum,
caetera sequentur nos. Let us follow Christ, other things shall follow us. But
if they do not, it is gain enough to have Christ. He is too covetous whom the
Lord Jesus cannot satisfy. We may loose diuitias Dei, but never Deum
diuitiarum. We may be forsaken of these riches of God, but never of the God of
riches. Amittamus omnia, dum habeamus habentem omnia. Let us loose all, so we
have him that has all.

That was never perfectly good, that might be lost. Of this nature are riches:
they have made many prouder, none better. As never man was better, so never
wise man thought himself better for them. That wise Prophet would never have
prayed against riches, if their want had been the want of blessedness. The
Devil indeed says, All those will I give thee: but the two dearest Aposties
say, Silver and gold have I none. Who would not rather be in the state of those
Saints, then of that Devil? Riches are such things, as those that have them
not, want them not: those that have them, want them: they are lost in a night,
and a man is never the worse for loosing them. How many Kings (not fewer then
nine in our Island) that have begun their glory in a Throne, have ended it in a
cell: changing their command of a Scepter, for the contemplation of a Book!
Alas silly things, that they should dare ask one dram of our confidence. Non
tanta in multis foelicitas, quanta in paucis securitas. There is not so much
happiness in the highest estate, as there is content and peace in the lowest.
Only then God be our trust, whose mercy we can no more loose, then himself
can loose his mercy.

Thus you see this second general point amplified: if Riches be Gods good
blessings, (not only in themselves, so they are always good, but to us) then
they are gotten honestly, disposed justly, lost patiently. As much happily
might be said for Honor; wherein I will briefly consider, how and when it is
of God.

God indeed gives Honor and Riches; but not all Honor; as you heard before
not all Riches. There are four things in an honored person. First his Person,
wherein he pertakes of the common condition of Mankind; lives and dies a man.
Even the sons of Princes have their breath in their nosthrilles. Secondly his
Honor and dignity; this simply considered is of God, whosoever he be that
has it, a Joseph or a Haman. Thirdly, the manner of coming to his Honor: and
this is no longer of God, then the means are good. If it be Gods honor, God
must give it, not man usurp it. Fourthly the menaging of this Honor; and this
is also of the Lord, if it be right and religious. It happens often that
Potens, the great man is not of God. Hos. 8. 4.
They have set up Kings, but not by me: they have made Princes, and I knew it
not. The manner of getting dignity is not always of God. Richard 3. came to
the Crown of England by blood and murder. Alexander 6. obtained the Popedom,
by giving himself to the Devil: Yet the dignity is of God. Prou. 8. 15.
By me Kings reign: by me Princes and Nobles.

It is a hard question, wherein Honor consists. It is in blood, descending
from the veins of noble ancestors? Not so, except nature could produce to
Noble parents noble children. It was a monstrous tale that Nicippus his Ewe
should yeane a Lion. Though it be true among irrational creatures, that they
ever bring forth their like; Eagles hatch Eagles; and Doves Doves: yet in man's
progeny there is often found not so like a proportion, as unlike a
disposition. The earthy part only follows the seed, not that whose form and
attending qualities are from above. Honor must therefore as well plead a
Charter of successiue virtue, as of continued scutchions, or it cannot consist
in blood. The best things can never be traduced in propagation: thou may
leave thy son heir to thy lands in thy will, to thy Honor in his blood;
thou can never bequeath him thy virtues. The best qualities do so cleave to
their subjects, that they disdain communication to others.

That is then only true Honor, where dignity and desert, blood and virtue
meet together: the greatness whereof is from blood, the goodness from
virtue. Among Fools dignity is enough without desert: among wise men desert
without dignity. If they must be separated, desert is infinitely better.
Greatness without virtue laudatur ore alieno, damnatur conscientia sua; is
commended by others tongues, condemned in the own heart. Virtue though without
promotion, is more comforted in the own content, then dishartned by others
contempt. It is a happy composition when they are united: think it your
honor ye great men, that you are ennobled with virtues: not that you have, but
that you deserve Honor. Let this that has been spoken teach us some lessons
concerning Honor.

1. Take it when God sends it, but be not ambitious of it. Indigni est
arripere, non accipere honorem. It is an argument of unworthiness to snatch it
denied, not to accept it offered. 1. Pet. 5. 5.
God resists the proud; opposes himself in a professed war against him; as
if he held a sword against his breast, when he would rise up in glory, to n^le
him fast down to the earth. But he gives grace to the humble: like a great
and good Prince he gives those servants grace and honor, whom he perceiues
least ambitious of it. Such men seek not for honor, as for a Jewel they
would feign find, but only stumble at it, as Saul sought but his Fathers
Asses, when he lighted on a Kingdom. Pride like smoke will surge upward,
though it vanish into air: massy virtue like gold keeps below, and is more
preciously respected.

He that would mount, cares not what attendance he daunces at all hours, upon
whose stairs he sittes waiting, what enormities he soothes, what deformities
he imitates, what base offices he does prostrate himself to, so he may rise.
His carriage is alienum a se, quite another thing from himself: he does glue
it on indecently, that he may skrew himself into favor. This man never
understood the charge that goes with honor; Which the most wise disposition of
God has coupled together. Charge without some honor would ouerlay a man. If a
man could have honor without some trouble, it would so transport him, that he
were continually in danger of running mad. The poor man enuies the great for
his honor: the great perhaps enuies the poor more for his peace: for as he
lives obscurely, so securely. He that rightly knows the many public, and
more secret vexatitions incident to Honor, would not (as that King said of his
Crown) stoop to take it up, though it lay at his feet before him.

2. Live worthy of that Honor thou have. Greatness not gooded with grace is
like a Beacon upon a high hill: Qui conspiciunt, despiciunt: they that behold
it, hate it, though perhaps they dare not censure it. The knee may be forced to
reverence, but but the mind cannot but abhor so unworthy a Statue. In his
pride he stomachs the couerd head, or the stiff knee of a good Mordecai,
fretting that other men do not think him so good as he thinks himself. But
indeed he does not think himself more honorable then others think bim base.
All the poor honor that he has, is only kept above ground with his body;
both corrupt, fall, and rotte together: and if it be coniurd up at the
funeral, to present it self, yet it fails not to go back with the Heralds.

3. Forget not your original, ye whose brows the wreathes of honor have
(above hopes) engirt. If the Lord has Psalm. 113. 7. 8.
raised you out of the dust: and lifted you up out of the dunghill: and set you
among the Princes of the people; yet forget not your Fathers house, nor the
place of your beginning. Miseranda obliuio originis non meminisse. He never
truly understands what he is, that forgets what he has been. Salomons
observation is often true; Eccle. 10. 6.
Folly is set in great dignity: Albeit this be not the right Vbi; Folly in
excellency. Now these excellent fools soon forget, de quo surrectio detur;
From how low estate they are risen. They consider not how glad their Carkases
would once have been of a warm covering; that are now richer then Lilies,
more gorgeous then May: scarce Mat. 6. 29.
Solomon in all his glory was arrayed like one of these. They consider not, that
need once made them trudge through the Mire, even many tedious iourneys; that
climb by unjust Riches to that dignity, as in their Caroches to be whirled
through the popular streets.

It was Jacobs humble acknowledgement of Gods mercy to him. Genesis 32. 10.
With my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. If
blind Ingratitude would suffer many proud eyes to see it, how justly might
diverse say: With my staff came I hither walking, and now I ride in triumph
with attendants. To these let me apply the words of the Prophet: Esa. 51. 1.
Look unto, the Rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence
ye are dug. Remember your poor beginning, that you may bless God for your
advancing. Say not only in general, Quis homo! Psalm. 8. 4.
What is man that thou O Lord art so mindful of him? But Quis ego? 1. Sam. 9.
21.
What am I, and what is my Fathers house, that GOD should thus raise me up!

4. If thou have Honor, keep it, but trust it not. Nothing is more
inconstant; for it depends upon inconstancy it self, the vulgar breath. Which
is Bellua multorum capitum, a Beast of many heads, and as many tongues, which
never keep long in one tune As they never agree one with another, so seldom
do they agree long with themselves. Paul and Barnabas Act. 14.
come to Lystra, and raise an impotent Creeple: Hereat the amassed people would
needs make them Gods, and draw Bulls and garlands to the Altars for sacrifice to
them. Not long after they draw Paul out of the City, and stone him. They
suddenly turn him from a God to a malefactor; and are ready to kill him in
stead of killing sacrifice to him. O the fickleness of that thing, which is
committed to the keeping of vulgar hands. Trust not then popularitie with thy
Honor, so it is mutable: but trust virtue with it, so it is durable. Nothing
can make sure a good memory, but a good life. It is a foolish dream, to hope
for immortality and a long-lasting name, by a monument of brass or stone. It
is not dead stones, but living men, that can redeem thy good remembrance from
oblivion. A Sumptuous Tomb couers thy putrified Carkase; and be thy life never
so lewd, a commending Epitaph shadows all: but the passenger that knew thee,
tells his friends; that these outsides are hypocritical, for thy life was as
rotten as is thy corpse: and so is occasioned by thy presumed glory, to lay
open thy deserved infamy. Neither can the common people preserve thy honor
whiles thou live, nor can these dull and senseless Monuments keep it when
thou art dead. Only thy noble and Christian life makes every man's heart thy
Tomb, and turns every tongue into a pen, to write thy deathlesse Epitaph.

5. Lastly, if God gives to some men Honor, it is then manifest that God
allows difference of persons. He ordaines some to rule and others to obey:
some masters, others servants; he sets some up on high, and places others
in a low degree. To repine at others greatness and our own meannesse, is to
cavil with God; as if he wanted wisdom and equity in disposing these
inferior conditions. It is a savage and popular humor, to malign and inveigh
against men in eminent places. That rhyme, When Adam delued, and Eve span, Who
was then a Gentleman? seems to be made among Jack Strawes followers, and to
savor of Rebellious discontent. God allows no man to vilefie, where he has
honored: no scurrilous Libelles disgracing those that live, yea disparaging
the very dead; shall pass the Court of Gods Justice uncensured. Where the Lord
conferres and confirms Honor, woe to the tongue that shall traduce it. This
second point has held us long, the brevity of the rest shall ease it.

3. Observe that Solomon in the donation of the left hand, couples together
Riches and Honor: as if these two were for the most part inseparable
companions. Eccle. 6. God gives to a man Riches and Honor. First Riches, and
then Honor: for it is lightly found, Eccl. 6. 2.
so much Riches, so much Honor; and reputation is measured by the Acre. I have
wealth enough, says the worldling. Luke 12. I will turn Gentleman, take my
ease, eat, drink, and be merry. Riches are the stairs whereby men climb up
into the height of dignity; the fortification that defends it: the food it
lives upon: the oil that keeps the lamp of Honor from going out. Honor is
a bare robe, if Riches do not lace and flourish it: and Riches a dull Lump,
till Honor give a Soul to quicken it. Fifthly then Honor and Riches, Wealth
and Worship do bear one another company.

4. Lastly observe, that though riches and honor be Gods gifts, yet they are
but the gifts of his left hand: therefore it necessarily follows, that every
wise man will first seek the blessings of the Right. Math. 6. 33.
First seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness: and these things shall
be added to you. Godliness is the best Riches, Riches the worst: let us strive
for the former without condition: for the other if they fall in our way, let us
stoop to take them up: if not, let us never covet them. It is no Wisdom to
refuse Gods kindness, that offers wealth: nor piety to scratch for it when
God withholds it. When the Lord has set thee up as high as Haman in the Court
of Ahasuerus, or promoted thee to ride with Joseph in the second Chariot of
Egypt: were thy stock of Cattle exceeding Jobs; Job 1. 3.
seven thousand sheep, three thousand Camels, five hundred yoke of Oxen: did
thy Wardrobe put down Salomons, and thy cup-bord of plate Belshazzars, when
the vessels of Gods temple were the ornature. Yet all these are but the gifts
of Wisdoms left hand; and the possessors may be under the malediction of God
and go down to damnation. If it were true, that sanctior qui ditior, that
goods could make a man good, I would not blame men's kissing the left hand, and
sucking out Riches and Honor. But alas what antidote against the terror of
conscience can be chym'd from gold? What charm is there in brave apparel to
keep off the rigor of Satan? Quod tibi praestat opes, non tibi praestat
opem. That which makes thee wealthy, cannot make thee happy.

Jonas had a Gourd that was to him an Arbor: he sat under it secure: but
suddenly there was a worm that bitte it, and it dyed. Compare (secretly in
your hearts) your riches to that Gourd: your pleasure to the greenesse of it:
your pomp, attendance vanities to the leaves of it: your sudden increase of
wealth, to the growing and shooting up of it. But withal forget not the Worm
and the Wind; the Worm that shall kill your root is Death, and the Wind that
shall blow upon you is calamity. There is a greater defect in this wealth and
worship then their uncertainty. Non m^do fallacia quia dubia verum insidiosa
quia dulcia. They are not only deceitful through their Aug.
ticklenesse, but dangerous through their lusho^snesse. Men are apt to surfeit
on this luxurient abundance: it is a ba^e to security, a baud to wantonness.

Here is the maine difference between the gifts of Gods right hand and of his
left. He gives real blessings with the left, but he does not settle them upon
us: he promises (...) perpetuity; but with the graces of his right he gives
assurance of euerlastingnes. Christ calls Riches the Math. 13. 22.
riches of deceitfulness: but grace Luke 10. 42. Psalm. 35. Psalm. 125.
the better part that shall never be taken away. David compares the wealthy to
a flourishing tree that is soon withered: but Faith stablisheth a man like
Mount Sion, never to be removed. He that thinks he sittes surest in his seat
of Riches, let him take heed least he fall. When a great man boasted of his
abundance, (says Paulus Emilius) one of his friends told him, that the anger
of God could not long forbear so great prosperity. How many rich Merchants
have suddenly lost all! How many Noblemen sold all! How many wealthy heirs
spent all! Few Sundays pass over our heads without Collections for
Ship-wrackes, fires, and other casualties; Demonstratiue proofs that
prosperity is inconstant, riches casual. And for honor, we read that
Bel^sarius an honorable Peer of the Empire, was forced in his old age to beg
from door to door, obulum date Bell sario. Frederick a great Emperor was so
low brought, that he s^ed to be made but the Sexton of a Church.

O then let us not adhere to these left hand blessings, but first seek length
of days, eternal joys never to be lost. A man may enjoy the other without
fault: the sin consists praeferendo vel conferendo; either in preferring
Riches, or in comparing them with faith and a good conscience. Vtere caducis,
fruere aeternis, Thou must necessarily use these transient things, only enjoy
and rest upon the everlasting comforts of Jesus Christ. When God has assured
to a Christian spirit the inheritance of Heaven, he joyfully pilgrims it
through this world: if wealth and worship salute him by the way, he refuses
not their company; but they shall not stray him out of his path, nor transport
his affections: for his heart is where his hope is, his love is where his Lord
is; even with Jesus his Redeemer at the right hand of God. Now this man's very
Riches are blessed to him; for as from the hand of God he has them, so from
Eccl. 2. 24.
the hand of God he has to enjoy good in them. Whereas to some (says
Solomon) Eccl. 5. 13.
I have seen Riches kept for the own^s thereof to their hurt: to this man Romans
8. 28.
they shall work to the best; blessing his condition in this life, and
enlarging his dition in heaven; as the wise man sweetly. Prou. 10. 22
The blessing of the Lord it makes rich: and he adds no sorrow with it.

Thus in particular: if we confer the right hand with the left, we shall
generally learn

1. That both Gods hands are giving: it is enough if man give with one hand;
but the Lord settes both his hands a doling his Alms of mercy. Nemo tuarum
vnam vincet vtraque manu. No man can do so much with both hands, as GOD with
one hand, with one finger. He has Manum plenam, extensam, expansam; hand
full, not empty: so full that it can never be emptied with giving. Innumerable
are the drops in the sea yet if one be taken out, it has (though insensibly)
so much the less: but Gods goodness can suffer no diminution, for it is
infinite. Men are sparing in their bounty, because the more they give, the
less they have: but Gods hand is ever full, though it ever disperse: and the
filling of many cisternes is no abatement to his ever running fountain. Our
prayers therefore are well directed thither for blessings; whence though we
receive never so much, we leave no less behind. Let this master of Requests
in heaven have all our suites: we are sure either to receive what we ask, or
what we should ask.

It is extensa, a hand put forth, and stretched out. Eccl. 4. 31.
Stretched out, not to receive, but to give. The Prophet speaks of Rulers that
stretch out their hands for bribes and cry Hos. 4. 18.
Give ye: but the Lords hand is put forth to offer good things. Romans 10. 21.
All day long have I stretched forth my hands to a disobedient people. Indeed
God has a hand; and woe to the man against whom it is stretched. Homer says
that all the Gods could not ward a blow of Jupiters hand. His hands are not
only (...), hands that cannot be sufficiently preised: but (...), hands that
cannot be resisted. It is a heavy hand when it lights upon men in anger. It is
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. When reuolting
Israel fell to serve Baal and Ashtaroth Judge. 2. 15.
Whethersoeuer they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them for evil.
When the men of Ashdod were smitten with Emerods, it is said 1. Sam. 5. 6.
the hand of the Lord was heavy upon them. So David in his grievous misery,
Psalm. 38. 2.
Thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses mesore. It is not this
hand that God here stretches out. Ser. (...). in cant
Bernard says, God has two hands; Fortitudo and Latitudo. A hand of strength,
Qua defendit potenter: wherewith he protects his friends, and confounds his
enemies. A hand of Bounty, Qua tribuit affluenter, whereby he disperseth and
disposes the larges of his gifts. This is the hand here put forth, manus
regalis, and gives munus regale; a royal hand, full of real mercies; let us
humbly kiss it.

It is expansa, not a shut hand, but open, Psalm. 145. 16.
Thou openest thy hand, and fillest all things living with plenteousnesse. 1.
Tim. 6. 18.
God gives richly, says Paul. Man is poor, because he is a creature: the
very nam^ of creature inferres poverty: it implies a receiving of all. Quid
habes quod non accepisti? The Creator has the possession of all, and the
disposition of all, at his own pleasure. Iam. 1. 17.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of Lights. Bread in the Lords prayer is called Ours; Give us this
day our daily bread: Aug. Epist. 143.
but ne putetur a nobis, dicimus da nobis: lest we should imagine it our own
from our selves, we are taught daily to beg it of our father in heaven, whose
it is. It is the Lords hand that barreth the gates of our cities, that fills
our garners with plenty, that Psalm. 144. 13.
sets peace about our walls, and prosperity in our palaces; that blesses
our goings out, and commings in; even all the works of our hands.

But what speak I of temporal things the gifts of his lest hand, in
comparison of length of days, everlasting joys, the treasures of his right?
Repentance, humility, charity, and the Lady of all graces Faith come from his
hand, and are the fair gifts of God. Aug. de spiritu and liter and. cap. 34.
Ipsum velle credore Deus operatur in homine. The first will to believe is
wrought in man by God. If any ask, Cur, illi ita suadeatur, vt persuadeatur;
illi autem non ita? Why does this man believe, and another remain in
infidelity? Hic digitus Dei: the hand of God has bin here, working faith in
the soul of him that believes. All comes from this hand of mercy. Aug.
Confess. Lib. 9. cap. 13.
Quisquis tibi enumerat merita sua, quid tibi enumerat nisi muneratua? He that
reckons to God his merits; what does he reckon, but Gods mercies? Quae bo na
mea, dona tua: those that are my goods, as Gods gifts.

2. Though hands be here attributed to God, yet it is but by way of metaphore;
not literally and in a true propriety of speech. To conceive GOD to be as
man, with humane dimensions, was the heresy of the Anthro pomorphites: and he
that thus grossly thinks of God, says Jerome makes an Idol of God in his
heart. But herein God stoopes to the quality of our understandings ascribing
to himself anger and displeasure, as it were passions to the impassible:
whereas Nec Deus affectu capitur, nec tangitur ir^: they are not passions, but
perfections. God has a mouth, by which he teaches man wisdom: he has feet,
by which he walks on the earth his footestoole: he has hands, by which he
gives food to all flesh: he has none of these organically, as men have; but
in the variety of effects which he produces. So Bernard; Per effectum haec
habet, Sermon. 4. in Cant.
non per naturam.

3. Observe that in the left hand there is a double benefit, Riches and
Honor: in the right but a single one; Length of days: yet this one far
transcends both the other. For if we should restrain it to this world: long
life is a great blessing; and more valuable then wealth and worship. But taking
it as it is meant, for eternity. (For this life is but a span long; a span
then; now scarce the length of a finger) as Psalm. 23. I will dwell in the house
of the Lord for ever: originally to length of days; but fitly Psalm. 23. 6.
translated For ever: the left hand is as far exceeded by the right, as short
mortality is by euerlastingnesse. Aged Israel to his grandchildren, Ephraim
and Manasseh two sons of Joseph, when the father had placed the first borne
Manasseh to his right hand, and Ephraim the younger to his left: he crossing
his hands, laid the right upon Genesis 48. 14.
Ephraim, and the left upon Manasseh. When Joseph would have removed his hands,
he refused: I know it my son, I know it. Manasseh also shall become a people,
and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be greater
then he. The Lord does bless many Manassehs with his left hand in riches and
honors: but blessed be that Ephraim to whom his right hand is commended. Lord,
let others enjoy the treasures of thy left hand, but lay thy right upon our
souls.

4. I conclude. Since the Lord out of both his hands powers and showers upon us
these mercies, what should we do but be thankful? Shall we receive benefits
by heaps; and is the incense of our gratitude of so thin a smoke? Et
capitur minimo thuris honor Deus? All these blessings seem to say to man;
Take, and take heed: Accipe, read, cave: Receive, return, beware. Take warmth
from me says apparel, heat from me f^yth fire, strength from me says bread.
Restore thankfulness to the Giver. Or else beware lest the fire burn thee,
water drown thee, air choke thee: lest all give destruction, that should
give comfort. Receive in the name of God, Return in the Praise of God, or
Beware in the fear of God. To whom for the blessings of both his hands, be
glory ascribed from all lips and hearts, for ever and ever.

Amen.
THE LOST ARE FOUND.
LVK. 19. 10. For the Son of man is come to seek, and to save that was lost.
THE first word is Causall, and puts us in mind of some reference. In brief
the dependence is this. Little Zacheus became great in Gods favor: he was. ver.
2. a Publican, a chief Publican, a rich Publican: Yet he has a desire to see
Jesus, and Jesus has a purpose to see him. A figtree shall help him to the
sight of Christ, and Christ to the sight of him.

Our Savior calls him down, (it is fit they should come down in humility
that entertain Christ) and bids himself to his house to dinner. He is made
Zacheus his gest for temporal food, and Zacheus is made his guest for
everlasting cheer. This day is salvation come to this house. ver. 9.

This mercy is not without the Pharisees grudging ver. 7. When they saw it, they
all murmured, saying, That he was gone to be guest with a man that is a
sinner. Murmuring is between secret backbiting, and open railing: a smotherd
malice, which can nether beevtterly concealed, nor dare be openly vented. The
cause of their murmuring was, that he was become a guest to a sinner: as if
the Sun of righteousness could be corrupted in shining on a Dunghill of
sin. No: whiles he did associate the bad, he made them good; feeding them
spiritually, that fed him corporally. He did not consent to their sin, but
correct it: not infecting himself, but affecting their souls, and effecting
their bliss. A man may accompany those, whom he desires to make better, or
them to make him better. And that the mouth of all wickedness might be
stopped, our Savior says, that his coming into the world was not only to
call home Zacheus, but even many such Publicans. For the Son of man is come
to seek, and to save etc.

We are thus gotten over the threshold; For: let us now look into the house,
and suruay every chamber and room in it. The foundation of this comfortable
scripture is Jesus Christ and the building may be distinguished into five
several Parlours, all richly hung and adorned with the graces and mercies of
God: and the midst thereof paued with love for the daughters of Jerusalem.
CHRIST is the Buttresse or corner stone; and in him consider Cant. 3. 10.
here His Humility. The Son of man. Verity. Is come. Pity. To seek.
Piety. To save. Power. That which was lost.



1. The Son of man. Ecce Humilitatem. He that is the Son of eternal God,
calls himself the Son of mortal man.

2. Is come. Ecce veritatem. What God had promised, his Servants prophesied,
his Types prefigured, he has now performed. They all foretold in their kinds
that he should come: he makes all good, he Is come.

3. To seek. Ecce compassionem. He knew that we were utterly gone; that we had
Nec valentis oculum, nec volentis animum: neither an eye able, nor a mind
willing to seek him: in Pity he seeks us.

4. To save. Ecce Pietatem. He seeks us not in ruinam, to our destruction as
we deserved: but in salutem, to our salvation as he desired. Amissos quaerit,
quaesitos invenit, inventos seruat. He seeks them that were lost, he finds
them he seeks, he saues them he finds. To save.

5. The lost. Ecce Potestatem. He is not only able to strengthen us weak, nor
to recover us sick, nor to fetch us home offering our selves to be brought:
but when we had neither will nor power to procure this; yea when we had a
reluctancie against this, for we were his enemies and hated him: he did recall
us gone, reviue us dead, seek and save us that were lost.

You see the Chambers, how they lie in order: let me keep your thoughts in
this house of Mercy a while, wherein may all our souls dwell for ever. In
survaying the Rooms, it is fit we should begin with the lowermost: and
thither the Text aptly first leads us.

The Son of Man.
Christ is called a Son in three respects. 1. In regard of his Deity, the
Son of God, begotten of him from all eternity, coequall and coessentiall to
him. 2. In respect of his flesh, the Son of Mary, naturally borne of her. 3. He
calls himself the Son of Man, in regard that he took on him man's nature, and
undertook the performance of man's redemption. Man like us in all things, sin
only excepted. So that in this circumstance two things are considerable in
Christ; the one necessarily involved in the other: His Humanity. Humility.



His Humanity.
When the fullness of time was come, Gal. 4. 4.
God sent his Son made of a Woman. Ex muliere, non in muliere: as Gorran
notes against Valentinus, whose heresy was, that Christ passed through the
Virgin as water through a Conduit-pipe. But this Preposition Ex, signifies a
preexistent matter: as a house is made of timber and stones, bread of wheat,
wine of grapes. Christ had therefore the materials of his body from the virgin
Mary; though not his Formale principium: for the holy Ghost was agent in this
wonderful conception.

Neither is this a thing impossible to God, though wonderful to Man; that this
Christ should be the Son of Mary without man. As it was possible to God in the
first creation, to make a Woman out of a Man without the help of a Woman: so
in this new creation, to make a Man out of a Woman without the help of a man.
There is the same reason of possibility. It is as easy to bring fire from a
steel without a flint, as from a flint without a steel. But he that could
dare essentiam nihilo, can raise a nature ex aliquo.

God had four diverse manners of creating humane creatures. 1. The first man
Adam was made of no man, but immediately created of God. 2. The second, that
was Eve, was made (not of a woman, but) of a man alone. 3. The third sort, all
men and women else are begotten of man and woman. 4. Christ the last sort was
of a different manner from all these. 1. not of no precedent flesh, as Adam. 2.
Not of a man without a woman, as Eve. 3. Not of man and woman, as all we. 4.
But after a new way; of a woman, without a man. We are all in this sort opposed
to Adam, Christ to Eve, Adam was made of neither man nor woman, we of both man
and woman. Eve of a man without a woman, Christ of a woman without a man.

Now as this was a great work of God, so it is a great wonder to man. Three
miracles here. Deum nasci, virginem parere, fidem haec credere. That the Son
of God should become the Son of woman, a great miracle. That a virgin should
bear a child, and yet before, at, after the birth remain still a virgin, a
great miracle. That the faith of man should believe all this, Maximum
miraculum; this is the greatest wonder of all.

Thus you have Divinity assuming Humanity: a great mystery; 1. Tim. 3. 16.
God manifested in the flesh. In mundum venit, qui mundum condidit: he comes
down to earth, but he leaves not heaven; hic affuit inde non defuit. Humana
natura assumpta est, Diuina non consumpta est. He took Humanity, he lost not
his Divinity. He abides Mariae Pater, the Father of Mary; who is made Mariae
Filius, the Son of Mary Esa 9. 6.
To us a child is borne, to us a son is given. Whereon Hom de. Not.
Emissenus; Natus qui sentiret occasum, datus qni resciret exordium. He was
borne that should feel death: he was given that was from everlasting, and
could not die. Natus qui and matre esset junior, datus quo nec Pater esset
antiquior. He that was borne was younger then his mother; he that was given
was as eternal as his father. He was Son to both God and Mary. Non alter ex
Patre, alter ex Virgin: sed aliter ex Patre, aliter ex virgin.

As the flowers are said to have Solemn in coelo patrem, solum in terra matrem:
so Christ has a father in heaven without a mother, a mother on earth without a
father. Here is then the wonder of his Humanity. The everlasting Esa. 9. 6.
Father is become a little child. He that spreads out the heavens, is wrapd in
Luke 2. 7.
swaddling clouts. He that is the Word, becomes an Infant not able to speak.
The Son of God calls himself the Son of man.

His Humility.
If your understandings can reach the depth of this bottom, take it at one
view. The Son of God calls himself the Son of man. The omnipotent Creator
becomes an impotent creature. As himself says; Ioh. 15. 13.
Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends. So greater humility never was then this, that God should be made man.
It is the voice of Pride in man, Esa. 14. 14.
I will be like God: but the action of Humility in God, I will be man. Proud
Nebuchadnezzar says, Ero similis altissimo, I will be like the Highest: meek
Christ says, Ero similis infimo I will be like the lowest: he put on him the
the form of a servant: yea he was a despised Worm. God spoke it in derision
of sinful man; Genesis 3. 22.
Behold, he is become as one of us: but now we may say, God is become as one
of us. There the lowest aspires to be the Highest, here the Highest vouchsafes
to be the lowest. Alexander a son of man would make himself the son of
God: Christ the Son of God makes himself the son of man. God in Psalm. 16.
11.
whose presence is fulness of joy, becomes Esa. 53. 3.
a man full of sorro^es. Eternal rest betakes himself to unrest: having
whilst he lived i passive action, and when he dyed active passion. Bern. ser.
in ser. 4. hebd.


The Act. 10. 36.
LORD over all things, and Hebr. 1. 2.
Heir of the world, undertakes ignominy and poverty. Ignominy: the Psalm.
24. 7.
King of glory is become Psalm. 22. 6.
the shame of men. Poverty: Bern. tract. de Pass. Dom. cap. 2.
Pauper in nativitate, pauperior in vita, pauperrimus in cruce. Poor in his
Birth, for borne in another man's stable: poor in his Life, fed at another man's
table: poor in his Death, buried in another man's sepulcher.

There are says In Cant. ser. 34.
Bernard, some that are humbled, but not humble: others that are humble, not
humbled: and a third sort that are both humbled and humble. Pharaoh was humbled
and cast down, but not humble: smitten with subversion, not moved with
submission. Gothfrey of Boloigne was not humbled, yet humble: for in the very
heat and height of his honor he refused to be crowned in Jerusalem, with a
Crown of gold, because Christ his master had bin in that place crowned with a
crown of thorns. Others are both humbled and humble. Psalm. 78. 34.
When he slew them they sought him: they returned and enquired early after GOD.
Our Savior Christ was Passiuely humbled: Heb. 2. 9.
he was made lower then the Angels, by suffering death: the Lord did break
him. Actiuely he humbled himself. Phil. 2. 7.
he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant:
he humbled himself. Habitually he was humbled. Mat. 11. 29.
Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart. Let this observation lesson
us two duties.

1. Esteem we not the worse, but the better of Christ, that he made himself
the Son of man. Let him not lose any part of his honor, because he abased
himself for us. He that took our Romans 9. 5
flesh, is also over all, GOD blessed for ever, Amen. There is more in him then
humanity: not alia persona, but alia natura: not another person, but another
nature. Though he be verus homo, he is not merus homo. And even that Man,
that was crucified on a cross, and laid in a grave, is more high then the
heavens, more holy then the Angels.

Stephen saw this very Act. 7. 56.
Son of man standing on the right hand of God. The blood of this Son of man
gives salvation: and to whom it does not, this Son of man shall Ioh. 5. 27.
adiudge them to condemnation. Under this name and form of Humility our
Savior apposed his Disciples. Mat. 16. 13.
Whom do men say, that I, the Son of Man, am? Peter answers for himself
and the Apostles, whatsoever the people thought; Ver. 16.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. He calls himself the Son of
man, Peter calls him the Son of God. 1. Cor. 1. 23.
The Jews see him only a st^mbling block, and the Greeks foolishness: but
Christians see him Ver. 24.
the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. The wicked behold him Esa. 53. 2.
without form or comeliness, or beauty to desire him: but the faithful
behold him Cant. 3. 11.
crowned with a Crown, Mat 17. 2.
his face shining, as the Sun in his glory. Therefore Bern. ser. 22.
Quanto minorem se fecit in humilitate, tanto maiorem exhibuit in bonitate.
Quanto pro me vilior, tanto mihi charior. The lower he brought himself in
humility, the higher he magnified his mercy. By so much as he was made the
baser for us, by so much let him be the dearer to us.

Observe it O man: and quia limus es, non sis superbus: and quia Deo iunctus;
non sis ingratus: because thou art dust of thy self, be not proud: because
thou art made immortal by Christ, be not unthankful.

Condemned world, that despisest him appearing as a silly man! The Jews
expected an external pomp in the Messiah: Can he not come down from the
Cross; how should this man save us? They consider not, that he who wanted a
Rest for his head, and Bread for his followers, fed some thousands of them with
a few loaves: that he which wanted a pillow, gives rest to all believing
souls: that he could, but would not come down from the cross; that the
dear price of their redemption might be paid.

Many still have such Jewish hearts: what, believe on a crucified man? But Paul
1. Cor. 2. 2.
determines to know nothing, but this Jesus Christ, and him crucified. They can
be content to dwell with him on mount Tabor, but not to follow him to mount
Caluary. They cleave to him so long as he gives them bread, but forsake him
when himself Ioh. 19. 28.
cries for drink. Oderunt pannos tuos. O Christ, they like well thy robes of
glory, but not thy rags of poverty. They love him whiles the people cry
Hosanna; but shrink back when they cry, Crucify him. All pleases them but
the Cross: all the fair way of delights they will accompany him, but at the
Cross they part.

They would share with him in his kingdom, but they will none of his
vassalage. The Lion (in a Fable) had many attendants, and he provided for them
good cheer. They like well of this, and are proud of their master, to whom all
the other beasts gave awe and obedience. But it chanced that the Lion fell
into the danger of the Dragon; who had got him down; ready to devour him.
His followers seeing this quickly betake them to their heels; and fell every
beast to his old trade of rapine. Only the poor Lamb stood bleating by, and
though he could not help, would not forsake his Lord At last the Lion gets
the victory, and treads the Dragon under his feet to death. Then he punishes
those revolting traitors with deserved destruction, and sets the Lamb by his
own side.

The great Reu. 5. 5.
Lion of Judah feeds many of the Jews, and at this day profane wretches:
whilst his bounty lasts, Christ, and none but Christ. But when the Red Dragon
has got him under, nailed him to the cross, Crucified him dead; away go
these runnagates; no more penny, no more Paternoster. If affliction come for
Christ his cause, they know where to find a kinder Master. Back to the world:
one to his fraud, and he will ouer-reach others with the sin of
deceitfulness, though himself be ouer-reached with the Heb. 3. 13.
deceitfulness of sin. Another to his usury; and he chymically proiects
money out of the poores bowels. A third to his covetousness; and he had
rather that the very frame of the world should fall, then the price of corn. A
fourth to his Idols; and he hopes for cakes from the Queen of heaven, as if
the King of heaven was not able to give bread. If the Lord pinch them with
distress, they run to Rome for succor: expecting that from a block, which
they would not tarry to obtain from the God of mercy. Then they cry like the
Israelites: Exodus 32. 1.
Up, make us gods to go before us: for as for this Moses, we know not what is
become of him. But at last this Lion conquers the Dragon; ouercomes Satan and
his damnation: what shall he then say to those Rebels that would not have him
reign over them? But Luke 19. 27.
Bring those mine enemies, and slay them before me. But the poor and pure
innocent Lambs that Romans 8. 17.
suffer with him, shall reign with him. Mat. 5. 10.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.

(...). The other use is St. Paul's. Phil. 2. 5.
Let the same mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus. What mind is that?
Humility. Ver. 7. He that thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
humbled himself to become Man: we should have found it no robbery to be
equal with Devils, and shall we be proud? What an intolerable disproportion is
this; to behold Humilem Deum, and superbum hominem? an humble God, and a proud
man? Who can endure to see a Prince on foot, and his vassal mounted? Shall the
Son of God be thus humble for us, and shall not we be humble for our selves?
For our selves, I say; that deserve to be cast down among the lowest; for our
selves, that we may be exalted.

He that here calls himself the Son of man, is now glorified: they that
humbly acknowledge themselves to be the Sons of men, that is mortal, shall be
made the Sons of God, that is immortal. In the first of King. 19. There was
a mighty strong wind, that rent the mountains, and brake the rocks; but God
was 1. King. 19. 11.
not in the Wind: the Lord will not rest in the turbulent spirit, puffed up
with the wind of vainglory. There was an earthquake, but God was not in the
earthquake. He will not dwell in a covetous heart, buried in the furrows of
the earth, and cares of the world. There was a Fire, but the Lord was not in
the fire. He will not rest in a choleric angry soul, full of combustion and
furious heat. There was a still soft voice, and the Lord came with it. In a
mild and humble spirit the God of heaven and earth will dwell. Esa. 57. 15.
The high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, will dwell in the contrite
and humble soul.

It is a sweet mixture of Greatness and Goodness; Vt dum nihil in honor
sublimius, nihil in humilitate submissius; When the highest in dignity are the
lowest in courtesy. Augustine called himself, Minimum non solum omnium
Apostolorum, sed etiam Episcoporum; the least not only of all the Apostles,
but of all the Bishops: whereas he was the most illuminate doctor and best
Bishop of his times. Paul thought himself 1. Cor. 15. 9.
not worthy to be called an Apostle: and behold, he is called The Apostle;
(...); not Paul, but The Apostle. Abraham that esteemed himself Genesis 18. 27.
dust and ashes, is honored to be the Romans 4. 11.
Father of all them that believe. David sits content at his sheepe-folds; the
Lord makes him King over his Israel.

But as Humility like the Be gathers Honey out of rank Weeds, very sins;
moving to repentance. So Pride like the Spider suckes poison out of the fairest
flowers, the best graces, and is corrupted with insolence. Vna superbia
destruit omnia. Only Pride overthrows all. It thrust proud Nabuchadnezzar out
of men's society, proud Saul out of his kingdom, proud Adam out of Paradise,
proud Haman out of the Court, proud Lucifer out of heaven. Pride had her
beginning among the Angels that fell, her continuance in earth, her end in
hell. Poor man; how ill it becomes thee to be proud, when God himself is
humble!

Is come.
We understand the person, let us come to his Coming. And herein, Ecce
veritatem; behold his Truth. Did God promise a Son of a virgin; Emanuell, a
Savior? He is as good as his word; Venit, he is come. Did the sacrificed blood
of so many Bulls, Goats, and Lambs, prefigure the expiatory blood of the Lamb
of God to be shed? Ioh. 1. 29.
Ecce agnus Dei; Behold that Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world. Is the Seed of the woman promised to break the head of the serpent?
Behold he breaks the heavens, and comes down to do it. 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the Devil. Did God engage his word for a Redeemer to purge our
sins? Math. 1. 21.
Call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins.

Against unbelieving Atheists, and mis-beleeuing Jews, here is sufficient
conviction. But I speak to Christians, that believe he is come. Hac fide
credit venturum esse, qua creditis venisse. Believe that he will come again,
with the same faith wherewith you believe he is come already. Do not curtall
Gods word, believing only so much as you list. Faith is holy and catholic:
if you distrust part of Gods word, you prepare infidelity to the whole. Did
God promise Christ, and in Gal. 4. 4.
the fulness of time to send him? Then since he has again promised him, and
Act. 17. 31.
appointed a day wherein he will judge the world by that man, he shall come. As
certainly as he came to suffer for the world, so certainly shall he come to
judge the world. Heb. 9. 28.
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look
for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation. He that
kept his promise when he came to die for us, followed by some few poor
Apostles, will not break it when he shall come in glory with thousa^ds of
Angels.

Neither did God only promise that Christ should come, but that all believers
should be saved by him. Ioh. 1. 12.
As many as received him, to them gave he power to be the sons of God, even
to them that believe on his Name. Misit filium, promisit in filio vitam. He
sent his Son to us, and salvation with him. Wretched and desperate men that
distrust this mercy! Whosoever believes, and is baptized, shall be saved.
Whosoever; Qui se ipsum excipit, seipsum decipit. Did not God spare to send his
promised son out of his bosom to death, and will he to those that believe
on him deny life? No; all his promises are Yea and Amen in Christ: may these
also be Yea and Amen in our believing hearts. A yielding Devil could say,
Jesus I knew: yet some men are like that tempting devil. Math. 4. Si filiu:
Dei sis; If thou be the son of God. Si if; as if they doubted, whether he
could or would save them.

Is come.
There is a threefold Coming of Christ: according to the threefold difference
of Time, Past, Present, Future. As Ser. 3. de Adventu Christi.
Bernard.

Venit Ad homines In homines Contra homines.

1. First for the time past, he came among men. John. 1.

1. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among us. 2. For Ioh. 1. 14.
the present, he comes into men; by his Spirit and grace. Reu. 3. I stand at
the door and knock, if any open unto me, Reu. 3. 20.
I will come into him. 3. For the time to come, he shall come against men.
Romans 2. At the day when God shall judge Romans 2. 16.
the secrets of all hearts by Jesus Christ. Or as it is wittily observed; the
Sun of righteousness appears in three Dr Boys. Post. Dom.
signs: Leo, Virgo, Libra. 1. In the Law like a Lion, roaring out terrible
things with a voice not indurable. Exodus 20. 19.
And they said to Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not
God speak with us, least we die. 2. In the Gospel he appeared in Virgo, an
Infant borne of a virgin. Math. 1. 25. 3. At his last Audite he shall appear
in Libra, weighing all our thoughts, words, and works in a balance. Reu. 22.
12.
Behold I come quickly and my reward is with me, to give every man according as
his work shall be.

Is come.
He was not fetched, not forced, sponte venit; of his own accord he is come.
Ioh. 10. 18.
No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self. In Mat. 26. 55.
Ambrose on these words of Christ; Are ye come out against a thief, with
swords and staves to take me? Stultum est cum gladijs eum quarere, qui vltro se
off^rt. It was superfluous folly to apprehend him with weapons, that willingly
offered himself: to seek him in the night by treason, as if he shunned the
light, who was every day teaching publicly in the Temple. Sed factum congruit
tempori and personis: quia cum essent tenebrae, in tenebroso tempore tenebrosum
opus excercebant. The fact agrees to the time and Persons: they were darkness,
therefore they do the work of darkness in a time of darkness. Indeed he
prays; Father, save m^e from this hour: but withal he corrects himself;
Therefore came I to this hour.

But he is said to fear does. Hebr. 5. What is it to us Quod timuit, that he
feared: nostrum est quod sustinuit, that he suffered. Christ's nature must
needs abhor destructive things: but his Rational overcame his Natural will.
He feared death. Lomb. 3. sent did. 17.
Ex affectu sensualitatis, not Ex affectu rationis. He eschewed it secundum
se, but did under go it propter aliud. Ex impetu naturae he declined it; but
ex imperio rationis; considering that either he must come and die on earth, or
we all must go and die in hell; and that the heads temporal death might
procure the bodies eternal life; behold the Son of man is come. Neither was
it necessary for him to love his pain, though he so loved vsto suffer this
pain. No man properly loves the rod that beats him, though he loves for his
souls good to be beaten. As Augustine said of crosses; Confess. lib. 10. cap. 28.
Tollerare iubemur non amare. Nemo quod tollerat amat, etsi tollerare amat. We
are commanded to bear them, not to love them. No man that even loves to
suffer, loves that he suffers.

Voluntarily he yields himself; saluting Judas by the name of Friend: Amice
^r venis? He suffered not his followers to offend his enemies, nor commands the
Angels to defend himself. Ambr. in Mat 27. 40.
O blind Jews; was it impossible for him, de paruo slipite ligni descendere,
qui descendit a coelorum altitudine? to come down from a piece of wood, that
came down from heaven? Nunquid Non venit vt se liberaret, qui sub seruituto
non erat; sed vt nos de seruitu^ redimeret. Ambr. vbi supra.
tua vincula illu^ possunt te^ere, quem c^li non possunt capere? Shall your
bonds hold him, when the heavens could not contain him? He came not to deliver
himself, that was in freedom: but to deliver us, that were in bondage.

Is come.
Is Christ come to us, and shall not we come to him? Does the Son of God
come to the Sons of men, and do the Sons of men scorn to come to the
Son of God? Proud dust, will thou not meet thy maker? If any ask; Cant. 6. 1.
Whether is thy beloved gone? that we may seek him with thee. The Church
answers; Ver. 2.
My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in
the gardens, and to gather Lillies. You shall have him in his Garden, the
Congregation of the faithful. Wheresoever a number is gathered together in his
Name. Behold, Venit ad limina virtus, Manna lies at your thresholds; will you
not go forth and gather it? The Bridegroom is come, will you not make merry
with him? The nice piece of dust; like Idolatrous Jeroboam, cries, the Church
is too far off, the journey too long to Christ. He came all that long way
from heaven to earth for us, and is a mile too tedious to go to him? Go too,
sede, ede, perde; sit still, eat thy meat, and destroy thy self: who shall
blame the justice of thy condemnation.

But for us, let us leave our pleasures, and go to our Savior. Non sedeas sed
cas, ni pereas per cas. Come a little way to him, that came so far to thee.
Philip tells Nathanael, we have found the Messiah: Nathanael objects, Can any
good thing come out of Nazareth? Ioh. 1. 48.
Come and see, says Philip. And straitwayes Jesus saw Nathanael coming.
Christ has sent many Preachers to inuit us to salvation: We ask, Vbi,
where: they say, Come and see: but we will not come; Christ cannot see us
coming. Mundus, cura, caro; three mischievous hindrers, we come not. Christ
himself calls; yet Ioh. 5. 40.
You will not come unto me; that you might have life. He comes amongst us,
Christians; ad suos: Ioh. 1. 11.
He came to his own^, and his own received him not. We say of such things as
are unlike; they come not near one another: many clothes lie on a heap
together, yet because of their different colors, we say they come not near
one to another. But of things that are alike, we say they come nigh one
another. Our coming near to Christ is not in place, but in grace. Not in
place; for so the wicked is near to God. Psalm. 139. 7.
Whether shall I fly from thy presence? But in grace and quality; being holy
as he is holy. Indeed he must first draw us before we can come. Cant.
Draw me: we will run after thee. He first draws us by grace, then we
run after him by repentance.

To seek.
He is come: to what purpose? Ecce compassionem; to seek. All the days of
his flesh upon earth he went about seeking souls. He went to Samaria to
seek the woman, to Bethany to seek Mary, to Capernaum to seek the Centurion,
to Jericho to seek Zacheus. O what is a man, and the Son of man, that the
Son of God should thus hunt after him! We sought not him. Psalm. 10. 4.
The wicked through the pride of his countenance will not seek after God.
Behold, he seeks us. We would not call upon him, he sends Ambassadors to
beseech us. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconcised to God. Indeed we cannot
seek him, till he first find us. Oportuit viam inuenire errantes, errantes
enim nequeunt inuenire viam. If the Ioh. 14. 6.
Way had not found us, we should never have found the Way. I oe his mercy: Non
solum redeuntem suscipit, sed perditum quarit. How joyful will he be to find
us, that is thus careful to seek us!

Let this teach us, not to hide our selves from him. Wretched men, guilty of
their own eternal loss, that will not be found of Christ when he seeks
them. How shall they at the last day 1. Ioh. 2. 28.
stand with confidence before him, that at this day run from him? If we will
not be found to be sanctified, we cannot be found to be glorified. Paul Phil.
3. 9.
desires to be found in Christ: in Christ found, for without Christ ever lost
Ioh. 17. 12.
Those that thou gave me, I have kept; and none of them is lost, but the
son of perdition. Woe to that man, when Christ shall return with a Non
inuentus. What can the shepherd do but seek? nolunt inueniri; they will not
be found. What the charmer but charm? Nolunt incantari, they will not be
charmed. What the Sutour but woo? nolunt desponsari, they will not be
espoused to Christ. What the Ambassador but beseech? Nolunt exorari they will
not be entreated. What then remains? Reu. 22. 11.
He that will be unjust, let him be unjust still: and he that will be
filthy, let him be filthy still. If we will not be found of him when he
seeks us, he will not be found of us when we seek him. Prou. 1. 28.
They shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. Quaesitus contemnet,
qui quarens contemnitur. He was despised when he sought, and will despise
when he is sought to.

Three vicious sorts of men are here culpable. 1. Some sculke when Christ
seeks. If there be any bush in Paradise. Adam will thrust his head into it. If
there be any hole of pretense, Saul will there borough his rebellion. If Gehe^i
can shadow his briberie with a lie, Elisha shall not find him. When the Sun
shines, every bird comes forth, only the owl will not be found. These birds
of darkness cannot abide the light. Ioh. 3. 19.
because their deeds are evil. Thus they play at All hid with God: but how
foolishly! Like that beast that having thrust his head in a bush, and seeing
no body, thinks no body sees him. But they shall find at last, that not holes
of Reu. 6. 16.
Mountains, nor caves of rocks, can conceal them.

2. Others play at fast and loose with God: as a man behind a tree, one while
seen, another while hid. In the day of prosperity they are hidden; only in
affliction they come out of their holes. As some beasts are driven out of their
boroughes by pouring in scalding water: or as Absolon fetched Ioab, by setting
2. Sam. 14. 30.
on fire his Barley fields. These are found on the Sunday, but lost all the
week. Like the Devil, they stand among the Sons of God yet devour the
servants of God. As Saul at one time prophesied with the Prophets, and at Job.
1.
another time massacred them. Christ calls them to a banquet of prosperity, they
cry Hic sumus, We are here: but if Satan (in their opinion) offer them better
cheer; Tibi sumus, We are for thee.

3. Others being lost, and hearing the seekers voice, go further from him.
These are Wolves, not sheep. The sheep hears his voice, and comes: the Wolf
hears it, and flies. The nearer salvation comes to them, the further they
run from it. Because England tenders them the Gospel, they will run as
far as Rome for damnation.

Christ came to seek the lost sheep; Luke 15. he found it, he laid it on his
shoulders, and he rejoiced. In his life he seeks the sinner till he find
him. In his death he lays him on his shoulders, bearing his sins in his
body on the Cross. In his resurrection he rejoiced for him. In his ascension
he opens the doors of heaven, and brings him home. Venit and invenit: he comes
to seek, and he seeks to save; which is the next point,

To save.
Ecce Pietatem, Behold his goodness. Herod sought Christ ad interitum, to kill
him: Christ seeks us ad salutem, to save us. 1. Tim. 1. 15.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance: that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners. Yield to be found, if thou will yield to
be saved. There is nothing but good meant thee in this seeking. Vidimus and
testamur, etc. 1. Ioh. 4. 14.
We have seen, and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the
Savior of the world. The Fishermens riddle was, Those we could not find we
kept, those we found we lost. But Christ's course is otherwise: Whom he finds
he saues; whom he finds not are lost for ever. It was a Poetical speech; Amare
and sapere vix conceditur dijs. To love and to be wise seldom meet. They are
met in Christ: he did love us, suscepit naturam he became man: he was wise,
occidit peccatum, he killed sin. In love he seeks us, in wisdom he saues
us: here was Amare and sapere. This sweet and comfortable note I must leave to
your meditations: my speech must end his saving, though of his salvation there
be no end. Paruum est seruare bonos: it is a small thing to save those that are
in no danger of spilling; therefore lastly look to the Object;

The lost.
There Ecce Potestatem, behold his power. He is that Luke 11. 22.]
strongest man, that unbound us from the fetters of sin and Satan.
Fortissimus; for caetera excellit, caetera expellit: he excels the rest, he
expels the rest. He had need be powerful, that redeemes so weak man from the
hands of so strong enemies. Magnus venit medicus, quia magnus iacebat aegrotus.
The whole world was sick: there had need be a great Physician, for there was a
great Patient. Lo where wretchedness lies at the foot of Goodness; ecce
miserum ante misericordem. What but infinite Misery should be the fit object
of infinite Mercy!

Here was then the purpose of Christ's coming; to seek the lost, to recall
wanderers, to heal the sick, to cleanse the Leprous, to revive the dead, to
save sinners. He Math. 9. 13. Luke 15.
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. He leaves the
nintie nine in the Wilderness, to seek the lost sheep. Whether it be meant
of the just Angels in Heaven; as Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hilary, Euthymius
think. Or those that thought themselves just, as Bucer and Ludolphus; the
Scribes and Pharisees, that presumed they needed no repentance. He embraces
Publicans and sinners, that confess themselves sick, and lacking a Physician;
sinful wretches, and needing a Savior.

Those worldlings in the Gospel have better cheer at home; what care they for
Christ's supper? It is the dry ground that thinks well of rain, the hungry
soul that is glad of sustenance. The mercy of God falls most welcome on the
broken spirit. They that feel themselves miserable, and that they stand in
need of every drop of his saving blood, to those it runs fresh and sweet.
They that feel themselves lost, are found. They are least of all lost, that
think themselves most lost: they are nearest to their health, that are most
sensible of their sickness. These he seeks, these he saues: to these Postil.
cathol con. 2. dom. 1. Aduent.
Nascens se dedit in socium, con^escens in cibum, moriens in pretium, regnans
in praemium. In his birth he became their companion, in his life their food, in
his death their redemption, in his glory their Salvation.

Lost; but where was man lost? There are diverse loosing places.

1. A garden of delights: and there the first man lost himself, and all us: in
a Garden therefore our Savior found us again. We were Lost in a garden of
rest, we are found in a garden of trouble. The serpent could never take the
hare, (he was too light footed for him) till he found him sleeping in a garden
of sweet flowers, under which the serpent lay hidden. Whilst man not only
surfeits on pleasures, but sleeps in them, Satan that old serpent wounds him
to death.

2. A wilderness is a place able to loose us: and that is this world, a wide
and wild forest; many lost in it. We read of a rich man, Luke 12. that lost
himself in one corner of this wilderness, his very barnes: strange, to be
lost in a barn. And yet how many loose themselves in a less room, their
Counting house! The usurer has there lost his soul, and no man can find it.
It is so long wrapped up among his bonds, till Satan take the forfeit. The
depopulator takes a larger field to loose his soul in; and to make sure work,
that grace may never find it, he hedges and ditches it in.

3. Another loosing place is a Labyrinth or Maze. In the Orchard of this world
the God of it has made a Labyrinth; which St. John describes. 1. Epist. 2. 16.
The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. The
entrance hereinto is easy; as you have seen in that Emblem of Suretiship,
the Horn: a man goes gently in at the Butte end, but comes hardly out at the
Buckall: the coming forth is difficult. It is so full of crooked meanders,
windings, and turnings, out of one sin into another; from consent to delight,
from delight to custom, from custom to impenitencie: that in this Labyrinth
men soon grow to a maze, and know not how to be extricated. Labyrinthus, quasi
labor intus: the wicked Wised. 5. 7.
weary themselves in the ways of destruction.

Lust of the flesh, lust of the eyes, pride of life. Haec tr^a pro trino Numine
mundus habet. This is the trinity the world worships.

Lust of the flesh. The adulterer loses himself in the forbidden bed. Inter
mammillas perditur: he is lost between the breasts of a Harlot. He that seeks
for him, must (as the Pursuivant for the Seminary) not forbear the Mistresses
bed to find him.

Lust of the eyes. Ahab casts a covetous eye at Naboths vineyard. David a
lustful eye at Bathsheba. The eye is the pulse of the soul: as Physicians
judge of the heart by the pulse, so we by the eye. A rolling eye, a rouing
heart. The good eye keeps minute-time, and strikes when i^ should: the
lustful crotchet-time, and so puts all out of tune.

Pride has lost as many, as any her fellow Devils. They say, she was borne in
heaven, and being cast down wandered upon earth, where a woman took her in;
and there she has dwelt ever since. Indeed Esaias 3. the shop of pride is the
woman's wardrobe: in this wardrobe many souls both of women and men too are
lost. The common study is new fashions; but it is an ill fashion thus to loose
the soul.

If we would get out of this maze, we must (as God warned the Math. 2. 12.
Wisemen) depart another way. Out of lust we must wind forth by Chastity, out
of covetousness by Charity, out of Pride by Humility. Penitence is the clew
to guide us forth: howsoever we came in, we must go out by Repentance.

4. A fourth loosing place is the multitude of new and strange ways: wherein
men wander, as Saul after his Asses, and are lost. There is a way to Rome, a
way to Amsterdam: a way to the silliness of ignorance, a way to the
fullennesse of arrogancy. None of all these is the way to Sion. In the
multitude of ways multitude of souls loose themselves.

5. Lastly some are lost in the dark vault of ignorance; applauding themselves
in their blindness, and like Bats refusing the Sunshine. They have an Act. 17.
23.
Altar, but it is Ignoto Deo, to an unknown God. Like the Host of the King of
Syria, they are blind, and lost betwixt 2. King. 6. 19
Dothan and Samaria. They may grope (as the Sodomites) for the door of heaven:
but let not the Pope make them believe, that they can find it blindfold.
Ignorance is not Gods Star Chamber of light; but the Devils vault of
darkness. By that doctrine Antichrist fills hell, and his own coffers. The
light that must bring us out, is Jesus Christ: Ioh. 1. 9.
Which lights every man that comes into the world. And his Psalm. 119. 105
Word is a la^pe unto our feet, and a light unto our paths.

Thus you see, there are many places to be lost in; but one way to be found;
and that is this; The Son of man is come to seek and to save that was lost.
O Jesus turn our wandering steps into the narrow way of righteousness. Come to
us that we may be sought, seek us that we may be found, find us that we may be
saved, save us that we may be blessed; and bless thy name for ever.

Amen.
A GENERATION OF Serpents OR The Poison of Wickedness.
PSALM. 58. 4. Their poison is like the poison of a Serpent, like the deaf
Adder that stops her ear.
THis verse spends it self on a double comparison, of Persons, Conditions.



The Persons compared are Men and Serpents. The Conditions or Qualities upon
which the similitude stands, are Poison and Deafness. The former whereof is
indefinite; Their Poison is as the Poison of a Serpent, any Serpent. The latter
is restrictiue; Their deafness is like the Adders; one kind of Serpents.

I will begin with the Conditions: for if the same qualities be found in Men,
that are in Serpents; there will follow fitly, too fitly, a comparison of their
Persons. The first Quality here ascribed to the wicked by the Psalmist, is

Poison.
There is such a thing as Poison; but where to be found; Vbi cumque fuerit, in
homine quis quareret? Wheresoever it is, in Man who would look for it? GOD
made man's body of the dust; he mingled no Poison with it. He inspireth his
soul from heaven, he breaths no Poison with it. He feeds him with bread, he
convayes no poison with it. Vnde venenum? Whence is this Poison? Mat. 13. 27.
Did not thou O Lord, sow good seed in thy field? Vnde Zizaniae? From whence
then has it tares? Whence? Hoc fecit inimicus; the Enemy has done this. We
may perceive the Devil in it. That great Serpent, the red Dragon, has powered
into wicked hearts this Poison.

His own Poison? Malitiam wickedness, Cum infundit peccatum, infundit venenum.
When he poures in Sin, he poures in poison. Sin is Poison. Original
pravitie is called Corruption; actual, Poison. The violence and virulence of
this venomous quality comes not at first. Nemo fit repent pessimus. No man
becomes worst at first dash. We are borne corrupt, we have made our selves
Poysonus. There be three degrees, as it were so many ages in sin. 1. Secret
sin: an ulcer lying in the bones, but skinned over with hypocrisy. 2. Open sin,
bursting forth into manifest villainy. The former is corruption, the second
eruption. 3. Frequented and confirmed sin, and that is rank poison,
enveneming soul and body.

When it is impostumated to this ripenes and rankenesse, it impudently
iustifies wickedness for goodness; venenum pro nutrimento; poison for
nutriment. It feeds on, swallows, digests sin, as if it were nourishment. As
Hemlocke is good meat for Goats, and Spiders for Monkeys. It despises all
reproof, Psalm. 1. 1.
sitting in the scorners chair: Which for the poison is called by divines,
Seeds Pestilentiae; the Seat of Pestilence. Peccator cum in profundum venerit,
contemnet. When a wicked man comes to the depth and worst of sin, ^hee
despises. Then the Hebrew will despise Moses: Exodus 2. 14.
Who made thee a Prince, and a Judge over us? Then Ahab will quarrel with
Micheah, because he does not 1. Kin. 22. 18.
Prophecy good unto him. Every child in Bethel will mock Elisha, and be bold
to call him 2. King. 2. 23.
Bald pate. Here is an original drop of veneme swollen to a maine Ocean of
Poison. As one drop of some Serpents poison lighting on the hand, gettes into
the veins; and so spreads it self over all the body, till it has stiffled
the vital spirits.

In this Poison there is a double pestilent effect Inficit, Interficit. It is
to themselves death, to others a contagious sickness.

To themselves
It is an epidemicall corruption, dispersing the venime over all parts of body
and soul. It poisons the heart with falsehood, the head with lightness, the
eyes with adultery, the tongue with blasphemy, the hands with oppression, the
whole body with intemperance. It Poisons beauty with wantonness, strength
with violence, wit with wilfulness, learning with dissension, devotion with
superstition, religion with treason. If they be greater gifts, it poisons them
with pride; putting Cantharides into the oile-pot. If meaner, it poisons them
with hypocrisy, putting Colocinthis into the porredge-pot. And where the
Cantharides of Pride, or Coloquintida of hypocrisy are, there is venenum and
exitium; Poison and death. This poison, faster then a Gangrene, runs from
joint to joint; as an enemy takes Fort after Fort, till he has won the
whole Country.

1. It is in the Thought: the Genesis 6. 5.
imaginations are full of poison. Every evil thought is not thus poisonous.
There is malum innatum, and inseminatum, says Bernard. An evil bred in us,
and an evil sown in us. Sins, like Weeds, will grow fast enough without
sowing: but Qui (...), he that Gal. 6. 8.
sowes to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption: he that shall sow
this venomous seed, poisons his soul. Ier. 4. 14.
Cleanse thy heart from iniquity, that thou may be saved. How long shall thy
vain thoughts lodge within thee? Lodge: he does not speak of transient; but
permanent sins. Such as Mic. 2. 1.
meditate mischief; study to be naught. Whose imaginations suck poison out
of every Object, yea though it be good: as the Spider suckes poison from the
sweetest flower.

Vanishing thoughts, that pass through a good man without approbation, not
without suppression, are properly Nec mors nec morbus animae, sed deformitas;
neither the disease nor death of the soul, but the deformity. They are
im^issae; Satan's darts shot through us: in cord, non de cord: in the heart,
not of the heart. Which the godly Sentiunt, non consentiunt; feel, but give no
liking to. They are our Crosses, not our sins. Such a thought is but morbus
mentis, the disease of the mind; the other morsus serpentis; the wound or
poison of the Serpent. The allowed filthy cogitation is the poison. Thus are
the thoughts poysond.

2. From thence it runs to the Senses, and sets open those windows to let in
the poisonous air of wickedness. The five Senses are the Cinque Ports, where
all the great traffic of the Devil is taken in. They are the Pores, whereby
Satan conveyes in the stinking breath of temptation.

The ear is set wide open to receive in the poison of scurrilous songs,
obscene ^ests, seditious libels. It is not only an Atheman ear, nouitatis
auida, greedy of news: but a Cretian ear, prauitatis auida, greedy of
evil. It listens to hear of civil wars, uncivil treasons: it would feign
have heard the great thunderclappe, which the Gunpowder should have made at
the blowing up of the Parliament house. Here is an ear for the Devil. Such
ears have the Jesuits: they would feign hear of the ruin of kingdoms. What
would make others 1. Sam. 3. 11.
ears tingle, makes their ears tickle. Aures illae in se sentiant, quod
audire de alij^ cupiunt. Let such ears feel that woe themselves, which they
desire so earnestly to hear of others.

The Eyelid is set open with the gagges of Lust and Envy. A libidinous eye
draws in much poison. There be eyes full of adultery, says the Apostle. They
fetch in seeds of poison from the Theater, yea (I tremble to speak it) from
the Church of GOD. It beholdes beauty, (Gods rare workemanshippe on a piece of
clay) not to bless the Creator, but to draw a curse on the creature. Like a
melancholy distracted man, that drownes himself in a clear Crystal river. O
such chaste Beauty is like the Bellows; though it own breath be cold, it
makes them burn.

There is another kind of Eye; that deriues poison to the heart; the envious
eye, that is vexed at the richer furniture, fatter estate, or higher honor of
another: thinking his own not good, because his neighbor has better. Any
man's advancement is so capital an offense to his malice, that he could
shoot out his own eyes, so they might be balls of Wildfire to consume him.
But his malice suckes up the greatest part of his own venime; and therewith
poisons himself, rather then others. A man that sees him, would say, He is
poisoned: for his blood looks of a yellowish color, like those that are
bitten with Vipers. His gall flows as thick in him, as if he had a
poisoned stomach. If he had, as Seneca wished to the Envious, eyes in every
place; his vncontainable poison would soon burst him. As he is, he would be
another enemy, but is his own mischief

3. From the Senses it runs to the Tongue; and sets it a swelling, a
swearing, that it infects the air, and poisons the very Zach. 5. 4.
Walls of the house. The excrements of the Jews spet upon the face of our
Savior, were not so feculent. Their blasphemies strive to blast, not only the
plants of the earth, but even the planets of Heaven; the Sun and Stars: and
if it were possible, they would make new wounds in the side of Jesus Christ. If
any swearer think, I do his tongue wrong; let him read. Romans 3. Romans 3. 13.
The poison of Aspes is under their lips. If you would know what that
pestilent poison is, the next verse expounds it. Ver. 14.
Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. They carry worse poison in ^re,
in their mouth; then any serpent in caud^, in his tail. Iam. 3. 8.
Their tongue is full of deadly poison. 1. They have poison. 2. not dead, but
deadly; mortal poison. 3. not a little, but saturitie of it; full of deadly
poison.

Poison has thus got from their silent thoughts, to their moving senses; and
from thence to their, loud and lewd talking tongues. And this bewrayes their
venime, as the Serpents Hissing betrays his malice. Eccl. 21. 26.
The heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their
heart. Caesar said, he feared not Anthony, whose heart was in his tongue; but
Cassius, whose tongue was in his heart. A wicked man's tongue discouers him. A
bell may have a crack, though invisible: take the clapper and strike, and you
shall soon perceive it. The ungodly may conceal his wickedness by silence:
but if the clapper strikes, if his tongue walks, you shall quickly perceive,
he is cracked. A poysond tongue cannot forbear to sputter abroad his venime.

4. From the Tongue this poison runs to the Hands. Anaxagoras thought Man the
wisest of all creatures, because he has hands: he might have thought him the
wickedest of all creatures, because he has hands. No creature does so much
hurt with his teeth or talons, as the wicked man with his poisoned hands. A man
does greatly express himself by his hands. Paul by beckoning his Act. 21. 40.
hand, procured silence. Much is done Pers. Satyr. 4.
Maiestate manus, as the Poet; by Majesty of the hand. The wit seems to
manifest it self in the hands: as the Italians say of the Duchmen, that their
wit dwells in their fingers end. The power in the hands. An nescis longas
Regibus esse manus? Yield the hand a principal instrument; yet corruption
optimi pessima. The evil hand does not so much manifest man's wittiness, as
his wickedness, Mic. 2. 1.
They devise iniquity, and practice it, because it is in the power of the
Hand. The poison that was conceived in their thoughts, dilates it self into
their hands: cogitant, agitant.

God reproues the Jews, that they had Manus sanguinum, Esa. 1. 15.
bloody hands. And the same Prophet seems to liken it to a venomous infection:
Esa. 59. 3.
your hands are defiled with blood. And if the tongue can be possibly brought,
to smother the in cherished poison, yet manus manifestabit, the hand will
discover it. ver. 6. The act of violence is in their hands. The Israelites
soon suspected, what a king Rehoboam would be when he threatened Grauitatem
manus, to make his hand heavy; yea his finger heavier then his fathers Loins.
Ahab quite disgraced himself for being thought religious, when he laid a
violent hand on Naboths vineyard. Jeroboam makes it plain, that he bore no
love to Gods Prophets, cum extendit manum; when he put forth his hand to
strike one. Many Landlords seem Christians, but they have Rehoboams hand, a
heavy hand on their Tenants, many usurers come to Church, but they have Ahabs
hand, to take the forfeit of the poor debtors heritage. Many parishioners
seem to love their Prophets, but they have Ieroboams hand, a hand that strikes
them, if not in person, yet in estate; undoing them and their families. This is
venenata manus, a poysond Hand.

5. Lastly this poison having got possession of the thoughts, words, works; it
must needs follow that it has taken the Heart. Esa. 1. 5.
Cor dolet, the whole heart is sick. These corrupted simptomes prove that the
heart is rotten Job. 20. 14. 16.
The very meat in their bowels is turned to the gall of Aspes. They suck the
poison of Aspes. If you ask why they feel it not; Paul says; Their sense is
lost: Ephesians. 4. 19.
They are past feeling. Their whole self is changed into a disease. Their
body is no longer Corpus, but Morbus. As Lucan. Totum est pro vulnere corpus.
Their whole body is as one wound or sickness. Neither can we say so properly of
them, that they are sick, as that they are dead. Nonaegroti, sed defuncti: not
diseased, but deceased.

And in all this observe the effect of this Poison in themselves. For it does
not only annoy others, but mostly destroy themselves. And herein their poison
is not only Tale and Tantum, such and so much as that of Serpents: but Plus
and Perniciosius, more, and more dangerous. Seneca says, Venenum quod
serpents in alienam perniciem proferunt, sine sua continent. The poison which
serpents cast out to the damage of others, they retain without their own
periudice. But the poison of the wicked, dum alios inficit, seipsos interficit;
Whilst it infects others, kills themselves. Prou. 5. 22.
His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself. Their own wickedness,
like poison, has in themselves these three direful effects.

It makes them Swell. Swill. Burst.

1. It makes them swell with pride, and blows up the heart, as a bladder with
a quill. 1. Sam. 25. 10
Quis est David? Who is David? and who is the Son of Iesse? Yea Job. 21. 15.
Quis est Dominus? Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him? Thus the
Spider, a poisonous vermin, Prou. 30. 28.
Climes up to the roof of the kings palace. If he be in prosperity nothing
can hold him to a man. Be he but a 2. King. 14. 9.
Thistle, he sends to the king of Lebanon, for his daughter to be his Sons
wife. Though he be but a dwarf in comparison, he would swell to a son of Anak.
Sin has puffed him up, and he forgets his maker. Ier. 5. 7.
The Lord has fed him to the full, and he rebels against him. We have then
good cause to pray with our Church; In the time of our wealth, good Lord
deliver us.

2. It makes them swill: the poison of sin is such a burning heat within
them, that they must still be drinking. And the devil, their Physician, holds
them to a dyet-drinke: they shall not have the water of the Sanctuary, that
would cool them: but the harsh, harish, and ill-brewd drink of damnation.
They shall taste nothing but sin; more poison still. Which is so far from
quenching their thirst, that it enflames it. Totis exquirit in agris. Lucan.

Quas modo poscit aquas, sitiens in cord venenum.


So a man puts out the Lamp by pouring in more oil and extinguisheth the fire
by laying on fuel. This may for a small time allay the heat, as cold drink
to a burning fever. So Ahabs, feruor was a little delayed, with a draught of
wine out of Naboths vinyard. But Satan holds his guests to one kind of lycour,
and that is rank poison; the mudde of sin and wickedness. He allows them no
other watring place, but this Puddle-wharfe.

3. It makes them burst, here be the three sore effects of sin in the soul,
as of poison in the body. Frst it makes a man swell, then it makes him drink,
lastly it it bursts him. Judas is houen with covetousness, he drinks the money
of treason, and then he bursts. Rumpuntur viscera Iudae. Act. 1. 18.
he burst out. This is the catastrophe of a wicked life. Iam. 1. 15.
Then when lust has conceived, it brings forth sin: and sin, when it is
finished, bringethforth forth death.

To others.
You see how fatal the poison of the wicked is to themselves. It does not
only rumperese, but corrumpere alios: burst themselves, but corrupt others. It
depriues their own good, it depraues others good. The hurt is does to others,
consists. in Correptione, Corruptione.

in outward harming, in inward defiling them.

Outwardly
Their Poison breaks forth in the injuries of all about them. They spare
neither forreiner nor neighbor. There be little snakes in Babylon, that bite
only forreiners, and not inhabitants. Pliny writes of Scorpions in the hill
Caria, that when they sting, only wound the natural borne people of the
Country; but extraneos leuiter mordere, but bite strangers gently, or not at
all. These, like fools, not only strike them that are nearest, but between
their poison in ruinam omnium, to the overthrow of all. Such a one cannot
sleep except he have done mischief: nay he dies, if others do not dye by
him. Et si non aliqua nocu^sset, mortuus esset. A man's Land cannot escape the
poison of the depopulator: nor his estate the poison of the usurer; nor his
children the rauisher: nor his peace the contender: nor his name the slanderer.
If their poison cannot prevail ad interitum hominis, they will spend it ad
interitum nominis. If they cannot murder, they will murmr. They are the
Devils bandogs; as one calls Parsons the Popes Cerb^rus. If they cannot come
to bite, they will bark. If their sting cannot reach, their mouth shall
sputter out their venime.

Yea some of them do not only this mischief whiles they live, but etiam
mortui, even dead. As Herod, that caused the noble Sons of the Jews to be
slain post mortem suam, after his death. They write of some serpents, that
their poison can do no hurt except it be shot from the live bodies of them:
but these leave behind them a still euill-working poison. As we say of a
charitable man, that he does good after he is dead; his alms maintain many
poor souls on earth, when his soul is in heaven: Et quamvis ipse sepultus,
alit. So these wicked sin perpetually even dead. The incloser of commons
sins after he is dead: even so long as the poor are deprived of that
benefit. He that has robbed the Church of a tenth, and so leaves it to his
heir, sins after he is dead: even so long as God is made to loose his right.
Moriente serpente moritur venenum: but here moriente homine viuit peccatum. As
one said of a Lawyer that resolving not to be forgotten, he made his will so
full of intricate quirkes; that his executors (if for nothing else; yet) for
very vexation of law might have cause to remember him. Ieroboams sin of
Idolatry out lived him. The unjust decrees of a partial Judge may out live
him: even so long as the adjudged inheritance remains with the wrongful
possessor. The decrees of diverse Popes; as in curtalling the Sacrament,
forbidding marriage, etc. are their still living sins though themselves be
dead and rotten.

Inwardly.
Their poison does most hurt by Infection: their company is as dangerous as
the plague: a man cannot come near them, but he shall be contaminated. Like
the weed called Gosses, they make the ground barren wheresoever they grow.
Their Poison is got Per Contactum Contractum Compactum Conspectum



1. By touching: he that touches pitch, shall be defiled. It is dangerous to
sport and dally with them: dum ludunt, laedunt. Prou. 26. 18.
He casts firebrands, and arrows, and death; and says, Am I not in sport.
As Solomon says, Their very mercies are cruel: so their very jest is killing
earnest.

2. By companying with them: they hurt by sporting, but worse by sorting. Prou.
1. 14.
Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse. They that will quarter
themselves with the wicked, must drink of their poison. If you ask, how
happes it that their infection is not sm^lt: Bernard answers; Vbi omnes
s^rdent, vnius De Consider.
minime sentitur: one is not smelt, where all stink.

3. By Confederacy; which is yet a higher degree of receiving their poison.
The first was alight dallying with their humors, the next a society with them
in some drunken riots and disorders: but this third is a conspiracy with them
in their pernicious and deadly plotts. Thus a Seminary comes from Rome, and
whistles together a number of traitors: he brought poison with him in a Bulls
horn, and they all must drink it. As they report, that once one scabbed
sheep from Spain rotted all the sheep of England.

In this manner is the poison of adultery spread from a Harlot. In selling her
flesh she settes pretium peccati, and takes praemium peccati: either pretium
pacti, or praemium facti: she has her price, and gives her male his reward.
This is a damnable combination: he that goes after her, poisons himself per
compactum; he bargains for his own destruction.

4. By Sight; as they that look on ill affected eyes attract some of the
anguish by a kind of reflection. So the very beholding of their wicked example,
deriues corruption to the heart by resultance. Many sins had been unknown,
if they had not been learned by precedent. Great men graceless are the
devils special factors: they have their new tricks of vanity to teach
others. And they often broach these new fashions of damnation, not so much out
of affection to the thing it self, as to be talked of. As Alcibiades cut off
his dogs tail, that all the people might talk of his curtall. O the
unspeakable deal of poison that is thus conveyed into men's hearts: and the
innumerable souls, that go to hell by pattern. Thus they hurt others.

But I have been too copious in discovery of their poison: I should come to
their Deafnes; but I am loath to speak of deafness till the end of the
Sermon. Their poison being thus compared with the poison of Serpents, let us
now compare

Their Persons.
They are here said to be Sicut Serpents; Like Serpents. But Matthew 23. Mat.
23. 33.
CHRIST calls the Pharisees very Serpents. And John Baptist Mat. 3. 7.
a generation of Vipers. And GOD tells Ezekiel, that he did Ezech. 2. 6.
dwell among Scorpions. In these places the Sicut is left out, and the wicked
are called very Serpents. Not that the frame and form of their bodily
constitution was Serpentine.

It was a foolish opinion among the Heathen, that there were Ophiogenes, or
Anguigenae. They write of Ophion, the companion of Cadmus, and builder of
Thebes, that he was made by Pallas, of a Dragons tooth. So Ephesus was once
called Colubraxia: and the people thereof Ophiussa.

I have read of one Exagon, an Ambassador to Rome, being at the Consuls command
cast into a Tun of snakes; that they licked him with their tongues, and did
him no harm. But to conclude hereon that these were of Serpents brood; we
might as well say, Daniel was borne of Lions, because they did not hurt him.

They are mystical Serpents, I mean. And if wicked men think scorn to be
called Serpents, let them abhor the qualities of Serpents. I refer you for
this doctrine to my Sermon upon Math. 10. 16.
Sin is of that power, that it can work metamorphoses, and transform men
into beasts and serpents. Let us now see what Serpents we have among us.

1. We have the Salamander, the troublesome and litigious neighbor; who ever
loves and lives in the fire of contention. Whatsoever they talk that the
Salamander is nourished by the fire; yet Galen and Dioscorides affirm, that if
it tarry long in it, it will be burnt, when the humiditie is wasted.
Whatsoever a man gettes by the fire of vexation, at last his humor will be
wasted, his wealth spent, and himself consumed in his own flames. Let no man
think to get by his troublesomenesse, as if he could be fed with fire. They
talk of a Net at Rome (wherein Christ's napkin is preserved) that it is washed
in nothing but fire. And Paulus Venetus speaks of a kind of earth in Tartaria;
which being spun into a thread, and wouen into cloth, is only purged from all
spots by washing it in the fire. But if ever any man grow rich by his
contentiousnes, I will believe that fire is nourishment.

Some make the Emblem of Strife the Snake. Alecto sent a Snake to move
contention in the family of Amata. Vnum de crinibus Anguem
Conijcit, inque sinum praecordia ad intima subdit. Aeneid. 7.

Let the unquiet man, that is still vexing his neighbors with suits and
quarrels, here take his choice: whether he will be a Snake or a Salamander.

2. We have the Dar^; and that is the Angry man. This is the Serpent that is
thought to leap on Paul's hand. Iaculum vocat Africa. It gathers it self into
a heap on the top of a tree, and so flies at a man, tanquam Act. 28.
Sagitta; as a Dart. Such a Serpent is the hasty furious man; he flies upon
another with a sudden blow. Some conjecture (I know not how probably) that
these were the fiery Serpents in the Desert.

3. There is the Dipsas, the Drunkard. This Serpent lives altogether in moorish
places: the serpent in the fennes, the man at the alehouse. Ovid writes of an
old drunken woman. Est quaedam nomine Dipsas anus. Ex re nomen habet. Her name
did agree with her nature. It is ever dry says Lucan. Medijs siti^bant
Dipsades vndis. If this Serpent wound a man, it turns all his blood into
poison. So the Drunkard turns his blood to water, his bread to drink, his
reason to poison, his very soul to froth.

4. There is the Crocodile, the Hypocrite. He will sobbe, and sigh, and weep,
to get a man into his clutches. If his hypocrisy can get him into a good
house, he will devour the Patron that breeds him, the maintainer that feeds
him: he undoes the family where he once sets a foot into their doors, or
puttes a finger into their purses. Pliny says, the Crocodile is so delighted
with the Sunshine, that it lies on the earth immovable, as if it were stark
dead. Let the Hypocrite be frank'd up with prosperity, and he sleeps as
securely, as if earth had lost all winds, and heaven the thunder. His pamperd
body grows so fat, that his soul lies soft in it, at great ease, and is
loath to rise.

5. The Cocatrice, that is said to kill with the eyes. Illius auditos expectant
nulla susurros. The reason why Nicand.
it killes by sight, is thus given; because the beams of a Cocatrices eye
corrupt the visible spirits of a man; which corrupted, corrupt the other
spirits coming from the brain, and life of the heart. Our common Phrase has
found out creatures to match this kind of Serpents; Whores, usually called
Cocatrices. I would to God they were believed as dangerous as they are, and are
named.

The Cocatrice is a very hot creature; and therefore made with spiraments and
breathing places all over the body: least the compage and iuncture of the whole
composition should be dissolved. The intemperate heat of harlots is worse, and
in some kind a very reflection from the fire of hell. There is an old tale,
that England was once so pesterd with Cocatrices, that a certain man found out
one only trick to destroy them: which was by walking up and down in glass
before them; whereby their own shapes were so reflected upon their own faces,
that they died. But it is idle, for it is more likely that the man should dye
by the corruption of the air from the cocatrice, then the cocatrice by the
resultance of it own similitude from the glass. As the harlot will sooner
pervert a man, then he shall convert the harlot. Indeed they say, if they first
see us, they kill us: if we first see them, they die. So if we first see the
damnation of a Courtezan, we save our selves: if they first see and wound us,
we dye of it.

6. There Is the Catterpillar; you all know this to be the Covetous. I confess
that other Serpents are also fit emblemes of the covetous: as the Toad, that
eats sparingly of the very earth for fear it should be all wasted and no food
left for her. The Germane Painters to signify Covetousness, do picture an old
woman sitting upon a toade. Or the Earth-worme: these worms eat up the fatt
of the earth, toades eat up those worms, and dragons eat up those toades. So
lightly petty usurers eat up the fat of the Country, great oppressors
devour those little extortioners, and at last the great red dragon swallows
those oppressors.

But* here I especially liken them to Catterpillars. Pline says, that little
worms bred in the green leaves of plants, prove in three days catterpillars
and eat up those plants. The Country breeds, these covetous wretches, and
they devour her. He writes also that Catterpillars are bred by a dew,
incrassated and thicked by the heat of the Sun. It is the warmth of
prospertie, that breeds and feeds our usurers. Others say, that they come of
butterflies eggs, the which heat of the Sun hatcheth, working so fit a
passive matter to the form of a catterpillar. So commonly your usurer
hatcheth, his riches out of the Butterflies eggs, laid abroad by prodigal young
galla^ts. The Scripture calls them great deuourers Joel. 1. 4. Martial.
Eracam vix pascit hortus vnam. A whole country will not content one auarous
catterpillar. At last the catterpillars perish of themselves (as ours do
wilfully) through famine, and are transformed into a bare and empty bag or
case. If they perish in summer, out of their rind being broken comes forth a
butterfly. Just as we see often from the ruins of a dead usurer, that was a
Catterpillar; springs a prodigal Heir, that is a painted Butterfly.

7. We have also the Aspe^ that is the traitors Seminary. Lucan writes, that
the original of Aspes was Africa, and that merchants translated them into
Europe. Sed quis erit nobis Lucripudor! Inde petuntur
Huc Lybicae m^tes, and fec^mus Aspida merces.
But what is our gain, says he? We have made the Aspos a merchandice. So
these our Aspes are bred in Italy, and shipped over into England as a precious
merchandice. They speak themselves so gentle, that Esa. 11. 8.
a sucking child may play (...) the hol^ of these Aspes: but we have found
their boroughs the holes of treason, and their vaults the vaults of gunpowder.
There is feud betwixt the Ichneumon and the Aspe: they often fight: if the Aspe
bite first, the Ichneumon dies: if the Ichneumon first, the Aspe dies. Let us
strike them with punishment, lest they strike us with death. These Aspes kill
many souls in our Land. Aspidis and mersu Loesum dormire fatentur
In mortem, antidotum nec valuisse ferunt.
If the be witched people once receive their poison, they sleep to death: and
no help preuailes, for they will not come to Church to be cured.

8. There is also the Lyzard, the Emblem of the Slothful. As is also the
Slow-worme, or the serpentine Tortoice. They write of the Lyzard, that having
laid eggs, she forgets the very place where she laid them. She will lie
still till you cut her in pieces: and then the forepart runns away upon two
Legs, and the hinder part on other two: living apart till they meet again,
and then are naturally ^onioyned. If the Lazy will follow the qualities, let
them take the name of Lisards.

9. There is also the Sea-Serpent, and that is the Pirate: a thief cross to
all kind of thieves. For other thieves first fall to robbery, and then are
cast into prison: but he first casts himself into a prison, and then falls to
robbery. In a little vessel, a very iayle, with a large grave round about it,
he does all mischief. At last when he grows great, he ruins himself. They
write of a Sea-dragon, that grows to a huge vastness: but then the winds take
him up into the air, and by a violent agitation shake his body to pieces. A
noble part of Gods providence; to tame that himself which his creatures cannot.

10. There is the Stellion, and that is the Extortioner. Extortion and
Cossenage is prouerbially called Crimen Stellionatus; the sin of Stellature.
When the Stellion has cast his skin, he greedily deuoures it again: which
says Theophrastus, he does in envy, because he understands that it is a
noble remedy against the falling sickness. So in malice it lines the guts with
that covered the back: and eats that in summer wherewith it was clothed in
winter. It destroys the honey of Bees Stellio saepe fauos ignotus adedit. So
the extortioner spoils the hiues, and deuours all the honey of pooremens
gathering. It is a beast full of spots. Aptumque colori. Virgil.
Nomen habet, varijs stellatus corpore guttis.


The spots that stick upon an Extortioner are more Orid.
innumerable. Cosonage is called Stellature. It were well if such Extortioners
were served, as Budaus relates a history of two Tribunes, Qui per Stellaturas
militibus multum abstulissent; whom the Emperor commanded to be stoned to
death.

11. The last is the great Serpent of all, Draco the devil; who is called the
Reu. 12. 3.
Great red Dragon. In idolatrous times and places dragons have been worshipped.
The common distinction is, Angneb, (...) Serpents terrarum, Dracones
Templorum. Snakes of the water, serpents of the earth, dragons of the Temple.
There are too many wicked worldlings, that still worship this God of the world,
the red Dragon. The dragons haunt principally trees of frankincense: Satan
loves to have men sacrifice to him: he tempted the son of God to fall down and
worship him. Nothing but the smoke of Styrax can drive away dragons: not holy
water, not crossings, but only faith in the Lord Jesus can put the devil to
flight. Serpens serpentem de^rando fit Draco. The devil at first was but a
Serpent; now by devouring many millios of these serpe^ts, the wicked; he is
become a Dragon.

I should here show you two things.

1. The remedy to draw out this poison, and to cure the soul; which is only
Sanguis medici, the blood of our Phisician. Ioh. 3. 14.
As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilder nesse, so was Christ lifted up us
a serpent; that what eye of faith soever looks on him, he may be healed of the
sting of those fiery serpents, and have the damnable poison of sin drawn out.

2. That our next course is Repentance for our sins. That as the oil of
Scorpions is the best remedy for them that are stung with scorpions: so
repentance for sin, is the best remedy within us to expel the poison of
sin. Think of the Wise man's counsel; Eccl. 21. 2.
Fly from sin as from the face of a serpent: if thou come too near it, it
will bite thee: and follow it.

Their Deafness remains to be spoken and must remain unspoken. How should
they be cured, that are deaf to the counsel of their Phisician? Though there
be poison in us, even the poiso of drago^s, yet God bless us from the
deafness of the Adder. Let us hear our remedy, and embrace it: pray to God
for it, and receive it: and 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins. To this Savior let
all that are saved, give praise and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
HEAVEN MADE SVRE OR The Certainty of Salvation.
PSALM. 35. 3. Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.
THE words contain a Petition for a Benediction. The Supplicant is a king, and
his humble ^te ^s to the king of kings: the king of Israel prays to the king
of heaven and ^arth. He does beg two things. 1. That God would save him. 2.
That God would certify him of it. So that the Text may be distributed
accordingly; In salutem Dei, and cortitudinem rei: into Salvation and Assurance
of it.

The Assurance
Lies first in the words, and shall have the first place in my discourse.
Wherein I conceive two things; the Matter and the Manner. The Matter is
Assurance: the Manner how assured, Dic anima; Say unto my soul. From the
matter or Assurance observe;

1. That Salvation may be made sure to a man. David would never pray for that,
which could not be. Nor would S. Peter charge us with a duty, which stood not
in possibility to be performed. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
Make your election sure. And to stop the ba^ng throats of all cauilling
adversaries, Paul directly proves it. 2. Cor. 13. 5.
Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobates? We may then know that Christ is in us: if Christ be in us, we are
in Christ: if we be in Christ, we cannot be condemned: for Romans 8. 1.
There is no damnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.

But I leave this point, that it may be sure, as granted: and come to our
selves that we may make it sure. The Papists deny this, and teach the contrary*
that Salvation cannot be made sure: much good do it them with their sorry and
heartlesse doctrine. If they make that impossible to any, which God has made
easy for many; Genesis 49. 6.
Into their secret let not my soul come.

2. That the best Saints have desired to make their Salvation sure. David that
knew it, yet entreats to know it more. Psalm. 41. I know thou fauourest me: yet
here still, Psalm. 41. 11.
Dic anima, Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. A man can never be too sure
of his going to heaven. If we purchase an inheritance on earth, we make it as
sure, and our tenure as strong, as the brawne of the law, or the brain of
Lawyers can devise. We have conueyance, and bonds, and fines; no strength too
much. And shall we not be more curious in the settling our eternal inheritance in
heaven? Even the best certe^tie has often in this thought it self weak Here
we find matter of consolation, of Reprehension, of Admonition. Comfort to
some, reproof to others, warning to al. 1. Of Cosolation. Even David desires
better assurance: to keep us from deiection, behold they often think
themselves weakest, that are the strongest. Sum Peccatorum maximus, dicit
Apostolorum non minimus. He calls himself the Chiefest of sinners, 1. Tim. 1.
15.
that was not the least of Saints. Indeed sometimes a dear Saint may want
feeling of the spirit of comfort. Grace comes into the soul, as the morning
Sun into the world: there is first a dawning, then a mean light, and at last
the Sun in his excellent brightness. In a Christian life there is Professio,
Profectio, Perfectio. A profession of the name of Christ wrought in our
conversion: not the husk of religion, but the sap: a pure heart, a good
conscience, and faith vnf^ned. Next there is a profection or going forward ^n
grace; working up our salvation in fear and trembling. Last a perfection or
full assurance, that we are sealed up to the day of redemption.

And yet after this full assurance there may be some fear: it is not the
commendation of this certainty to be void of doubting. The wealthiest Saints
have suspected their poverty: and the richest in grace are yet poorest in
spirit. As it is seen in rich misers; they possess much, yet esteem it
little in respect of what they desire: for Plenitudo opum non implet hiatum
mentis: the fullness of riches cannot answer the insatiable affection. Whence
it comes to pass, that they have restless thoughts, and vexing cares for that
they have not, not caring for that they have. So many good men, rich in the
graces of Gods spirit, are so desirous of more, that they regard not what they
enjoy, but what they desire: complaining often that they have no grace, no
love, no life. God does sometimes from the best men's eyes hide that saving
goodness, that is in their hearts.

1. To extend their desires, and sharpen their affection. By this means he
puts a hunger into their hearts after righteousness; whereas a sensible fulness
might take away their stomaches. Deferred comforts quicken the appetite.

2. To enlarge their joys, when they shall find again the consolation, which
they thought lost. Defiderata diu (...) veni^t. What we much wished before it
came, we truly love when it is come. Our Lady had lost our Lord. Luke 2. three
days: who can express the joy of her soul when she found him! She rejoiced
not only as a Mother finding her Sun; but as a sinner finding her Savior.
Iucunde obtinetur, quod diu detinetur. What was detained from us with grief,
must needs be obtained of us with joy.

3. To try, whether we will serve God gratis; and be constant in his
obedience, though we find no present recompense. Satan objects that against
Job, Pro nihilo? Does Job fear God for naught. Thus put to the Test, Job. 1. 9.
whether our service proceed from some other oblique respect; or merely out of
love to God: when nothing but smart is presented to our instant sense.

4. That our care may be the greater, to keep this comfort when we have it.
Quod lachrymanter Iugemus ademptum, vigilanter seruamus adeptum. If we so
sorrowfully lamented the loss, sure we will look well to the possession.

In all this; Deus dona sua non negat, sed commendat. God intends not to deny
us his comforts, but to instruct our hearts how to value them. Cito data
viliscunt. If we might have them for the first asking, their worth would fall
to the opinion of cheapnesse and contempt. We shall have it, though we stay
for it. And to comfort us, let us assuredly know, that this mourning for Gods
absence, is an evident demonstration of his presence.

2. Of Reprehension to others, that say they are sure of the purchase, before
they ever gave earnest of the bargain. Presumption is to be avoided so well as
despair. For as none more complain that they want this assurance, then they
that have it: so none more boast of it then they that have it not. The fond
hypocrite takes his own presumption for this assurance: he lives after the
flesh, yet brags of the Spirit. This false opinion arises partly from his own
conceit, partly from Satan's deceit.

1. From his own Conceit: he dreams of the Spirit, and takes it granted that
it ever rests within him: but when his soul awakes, he finds there no such
manner of guest; the holy Spirit never lodged there. Prou. 30. 12.
There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes: yet are not washed
from their filthiness. These pure people so vaunt the^ assurance of salvation;
that they will scarce change places in heaven with St. Peter, or St. Paul
without boot. The infallible mark of distinction which the Apostle sets on
the Sons of God, is this: they are led by the Spirit. Romans 8. Romans 8. 14. and
Gal. 5. 18.
So many as are led by the Spirit of God, (...) sons of God. The holy Ghost
is their God, and their guide^ and this Spirit Ioh. 16. 13.
(...) them into all truth: and guides them Psalm. 143. 10.
into the land of righteousness. But these men will Spiritum d^ere, lead the
Spirit. They are not ductible; they will not be led by the Spirit into truth
and pence; but they will lead the Spirit, as it were, overrule the holy Ghost
to patronize their humors. Let them be adulterers, usurers, bribe-corrupted;
sacrilegious, etc. yet they are still men of the Spirit. But of what Spirit?
Nes^tis: we may say to them, as Christ to hit two hot disciples; Luke 9. 55.
ye know not of what Spirit you are. It is enough, they think, to have oculos
in coelo, though they have manus in fundo, animos in profund^. It is held
sufficient to have eyes fixed on heaven, though covetous hands busy on earth,
and crafty minds deep as hell. This ouer-venturous conceit, that heaven is
theirs how base and debauched lives so ever they live, is not assurance, but
presumption.

2. This arises from Satan's Deceit: who cries like Corah. Numb. 16. 3.
Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation is ^ily, every one of
them. You are holy enough, you are sure of heaven: what would you more? You may
sit down, and play: your work is done. Hereupon they sing peace and Requiems
to their souls; and begin to wrappe up their affections in worldly joys: But
Tranquilitas ista tempestas est: this calm is the most grievous storm. This
is carnal security, not heavenly assurance. As the Jews went into captivity
with Templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord, etc. in their lips: so many go to
hell with the water of Baptism on their faces, and the assurance of salvation
in their mouths.

3. Of Instruction, teaching us to keep the euen-way of comfort: eschewing
both the rock of presumption on the right hand, and the gulf of desperation
on the left. Let us neither be Tumidi, nor Timidi: neither over bold, nor
ouer-fainting. But endeavor by faith to assure our selves of Jesus Christ: and
by repentance to assure our selves of faith: and by an amended life to assure
our selves of repentance. For they must here live to Gods glory, that would
hereafter live in Gods glory.

3. In the next place observe the means how we may come by this assurance.
This is discovered in the text: Dic animae; Say unto my Soul. Who must speak?
God. To whom must he speak? to the Soul. So that in this assurance God and
the Soul must meet. This St. Paul demonstrates: Romans 8. 16.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children
of God. The word is (...), contestari, to bear witness together. Neither our
spirit alone, nor Gods spirit alone makes this Certificate; but both concurring.

Not our spirit alone can give this assurance: for man's heart is always evil,
often deceitful. At all times evil. Genesis 6. 5.
Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart is only evil continually. At
some times deceitful. Ier. 17. 9.
The heart is deceitful above all things; and desperately wicked: Who can know
it? Non noui animam meam; says Job. Job. 9. 21.
I know not my own soul; though I were perfect. And Paul concerning his
Apostleship. 1. Cor. 4. 4.
I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified. And if David's soul
could have made a sufficient testimony alone, what needed he pray Dic animae?
say Thou to my soul? Some have a true zeal of a false Religion, and some a
false zeal of a true Religion. Paul before his conversion had a true zeal of
a false Religion. Gal. 1. 14.
I was exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my Fathers. The Laodiceans had
a false or rather no zeal of a true Religion. Reu. 3. 15.
I know thy works, that thou art neither hot nor cold. So that when about this
certificate a man deals with his heart singly, his heart will deal with him
doubly.

No nor does Gods spirit alone give this Testimony: least a vain illusion
should be taken for this holy persuasion. But both Gods spirit and our spirit
meeting together are Concordes, and Contestes; joint witnesses. Indeed the
principal work comes from Gods spirit: he is the primary cause of this
assurance. Now he certifies us by word, by deed, and by seal. By word, terming
us in the Scripture Gods children; and putting into our mouths that filial
voice, whereby we cry Abba Father. By deed; Gal. 5. 22.
the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, etc. By these is
our 2. Pet. 1. 10.
Election made sure, says Saint Peter. By Seal; Grieve not the holy spirit of
God, by whom you are sealed to the day of redemption. Now our spirit witnesses
with him from the sanctity of our life, faith and reformation. Ioh. 5. 10.
He that believes on the son of God, has the witness in himself.

4. Lastly, this is the sweetest comfort that can come to a man in this life;
even an heaven upon earth, to be ascertained of his salvation. There are many
mysteries in the world, which curious wits with perplexfull studies strive to
apprehend. But without this, he that Eccl. 1. 18.
increases knowledge, increases sorrow. Vnum necessarium; this one thing is
only necessary: whatsoever I leave unknown let me know this that I am the
Lords, Qui Christum discit, satis est, si caetera nescit. He may without danger
be ignorant of other things, that truly knows Jesus Christ.

There is no potion of misery so embittered with gall, but this can sweeten it
with a cofortable relish. When enemies assault us, get us under, triumph over
us, imagining that salvation it self cannot save us: what is our comfort? Noui
in quem credidi, I know whom I have believed; I am sure the Lord will not
forsake me. Deficit panis? thou want bread; God is thy bread of life. We
want a pillow: God is our Psalm. 32. 7. Fulgent.
resting place. We may be Sine vest, non sine fide; sine cibo, non sine
Christo: sine Domo, non sine Domino. Without apparel, not without faith:
without meat, not without Christ: without a house, never without the Lord.
What state can there be, wherein the stay of this heavenly assurance gives us
not peace and joy?

Are we clapped up in a dark and desolate Dungeon: there the light of the Sun
cannot enter, the light of mercy not be kept out. What restrained body, that
has the assurance of this eternal peace, will not pity the darkness of the
profane man's liberty; or rather the liberty of his darkness? No walls can
keep out an infinite Spirit: no darkness can be uncomfortable, where the Iam.
1. 17.
Father of lights, and the Mal. 4. 2.
Sun of righteousness shines. The presence of glorious Angels is much, but
of the most glorious God is enough.

Are we cast out in exile; our backs to our native home, all the worlds our
way. Whether can we go from God? Psalm. 139. 7.
Whether shall I go from thy face? or whether shall I fly from thy presence?
If I ascend, etc. That exile would be strange, that could separate us from God.
I speak not of those poor and common comforts; that in all Lands and coasts,
it is his Sun that shines; his elements of earth or water that bears us, his
air we breath. But of that special privilege, that his gracious presence is
ever with us: that no sea is so broad, as to divide us from his favor: that
wheresoever we feed, he is our host: wheresoever we rest, the wings of his
blessed providence are stretched over us. Let my soul be sure of this, though
the whole world be traitors to me.

Does the world despise us? We have sufficient recompense, that God esteems
us. How unworthy is that man of Gods favor, that cannot go away contented
with it, without the worlds! Does it hate us much? God hates it more. That is
not ever worthy which man honors; but that is ever base which God despises.
Without question the world would be our friend, if God were our enemy. The
sweetness of both cannot be enjoyed; let it content us, we have the best.

It may be, poverty puts pale leannes into our cheeks: God makes the world
fat, but withal puts leanness into the soul. We decay in these temporal
vanities, but we thrive in eternal riches. Job. 5. 22.
The good man laughes at destruction and dearth. Does sickness throw us on our
weary beds? It is impossible any man should miscarry, that has God for his
Physician. So Martha confessed to Jesus; Ioh. 11. 21.
Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed. Thy body is weak,
thy soul is strengthened: dust and ashes is sick, but thy eternal substance
is the better for it. Psalm. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
statutes.

Lastly does the inevitable hand of death strike thee? Egredere anima mea,
egredere. Go forth my soul with joy and assurance; thou have a promise to be
received in peace. Happy dissolution, that parts the soul from the body,
that it may knit them both to the Lord. Death like the proud Philistine comes
marching out in his hydeous shape, daring the whole Host of Israel to match
him with an equal combatant. The Atheist dares not die, for fear (non esse)
that he shall not be at all: the covetous usurer dares not die, for fear
(male esse) to be damned: the doubtful conscience dares not die, because he
knows not (an sit, an non sit, an damnatus sit) whether he shall be, or be
damned, or not be at all. Only the resolved Christian dares die, because he
is assured of his election: he knows he shall be happy; and so lifts up
pleasant eyes to heaven, the infallible place of his eternal rest. He dares
encounter with this last enemy, trample on him with the foot of disdain, and
triumphantly sing over him; 1. Cor. 15. 15
O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? He conquers in
being conquered; and all because God has said to his Soul; I am thy Salvation.

The poor Papist must not believe this: such an assurance to him were
Apocryphal, yea heretical. He must lie on his deathbed, call upon what Saint
or Angel he list; but must not dare to believe he shall go to heaven. O
uncomfortable doctrine, able to loose the soul! What can follow, but fears
without, and terrors within; distrustful sighs, and heartbreaking groans!
Go away he must with death; but whither he knows not. It would be presumption
to be confident of heaven. How should Purgatory stand, or the Popes kitchen
have a Larder to maintain it, if men might be sure of their salvation?
Herefore they bequeath so great sums for masses and Dirge's, and Trentals, to
be sung or said for them after they are dead: that their souls may at the
last be had to heaven; though first for a while they be reezed in Purgatory. If
this be all the comfort their Priests, Jesuits, and Confessors can give them;
they may well say to them, as Job to his friends; Job. 16. 2.
Miserable comforters are ye all.

But he that has Stephens eyes, has also Paul's heart, and the Saints tongue.
He that with Stephens eyes can see that Act. 7. 55.
Son of man standing on the right hand of God; as if his arms were open to
wel-come and embrace him: must needs with Paul Phil. 1. 23.
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: and with the Saints cry; Come
Lord; how long! Amen, even so come Lord Jesus.

Thus much for the matter of the Assurance; let us now come to the manner. Dic
Animae.

Say unto my soul.
Say: but is God a man? has he a tongue? how does David desire him to speak?
That God who made the ear, shall not he hear? he that made the eye, shall not
^e see? he that made the tongue, shall not he speak? He that sees without
eyes, and hears without ears, and walks without feet, and works without
hands, can speak without a tongue. Now God may be said to speak diverse ways

1. God has spoken to some-by his own voice. To Adam; vocem audiuerunt: they
heard the Genesis 3. 8.
voice of God etc. To Israel. Deuteronomy. 4. 15.
The Lord spoke unto you out of the midst of the fire: ye heard the voice of
the words but saw no similitude: only you heard a voice. To Christ: Ioh. 12.
28.
I here came a voice from heaven, saying: I have both glorified it, and I will
glorify it. This S. Peter testifies. 2. Pet. 1. 17.
There came a voice from the excellent glory; This is my beloved son, in whom
I am well pleased.

2. To omit visions, and dreams, and clouds and Cherubins and Angels, vrim
and thummim: God speaks also by his works. Psalm. 19. 1.
The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament shows his handie
work. M^nus loquuntur; his works have a tongue. Opera testantur de me, says
Christ: my works bear witness of me. We may thus understand God ex operibus;
his actions preach his will.

3. God speaks by his Son. Hebr. 1. God who at sundry times, and in diverse
manners, spoke in t^me past unto the Fathers by the Prophets; has in these
last daves spoken unto us by his Son. He is therefore called the Word. Ioh.
1 The sacred Scriptures, and sayings of the Prophets, given by the inspiration
of God; (for 2. Pet. 1. 20.
no prophecy is of private interpretation: it came not by the will of man; but
holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.) are called Verbum Domini,
the word of the Lord. But to distinguish God the Son from those words, he is
after an eminent sort called (...), The word, or That excellent word. As also
he is called (not a light, but) Ioh. 1. 8.
That light: (not a lamb, but) ver. 29.
that lamb. Not a vocal word formed by the tongue beating the air; for he
was before either sound or air. But the mental and substantial word of his
Father; but Ipse Pater^
(...), effigies lumenque a lumine vero. Pallad.



According to that of Paul. Hebr. 1. 3.
The brightness of his glory, and express image of his person.

4. GOD speaks by his Scriptures. Rem. 15. 4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, are written for our learning: that
we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. Scripta
sunt, they are written. Things that go only by take, or tradition, meet with
such variations, augmentations, abbreuiations, corruptions, false glosses; that
as in a Lawyers pleading, Truth is lost in the Quaere for her. Related things
we are long in getting, quick in forgetting. Therefore God commanded his law
should be written. Litera scripta manet.

Thus God does effectually speak to us. Many good wholesome instructions have
dropped from humane pens; to lesson and direct man in goodness. But there is
no promise given to any word to convert the soul, but to Gods word.

Without this Antiquity is novelty, Novelty subtletie, Subtletie death.
Theologia Scholastica multis modis sophistica. School Divinity is little
better then mere Sophistry. Plus argutiarum quam doctrine, plus doctrina quam
vsus. It has more quickness then soundness, more fauce then meat, more
difficulty then doctrine, more doctrine then use.

This Scripture is the Perfect and Absolute rule. Bellarmine acknowledges two
things requireable in a Perfect Rule; Certainty, and Evidence. If it be not
certain, it is no Rule: if it be not evident, it is no rule to us. Only the
Scripture is both in truth and evidence a perfect rule. Other writings may have
canonical verity, the Scripture only has canonical authority. Others like
oil may make cheerful man's countenance; but this like Bread strengthens his
heart. This is the absolute Rule; Gal. 6. 16.
And as many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

O that we had hearts to bless GOD for this mercy, that the Scriptures are
among us, and that not sealed up under an unknown tongue. The time was when a
devout Father was glad of a piece of the new Testament in English: when he
took his little Son into a corner, and with joy of soul heard him read a
chapter: so that even Children became Fathers to their Fathers, and begat them
to CHRIST. Now as if the commonnesse had abated the worth, our Bibles lie dusty
in the windows: it is all if a Sunday-handling quite them from perpetual
oblivion. Few can read, fewer do read, fewest of all read as they should. God
of his infinite mercy lay not to our charge this neglect.

5. GOD speaks by his Ministers, expounding and opening to us those
Scriptures. These are Legati a latere; dispencers of the mysteries of heaven.
2. Cor. 5. 20.
Ambassadors for CHRIST: as if God did beseech you through us, so we pray you
in Christ's stead, that you would be reconciled to God. This voice is
continually sounding in our Churches, beating upon our ears; I would it could
pierce our consciences, and that our lives would echo to it in an answerable
obedience. How great should be our thankfulness!

God has dealt with us as he did with Eliah. 1. King. 19. 11.
The Lord passed by, and a great strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in
pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind. After the
wind came an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake. After the
earthquake, a fire; but the Lord was not in the fire. And after the fire, a
still voice: and the Lord came with that voice. After the same manner has God
done to this Land. In the time of K. Henry 8. there came a great and mighty
Wind, that rent down Churches, overthrew Altarages, impropriated from
Ministers their livings: that made Laymen substantial Parsons, and Clergy
men their vicar-shadowes. It blew away the rights of Leui, into the lap of
Issachar: a violent wind: but God was not in that wind. In the days of King
Edward the sixth there came a terrible Earthquake, hideous vapors of Treasons
and conspiracies, rumbling from Rome, to shake the foundations of that Church,
which had now left off loving the Whore, and turned Antichrist quite out of his
saddle. Excommunications of Prince and people, execrations and curses in their
tetricall forms with Bell, Book, and Candle; Indulgences, Bulls, Pardons,
promises of heaven, to all traitors that would ext^rpate such a King and
kingdom: a Monstrous earthquake; but GOD was not in the Earthquake. In the
days of Queen Mary came the Fire, an unmerciful fire: such a one as was
never before kindled in England, and (we trust in Jesus Christ) never shall be
again. It raged against all that professed the Gospel of Christ: made
bonefires of silly women for not understanding that their ineffable mystery of
Transubstantiation; burnt the mother with the child: Boner and Gardener those
hellish bellows that set it on flaming. A raging and insatiable fire; but God
was not in that fire. In the days of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, came
the still voice, saluting us with the songs of Sion, and speaking the
comfortable things of Jesus Christ: and GOD came with his voice. This sweet
and blessed voice is still continued by our Gracious Sovereign: GOD long
preserved him with it, and it with him, and us all with them both.

Let us not say of this blessing, as Lot of Zoar; Is it not a little one? nor
be weary of Manna with Israel: lest GODS voice grow dumb unto us, and (to our
woe) we hear it speak no more. No, rather let our hearts answer with
Samuel; 1. Sam. 3. 10.
Speak Lord, for thy servants hear. If we will not hear him say to our
souls, I am your salvation: we shall hear him say, Depart from me, I know
you not. So says wisdom; Prou. 1. 26.
Because I have called, and ye refused: I will therefore laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear comes. The gallant promises himself
many years, and in them all to rejoice: he thinks of Preachers, as the
Devil said of CHRIST; that we come to torment him before his time. Well then,
Rejoice says GOD: Ecel. 11. 9.
Let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth. But ironice, he mockes
when he says so. Now quod Deus loquitur ridens, tu lege lacrymans: What God
speaks laughing, do thou read lamenting. If God once laughes, itis high time
for us to weep: They will not hear God when he preaches in their health: God
will not hear them when they pray in their sickness. They would not hearken to
him in the Pulpit, nor he to them on their death bed.

6. God speaks by his Spirit: This spirit bears witness with our spirit
etc. Perhaps this is that Esa. 30. 21.
voice behind us; as it were whispering to our thoughts? This is the way, walk
in it. This is that speaking Spirit: Math. 10. 20.
It is not ye that speak; but the Spirit of your Father, which speaks in
you. It is this Spirit that speaks for us, and speaks to us, and speaks in
us. It is the Churches prayer; Cant. 1. 2.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth. Sanctus Spiritus osculum
Patris. The holy Ghost is the kiss of God the Father. Whom God kisseth, he
loves.

Now by all these ways does God speak peace to our consciences, and say to
our souls, that he is our Salvation.

1. He may speak with his own voice: and thus he gave assurance to Abraham;
Genesis 15. 1.
Fear not, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward. If God speak
comfort, let hell roar horror. 2. He may speak by his works: actual
mercies to us demonstrate that we are in his favor, and shall not be
condemned. Psalm. 41. 11.
By this I know thou fauourest me, because mine enemy does not triumph over
me. 3. He may speak by his son; Math. 11. 28.
Come to me all that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will ease you. 4. He
may speak by his Scripture this is Gods Epistle to us, and his letters Patent,
wherein are granted to us all the privileges of salvation. An universal
Siquis: Whosoever believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved. 5. He may speak
by his Ministers to whom he has given 2. Cor. 5. 19.
the Ministry of reconciliation. 6. He does speak this by his spirit: he
Gal. 4. 6.
sends forth the spirit of his son into our hearts, crying Abba Father. By
all these voices God says to his elect, I am your salvation.

To my Soul.
Many hear God speaking comfort to the corporal care, that hear him not
speaking this to the soul. They hear him, but they feel him not. The best
assurance is from feeling. Genesis 27. 21.
Come near, let me feel thee my Son, said Isaacto Jacob: let me feel
thee, my Father; say we to God. The thronging Jews heard Christ, but Zacheus
that believing Publican felt Christ. Luke 19. 9.
This day is salvation come to thy house.

My Soul.
There is no vexation to the vexation of the soul: so no consolation to the
consolation of the soul. David in this Psalm calls it his Darling. Ver. 17.
Rescue my soul from their destructions, my Darling from the Lions. The same
Prophet complained of a great unrest, when Psalm. 42. 11.
his soul was disquieted within him. Jonas of a grievous sickness, when Ioh.
2. 7.
his soul fainted. Joseph had a cruel bondage, when Psalm. 105. 18.
The iron entered his soul. So no comfort to the comfort of the soul. In the
multitude of my thoughts within me, Psalm. 94. 19.
Thy comforts have refreshed my soul. The wicked hear tell of Gods mercies:
communitur audimus verbum salutis: but God speaks not to their souls.
Therefore they cannot say with Mary; My soul rejoices. This joy, when God
speaks peace to the soul, is ineffabile gaudium: a iubilation of the heart,
which a man can, neither recitare, nor reticere: neither suppress, nor
express. It gives end to all ^arres, doubts, and differences; ouercomes the
world, non-sutes the devil; and makes a man keep Hilary Term all his life.

To my Soul.
Mine; I might here examine whose this Mea is; who is the owner of this my? A
prophet, a king, a man after Gods own heart; that confessed himself the
beloved of God; that knew the Lord would never forsake him; holy, happy David
ownes this meae: he knows the Lord loves him, yet desires to know it more;
Dic animae Mea; say to My soul.

But let this teach us to make much of this My. Luther says, there is great
divinity in pronounes. The Assurance that GOD will save some is a faith
incident to Devils. The very Reprobates may believe that there is a book of
Election; but GOD never told them, that their names were written there. The
hungry beggar at the Feast-house gate smells good cheer, but the Master does
not say; this is provided for thee. It is small comfort to the harbourlesse
wretch, to pass through a goodly City, and see many glorious buildings; When
he cannot say; Haec mea domus, I have a place here. The beauty of that
excellent City Jerusalem, built with Sapphires, Emeralds, Chrysolites, and such
Reu. 21.
precious stones: the foundation and walls whereof are perfect gold; affords a
soul no comfort; unless he can say, mea ciuitas, I have a Mansion in it. The
all sufficient merits of Christ do thee no good, unless tua pars and portio:
he be thy Savior. Happy soul, that can say with the Psalmist. O Lord thou
art my portion. Let us all have oil in our Lamps; lest if we be then to
buy, beg, or borow; we be shut out of doors like the fools not worthy of
entrance. Pray Lord say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

I am thy salvation.
The Petition is ended: I will but look into the Benediction: wherein I should
consider these four circumstances; Quis, quid, Cui, quando. Who, What, to
Whom, When.

Who.
The Lord: to the Lord David prays. He has made a good choice, for there is
salvation in none other. Hos. 13. 9.
Thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. The world fails, the
flesh falls, the Devil kills, only the Lord saues.

What.
Salvation; a special good thing: every man's desire: who would not be saved?
Every man would go to heaven, though perhaps he runs a course directly to
hell. Beatus vult homo esse, etiam non sic viuendo vt possit esse. Man would be
blessed, though he takes the course to be cursed. I will give thee a Lordship,
says God to Esau. I will give thee a kingdom, says God to Saul. I will give
thee an Apostleship, says God to Judas. But I will be thy salvation, he says
to David, and to none but Saints.

Indeed this voice comes from heaven, comes unto earth: but only through the
mediator betwixt heaven and earth, Jesus Christ. He is the alone Savior.
Worldlings possess many things, but have right to nothing, because not right
to him, that is Heb. 1. 2.
the heir of all things, Christ. The soul is the perfection of the body,
Reason of the Soul, Religion of reason, Faith of Religion, Christ of faith. A
man can warrant us upon earth, that our land is ours, our garment ours, our
money, servant, beast ours: and that he is a thief who robs us of these. But
all the men in the world cannot warrant us our Salvation, but only Jesus
Christ. Therefore that we may have assurance, that all these are ours, and that
we shall never answer for every bit of bread we have eaten, and for every
drop of wine we have drunk; that our possessions are our own, our gold,
robes, rents, revenues are our own; let us be Christ's. 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come; all are yours: and ye are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods. Be sure of salvation, and be sure of all. For Romans 8. 32.
he that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall
he not with him also freely give us all things?

To whom.
My salvation; not others only, but Mine. A man, and a Christian are two
creatures: he may be a man, that has reason and outward blessings; he is
only a Christian, that has faith, and part in the salvation of Christ. God is
plentiful salvation, but it is not ordinary to find a Cui; to whom. Much of
heaven is lost for lack of a hand to apprehend it. All passengers in this
world presume they are going to heaven, but we may guess by the throng, that
the greater part take the broader way. Christ leaving the earth in respect of
his bodily presence, left there his Gospel, to apply to men's souls the virtue
of his death and passion: Ministers preach this Gospel, people hear this
Gospel, all boast of this Gospel: yet himself foretells, that when he comes
again, he shall scarce find faith upon earth. No doubt he shall find
Christians enough, but scarce faith. Salvation is common, as St. Jude speaks.
Iud. ver. 3.
When I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common salvation: but few
make it proper to themselves. That God is my salvation, and thy salvation, this
is the comfort.

When.
In the time present, I am. Sum, non (sufficit, quod) ere. It is comfort to
Israel in captivity, that God says, Ero tua redemptio, I will redeem thee.
But the assurance that quiets the conscience is this, I am thy salvation. As
God said to Abraham; fear not, I am with thee. Deferred hope faints the heart.
Whatsoever God forbear to assure us, O pray we him not to delay this; Lord say
to our souls, I am your salvation.

To conclude; it is salvation our Prophet desires: that God would seal him up
for his child, then certify him of it. He requests not Riches: he knew that
man may be better fed then taught: that wealth does but frank men up to death.
He that preferres Riches before his soul, does but sell the horse to buy the
saddle, or kill a good horse to catch a hare. He begs not honor: many have
leapt from the high throne to the low pit. The greatest commander on earth
has not a foot of ground in heaven, except he can get it by entitling
himself to Christ. He desires not Pleasures: he knows, there are as great
miseries beyond prosperity, as on this side it. And that all vanity is but
the indulgence of the present time: a minute begins, continues, ends it: for it
endures but the acting, and knows no solace in the memory. In the fairest
garden of delights, there is somewhat, quod in ipsis floribus angat; that
stings in the midst of all vain contents.

In a word, it is not momentany, variable, apt to either change or chance, that
he desires; but eternal; salvation. He seeks like Mary, that better part
which shall never be taken from him. The wise man's mind is ever above the
moon, says Seneca: let the world make never so great a noise, as if it all
ran upon Coaches, and all those full of roarers; yet all peace is there. It is
not sublunary, under the wheel of changeable mortality, that he wishes, but
salvation. To be saved is simply the best plot: beat your brains, and break
your sleeps, and wast your marrowes, to be wealthy, to be worthy; for riches,
for honors: plot, study, contriue; be as politic as you can: and then kiss
the child of your own brains, hug your inventions, applaud your wits,
dote upon your aduancements or aduantagements: yet all these are but dreams.
When you awake, you shall confess that to make sure your salvation was the
best plot and no study shall yield you comfort, but what has bin spent about
it. What should we then do, but work and pray? work, says Paul; Phil. 2.
12.
Work up your salvation with fear and trembling: and then pray with our
Prophet; Lord say to our souls, thou art our salvation with comfort and
rejoicing.

THE SOVLES REFVGE.
1. PET. 4. 19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit the
keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.
ATRVE Christians life is one day of three meals, and every meal has in it
two Courses. His first meal is Nasc^ and renasci; to be borne a sinner, to be
newborn a Saint. Psalm. 51. 5.
I was borne in iniquity, and in firm did my mother conceive me; there is one
Course. Ioh. 3. 3.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the kingdom of God; there is the
other Course. His second meal is Been agere, and male pati; to do well, and
to suffer ill. Do good unto all; but especially to those that are of the
household of Faith; there is one Course of Doing. c All that live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer persecution; there is the other Course of Suffering. His
third meal is More and viuere; to die a temporal death, to live an eternal
life.

The first is his Breakfast, and herein he is naturally Natus and da^; borne
in sin, and condemned for sin spiritually (...) and (...); borne again in
righteousness, and justified from sin. The last is his Supper: wherein there
is one bitter dish; Death. Heb. 9. 27.
Statutum est omnibus semel m^ri; It is appointed to all men to die once.
Omnibus semel, plorisque bis: to all once, to many twice; for there is a Reu.
20. 6.
second death And that is truly a does, because it is mors vita, the death of
life: the other rather a life, for it is mors m^rtis, the death of death: after
which mors non erit vltra; Reu. 21. 4.
there shall be no more death. Therefore rise, that you may not fall: rise now
by a righteous life, least you fall into an everlasting death. If the soul
will not now rise, the body shall one day be raised, and go with the soul
to Judgment. The second Course is incomparably sweet; vinere post mortem, to
live after death. I say after death, for a man m^st die that he may live. So
that a good supper brings a good sleep: he that lives well, shall sleep
well. He that now apprehends mercy, mercy shall hereafter comprehend him.
Mercy is the vltimus (...); no hope be^nd it and this is the time for it, the
next is of Justice. The middle meal between both th^se is our Dinner; and
that consists patiendo malum, and faciendo bonum; in doing good, and suffering
evil. And on these two Courses, my Text sp^nds it self. First, they that
suffer according to the wit of God; there is the Passion. Secondly, they may
trust God with their souls in well doing, there is the Action.

More particularly in the words we may consider five Graduall Circumstances.

1. The Sufferance of the Saints. They that suffer. 2. The Integrity of this
Sufferance. According to the will of God. 3. The Comfort of this Integrity.
May commit their souls to God. 4. The Boldness of this Comfort. As unto a
faithful Creator. 5. The Caution of this Boldness In well doing.
1. The Sufferance of the Saints.
They that suffer. All men suffer: Job. 5. 7.
Man is borne unto trouble, as the sparks she upward. This life is well
compared to a throng in a narrow passage: he that is first out, finds ease: he
that is in the midst, is in the worst place and case; for he is hemmed in with
troubles: the hind-most drives out both the former; and if he have not the
greatest part in suffering evil, lightly he has the greatest share in doing
it. Outward things happen alike to good and bad. Eccl. (...). 2.
There is one event to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: to him that swears, and to him
that fears an oath. They are both travelers in the throughfare of this
world, both lodge in one Inn, both have the same provision; perhaps the wicked
have the better cheer: but in the morning their ways part. There are common
evils, as there are common goods. Poverty, sickness, death spares not the
greatest: health, wealth, prosperity is not denied to the meanest. All have
three Mans^ns. 1. This earth; there (as in No^s Arc) are the clean and
unclean, righteous and wicked promiscuously confused. 2. The Grave: this is a
common house; a very Pesthouse: where all lie together under the Surgerie of
death. It is a cheap and universal house; we pay no rent for it. 3. But
after all are come to this place, there is then a way of parting. Est locus bis
parts vbi se via findit in ambas. Some Virg.
go to hell, others to heaven. Ioh. 5. 29.
They shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of
life: and they that have done evil unto the resurrection of damnation. Some to
immortal honor, others to immortal horror.

God gives not all outward prosperity to the wicked; least they should ascribe
it to their own wits, or worths: least they should Hab. 1. 16.
sacrifice to their net, and burn incense to their dragge. Nor all affliction
to the good, least they should fall to some sinister and unwarrantable courses.
Psalm. 125. 3.
The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; least the
righteous put forth their hands to iniquity. There is a mixture of good and
evil: prosperity and adversity have their vicissitudes. Greg.
Praesentis vita nec prosperitas innocentiam testatur, nec acerbitas miseram
animam indicat. Neither do the crosses of this world witness a man's
guiltiness, nor the blessings of the world his innocence. But the good have a
larger share in sufferings, then the reprobates. Impius non percutitur nisi a
Domino, not ab I^s. None strikes the wicked but God; but all the wicked strike
and vex us. This world, like the earth, is a mere stepdame to good herbs, an
own mother to weeds: no marvel if she starues us; all is too little for her
own children. Omnes patiuntur plurim^, quidam patiuntur omnia. All suffer many
kinds of miseries; many suffer all kinds of miseries.

Christi^ est (...): it is the part of a Christian to suffe^ wheresoever he is,
let him expect it. Adam was see upon in Paradise, Job in the dunghill: Job
fortior in st^oore, quam Adam in Paradise. Job was more strong to resist
temptations in the miserable dust, then was Ad^ in that glorious Garden. The
Jews were commanded to eat four herbs with their sweet Passover:
bitterness ever treads on the heels of pleasure. Jacob has a Son, and
loses his Wife: Benjamin is borne, Rachel dies. Our Lady coming from that
great Feast, Luke 2. 45.
lost her son Jesus three days. Seven days she had eaten sweet bread:
here followed three days sour bread for it. Good things are to be taken with
much thankfulness, evil with much patience.

Let this teach us two duties; First, to prepare for evils before they come:
next to make them welcome, when they are come. So they shall neither meet us
with fear, nor leave us with sorrow.

1. Preparation to suffer is specially necessary. Sudden crosses find weak
souls secure, leave them miserable, make them desperate. Expectatum malum
l^uius mordet. A looked for evil smarts more gently. Repentina bona sunt
suauiora; sed repentina mala sunt grauiora. Unexpected joys are more gracious,
but unexpected evils are more grievous. Mischiefs come most commonly without
warning.

They do not allow, as Jonas did to Nineveh, forty days respite: not so much
as an Hac noste, this night: which was allowed to the worldling; Luke 12. 20.
This night shall they fetch away thy soul from thee. Happy man that gives
himself warning: he that conceits what may be, arms himself against what
must be. Thou art in health, eatest, digestest, sleep; Quid si morboso
iaceant tua membra cubili? What if sickness shall cast thee down on thy weary
couch? Though riches allow thee meat for thy stomach, what if sickness allow
thee not stomach to thy meat? How if the very smell, if the very thought of
thy best dishes should offend thee? How if after many tossed sides, and ^fted
places; nullo poteris requ^escere lecto? thou could find no corner to give
thee ease? How could thou take this distemper? Thou art rich: thy throat
tastes it; thy belly feels it, thy back wears it: how if from no fear of
want thou should come to no want of fear? to care for to morrowes provision,
with extreme sweat of brows not to earne bread enough to keep life and soul
together; nakedness exposing thy body to the violences of heaven, scorching
heat of the Sun, cold storms of the air? How could thou brook the
difference Inter tantam refectionem, and talem defectionem; between that
abundant opulencie, and this distitute penury? Thou art at home in peace,
singing in thy own vineyards; thou sit in a shocke secure, whilst thy
reapers fell down the humble corn at thy foot, and fill thy barnes. What if
for religion thou should be sent to exile: where thou may weep with
Israel to thy deriding enemies demanding a Song of Sion; Psalm. 137. 4.
How shall I sing the song of joy in a strange land? How can thou digest the
injuries, and brook the contempt of strangers?

These be good thoughts to prearme our souls: nothing shall make them
miserable, that have this preparation. Agabus told Paul, having first bound his
hands and feet with his girdle; Act. 21. 11.
Thus says the holy Ghost: so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that
owes this girdle. Hereupon the rest of the Saints besought him with tears not
to go up to Jerusalem. But observe that blessed Apostles resolved answer;
Paratus sum, I am ready. Ver. 13.
What mean ye to weep, and to break my heart? I am ready, not to be bound
only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. The account
is past, I am prepared. Men that want this fore-resolution are like a secure
city, that spends all her wealth in furnishing her chambers, and furbishing
her streets; but lets her bulwarks fall to the ground. Here is provision for
peace, none for war: something for content of friends, nothing for defense
against enemies. It is usual for young men with wooden Wasters to learn how
to play at the sharp: they are taught with foiles how to deal with points. He
is desperate that ventures on a single combat in the field, and was never
lesson'd at the Fence-schoole. We shall be unable to fight with evils
themselves, if we cannot well encounter their shadows. Mischiefs are like the
Cocatrices eye,
If they see first they kill, foreseen they die.


What our foresight takes from their power, it adds to our own: it enervates
their strength and corroborates ours. For by this both they are made less able
to hurt us, and we are more strong to resist them. Since therefore we must
pass through this fiery trial, let us first prove our strength in a gentle
meditation: as that martyr tried his finger in the Candle, before his body
came to the fire.

2. They must be made welcome, when they are come. Non vt hosts sed vt
hospites admittendi. They must not be entertained as enemies, but as guests.
Their Romans 10. 15.
feet are beautiful, that bring good tidings: but crosses bring good news.
They assure us, that we are no bastards. If you endure chastening, God deals
with you as with Sons. But if you be without correction, Heb. 12. 8.
then are ye bastards. Aug.
Non timeas flagellari, sed exhaeredari. Fear not to be scourged, but to be
disinherited. There is so much comfort in sorrow, as makes all affliction to
the elect, Greg.
Carmen in nocte; a song in the night. Adversity sends us to Christ, as the
leprosy sent those Ten. Luke 17. Prosperity makes us turn our backs upon
Christ, and leave him; as health did those Nine. David's sweetest songs were his
lacrymae. In misery he spared Saul his great adversary: in peace he killed
Vriah his dear friend. The wicked sing with Grasshoppers in fair Weather: but
the faithful (in this like Sirens) can sing in a storm.

It is a question whether the Sun or the Wind will first make a man throw off
his cloak: but by all consent the Sun will first vncloke him. Imagine by the
Sun the warm heat of prosperity; by the Wind the blustering cold of
calamity; by the cloak Christ's liuerie, a sincere profession. Now which of
these will first uncase thee of thy zeal. The boystrous wind makes a man
gather his cloak closer about him: the hot silent Sun makes him weary of so
heavy a burden; he soon does it off. Secure plenty is the warm Sun, which
causes many to discloke themselves, and cast off their zeal, as it did Demas,
who left Christ to embrace this present world. But the cold wind of afflictio
gathers it up closer to him, and teaches him to be more zealous. When a man
cannot find peace upon earth, he quickly runs to heaven to seek it.

Plutarch writes, that Antigonus had in his army a valiant soldier, but of a
sickly body. Antigonus observing his valor, procured his Physicians to take
him in hand; and he was healed. Now being sound, he began to fight in some
fear, to keep himself a good distance from danger, no more venturing into
the vanne or forlorn place of the battle. Antigonus noting and wondering at
this alteration, asked him the cause of this new cowardice. He answers, O
Antigonus, thou art the cause. Before I ventured nothing but a diseased corpse,
and then I chose rather to die quickly, then to live sickly: I invited death to
do me a kindness. Now it is otherwise with me, for I have somewhat to loose. A
poor and afflicted life makes a man bold in his religio: it is nothing to part
with hunger, thirst, cold contempt. But when prosperous fortunes flow upon him,
he dares not stick so constantly to Christ. Would you have the rich Merchant
find fault with Idolatry, and stand to justify Gods truth? No he has somewhat
to take to; and although he ventures much, he would be loath to be a venturer
in this Yet this somewhat is nothing in regard of what he loses, because he
will not loose his riches. Affliction sometimes makes an evil man good,
always a good man better. Crosses therefore do not only challenge our
patience but even our thanks. Thy soul is sick, these are thy Physic. Aug.
Intelligat hom^ Deum esse medicum: sub medicamento positus vreris, secaris,
clamas. Non audit medicus ad voluntatem, sed audit ad sanitatem. Understand God
thy Physician, he ministers to thee a bitter, but wholesome potion: thy stomach
abhors it: thou lie bound under his hand, whiles he works upon thee: thou
cryest to be delivered; he hears thee not according to thy will, but according
to thy weal. 1. Cor. 11. 32
We are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.
Thou payest the Physician of thy body though he cannot heal thee: will thou
not thank the Physician of thy soul that has healed thee? The child cries
for the knife, the parent knows it can but hurt him; though he weep for it,
he shall not have it. Such children are we to think God does not use us
kindly, unless he give us every vanity we affect. In stead of these toys
that would make us wanton, God lays on us the rod of correction to make us
sober. Our flesh is displeased, our soul is saved; we have no cause to
complain. I come now from the Sufferance of the Saints, to

The Integrity of that Sufferance.
According to the will of God. We have sufferd enough, except it be according
to his will. The manner commends the matter. To go no further, this point is
sufficiently directed by our Apostle, Verse. 14. If ye be reproached for the
name of Christ, happy are you; for the Spirit of glory rests upon you. But
let none of you suffer as an euill-doer. For Chap. 2. 19. This is
thanke-worthie, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. This our Savior taught us. Math. 5. 10.
Blessed are they that suffer persecution for righteousness sake, (non qui
patiuntur, sed qui patiuntur propter iustitiam) for theirs is the Kingdom of
heaven. Non mortes, sed mores faciunt martyrs. It is not the death, but the
cause, that gives the honor of Martyrdom.

Indeed there is no man that suffers contrary to the will of God, but many
suffer not Secundum, not according to the will of GOD. In his concealed will he
allows the sufferings of the Reprobates: this is his just judgment. They are
smitten, but for their faults. Moerent, and merentur: they lament, and deserve
to lament. When the Adulterer is wounded for his lust, he cannot think
himself a patient secundum beneplacitum Dei, according to the will of God.
When the usurer is fetched over for his extortion, the depopulator for his
enclosing, the slanderer for his libelling, all these suffer, but not for
conscience toward God, not according to his will. They only are said to suffer
according to his will, that suffer first innocently, then patiently.

1. Innocently; for the wicked suffer: mali male sed merito. Evil men bear
evil things, but after their deserts. The Pope has made many Saints from this
kind of suffering. Straw-saints, such as Garnet was. If they be first drenched
at Tyber, and after hanged at Tyburne, Martyrs sunt; they can be no less then
Martyrs. Not seldom their names are put into the Rubricke: but they stand
there in those red letters for nothing else, but to remember their red and
bloody actions. They may pretend some show of religion, as if for cause
thereof they suffered: but it is not a meene, but a mixed cause: not for faith,
but for faction: not for truth, but for treason. It is observed, that as the
Physicians say, none die of an ague, nor without an ague: so none of them
suffer for the Romish religion, nor without the Romish religion. Therefore as
Aristides dying of the bite of a Weasell, exceedingly lamented that it was not
a Lyo^so these Seminaries may greatly lament that they die not for the Lion of
Judah, but for the Weasell of Roe. Not secundum voluntatem Dei, but secundum
voluptatem Antichrists: not according to the will of Christ, but according to
the lust of Antichrist. But he can make them amends with Sainting them: men
shall kneel to them, pray to them, climb to heaven by the ladder of their
merits. Alas! poor Saints: the Pope sends them to heaven, but how if they
were in hell before? May we not say of them, as Augustine did of Aristotle:
woe unto them, they are praised, and prayed unto where they are not, and
condemned where they are. Unless as the vision was to Ormus; that among the
Apostles and Martyrs there was a vacant place left in heaven, which says he,
was reserved for a Priest in England, called Thomas Becket: Martyrol. page 229.
and this revelation was full twelve years before Becket dyed. So except the
Pope can make them Saints before they die, I fear his authority can do
little afterward. Yet indeed the Pope is a great Saint-maker, and has helped
abundance of men to heaven. For he sent them thither through the fire, for the
cause of Christ: he condemned, cursed, burnt them to ashes: and thus spite of
his teeth, he has helped to make them martyrs and Saints. For our selves, if
we suffer any wrong of men, let us be sure we have not deserved it. Our
Innocence comends our suffering; for this is according to the good will and
pleasure of God.

2. Patiently; a murmuring mind evacuates the virtue of thy sufferings. 1. Pet.
2. 20.
For what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults, ye shall take
it patiently: but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye then take it
patiently, this is acceptable to God. Let me therefore help your patience by
two considerations.

1. What Christ our head suffered for us; bitter words, and more bitter wounds.
Observe him; Heb. 12. 2.
Look to Jesus the author and finisher of our faith; who for the joy that was
set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame. So let us run with
patience the race that is set before us. If we cannot endure an angry word from
our brothers mouth, how would we suffer boiling lead, and boiling coals, as
the Martyrs did? How to be crucified as our Lord Jesus was? What would we do
then? Show me now one dram of this patience. Among gallants a word and a blow:
among civil men a word and a writ. The back of Patience can bear no load.
But Luke 24. 24.
ought not Christ first to suffer these things, and then to enter into his
glory? First he was crowned with thorns, and then crowned with honors. Caput
spinosum in terris, si sit gloriosum in coelis. That head must first wear a
wreath of sorrow on earth, that shall wear a wreath of joy in heaven. 1. Pet.
2. 21.
Hereunto are we called: because Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that we should follow his steps.

2. That all this is according to the will of God. Our blows come at least
mediately from the hand of God. And this hand is guided with providence, and
temperd with love. Distressed worldlings cry out, it was my own folly that ran
me into this danger, or the malice of mine enemy undid me, or surfeit on such
meat made me sick. So the cur bites the stone, which could never have hurt him
but from the hand that threw it. Look up to the first mouer, O mad man, and
discharge the means. The Instrument may be unjust in thy wrongs, but the cause
is just from him that inflicted it. What rod soever beats thee, consider it
according to the will of God, and be patient. His hand sets theirs on work: I
hope thou will not dispute with thy maker. The medicine of thy passion is
composed by God himself: no evils nor devils shall put in one dram more then
his allowance: no man nor Angel can abate one scruple. The impatient man wants
either wisdom or obedience. Wisdom, if he be ignorant from whom his crosses
come: obedience, if he knows it, and is not patient. This is the Integrity of
the Suffering: now follows

The Comfort of this Integrity.
Let him commit the keeping of his soul to God. Every man cannot with this
confidence: but qui patitur propter Deum, recurrit ad Deum. He that suffers for
Christ's testimony, is confident of Gods mercy. Heb. 4. 16.
Let us come therefore unto the throne of grace boldly, that we may obtain
mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need. Here let us observe three
circumstances; Quis, Quid, Cui; Who, What, to Whom.

Who
They that suffer according to the will of God. Felicity thinks, it has no
need of God. But God is more dainty of spiritual comforts, then to give them
to such as are confident in worldly comforts. The Balm of the Spirit shall not
be sophisticated, or mixed veneno mundi, with the poison of this world. Give
strong drink to the heavy, says Solomon. God will not give his consolations
to those that are drunk with prosperity, mad-merry with the world: but his
wine to the heavy heart. He will Esa. 61. 2.
comfort them that mourn. Let them that suffer commit, etc.

What.
The Soul, and the keeping thereof. The Soul is a very precious thing; it had
need of a good keeper. Mat. 16. 26.
For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and loose his
own soul. We trust the Lawyer to keep our Inheritance; the Physician to
keep our body, the coffer to keep our money, shepherds to keep our flocks:
but the Soul had need of a better keeper. Howsoever it goes with thy liberty,
with thy love, with thy land, with thy life; be sure to look well to thy
soul: that lost, all is lost.

The body is not safe, where the Soul is in hazard. Chry. de recuperat. Laps.
Non-anima pro corpore, sed corpus pro anima factum est. The soul is not made
for the body, but the body for the Soul. He that neglects the better, let
him look never so well to the worse, shall loose both. He that looks well to
the keeping of the better, though he somewhat neglect the worst, shall save both.
The Body is the instrument of the soul: it acts, what the other directs: so it
is the external, actual, and isntrumental offender: Satan will come with a
Habeus corpus for it. But I am persuaded, if he take the Body, he will not
leave the Soul behind him.

To whom.
To God; he is the best Keeper. Adam had his Salvation in his own hands, he
could not keep it. Esau had his Birthright in his own hands, he could not
keep it. The Prodigal had his Patrimony in his own hands, he could not
keep it. If our Soul were left in our own hands, we could not keep it. The
world is a false keeper; let the soul run to riot, he will go with it. The
Devil is a Churlish keeper, he labors to keep the soul from salvation. The
Body is a brittle and inconstant keeper; every sickness opens the door, and
lets it out. God only is the sure keeper. Col. 3. 3.
Your life is hid with Christ in God. This was David's confidence; Psalm. 32. 7.
Thou art my hiding place, thou shall keep me. The Jewels given to thy
little children, thou will not trust them with but keep them thy self. O Lord
keep thou our only one, do thou Psalm. 35. 17.
Rescue our soul from destructions, our Darling from the Lions. Trust us not
with our own souls: we shall pass them away for an Apple, as Adam did: for
a morsel of meat, as Esau did: for the love of a harlot; as that Prodigal
did. Lord do thou keep our Souls.

Now the Christian patient must commit the keeping of his Soul to God both in
Life. Death.

1. Living; the Soul has three places of being. In the body from the Lord, in
the Lord from the body, in the body with the Lord. The two last are referred to
our salvation in heaven: either in part, when the Soul is glorified alone: or
totally, when both are crowned together. Now the soul must be even here in the
Lords keeping, or else it is lost. If God let go his hold it sinkes. It came
from God, it returns to God, it cannot be well one moment without God. It is
not in the right vbi, except the Lord be with it. It is sine sua domo, if sine
suo Domino. Here be four sorts of men reprouable. 1. They that trust not God
with their souls, nor themselves, but rely it only upon other men. 2. They
that will not trust God with their souls, nor others, but only keep it
themselves. 3. They that will trust neither God with their souls, nor others,
nor keep it it themselves. 4. They that will neither trust others with their
souls, nor themselves, but only God, yet without his warrant that he will
keep it.

1. They that trust their souls simply on the care of others: they are either
Papists or profane Protestants. The Papist trusts Antichrist with his soul;
he is like to have it well kept. If Masses and Asses can keep it, (for so the
Jesuits term their secular Priests) it shall not be lost. The devil fights
against the soul, the Pope interposeth an armoury of Agnus Dei's, sprinklings,
crossings amulets, prayers to Saints. But surely if this Armor were of proof,
S. Paul forgot himself in both these Ephesians. 6. 13.
places, where he describes that Panoply, or whole armor of God. He speaks of
a plate of righteousness for the breast, shoes of patience for the feet, the
shield of P 1 Thessalonians. 5. 6.
Faith, the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit. To the
Thessalonians indeed he somewhat varies the pieces of armor; but in neither
place does he mention Crosses, Crucifixes, aspersions, unctions, etc. Or they
will trust the Saints in heaven with their souls. Sancta virgo Dorothea, tua
nos virtute bea, cor in nobis nouum crea. What that Psalm. 51. 10.
Prophet desired of God; they as if they were Ioth to trouble the Lord about
it, and could have it nearer hand; beg of their Saint Dorothy; to create a new
heart within them. Such a rithme have they to the Virgin Mary. Virgo matter,
maris stella, Fons hortorum; verbi cella, ne nos pestis aut procella,
peccatores obruant. But the Saints are deaf: non audiunt. They would pray them
to forbear such prayers, they abhor such superstitious worship. They that
were so jealous of Gods honor on earth, would be loath to rob him of it in
heaven. So our carnal professors only trust the Minister with their soul: as
if God had imposed on him that charge, which the Prophet gave to Ahab. 1. King.
20. 39.
keep this man if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his
life. But indeed if he do his duty in admonishing: Ezekiel. 33. 9.
If thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it: if he do not turn from
his way; he shall die in his iniquity: but thou have delivered thy soul.

2. They that will not trust others with their soul, but keep it themselves.
They wrapit warm in the nest of their own presumptuous merits: as if good
works should hatch it up to heaven. But the soul that is thus kept, will be
lost. He that will go to heaven by his own righteousness, and climbers by no
other ladder then his own Just works, shall never come there. The best
Saints, that have had the most good works, durst not trust their souls with
them. 1. Cor. 4. 4.
I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified. Iam. 3. 2.
In many things we sin all: All in many things, many in all things: And the
most learned Papists, whatsoever they have said in their disputations, reserve
this truth in their hearts: otherwise speaking in their deaths; then they did
in their lives. Now non merita mea, sed misericordia tua? not my merits, but
thy mercies, O Lord. All our life is either unprofitable or damnable: therefore
O man, what remains. Anselm.
Nisi vt in tota vita tua deplores totam vitam tua^: but that during al thy
life thou should lament al thy life, works cannot keep us, but grace: let
them boast of perfection, we cry for pardon: they for merits, we for mercies:
they for justifying works of their own, we only for our sweet Savior Jesus
Christ.

3. They that will neither trust others with their soul not keep it
themselves: but either do sell it for ready money, as Esau sold his Birthright
and Judas (...) Jesus. Or pawn it for a good bribe, some large temptation of
profit pleasure or honor, they will not sell it outright, but morgage it for a
while, with a purpose (that se^dome speeds) to redeem it Or loose it; walking
negligently through the streets of this great City the world, their soul is
gone, and they are not aware of it. Or give away their soul, as do the envious
and desperate and have nothing in lieu of it but terrors without, and horrors
within: they serve the devils turn for nothing 4. They that will trust God
with their soul, but have no warrant that God will keep it. They lay all the
burden upon the shoulders of Christ, and meddle no more with the matter. As if
God would bring them to heaven; even whilst they pursue the way to hell: or keep
that soul for the body when the body had quite given away the soul. He never
promised to save a man against his will. As he does save us by his Son so he
comands us. Phil. 2. 12.
to work up our salvation with fear and trembling. He that lies still in the
myrie pit, of his sin and trusts to heaven for help out, without his own
concurring endeavor may hap to lie there still. 2. Dying; there is no comfort
but to trust the soul with God So David, Psalm. 31. 5.
Lord into thy hands I commit my spirit, So Steven; Act. 7. 59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, with these words our Lord Jesus himself gave up
the Ghost. It is justice to restore, whence we receive. It is not presumption,
but faith to trust God with thy spirit. The soul of the king, the soul of the
beggar, all one to him: David a king; Lazarus a beggar God receives both their
souls. From giving up the Ghost the highest is not exempted; from giving it
into the hands of God the poorest is not excepted. There is no comfort like
this: when riches bring aut nequam, aut nequicquam, either no comfort, or
discomfort; when the wardrobe, furniture, iunkets, wine offend thee, when thy
money cannot defend thee: when thy doctors feed themselves at thy cost, cannot
feed thee: when wife, children, friends stand weeping about thee: where is thy
help, thy hope? all the world has not a dram of comfort for thee; this
sweetens all, Lord into thy hands I commend my soul; Thou have redeemed me, O
thou God of truth.

Our Spirit is our dearest jewel: howl and lament if thou think thy soul is
lost. But let thy faith know, that is never lost which is committed to Gods
keeping. Spiritum emittis, non amittis. Durius seponitur, sed melius reponitur.
That soul must needs pass quietly through the gates of death, which is in the
keeping of God. Woe were us, if the Lord did not keep it for us whiles we have
it, much more when we restore it. While our soul dwells in our breast, it is
subject to manifold miseries, to manifest sins: temptations, passions,
misdeedes distemper us: in heaven it is free from all these. Let the soul be
once in the hands of God, nec dolor pro peccato, nec peccato prae dolor
torquetur; it is neither disquieted with sorrow for sin, nor with sin which
is beyond all sorrow. There may be trouble in the wilderness, in the land of
promise there is all peace. Then may we sing, Psalm. 124. 7.
Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the foulers: the snare is
broken, and we are escaped. Inuadit Satanas, euadit Christianus. It is there
above the reach of the devil. There is no evil admitted into the city of
heaven, to wrestle with the citizens thereof. Death is ready at hand about us,
we carry deaths enough within us: we know we shall die, we know not how soon: it
can never prevent us, or come too early, if our souls be in the keeping of
God. Man was not so happy when God gave his soul to him, as he is when he
returns it to God. Give it cheerfully: and then like a faithful Creator,
that thou give to him in short pain, he will give thee back with endlese
joy. And so we come fittly from the Comfort of our Integrity.

The Boldness of this Comfort.
As unto a faithful Creator. Wherein our confidence is heartned by a double
argument: the one drawn ex maiestate, the other ex Misericordia: from
Majesty, from mercy. His greatness, a Creator: his goodness, a Faithful
Creator.

1. Creator; not a stranger to thee, but he that made the. It is natural to
man, to love the work of his own hands. Pigmalion dotes upon the stone, which
himself had carved. But much more natural, to love his own Images, his
children, the walking Pictures of himself, the divided pieces of his own
body. God loves us as our Creator: because his own hands have fashioned us.
But creauit and vermiculos: he also made the worms: yield it, and therefore
non odit vermiculos, he hates not the very worms. Creauit and Diabolum: he
made the devil: no; God made him an Angel, he made himself a devil. God
loves him (vt naturam) as he is a nature, hates him (vt Diabolum) as he is a
corrupted nature, an evil, a devil. But we are not only his creatures, the
workmanship of his hands; but his children; so Adam is called Luke 3. 38.
The son of God. His own Image; fecit hominem in similitudinem suam: he made
Genesis 1. 26.
man after his likeness, in his Image. We are more then opus Dei, the mere
work of God: for Imago Dei, the very Image and similitude of God. We may
therefore be bold to commend our souls to God, as a faithful Creator.

Diverse men have that for their God, which never was their Creator. The proud
man makes his Honor his god: the covetous makes his gold his God: the
voluptuous makes his belly his God Ioann. de combis. Compend lib. 5. cap. 60.
now whereas God not only charged in the first Precept, Thou shall have no
other Gods before me: but added further in the next, Thou shall not make to
thee any Image or Similitude of any thing, whether in heaven above, or earth
beneath, or water under the earth, etc. These three sins seem to cross God
in these three interdicted places. For the proud man has his Idol as it were
in the air: the covetous man has his Idol in the earth: the drunken Epicure
has his Idol in the water. Let them take their Gods to themselves: let no
Rachel that has married Jacob, steal away Labans Idols. Our Creator is in
heaven, boldly give thy soul to him: who should better have it, then he that
made it?

2. The other argument of our comfort, is that he is Fidelis, a Faithful
Creator, He is faithful to thee, how unfaithful soever thou have been to
him. He made thee good, thou made thy self naught? he does not there yet
leave thee, as man his friend in misery; but sent his Son to redeem thee.
Here was great faithfulness. He sends his holy Spirit into thy heart, to apply
this redemption of Christ: here is great faithfulness. Thou often turnest thy
back upon him, and following sin leauest him: he leaves not thee. Hebr. 13.
5.
I will not leave thee, nor for sake thee: here is great faithfulness. He has
promised Poenitenti veniam, credenti vitam to him that repents pardon, to him
that believes salvation: here is faithfulness. Now has he promised? he is
faithful to perform it. What man or devil dares stand up, to challenge God
with unfaithfulness?

This infalibilitie Christ knew, when to his Fathers faithful hands he gave up
the Ghost. You will say, who might better do it; the Son might well be
confident of the Father. Not he alone the servants have bin faithful also in
this emission, and found God as faithful in acception. So David, Stephen, etc.
God is faithful, there is no distrust in him; all the fear is in thy self.
How can thou trust thy Jewel with a stranger? God is thy Creator, and a
Faithful Creator; but how if thou be an unfaithful creature? Thou will
frequent the doors of thy Patron, present gifts to thy Landlord, visit thy
friend: but how if to him that made thee, thou make thy self a stranger? How
often has God passed by thee, without thy salutation! In the temple he has
called to thee, thy heart has not echoed, and sent out thy voice to call upon
him. There has he charged thee, Seek my face; thou have not answered, Thy
face O Lord, I will seek. By his Spirit he has knocked at thy door, thou
have not opened to him. Now upon some exigent thou bequeathest thy soul to
him: upon what acquaintance? Will this sudden familiarity be accepted?

It is our own ignorance or strangenes or vnfaithfullnes that hinders us. The
reprobates think Christ a stranger to them; Math. 25. 44.
When did we see thee hungry etc. But indeed they are strangers to Christ, and
he may well say, when did I see you visit me? I was sick and in prison, and
ye came not at me. Would you have God cleave to them, that leave him? Does a
man all his life runn from God, and shall God on his deathbed run to him?
No, you would not know me; and therefore now non noui vos, I know not you. But
the faithful creature knows God a faithful Creator. I know whom I have
believed. Thou may say with that good father; Egredere anima mea, quid times?
Go forth my foul, go forth with joy, what should thou fear? Yea it will
go without bidding, and fly cheerfully into the arms of God, whom it trusted
as a faithful Creator. I have served thee, believed on thee, now I come unto
thee; says Luther. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, says
Paul. These are not the voices of worldlings, but of Saints. God will be a
faithful Creator to receive and preserve their souls. I have served thee,
says man: I have preserved thee, says God. In me credis, ad me venis: thou
beleeuest on me, thou come to me. Here is now the Boldness of our comfort:
there is yet

A Caution of this Boldness.
In well doing. The wicked man may commit his soul to Gods keeping, but how is
he sure God will take the charge of it? what should God do with a foul and
polluted soul? The soul must at last be committed to some: now he only is
the receiver of it in death, that was the keeper of it in life. If Satan have
always ruled it, GOD will not embrace it. As Ieptha said to the Elders of
Gilead: Judge. 11. 7.
Did ye not hate me, and expel me out of my fathers house? and why are ye
come unto me now, when you are in distress? Did you thrust God out of your
hearts, out of your houses, out of your barnes, out of your closets; and shall
God open heaven to your souls? They that thus commit their souls to God, God
will commit their souls to Satan. It must be delivered up in Patiendo malum,
but in faciendo bonum; in suffering that is evil, but in doing that is good.
Otherwise if we thrust God from us, God will thrust us from him.

Thus is God even with man. They say now to the holy one of Israel, Job. 21. 14.
Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Hereafter God shall
say to them, Math. 7. 23.
Depart from me, I know you not. Man's soul is but an inmate to the bosom,
sent to lodge there for a time; but must not take it up for a dwelling; God is
the Lord of the Tenure, to him it must be surrendered. We have a soul within
us, but it is not ours; (and yet what is ours if our soul be not) it must be
committed to God; either in evil doing as to a Judge, or in well doing as to a
faithful Creator. Some live as if they had no souls; more belluino, like
humane beasts. The vicissitude of drunkenness, whoredom, sleep, share all
their time. Others live as if they should never part with their soul.
Therefore Reppnunt in mu^tos annos they lay up for many years: this was the
Cosmopolites self flattery. Luke 12. Soul be merry, thou have much goods
laid up for many years. Yet others live as if their soul was not merely
their own, but given them to spend at their pleasure, without ever being
accountable for it.

But the good live, as if their soul was Gods: to him they commend it in a
sweet conversation with God: corporalier mouent in terris, animaliter viuunt in
coelis. Their bodies move on earth, their souls live in heaven. To him they
may boldly commend their spirits: for they that fit their souls for God in
health, shall never find the offer of their deathbed refused. If a man had no
soul, if a mortal one, if his own, if never to be required, he might
without wonder be induced to live sensually: he that knows the contrary, will
live well that he may die well; and commit his soul to God in well doing. Here
further observe;

A man may do good, yet come short of this comfort, it is given been
facientibus, to them that do well. It is not doing good, but doing well, that
gets God to keep the soul. You have served me, says God to Israel, but after
your own lusts. To serve God is doing good, but after their own lusts is not
doing well. To build a Church is a good work; yet if the foundations of it be
laid in the ruins of the poor, their children come not to pray for, but
curse the builder. Great and good were the works of the Pharisees, yet all
spoiled for want of a Been. Math. 5. 20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
you cannot enter the kingdom of heaven. Therefore Saint Paul's council directs
us; 1. Cor. 9. 24.
So (not only run, but so) run that you may obtain. Schismatickes run,
but they run out of the Church: they love the truth, but not in peace. Secure
people run, but they run beside the church: they love peace, but not in
truth: Others follow the truth in peace, but not for the truth: Aug.
Dum quaerunt came, non quaerunt ipsam. They sail in their Sic, they miss this
same Well. Prosunt alijs, sibi neutiquam. They do good to others, but not well
to themselves. But we have almost lost both Bonum and Been; Good and Well. It
is an ill disjunction, that our fathers had so good works, and wanted our
faith: and we have the true faith, but want their works. This Well is the
very form of a good work: and Forma dat esse rei, it can not be good without
it. Let me take here just cause to reprove two sorts of people.

1. Some there are that trust God with their souls, and destroy their own
bodies. But God will take no charge of the soul but in well doing. Those
virgins that would kill themselves to prevent rauishments are reproved by just
censure. Satius incertum adulterium in futuro, quam certum homicidium in
praesenti. Better an uncertain adultery to be endured, then a certain
selfe-murther to be acted. How can they hope for Gods hand of mercy, that lay
on themselves a hand of cruelty. Rhasis in the Maccabees, falling upon his
own sword, and throwing himself down from the wall, yet committed himself
to Gods keeping, calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, etc. The Text says
twice (with little credit to the own Judgment) that it 2. Matt. 14. 46.
was done Manfully. But it was magne, potius quam been factum: done with
desperate valor; with more venture then wisdom, temeritie then honesty. This
was that the Devil left out, when he cited Scripture to Christ; In all thy
ways; he made that a parenthesis, which was essential to the Text. This the
original Math. 4. 6.
testified. Psalm. 91. 11. Custodient in vijs tuis: but this was none of his
ways down from the pinnacle, to show the people a tumbling trick, and to
break his neck. So the Devil labors to secure men of Gods providence
generally, though they be quite out of the way. He bids men be confident that
God will keep their souls, howsoever they walk: so under color of Gods
protection, he brings them to destruction. He tells a man of predestination,
that he is sure of an eternal election to life, therefore may live at his own
pleasure: so from Gods decree draws encouragement to a secure life. He tells
him of Justification, that he is acquitted by the blood of Christ; so emboldens
him on the back of presumption to ride post to Hell, whereas Predestination
and Justification are only made known to us by well-doing.

2. It is impossible for a man of an ill life, to hope that God will keep his
soul. He that lives ill, and hopes well, teaches his ignorance to deceive
his wickedness, and them both to deceive his soul. Esa. 59. 2.
Your iniquities have separated between you and your God. But 2. Cor. 6. 17.
separate your selves from the unclean thing, and I will receive you. Take
away the bar, your sins: break off the partition by repentance; then I
will keep you says God. Commit your souls to the Lords trust in well-doing,
or not at all. If Christ had come down from the pinnacle headlong, and not by
the stairs; he had neglected the way, and so been out of the compass of Gods
promise to keep him. It is an ouer-bold presumption, to charge God to keep
thy soul, whilst thou do wilfully loose it. Will thou clippe the wings of
thy soul, and then bid it fly to God? It is all one, as if thou should cut
off a man's leg, and then send him on an arrand. Our presumption is able to
tie up Gods arms, that he cannot help us. He that will walk in profaneness,
and commit his soul to God; is like him that throws himself into a deep
pit, to try whether God will help him out, and save him from drowning. Man is
timorous where he should be bold, and bold where he should be timorous.

God bids us cast our care upon him for this life: Mat. 6. 31.
Take no thought for your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink,
or wherewith you shall be clothed: your heavenly Father knows ye have need of
all these things. Yet we dare not trust God without a pawn: unless we have
bread, we think we shall starve. Here we fear, where we ought not. God
tells us, the bread of heaven must feed our spirits; more necessary to
maintain life in the soul, then is bread to preserve life in the body: we
never hunger after this, yet presume we have sound souls, and trust God to
keep them. Here we do not fear where we ought. We are so sottish, that
we dare trust God with the soul, the more precious part without well doing,
the means to have it saved: yet dare not trust him with our bodies, unless we
can see our barnes full, or at lest our cupbords.

But in vain thou committest thy soul to God, except thou obeyest God. There
is still a Commandment with the promise: if thou keep not the precept, thou
have no interest in the promise. If thou will not perform thy part, God is
discharged of his part: if thou refuse to do well, he will not keep thy
Soul. The protection of God extends not to us in lewd courses: we are then out
of our way, and the Devil may take us up as Vagabonds. Genesis 4. 7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? if thou do evil, sin lies
at the door. If thou do evil, Sin is thy keeper, not God. There was a
Temple, called the Temple of Trust: God will not be to them a Temple of Trust,
that had no trust in their Temples.

It is a good thing to have God keep the soul, but the wicked cannot have
this hope. He that has money, lays it up in his coffers; or if he sends it
abroad, like a stern laylor, he suffers it not to go without a keeper; sound
bonds. He that has lands makes strong conueyances to his desired heirs, that
they may be kept. If children, he prouides to have them safely kept. He keeps
his goods from the thief, his chickens from the kite, his lamb from the
wolf, his fawn from the hound, his dove from the vermin: yet he keeps not
his soul from the Devil. O wretched man that must die, and knows not what
shall become of his soul. The world would have it, but he knows it must not:
himself would keep it, but he knows he cannot: Satan would have it, and he
knows not whether he shall: he would have God take it, and he knows not
whether he will. O miserable man, that must part with his soul he knows not
whether.

We see what it is to lead an evil life, and to be a stranger to God. He Ioh.
10. 14.
knows his sheep, but the goats are not written in his book. 2. Tim. 2. 19.
The foundation of God stands sure, having the seal, the Lord knows them
that are his. It is a goodly thing to be famous and remarkable in the world.
Est pulchrum digito monstrari, and dicier hic est. It is a goodly thing to be
said, Esth. 6. 9.
this is the man whom the world honors: but perhaps this is not he whom God
honors. He that suffers and does according to the will of God, the Lord will
take that man into his boso^, Psalm. 149. 9.
Such honor have all his Saints, It is no great matter for men to be known to
kings and nobles, if the Lord know them not: nothing to ride in the second
Coach, as Joseph; to be next to the Prince, if they be strangers to the Court
of heaven.

Therefore let us all lay hold on well-doing, that we may have comfort in
well-dying. We desire to shut up our last scene of life, with In manus tuas
Domine commendo spiritum meum; Lord, Into thy hands I commend my spirit.
Behold while we live GOD says to us, In manus tuas homo, commendo spiritum
meum; Man, into thy hands I commend my spirit. As we use Gods Spirit in life,
God will use our Spirit at death. If we open the doors of our hearts to his
Spirit, he will open the doors of heaven to our Spirit. If we feast him with a
Reu. 3. 20.
supper of Grace, he will feast us with a supper of Glory. If we Ephe. 4. 30.
grieve his Spirit, he will grieve all the veins of our hearts. When such
shall say; Lord, into thy hands we commend our souls: no says God, I will
none of your Spirit, for you would none of my Spirit. You shut him out when he
would have entered your hearts, he shall shut you out when you would enter
heaven. Let us therefore here use Gods Spirit kindly, that hereafter he may so
use our spirits. Let us in life entertain him with Faith, that in death he may
embrace us with mercy. So Lord, into thy hands we commend our souls; keep
and receive them O thou faithful Creator, and God of truth, through Jesus
CHRIST.

Amen.
FINIS.

