SIR GYLES GOOSECAPPE Knight. A Comedy presented by the Chil: of the Chapel.



AT LONDON. Printed by John Windet for Edward Blunt. 1606.

(...), Awidowe, and a Noble Lady. Hyppolita, Ladie-virgines, and Companions
to Eugenia* Penelope, Ladie-virgines, and Companions to Eugenia* Wynnifred,
gentlewoman to Eugenia. Monfor^, A Noble Man, uncle to Eugenia. Clare^ce,
Gentleman, friend to Monf. Fowle^ either, a french affected Trauayler, and a
Captain. Sir Giles Goosecap* a foolish knight. Sir Cuthbert (...), a blunt
knight. Sir Clement kingcob, a knight. Lord Tales. Lord Furnifall. Bullaker, a
french Page. ^ack `Pages Will `Pages
SIR GYLES GOOSECAPPE, KNIGHT.
ACTVS PRIMVS,
SCAeNA PRIMA
Enter Bullaker with a Torche. Bullaker. THis is the Countess Eugenias house I
think, I can never hit of these same English City howses, tho I were borne
here: if I were in (...) City in France, I could find any house there at
midnight.


Enter Jack, and Will. Jack. These two strange hungry knights ( VVil) make
the leanest trenchers that ever I waited on.


(...). A plague on them Jack, they leave us no fees at all, for our
attendance, I think they use to set their b^nes in silver they pick them so
clean, see, see, see Jack what is that?


Jack A my word ( (...)) it is the great Baboone, that was to be seen in
Southwarke.


Will Is this he? gods my life what beasts were we, tha^ we wood not ^ee him
all this while, never trust me if he look not somewhat like a man, see how
pretely he holds the torche in one of his forefeete, where is his keeper (...)
owe, is he broke loose?


Jack Have ever an Apple about thee ( Will) we will take him up sure, we shall
get a monstrous deal of money with him.


VVil. That we shall yfath boy, and look thou here, here is a red cheekt apple
to take him up with.


Ia. Excellent ^it a my credit, lets lay down our prouant, and to him.


Bull* I Will let them alone a while.


Ia. Give me the apple to take up Jack, because my name is Jack.


VVil Hold thee Jack, take it.


Ia. Come Iack^, come Jack, come Jack.


Bull. I will come to your Sir, I Will Jack ye a my word, I Will Jack ye.


Will Gods me he speaks Jack, O pray pardon us Sir*


Bull. Out ye m^pede monckies can ye not know a man from a Marmasett, in these
Frenchified days of ours? na^ i will Iackefie you alittle better yet.


both, Nay good Sir, good Sir, pardon us*


Bull* Pardon us, out ye homebred peasants, plain english, pardon us, if you
had parled, and not spoken, but said pardonne moy* I wood have pardoned you,
but since you speak, and not parley, I will cudgel ye better yet.


Ambo O pardonne moy mounsieur.


Bull. Bien ie vous remercie, there is pardonne pour vous Sir now.


Will Why I thank ye for it Sir, you seem to be a Squire of our order Sir.


Ia. Whose page might you be Sir.


Bull. I am now the great French Traualers page*


Will Or rather the french Traualer^ great page. Sir, on, on


Bull. Hight Captain Fouleweather, alias Comendations; whose valors within
here at super with the Cou^^es Eugenia, whose propper eaters I take you two to
be.


Will You mistake us not Sir.


Ia. This captain Fouleweather, alias Co^mendations ( Will) is the galla^t that
will needs be a suitor to our Cou^tes


Will Faith and if Fouleweather be a welcome suitor to a ^aire Lady, has good
luck.


Ia. O Sir, beware of one that can shower into the* lapps of Ladies, Captain
Fowleweather? why he is a Captinado, or C^ptaine of Captains, and will lie in
the^r io^ntes that give him cause to work v^pon them so heauylie, that he
will make their hearts ache I warrant him* Captain Fowleweather? why he will
make the cold stones sweat for fear of him, a day or two before he come at
them. Captain Fowleweather? why he does so dominere, and reign over women.


Will A plague of Cap^aine Fowleweather I remember him now Jack, and know him
to be a dull moist braind Ass.


Ia. A Southern man I think.


Will As fearful as a Hare, and a will lie like a Lapwing, and I know how he
came to be a Captain, and to have his Surname of Commendations.


Ia. How I preethee Will?


Will Why Sir he served the great Lady Kingcob, and was yeoman of her
wardroppe, and because a cood brush up her silks lustely, she thought he
would curry the enemies coats as soundly, and so by her commendations, he was
made Captain in the low Countries.


Ia. Then being made Captain only by his Ladies comme^dations, without any
worth also of his own, he was ever after surnamde Captain Commendations?


Will Right.


Bull. I Sir right, but if he had not said right, my Captain should have taken
no wrong at his hands, nor yours neither I can tell ye.


Ia. What are those two Knights names, that are thy captains Comrades, and
within at supper with our Lady?


Bull. One of their names Sir, is, Sir Gyles Goosecappe, the others Sir Cut.
Rudseby.


Will Sir Gyles Goosecappe what is he a gentleman?


Bull. I that he is at least if he be not a noble man, and his chief house is
in Essex.


Ia. In Essex? did not his Ancestors come out of London


Bull. Yes that they did Sir, the best Gosecappes in England, comes out of
London I assure you.


Will I but Sir these must come into it before they come out ont I hope, but
what countriman is ^ir Cut. Rudeby?


Bull. A Northern man, or a VVesternma^ I take him, but my Captain is the
Emphaticall man; and by that pretty word Emphaticall ^ou shall partly know him;
for it is a very forcible word in troth, and yet he forces it too much by his
favor; mary no more then he does all the rest of his words; with whose
multiplicitie often times he travails himsele out of all good company.


Jack Like enough; he trauaild for nothing else.


VVil But what qualities haunt Sir Gyles Goosecap now Sir?


Bull. Sir Gyles Goosecap has always a deaths head (as it were) in his mouth,
^or his only one reason for ^uery thing is, because we are all mortal; and
therefore he is generally called the mortal knight; then has he another
pretty phrase too, and that is* he will tickle the vanity ant still in every
thing and this is your Summa totalis of both their virtues.


Ia. It Is enough, it is enough, as long as they have land enough, but now muster
your third person before us I beseech you,


Bull. The third person and second knight blunt Sir Cut. Rudesby, is indeed
blunt at a sharp wit, and sharp at a blun^ wit a good bustling gal^ant talks
well at Rouers; he is two parts soldier; as slovenly as a Switzer, and
somewhat like one in face too; for he wears a bush beard will dead a Cannon
shot better then a woolpacke: he will come in^o the presence like yor
Frenchman ^n foul boots* and dares eat garlik as a prep^atiue to his
Cour^ship; you shall know mo^e of hi^ h^reafter; but good wags let me win
you now, for the Geographicall parts of your Ladies in requital.


Will That you shall Sir, and the Hydrographicall too and you will; first my
Lady the widow, and Countes ^ugenia, is in earnest, a most worthy Lady, and
indeed can do more then a thousand other Ladies can do I can tell ye.


Bvl What Is that I pray thee?


Jack. Mary Sir, he means she can do more then sleep, and eat and drink; and
play at noddy, and help to make her self ready.


Bull Can she so?


Will She is the best scholar of any woman but one in England, she is wi^e and
virtuous,


Ia. Nay she has one strange quality for a woman besides, tho these be
strange enough that he has rekoned.


Bull. For Gods sake what is that?


Ia. She can love reaso^able constantly, for she loved her husband only, almost
a whole year together.


Bull. That's strange indeed, but what is your fair Lady Sir?


Ia. My Lady Sir, the Lady Hippolita.


Will That is as chaste as ever was Hippolitus.


Ia. (True my pretty Parenthesis) is half a maid, half a wife, and hal^e a
widdowe.


Bull. Strange tale to tell; how can thou make this good my good Assumpsit.


Ia. Thus Sir, ^he was betroathed to a gallant young gentleman that loud her
with such passion and admiration that he never thought he could be so blessed
as to en^oy her in sull marriage, till the minister was marrying them, and even
then when he was saying I Charles take thee Hippolita; with extreme joy he
began to look pale, then going forwards saying to my wedded wife, he looked
paler, and, then pronouncing, for richer for poorer as long as we both shall
live, he looked extreme pale; Now sir when she comes to speak her part, and
said, I Hippolota take thee Charles, he began to faint for joy, then saying to
my wedded husband, he began to sink, but then going forth too for better sor
wo^e, he could stand no longer but with very conceit it seemd, that she
whom he tendered as the best of all things, should pronounce the worst, and
for his sake too, he suncke down right, and died suddenly: And thus being
half married, and her half husband wholly dead, I hope I may with discretion
affirm her, half a maid, half a wife, and half a widdowe; do ye conceiu^
me Sir?


Bull. O Lord Sir, I devour you quick; and now Sir I beseech you open unto me
your the other Lady, what is she?


Will I Will answer for her, because I know her Ladyship to be a perfect maid
indeed.


Bull How can thou know that?


Will Passing perfectly I warrant ye.


Ia. By measuring her neck twice, and trying if it will come about her
forehead, and slyp over her nose?


Will No Sir no, by a rule that will not slip so I warrant you, which for her
honors sake I will let slip unto you, gods so Jack* I think they have supt.


Ja. Bir Lady we have waited well the while.


Will Well though they have lost their attendance, let not us lose our Suppers
Jack.


Jack I do not mean it, come Sir you shall go in and drink with us y faith.


Bull. Pardonne moy mounsieur.


both ^o pardoning in truth Sir,


Bull Ie vous remercy de-bon Ceur.

Exeunt.
Enter Goosecappe Rudesby Fouleweather Eugenia Hippol. Penelope, Win. Rud. A
plague on you sweet Ladies, it is not so late, what needed you to have made so
short a supper.


Goos. In truth Sir Cut. we might have tickled the vanity ant, an hour
longer if my watch be trustible.


Foul. I but how should these bewties know that Sir Gyles? your watch is
mortal, and may err.


Go. T^ats ^ooth Captain, but do you hear hone^ (...) pray take a light, and
see if the mo^ne shine, I have a Sun dial will resolve presently.


Fo. Howsoever believe it Ladies, it is unwholesome, vncourtlie, unpleasant to
eat hastily, and rise suddenly, a man can show no discourse, no wit, no
stirring, no variety, no pretty conceits, to make the meat go down
emphaticaly?


Eu. Wi^fred.


Win. M^dam.


Eu. I prethie go to my uncle the Lord Momford, and entreat him to come
quicken our ears with some of his pleas^nt Spirit; This ^ame Fowleweather ^as
made me so melancholy, prethie make haste.


Win. I will madam.

E^it.
Hip. We will bid our guests good night madam, this sa^e Fowleweather makes me
so fleepie.


Pen. Fie upon it, for Gods sake shut the Casements, here is such a fulsome air
comes into this chamber; in good faith madame you must keep your house in
better reparations, this same Fowlweather beats in so filthily.


Eug. I Will take order with the Porter for it Lady, good night gentlemen.


Ru. Why good night and be ha^gd, and you will needs be gone.


Goos. God give you good night madams, thank you for my good cheer, we will
tickle the vani^e ant, no longer with you at this time, but i will ind^te your La:
to supper at my lodging one of these mornings; and that ere long too, because
we are all mortal you know.


Eu. Light the Lady Penelope, and the Lady Hippolita to their chambers, good
night fair Ladies.


Hip. Good night madam, I wish you may sleep well after your light supper.


Eug. I warrant you Lady I shall never be troubled with dreaming of my French
Suter.

Exeunt
Ru. Why how now my Fre^chified captain Fowlweather? by gods ludd thy Surname
is never thought upon here, I perceive heeres no body gives thee any
co^mendations.


Fo. Why this is the vntrauaild rudnes of our gross English Ladies ^ow; would
any French Lady v^e a man thus think ye? be they any way so uncivil, and
fulsome? they say they wear foul smockes, and course smockes, I say they lie,
and I will die int.


Rud. I, do so, pray thee, thou shall die in a very honorable cause, thy
countries general quarrel right.


F^l. Their smockes quoth you? a my word you shall take them up so white, and
so pure, so sweet, so Emphaticall, so moving.


Rud. I marry Sir, I think they be continually moving.


Foul. But if their smockes were Course or foul.


Rud. Nay I warrant thee thou ca rest not, ^o thou were: at them.


Foul God's Death they put not all their virtues in their smockes, or in their
mockes, or in their stew de cocks as our Ladies do.


Rud. But in their stewde pox, there is all their gentilitie.


Goos. Nay good Sir Cut. do not agrauate him no more.


Fowl. Then are they so kind, so wise, so familiare so noble, so sweet in
entertainment, that when you shall, have cause to descourse or sometimes to come
nearer! them; if your breath be ill, your teeth ill, or any thing about you
ill why they will presently break with ye, in kind sort, good terms, pre^ty
experiments, and tell you plain this; thus it is with your breath Sir, thus it
is with your teeth Sir, this is your disease, and this is your medicine.


Goos. As I am true mortal Knight, it is most superlatiuely good, this.


Foul. Why this is Courtly now, this is sweet, this plain, this is familiar,
but by the Court of France, our peuishe dames are so proud, so precise, so coy,
so disdain^full, and so subtle, as the Pomonean Serpent, mort dieu the Punck
of Babylon was never so subtle.


Rud. Nay do not chafe so Captain.


Foul. Your Frenchman wood ever chase Sir Cut, being thus moude.


Rud. What? and play with his beard so.


Foul. I and bry^le, it does express that passion of anger very full and
emphaticall.


Goos. Nay good knight if your French wood bry^le, let ^im alone, in troth our
Ladies are a little too coy and subtle Captain indeed.


Foul. Subtle Sir Giles Goosecappe? I assure your Soul, they are as subtle
with their suitors, or loves, as the Latin Dialect where the nominative Case,
and the verb, the Sub^antiue, and the Adjective, the verb, and the verb,
stand as far a sunder, as if they were perfect strangers one to another; and
you shall hardly find them out, but then learn to Construe, and perse them,
and you shall find them prepared, and acquainted, and agree together, in Case,
gender, and number.


Goos. I detest Sir Cut, I did not think he had bin half the quintissence
of a^choller he is.


Foul. Slydd there is not one of them truly emphatical.


Goos. Yes I Will ensure you Captain, there are many of them truly Emphaticall
but all your French Ladies are not fatt? are they Sir?


Foul. Fatt Sir, why do ye think Emphaticall is fatt Sir Giles?


Rud. Gods my life brother knight, did thou think so? heart I know not what
it is my self, but yet I never thought it was fatt, I Will be sworn to thee.


Foul. Why if any true Courtly dame had had but this new fashioned suit, to
entertain any thing in differently stuffed, why you should have had her more
respective by far.


Rud. Nay there is some reason for that Captain, me thinks a true woman should
perpetually doat upon a new fa^ion.


Foul. Why you are i'thright Sir Cut. Innoua fert Ani^ mus m^tatas
dicere-formas. it is the mind of man, and woman to affect new fashions; but to
our Mynsatiues for sooth, if he come like to your Besognio, or your bore, so he
be rich, or emphaticall, they care not; would I might never excel a dutch
Skipper in Courtshippe if I did not put distaste into my carriage of purpose; I
knew I should not please them. Lacquay? allume le torche.


Rud. Slydd, here is neither Torch, nor Lacquay me thinks.


Foul. O mon dew.


Rud. O do not swear Captain.


Foul. Your Frenchman ^uer swears Sir Cut, upon the lack of his Lacquay I
assure you.


Goos. See here he comes, and my Ladies two pages, they have bin tickling the
vanity ont yfa^th.


SCAeNA TERTIA.
Enter to them Jack Butlaker, Will. La. Captain ^owleweather, my Lady the
Countes Eugenia commends her most kindly to you, and is determined to morrow
morning early if it be a frost to take her Coach to Barnet to be nipt where
if it please you, to meet her, and accompany her homewarde, joining your wit
with the frost, and help to nippe her, She does not doubt but tho you had a
sad supper, you will have a joyful breakefast.


Foul. I shall indeed my deeare youth.


Rud. Why Captain I abusd thee, I see: I said the Ladies respected thee not,
and n^w Iperceiue the widow is in love with thee.


Foul. Sblood knight I knew I had struck her to the quick, I wondered she
departed in that extrauagant fashion: I am sure I past one Passado of Courtship
upon her, that has hertofore made a lane amongst the French Ladies like a
Culuering ^hot, I Will be sworn; and I think Sir Gyles you saw how she fell under
it.


Goos. O as clear as can dlelight, by this daylight.


Rud. O good knight a the post, heel swear any thing.


Will The other two Ladies commend them no less kindly to you two knights too;
and desire your worships wood meet them at Barnet ith morning with the
Captain.


Foul. Goos. Rud. O. good Sir.


Goos. Our worships shall attend their Ladyships thither.


Ia. No Sir Giles by no means, they will go privately thither, but if you
will meet them there.


Rud. Meet them, we will die fort, but we will meet them.


Foul. Lets go thither to night knights, and you be true gailants.


Rud. Content.


Ja. How greedely they take it in Sir.


Goos. No it is too far to go to night, we will be up betimes ith morning,
and not go to bed at all.


Foul. Why its but ten miles, and a fine clear nightS. Gyles


Goos. But ten miles? what do ye talk Captain?


Rud. Why do think its any more?


Goos. I, ^elaie ten pounds its more then ten mile, or twelve either.


Rud. What to Barnet?


Gous. I, to Barnet?


Ru. Slidd, I Will lay a hundred pound with thee, if thou will.


Goos. I Will lay five hundred, to a hundred, Slight I will not be out borne with
a wager, in that I know, I am sure it was four years agon ten miles thither,
and I hope it is more now, Slidd do not miles grow think you, as well as other
Animals.


Ia. O wise Knight!


Gos. I never Innd in the Town but once, and then they lodged me in a Chamber
so full of these Ridiculus Fleas, that I was feign to lie standing all night,
and yet I made my man rise, and put out the candle too, because they should not
see to bire me.


Foul. A pretty project.


Bull. Intruth Captain if I might advise you, you should tarry, and take the
morning before you.


Foul. How? O ^on Diew, how the villain poulltrou^e, dishonours his travail?
you Buffonly Mouchroun, are you so mere rude, and English to advise your
Captain?


Ru. Nay I prethie Fouleweather be not te^pesteous with thy poor Lacquay.


Foul. Te^pesteous Sir Cut, will your Frenchman think you, suffer his Lacquay
to adui^e him?


Go. O God you must take heed Lacquy how you advise your captain, your French
lacquay would not have donit.


Foul. He would have bin poxt first: Allume le torche, sweet pages commend us
to your Ladies, say we kiss their white hands, and will not fail to meet
them* knights which of you leads?


Goos. Not we Sir, you are a Captain, and a leader.


Rud. Besides, thou art commended for the better man, for thou art very
Commendations it self, and Captain Commendations.


Foul. Why, what tho I be Captain Commendations?


Rud. Why and Captain comme ndations, is hearty? commendations, for Captains
are hearty I am sure, or else hang them,


Foul. Why, what if I be hearty Commendations, come, come, sweet knights
lead the way.


Rud. O Lord Sir, always after my hearty Commendations.


Foul. Nay then you conquer me with president, by the Autenticall form of all
Justice letters. Alloun.

Exeunt.
Ia. Here Is a most sweet Gudgeon swallowed, is there not?


Will I but how will they digest it think thou? when they shall find our
Ladies not there?


Ia. I have a vaunt-Curriing devise shall make them digest it most healthfully.

Exeunt.
SCAeNA QVARTA.
Enter Clarence Musuians. Cla. Work on sweet love, I am not yet resolud
T'exhaust this troubled spring of vanities
And nurse of perturbations, my poor life,
And therefore since in every man that holds
This being dear, there must be some desire
Whose power to' enjoy his object may so mask
The Judging part that in her radyant eyes
His estimation of the world may seem
Upright, and worthy, I have chosen love
To blind my Reason with his mistie hands
And make my estimatiue power believe
I have a project worthy to employ
What worth so ever my whole man affordes:
Then sit at rest my Soul, thou now have found
The end of thy infusion, in the eyes
Of thy divine Eugenia look for heaven.

Cla. Thanks gentle friends is your good Lord and mine, gone up to bed yet?

A song to the Uiolls
Enter Momford. Mom. I do assure ye not Sir, not yet, nor yet, my deep, and
studious friend, not yet musical Clarence.


Cla. My Lord?


Mom, Nor yet, thou sole deuider of my Lordshippe.


Cla. That were a most unfit division
And far above the pitche of my low plumes
I am your bold and constant guest my Lord.

Mom. Far, far from bold, for thou have known me long
Almost these twenty years, and half those years
Have bin my bedfellow; long time before
This unseen thing, this thing of naught indeed
Or Atome called, my Lordshippe shinde in me,
And yet thou makst thy self as little bold
To take such kindness, as becomes the Age
And truth of our indissolable love
As our acquaintance sprung but yesterday
Such is thy gentle and too tender Spirit.

Cla. M^ Lord, my want of Courtship makes me fear
I should be rude, and this my mean estate
Mee^es with such envy, and detraction
Such misconstructions, and resolud misdoomes
Of my poor worth, that should I be aduaunc'd
Beyond my unseen lowen^s, but one hai^e
I should be torn in pieces with the Spirits
That fly in ill-lungd tempests through the world,
Tearing the head of virtue from her shoulders
If she but look out of the ground of glory.
Twixt, whom, and me and every worldly fortune
There fiights such sour, and Cursed Antipathy
So waspi^he, and so petulant a Star,
That a^l things tending to my grace or good
Are ravished from their object, as I were
A thing created for a wilderness
And must not think of any place with men.

Mom. O hark you Sir, this waiwarde mood of yours must syfted be, or rather
rooted out, you will no more music Sir?


Cla. Not now my Lord,


Mom. Begone my masters then to bed, to bed.


Cla. I thank you honest fri^nds

Exeunt Musicians.
Mo. Hence with this book and now Mou^sieur Clarence, methinks plain and prose
friendship would do excellent well betwixt us comethus Sir, or rather thus,
come Sir it is time I trow that we both lived like one body, thus, and that
both our sides were sli^, and Concorporat with Organs fit to effect an
individual passage even for out very thoughts; suppose we were one body now,
and I charge you believe it; where of I am the heart, and you the liver.


Cla. Your Lordship might well make that division if you knew the plain song.


Mom. O Sir, and why so I pray?


Cla. First because the heart, is the more worthy entraile, being the first
that is borne, and moves, and the last that moves, and dies; and then being the
fountain of heat too, for wheresoever our heat does not flow directly from
the heart to the other Organs, there, their action must of necessity cease, and
so without you I nether would nor could live.


Mom. Well Sir for these reasons I may be the heart* why may you be the liver
now?.


Cla. I am more then ashamde, to tell you that my Lord.


Mom. Nay nay be not too suspicious of my judgment, in you I beseech you:
ashamed friend? if your love overcome not that shame, a shame take that love I
say. Come sir why may you be the li^er?


Cla. The plain and short truth is (my Lord) because I am all liver, and
tournd lover.


Mom. Lover?


Cla Lover y faith my Lord.


Mom. Now I prithee let me leap out of my skin for joy why thou will not now
reviue the sociable mirth of thy sweet disposition? will thou shine in the
world a new? and make those that have fleighted thy love, with the Austeritie
of thy knowledge, doat on the again with thy commanding ^haft of their
humors?


Cla. A las my Lord they are all far out of my aims and only to fit my
self a little better to your friendship, have I given these wilful raygnes
to my affections.


Mom. And y faith is my sower friend to all worldly desires overtaken with the
heart of the world? Love I shall be monstrous proud now, to hear she is every
way a most rare woman that I know thy spirit, and judgment has chosen, is she
wise? is she noble? is she capable of thy virtues? will she kiss this forehead
with judicial lips? where so much judgment and virtue deserves it? Come
brother Twinn, be short I charge you, and name me the woman.


Cla. Since your Lordship will shorten the length of my follies relation, the
woman that I so passionateli^ love, is no worse Lady then your own Niece, the
too worthi^ Countess Euge^ia.


Mom. Why so, so, so, you are a worthy friend are you not to conce^le this
loue-mine in your head, and would not open it to your heart, now beshrow my
heart, if my heart dance not for joy tho my hee^es do not, and they do not,
because I will not set that at my heels that my friends set at his heart,
what? friend and Nephew? both nephewis a far inferior title to friend I
confess, but I will prefer the backwards (as many friends do) and leave
their friends worse then they found them,


Cla. But my noble Lo. it is almost a prodegie, that I being only a poor
Gentleman and far short of that state and wealth that a Lady of her
greatnesses in both will expect in her husband.


Mom. Hold thy doubt friend, never fear any woman, unless thy self be made
of straw, or some such dry matter, and she of lightning, Audacitie prospers
above probability in all worldhe matters, do not thou know that Fortune
gouernes them without order, and therefore reason the mother of order is none
of her counsel, why should a man desiring to aspire an unreasonable creature
which is a woman? seek her fruition by reasonable means, because thy self
binds upon reason, will thou look for congruitie in a woman? why? there is
not one woman amongst one thousand, but will speak false Latin, and break
Priscians head, attempt nothing that you may with great reason doubt of, and
out of doubt you shall obtain nothing, I tell thee friend the enmine^t
confidence of strong spirits is the only wich-craft of this world, Spirits
wrestling with spirits, as bodies? with bodies? this were enough to make the
hope well, if she were one of these painted communities, that are ravished with
Coaches, and upper hands, and brave men of dirt: but thou know friend she is
a good scholar, and like enough to, bite at the rightest reason, and reason
evermore Ad optima hortetur: to like that which is best, not that which is
brauest, or rightest, or greatest, and so consequently worst, But prove what
she can, we will turn her, and wind her, and make her so plyant that we will
draw her through a wedding ring y faith.


Cla. Would to god we might my Lord.


Mom. I Will warrant thee friend.


Enter Messenger. Mes. Where is mistress Winnyfred; for my Lady Eugenia desires
to speak with your Lordshippe.


Mom. Marry enter mistress Winnifred even here I pray thee, from the Lady
E^genia, do you hear friend?


Cla. Very easily on that side my Lord.


Mom. Let me feel? does not thy heart pant apace, by my heart well labored
Cupid, the field is yours sir God, and upon a very honorable composition, I
am sent for now I am sure, and must even trusse and to her:

Enter Winnyfred. witty mistress Winnifred, nay come near woman I am sure this
Gentleman thinks his chamber the sweeter for your dear presence.


Win, My absence shall thank him my Lord.


Mom. What rude Mistress Winnifred? nay faith you shall come to him, and kiss
him, for his kindness.


Win. Nay good my Lord, I Will never go to the market for that ware I can have it
brought ho^e to my door


Mom. O Winnifred, a man may know by the m^rket folks how the market goes.


Win. So you may my Lord, but I know few Lords that think scorn to go to
that market themselves.


Mom. To go to it Winnifred, nay to ride to it y faith.


Win. That's more then I know my Lord.


Mom. You Will not believe it till you are then a horseback, will ye?


Win. Come, come, I am sent of a message to you will you hear it?


Mom. Stop, stop fair Winnifred, would you have audience so soon, there
were no state in that y faith; this fair gentlewoman sir.


Win. Nuw we shall have a fiction I believe.


Mom. Had three Suitors at once.


Win. You Will leave out none my Lord.


Mom* No more did you Winnifred you enterferde with them all in (...).


Win. O Monstrous Lord by this light!


Mom. Now Sir (...) make my tale short I will do that which she did not; vz.
leave out the two first, the third coming the third night for his turn.


Win. My Lord, my Lord, my Lady does that, that no body else does, desires
your company and so fare you well.


Mom. O stay a little sweet Winnifred, help me but to (...) my points again,
and have with you.


Win. Not I by my truth my Lord, I had rather see your hose about your heels,
then I would help you to trusse a point.


Mom. O witty Winnifred? for that left, take thy pasport, and tell thy Ladies
thou leftst me with my hose about my heels.


Win. Well, well my Lord you shall sit till the moss grow a bout you^ he les,
ere I come at you again.

aexit.
Mom. She cannot abide to hear of her three Sui^; but is not this very fit my
sweet Clarence? Thou (...) my rare Niece cannot sleep without me; but forthy
company sake, she shall to night; and in the morning I will visit her early;
when do thou but stand in that place, and thou maie^t chance hear, (but art
sure to see) in what subtle, and farre-fetcht manner I Will solicit her about
thee.


Cla Thanks worthy Lord.

exeunt.
Finis. Actus Primis
ACTVS SECVNDI
SAeNA PRIMA
Clarence Solus. Cla. I That have studied with world-(...) thoughts the way of
heaven, and how ^rew heaven is reached

To know how mighty, and how many are
The strange affections of inchaunted number
How to distinguish all the motions
Of the Celestial bodies, and what power
does separate in such form this massy Rownd:
What is his Essence, Efficacies, Beams?
Footesteps, and Shadows? what Eternes^es is
The world, and Time, and Generation?
What Soul, the worlds Soul is? what the black Springes
And vnreueald Original of Things,
What their perse^erance* what is life and death,
And what our Certain Restoration?
Am with the staid*heads of this Time imployd
To watch withal my Nerves a Female shade.

Enter Wynnefred, Anabell, with their sowing works and sing: After their song
Enter Lord Momford. Mom. VVitty Mistrisse Wynnefred, where is your (...) I pray?


Wyn. Faith your Lordship is bold enough to ^eeke her out, i^ she were at her
vrinall?


Mom. Then She Has done it seems, for here she comes to save me that labor,
away wenches, get you hence wenches.

Exeunt.
Eu. What, can you not abide my maids uncle?


Mom. I never ^ood abide a maid in my life Niece, but either I draw away the
maid, or the maidenhead with a wet finger.


Eu. You love to make your self worse then you are still.


Mom. I know few mend in this world Madam, For the worse the better thought
on, the better the worse spoken on ever amongst women.


Eu. I wonder where you have binne all this while with your sentences.


Mom, Faith where I must be again presently. I cannot stay long with you my
dear Niece.


Eu. By my faith but you shall my Lord, Gods pity what will become of you
shortly, that you drive maids before you, and offer to leave widows behind you,
as mankindelie, as if you had taken a surfeit of our Sex lately, and our very
sight turned your stomach.


Mom. Gods my life, She abuses her best uncle; never trust me if it were not a
good revenge to help her to the loss of her widowhead.


Eu. That were a revenge and a half, indeed.


Mom. Nay twere but a whole revenge Niece, but such a revenge as would more
then observe the true rule of a revenge.


Eu. I know your rule before you utter it, Vlciscere Inimico sed sine tuo
incommodo.


Mom. O rare Niece, you may see, what it is to be a a scholar now, Learning in
a woman is like weight in gold, or Luster in Diamants, which in no other Stone
is so rich or refulgent


Eug. But say dear Uncle how could you find in your heart to stay so long
from me.


Mom. Why alas Niece, you are so smeard with this willfull-widdowes three-yeeres
black weed, that I never come to you, but I dream of Courses, and
Sepulchers, and Epitaths, all the night after, and therefore adieu dear Niece.


Eug. Beshrew my heart my Lord, if you go these three hours.


Mom. Three hours? nay Niece, if I dance attendance three hours (alone in
her chamber) with an Lady so near alide to me, I am very idle isaith, marie
with such an other; I would dance, one, two, three, four, and five, tho it
cost me ten shillings; and now I am in, have at it, my head must devise
something while my feet are pidling thus, that may bring her to some fit
consideration of my friend, who indeed is only a great scholar* and all his
honors, and riches lie in his mind.*


Eug. Come, Come, pray tell me uncle, how does my cosen Momford?


Mom. Why, well, very well Niece, and so is my friend Clarence well too, and
then is there a worthy gentleman well as any is in England I can tell ye.


Eug. But when did you see my Cosen?


Mom. And it is pity but he should do well, and he shall be well too, if all my
wealth will make him well.


Eug. What means he by this tro ye, your Lo: is very dancitiue me thinks.


Mom. I, and I could tell you a thing would make your Ladyship very dancitiue,
or else it were very dunsatiue in faith. O how the skipping of this Christmas
block of ours moves the blockhead heart of a woman, and indeed any thing that
pleases the foolish eye which presently runs with a lying tale of Excellence
to the mind.


Eug. But I pray tell me my Lord could you tell me of a thing would make me
dance say you?


Mom. Well, farewell sweet Niece I must needs take my leave in earnest.


Eug. Lord bless us, here is such a stir with your farewels.


Mom. I will see you again within these two or three days a my word Niece.


Eug. Gods precious, two or three days? why this Lord is in a marualous
strange humor. Sit down sweet Uncle, in faith I have to talk with you about
great matters.


Mom. Say then dear Niece, be short utter your mind quickly now.


Eug. But I pray tell me first, what is that would make me dance in faith?


Mom. Dance, what dance? hitherto your dauncers legs bow for-sooth, and
Caper, and Ierke, and Firke, and dandle the body above them, as it were their
great child, though the special Ierker be above this place I hope, here lies
that shudd fetch a perfect woman over the Coals in faith.


Eug. Nay good Uncle say what is the thing you could tell me of.


Mom. No matter, no matter* But let me see a pass^g prosperous forchead of an
exceeding happy distance betwixt the eye brows; a cle^ lightning eye; a
temperate and ^eshe blood in both the cheeks; excellent m^arkes, most
excellent marks of good fortune.


Eug. Why, how now Uncle did you never see me before!


Mom. Yes N^ce* but the state of these things at this instant must be
specially observed, and these outward signs being now in this clear
elevation, show your ^oubled mind is in an excellent power, to prefer them
to act forth then a little dear N^ce.


Eug. This is excellent.


Mom. The Creses here are excellent good; The propor^ion of the chin good; the
little aptnes of it to stick out; good. And the wart above it most exceeding
good. Never trust me, if all things be not answerable to the predictio^ of a
most divine fortune toward her; uow if she have the grace to apprehend it in
the nicke; there is all.


Eug. Well my Lord, since you will not tell me your secret, i will keep another
from you; with whose discovery, you may much pleasure me, and whose
concealment may hurt my es^ate. And if you be no ^inder then to see me so
endangered; i will be very patient of it I assure you.


Mom. Nay then it must instantly forth. This kind con iuration even fires it
out of me; and (to be short) gather all your Judgment together, for here it
comes. Niece; Clarence Clarence, rather my Soul then my ^rie^d Clarence of too
substantial a worth, to have any figures cast about him, (notwithstanding, no
other woman with Empires could stir his affections) is with your vertue^ most
extremely in love; and without your requital dead. And with it ^ame shall
^ound this golden disticke through the world of you both.

No^ illo melior quisquam nec amantior aequi
Vir fu^t, aut illa reuerentior vlla Dearum.

Eug. Ay me poor Dame, O you amase me Uncle,
Is this the wondrous fortune you presage?
What man may miserable women trust?

Mom. O peace good Lady, I come not to rauishe you to any thing. But now I see
how you accept my motion: I perceive (how upon true trial) you esteem me.
Have I ridd all this C^cuite to levy the powers of your Judgment, that I might
not prove their strength too suddenly with so violent a charge: And do they
fight it out in white blood. And show me their hearts in the soft Crystal of
tears


Eug. O uncle you have wounded your self in charging me that I should shun
Judgment as a monster, if it would not weep; I place the poor felicity of
this world in a worthy friend, and to see him so unworthily revolted, I
shedd not the tears of my Brain, but the tears of my soul. And if ever
nature made tears theffects of any worthy cause, I am su^e I now shed them
worthelie.


Mom. Her sensual powers are up in faith, I have thrust her soul quite from her
Tribunal. This is her Seeds vacans when her sub^ects are priueledged to libell
against her, and her friends. But weeps my kind Niece for the wounds of my
friendship? and I touched in friendship for wishing my friend doubled in her
singular happiness?


Eug. How am I doubled? when my honor, and good name, two essential parts of
me; would be less, and lost?


Mom. In whose Judgment?


Eug. In the judgment of the world.


Mom. Which is a fools boult. Nihil a vertute nec a viritate remotius quam
Vulgaris opi^: But my dear Niece, it is most true that your honor and good
name tendered (...) they are the species of truth are worthily two essential
parts of you; But as they consist only in ayrie titles and corrupteble blood
(whose bitterness sanitas et non nobilitas efficit) and care not how many base
and exe crable acts they commit, they touch you no more then they touch ^nitie.
And yet shall no nobility you have in either, be impaired neither.


Eu. Not to marry a poor gentleman?


Mom. Respect him not so; for as he is a gentleman he is noble; as he is
welthilie furnished with true knowledge, he is rich and therein adorned with
the exatest complements belonging to everlasting nobleness.


Eug. Which yet will not maintain him a week: Such kind of nobleness gives
no cotes of honor nor can scarce get a cote for necessity


Mom. Then is it not substantial knoweledge (as it is in him) but verbal and
fantastical for Om^a in illa *ille. complexutenet.


Eug. Why seeks he me then?


Mom. To make you joint partners with him in all things, and there is but a
little partial difference betwixt you, that hinders that universal ioynture:
The bigness of this ci^cle held too near our eye keeps it from the whole
Sphere of ^he Sun but; could we sustain it indifferently betwixt (...) and
it, it would then without check of one beam appear in his fulness.


Eug. Good Uncle be content for now shall I never dream of contentment.


Mom. I have more then done Lady, and had rather have suffered an alteration
of my being then of your Judgment; but (dear niece) for your own honor sake
repair it instantly.

Enter Hippolita. Penelope. Jack. Will. See here comes the Ladies; make an
April day one dear^ love and be suddenly cheerful God save you more then
fair Ladies, I am glad your come, for my business will have me gone presently.


Hip. Why my Lord Mo^ford I say? will you go before dinner?


Mom. No remedy sweet Bewties, for which rudene^e I lay my hands thus low
for your pardons:


Pen. O Courteous Lord Momford!


Mom. Niece? Men's estquae sola qui^s. Sola facit claros meant emque honoribus
ornat

ex^
Eug Verus honos ^at at mendax infamia terret.


Mon. Mine own dear nephew?


Cla. What success my Lord?


Mom. Excellent; excellent; come I Will tell thee all.

exeunt
Hip. Do you hear madam, how our youths h^re have guld our three suitors?


Eug not I Lady, I hope our suitors are no fit meat for our Pages.


Pe. No madam, but they are fit sauce for any man's meat I Will warrant them.


Eug. What Is the matter Hippolita?


Hp. They have sent the knights to Barnet madam this frostie morning to meet
us their.


E^ug. Is It true youths, are knights fit subiec^ for your knaueries*


Will. Pray pardon us madam, we would be glad to please any body.


^a. I indeed madam and we were sure we pleas^d the^ highly to tell the^ you
were def^rous of their company.


Hip. O it was good Eugenia, their livers were too hot, you know, and for temper
sake they must needs have a cooling card played upon them.


Will. And besides madam we wood have them know that your two little Pages,
which are less by hal^ ^hen two leaves, have more learning in them then is in
all their three volumnes.


Ia. I faith Will, and putt their great pagicall index to them too.


Hip. But how will ye excuse your abuses wags?


Will We doubt not madam, but if it please your Ladyship to put up their abuses,


Ia. Trusting they are not so dear to you, but you may.


Will We shall make them gladly furnishe their pockets with them.


Hip. Well, children, and fowls, agree as you will, and let the world know
now, women have nothing to do with you.


Pe. Come madam I think your dinner be almost ready,

Enter Tales Kingcob.
Hip. And see, here are two honorable guestes for you, the Lord Tales, and Sir
Cutberd Kingcob.


Ta. Lack you any guests madam?


Eu. I my Lord such guests as you.


Hip There Is as common an answer, as yours was a question my Lord.


King. Why? al things shood be common betwixt Lords, and Ladies you know.


Pen. Indeed Sir Kuttberd Bingcob, I have heard, you are either of the family
of Love, or of no religion at all.


Eug. He may well be said to be of the family of Love, he does so flow in the
loves of poor overthrown Ladies.


King. You speak of that I wood do madam, but in earnest, I am now suing for
a new mistres; look in my hand sweet Lady, and tell me what fortune I shall
have with her.


^ug. Do you think me a witch, Sir Cutberd?


King. Pardon me Madam, but I know you to be learnd in all ^hinges.


Eug. Come on lets see.


Hip. He does you a special favor Lady, to give you his open hand, for it is
commonly shut they say.


King. What find you in it madam?


Eug. Shut it now and i will tell ye.


King. What now Ladi^?


Eug. You Have the worst hand that ever I saw knight have* when it is open, one can
find nothing in it, and when it is shutt one can get nothing out ont.


King. The age of letting go is past madam, we must not now let go, but
strike up men's heels, and take am as they fall.


Eug. A good Cornish principle believe it Sir Cuttberd.


Tales But I pray tell me Lady Penelope, how entertain you the love of my
Cosen Sir Gyles Goosecappe.


Pene. Are the Goosecaps a kin to you my Lord.


Ta. Even in the first degree madam. And Sir Gyles I can tell ye, tho he seem
something simple, is composd of as many good parts as any knight in England.


Hip, He shood be put up for concealment then, for he shows none of them.


Pen. Are you able to reckon his good parts my Lord?


Ta. I Will do the best I can Lady, first, he daunces as comely and lightly as
any man, for upon my honor, I have seen him dance upon Eggs, and a has not
broken them.


Pen. Nor cracked them neither.


Ta. That I know not, indeed I wood be loath, to lie though he be my kinsman,
to speak more then I know by him.


Eug. Well forth my Lord.


Ta. He has an excele^t skill in all manner of perfumes, and if you bring him
glones fro forty pence, to forty Shillings a pair he will tell you the price
of them to two pence.


Hip. A pretty sweet quality believe me.


Tales Nay Lady he will perfume you gloves him self; most dilicately, and
give them the right Spanish Titillation.

Titillation what is that my Lord?


Tal. Why Lady it is a pretty kind of term new come up in perfuming, which
they call a Titillation.


Hip. Very well expounded my Lord; forth with your kinsmans parts I pray.


Tal. He is the best Sempster of any woman in England, and will work you
needle work edgings, and French purles from an Angel to four Angels a
yearde.


Eug. That's precious ware indeed.


Tal. He will work you any flower to the life, as like it as if it grew in
the very place, and being a delicate perfumer, he will give it you his
perfect and natural savor.


Hip. This is wonderful; forth sweet Lord Tales.


Tal. He will make you flies and worms, of all sorts most lively, and is now
working a whole bed embrodred, with nothing but glowe worms; whose lights a
has so perfectly done, that you may go to bed in the chamber, do any thing in
the Chamber, without a Candle.


Pene. Never trust me if it be not incredible; forth my good Lord.


Tal. He is a most excellent Turner, and will turn you wassel-bowles, and
posset Cups carved with Libberdes faces, and Lions heads with spoutes in
their mouths, to let out the posset Ale, most artificially.


Eug. Forth good Lord Tales.


Pene. Nay good my Lord no more, you have spoken for him thoroughly I warrant
you.


Hip. I lay my life Cupid has shot my sister in love with him out of your
lips my Lord.


Eug. Well, come in my Lords, and take a bad dinner with me now, and we will
all go with you at night to a better supper with the Lord, and Lady Furnifall.


King. Tale. We attend you honorable Ladies.

Exeu^.
ACTVS TERTII
SCAeNA PRIMA*
Enter Rudes^ Goosecappe. Rud. Bullaker.


Bull. I Sir.


Rud. Ride and catch the Captains horse.


Bull. So I do Sir.


Rud. I wonder Sir Gyles you wood let him go (...), and not ride after him.


Goos. VVood I might never be mortal Sir C^tt: if I ridd not aftter him, till
my horse sweat, so that he had nere a dry thread on him, and hollod and hollod
to him to stay him, till I had thought my fingers ends wood have gone off with
hollowings; I Will be sworn to ye and yet he ran his way like a Diogenes, and
would never stay for us.


Rud. How shall we do to get the (...) Captain to London, now his horseis
gone?


Goos. Why he is but a lame Jade neither Sir Meyle, we shall soon our'take him
I warrant ye.


Rud. And yet thou say thou gallopst after him as fast as thou coodst, and
coodst not Catch him; I lay my life some Crabfishe has bitten thee by the
tongue, thou speak so backward still.


Goos. But here is all the doubt Sir Cut: if nobodie shoold catch him now, when
he comes at London, some boy or other wood get up o^ him and ride him ^otte
into the water to wash him; I Will be sworn I followed one that ridd my horse
into the Thames, till I was up tooth knees hitherto; and if it had not been
for fear of going over shoes, because I am troubled with the rheum, I wood
have taught him to wash my horse when he was

Enter Foul. hott yfath; how now sweet Captain do feel any (...) in thy
pain yet*


Rud. Ease in his pain quoth you, has good luck if he feel ease in pain I
think, but wood any ass in the world ride down such a hill as Highgate is,
in such a frost as this, and never light


Foul. Gods precious Sir Cut. your Frenchman never lights I tell ye.


Goos. Light Sir Cut, Slight and I had my horse again, there is nere a paltrie
English frost an them all shood make me light.


Rud. Go too you French Zanies you, you will follow the french steps so long,
till you be notable to set one Sound Step oath ground all the days of your
life.


Goos. Why Sir Cut I care not if I be not sound so I be well but we were justly
plaugde, by this hill for following women thus.


Foul. I and English weomen too sir Giles.


Rud. Thou arr still prating against English women I have seen none of the
French dames I confess, but your greatest gallants for men in France, were
here lately I am sure, and methinkes there should be no more difference bet^ixt
our Ladies and theirs, then there is betwixt our Lords and theirs, and our
Lor^s are as far beyond them in faith, for person, and Courtshippe, as they are
beyond ours for phantasticallitie.


Foul. O Lord sir Cut, I am sure our Ladies hold our Lords tack for
Courtshippe, and yet the french Lodrs put them down, you noted it sir Gyles.


Goos. O God sir, I stud and heard it, as I satith presence.


Rud. How did they put them down I pray thee?


Foul. Why for wit, and for Court-shippe Sir Moile.


Foul. As how good lefthandded Francois.


Fou.. Why Sir when Meuusieur Lambois came to your mistress the Lady Hippolita
as she sat in the presence, sit down here good Sir Gyles Goosecappe, he
kneeld me by her thus Sir, and with a most queint French Art in his speech of
ah bellissime, I desire to die now sa^es he for in his speech of ah bellissime
I desire to die now says he for your love that I might be buried here.


Rud. A good pick-thacht complement by my faith; but I prithee what answered
she.


Foul. She, ^ scorn to note that I hope then did he vie it again with an
other hah.


Rud. That was hah, hah, I wood have put the third hah to it, if I had been as
my mistress, and hah, hah, haht him out of the presence in faith,


Foul. Hah says he, these fair eyes, I wood not for a million they were in
France, they wood renew all our ciuill-wars again.


Goose. That was not so good me thinks captain.


Rud. Welliudgd in faith, there was a little wit in that I must confess, but she
put him down far, and au^swered him with aquestio^ and that was whether he wood
s^em a lover or a ie stter, if a lover a must tell her far more lykelier then
those, or else she was far from believing the^, if a Iester, she cood have much
more ridiculous jests then his of twenty fools that followed the court, and
told him she had as lieue be courted with a brush faggot as with a fre^chman,
that spent it self al in sparks, and would soonerfire ones chimney then warm
the house, and that such fparkes were good enough yet to set thatcht
dispositio^s a fire, but hers was tild with slight, and respected the^ as
slightly.


Goos. Why so Captain, and yet you talk of your great frenchmen, to God
little England had never known them I may say.


Foul. What Is the matter sir Giles, are you out of love with frenchmen now of
a sudden.


Goos. Slydd captain VVood not make one, I Will be sworn, I Will be sworn, they
took away a mastie dog of mine by commission now, I think on it makes my
tears stand in my eyes with grief, I had rather lost the dearest friend that
ever I lay withal, in my life be this light, never stir if if he fought not
with great Sekerson four hours to one, foremoste take up hindmoste, and took
so many loaves from him, that he sterud him presently: So at last the dog
cood do no more then a Bear cood do, and the bear being heavy with hunger
you know, fell upon the dog, broke his back, and the dog never stird more.


R^ud. Why thou say the frenchmen took him away.


Goos. Frenchmen, I, so they did too, but yet and he had not bin killed, twood
nere a greeud me.


Foul. O excellent unity of speech.


Enter Will and Jack at several doors. Will Save ye knights.


Ia. Save you Captain.


Faul. Pages, welcome my fine pages.


Rud. Welcome boys.


Goos. VVelcome sweet Will, good Jack.


Foul. But how chance you are so far from London now pages, is it not almost
dinner time.


Will Yes indeed Sir, but we left our fellows to wait for once, and cood not
choose in pure love to your worships, but we must needs come and meet you,
before you met our Ladies, to tell you a secret.


Omnes A secrett, what secret I pray thee?


Ia. If ever your worships say any thing* we are undone for ever.


Omnes Not for a world believe it.


Will Why then this it is; we oue^heard our Ladies as they were talking in
private say they refusde to meet you at Barnet this morning of purpose, because
they wood try which of you were most patient.


Ia. And some said you, Sir Gyles, another you Sir and the third you Captain,


Om. This was excellent.


Will Then did they swear one another not to excuse themselves to you by any
means, that they might try you the better, now if they shall see you say
nothing in the world to them, what may come of it, when Ladies begin to try
their suitors once, I hope your wisdoms can i^dge a little.


Foul. O ho my little knave let us alone now in faith, wood I might be Casheird,
if I say any thing.


Rud. Faith and I can forbear my Tongue as well as another I hope.


Goos. VVood I might be degraded if I speak a word, I Will tell them I care not
for loosing my labor.


Foul. Come knights shall we not reward the pages?


Rud. Yes I prithee do, Sir Gyles give the boys something.


Goos. Never stir Sir Cut, if I have ever a groat about me but one three
pence.


Foul. Well knights i will lay out fors all, here my fine pages.


Will No in deed ant please your worship.


Foul. O pages refuse a gentleman's bounty.


Ia. Cry you mercy Sir, thank you sweet Captain


Foul. And what other news is stirring my fine villiacos.


Will Marry Sir they are inui^ed to a great supper to night to your Lords
house Captain* the Lord Furnifall, and there will be your great cosen Sir
Gyles Goosecappe, the Lord Tales, and your uncle Sir Cut. Rudesby, Sir
Cutbert Kingcob.


Foul. The Lord Tales, what countriman is he?


Ia. A kentish Lord Sir, his ancestors came forth off Canterbury.


Foul. Out of Canterbury.


Will I indeed Sir the best Ta^s in England are your Canterbury tales, I
assure ye.


Rud. the boy tells thee true Captain.


Ia. He writes his name Sir, Tales, and he being the tenth son his father
had; his father Christ^d him December Tales, and so his whole name is the Lord
December Tal^s.


Goos. A my mortallitie the boy knows more then I do of our house.


Rud. But is the Lady Furnif^ (Captain) still of the same drinking humor she
was wont to be.


Foul. Still of the same knight, and is never in any sociable vain till she be
typsie, for in her sobriety she is madd, and fears my good little old Lord
out of all proportion.


King. And therefore as I hear he will earnestly inuit guestes to his house,
of purpose to make his wife dronk, and then dotes on her humor most profanely.


Foul. It Is very true knight; we will suppe with them to night; and you shall
see her; and now I think ont, i will tell you a thing knights, wherein perhaps
you may exceedinly pleasure me.


Goos. What Is that good Captain.


Foul. I am desirous to help my Lord to a good merry Fool, and if I cood
help him to a good merry one, he might d^e me very much credit I assure ye.


R^d. Sblood thou speak to us as if we cood serve thy turn.


Foul. O France Sir Cut: your Frenchman wood not have taken me so, for a
world, but because Fools come into your companies many times to make you merry


Rud. As thou do.


Goos. Nay good Sir Cut: you know fools do come into your companies.


Rud. I and thou know it too, no man better.


Foul. Bear with Choler Sir Gyles.


Will. But wood you help your Lord to a good fool so feign Sir.


Foul. I my good page exceeding feign.


Ia. You mean a wench, do you not Sir, a foolish we^ch?


Foul. Nay I wood have a man fool, for his Lord: page*


W^ll Does hi^ Lord: love a fool, so well ^ pray.


Foul. Assure thy self page, my Lord loves afoole as he loves himself.


Ia. Of what degr^e wood you have your Fool Sir, for you may have of all manner
o^ d^s.


Foul. Faith I wood have him a good Emphaticall fool, one that wood make my
Lord laugh well, and I card not,


Will Laugh well (vm) then we must know this Sir, is your Lord Costiue of
laughter, or laxatiue of laughter?


Foul. Nay he is good merry little Lord, and indeed something Laxatiue of
Laughter.


Will. Why then Sir the less wit will serve his Lordships turn, marry if he
had bin Costiue of laughter, he must have had two or three drams of wit the
more in his fool, for we must ^inister according to the quantity of his Lord:
humor you know, and if he s^ood have as much Wit in his fool being Laxatiue
of laughter, as if he were Costiue of Laughter, why he might laugh himsele
into an Epilepsie, and fall down dead suddenly, as many have done with the
e^tremitie of that passion; and I know your Lord cares for nothing, but the
health of a fool.


Foul. Thart ith right my notable good page.


Ia. Why, and for that health Sir we will w^rrant his Lordship, that if he
should have all Bacon de sanitate tu^da read to him, it shood not please his
Lordship so well as our fool shall.


Foul. Remercy my more then English pages.


Goos. A my word I have not seen pages have so much wit, that have never bin
in France Captain.


Foul. It Is true indeed Sir Gyles, well then my almost french Elixers* will you
help my Lord to a fool, so fit for him as you say.


Will As fit, I Will warrant you Captain, as if he were made for him, and he
shall come this night to supper, and fool where his Lord: sits at table.


Foul. Excellent ^rt, fail not now my sweet pages.


Ia. Not for a world sir, we will go both, and seek him presently.


Foul. Do so my good wagges


Will. Save you knights.


Ia. Save you Captain.

Exeunt.
Foul. Farewell my pretty knaves, come knights, shall we resolve to go to
this Supper?


Rud. What else.


Goos. And let us provide torches for our men to sit at door with all captain.


Foul. That we will I warrant you sir Giles.


Rud. Torches? why the Moon will shine man.


Goos. The moon Sir Cut: I scorn the moon in faith, Slydd sometimes a man shall
not get her to shine and if he wood give her a couple of Capons, and one of
them must be white too, God forgive me I cud never abide her since yesterday,
she seru'de me such a trick the other night.


Rud. What trick sir Gyles?


Goos. Why sir Cut: cause the days be mortal and short now you know, and I
love day light well; I thought it went a way faster then it needed, and run
after it into Finsburie-fieldes ith calm evening to see the wind mils go?
and even as I was going over a ditch the moon by this light of purpose runs
me behind a cloud, and lets me fall into the ditch by heaven.


Rud. That was ill done in her in deed sir Giles.


Goos. Ill done sir Cut: Slydda man may bear, and bear, but and she have noe
more good manners, but to make every black slouenly cloud a pearl in her eye
I shall nere love English moon again, while I live I Will besworne to ye.


Foul. come knights to London horse, horse, horse.


Rud. In what a case he is with the poor English moon, because the french
moons (their torches) will be the less in fashion, and I warrant you the
Captain will remember it too, tho he say no thing, he se^onds his resolute
chaseso and follows him, I Will lay my life you shall see them the next cold
night, shut the moon^shine out of their chambers, and make it lie without
doors all night. I discredit my wit with their companies now I think on it,
plague a god on them; I Will fall a beating on them presently.

Exit.
Enter Lord Momford and Clarence. Clarence Horatio. Cla. Sing good Horatio,
while I sigh and write.
According to my master Platos mind
The Soul is music, and does therefore joy
In accents musical, which he that hates
With points of discord is together tied
And barks at Reason, Consonant in sense.
Divine Eugenia, bears the ^ular form
Of music and of Reason, and presents
The Soul exempt from flesh in flesh inflamed,
Who must not love her then, that loves his soul?
To her I write, my friend, the star^e of friends
VVil needs have my strange lines greet her strange eyes
And for his fake i will power my poor Soul forth
In floods of Ink; but did not his kind hand
Bar me with violent grace, I wood consume.
In the white flames of her impassionate Love
E^e my harsh lips shood vent the odorous blaze.
For I am despera^e of all worldly Joys
And there was never man so harsh to men,
When I am fullest of digested life
I seem a liuelesse Embrion to all
Each day rackt up in nightlike Funeral.
Sing good Horatio, whilst I sigh and write.

Canto. The Letter.
Suffer him to love that suffers not loving, my love is without passion and
therefore free from alteration.


Prose is too harsh, and verse is poetry
Why shood I write then? merit clad in Ink
Is but a mourner, and as good as naked
I will not write my friend shall speak for me
Sing one staue more my good Horatio.
Canto. I must remember I know whom I love,
Adame of learning, and of life exemt
From all the Idle fancies of her sex,
And this that to an other dame wood seem
Perplex^ and foulded in a rudelesse veil
Will Be more clear then ballads to her eye
I Will write, if but to satisfy my friend.
Your third stauce sweet Horatio and no more.
Canto. How vainly do I offer my strange love?
I marry, and bid states, and entertain
Ladies with tales and jests, and Lords with news
And keep a house to feast Acteons hounds
That eat their master, and let ydell guests
Draw me from serious search of things divine
To bid them sit, and welcome, and take care
To sooth their pal ats with choice kytchin-stuff
As all must do that marry and keep house
And then look on the left sid of my yoke
Or on the right perhaps and see my wife
Draw in a quite repugnant course from me
Busied to starch her french purles, and her puffs
When I am in my Anima refiexa quid sit faelicitas quae origo rerum?
And make the^e beings that are known to be
The only serious objects of true men
Seem shadows, with substanti al^ stir she keeps
About her shadows, which if husbands love
They must believe, and thus my other self
Brings me another body to dispose
That have already much too much of one,
And must not look for any Soul of her
To help two rule to bodies.
Mom. Fie for shame.
I never heard of such an antedame.
Do women bring no help of soul to men?
Why friend they either are men's souls themselves
Or the most witty Imitatrix^s of them
Or prettiest sweet apes of human Souls,
That ever Nature framed; as I will prove.
For first they be Substantiae lucidae
And p^rer then men's bodies like their souls,
Which men's harsh hairs both of their breast and chinne
Occasiond by their gross and ^uder heat
Plainly demonstrates: Then like souls they do,
Mouere corpora, for no power on earth
Moves a man's body, as a woman does!
Then do they Dare formas corpori
Or add fair forms to men, as their souls do:
For but for women, who wood care for forms?
I vow I never wood wash face, nor hands
Nor care how ragg'd, or flouenlie I went
Were not for women, who of all men's pompes
Are the true final causes: Then they make
Men in their Seeds imortall like their Souls
That else wood perish in a spanne of time.
Oh they be Soulelike-Creatures, and my Niece
The Soul of twenty rare Souls stild in one.

Cla. That, that it is my Lord, that makes me love.


Mom. Oh are ye come Sir, welcome to my Niece
As I may say at midnight gentle friend
What have you wrott I pray?

Cla. Strange stuff my Lord. He reads (...) comments.



Mom. Indeed the way to believe is to love
And the right way to love is to believe,
This I will carry now with pen and In^ke
For her to use in answer, see, sweet friend
She shall not stay to call, but while the steel
Of her affection is made soft and hott,
I Will strike and take occasion by the browe.
Blessed is the wooing that's not long a doing.
Exi^.
Cla. Had ever man so true, and noble friend?
Or wood men think this sharp worlds freezing Air
To all true honor and judicial love
VVood suffer such a flourishing pyne in both
To ouerlooke the boxe-trees of this time?
When the learnd mind has by impulsion wrought
Her eyes cl^re fire into a knowing flame.
No elementall smoke can darken it
Nor Northen cold^es nyppe her Daphnean flower,
O sacred friendship thanks to thy kind power
That being retired from all the faithles world
Appearst to me in my vnworldly friend,
And for thine own sake let his noble mind
By moving presedent to all his kind
(Like just Deucalion) of earths stony bones
Repair the world with humane blood and flesh
And dying virtue with new life refresh.
Exit.
ACTVS QVARTVS.
Enter Tales, Kingcob, E^genia, Hipp^lita, Penelope, Winnifred. King. It Is time
to leave your Chests Ladies it is too studious an exercise after dinner.


Tal. Why is it called Chests?


Hip. Because they lean upon their Chests that play at it.


Tal I wood have it called the strife of wits, for it is ^ game so witti^, that
with strife for maisterie, we hunt it eagerly.


E^g Specially where the wit of the G^caps are in cha^ my Lord.


Tal. I am a Goosecappe by the mothers side madam, at least my mother was a
Goosecappe.


Fen. And you were her white son, I warrant my Lord.


Tal. I was the youngest Lady, and therefore must be her white son ye know,
the youngest of ten I was.


Hip. And the wisest of Fifteen.


Tal. And sweet Lady will ye cast a kind eye now upon my Cousin, Sir Gyles
Goosecappe.


Pen. Pardon my Lord I have never a spare eye to cast away I assure ye.


Tal. I wonder you shood Countit cast away Lady upon him, do you remember
those few of his good parts I rehearst to you.


Pen. Very perfectly my Lord, amongst which one of them was, that he is the
best Sempster of any woman in England, pray lets see some of his work?


Hip. Sweet Lord lets see him sow a little.


Tal. You shall a mine honor Lady.


Eug. He Is a goodly great knight indeed; and a little needle in his hand will
become him prettelie.


King. From the Spanish pike to the Spanish needle, he shall play with any
knight ^n England Lady.


Eug. But not ^ c^erso, from the Spanish needle to the Spanish pike.


King. I think he be too wise for that indeed madam, for he has 20. miles
length in land lies together, and he wood be loath to bring it all to the
length of ^ pike.


Hip. But no man commends my blount Servant Sir Cut: Rudeshy methinks.


King. He is a kind gentleman Lady though he be blunt, and is of this
humor, the more you presume upon him without Ceremony, the more he lo^ you,
if he know you think him kind once and will say nothing but still use him,
you may melt him into any kindness you will; he is right like a woman, and
had rather, you shood bluntly take the greatest ^our you can of him, then
shamefastly entreat it.


Eug He says well to you Hippolita.


Hip I madam, but they (...), he will beat one in Jest, and byte in kindness,
and tear ones ruffes in Cour^ippe.


King. Some that he makes sport withal perhaps, but none that he respects
^assureye.


Hip. And wha'ts his (...) C^beard?


King. Some two thousand a year Lady.


Hip. I pray do not tell him that I ask't, for I stand ^ot upon living.


King O Good Lady who can live without living?


Enter Momford. Mom Still here Lordings? good companions in faith, I see you
come not for vittles.


Tal. Vittles, my Lord, I hope we have vittles at home.


Mom. I but sweet Lord, there is a principle in the Poli^itians physic, ^at
not your meat upon other men's trenchers, and beware of surfits of your own
cost many good companions cannot abide to eat meat at home ye know. And how
(...) my noble Niece now, and her fair Lady Feeres?


Eug. What wind blows you hither troe?


Mom. Hark you madam, the sweet gale of one Clarences breath, with this his
paper ^ayle blows me hither.


E^g. Aye me still, in that humor? beshrowe my heart it I take any Papers from
him.


Mom. Kind bosom do thou take it then.


Eug. Nay then never trust me.


Mom. Let it ^all then, or cast it awa^e you were best, that every body may
discover your love suits, do; there is sombodie near if you note it, and how
have you spent the time since dinner nobles?


King. At chests my Lords,


Mom. Read it niece.


E^g. Here bear it back I pray.


Mom. I bear you on my back to hear you; and how play the Ladies sir
Cuthbert, what men do they play best withal, with knights or rookes?


Tal. With knights my Lord.


Mom. It Is pity their board is no broader, and that some men caled guls are
not added to their game


King. Why my Lo it needs not, they make the knights guls.


Mom That's pretty sir Cuthbert; you have begone I know Niece, forth I command
you.


Eug. O yare a sweet uncle.


Mom. I have brought her a little Gre^ke, to help me out withal, and she is so
coy of her learning for sooth she makes it strange: Lords, and Ladies, I inuit
you al to supper to night, and you shall not deny me.


Ad. We will attend your Lordshippe.


Tal. Come Ladies let us into the gallerie a little.

exeunt
Mom. And now what says mine own dear niece in faith?


E^g. What shood she say to the backfide of a paper.


Mom. Come, come, I know you have been a'the belly side.


Eug. Now was there ever Lord so prodigal, of his own honored blood, and
d^nity?


Mom A^ay with these same horse fair alligations, will you answer the l^r?


Eug. Gods my life you go^ like a cuning spokes man, man, answer uncle? what
do ye think me desperate of a husband


Mom. Not so niece, but careless of your poor uncle.


Eug. I will not write that is certain.


Mom. What will you have my friend and I pe^ish, do you thirst our bloods?


Eug. O yare in a mighty danger noe doubt on it.


Mom. If you have our bloods beware our ghostes I can tell ye, come will ye
write?


Eug. I will not write in faith.


Mom. in faith dame, then I must be your secretary I see, here is the letter,
come, do you dictate and I Will write.


Eug. If you write no otherwise then I dictate, it will scarce prou^ a kind
answer I believe.


Mom. But you will be aduis'de I trust. Secretaries are of counsel with their
countesses, thus it begins. Suffer him to love, that suffers not loving, what
answer you to that?


Eug. He loves extremely that suffers not in love.


Mom. He answers you for that presently, his love is without passion, and
therefore free from alteration, for Pa^ you know is in Alterationem lab^ he
loves you in his soul he tells you, wherein there is no passion, say dame what
answer you.


Eug. Nay if I answer any thing.


Mom. Why? veri^ well, i will answer for you.


Eug. You answer? shall I set my hand to your answer?


Mom. I by my faith shall ye.


Eug. By my faith, but you shall answer as I wood have you then.


Mom. Always put in with advice of your secretary, niece, come, what answer
you?


Eug. Since you needs will have my Answer, I Will Answer (...) to the first,
and last part of his letter.


Mom. Do so Niece, and leave the midst for himself a gods name, what is your
answer?


Eug. I cannot but suffer you to love, if you do love.


Mom. Why v^ry good, there it is, and will requit your love; say you so? He
writes and she dic^ates.



Eug. Beshrowe my lips then my Lord.


Mom. Beshrowe my fingers but you shall; what, you may promise to requite his
love, and yet not promise him marriage I hope; well, and will requite your love.


Eug. Nay good my Lord hold your hand, for i will be sworn, i will not set my hand
^oo't.


Mom. Well hold of your hand good madam till it shood come on, I Will be ready
for it anon, I warrant ye^ now forth; my Love is without passion, and therefore
free from alteration, what answer you to that madam?


Eug. Even this my Lord, your Love being mental, needs no bodily Requital.


Mom. I am Content with that, and here it is; but in heart.


Eug. What but in heart?


Mom. Hold of your hand yet I say, I do embrace and repaie it,


Eug. You may write uncle, but if you get my hand to it,


Mom. Alas Niece this is nothing, is it any thing to a bodily marriage, to say
you love a man in Soul if your hearts agree and your bodies meet not? simple
marriarge rites, now let us forth: he is in the way to felicity, and desires
your hand.


Eug. My hand shall always sign the way to felicity.


Mom. Very good, may not any woman say this now. Conclud now sweet Niece.


Eug. And so God prosper your Journey.


Mom. Charitably concluded, though far short of that ^oue I wood have showen
to any friend of yours Niece I swear to you, your hand now, andlet this little
stay his appetite.


Eug. Read what you have writ my Lord.


Mom. What needs that madam, you remember it I am sure.


Eug. Well if it want sense in the Composition, let my secretary be blamed
for it, theirs my hand.


Mom. Thanks gentle Niece, now i will read it.


Eug. Why now, more then before I pray?


Mom. That you shall see strait, I cannot but suffer you to love if you do
love and will requite your love.


Eug. Remember that requital was of your own putning it, but it shall be after
my fashion I warrant ye.


Mom. Interrupt me no more, your love being mentoll needs no bodily requital^,
but in heart I embrace and repay it; my hand shall always sign the way to
felicity, and my self knit with you in the bands of marriage ever walk with
you, in it, and so God prosper our journey:

Eugenia.
Eug. Gods me life, it is not thus I hope.


Mom. By my life but it is Niece.


Eug. By my life but it is none of my deed then.


Mom. Do you use to set your hand to that which is not your deed, your hand is
at it Niece, and if there be any law in England, you shall perform it too:


Eug. Wh, ythis is plain dishonored deceit.
Does all your truest kindness end in law?

Mom. Have patience Niece, for what so ere I say
Only the laws of faith, and thy free love
Shall join my friend and thee, or naught at al,
By my friends love, and by this kiss it shall.

Eug. Why, thus did false Accontius snare Cydippe.


Mom. Indeed dear love his wile was something like
And then it is no vnheard-of^recherie
That was enacted in a gods Eye,
Acconti^s wort^ie love feared not Diana
Before whom he contriu'de this sweet deceit

Eug. Well there you have my hand, but i will besworne I never did thing so
against my will.


Mom It Will prove the better madam, doubt it not*
And to allay the billows of your blood,
Rais'de with my motion bold and opposite
Dear niece suppe with me, and refresh your spirits:
I have invited your companions
With the two guests that dinde with you to day,
And will send for the old Lord Furnifall
The Captain, and his mates and (tho at night)
We will be merry as the morning Lark.

Eug. No, no my Lord, you will have Clarence there.


Mom. A las poor gentleman I must tell you now
He Is extreme sick, and was so when he writ
Tho he did charge me not to tell you so;
And for the world he cannot come abroad.

Eug. Is this the man that without passion loves


Mom. I do not tell you he is sick with love;
Or if he be it is wilful passion.
Which he does choose to suffer for your sake
And cood restrain his sufferance with a thought,
Upon my life he will not trouble you;
And therefore worthy niece fail not to come.

Eug. I will on that condition.


Mom. It Is performed: for were my friend well and cood comfort me; I wood not
now entreat your company, but one of you I must have, or I die, oh such a
friend is worth a monarchy.

Exeunt.
Enter Lord Furnifall. Rudsbie. Goosecapp^. Fowlweather. Bullaker. Fur. Nay my
gallants I will tell you more.


All. Forth good my Lord.


Fur. The evening came and then our waxen stars
Spa^kled about the heavenly court of France.
When I then young and readiant as the sun
G^ue luster to those lamps, and curling thus
My golden foretoppe* stepped into the presence,
Where set with other princely dames I found
The Countess of Lancalier and her niece
Who as I told you cast so fixed an eye
On my behauiours talking with the king:

All True my good Lord.


Fur. They rose when I came in, and all the lights
Burnd dim for shame, when I stood up and shind.

Fou^ O most passionate description Sir Cut:


Rud. True of a candles end.


Goos. The passingst description of a candle, that ever lived Sir Cut:


Fur. Yet aymd I not at them, nor seemd to note
What grace they did me, but found courtly cause
To talk with an accomplished gentleman
New come from Italy, in quest of news*
I spoke Italian with him.

Rud. What so young?


Fur. O rarissime volte cad^no nel parlar nostro familiare.


Foul. Slidd a cood speak it knight, at three year old.


Fur. Nay gentle Captain do not set me forth
I love it not, in truth I love it not.

Foul. Slight my Lo^d but truth is truth you know.


Goos. I dare ^nsure your Lordship, Truth is truth, and I have heard in
France, they speak French as well, as their mother tongue my Lord.


Fur. Why it is their mother tongue my noble knight*
But (as I tell you) I seemed not to note
The Ladies notes of me, but held my talk,
with that Italionate Frenchman, and took time
(Still as our conference served) to show my Courtship
In the three quarter leg, and settled look,
The quick kiss of the top of the forefinger
And other such exploytes of good Accost;
All which the Ladies took into their eyes
With such attention that their favors swarm'de
About my bosom, in my hatt, mine ears,
In skarffes about my thighs, upon mine arms
Thick on my wrystes, and thicker on my hands,
And still the less I sought, the more I found.
All this I tell to this notorious end,
That you may use your Courtship with less care
To your coy mistress^s; As when we strike
A goodly Sammon, with a little line
We do not tugge to hale her up by force
For then our line wood break, and our hook lost;
But let her careless play along the stre^me
As you had left her, and she will drown her self.

Foul A my life a most ri^h comparison.


Goos. Never stir, if it be not a richer Caparison, then my Lord my Cosine
wore at tilt, for that was brodred with nothing but mooneshine ith the water,
and this has Sa^mons in it; by heaven a most edible Capariso^.


Ru. Odious thou woodst say, for Co^pariso^s are odious.


Foul. So they are indeed sir Cu^* al^ but my* Lords.


Goos. Be Caparisons odious Sir Cut: what like flowers?


Rud. O ass they be odorous.


Goos. A botts athat stinking word odorous, I can never hitt on it,


Fur. And how like you my Court-counsaile galla^ts ha*


Foul. Out of all proportion excellent my Lord: and belee^e it for Emphaticall
Courtship, your Lordship puts down all the Lords of the Court.


Fur. No good Captain no.


Foul. By France you doemy Lord for Emphaticall Courtship.


Fur. For Emphaticall Courtship indeed I can do somewhat.


Foul. Then does your merry entertainment become you so festifally, that you
have all the bravery of a Saint Georges day about ye when you use it.


Fur. Nay that's too much in sadness Captain.


Goos. O good my Lord, let him praise you, what so ere it costs your Lordshippe.


Foul. I assure your Lordshippe your merry behavior does so festifally show
upon you, that every high holliday when Ladies wood be most bewtifull; eue^y
one wishes to God she were turned into such a little Lord as you, when you are
merry.


Goos. By this fire they do my Lord, I have heard am.


Fur. Marry God forbid knight they shood be turned into me; I had rather be
turned into them amine honor.


Foul. Then for your Lordships quippes, and quick jests, why Gesta Romanorum
were nothing to them a my virtue


Fur. Well, well, well, I will hear thee no more, I will hear thee no more,
good Captain, Tha'st an excellent wit, and thou shall have Crowns amine
honor, and now knights and Captain, the fool you told me off, do you al know
him?


Goos. I know him best my Lord.


Fur. Do you Sir Gyles, to him then good knight, and be here with him, and
here, and here, and here again; I mean paint him unto us Sir Gyles, paint him
lively, lively now, mygood knightly boy.


Goos. Why my go^d Lord? he will nere be long from us, because we are all
mortal you know.


Fur. Very true,


Goos. And as soon as ever we go to dinner, and supper together,


Rud. Dinner and supper together, whens that troe?


Goos. A will come you in amongst us, with his Cloak buttond, loose under his
chinne.


Rud. Buttond loose my Lord?


Goos. I me Lord buttond loose still, and both the flaps cast o^r before, both
his shoulders before him.


Rud. Both shouldiers before him?


Fur. From before him he means; forth good Sir Gyl^s.


Goos. Like a potentate My Lord?


Rud. Much like a ^otentate indeed.


Goos. For all the w^rld like a Potentate S. Cut: ye know.


Rud, So Si^.


Goos. All his beard nothing but hai^e.


Cud. Or something else.


Goos. Or something else as you say.


Foul. Excellent good.


Goos. His Mellons, or his Apricocks, Orrenges always in an unclean hand
kerchiffe very cleanely I warrant you my Lord.


Fur. A good nea^e fool Sir Gyles of mine honor.


Goos. Then hi^ fine words that he sets them in, concatic^ll, a fine
Annisseede wenche fool upon ticket and so forth.


Fur. Passing strange words believe me,


Goos. Knoth every man at the table, though he never saw him before, by sight
and then will he fool you so finely my Lord, that he will make your heart
ache, till your eyes run over.


Fur. The best that ever I heard, gray mercy good knight for thy merry
description, Captain, I give thee twenty companies of commendations, never to
be casheird.


Enter Jack and Will on the other side. Am. Save your Lordship,


Fur. My pretty cast of Merlins, what prophecies with your little
maistershippes?


Ia. Things that cannot come to pass my Lord, the worse our fortunes.


Foul. Why what is the matter pages?


Rud. ^ow now my Ladies foysting hounds.


Goos. M. Jack* M. Jack; how do ye M. William, frolic?


Will Not s^ frolic, as you left us Sir Gyles.


Fur. Why wags, what news bring you a Gods name.


Ia. Heavy news indeed my Lord, pray pardone us.


Fur. Heavy news? not possible your little bodies cood bring am then, unload
those your heavy news I beseech ye?


Will. Why my Lord the fool we took for your Lord: is thought too wise for
you, and we dare not present him,


Goos. Slydd pages, you will not cheates of our fool will ye?


Ia. Why sir Giles, he is too dogged and bitter for you in truth, we shall
bring you a fool to make you laugh, and he shall make all the world laugh at
us.


Will. I indeed sir Giles, and he knows you so well too


Giles Know me* slight he knows me no more then the begge^ knows his dish.


^a. Faith he begs you to be content sir Giles, for he will not come.


Goos. Beg me? slight I wood I had known that, the other day, I thought I had
met him in Paul's, and he had been any body else but a pillar, I wood have
run him through by heaven, beg me?


Foul. H^ begges you to be content sir Giles, that is, he prays you*


Goos. O does he praise me, then I commend him.


Fur. Let this unsuitable fool go sir G^les, we will make shift without him.


Goos. That we will a my word my Lord, and have him too for all this.


Will. Do not you say so sir Giles, for to tel^ you true that fool is dead.


Goos. Dead? Slight that cannot be man, I know he wood ha writ to me ont had
been so.


Fur. Quick or dead let him go sir Giles.


Ia. I my Lord, for we have better news for you to harken after.


Fur. what are they my good Nou^tions?


Ia. My Lord Momford intreates your Lorship and these knights and captain to
accompany the countess Eugenia and the other two Ladies at his house at supper
to night.


Will. All desiring your Lo: to pardon them, for not eating your meat to night.


Fur. VVithall my heart wagges, and theirs amends; my hearts, now set your
courtshippe a'the last, a'the tainters, and prick up your sel^es for the
Ladies.


Goos. O brave s^r (...) come (...) prick up the Ladies:


Fur. And will not the knights two noble kinseme^ be there?


Ia. Both will be their my Lord.


Fur. Why there is the whole knot of us then, and there shall we kno^ke up
the whole triplicitie of your nuptials.


Goos. ^e make my Lord my Cousin speak for me.


Foul. And your Lordship will be for me I hope.


Fur. With tooth and nail Captain, A my Lord.


Rua. Hang am Tytts i will pommell my self into am.


Ia. Your L^: your Cousin S^r Gyles has promised the Ladies they shall see you
sow.


Goos. Gods me, wood I might never be mortal if I do not carty my work with
me.


Fur. Do so Sir Gyl^s, and withal use means
To taint their high bloods with the shafte of Love,
Sometimes a fingers motion wounds their minds;
A jest, a Iesture, or a pretty laugh.
A voice, a present, ah, things done ith nick
VVound deep, and sure, and let fly your gold
And we shall nuptials have hold belly hold.

Goos. O rare Sir Cut: we shall eat nut-shells. hold belly hold

Exeunt.
Ia. O pitiful knight, that koowes not nuptials from nutshells.


Will. And now Comme port^ vous monsieur?


Bull Port bien vous remercy.


Ia. We may see it indeed Sir, and you shall go before with us.


Bull. No good monsieurs.


Will: Another Crashe in my Ladies Celler in faith monsieur.


Bull. Remercy de bon ceur m^nsieurs.

Exeunt.
Enter Clarence Momford. Mom. How now my friend does not the knowing beams
That through thy common sense glau^ce through thy eyes
To read that letter, through thine eyes retire
And warm thy heart with a tryumphant fire?

Mom. My Lord I feel a treble happiness
Mix in o^e soul, which proves how eminent
Things endless are above things temporal,
That are in bodies needefully confin'de;
I cannot suffer their dementions pierst
Where my immortal part admits expansure
Even to the comprehension of two more
Commixt substantially with her mere self.

Mom. As how my strange, and riddle* speaking friend?


Cla. As thus my Lord, I feel my own minds joy
As it is separate from all other powers,
And then the mixture of an other soul
Ioyn'de in direction to one end, like it,
And thirdly the contentment I enjoy,
As we are joined that I shall work that good
In such a noble spirit as your niece,
Which in my self I feel for absolute;
Each good mind dowbles his own free content
When in an others use they give it vent.

Mom. Said like my friend, and that I may not wrong
Thy full perfections with an emptier grace,
Then that which show presents to thy conceits,
In working thee a wi^e worse then she seems;
^e tell thee plain a secret which I know.
My niece does use to paint herself with white
Whose cheeks are naturally mixed with redd
Either because she thinks pale-lookes moves most:
Or of an answereable nice affect
To other of her modest qualities;
Because she wood not with the outward blaze
Of tempting beauty tangle wanton eyes;
And so be troubled with their tromperies:
Which (...) as thou will. I make it known^
That thy free comment may examine it,
As willinger to tell truth of my nee^e,
Then in the least degree to wrong my friend.

Cla. A ielous part of friendship you unfold;
For was it ever seen that any dame
Wood chainge of choice a well mixed white and redd
For bloodles palenes, if she strived to move?
Her painting then is to shunn motion,
But if she mended some defect with it
Breeds it more hate then other ornaments;
(Which to supply bare nature) Ladies wear?
What an absurd thing is it to suppose;
(If Nature made us either lame or sick,)
We wood not seek for sound lymmes, or for health
By Art the Rector of confused Nature?
So in a face if Nature be made lamer
Then Art can make it, is it more offense
To help her want there then in other limbs?
Who can give instance where dames faces lost
The privilege their other parts may boast.

Mom. But our most Court received Poets says
That painting is pure chastities abator.

Cla. That was to make up a poor rhyme to Nature.
And far from any Judgment it confered
For lightness comes from hearts, and not from looks
And if inchastitie possess the heart;
Not painting does not race it, nor being clear
Does painting spot it,
Om^e bonum naturaliter pulchrum.
For outward fairenes bears the divine form,
And moves beholders to the Act of love;
And that which moves to love is to be wished
And each thing simply to be wished is good.
So I conclude mere painting of the face
A lawful and a commendable grace*

Mom. What paradox do thou defend in this
And yet through thy clear arguments I see
Thy speech is far exempt from flattery,
And how illiterate custom groslie erres?
Almost in all traditions she preferres.
Since then the doubt I put thee of my niece,
Checks not thy doubtless love, forth my dear friend,
And to all force to those impressions,
That now have carved her fantasy with love,
I have invited her to supper here.
And told her thou art most extreameli^ sick.
Which thou shall counterfeit with all thy skill,

Cla: Which is exceeding small to counterfeit,


Mom. Practice a little, love will teach it thee,
And then shall doctor Versey the physician,
Come to thee while her self is in my house.
With whom as thou confer'st of thy disease,
I Will bring my niece with all the Lords and Ladies.
Within your hearing under feigned pretext,
To show the pictures that hang ^eere thy chamber,
Where when thou hearst my voice, know she is there.
And therefore speak that which may stir her thoughts,
And make her fly into thy opened arms.
Ladies whom true worth cannot move to ruth
True lovers must deceue to show their truth
Exeunt.
Finis Actus Quarti.
ACTVS QVINTI
SCAeNA PRIMA.
Enter Momford, Furnifall, T^es, Kingcob, Rudesbi^, Goosecap, Fou^weather,
Eugenia, Hippolita, Penelope, Winnifred. Mom. Where is Sir Gyles Goosecappe
here?


Goos. Here my Lord.


Mom. Come forward knight it is you that the Ladies admire at working a mine
honor.


Goos: A little at once my Lord for Idleness sake.


Fur: Sir Cut, I say, to her captain.


P^nel: Come good ser^ant let us see what you work.


Goos: Why look you mistress* I am making a fine dry sea, full of fish,
playing in the bottom, and here i will let in the water so lively, that you shall
hear it rore.


Eug: Not hear it Sir Giles.


Goos. Yes in sooth madam with your eyes.


Tal: I Lady; for when a thing is done so exceedeingly to the life, as my
knight^e cosen does it, the eye oftentimes takes so strong a heed of it, that
it cannot contain it alone, and therefore the ear seems to take part with it.


Hip: That Is a very good reason my Lord.


Mom. What a Jest it is, to hear how seriously he strives to make his
foolish kinsmans answers wise ones.


Pen: What shall this be servant?


Goos: This shall be a great whale mistress, at all his bigness spouting huge
hills of salt water before him, like a little* water squirt, but you shall not
need to fear him mistress, for he shall be si^ke and gould* he shall do you noe
harm, and he be nere so lively.


Pen. Thank you good servant.


Tal: Do not think Lady, but he had need tell you this a forehand for a mine
honor, he wrought me the monster Caucasus so lively, that at the first sight I
started at it.


Mom. The monster Caucasus my Lord? Cauca^s is a mountain; Cacus you mean.


Tal: Cacus indeed my Lord, cry you mercy.


Goos: Here i will take out your eye, and you will mistress.


Pen: No by my faith Servant it is better in


Goos. Why Lady, I Will but take it out in jest, in carnest.


Pen. No, something else there, good servant.


Goos. Why then here shall be a Camel, and he shall have horns, and he shall
look (for all the world) like a maid without a husband.


Hip. O bitter sir Giles.


Tal. Nay he has a dry wit Lady I can tell ye.


Pen. He bobd me there indeed my Lord.


Fur. Marry him sweet Lady, to answer his bitter bob.


King. So she may answer him with horns indeed.


Eug. See what a pretty work he wears in his boote*hose.


Hip. Did you work them your self sir Gyles, or buy them?


Goos. I bought am for nothing madam in th'exange


Eug. Bought am for nothing.


Tal. Indeed madam in the exchange they so honor him for his work that they
will take nothing for any thing he buies on am; but where is the rich
night-cappe you wrohgt cosen* if it had not been too little for you, it was the
best piece of work, that ever I saw.


Goos. Why my Lord, it was bigg enough, when I wrought it, for I wore pantables
then you know.


Tal. Indeed the warmer a man keeps his feet the less he necdes wear upon
his head.


Eug. You speak for your kinsman the best, that ever I heard my Lord.


Goos. But I believe madam, my Lord my cosen has not told you all my good parts.


Tal: I told him so I warrant you cosen.


Hip: What do you think he left out Sir Giles?


Goos: Marry madam I can take tobacco now, and I have bought glow-wormes to
kindle it withal, better then all the burning glasses ith world.


Eug. Glowe-wormes sir Giles will they make it burn?


Goos. O od madam I feed am with nothing but fire, a purpose, I Will besworne they
eat me sieve faggots aweeke in charcoale.


Tal: Nay he ha^ the strangest devices Ladies that ever you heard I warrant ye.


Fur: That Is a strange device in deed my Lord.


Hip: But your sowing sir Gyles is a more gentlewoman-like quality I assure
you.


Pen: O far away, for now servant, you nee de never marry, you are both
husband, and wife your self.


Goos: Nay indeed mistress I wood feign marry for all that, and i will tell you
my reason, if you will.


Pen: Let Us hear it good servant.


Goos: Why madam we have a great match at football toward, married men
against batchellers, and the married men be al my friends, so I wood feign
marry to take the married men's parts in truth.


Hip: The best reason for marriage that ever I heard sir Gyles.


Goos: I pray will you keep my work a little mistress; I must needs strain a
little courtsie in truth.

Exit Sir Gyles.
Hip: Gods my life I thought he was a little to blame.


Rud: Come, come, you hear not me dame.


Fur: Well said sir Cut, to her now we shall hear fresh courting.


Hip: A las sir Cut, you are not worth the (...), every body says you cannot
love, how soever you talk on it.


Rud: Not love dame? slydd what argument woodst have of my love tro? let me
look as red as scarlet a fore I see thee, and when thou comst in sight if
the sun of thy beauty, do not white me like a sheppards hollandl am a Jew
to my Creator.


Hip. O excellent.


Rud. Let me burst like a Tode, if a frown of thy browe has not turned the
very heart in my belly, and made me ready to be hanged by the heels for a
fortnight to bring it to the right again.


Hip. You shood have hanged longer Sir Cut: it is not right yet,


Rud. Zonnes, bid me cut off the best lymme of my body for thy love, and i will
lai't in thy hand to prove it, do think I am no Christian, have I not a
Soul to save?


Hip. Yes it is to save yet I warrant it, and will be while it is a soul if yo^ use
this.


Fur. Excellent Courtship of all hands, only my Captains Courtshippe, is not
heard yet, good madam give him favor to court you with his voice.


Eug. What shood he Court me with all else my Lord?


Mom. Why, I hope madam there be other things to Court Ladies withal besides
voices.


Fur. I mean with an audible sweet song madam.


Eug. With all my heart my Lord, if I shall be so much in debted to him.


Foul. Nay I will be indebted to your ears Lady for hearing me sound music.


Fur. Well done Captain, prove as it will now.

Enter Messenger.
Me. My Lord Doctor Versey the Physician is come to see master Clarence.


Mom. Light and attend him to him presently.


Fur. To master Clarence? what is your friend sick?


Mom. Exceeding sick.


Ta. I am exceeding sorry.


King. Never was sorrow worthier bestowed
Then for the ill state of so good a man.

Pen. Alas poor gentleman; good my Lord lets see him.


Mom. Thanks gentle Lady, but my friend is loath
To trouble Ladies since he cannot quitt them.
With any thing he has that they respect.

Hip. Respect my Lord; I wood hold such a man
In more respect then any Emperor
For he cood make me Empress of my self
And in mine own rule comprehend the world.

Mom. How now young dame? what so dainly inspird
This speech has silver hairs, and reverence asks
And sooner shall have duty done of me
Then any pomp in temperall Emperie.

Hip. Good madam get my Lord to let us greet him.


Eug. Alas we shall but wrong and trouble him.
His Contemplations greet him with most welcome.

Fur. I never knew a man of so sweet a temper
So soft and humble, of so high a Spirit.

Mom. Alas my noble Lord he is not rich,
Nor titles has, nor in his tender cheeks
The standing lake of Impudence corrupts,
Has naught in all the world, nor naught wood have,
To grace him in the prostituted light.
But if a man wood consort with a Soul
Where all man's Sea of gall and bitterness
Is quite evaporate with (...) holy flames,
And in whose powers a Doue-like Innocence
Fosters her own deserts, and life and death,
Runs hand in hand before them: All the Skies
Clear and transparent to her piercing eyes,
Then wood my friend be something, but till then
A Cipher, nothing, or the worst of men.

Foul. Sweet Lord lets go visit him.

Enter Gooscappe.
Goos. Pray good my Lord, what is that you talk on?


Mom. Are you come from your necessary business Sir Gyles? we talk of the
visiting of my sick friend Clarence.


Goos. O good my Lord lets visit him, cause I know his brother.


Hip. Know his brother, nay then Co^nt do not deni^ him.


Goos. Pray my Lord whether was eldest, he or his elder brother?


Mom. O! the younger brother eldest, while you live Sir Gyles.


Goos. I say so still my Lord, but I am so borne down with truth as never any
knightith world was I think.


Ta. A man wood think he speaks simply now; but indeed it is in the will of
the parents, to make which child they will youngest, or eldest: For often we
see the younger (...), wherein he is eldest.


Eug. Your Logical wit my Lord is able to make any thing good.


Mom. Well come sweet Lords, and Ladies, let us spend
The time till supper-time with some such sights
As my poo^e house is furnished withal
Pictures and Jewels; of which implements
It may be I have ^ome will please you much.

Goos. Sweet Lord lets see them.

Exeunt.
Enter Clarence and Doctor. Do. I think your disease Sir, be rather of the
mind then the body.


Cla. Be there diseases of the mind Doctor?


Do. No question Sir, even as there be of the body.


Cla. And cures for them too?


Do. And cures for them too, but not by Physic.


Cla. You will have their deseases, greifes? will ye not?


Do. Yes, oftentimes.


Cla. And do not greifes ever rise out of passions?


Do. Evermore.


Cla. And do not passions proceed from corporal distempers?


Do. Not the passions of the mind, for the mind many times is sick, when the
body is healthful.


Cla. But is not the mindes-sicknes of power to make the body sick?


Do. In time, certain.


Cla. And the bodies ill affections able to infect the mind?


Do. No question.


Cla. Then if there be such a natural commerce of Powers betwixt them, that
the ill estate of the one offends the other, why shood not the medicines for
one cure the other?


Do. Yet it will not you see. Heimihi quod nullus a^or est medicabilis herbis.


Cla. Nay then Doctor, since you cannot make any reasonable Connection of these
two contrarieties the mind and the body, making both subject to passion,
wherein you confound the substances of both, I must tell you there is no
disease of the mind but one, and that is Ignorance.


Do. Why what is love? is not that a disease of the mind?


Cla. Nothing so for it springs naturally out of the blood, nor are we
subject to any disease, or sorrow, whose causes or effects simply and natiuely
concern the body, that the mind by any means partaketh, nor are there any
passions in the Soul, for where there are no affections, there are no
passions: And Affectus your master Gallen refers part^irascents, For illic est
anima sentiens vbi sunt affectus: Therefore the Rational Soul cannot be there
also.


Do. But you know we use to say, my mind gives me this or that, even in those
addictions that concern the body.


Cla. We use to say so indeed, and from that use comes the abuse of all
knowledge, and her practice, for when the object in question only concerns the
state of the body? why shood the soul be sorry or glad for it? if she
willingly mix her self, then she is a fool, if of necessity and against
her will, A slave, And so, far from that wisdom, and freedom that the
Empress of Reason, and an eternal Substance shood comprehend.


Do. Divinely spoken Sir, but very Paradoxicallie.


Ent^r Momford, Tales, Kingcob, Furnif; Rudes. Goos: Foul: Eugenia, Penelope,
Hipposita, Winnifrid. Mom. Who Is there?
I, my Lord.

Mom. Bring hither the key of the gallerie, me thought I heard the Doctor and
my friend.


Fur. I did so sure.


Mom. Peace then a while my Lord
We will be bold to evesdroppe; For I know
My friend is as respective in his chamber
And by himself, of any thing he does
As in a Critic Synods curious eyes
Following therein Pyth^goras golden rule.
Maxim omnium ^psum reuerere.

Cla. Know you the Countess Eugonia Sir?


Do. Exceeding well Sir, she is a good learned scholar.


Cla. Then I perceive you know her well indeed.


Do. Me thinks you two shood use much conference.


Cla. Alas sir, we do very seldom meet,
For her esta^e, and mine are so unequal,
And then her knowledge passes mine so far
That I hold much to sacred a respect,
Of her high virtues to let mine attend them.

Do. Pardon me Sir, this humblenes cannot flow
Out of your udgment but from passion.

Cla. Indeed I do accoun^ that passion,
The very high perfection of my mind,
That is excited by her excellence,
And therefore willingly, and gladly feel it.
For what was spoken of the most chaste Queen
Of rich Pasiaca may be said of her.
Ante^t sortem moribus virtutibus Annos,
Sex^ animo, morum No^litate Genus.

Do. A most excellent Dictick.


Mom. Come Lords away, lets not presume too much
Of a good nature, not for all I have
VVood I have him take knowledge of the wrong
I ru^ely off^r him: come then i will show
A few ^are Jewels to your honored eyes,
And then pre^t you with a common supper.

Goos. ^wells my Lord, why is not this candlestick^ one of your iew^ pray?


Mom. Yes marrre is it Sir Gyles if you will.


Goos: ^is a most si^e candlestick in truth, it wants nothing but the
languages.


Pen. The languages servant, why the languages?


Goos. Why mistress; there was a la^tin cand^estick h^re before, and that had
the languages I am sure.


Ta. I thought he had a reason for it Lady.


Pen. I and a reason of the Sun too my Lord, for his father wood have bin
ashamed on it.

Exeunt.
Do. Well master Clarence I perc^iue your mind
Has so incorparate it self wi^h flesh
And therein ratified that flesh to spirit,
That you have need of no Physicians help.
But good Sir even for holy virtues health
And grace of perfect knowledge, do not make
Those ground-workes of eternity, you lay
Means to your ruin, and short being here:
For the too strict and rational Course you hold
Will eat your body up; and then the world,
Or that small point of it, where virtue lives
Will suffer Diminution: It is now
Brought almost to a simple unity,
Which is, (as you well know) Simplicior puncto.
And if that point fail once, why, then alas
The unity must only be supposed,
Let it not fail then, most men else have sold it;
Tho you neglect your self, vphould it,
So with my reverend love I leave you Sir.
Exit.
Cla. Thanks worthy Doctor, I do amply quite you
I proppe poor virtue, that am propt my self,
And only by one friend in all the world,
For virtues only sake I use this wile,
Which otherwise I wood despise and scorn,
The world should s^ke and all the pomp she hugs
Close in her heart, in her ambitious gripe
Ere I sustain it, if this slendrest joint
Moved with the worth that worldlings love so well
Had power to save it from the throat of hell

He draws the Curtains and sits within them. Enter Eugenia, Penelope,
Hippolita. Eug. Come on fair Ladies I must make you both
Familiar witnesses of the most strange part
And full of impudence that ere I plaide.

Hip. What Is that good madam?


Eug. I that have been so more then maiden-nice
To my dear Lord and uncle not to yield
By his importunate suite to his friends love
In look, or almost thought; will of my self
Far past his expectation or his hope
In action, and in person greet his friend,
And comfort the poor gentleman's sick state.

`Pen. Is this a part of so much Impudence?


Eug. No but I fear me it will stretch to more


Hip. Mary madam the more the merrier.


Eug. Marry Madam? what shood I marry him?


Hip. You take the word me thinks as tho you would,
And if there be a thought of such kind heat
In your cold bosom, wood to God my breath
Might blow it to the flame of your kind heart.

Eug. Gods precious Lady, know ye what you say,
Respect you what I am, and what he is,
What the whole world wood say, and what great Lords
I have refused and might as yet embrace,
And speak you like a friend, to wish me him?

Hip. Madam I cast all this, and know your choice
Can cast it quite out of the crystal doors
Of your Judicial eyes: I am but young
And be it said without all pride I take,
To be a maid, I am one, and indeed
Yet in my mothers womb to all the wiles
Weend in the loomes of greatness, and of state:
And yet even by that little I have learned
Out of continual conference with you,
I have cride harvest home of thus much judgment
In my green sowing time, that I cood place
The constant sweetness of good Clarence mind,
Filled with his inward wealth and noblenes;
(Look madam here,) when others outward trashe
Shood be contented to come under here.

Pen. And so say I upon my maiden head.


Eug. It Is well said Ladies, thus we differ then,
I to the truth-wise, you to worldly men:
And now sweet dames observe an excellent jest
(At least in my poor jesting.) The Etl my uncle
Will miss me strait, and I know his close drift
Is to make me, and his friend Clarence meet
By some device or other he has plotted.
Now when he seeks us round about his house
And cannot find us, for we may be sure
He will not seek me in his sick ^iends chamber,
(I have at al times made his love so strange,)
He straight will think, I went away displeased,
Or hartelie careless of his hartiest suit.
And then I know there is no grief on earth
Will touch his heart so much, which I will suffer
To quite his late good pleasure wrought on me,
For i will be sworn in motion and progress
Of his friends suite, I never in my life
VVrastled so much with passion or was moved
To take his firm love in such ^elouse part.

Hip. This is most excellent madam, and will prove
A neecelike, and a noble friends Revenge.

Eug. Bold in a good cause, then lets greet his friend,
Where is this sickly gentleman at his book?
Now in good troth I wood these books were burnd
That rapp men from their ^app before their time,
How does my uncles friend, no other name
I need give him, to whom I give my self,

Cla. O madam let me rise that I may kneel,
And pay some duty to your sovereign grace.

Hip: Good Clarence do not wo^ke your self disease
My Lady comes to ease and comfort you.

P^n: And we are handmaides to her to that end.


Cla: Ladies my heart will break, if it be held
Within the verge of this presumtuous chair.

Eug. Why, Clarence is your judgment bent to show
A common lovers passion? let the world,
That liue^ without a heart, and is but show,
stand on her emtie, and impoisoned form,
I know thy kindness, and have seen thy heart,
Clest in my uncles free, and friendly lips
And I am only now to speak and act,
The rit'es due to thy love: oh I cood weep*
A bitter show of tears for thy sick state,
I cood give passion all her blackest rites.
And make a thousand vows to thy deserts,
But these are common, knowledge is the bond,
The seal and crown of our united minds*
And that is ra^e, and constant, and for that,
To my late written hand I give thee this,
See heaven, the soul thou gave is in this hand.
This is the knot of our eternity,
Which fortune, death, nor hell, shall ever loose.

Enter Bullaker. lack* Will. Ia: What an unmannerly trick is this of thy
countess, to give the noble count her uncle the slip thus?


Will Vnmannerlie, you villayne? O that I were worthy to wear a ^agger to an^e
purpose for thy sake?


Bull: Why young gentlemen, utter your anger with your fists.


Will. That cannot be man, for all fists are shut you know, and utter nothing,
and besides I do not think my quarrel just for my Ladies (...) in this
cause, for I protest she does most (...) miscarrie her self.


Ia: Protest you sawsie Jack you, I shood do my country and court-shippe good
service to beat thy co^lts teeth out of thy head, for suffering such a
reverend word to pass their guarde; why, the oldest courtier in the world
man, can do noe more then protest,


Bull. Indeed page if you were in France, you wood be broken upon a wheel
for it, there is not the b^st Dukes son in France dares say I protest, till
h^e be one and thirty year old at least, for the inheritance of that word
is not to be possessed before.


Will, Well, I am sorry for my presumtion then, but more sorry for my Ladies,
marie most sorry ^or thee good Lord Momforde, that will make (...) most of a^l
^orie for our selves, if we do not find her out.


la: Why alas what shood we do? all the stars of out heaven see, we seek
her as fast as w^e can, if she be crept into a rush we will seek her out or
burn her.


Enter Momfor^. Mom. Villains where are your Ladies, seek them
Out; hence, home ye monsters, and still keep you there Exeuut* Page^.

Where le^itie keeps, in her in constant Sphere,
A wa^e you pr^ious villains, what a plague,
Of varried tortures is a woman's heart?
How like a peacockes tail with different lights,
They differ from them selves; the very air
Alters the aspen humors of their bloods.
Now excellent good, now superexcellent badd.
Some excellent good, some? but one of all:
VVood any ignorant babie serve her friend,
Such an uncivil part? Sblood what is learning?
An artificial cobwebbe to catch flies,
And nourish Spiders, cood she cut my throat,
VV with her departure I had been her calfe,
And made a dish at supper for my guests
Of her kind charge, I am beholding to her,
Puff, is there not a feather in this ^yre
A man may challenge for her? what? a feather?
So easy to be seen; so apt to trace;
In the weak flight of her unconstant wings?
A mote man at the most, that with the sun,
Is only seen, yet with his radiant eye,
we cannot single so from other motes,
To say this mote is she, passion of death,
She wrongs me past a death, come* come my friend,
Is mine, she not her own, and there is an end.

Eug. Come uncle shall we go to supper now?


Mom. Zounes to supper? what a do^r is this?


Eug. A las what ailes my uncle, Ladies see.


Hip. Is not your Lordshippe well?


Pen: Good speak my Lord.


Mom. A sweet plague on you all, ye witty rogues have you no pity in your
villainous jests, but run a man quite from his fifteen wits?


Hip. Will not your Lord-shippe see your friend, and niece?


(...). VVood I might sink if I shame not to see her
Tush it was a passion of pure Ielosie,
I Will now make her now a mends with Adoration.
Gods of learning and of constancy,
Of friendship and every other virtue.

Eug. Come, come, you have abus'de me now I know
And now you plaster me with flatteries.

Pen. My Lord the con^ract is knit fast betwixt them


Mom. Now all heavens quire of Angels sing Amen,
And bless the^s true borne (...) with their bliss,
And Niece tho you have (...) me in this,
I Will uncle you yet in an other thing,
And quite deceive your expectation.
For where you think you have contracted hearts
With a poor gentleman, he is sole heir
To all my ^arledome, which to you and yours
I freely, and for ever here bequeath;
Call forth the Lords, sweet Ladies let them see
This sudden and most welcome Novelty;
But ^rie you mercy Niece, perhaps your modesty
Will not have them partake this sudden match.

Eug. O uncle think you so, I hope I made
My choice with too much Judgment to take shame
Of any form I shall perform it with.

Mom. Said like my Niece, and worthy of my friend.


Enter Furnifal, Tal: King: Goos: Rud: Foul: Ia: Will, Bullaker. Mom: My Lords,
take witness of an absolute wonder,
A marriage made for virtue, only virtue,
My friend, and my dear niece are man and wife.

Fur. A wonder of mine honor, and withal
A worthy presedent for all the world;
Heaven bless you for it Lady, and your choice.

Ambo Thanks my good Lord.


Ta. An Accident that will make policy blushe,
And all the Complements of wealth and state,
In the succesfull and unnumbered Race
That shall flow from it, filled with fame and grace.

Kin. So may it speed dear Countsse, worthy Clarence.


Ambo Thanks good Sir Cu^berd.


Fur. Captain be not dismayed, I Will marry thee,
For while we live, thou shall ^y consort be.

Foul. By France my Lord, I am not grieved a whit,
Since Clarence has her; he has bin in France,
And therefore merits her if she were better.

Mom. The^ knights i will knit your happy nuptial knots,
I know the Ladies minds better then you;
Tho my rare Niece has chose for virtue only,
Yet some more wise then some, they choose for both
Virtue, and wealth.

Eug. Nay (...) then I plead
This goes with my choice, Some more wise then some,
For only virtues choice is truest wisdom.

Mom. Take wealth, and virtue both amongst you then,
They love ye knights exreamely, and Sir (...):
I give the ch a st Hippolita to you*
Sir Gyles this Lady;

Pen. Nay stay there my Lord,
I have not yet proved all his knightly parts
I hear he is an excellent Poet too.

Tal. That I forgot sweet Lady; good Sir Gyles*
Have you no sonnet of your pen about ye?

Goos. Yes, that I have I hope my Lord my Cosen.


Fur. Why, this is passing fit.


Goos. I Would be ^oth to go without paper about me against my mistress, hold my
work again, a man knows not what need he shall have perhaps.


Mom. Well remembered a mine honor Sir Gyles:


Goos. Pray read my Lord, I made this sonnet of my mistress.


Rud. Nay read thy self man.


Goos. No intruth Sir Cut: I cannot read mine own hand.


Mom. Well I will read it.

Three things there be which thou should only crave,
Thou Pomroy, or thou apple of mine eye;
Three things there be, which thou should long to have,
And for which three, each modest dame wood (...),
Three things there be, that shood thine anger swage,
An English mastife, and a fine french page.

Rud. Sblood (...), there is but two things, thou (...) thy self.

Why Sir Cut: that's (...), the verse wood have binne too long, and I had put
in the third, S'light you are no Poet I perceive.


Pe^. It Is excellent servant.


Mom. Keep it Lady then,
And take the only knight of mortal men.

Goos. Thank you good my Lord as much as tho you had given me twenty
shillings in truth, now I may take the married men's parts at footeball.


Mom. All comforts crown you all; and you Captain
For merry form sake let the willowe crown;
A wreath of willow bring us hither strait.

Fur. Not for a world shood that have bin forgot
Captain it is the fashion, take this crown.

Foul. With all my heart my Lord, and thank ye too
I will thank any man that gives me crowns.

Mom. Now will we con^ecrate our ready supper
To honored Hymen as his nuptial rite,
In form whereof first dance fair Lords and Ladies
And after sing, so we will sing and dance,
And to the skies our virtuous joys advance.
The Measure. Now to the song, and do this garland grace.


Cant^.
Willowe, willowe, willowe.*
our captain goes down:
Willowe, willowe, willowe,
his valor does crown.
The rest with Rosemarie we grace,
O Hyme^ let thy lights
With richest rays guild (...) face,
and feast hearts with delights.
Willowe, willowe, willow,
we chaunt tothe skies:
And with black and yellows,
give co^rtship the prize.
FINIS.

