Eglogs Epytaphes, and Sonettes. Newly written by Barnabe Googe: 1563. 15.
March.

Imprynted at London, by Thomas Colwell, for Raffe Newbery, dwelyng in Fleet
street a little above the Conduit in the late shop of Thomas Bartelet.

Alexander Neuyll.
THe Mountains hie the blustryng wi^ds The fluds: ye Rocks wtsta^d
The Cities strong, the Ca^nons shot, and threatening Cheiftains hand.
The Castles houge by long beseyge, and dreadful battrye brook,
Both fire, and flames, and thundryng^ thumps and every deadly stroke,
With fervent broylyng furious rage, does beat, and ^ryue to ground
The long defenced walls by force, and thoroughly them confound.
Right so thy Muse (Oh worthy Googe.) thy pleasant frain^d style.
Discouerd lies to momish Mouths Reproachful tongs and vile
Diffaming minds. Regard them not. preas thou for higher praise.
Submit thy self to persons grave, whose Judgment right always
By Reason ruled does ryghtly judge, whom Fancies none can charm,
Which in the most Inco^stant brains, are chyefly wont to swarm.
Whom no desire of fylthy gain, whom lucre none can move
From truth to stray. Such me^ esteam, Such such embrace and love.
On such men stay thy tender years, such Patrons seek to choose.
Which taught by Time, and practisde Proof vprightest judgment use.
But as for those Crabsnowted bestes those ragyng feends of Hell.
Whose vile, malicious, hateful minds, with boylyng Rancour swell.
Which puffed with Pride, enflamd with spite, and drowned in deape disdain:
Like Momus monstrous brood outright even of a ielows Brayn
With curious, ca^ckard, carping mouths, most famous deeds diffame,
Defacing those whose labors great, Deserve immortal name.
Such crabfaced, ca^kerd, carlish chuffs within whose hateful breasts,
Such Malice bydes, such Rancour broils, such endless Envy rests
Esteame thou not. No prejudice to th^e: nor yet oprest,
Thy famous wrytyngs are by them. Thou lyuest and ever shall.
Not all the slaundryng tongues alive, may purchase blame or fault
Unto to thy name (O worthy Goog^.) No time, no fyrye flame
Not all the furies frettyng Force, Thy doings may dyffame.
Let them in broyle of burning spite, continual Toil sustain
Let the^ feel scourging Plags of mind Let ever during pain,
Spread through their poisoned veins. Let Care with payse of dedly weight:
Oppress their vile infected Hearts, with stynging Malice freight.
Let them destroy them selves in Time. In Rancour let them boil.
Let mortal hate, let pynching gryefe, let flaming torments broyle,
Within their grievous vexed breasts, for evermore to dwell
Let them feel Enuies cursed force. (consumyng Feend of Hell.)
Defye them all. (...) and squynteyd Monsters right
They are. In fine leave Sow to swill and Chuff to canckerd Spyght.
But thou proceed in virtuous deeds, and as thou haste begone,
Go forward still to aduau^ce thy fame Lyfes Race half ryghtly ron
Far easyer it is for to obtain, the Type of true Renown.
Like Labors have been recompenst with an immortal Crown.
By this does famous Chaucer live, by this a thousand moore
Of later years. By this alone the old renowned Stoore
Of Ancient Poets live. By this their Praise aloft does mownt.
Unto the Skies: and equal is with Stars above. Accownt
Thy self then worthy of the like, if that thou doste proceade
By famous deds thy Fame to enhau^ce and name abroad to spread.
With Courage stout tha^ through the thikst thou needst not for to feare^
Not he that says, but he that does, ought Gloryes Garlande wear.
Thus shall you still augment thy name, and win the high Renown,
And present Praise, in present Life, and after Death a Crown
Of Honor, that for ever lasts. immortal Fame in fine.
To whose reward, thy faithful Friend does wholly the resygne.
Finis.
B. Googe.


To the right worshipful M. William Louelace, Esquier, Reader of Grayes Inn:
( Barnabe Googe) wyssheth health.
How loathe I have been, being of long time earnestlye required, to suffer these
tryfles of mine to come to light: It is not unknown to a great nombre of my
famyliar acquaintance. Who both daily and hourly moved me thereunto, and
little of long time prevailed therein. For I both considered and wayed with my
self, the grosenes of my Style: which thus committed to the gasynge show of
every eye should forth with disclose ye manifest folly of the Writer, and also I
feared and mistrusted the disdaynfull minds of a nombre both scornful and
carpynge Correctours, whose Heads are ever busyed in tauntyng Judgments.
Least they should otherwise interpret my doyngs than in dead I meant them.
These two so great mischiefs utterly diswaded me from the following of my
friends persuasions, and wylled me rather to condem the^ to continual
darkness, whereby no Inconvenience could happen: than to endaunger my self in
gyuynge them to light, to the disdaynfull doom of any offended mind.
Notwithstanding all the dylygence that I could use in the Suppression thereof
could not suffice for I my self being at that time out of the Realm, little
fearing any such thing to happen. A very Friend of mine, bearing as it
seemed better will to my doings than respectyng the hazard of my name,
committed them all together vnpolyshed to the hands of the Prynter. In whose
hands during his absence from the City, till his return of late they
remained. At which time, he declared the matter wholly unto me: showing me,
that being so far past, and Paper provided for the Impression thereof: It
could not without great hynderaunce of the poor Printer be now revoked. His
sudden tale made me at ye first, utterly amazed, and dou^ting a great while,
what was best to be done: at the length agreyng both with Necessytie and his
Counsel, I said with Martial. I^am edpo^^ras tu^^oresse domi. And calling to
mind to whom I might chieflye commit the fruytes of my smiling muse: suddenly
was cast before my eyes the perfect vewe of your friendly mind (gentle Master
Louelace) Unto who^ for the nombred heaps of sundry Frendshyps, accou^tynge
my self as bound, I have thought best to give them, (not doubtyng) but that
they shall be as well taken, as I do p^esently mean them.

Desyry^^e (...) herein, as all such as shall (...) them especially to bear
with the unpleasant form of my to hastily fynyshed Dream, the greater part
whereof with little advise I lately ended, because the beginning of it, as a
senseles ^ead separated from the body was given with the rest to be prynted.
And thus desiring but for recompense the friendly receyuyng of my slender
Gift, I end: wyshyng unto you good Master Louelace in this life the happy
enioyeng of prosperous years: and hereafter the blessed estate of never
ceasynge Joy.

Yours assuredly Barnabe Googe.

Daphnes. Amyntas.


L. Blundeston to the Reader.
TO creep into thy favor (good Reader) with a long painted Preamble in
praise of this Auctor, I account it as vain. The Son Beams gyues light
sufficient. To move thy Affection with fore promised pleasure in reading the
voh^me, I think it as Booteles. Gold is of self force and virtue to draw the
desire. But with flowers of Rethorique first to delyght the, or with Pythy Reasons
to win thy good will and frendlye Report for this my attempt: if such
tropes and signs were flowing in me to persuade well thy favor, or so much
Discrescion wantynge in the to necglecte my good meaning, I would either enforce
my self to use a better kind of persuasion or else withdraw my good will from
the Sentence of so carpynge and slender a Judgment: but as I have felt no
^luddes of the one, so likewise I see no Ebbes of the other, that if I wear no
more barraygne of the first, then fearful of the last: I would be then no
more sparynge to horde up my Treasure from the: then I trust to find the
thankful now in taking this Present from me, which not only to show my good
will, (as my Preface discourses more largely) by preserving the worthy Fame,
and Memory of my dear friend M. Googe in his absence I have presumed more
bouldely to hazard ye prynting heareof, though this may suffyce to excuse well
my enterprise, but also to stir up thy Pleasure and further thy proffit by
readyng these his works, which here I have Puplyshed: openly unto thee. And
so (being vnstored my selffe) I seake to satesfie thy learned or willing desire
with other men's trauaeiles. But wheare the power fails the will may suffyce,
the gyuer, not the gift is to be regarded: prefer Colonus Radyshe root
before the Courtiers barbed horse.

Accept my goodwyll and way not the value, so shall thou bynd me if power (as
it is unlikely, may answer hearafter my meaning, to gratefie thee with the
whole fruits of mine own endeavor and so shall thou encourage others to make
the partaker of the like or far greater Jewels who yet doubtyng thy
unthankful receyte nigardly keape them to their own use and private
commodity. whear as being assured of the contrary by thy friendly report of
other men's trauayles, they could parhappes be easily entreated more freely to
lend them abroad to thy greater avail and furtherraunce. Thus therefore to thy
good or evil taking I put forth this pattern for others to follow in
weightyer matters or else to beware by other men's harms, in keaping their names
unreproved by silence.

From my Chamber, the.xxvii. of May. 1562.
The Preface of L. Blundeston.
The Sen^es dull of my appailed mus^
Foreweryed with the travail of my brain
^n stannyng of the argued Books di^^use,
And dark for me the glimeryng sight ^o ^uyne,
Deb^^^e ^t long what excersyce to use,
To fyle the edgeles parts of Wit agayn^
To cleanse the ^^eade from sleapy humors slyme.
To rouse the Heart from drowsye Dreams i^ ^ime
The mind desires to brek from thoughtful den
And time requyres the painted felds to vewe.
The Eye procures to please the Fancy then
With f^e^dish sights of diverse colors new.
The smelling likes the savor sweet of them.
The Ear agrees the pleasant lay anewe
Of Byrds to here. Thus these do all contryue,
With this disporte the Spirits to reuyue.
But Fancy then, by search of self denyse,
Renouncyng thus to spend the pleasant May
So vainly out with sport of fruteles Price
Found out at length, this practyse for thy play,
To pen in Verse, the toy^s of her de^is^,
To pas this time of Pentecoste away
Whose idle days she w^ld u^e thus to spend?
And publish forth her doings in the end.
Quod Reason no, (and brake her tale begone,
Will thou presume, lyk^ Bayarde blind to press,
Into the throng, of all the lookers on
Whose vewyng eyes, will wey thy wisdom ^esse.
To se the threde of all thy work^s ill spon
Drawn out at length, unto the common g^sse,
Then i^ thou shuldst keep to thy self thy clewe
Where none thy works besides thy self may view
With this rose up, from out her Seat behind,
Dame Memory, and Reason thus besought.
Since Lady chief of us thou art assygnde
To rule and temper all my secret thought
And to restrane affections Fancy blind,
Let me entreat if I may perce the ought,
For to present a Solace very fytte
Our Senses dull with changed Muse to whet.
Lo here the Eye a Paper buntche does se
Of fyled work of Googes flowing Head,
Left here behind, when hence he past from me,
In all the storms that Winter blastes bespreade
Through swellyng Seas and loftye mou^tains hye
Of Pyrenet the paths unknown to tread.
Whose great good will I keep, and in his plate
His Verses crave to represent his face.
Unfold the trusse therefore and if the Muse
Be s^tted so with this grave Study past
In so short space, or if we seek to choose
To prynt our acts in safety at the last
Cease of a while this Labor and peruse
These Papers left of such delyghting taste
And put in prynt these works of worthy Skyll
So shall we show the fruytes, of our good will.
This Fancy lykte, imagynyng aryght
Of her own Joy in hearing of his Verse
And pleasant Style, most pythyly endyght
whose Fame forth blown, his deds could well rehearse
But for to paynt my name in open sight
with others Stuff, this would she feign reuerse,
And thinks I should in others Plumes so show
My self, to be a second Esops Crow.
But after when the Eye had vewed trhe Line.
That Googe had pend and left behind with me,
when Memory could all the e^fect refygne,
To Reasons Skyll. to weye them as they lie.
with long rehearse of tried Faith by time
Then Fancy soon her Pride, began to plye
And all received much pleasure to the Mind
More profytte far then Fancye had assygnde.
And Fancy thus her self with blushyng face,
Condemned by Dame Reasons dome deuyne
To se thalluryng Style the cumly grace,
The sappye Sense of this his passing Ryme,
So far surmountynge her Invention base,
And hearing of his frendlynes in syne
which Memory her Storehouse held full fast^
Allowed well their Judgments at the last.
Since every Sense did wonted strength reune,
The Blud congeld, recoursed to his place
The wyts benomd brought to their propre quue
The Heart oppressed with old delighting grace,
Vnburdend now and puffed with pleasure new
By taking of this Book the vewyng gase
They all at ons Good will now calde dyon,
To wrest her self to quyght these works ad on.
Thus pushte I forth strayghte to the Printet^ hand
These Eglogs, Souets, Epytaphes of men
Unto the Readers Eyes for to be skande,
with Praises such as is due unto them
who absent now their Master may commend,
And feade his Fame what soever f^yleth him,
Give Googe therefore his own deserved Fame,
Give Blundeston leave to wysh well to his nam^^
Finis.
Egloga prima.
Daphnes. Amyntas.
Sith Phoebus now begins to flame,
O friend Amyntas dear:
And placed has his gorgeous globe in midste of all the Sphere
And from yt place does cast his Beams; where (they that fratres defyne)
Lies point (do say) that termed is, right Equinoctial line.
whereas the Rain does cause to spring, each herb and flower in fyelde
And forces ground (y^ spoyld of grene Old lie,) new grene to yield.
Let shepherds us yield also tales, as best beco^mes the time:
Such tales as Winter storms have stayde in country Phets Ryme.
Begin to sing Amyntas thou, for why? thy wit is best:
And many a laged saw lies hyd within thine aged breast.
Often have I heard, of Shephards old, thy fame reported true,
No Herdman lives: but knows the praise, to old Amyntas due:
B^gyn therefore, and I give care, for talk does me delyght,
Go Boy: go drive the Beasts to feed while he his mind resyght.
Amin.
Thy praises Da^^nes are to great, and more for me than meet:
Nor ever I, such saged sawes, could sing in Verses sweet.
And now, to talk of spring time tales my hears to hoare, do grow
Such tales as these, I told in, time, when youthful years did flow.
But since, I can not the deny, thy Fathers love does bind:
In simple Song I will adresse my self, to show my mind.
Long have thou Daphnes me required the state of Love to tell,
For in my youth, I knew the force, and passions all, full well.
Now Love therefore I will defyne and what it is declare,
which way poor souls it does entrap and how it them does snare.
My Boie, remove my beasts from hens and drive them farther down,
Upon the Hills, let them go feade, that join to yender town,
O Cupyde king of fyerye Love, aid thou my singing Verse,
And teach me hear the cause and case, Of Lovers to rehearse,
Direct my tongue, in trothe to tread, with Furye fill my brain,
That I may able be to tell, the cause of Lovers pain.
Opinions diverse could I show, but chiefest of them all,
I will declare: and for the rest, with silence leave I shall.
A seruent Humor, (some do judge) within the Head does lie,
Which yssuyng forth with poisoned beams does rou from eye to eye:
And taking place abroad in heads, a while does fyrmely rest:
Till Frenzy framde in Fancy fond* discends from head, to breast.
Plato.
And poison strong, from eyes outdrawn does perce the wretched heart,
And all infectes the blood about, and boyles in every part:
Thus: when the beams, infected has, the woeful Lovers blud:
Then Senses al, do straight decay, oppressed with Furyes flud.
Then Liberty withdrawes her self, and Bondage bears the swaye,
Affection blind then leads the heart, and Wit, is wownde away.
O Daphn^s then, the pains appear, and torments all of hell.
Then sekes, the selye wounded soul, the flames for to expel.
But all to late, alas he stryues, for Fancy bears the stroke
And he, must toil (no help there is) in slauysshe seruyle yoke.
His blud corrupted all within, does boil in every vain,
Than sekes he how to sewe for salve that may redress his pain.
And when the face, he does behold by which he should have aid,
And sees no help, the^ looks he long, and trembles all afraid.
And museth at the framed shape, that has his life in hands:
Now fast he flies, about the flames, now still amassed stands:
Yet Hope relieues, his hurtful Heat and Will does Pain make light,
And all the griefs, that then he feels does Presence still requyght.
But when the Light absented is, and Beams in heart remain,
Then flames the Fire fresh again, and new begyns his Pain.
Then long he looks, his loss to se, then sobbes, and syghes abound,
Then mourns he, to mys the mark that erst to soon he found.
Then shadefull places out he looks, and all alone he lives,
Erylynge Joy, and mirth from him, himself to waylynge gyues,
And still his mind thereon does muse and still, thereof he prates,
O Daphnes here I swear to the, no grief to Lovers state.
If he but ones behold the place, where he was wont to mete,
The pleasant form yt him enflamd, and joyful Countnaunce sweet.
The place (a wondrous thing I tell) his gryefe augmenteth new,
Yet still he sekes the place to se, that most he should esc^ewe.
If but the name rehearsed be, (a thing more strange to hear)
Then Color co^mes and goes in have then quaketh he for fear,
The very name, has such a force, that it can dase the mind,
And make the man amasde to stand, what force has Love to bind?
Affection none to this is like, it does surmownt them all,
Of grei^fes, the greatest grief no doubt is to be Venus thrall,
And therefore, Daphnes now beware, for thou art young, and fre,
Take head of vewynge faces long, for loss of Lybertye,
I shall not need (I think) to bid the, to detest the Crime,
Of wicked love, that Jove did use, In Ganimedes time, Jupiter.

For rather would I (thoo it be much) that thou should seake the fire,
Of lawful Love, that I have told, than burn with such desire,
And thus an end, I weryed am, my wind is old, and faint,
Such matters I, do leave to such, as finer far can paint,
Fetch in the Got: that goes astraye, and drive him to the fold,
My years be great I will be gone, for spryngtyme nights be cold.
Daphnes
Great thanks to the, for this thy tale Amyntas here I give:
But never can I make amends to the whilste I do live.
Yet for thy pains (no recompenc^) a small reward have here.
A whistle framed long ago, wherewith my father dear
His joyful beasts, was wont to keep. No Pype for tune so sweet
Might shepharde ever yet po^ses. (a thing for the full mete.)
Finis Eglogae primoe.
Egloga secunda.
Dametas.
MY beasts, go feed upon ye plain, and let your herdman lie,
Thou see her mind, and fearst you now, Dametas for to dye?
Why stayest you thus? why doste you stay^ thy life to long does last:
Accounte this flud, thy fatal grave, sith time of hope is paste.
What meanst thou thus to linger on? thy life would feign depart,
Alas: the wound does fester still, of cursed Cupids darte.
No salve but this, can help thy sore, no thing can move her mind
She has decreed, that thou shall dye, no help there is to find.
Now sith there is, no other help, nor ought but this to try^,
Thou see her mind: why fearste thou than? Dametas for to dye.
Long have thou served, and served true, but all alas, in vain,
For she thy service, naught estemes, but deals the grief for gain.
For thy good will, (a gay reward) Disdain, for Love she gyues,
Thou love her while thy life does last, she hates the, wile she lives.
Thou flamste, when as you see her face with Heat of hye desire,
She flames again, but how? (alas) with deep disdaynfull Ite.
The greatest pleasure is to the, to se her void of Pain,
The greatest gryefe to her again, to se thy Health remain.
Thou couetste ever her to find, she sekes from the to fly,
Thou see her mind, why fearst thou than? Dametas for to dye?
Doste thou accounte it best to keep, thy life in sorrows still?
Or thynkste thou best it now to live, Contrary to her will?
Thynkste thou thy life for to retain? when she is not content,
Canste thou addicte: thy self to live? and she to murder bent.
Doste thou entende again, to sewe for mercy at her hands?
As soon thou may go plow ye rocks, and reap upon the Sands.
Draw nere O mighty Herd of beasts sith no man else is bye,
Your Herdman long that has you kept, Dametas now must dye.
Resolve your Brutisshe eyes to tears and all together cry,
Bewail the woeful end of Love, Dametas now must dye.
My pleasant Songs, now shall you here no more on Mountains hye,
I leave you all, I must be gone. Dametas now must dye:
To Titirus I you resyne, in Pasture good to lie,
For Titirus shall keep you though, Dametas now must dye.
O cursed Cause, that has me slain, My trothe alas to try,
O Shephardes all, be Witnesses, Dametas here does dye.
Finis Eglogae secundoe.
Egloga tertia.
Menalcas. Coridon.
A Pleasant wether Coridon, and lytte to keep the fyelde,
This moon has brought* hearst you the birds what joyful tunes they yield,
Lo: how the lusty lambs do course, whom spring time heat does prick
Behold again, the aged Yewes, with bouncinge leapes do kick,
Amonst the^ all, what ails thy ra^me, to halte so much behind,
Some sore mischau^ce, has him be ^aln or else some grief of mind,
For wont he was, of stomach stout and courage hye to be,
And looked proud, amongst ye flock, and none so stout as he.
Cor.
A great mishap, and grief of mind, is him be fallen of late,
Which causes him, against his will, to lose his old estate.
A lusty flock has Titirus, that him Dametas gave,
Dametas he, that Martyr died, whose soul the heaues have,
And in this flock, full many Yewes of pleasant form do go,
with the^ a mighty Ra^me does run, that works all Woers woe.
My Ra^me, when he the pleasant dames had vewed round about,
Chose ground of battle, with his foe and thought to fight it out.
But all to weak, (alas) he was, although his heart was good,
For when his enemy him espied, he ra^ne with cruel mood.
And with his crooked weapon smote, him sore upon the side,
A blow of force, that stayde not there but to the legs did glyde.
And almost laamd the woer quyte. (such happes in love there be:)
This is the cause, of all his grief and waylynge that you se.
Men.
Well Coridon let him go halte, and let us both go lie,
In yonder busshe of Juniper, the Beasts shall feed hereby.
A pleasant place here is to talk: good Coridon begin,
And let us know the Towns estate, that thou remaynest in.
Cor.
The Towns estate? Menalcas oh thou makste my heart to groan,
For Vice has every place possess, and Virtue thence is flowne.
Pride bears her self, as Goddess chief and boastes above ye Sky,
And Lowlynes an abiecte lies, with Gentleness her bye,
Wit is not ioynde with Symplenes, as she was wont to be,
But sekes the aid of Arrogance, and craftye Polycie.
Nobylitie begyns to fade, and Carters up do spring,
Then which, no greater plague can hap, nor more pernicious thing.
Menalcas I have known my self, within this thyrtye year,
Of Lords and Ancient Gentelmen a hundredth dwelling theare,
Of whom we Shephardes had relief such Gentleness of mind,
Was placed in their noble Hearts, as none is now to find.
But Hawtynes and proud Disdain has now the chief Estate,
For sir John Straw, and sir John Cur, will not degenerate.
And yet, they dare account the^ selves to be of Noble bludde.
But Fisshe bred up, in durtye Pooles, will ever stynke of mudde.
I promysse the Menalcas here, I would not them envy.
If any spot of Gentleness, in them I might espy.
For if their Natures gentell be, though birth be never so base,
Of Gentelmen (for mete it is) they ought have name and place:
But when by birth, they base are bred, and churlisshe heart retain,
Though place of gentlem^n they have yet churles they do remain.
A proverb old, has often ben hard^ and now full true is tried:
An Ape, will ever be an Ape, though purple garments hyde.
For seldom, will the mastye course, the Hare or else the Dear:
But still, according to his kind. will hold, the hog by theare.
Unfit are dunghill knights to serve the town, with Spear in field:
Nor strange it semes, (a sudain Chop) to leap from whyp, to shield.
The chiefest man, in all our town, that bears the greatest swaye,
Is Coridon no kynne to me, a Neteherd the other day
This Coridon come from the Carte, In honor chief does sytte,
And gouernes us: because he has, a Crabbed, Clownish wit.
Now se the Churlysh Crueltye, that in his heart remayns.
The selye Sheape y^ Shephards good, have fosterd up with Pains,
And browght away, from Stynkyng dales on pleasant Hills to feade:
O Cruel Clownish Coridon, O cursed Carlish Seade:
The simple Sheep, constrained he, their Pasture sweet to leave,
And to their old corrupted Grass. enforces them to cleave.
Such Sheep, as would not them obaye but in their Pasture bide.
with (cruel flames,) they did consume and vex on every side.
And with the sheep, y^ Shephardes good, (O hateful Hounds of Hell,)
They did torment. and drive the^ out, in Places far to dwell.
There dyed Daphnes for his Sheep, the chiefest of them all.
And fair Alexis flamde in Fire, who never perysshe shall.
O Shephards wayle, for Daphnes death, Alexis hap lament,
And curs the force of cruel hearts, that them to death have sent.
I, since I saw such sinful syghts, did never like the Town,
But thought it best to take my sheep, and dwell upon the down.
Whereas I live, a pleasant life, and free from cruel hands,
I would not leave, the plesaunt fyelde for all the Townysh Lands.
For sith that Pride, is placed thus, and Vice set up so hye:
And Cruelty does rage so sore, and men live all awrye:
Thynkste you? y^ God, will long forbere, his scourge, and plague to send?
To such as him do still despise and never seek to mende?
Let them be sure he will revenge. when they think least upon.
But look a stormy shower does rise, which will fall hear anon.
Menalcas best we now depart, my Cottage us shall keep,
For there is rowme for the, and me, and eke for all our sheep:
Some Chestnuts have I there in store with Cheese and pleasant whaye,
God sends me Vittayles for my need, and I sing Care away.
Finis Egloge tertie.
Egloga quarta.
Melibeus Palemon.
O God, that guyds ye golden Globe, where shinyng shapes do dwell
O thou ye throwest the thu^der thumps from Heavens hye, to Hell,
what wonders works thy worthynes what meruayles doste thou frame?
What secret syghts be Subject seen unto thy holy name?
A simple Shepharde slain of late, by foolysshe force of Love,
That had not Grace such fancies fond and Flames for to remove,
Appeared late, before mine eyes, (Alas I fear to speak,)
Not as he here was wont to live, while Gryefe him none did break.
But all in Black, he clothed came an ugly sight to se:
As they that for their due Desartes. with Pains tormented be,
My sheep for fear amassed ran, and fled from Hill to Dale,
And I alone remained there, with countenance wan and pale.
O Lord (quoth I,) what means this thing is this Alexis spryght?
Or is it Daphnes soul that shows? to me this dreadful sight.
Or comes some Feend of Hell abroad? with fear men to torment?
Megera this? or ^isiphon? Or is Alecto sent?
what soever thou art, yt thus do com! Ghoost, Hagge, or Fend of Hell:
I the command by him that lives, thy name and case to tell.
With this, a stynkyng smoke I saw, from out his mouth to fly,
And with that same, his voice did sound. None of them all am I.
But ons thy friend ( O oldibe^) Dametas was my name,
Dametas I, that slew my self, by force of foolysshe flame.
Dametas I, that dotynge dyed, In fire of unkind Love:
Dametas I, whom Deiop^y, did cause such end to prove,
The same Dametas here I com, by lyceus unto the:
For to declare the woeful state, that happens now to me.
( O Melibe^) take heed of Love, of me Example take,
That slew my self, and live in Hell, for Deiopeias sake.
I thought that Death should me release from pains and doleful woe,
But now (alas) the trothe is tried, I find it nothing so,
For look what Pain and gryefe I felt when I lived hear before:
With those I now tormented ant, and with ten thousand more.
I mean not that I burn in love, such foolysh toys begone,
But Gryefes in nombre have I like and many more upon.
O cursed Love, (what should I say,) that brought me first to Pain,
Well, might I ones despise thy lore, but now (alas) in vain.
With fond Affection, I did flame, which now I most repent,
But all to late (alas) I wayle, sith hope of Grace is spent.
The fickle fading form, and face, that ones so much I fowght,
Has made me lose the Skies above, and me to Hell has browght.
Why had I Reason dealt to me? and could not Reason use.
Why gave I, Bridle to my will? when I might well refuse.
A wicked Will, in deed it was, that blinded so my sight,
That made me on such fadyng Duste, to set my whole Delyght.
A fond Affection lead me then, When I for God did place,
A Creature, cause of all my Care, a flessh ye fletynge face,
A woman Wave of Wretchedness, a Pattern pylde of Pride,
A Mate of Myschiefe and Distress, for whom (a Fool) I dyed.
Thus while he spoke, I saw me thought of Hell an vglye Fend,
With loathsome Claws, him for to close and forced him there to end.
And with this same, (O M^l^bey,) farewell, farewell (quoth he.)
Eschew the Blase of fervent flames, Example take of me.
My Heart with this began to rent, and all amasde I stood.
O lord (quoth I) what flames be these what Rage, what Furyes wood?
Does Love procure, to wretched men what Bondage does it bring?
Pain here: and Pain in life to come. (O doleful, dredefull thing.)
I quake to hear, this Storye told, and Melibei I fainte,
For sure I thought Dametas had, ben placed like a Saint.
I thought that cruel Charons Boat, had myste of him her frayght,
And through his death, he mounted had to stars and Heavens straight.
How valiantly did he despise, his life in Bondage led?
And sekyng Death with courage hye, from Love and Lady fled.
And is he thus rewarded now? The ground be cursed than,
That fosterde up, so fair a face that lost so good a Man.
Finis Egloge quarte.
Egloga quinta.
Mopsus. Agon.
Some doleful thing there is at hand thy countenance does declare,
Thy face good Agon void of blud thine eyes amassed stare:
I se thy tears, how they do still, disclose thy secret mind,
Has Fortune fr^wned late on the? Has Cupide ben unkind.
A pyteous thing to be bewaylde a desperate Act of Love, Agon.

(O Destenies) such cruel broils, How have you power to move?
Here lived a Lady fair of late, that Claudia men did call:
Of goodly form, yea such a one, as far surmounted all.
The stately Dames, yt in this Court, to show them selves do lie,
There was not one in all the Crewe: that could come Claudia nigh.
A worthy Knight did love her long, and for her sake did feale,
The panges of Love. that happen still by frownyng Fortunes wheale,
He had a Page, Valeri^^ named, whom so much he did trust,
That all the secrets of his Heart, to him declare he must.
And made him all the only means, to sue for his redress,
And to entreat for grace to her, that caused his distress.
She when as first she saw his page was straight with him in Love,
That nothing could Valeri^^ fare, from Claudias mind remove.
By him was Faustus often hard, by him his suits took place,
By him he often did aspyre, to se his Ladies face.
This passed well, till at the length, Vale^^us sore did sewe*
With many tears besechynge her, his Masters gryefe to rewe.
And told her that if she would not release, his Masters pain,
He never would attempt her more, nor se her ones again.
She then with mased countnaunce there and tears ye gushing fell,
Astonyed answerde thus, lo now, alas I se to well.
How long I have deceived ben, by the Valerius hear,
I never yet believed before, nor till this time did fear,
That thou dydste for thy Master li^e but only for my sake.
And for my sight, I ever thought, thou dydste thy travail take.
But now I se the contrary, thou nothing carste for me,
Since first thou knewste, the fyerye flames that I have felt by the.
O Lord how ill, thou doste requyte that I for the have done,
I curse the time, that frendshyp first, to show, I have begone.
O lord I the beseech let me, in time revenged be:
And let him know that he has synd, in this misusing me.
I can not think, but Fortune once, shall the reward for all,
And vengeance due for thy deserts, in time shall on the fall.
And tell thy master Faustus now, if he would have me live:
That never more he sewe to me, this answer last I give:
And thou o Traitor vile, and enmye to my life,
Absent thy self from out my sight, procure no greater strife,
Since yt these tears, had never force to move thy stoneye heart,
Let never these my weryed eyes, se the no more. Depart.
This said, in haste she hieth in, and there does vengeance call,
And struck her self, with cruel knyfe, and bluddye down does fall.
This dolfull chance, wha^ Paustus heard lamenting loud he cries,
And tears his hear and does accuse, the unjust and cruel Skies.
And in this ragynge mood away, he steals out alone,
And gone he is: no man knows w^ere each man does for him moan.
Valerius when he does perceive, his Master to be gone:
He weeps and wailes, in piteous plight and forth he ronnes anon.
No Man knows where, he is become, some say the wooddes he took,
Intending there to end his life, on no Man more to look:
The Court lamentes, the Princess eke her self does weep for woe,
Lo, Faustus fled, and Claudia dead.
Valerius vanysshed so.
Finis Egloge quinte.
Egloga sexta.
Felix. Faustus.
Felix.
O Faustus, whom above the rest, of Shephardes here that keep,
Upon these holts, ye no^bre great of waightye fleesed sheep:
I ever have estemde: and counted eke, the chiefest Friend of all,
What great mishap, what scourge of mind or grief has the befall?
That has the brought i^ such a plight far from thy wonted guyse?
What means this cou^tenau^ce all bespre^t with teres? these wretched eyes
This mourning look, this Vesture sad this wrethe of Wyllow tree,
(Unhappy man) why doste thou weep what chance has altered the?
Tell tell, me soon, I am thy friend, Disclose to me thy gryefe,
Be not afraid, for friends do serve, to give their Friends relyefe.
The woeful cause of all my hurt, good Felix long ago, Faustus.

Thou knewst full well: I need not now by words to double woe,
Since that (alas) all hope is past since gryefe, and I am one,
And since the Lady of my life, (my fault) I have forgone,
What woldst you have me do (oh friend?) to Joy? in such dystres?
Nay pleasures quyte I banish here, and yield to Heaviness,
Let gryefes torment me evermore, let never Cares away.
Let never Fortune turn her wheale to give me blysfull day.
Love has me scourged: I am content lament not thou my state.
Let spyght on me take vengeance now let me be torn with hate.
Let her enjoy, her happy life, a Flower of golden hew,
That closes when the Son does set, and spreads with Phoebus new. A Marygolde.

Sith from my Garlande now is fallen, this famous Flower sweet:
Let Wyllows wind about my head, (a Wrethe for Wretches mete)
Felix.
Fie Faustus, let not Fancy fond, in the bear such a swaye,
Expel Affections from thy mind, and drive them quyght away.
Embrace thine Ancient Liberty, let Bondage vile be fled:
Let Reason rule, thy crased Brain, place Wit, in Folies stead.
Since she is gone, what remedy? why should thou so lament?
Will thou destroy thy self with tears and she to pleasures bent?
Give ear to me, and I will show the remedies for Love
That I have learned long ago: and in my youth did prove.
Such remedies as soon shall quench the flames of Cupids Fire,
Such remedies as shall delay, the Rage of fond Desire.
For Faustus if thou follow still, the blinded God to please,
And wylt not seek, by Reasons Rule, to purchase thine own ease,
Long can thou not thy friends enjoy but bid them all farewell.
And leave thy life, and give thy soul to depest fluds of Hell.
Leave of therefore, betymes and let Affection bear no swaye,
And now at first the Fire quench before it further straye,
Each thing is easily made to obaye, while it is young and grene,
The tender twyg, that now does bend at length refuses clean.
The fervent Fire, that flaming first, may little water drenche,
When as it has obtained time, whole Ryuers can not quench:
Forsake the Town, (my Faustus dear) and dwell, upon this plain,
And time shall heal, thy festryng wou^d and Absence banysh Pain.
Above all things fly Idleness, For this does dowble strength,
To Lovers flams, and makes the^ rage, till all be lost at length,
Here in these felds, are pleasant things to occupye thy brayn,
Be hold: how spryng reuyues again, that winter late had slain,
Behold: the plesaunt Hills adournd, with diverse colors fair,
Give ear to Scillas lusty songs, reioysynge in the air,
What pleasure can thou more desire, then here is for to se:
Thy lusty yewes, with many a lam, Lo: whear they wayt on the,
Think not upon that cursed face, that makes the thus her slave
But well regard the pleasant life, that here thou see me have,
When I long time a go, did feale, the flames of Cupids fire,
These means Lo than I practiced, to cure my fond desire.
I first wayed with my self, How fond a thing it seamd,
To let my heart lie there in chains, where I was naught esteamd.
And how with flames I burnt for her, that passed naught for me,
And how, these eyes encreast my harms that first her face did se,
With pensyfe heart full freight with thoughts, I fled from thence away,
And though that Love bad turn my steps, yet would I never stay,
But from that foul infectyue air, where first I took my sore,
I hyed in have, and shund the place, to se for ever more.
Each letter that I had received from her, I cast away,
And tokens all, I threw them down, to my no small dysmay.
Then busyed I my self in things that might me most delyght,
And sought the chiefst means I could, to help my weryed spryght.
Sometime I would behold the fyelds, and Hills that thou doste se,
Sometime I would betraye the Byrds, that light on lymed tree,
Especially in Shepstare time, when thick in flocks they fly,
One would I take, and to her Leg, a lymed Line would tie,
And where ye slock flew thickest, there I would her cast away,
She straight unto the rest would hye, amongst her Mates to play.
And preasyng in the mydste of them, with Line and Lyme, and all,
With cleuyng wyngs, entangled fast they down together fall.
Sometime I would the little Fysh: with bayted Hook beguyle:
Sometime the craftye Fore I would, deceive for all his wyle:
Sometime the Wolf, I would pursue, sometime the fomyng Boore:
And when with labor all the day, my weryed Lyms were soore.
Tha^ rest and sleep I straightway sought no Dreams did me afraye:
Tormented naught with care, I past the lyngryng night away.
And thus I clean forgot: in time, the dotyng Days I saw,
And freed my self, to my great Joy, from Yoke of Lovers Law.
More of this same, I will the tell, the next time here we mete,
And stronger Medycines will I give, to purge that Venym sweet.
Behold the Day is slypt away, and Stars do fast appear,
Lo where Calicto Virgin ones, does shine in Skies so clear.
Lo where old Ceph^us walks about, with twynyng Serpent bye,
We will no longer hear abide, But hence will homwarde hye.
Finis Eglogae sextoe.
Egloga septima.
Siluanus. Sirenus. Seluagla.
SIrenus Shephard good and thou, that have ill luck in love,
The cause of al my hurt by whom my suits could never prove.
God never let that I should seek, to be revenged of the,
For when I might have been with case, yet would not suffer me.
The Love that I Duerda bare, on the to show my Spyte:
On the in whom my Lady fair, had once her whole delyght,
If thy myshaps do not me grieve, my mischiefs never end,
Think not sirenus that because, Diana was thy friend,
I bear the worser will assure thy self so base my love never semde
That only I should favor her. but all that she estemde.
Siren.
Thou either art siluanus borne, Example for to give,
To us that know not how, when Fortune frowns to live,
Or else has Nature placed in the so strong and stout a mind.
Suffysynge not, thine yls alone to bear, but means to find,
That may the Griefs of others help, I se thou art so bent,
That Fortune can the not amase, for all her mysciefes meant,
I promys the siluanus hear, time plain in the does show,
How daily she dis^ouers things, that erst did men not know.
I can not bear the Gryefes I feale, my force is all to faint,
I never could as thou can stynt, the tears of my complaynt.
Diana has procured the pains, that I shall never end,
When first she falst her troth to me, she kyld a faithful friend.
I marvel how she could so soon, put the out of her mind, Siluan.

I well remember since thou wents^e alone I did her find.
In place that sorrow semde to shape, where no man stood her nigh,
But only (I unhappy wretch,) that herd her woeful cry,
And this with tears alowde she said, O wretch in ill time borne.
What chance have thou? that thus thou have Sirenus sweet forlorn.
Give over pleasures now, Let never Joy the please,
Seek all the cruel means thou can that may thy heart disease.
When thou doste him forget I wysh, all mischifes on the light,
And after death, the Fendes of Hell, torment thy living spryght.
What man would here believe? that she that thus could speak, Siren.

In so short time as I have been away. would promys break.
O stedfastnes and Constancy, how seldom are you found:
In women's hearts to have your seats, Or long abydyng ground?
Who look how much more earnest they, at first their hearts do set,
So much more sooner ever more, where late they loved, forget:
Full well could ever I believe, all women gylty of this:
Save her alone, in whom I judge, never nature wrought amiss:
But sins her marriage how she speeds Siluanus I pray the tell?
Siluan.
Some say she lykes it very ill, and I believe it well:
For Delius he that has her now, although he welthy be,
Is but a lout and has in him, no hansome qualytie:
For as for all, such shynges wherein, we Shepeheardes have delyght,
As in Quaiting, Leaping, Singing or to sound a Bagpype right:
In all these things he is but an Ass, and nothing do he can,
They say tys quallities but tush, Its riches makes a man:
What woman is that y^ comes here, Siluanus can thou tell? Siren.

Its one has sped as well in Love, as we, I know her well: Siluan.

She is one of fair Guerdas friends, who keeps her beasts below,
Not far from hence by her thou may, Dianas State well know.
She loved hear a Shephearde called, Alanius long a go:
Who fauers one ysmenia now, the cause of al her woe:
No place so fyt for the as this, Lo hear Siluanus stands, Siluag.

Who has received like luck to thine at cruel Fortunes hands,
This company besemes the well, Fair Shepherds both good deane,
To the Seluagina eke of Hope, whom Love has spoiled clean: Silua.

A thousand better days I wysh, than thou have had before,
Seluag.
At length may better Fortune fall, For worse can not be more.
To trust the feigned words of men, Lo, thus poor women's speeds,
Siluan.
And men do smarte not through your words but your unconstant deeds.
For you when earnestlyest you love, no thing can chance so light.
But if a toye com in your Brain, your mind is altered quyght.
If we but ones, absent our selves, the shortest time we may,
So much unconstant is your minds Love soreth straight away,
Example take Sire^us here, whom once Diana lovd,
As all we know, and look how soon her mind is now removd:
No, no, there is not one of you, that constant can remain:
Siluag.
You judge but of malicious heart, and of a Ialouse brain.
All things you do your selves esteem, and men must bear no blame.
Of your dissemblyng noughty deeds, we women bear the shame.
Fair Damesell if you can perceive Siluanus true does say Siren.

There is not one amongst you all, but does from reason straye.
What is the cause that women thus? in their vnconstancye,
Do cast a man from highest hap, to deepest myserye?
Its nothing else, I you assure, but that you know not well,
What thing is love, and what you have, in hand you can not tell.
Your simple wyts are all to weak, Unfeigned love to know,
And thereof does forgetfulness, in you so shortly grow.
Si^enus judge not so of us, our wyts be not so base, S^luag.

But that we know as well as you, what is what in every case.
And women eke, there are ynow that could if they were brought
Teach men to live, and more to love, if love might well be tought,
And for all this, yet do I think, no thing can worser be.
Than women's state. it is the worst, I think of each degree.
For if they show but gentle words you think for love they dye.
And if they speak not when you list, than straight you say, they are hye.
And that they are, disdainful Dames, and if they chance to talk.
Tha^ cownt you the^ for chatring Pies whose tongs must always walk.
And if perhaps they do forbear, and Silence chance to keep,
Than tush, she is not for company, she is but a simple sheep.
And if they bear good will to one, the^ straight they are judged naught
And if ill name to shun they leave, Unconstant they are thought.
Who now can please these Ialouse heads, the fault is all in you,
For women never would change their minds if men would still be true,
To this, I well could answer you, but time does bid me stay, Siren.

And women must the last word have no man may say them nay.
Pass over this, and let us here, what luck you have had in love,
And show if ever love of man, your constaunt heart could move.
No fytter place can be than this, here may you safely rest,
Thus syttyng here, declare at large, the secrets of your breast.
Nay: longer here we may not bide, but home we must away, Siluag.

Lo how the Son denies his Beams depriuyng us of day.
Finis Egloge septime.
Egloga octaua.
Coridon. Cornix:
NOw ragethe Titan fyerce above his Beams on earth do beat.
Whose hot reflection, maks us an over fervent heat:
With fyery Dog, he forward flames feale hot Agues up he dryues:
And sends them down, with boylyng blud to shorten Mysers lives.
Lo, how the beasts, lies under trees how all thing seeks the shade,
O blessed God, that some defense, for every hurt have made,
Behold this pleasant Brodeleaued Be^ch and springing fou^tain clear,
Hear shade enough, here water cold com Cornix rest we here,
And let us songs begin to sing, our purs and hearts be light.
We fere not we, the tomblyng world we break no sleaps by night.
Both place and time my Coridon exhorts me to sing, Cornix:

Not of the wretched Lovers lives, but of the immortal king.
Who gyues us pasture for our beasts and blesses our increase:
By whom, while other cark and toil we live at home with ease.
Who keeps us down, from climyng hye where honor breeds debate,
And here has granted us to live in simple Shephards state,
A life that sure does fare exceade, each other kind of life:
O happy state, that does content, How far be we from strife?
Of him therefore, me list to sing, and of no wanton toys,
For him to love, and him to praise, surmounts all other Joys.
O Shephards leave Cupidoes Camp, the end whereof is vile,
Remove Dame Venus from your eyes and harken here a while.
A God there is, that guyds the Globe, and framde the fyckle Sphere,
And placed has, the Stars above, that we do gase on here,
By who^ we live, (unthankful beasts) by whom we have our health,
By whom we gain our happy states by whom we get our wealth.
A God: that sends us that we need, a God: that us defends.
A God: from whom the Angels hye, on mortal men attends.
A God: of such a Clemency, that who so him does love
Shall here be sure to rest a while, and always rest above.
But we, for him do little care, His Heasts we naught esteem,
But hunt for things that he does hate most pleasant those do seem,
(Unthankful mysers) what do we? what mean we thus to straye?
From such a God, so merciful, to walk a worser way?
May naught his benefyts procure? may naught his mercyes move?
May nothing bind, but needs we must? give hate to him for love?
O happy (ten times) is the man, (a Bird full rare to find)
That loves God with all his heart, and kepes his laws in mind.
He shall be blessed in all his works, and safe in every time,
He shall sweet quietness enjoy, while other smarte for Crime.
The threatnyng chau^ces of the world shall never him annoye,
When Fortune frowns on foolish men he shall be sure to joy.
For why? the Angels of the Lord, shall him defend always,
And set him free, at every harms, and hurts at all assayes.
Even he that kept the Prophet safe, from mouths of Lions wild, David.

And he that once preserved in Flags, the sely suckyng Child, Moses.

Elias.
The God that fed, by Ravens Byll, the Teacher of his word,
Shall ^ym (no doubt) in safety keep* from Famyn, Fire, and Sword.
Not he, whom Poets old have faynd, to live in Heaven hye,
Jupiter.
Embracyng Boys: (O fylthy thing) in beastly Lecherye.
Juno.
Nor Iu^^ she: (that wrinkled Jade,) that Queen of Skies is calde,
Saturn.
Nor soleyn Sat^^n Churlysh Chuffe* with Scalpe of Cancre bald.
Mars.
Nor fumyng Fool, with fyery face, that moves the fyghters mind.
Venus.
Cupido.
Nor Venus she: (that wanton wench) that guyds the Shoter blind.
Can the defend: as God will do, for they were sinful fools,
N^merus.
Who^ first ye blind hye wytted Grek^ brought in to wise men's Scooles.
No none of these, but God alone, ou^ht worship for to ^aue,
For they for all their Honor ones, rest ye tin stynkyng Grave.
Hear have thou heard, the happy state of them that live in fear,
Of God* and love him best: now list, his foes reward to hear,
And first know thou that every man, that from this God does go,
And folows lust, him he acountes, to be his deadly foe,
This mighty King of whom we talk, as he is merciful,
And suffers long, reuengyng slow, So when we be thus dull,
That we will not perceive in time, the goodness of his grace,
His favor straight, he does withdraw and tournes a way his face.
And to him self then does he say, How long shall I permit
These stubburne beasts, for to rebel? and shall I love them yet,
That hate me thus? or have I need their loving mynds to crave?
I ask no more but only love, and that I can not have.
Well, well, I will not care for them, that thus do me despise,
Let them go live, even as they list, I turn away mine eyes.
When God has thus said to him self, Then does the braynlesse fool,
Cast Bridle of, and out he runs, neglecting virtues Scoole,
Then does the Devil give him line, and let him rune at large,
And Pleasure makes his Mariner, to row in vices Barge,
Then up the Sails of wilfulnes, he hoyses hie in have,
And fond Affection blows him forth, a wynd that Pluto plast,
Then cuttes he swyft, the seas of sin, and through the Channel deape,
With Joyful mind, he fleets a pace, whom Pleasure bryngs a sleep,
Then who so happy thinks him self? who dreams of joy but he?
Tush, tush, says he: to thynk of God, Inage suffiseth me,
Now will I pass my pleasant youth, Such toys becomes this age,
And God shall follow me says he, I will not be his page,
I will be proud, and look a loft, I will my body deck,
With costly clothes, above my state who then dare give me che^ke?
Garments some time, so guard a knave, that he dare mate a Knight, Coridon.

Yet have I seen a Ne^ in hemp, For Checking often light.
The Peacocks plume shall not me pas that nature finely framde Cornix.

For coulord sylkes shall set me fourth, that nature shall be shamde,
My Sword shall get me valiant fame, I will be Mars out right,
And Mars you know, must Venus have, to recreate his spryght.
I will oppress the simple knave, shall Saues be sawsy now?
Nay: I will teach the nedy Dogs, with Cappe to crowche, and bow.
Thus fares he, and thus he lives, no whyt estemyng God,
In health, in joy, and lustynes, free from the smartyng Rod,
But in the miost of all his mirth, while he su^pecteth least,
His happy chance, begyns to change and else his fl^etynge feast,
For death (that old deuouryng Wolf) whom goo^ men nothing fear,
Coms saylyng fast, t^ Galley black, and when he spy^s him near.
Does boorde him straight, and grapels fast and than begy^s the fight.
In riot leaps, as Captain chief, and from the Mayn mast right,
He downward com^, and surfeit than, assayleth by and by,
Then vile diseases forward shoues, with pains and gryefe thereby,
Life stands aloft, and fyghteth hard, but pleasure all agaste.
Does leave his ore, and out he flies then death approaches fast.
And gives the charge so sore, ye needs must life begin to fly,
The^ farewell all. The wretched man with Caryen Corse does lie,
Who^ Death himself flyngs over board, amyd the Seas of syn,
The place where late, he swetly swam now lies he drowned in.
Contynuall torment him awaytes, (a Monster vile to tell)
That was begot of Due Desert, and raygneth now in Hell,
With gredy mouth he always fe^ds upon the Syndrownd soul,
Whose gredy Paws, do never ceas, in sinful fluds to prowle.
Lo. ^ his the end, of every such as here lives lustylye
Necglectyng God thou see. in vice, ^o live. in syn do dye.
What should I speak of al their harms blud that happens them in life?
Their Conscience pricked, their barren their toil, their grief, their strife,
With mischiefs heaped many a one, which they do never try,
That Lou^ and Fear the mighty God, that rules and raynes on hye,
To long it we are, to make discourse, and Phoebus down descends,
And in the Clouds his beams does hyde which tempest sure portends,
Look how the beasts begin to sling, and cast their heads on hye,
The Hear on show mountes above the Clouds ye Crows each where do cry
All this shows rayn, time byds us go com Coridon away,
Take up thy Staff, fetch i^ thy beasts let us go while we may.
Coridon:
Cornix agreed, go thou before, you cursed Bull of mine
I must go drive: he never bydes, among my Fathers Kyne.
Finis Egluge octaue.
An Epytaphe of the Lord Sheffeldes death.
WHen Brutysh broyle, and rage of war in Clownysh hearts began
When Tigres stout, in Ta^ners bond vnmusled all they ran,
The Noble Sheffeyld Lord by birth and of a courage good,
By clubbish hands, of crabbed Clowns there spent his Noble blud.
His noble birth auayled not, his honor all was vain,
Amyd the prease, of Mast ye Curres, the valyant Lord was slayue.
And after such a sort (O ruth,) that who can tears suppress.
To think ye Dunghyll Dogs should dawnt the Flower of worthynes.
While as the rauenyng Wolves he prayed his gylteles life to save.
A bluddy Butcher byg and blunt, a vile unwieldy knave
With beastly blow of boisterous byll at him (O Lord) let drive,
And cleste his head, and said therewith shall thou be left alive?
O Lord that I had present ben, and Hectors force withal,
Before that from his Carlysh hands, the cruel Byll did fall.
Then should that peasaunt vile have felt the clap upon his Crown,
That should have dazed his dogged heart from dryuyng Lords adowne.
Then should my hands have saved thy life good Lord who^ dear I loved
Then should my heart in doutfull case, full well to the ben proved,
But all in vain thy death I wayle, thy Corpse in earth does lie.
Thy king and Country for to serve thou dydste not fear to dye.
Farewell good Lord, thy death bewail all such as well the knew,
And every man laments thy case: and Googe thy death does rewe.
An Epytaphe of M. Shelley slain at Musselbroughe.
Won Mars had moved mortal hate and forced sumysh heat
And hye Bellona had decreed, to sit with Sword in Seat,
The Scotts untrue with fighting hand, their promys to deny,
Assembled fast, and England thought, the trothe with them to try.
Chose Musclebroughe their fighting place amyd those barrayne fyelds
Their breche of faith, there not to try with trothe, but trotheles Shyeldes
In battle brave, and Army strong Encamped soore they lay,
Ten Scotts to one (a dredeful thing a dolfull fyghtyng day.)
That Englysh men were all agaste, with quakyng staves in hand.
To se their enemies lie so near, and death with them to stand.
No other remedy there was, but fight it out or fly.
And who should first the Onset give, was sure therein to dye.
Thus al dismayde, and wrapped in fear with doutfull mind they stand,
If best it be, with flight of foot, to strive or fight of hand.
Till at the length, a Captayn stout. with hawtye mind began speak.
O Toward all, and maydly men of Courage faint and weak,
Unworthy com of Brutus race, is this your manhood gone,
And is there none you Dastardes all. that dare them set upon.
Then Shelley all inflamed with heat with heat of valiant mind,
No Toward we, nor maydly men, ne yet of Dastards kind,
I would you wyste did ever com, but dare be bold to try,
Our manhood hear, though naught appear but death to all men's eye
And with these words (O noble heart) no longer there he stayde,
But forth before them all he sprang as one no whyt dismayed
With charged staff on fomyng horse his Spurs with heels he strykes,
And forewarde ronnes with swyftye race, among the mortal Pykes
And in this race with famous end, to do his Country good,
Gave Onset first upon his Foes, and lost his vital blud.
Finis.
An Epytaphe of Master Thomas Phayre.
THe hawtye verse, ye Maro wrote made Rome to wonder mu^he
And marvel none for why the Style and waightynes was such,
That all men judged Parnassus Mownt had clefte her self in twain,
And brought forth one, that seemd to drop from out Minerua^s brain.
But wonder more, may Bryttayne great where Phayre did florysh late,
And barreyne tongue with sweet accord reduced to such estate:
That Virgils verse has greater grace in forrayne foot obtaynde,
Than in his own. who whilst he lived each other Poets stayned^
The Noble H. Hawarde once, that raught eternal fame,
With mighty Style, did bring a piece of Virgils work in frame,
And Grimaold gave the like attempt, and D^uglas wan the Ball,
whose famous wit in Scottysh ryme had made an end of all.
But all these same did Phayre excel, I dare presume to write,
As much as does Appoll^es Beams, the dymmest Star in light.
The enuyous fates (O pytie great, had great disdain to se,
That us amongst there should remayn so fine a wit as he,
And in the mydst of all his toil, did force him hence to wend,
And leave a Work vnperfyt so, that never man shall end.
An Epytaphe of the Death of Nicolas Grimaold.
Behold this fletyng world how al things fade
How every thing does pass and we are away,
Each state of life, by common course and trade,
Abydes no time, but has a passing day.
For look as life, that pleasant Dame has brought,
Tht pelasaunt years, and days of lustynes,
So Death our Foe, consumes all to naught,
Enuyeng thief, with Darte does us oppress,
And that which is, the greatest gryfe of all,
The gredye Grype, does no estate respect,
But where he comes, he makes them down to fall,
Ne stays he at, the hie sharp wytted sect.
For if that wytt, or worthy Eloquens,
Or learning deape, could move him to forbear,
O Grima^ld then, thou hadste not yet gone hence
But hear hadest seen, full many an aged year.
Ne had the Muses lost so fine a Flower,
Nor had Minerua wept to leave the so,
If wisdom might have fled the fatal hour,
Thou hadste not yet ben suffered for to go,
A thousand doltysh Geese we might have sparde,
A thousand wytles heads, death might have found
And taken them, for whom no man had card,
And laid them low, in deep obliuious ground,
But Fortune favors Fools as old men say
And lets them live, and take the wise away.
Finis.
To Master Alexander Nowell.
THe Muses joy, and well they may to se,
So well their labor com to good success,
That they sustained long ago in the,
Minerua smyles, Phoebus can do no less,
But over all, they chyefly do rejoice,
That leauyng things, which are but fond and vain,
Thou dyddest choose, (O good and happy choice)
In sacred Scoles, thy luckye years to train,
By which thou have obtaynde (O happy thing)
To learn to live, while other wander wide,
And by thy life, to please the immortal king,
Then which so good, nothing can be applied,
Law gyues the gain, and Physycke fyls the Purse,
Promotions hye, gyues Arts to many one,
But this is it, by which we escape the Curse,
And have the blys of God, when we be gone.
Is this but only Scriptures for to read?
No, no. Not talk, but life gyues this in dead.
To Doctor Bale.
GOod aged Bale: that with thy hoary hears
Doste yet persyste, to turn the paynefull Book,
O happy man, that have obtaynde such years,
And leavst not yet, on Papers pale to look,
Give over now to beat thy weryed brayns,
And rest thy Pen that long has labored soore
For aged men unfit sure is such pain,
And the beseems to labor now no more,
But thou I think Don Platoes part will play
With Book in hand, to have thy dyeng day.
Finis.
To M. Edward Cobham.
Old Socrates, whose wisdom did excel,
And past the reach, of wysest in his time,
Surmounted all, that on the earth did dwell,
That Craggye Hyls, of virtue hye did clyme,
That Socrates, my Cobham did allow,
Each man in youth, him self in Glass to view,
And wyld them often, to use the same, but how?
Not to delyght, in form of fadyng hew.
Nor to be proud thereof, as many be,
But for to strive, by beauty of the mind,
For to adourne, the beauty he does se.
If warlyke form, Dame Nature him assygnde,
By virtuous life, than cou^tenau^ce for to get,
That shall deface, the fairest of them all,
Such Beauty as no age nor years will fret:
That flies with fame, when fyckle form does fail,
Thus much I say, that here to the present,
My words a Glass for the to look upon.
To the whom God, in tender years has lent,
A towardenes, that may be mused upon,
Such towardenes, as in more grauer years,
Does sure a hope, of greater things pretend,
Thy noble mind, that to thy friends appear,
Does show the blud, whereof thou doste descend,
The gentleness, thou use unto all such,
As smallye have deserved good will of the,
Does show the grace, thou have that sure is much,
As ever yet, in any I did se,
Thy wit as ripe, as Nature well can give,
Declares a greater hope than all the rest,
That shall remain, to the whilst thou doste live,
In desperate yls, a Medycyne ever pressed.
The good behauyour, of thy self in place
Whersoeuer that thou chauncest for to light,
So much both beauty, mind and wit does grace
As well can be required of any wight.
What rests now? but only God to praise,
Of whom thou have received these Gifts of thyns,
So shall thou long, live hear with happy days,
And after Death, the starrye Skies shall clyme,
Let noughtye men, say what they list to the,
Trade thou thy self, in seruyng him above,
No sweter service can devised be,
Whom if thou fearst, and faithfully doste love,
Be sure no thing, on earth shall the annoye,
Be sure he will, the from each harm defend,
Be sure thou shall, long time thy life enjoy,
And after many years to have a blessed end.
Finis.
Of Edwardes of the Chapel.
DEuyne Camenes that with your sacred food,
Have fed and fosterde up from tender years,
A happy man, that in your favor stood
Edward's in Court that can not find his fears
Your names be blessed, that in this present age
So fine a head, by Art have framed out
Whom some hereafter helped by Poets rage,
Perchance may match, but none shall pass (no doubt)
O Plautus if thou were alive again,
That Comedies so fynely dydste endyte.
Or Terence thou that with thy plesaunt brain,
The hearers mind on stage dydst much delyght.
What would you say syrs if you should behold,
As I have done the doyngs of this man?
No word at all, to swear I durst be bold,
But burn with tears, that which with mirth began,
I mean your books, by which you gate your name,
To be forgot, you would commit to flame.
Alas I would Edward's more tell thy praise,
But at thy name my muse amassed stays.
To L. Blundeston.
SOme men be counted wise that well can talk:
And some because they can each man begyle.
Some for because they know well chese from chalk,
And can be sure, weep who so list to smyle.
But (Blundston) him I call the wysest wight,
Whom God gyues grace to rule affections ryght^
The Answer of L. Blundeston to the same.
AFfections seeks high honors frail estate,
Affections does the golden mean reprove.
Affections tourns the friendly heart to hate,
Affections breed with out discretion Love,
Both wise and happy ( Googe) he may be hight,
Whom God gyues grace, to rule affections right.
To Alexander Neuell.
THe little Fysh, that in the streme does fleet
With broad forth stretched Fyns for his disporte
When as he spies, the Fysshes bayte so sweet.
In haste he hyes, fearing to com to short.
But all to soon (alas) his gredy mind,
By rash attempt, does bring him to his bane,
for where he thought a great relyefe to find,
By hydden hook, the simple fool is taken.
So fares man, that wanders here and theare,
Thynkyng no hurt to happen him therbye,
He ronnes amayne, to gase on Beauties cheer,
Takes all for gold that glysters in the eye,
And never leaves to feade by lookyng long,
On Beauties Bayte, where Bondage lies enwrapt,
Bondage that makes him sing an other song,
And makes him curse the bayte that him entrapte.
Neuell to the, that love their wanton looks,
Feade on the bayte, but pet beware the Hooks.
Alexander Neuells Answer to the same.
IT is not cursed Cupids Dart:
Nor Venus cancred Spyght,
It is not vengeance of the Gods
That wretched hearts does smyght,
With restless rage of careful Love.
No, No, thy Force alone
Aff^ct^on fond, does styr these flames.
Thou causest us to moan
And wail, and curs our wretched stats.
Our thryse unhappy plights,
Our sighs, and powdered sobs with tears,
Our grievous gronyng Sprights,
Thy hateful Malice does procure:
O Fancye flaming Feend
Of Hell. For thou in outward shape,
And color of a friend
Do by thy Snares and slymed Hooks
entrap the wounded Hearts:
From whence these Hellike torments spryng,
and ever greauyng Smarts.
Whence ^ripe of mind, with changed chere
Whence face be smeard with tears.
Whence thousand mischiefs more, where with
such Mysers lives outweares.
Our gasyng eyes on Bewties bayt
do work out endless bane.
Our eyes I say do work our woo,
Our eyes procure our pain.
These are the Traps to vexed mynds
Here Gyns and Snares do lie.
Here fire and flames by Fancy framde,
In breast do broyle and frye.
O Goo^e the Bayte sone spyed is,
Soon vewd their wanton looks.
Whereon to feed, and yet to shun,
The privy lurkyng hooks,
Their pain, Their toil, Their labor is
There There lies endless strife.
O happy than that Man account,
Whose well directed Life
Can fly those yls, which fancy stirs,
And live from Bondage free.
A Phoenix right on earth (no doubt)
A Bird full rare to see.
To M. Henrye Cobham of the most blessed state of Life.
THe happyest life that here we have,
My Cobham if I shall desyne,
The goodlyest state, twyxte birth and grave,
Most gracious days and swetest time.
The fairest face, of fading Life,
Race ryghtlyest run, in ruthful ways,
The safest means to shun all strife:
The surest Staff, in fyekle Days:
I take not I as some do take,
To gape and gawne, for Honors hye,
But Court and (...) to forsake,
And live at home, full quyetlye,
I well do mind, what he once said,
Who had, Court not in any case,
For Virtue is, in Courts decayed,
And Vice with States, has chyefest place,
Not Court but Countreye I do judge,
Is it wheare lies, the happyest life,
In Countreye grows, no gratynge grudge,
In Countreye stands not sturdye strife,
In Countreye, Bacchus has no place,
In Countreye Venus has defecte,
In Countreye Thra^^ has no grace,
In Countreye few of G^atoes Sect.
But these same four and many more,
In Court, thou shall be sure to find,
For they have vowed, not thence to go,
Because in Court, dwells idle mind.
In Countreye may thou safelye rest,
And fly all these, if that thou list,
The Country ^herfore, judge I b^st,
Where godly life, does vice resyste,
Where virtuous exercise with joy,
Does spend the years that are to run,
Where Vices few, may the annoye,
This life is best when all is done.
To Alexander Neuell of the blessed Sat of him that feels not the force of
Cupids flames.
AS often as I remember with my self,
The Fancies fond, that flame by foolysh Love,
And mark the Furyes fell, the blinded elfe
And Venus she that raynes so sore above,
As often as I do se the woeful state,
Of Lovers all, and eake their myserye,
The ones desyryng mind the others hate,
Trothe with the one, with the other Trecherye,
So often say I, that blessed is the wight,
Yea Neuell blessed, and double blessed again,
That can by reason rule his mind a right,
And take such foolysh fading toys for vain.
Alexander Neuells Awnswere to the same.
THe plu^ged mind in fluds of griefs
The Senses drowned quyght,
The Heart oppressed. The flesh consumed
The changed state outright.
The Body dried by broylyng blase,
Of preuy schorchyng Flame.
The doulfull Face. The cou^tnau^ce sad
The drowping Courage tame.
The Scaldyng syghes. The grievous groones
The burning rage of fire
The ernest suit, The fruitles Toil.
The deep and hot Desire,
The Brains quight brusd and crushed with Cares.
The ever during soore.
The very pains of Hell it self,
with thousand mischyefes moore,
Which wounded Hearts enflamd with Love
with Gryefe do ouerflow,
And works their endless plage and spite
Till Death from thence do grow.
All these conclude him blessed (my Googe)
and trible blessed again,
That taught by tract of Time can take
Such fadyng Toys for vain.
To Maystresse A.
Since I so long have lyved in pain and burnt for love of the,
(O cruel heart) doste thou no more esteame the Love of me,
Regardst thou not, the health of him? that the, above the rest
Of Creatures all, and next to God, has dearest in his breast.
Is pytie placed from the so far is gentleness exylde?
Have thou ben fostred in the Caves, of Wolves or Lions wild?
Have thou ben so? why then no force, the less I marvel I,
Such as the Da^me, such is the young experyence true does try.
Sith thou art of so fyerce a mind, why did not God then place
In the, with such a Tigers Heart, a foul ill fauerde face?
Sure for no other end but that, he lykes no Lovers trade,
And the therefore a ragynge Fend, an Angels face has made.
Such one as thou, was Go^gon ones as ancient Poets tell,
Who with her Beauty maz^d men, and now does raygne in H^ll.
But mercy yet, of the I crave, if ought in the remain,
And let me not so long the force, of flaming fire sustain,
Let pytie ioynde with beauty be, so shall I not dysdayne.
My blud, my heart, my life to spend with toil, with strife, and pain,
To do the good, my breath to loose, if need shall so require,
But for my service and my pains thou gyuest me hate for hyre.
Well now take this for end of all, I love and thou doste hate,
Thou lyuest in pleasures happily. and I in wretched stay.
Pains can not last for evermore, but time and end will try,
And time shall tell me in my age, How youth led me awrye.
Thy face that me tormented so, in time shall sure decay,
And all that I do like or love, shall vanysh quyte away,
Thy face in time shall wrynckled be, at which I shall be glad,
To see thy form transformed thus, that made me once so sad,
Than shall I blame my folly much and thank the mightyest king
That has me saved till such a day, to se so fond a thing.
And till that time I will keep close my flames and let them blase,
All secretly within my breast, no man on me shall gase.
I will not trespass synfully, for God shall give me grace
To se the time wherein I shall neglecte thy folysh face,
And till that time adieu to thee, God keep thee far from me,
And send thee in that place to dwell, that I shall never see.
To George Holmeden of a ronnynge Head.
THe greatest vice that happens unto men,
And yet a vice, that many common have,
As aunci^nt Writers way with sobre Pen,
Who gave their doom, by force of wysdom grave,
The sorest mayme, the greatest evil sure,
The vylest plague that Students can sustain,
And that which most does ygnoraunce procure.
My Holmeden is to have a ronnyng Brain,
For who is he that leads more restles life,
Or who can ever live more ill bestead?
The Heart absent.
Sweet muse tell me, where is my heart become.
For well I feel, it is from hence a way,
My Senses all, does sorrow so benumme:
That absent thus, I can not live a Day.
I know for troth, there is a special Place.
Where as it most, desires for to be:
For Often it leaves, me thus in Dolfull case,
And hither co^mes, at length a gain to me?
Would thou so feign, be told where is thy Hart^
Sir Fool in place, where as it should not be:
Tied up so fast, that it can never starte?
Till Wysdom get, again thy Lybertye:
In place where thou, as safe may dwell swet daw?
As may the heart, ly by the Lions paw:
And where for thee, as much be sure they pass:
As did the master, ons for Esops Ass.
To Alexander Neuell.
IF thou can banish Idleness,
Cupidoes Bow is broke, Guld.

And well thou may despise his bronds clean void of flame and smoke
What moved the king Agistus ons, to Love with vile excess:
The cause at hand does straight apeare he lived in Idleness.
Finis.
The Answer of A. Neuell to the same.
THe lack of labor mayms yt mind,
And wit and Reason quyght exiles.
And Reason fled. Flames Fancy blind.
And Fancy she forthwith beguyles
The Sensles wight: that swiftly sails
Through deepest fluds of vile exces.
Thus vice abou^ds. Thus virtue quails
By means of drowsy Idleness.
To Maystresse D.
NOt from the hye Cytherion Hill nor from that Ladies throne
From whe^s flies forth ye winged boy yt makes some sore to groan.
But nearer hence this token coms, from out the Dongeon deep,
Where never Plutto yet did raygne nor Proserpyne did sleep.
Whereas thy faithful Servant lives. whom duty moves aryght,
To wayle that he so long does lack, his own dear Maystres sight.
Out of an old Poet.
Fie Fie, I loathe to speak wylt thou my lust,
Compel me now, to do so foul an act.
Nay rather God, with Flame consume to dust.
My carry on vile, then I perform this fact
Let rather thoughts, that long, have weryed me:
Or sycknes such as Fancy fond has brought,
O gapyng Hell, dryne me now down to the,
Let boylyng syghes, consume me all to naught.
ONs musing as I sat, and Candle burning bye,
When all were hushed I might discern a simple selye Fly.
That flewe before mine eyes, with free reioysynge Heart,
And here and there, with wings did play as void of pain and smart,
Sometime by me she sat, when she had playde her fill,
And ever when she rested had about she flyttered still.
When I perceyud her well, reioysyng in her place,
O happy Fly quoth I, and eake, O worm in happy case.
Which two of us is best? I that have reason? no:
But thou that reason art without and therewith void of woe.
I live and so doste thou, but I live all in pain,
And Subject am to her alas, that makes my Gryefe her gain.
WHen I do hear thy name, alas my heart does rise:
And seeks fourthwith to se the salve that most conte^tes mine eyes.
But when I se thy Face, that has procured my pain,
Then boyles my blud in every part, and beats in every vain?
Thy voice when I do hear, then color comes and goes,
Some time as pale as Earth I look, some time as red as Rose.
If thy sweet Face do smyle, then who so well as I?
If thou but cast a scornful look, then out alas I dye.
But still I live in pain, my fortune wylleth so,
That I should burn and thou yet know, no whytt of all my woe.
Unhappy tongue, why dydste thou not consent
When first mine eyes did vewe that Princely face,
To show good will, that heart oppressed than meant.
And whylst time was, to sewe for present grace.
O fayntyng Heart, why dydst thou then conceal?
Thine inward Fyers, that flamde in every vain,
When pytie and gentleness, were bent to heal.
Why dydst thou not, declare thy ragyng pain?
When well thou might have moved her gentle mind,
Why dydste thou than, keep back thy woeful plain?
Thou knewste full well, redres is hard to find,
When in thy own affairs, thy courage faynts.
But since she is gone, bewail thy grief no moore
Since thou thy self, wart Causer of the Soore.
Oculi augent dolorem. Out of sight, out of mind.
THe oftener seen, the more I lust,
The more I lust, the more I smart
The more I smart, the more I trust,
The more I trust, the heauyer heart,
The heavy heart, breeds mine unrest,
Thy absence therefore, like I best.
The rarer seen, the less in mind,
The less in mind, the lesser pain,
The lesser pain, less gryefe I find,
The lesser gryefe, tthe greater gain,
The greater gain, the meryer I,
Therefore I wysh thy sight to fly.
The further of, the more I joy.
The more I joy, the happyer life,
The happyer life, less hurts annoye
The lesser hurts, pleasure most ryfe,
Such pleasures ryfe, shall I obtain
When Distau^ce does depart us twain
Finis.
ACcuse not God, if fancy fond, do move thy foolysh brain,
To wayle for love, for thou thy self, art cause of all thy pain.
Finis.
TWo Lines shall tell the Gryefs that I by Love sustain.
I burn, I flame, I faint, I fryse, of Hell I feel the pain.
Of the unfortunate choice of his Valentyne.
THe Pains that all the Furyes fell can cast from Lymbo lake,
Each Torment of those Hellish brains where crawleth mani a snake,
Each mischief that therrin does lie each smart that may be found,
Fly from those feendish clawe^ a while with flames break up the ground,
Light here upon this cursed hand, make here your dwelling place,
And plague the part, ye durst presume his Master to disgrace.
Which thrust amongst a nombre of: so many princely names,
And where thy Maistres had her place amongst the chiefest Dames,
Durst thus presume to leave her there and draw a stranger wight,
And by thine own unhappy draught torment my pauled Spryght.
The uncertainty of Life.
NO vayner thing there can be found amyd this vale of strife,
As Ancient men report have made then trust uncertain life.
This trwe we daily find, by proofs of many years,
As answered well, unto thy virtuous fame,
The gentleness that at thy hands I found
In staungers house, all vnaquaynted I,
Good S. has my Heart to the so bound,
That from the can it not be forced to fly,
In pledge whereof, my service here I give
If thou so will, to serve the whylst I live.
Of Money.
Give Money me, take Frendshyp who so list,
For Friends are gone come once Aduersytie,
When Money yet remains safe in Chest,
That quickly can the bring from myserye,
Fair face show friends, when riches do habounde,
Come time of proof, farewell they must away,
Believe me well, they are not to be found.
If God but send the once a lowrynge day.
Gold never starts aside, but in dystres,
Fyndes ways enoughe, to ease thine heaviness.
Going toward Spain.
FArewell thou fertyll soil, that Brutus first out found,
When he pooresoule, was driven clean from out his Country ground.
That Northward layst thy lusty sides amyd the ragyng Seas.
Whose welthy Land does foster up, thy people all in ease,
While others scrape and carke abroad, their simple food to get,
And selye Souls take all for good, that comes to the Net.
Which they with painful pains dopych, in barrain burning Realms:
While we have all with out restreint among thy welthy streams.
O blessed of God thou Pleasant I Will, where wealth her self does dwell:
Wherein my tender years I past, I bid thee now farewell.
For Fancy dryues me forth abroad, and byds me take delyght,
In leuyng thee and raungyng far, to se some stranger sight.
And says I was not framed hear, to live at home with eas:
But passing forth for knowledge sake to cut the fomyng seas.
At Bonyuall in France.
O Fond affectyon, wounder of my Heart,
When wylt thou Cease, to breed my restles pain,
When comes the end, of this my Cruel smart:
When shall my force, beat back thy force again.
When shall I say, this restles rage of mine:
By Reason ruld, is banysht quyte a way,
And I escaped, these cruel bonds of thine:
O flamynge seend, that seakest my decay.
Safe thynkyng I, ^haribdis Rage to fly,
On Scyll a Rock, in Bonyuall I dye.
Coming home ward out of Spain.
O Ragyng Seas, and mighty Neptunes rayn^*
In monstrous Hills, that throwest thy self so hye,
That with thy sludes, do beat the shores of Spain:
And break the Clyues, that dare thy force envy.
Cease now thy rage, and lay thine Ire a side,
And thou that have, the governance of all,
O mighty God, grant Wether Wynd and Tide,
Till in my Countreye Coast, our Anchor fall.
To L. Blundeston of Ingratitude.
THe little Bird, the tender Marlyon,
That uses often upon the Lark to pray,
With great reproach, does stayne the mind of man
If all be true, that Writers of her say.
For she a Creature, maymde of Reasons part,
And framde to live according to her kind,
Does seem to foster Reason in her Heart
And to aspyre unto Deuyner mind.
When Hungers rage she has exyled quyte,
And supped well as falls for her state.
The selye Lark, does take by force of flight,
And hyes to tree, where as she lodged late,
And on the tremblyng Bird all night she stondes,
To keep her feet, from force of nyppynge cold,
The amazed Wretch, within her e^nemyes hands,
And closed fast, within the claspyng hold.
Awayteth Death, with drowsye drowpyng Heart,
And all the night with fear draws on her life,
The gentle Bird, when darkness does depart
Does not depryue, the selye soul of life,
Nor fylles with her her hungered egre breast
But wayeng well, the service she has done.
To spyll the Blud, her Nature does detest,
And from so great a Crime, her self does shun.
She lets her go and more with steadfast eyes.
Beholds which way she takes with mazed flight,
And in those parts that Day she never flies
Least on that Bird again she chance to light.
Lo, Blundston hear how kyndenes does habounde,
In selye Souls where Reason is exylde,
This Bird alone suffyseth to confound,
The Brutysh minds of men that are defiled,
With that great Vice, that vile and heinous Crime
Ingratitude (which some unkindness call.)
That Poison strong that spryngeth still with time,
Till at the length, it has infected all.
The Answer of L. Blundeston to the same.
THis Mirror left of this thy Bird I find,
Has not such force, to enter in the Heart,
To root away, Unthankfulness of mind,
As others have, the Virtues to pervert, (so prone we are to Vice:)
The Tenche by kind, has Salve for every Soore,
And heales the maimed Pike in his dystresse,
The Churlysh Pike fo Gentleness therefore,
In his reward, does Cruelty express.
His murdring mind, his fylthy spotted faith,
When hungre pricks to fill his gredye Jaws,
He grypes his poor Chyrurgion unto death.
Who late to him of life was only cause.
Thy Merlians have few Ayryes in our ground
But Pikes have Spawnes good stoore in every Pound
To the Tune of Appelles.
THe rushyng Ryuers that do run
The valeys sweet adourned new
That leans their sides against ye Sun
with Flours fresh of sundry hew,
Both Ash and Elm, and Oak so hye,
Do all lament my woeful cry.
while winter blak, with hydious storms
Does spoil ye ground of So^mers grene,
while springtime sweet ye leaf returns
That late on tree could not be seen,
while so^mer burns while harvest rai^s
Still still do rage my restles pains.
No end I find in all my smart,
But endless torment I sustain
Since first alas, my woeful Heart
By sight of the was forced to plain,
Since that I lost my Liberty,
Since that thou madste a Slave of me
My Heart that once abroad was free
Thy Beauty has in durance brought
Ons reason ruled and guyded me,
And now is wit co^sumde with thought
Ons I reioysed above the Sky,
And now for the I alas I dye.
Ons I reioysed in Company,
And now my chief and whole delyght
Is from my friends away to fly
And keep alone my weryed spryght
Thy face deuyne and my desire,
From flesh has me transformed to fire.
O Nature thou that first did frame,
My Ladies hear of purest Gold
Her face of Crystal to the same.
Her lips of precious Rubyes molde
Her neck of Alablaster white
Surmountyng far each other Wight
Why dydst thou not that time devise
Why dydst thou not forese before?
The mischyefe that thereof does rise,
And grief on grief does heap with stor
To make her Heart of War alone,
And not of Flynt and Marble Stone.
O Lady show thy favor yet,
Let not thy Servant dye for the
Where Rygour ruled, let Mercy sit
Let Pytie Conquer Cruelty,
Let not Disdain, a Feend of Hell,
Posses the place, where Grace should dwell.
Cupido Conquered.
THe sweetest time of all the year it was when as the Son,
Had newly entered Gemini, and warming heat begun:
When every tree was clothed green, and flowers fair did show,
And when the whyt and blowmynge May on Hawthorns thick did grow,
When sore I longd to seek a broad, to se some Pleasant sight,
A mid my woes and heavy happes, that might my Mind delyght,
Care would not let me bide within, but forced me forth to go:
And bad me seek sum present help, for to relyue my woe.
Than forward went I forth in haste, to view the garnysht trees?
What time the Son was mounted up, twirt nine and ten degrees.
From Flowers flew sweet ayers abroad, delighting much my brayn,
With sight and smells ga^ ^orow fade, and Joy return again.
So that in mind I much rejoice, to feel my self so light:
For gorgyous syghtes and odours sweet had new reuyued my spryght.
Beside the pleasant Harmonye, that syngyng Birds did make:
Bad me pull up my Heart again, and sorrow sone forsake.
For though (quoth Reason.) she be gone on whom thy Life dependes,
Yet fond it is to carke and care where there is none amends.
Thus forth I went, and in the grooues I raunged hear and theare,
Whereas I hard such pleasant tunes as Heaven had been near.
I think that if Amphion had, ben present there to play,
Or if Sir Orph^us might have hel^, his Harp, that present day.
Or if Apoll^ with his Lute, had stryuen to excel,
None of them all, by Musycke should, have borne away the Bell.
I rather judge the thracian would, his Harp wherwi^h he played,
Have cast a way as one whom Ire, had utterly dismayed.
Such passing tunes of sundry Byrds, I never herd before,
The further I went in the Woods. the noise resounded more.
O happy Birds quoth I what life, is this that you do lead,
How far from Care and mysery, how far from Fear and dread:
With what reioysynge melody, pass^ you this fadyng Life,
While Man unhappiest creatur lives In wretched toil and strife.
Still forth I went and wonderd at, this plesaunt Harmony.
And gased at these little Fools, that made such Melody:
Till at the length I began to spy, a stately Laurel tree,
So plast and set in such a guyse, That as it seamed to me,
Dame Nature strove to show her self in plantyng such a thing,
For Even out beside the rock, a fountain clean did spryng,
Where in the water I beheld, resembled wondrous true,
The White and Green of all the trees, adourned late of new.
And how in order eake they stood, a goodly sight to se,
And there I might discern the Byrds that song in every tree.
To move the Byll and shake the wings in vteryng Music sweet
And hear and thear, to fly to feade, and eftesones theare to meet.
Great pleasure had I there to bide, and stare upon the Spryng,
For why me thought it did surmount, each other kind of thing.
Now was the Son got up aloft, and raught the mydle Line,
And in the Well, the Golden Gloobe, with flaming Beams did shine,
Whereof the Bryghtnes was so great that I might not endure,
Longer to look within the Spryng, whose waters were so pure.
Unwilling went I thence away, and underneath the tree,
I laid me down whose branches broad did keep the Son from me.
Thynkyng to rest me there a while, till falling some degrees*
Sir Phoebus should have hyd him self, behind the shadowyng trees,
And the^ for to have vewd the Spring, and marked every place,
And seen if there I could have spied the weepyng Biblis face.
For sure I think, it was the place, wherein Narcissus dyed,
Or else the Well, to which was turned poor Biblis while she cried.
But whether it was werynes, with labor that I took,
Or Fume y^ from the Spryng did rise, wherein I late did look.
Or if it were the sweet accord that syngyng Birds did keep,
Or what it was, I know no whit but I fell fast a sleep.
I think the woddy Nymphs agreed that I should have this chance,
And that it was their pleasure so, to show me things in trance.
Whilste I lay thus in slumbre deep. I might perceive to stand,
A Person clothed all in white, that held a Rod in hand.
Which was me thought of Massey Gold, I knew it very weal,
For that was it, made Argos sleep, while he did Io steal.
When I perceived by his attire, that it was Mercuri.
My Heart at first began to faint, yet at the length quo^h I
Thou Goddess Son, why standste y^ there what business now with thee,
What meanest you in thy flying weed, For to appear to me,
And therwithall my thought I stayed, and could no farther speak,
For Fear did force my spech to fail, and Courage wared weak.
Which when the sone of Maia saw, he took me by the hand,
Look up quoth he be not affrayed: but boldly by me stand.
The Muses all of Helicon, have fent me now to thee:
Who^ thou do serve and whose you sekst For ever more to be.
And thanks to the by me they send, Because thou tookest pain,
In their Affairs (a thankeles thing) (...) ^^ayne.
Desyring thee not for to stay, for Momus ill report,
But endyng that thou have begun, to spyte the Canckred sort.
And thynk not thou, that thou art he, that can escape Disdain.
The day shall come when thankful men, shall well accept thy Pain,
But rather lay before thine eyes, the hie attemptes of those,
Whose statly style with painful proof, their worthy wytes disclose,
Mark him that thundered out ye deeds grace, Of old Anchifes sun,
Whose English verse gyues Maroes In all that he has done,
Whose death the Muses sorrow much, that lack of aged days,
Amongst the common Brytons old, should hinder Virgils praise.
Mark him y^ has well framde a Glass* for states to look upon,
Whose labor shows the ends of the^, that lived long a gone.
Mark him that shows ye Tragedies thine own famylyar Friend,
By whom ye Spaniards hawty Style in Englysh Verse is pende.
Mark these same three, and other more, whose doyngs well are known,
Whose fair attempts in every place The flying fame has blown,
Have thou not hard, thy self in place full often and many a time,
Lo here the Auctor loses grace, Lo here a doltysh Ryme,
Now sith that they have this reward who pass the even as far,
As in the night Diana does, Excel the dimmest Star.
Take thou no scorn at evil tongs, what neadst thou to disdain?
Sith they who^ none can well amend have like fruit of their pain.
Moreover yet the Ladies nine, have all commanded me,
Because they know, the blinded God has some thing pierced the.
To lead the forth, a thing to see, if all things happen right,
Which shall give the occasion good, with joyful mind to wryght.
To this, I would have answered feign and theare began to speak,
But as my words were coming forth my purpose he did break.
Come on (quoth he,) none Answer now we may no longer stay.
But frame thy self, to fly abroad, for hence we must away.
And here withal, on both my sides, two wyngs me thought did grow,
Of mighty breadth, away went he, and after him I flow.
And ever as we mounted up, I lookte upon my wyngs,
And proud I was, me thought to see such unacquainted things.
Till forth we flewe, my Guide and I, with mowntyng flight apace,
Beholding Ryuers, woods, and Hills and many a goodly place.
Till at the length me thought I might a Gorgyous Castle spy,
Thear down began my guyd to fall, and downward eake fell I,
Lo hear the place where you must light Began Mercury to say,
Farewell and note what thou do se, for I must hence away.
And with this same a way flewe he, and left me there alone,
Where as with Fear a masde I stood, and thus began to move.
Alas where am I now become, what Cursed Chance has blown,
Me from the place where I was bred, to Countries hear unknown.
What meant that fell unhappy Feend, that Maia brought to light,
To bring me from my Hearts desire, to see this doleful sight.
Unhappy Wretch, I would I had, his Person hear in hand,
Then should I wreak mine Ire of him, that brought me to this Land.
But all to late alas I wysh, for words avail not now,
It Is best to learn, what place it is, and yet I know not how.
Alas that here were P^h^l^me, with Compass Globe in hand,
Whose Art should show me true the place and Clymate where I stand,
Well yet what soever chance thereon what soever Realm it be,
You Castle will I vysyte sure, hap what hap will to me.
Thus much me thought alone I spoke* and then I forewarde went,
And cursed eke an hundred fold, them that me thither sent.
Thus to the Ca^tell, straight I came, which when I vewde about,
And saw the workmanshyp thereof full gorgeouslye set out.
I entered in, with fearful Heart, much doutyng how to speed,
But ever hope of happy chance, my heavy Heart ^yd fee^e.
Wide was the Court and large within the walls were raised hye,
And all engraued with Stories fair of costlye Imagrye.
There might I se, with wondrous Art, the Picture porturde plain,
Of old Orion Hunter good, whom Scorpions vile had slain.
And by him stood his Borspeare and his other Instruments,
His Net, his Darte, his Coursar, and his Hunters restyng Tents.
And under him was written fair, in Letters all of Gold,
Here lies he slain, with Scorpions sting, unhappy wretch that would,
Have forced the Lady of this forte with stayne of Royalty.
To have consented to his will, in filthy Lecherye.
Wherefore beware that enters here, what soever man thou art?
Accounte thy self but lost, if that thou bearste a lecherous Heart.
When I had vewd these written lines and markde the Storye well,
I ioyed much, for why I knew, Diana there did dwell.
Diana she that Goddess is, of Virgyns sacred mind,
By whom Orion Hunter wild, his Fatal end did find.
Next unto him, I might behold, Acteon woeful wight,
In what a manner, all to torn, his cruel Dogs him dyght.
There might be seen, their gredye mouths with Masters blud embrued,
And all his own unhappy men, that fast their Lord pursued.
And many Stories more there war engraued: to long to tell.
What fearful haps to many men, for lust unclean befell.
Thus as I stood with musyng mind beholding all things theare,
In rusheth at the Gate behind a Post with heavy cheer.
(...) Above them all I might behold, as placed before the rest,
Hipolitus whom Phedraes spyte? most Cruelly had dressed.
Hipolitus the unspotted Pearl: of pure Virginity,
Whose noble Heart culd not agree, to stepdames vyllany.
Next unto him sat Continence, and next was Labor placed?
Of body bygge and strong he was, and somewhat Crabtre faced.
Next him was placed Abstinence, a lean vnwyldy wight,
Whose Diet thyn had banished clean, all fond and vain delyght.
A Thousand more me thought there war whose names I did not know,
And if I did to long it were, in Verses them to show.
Down of his knees the messenger, before them al does fall,
And unto chaste Diana thear, for succor thus does call.
O Goddess chief of Chastity, and Sacred Virgins mind:
Let Pity from your noble Heart: redress for Misers find.
Let not our weryed Hearts sustain, such wrongful Tyranye?
Quench quickly now the fyrie flames of open Iniurye.
This said for Fear he stayed awhyle, and than began again,
A mighty Prince (quoth he) is com, with great unruly train.
All armed well at every point, (a dredefull sight to se:)
And every man in feats of arms, right skylfull all they be.
The Captain chyfe in Charyot ride with pomp and stately Pride:
With Bow in hand of glistring gold, and Quyuer by his side.
Where many a shaft full sharp does ly: and many a mortal Darte,
That has with poisoned force destroid, Full many a yealdyng Heart.
He entered has within your Realm, and taken many a Forte,
Has sakte them all, and spoiled them quyte and slain a wondrous forte.
In straungest guyse, for where he shoots the wound does fester still
And all the Surgians that we have can not remove the ill,
In little time the gryefe so sore, does grow in every part,
Distraynyng through the venomed veins does so torment the Heart.
That some to ryd them selves thereof in fluds full deep they leap,
And drown the^ selves some downward falls from Houses hye by heap,
Some Anchor cast on crossed Beams to ryd them selves from strife,
And hang them selves full thycke on trees to end a wretched life.
And they whose fearful mynds dare not thus make an end of woe,
With grievous flames, consumynge long their life at length forgo.
Lo here the So^me of all I have, this Tygre us anoyes,
And cruellye has spoiled us, of all our wonted joys.
Whom if your Grace, do not repuls, and find some present stay,
Undoubtedly he will wyn this Realm, and take us all away.
At this, the Ladies all amazde for fear did look full pale,
And all beheld with mazed eyes, the Wretch that told the tale.
Till at the length Hipolitus of Heart and courage hye,
Nothing abashde, with sudden news began thus to replye.
Cast fere away, fair Dames (quoth he) dismaye your selves no more,
I know by who^ this mischief spryngs and know a help therefore.
It is not such a dredefull Wight, as he does here report,
That entered is within these parts, and plagues the simple sort.
Nor is his force so great to fear, I know it I full well:
It is the scornful blinded Boy, that near to us does dwell.
Whom Mars long time a go begott, of that Lascivious dame:
That Linckt in Chains for Lechery, received an open shame.
A disobedient blinded Fool, that durst presume to turn:
His darts against his mother ons, and causd her sore to burn.
An ancient foo: to all this Court, Of long time he has been:
And has attempted evermore, by this: Renown to win.
His cruel Heart, of Pity voyed, does spare no kind of age:
But tender youth and dotyng age, he strykes in furyous rage.
And laughes to scorn the sely souls that he has wounded so,
No Fine appointed of their ils, no end of al their woe.
But syns he has presumed thus, to enter hear in Place,
And hear to threten Conquests thus, against Dianaes Grace,
Let him besure his lofty Mind, this dead shall soon repent,
If that your grace do here agree, with Fre and full concent.
To make me Cheftain of this Charge and whom I list to chose,
If Prisoner hear I bring him not, Let me mine Honor lose.
And there he ceasde with joyful looks the Ladies smyled all,
And thorough his words they hoaped soon to se Cupidoes fall.
With heavenly voice Diana thear, as chyefe above the rest:
This wise her words began to frame, From out her sacred breast.
My good Hipolitus quoth she, whose true and faithful mind:
In doubtful danger often I, do always ready find.
For to revenge the cankred rage, of all my spytfull foes,
Thou be from whose vn^^otted heart, the fluddes of virtue flows.
whose seruise long has been aproued, within this court of mine,
Restrain this boys unruly rage, by valyant means of thine,
I give the leave and thee appoint, my cheyf Lieutenant here,
Choose whom you wilt take whom you list, thou nedest no whit to fear.
With this he rose from out his place, and lokynge round a bout:
Chose Abstinence and Cont^^^^^, with Labor Captain stout.
And with these three he took his leave of all the Ladies there,
Who doubtyng of his safe return, let fall full many a tear.
He left them theare in heauynes, and made no more delay,
But outward went and toward ye Ca^pe, he took the nearest way.
With this the Queens commyssion straight was sent abroad in haste,
To raise up souldiars round about, and with their Captain plaste.
To bring them forth and marching on, Hipolitus to meet.
Than sounded Trumpetes al a broad, and Drumes in every streat.
And souldiears good like swarms of Bees their Captains prease about
All armed brave in Corsletes white, they march with courage stout.
And forward shoue, till at the length where as their marshall lies,
They find the place the ioifull sou^ds, Do mount above the skies.
Hipolitus received them all, with words of plesaunt cheer,
And placith them in good array, because the camp was near.
Three Battails big of them he frams, and of the Rereward strong,
Has Labor charge who steppeth forth, before the statlye thronge:
And Captayn of the rear ward next, was placed abstinens.
And Ioind to him for Policy, was Captain Continence:
The Battle main Hipolitus, him self did choose to guyd.
And in the formest front thereof, on Courser fair does ride:
The Trumpets sound march on apace, and Dromes the same do stryke.
Then forward moves ye Army great, In order Martial like.
I came behind (me thought) and best, it seamed then to me:
To view the dynt of dreedfull sword, and feyghter none to be.
Thie Spies were sent abroad to view, the place where Cupide lay:
A longest a River fair and broad, they spy a pleasant way,
Which way they took and passing forth, at length apeares a plain:
Both large and vast where lies ye rowt, of Cruel Cupides train.
Thus told the spies we onward hye, and straight in sight we have,
The ferfull show of all our Foes, and dreadful army brave.
The first y^ marched from Cupides Camp was drowsy Idleness.
The chyefest friend that love had then, the next was vile Exc^s.
A Lubbour great, misshapen most, of all that thear I saw,
As much I thynk in quantity, as hores six can draw.
A mighty face both broad and flat, and all with Rubies set:
Much nosed like a Turkey Cock, with teth as black as Get.
A Belie* byg, full trust with guts, and Pestels two, like Posts,
A knave full square in every point, a Prince of dronken Dostes.
Upon a Camel couched hye, for Horse could none him bear,
A mighty Staff in hand he had, his Foes a far to fear.
Behind them all, the blinded God, does com in Charyot fair,
With ragyng flames flong round about he pestres all the air.
And after him, for tryumphe leads a thousand wounded Hearts,
That gush abroad hot streams of blud new persed with his Darts,
The army ready for to meet and all at point to fight,
Hipolitu^ with lusty cheer and with a noble Spryght.
His Soldiers to encourage. Thus his words begyns to place.
My valiant friends and Subjects all of Chaste Dianaes Grace.
whose noble Hearts were never staind with spot of Dastards mind,
Behold our enemies here at hand, behold you coward blind.
Of little force, comparde with you how in a fond array,
They stragle out no order dew, observed in their way.
Behold what goodly Guyds they have to govern them withal,
That never knew what fighting meant but live to Venus thrall.
Mark him that guyds the rerewarde there that vile deformed Churl,
Whose foggy Mates, with paunches side do thycke about him whurle.
And he that foremost hither coms lo what a handsome Squyre,
Sure full unapt to keep the field, more fyt to sit by the fire.
In fine lo Victory at hand with hye tryumphant Crown,
Bent for to spoil our Foes of Fame, and cast their Glory down.
Fight therefore now courageouslye, and ryd your friends of fear,
Declare your Manhod valyauntly, and let your Hearts appear.
With this the sound begyns to mount and noise hye to rise,
And warlyke tunes begin to dash, them selves against the Skies.
The Canons Crack, begins to roor^ and Darts full thycke they fly
And couerd thycke, the armies both, and framde a Counter Sky.
And now the Battayls both be ioynde with stroke of Hand to try.
The quarrel just and for to find, where Victory^ does lie,
The Souldyers all of Idl^nes, where Labor coms, do fall,
And wounded sore, by force of him, all bathde in blud, they sprall.
Him self alone with Idl^nes now hand to hand does fight
And after many a mortal wound, destroys the selye wight.
Then ioynes with him Sir A^stinence with aid and succors new,
And both upon the gresye Hoaste, of Gluttony they flewe.
The Captayn does advance himself with Abstinence to meet,
The unwieldy Creature smitten there is tombled under feet.
Than Fancy flies Incontinence and all C^pidoes friends.
Beholdynge Fortune thus to frown, by flight them self defendes.
Cupido when he sees himself, thus spoylde of all his aid,
The chyef Supporters of his Court, so suddenly decade.
Bad turn his Charyottes than with haste and fast away he flies,
Amongst the chaste Hipolitus on swyftye Courser hyes,
Than all with Joy they after run, down thycke the enemies fall,
The blinded boy, for succor straight to V^nus hye does call,
But all his cries avails not, his Foes him fast pursewe,
The dryuer of his Charyot soon, Hip^litus there slew.
And down from Horse, the wretch does fall. The horses spoyld of guide,
A Soldier stout of Reasons band, is wylled there to ride.
Who turyng Raynes another way restrayns him of his flight,
His Honors lost and taken thus, Cupide in dolfull plyght.
These words with tremblyng voice began sith Fortune thus quoth he,
Has given her doom from doubtful breast and turned her Grace from me.
Sith that the most misfortune now, that ever I could find,
Has chanced to me and Myser I, by Destenyes assygnde.
Am Captyue hear, consydre yet, what Fortune might have wrought
And made a Canquerer of me, and you in Bondage brought.
Consydre yet the woeful plyght, where in you had remaynd,
If that the Gods my happy state, had not so sore disdaynd,
And by your Gryef, than mesure mine show mercy in this case,
That Conqueror commended is, who gyues to pytie place.
The cruel mind dispraysed is, In every kind of state,
No man to hauty lives on earth, but ons may find his mate.
These words Hipolitus I speak, to bread no farther strife,
I speak not this of malice hear, my fute is for my life.
Sith Fortune thus has fauord you, grant this my small request,
And let me live if mercy dwell, within your Noble breast,
By this time Morphens had dispersed the drowsy Clowd of sleep,
And from my brains the quiet trau^ce, began full fast to Creape.
And dounward fell. I wakd therewith and lokyng round a bout,
Long time I mused where I was, my mind was still in doubt.
Till at the length I vewde the tree, and place where as I sat,
And well beheld the pleasant Spryng that late I wondered at.
that late I wondered at,
I saw beside the Golden Globe, of Phoebus shynyng bright,
That Westwarde half, did hyde his face approchyng fast the night.
Each Bird began to shroud himself in tree to take his rest
And ceaste the pleasant tunes yt late proceaded from their Breaste.
I homewarde went, and left them all, and restles all that night,
I musing lay, tormented thus, with fond lamentyng spryght.
When Phoebus rose to pass the time, and pass my gryefe away
I took my Pen and pend the Dream that made my Muses stay.
Finis.
Imprynted at London in S. Brydes Churchyard, by Thomas (...), for Raufe
Nevvbery.

And are to be sold at his shop in Fleetestrete, a little above the Conduit.

1563. 15 Die Mensis March.

Faults escaped in the Pryntynge.
In ye.5. Eglog, for Agon read Egon. In the.6. Eglog for Calicto, read
Calisto. In ye.7. Eglog, for Duerda and Guerda, read Diana, For Siluanus read
Siluan. For Seluagina, read Seluagia.

In the.2. Epytaphe, for soore, read sure. In. H. the.2. Page, and.15. line,
for in, read on. H. v. Page.1. line, for fo, read for.4. line, for Cruelty,
read cruellye. In. K.5. Page.12. line, for hores, read Horses.

Read these.8. Lines at the end of the Sonet. Ons musyng. etc.

Thou lyuest, but feelst no gryefe, no Love does the torment,
A happy thing for me it were, If God were so content.
That thou with Pen, were placed here and I sat in thy place,
Then I should Joy as thou do now and thou shuldst wayle thy case.

