To the right noble Gentleman, Master Philipp Sydney Esquier, Stephan Gosson
wysheth health and happiness.
IT was a custom, right worshipful, among the Heathens, when they had
travailed the Seaes, and escaped the danger, to sacrifice some part of their
treasure to that god, which they judged to be their deliverer: And since it has
been my fortune to bear sail in a storm, since my first publishing the
School of Abuse, and too be tossed by such as some without reason, and
threaten me death without a cause, feeling not yet my finger ache, I can not but
acknowledge my safety, in your Worships patronage, and offer you Phialo my
chiefest Iuel, as a manifest pledge of my thankful heart. Notwithstanding if
the value answer not your expectation, accept my good will, which hold out my
hand to do my best: little children, that draw but a hazel stick, think
they perform as much as he, that shootes every shaft in a bow of steel. I
confess that Phialo is too blu^t for the court if you judge his conditions by
his coat, for the skin of the Fox is not comparable to the Leopard, yet that
is no sign that he wants wit. Though Phialo present himself barely to
your worships view, when my skill will not suffer me to pou^ce him out, yet
such as he is, I dare affirm, that cloth and carcass is at your
commandment. The pardon he craves is for his simplicity, which has been
somewhat homely brought up like a rude Macedon, and taught too call a spade, a
spade without any glosing. Wherein I judge him the more to be esteemed, because
he uses no going about the bushe, but treades Dunstable way in all his
travel. For such as have tried the conclusion, know, that he which baiteth
his hooks with medicinable drugges, catches the greatest store of fish; yet
are they not toothesome, nor good to be brought unto the table: And he that
tempers his speech with art, smootheth his style wi^^ a double tongue, shall
quickly have infinite swarms of friends, but angle with poison, and do much
hurt. The Days works of Phialo, which spends his time in profitable
disputation among his friends, I have called his Ephemerides, after the manner
of the Greeks; humbly requesting your worship to vouchsafe them the reading,
because you are learned; and to yield them your patronage, since they carry some
taste of the University.

Your Worships to command. S. G.

Literarum Studiosis in Oxoniensi Academia Steph. Gosson Sal.
EA est (egregij Philosophi) Academiae seueritas in iudicijs; and multitudinis
temeritas in assensu; vt, quae vobis obijciuntur, rationis statera; quae huic
occurunt, opinionis trutina perpendantur. Apud vos qui contorta dissoluit, qui
distinguit ambigua, qui Metrodorum configit, qui eruit abstrusa, and altiores
in natura sulcos agit, solus coronam demeretur. Apud hanc, qui formam, qui
fu^um, qui Veneris pigmenta cantat, acclamatione recipitur and applausu.
Videte, quaeso, quomodo mihi ista cogitanti, and Phiali Diaria in lucem
emittere cupienti, vtriusque spectra faces ardentes intentarunt, qui bus, ab
instituto faciledeterrerer, nisi me vestra humanitas e tantis angustijs
emanciparet. Aliquot iam menses sunt elapsi, cum ego in Poetarum, Fidicinum
atqueue Histrionum ineptias grauiter inuehebam, quo negotio, quia profligatis
hominibus in Epicureorum reorum hortulis apricantibus, Solemn ac Coelum
interclusi, mei nominis existimationem effraenate inuaserunt. Verum, quia
rumoribus pugnant, cum argumenta expectemus, non possumus tam inani crepitu
perterreri. Quid enim est quod acutuli isti hohomines pungunt? quid premunt?
quid asserunt? Gossonum eiecisse Poesin in exilium: fabre; Scholas, Academias,
Musarum domicilta, Philosophorum coetum and Senatum reclamare: Pape, iugularunt
hominem. Non sum ita rerum optimarum rudis, vt negem aliquando Poesin esse
numerum, numerum ordinem, ordinem de coelo, quasi de iugo sapientiae
defluxisse. Nihilo tamen magis ista probant Poetas omnes esse diuinos, quam
Medicos omnes, Aesculapios. Fateor ego, fabularum inuolucris multa non
contemnenda adumbrari, sed somnia sunt ista, quae succos de foece hauriendos
propinarunt. Nolo Poesin verborum suppellectile, vel suauitate fidium, sed
rerum harmonia iudicari: nec Poetam illum sertis redimiri, qui carmina ad
digitorum terminos studiose panxerit, sed cuius animus cum ordine, vita cum
scriptis conspirauerit. Auide sibi hoc homines famelic^ arripiunt, me qui
Poetas reprehendo, Poetae parts suscepisse, and dictasse ijs versus quos in
Theatris recitarunt. At prae stupore non intelligunt, nos ea studia iuuentutis
aestu persequi, quae flexu aetatis nauseamus, and quae desideria eo temporis
flore, quasi vere tepefacta pullulant, maturiori iudicio circumcidi. Lauda^t
Agricolae eas arbores, quae se ita profundunt, vt resecentur; and malumus omnes
amputare nimia, quam noua serere. Spero me in adolescentiae delicijs cu^ Poetae
personam sustinerem, moribus ijs enituisse, qui frugem virtutis nutricarent,
and futurae industriae culmum erigerent. Quod si, vt isti volunt, delinitus
impegerim, non est refragandum enatanti: Malo semel emergere, quam haerere
semper. Conceditur ara fugienti, deprecanti medicina. Non sumus ex aere
Corinthio fabrefacti, vt tarde admodum intabescamus, and ocyssime expiemur. Me
suadent haec tempora, priora studia non exuere solum, sed abijcere; and mature
ad metam collineare. Illi vero qui meum consilium male probant, pergant, qua
caeperint, and Poetis inhient, non officio; si omnia sic desiderio condiant, vt
immoderata siti aestuantes, turbidas aquas iucunde ingurgitent, sua voluptate
perfruantur; mihi fontium perennitas arridebit. Itaqueue ne diffluamus otio,
diarijs istis maiora quaedam latin molior, quae emanabunt aliquando, and meum
in vos animum eminenter expriment. Vale te Londini 5. Kalend. Nouemb. 1579.

Stephanus Gosson.

To the Reader.
GEntlemen and others I could wish it, that I had that virtue in my pen,
which the Bear has in her tongue, too lick out mye whelps in some
proportion, when I have cast them in a rude lump. But I see my cunning serves
me so il, that whilst I desire to perfect my work, I am constrained with
Apelles too set it out, where every beholder may view it at will, and tell me
his mind when he sees a fault. Many hands make light work. Coppie of
Precepts breed an Art. Where sundry woorkmen show them selves, a rare
device is brought to light. Read and run over, I give you leave, I set it
down to none other end. Diverse are the studyes of men in one School, some
follow Philosophy, some the tongues some are contented with meaner Lectures;
infinite wares in one fair, where the Soldier approaches to cheapen a
Swoorde, the wanton inquireth for a glass. And I know that in Books, as in
open fields, every man pursues that game that he lyketh best: a noble mind
will chase the Heart, but fools pick Dasies if they may find them. Therefore if
idle Drones assail me, let them know that I show no sport for them, my
desire is, to seek out meat for manly stomachs. I have seen what Cankers
shoot alofte, where amorous toys are daily sown. He that troubles the
Spring where you should drink, may be turned to a Frog if Juno frown. Such
as flatter the Reader with vain delights, bear the shape of a monster in
their hearts, and are to be fled as dangerous shelues. Those storms that
forbid us to shoot into harbor, ar more to be feared then those that
discourage us too hoyst our sail; and those discourses are worst of all, that
hinder our passage when we travel home, and seek for the end in which we
should rest. As I write not this for mine own behoof, to justify that which
I do my self, of too spurn at other that have gone before me; So I hope you
will take it for a lawful excuse, that I write not so loosely as some desire.
I have bin requested by some of my friends to take longer time, and increase
my volume, wherein I perceive they understand not that the Countrieman casts
his seed very thin, yet finds his barnes to be filled by them. That the
spirit of man, in the straightest Trumpet has greatest sound; blown through
a barrel, makes no noise. But since they had rather see their hands full of
Paper, then their heads full of knowledge, I let them go. And trusting too
the courtesy of you that are skillful Gentlemen, I have performed my promise,
and discharged my hands, given Phialo his pasporte, and sent him to you.

Farewell. Yours, Stephan Gosson.

The Ephemerides of Phialo.
VARRO reports, that they which did sacrifize to Hercules, used continually
before they began their Ceremonies, to drive their dogs out of the city. And I
think it necessary, before I set down the discourses of Phialo, as the fruit
of my travel sacrificed here unto skilful Readers, to whippe out those Dogs,
which have barked more at me for writing the School of Abuse, then Cerberus
did at Hercules for descending to Hell; and have labored with the venom of
their teeth to wound me deeper, then that cursed Curre, which was the death of
Licinius, and the cause of a battle, wherein Hercules lost his brother
Iphiclus. It is not long since, A Libell ca^^ out against the School of abuse.
a friend of mine presented me with strange news out of Afric, requesting
me earnestly to shape them an answer. After I had unfolded the Paper, and
found nothing within but guts and garbage, neither heart nor liver, nor any
good intrayles, I called too mind the reply that Apelles made to a course
Painter, which brought him a cou^terfait of his own drawing, requesting his
judgment in the work; Truly, quoth Apelles, had thou not told me it had bin
thine, at the first blush I would have judged it to be done in haste. And had
not the writer himself, which sent these news into England, revealed his name
to some of his friends by who^ I heard it, I would have judged such a Daw to
be hatched in Barbary, and the tydinges that came, to be scribled in ^ost.
Co^modus the Emperor coming to Rome, in the face of the whole senate, began with
a grave countenance to declame: When every man looked for some weighty matter
touching the government of the common wealth, he fell to trifling; and told
the^, that riding abroad one day with his father, who at that time was cast
from his horse, himself alighted and holy him out of the mire. This Doctor of
Affrike with a strange kind of style begins to write thus: To his frinds the
Plaiers, and to (...) rare, at the first like a perfect Orator, he sittes down
in his study, looks about for his books, takes pen in his hand, and as
manerly as he can, breathes out this oracle from the threefootedstoole of
Pythia: Africa semper aliquid apportat noui, There is ever a new knack in a
knaves hood, or some kind of mo^ster to be seen in Affrik. To which principle
when he thinks he has given sufficient light, by the joining together of
sundry beasts, his friends gaping for some strange conceit to bring to the
stage, find him to dally: for with a tale of a tub, he slippeth down presently
into a dirtie comparison of a dutch Mule and an english mare, that engendered an
Ass, and to cast his foale quickly (with a devout prayer to God, to send
players few asses, and many auditors) he grows to conclusion, behauing himself
in his learned Paraphrase like Megabizus, who came into Apelles shop and began
to talk of his shadows, til the painter reproved him in this manner: Had thou
kept silence O Megabizus, I would have reverenced thee for thy gay coat; now
the worst boy that grindeth my coulors will laugh thee to scorn. And I, if this
Geographer had stayed his pen within the compass of Affrike, would have read
him with patience for the countries sake, but now the least child which is able
to temper his ynke, will give him a floute. If Players get no better Atturnie to
plead their case, I will hold me contented where the Hardest is hard, too
take Otes of ill debtors in part of payment.

Touching the frutefulnes of his Mule, which is not agreeable unto kind,
because the coldenesse of seed killes the power of ingendering, I could find
him sport by Philosophy, if I were disposed to play with his nose, or to
cast any thing but draffe to Swine. But I intend not to answer him, lest I
kick with Cresiphon, when my Mule win^eth. As long as he rayles, he profits
not; as long as he dotes, he hurtes not; Let him say what he will, he shall
not cut me; Let him write what he please, he shall not kill me; and favor him
that list, they shall not grieve me; it is but kind for a Cock head, to
breed a Comb; and a rash wit, a raw devise. Though the Mariner have skill
to govern his vessel, it lies not in his cunning to calm the seas: though
the cou^triman know how to graffe an ympe, his toil will not alter the cast of
the Crab: Though my self have learned to rule mine own talk, I can not
snaffle the tongue of a Carper. Notwithstanding the Sayler comes safely to
harbor, though he be shaken: The husbandman gathers much pleasant fruit,
though his Wylding be sower: And I have no doubt I shall please the wise,
though the malicious turn up their gall. The same Solomon which forbiddes us
to aunsweare a fool in his folly, lest we liken our selves unto him, charge
us sharply to show him his fault, lest he seem wise in his own conceit.
Therefore I have neither replied to the writer of this Libel for loosing my
time, nor let him go scotfree for making him proud, but poynted to the straw
where the Padd lurkes, that every man at a glimse, might discry the beast, and
repair to Phialo.

To deliver you the History as faithfully as I learned it, you shall first
understand that Phialo a young Gentleman, and a younger brother, borne in
Ferara, and brought up in Sienna, studied there in the University to win that
by learning, which he wanted in living: But Fortune in the end so knit her
brows, and discharged her shot at the face of him, that his Father dyed,
leaving his portion in the hands of an Abbot in Ferara, of whom I dare
neither speak as I should, nor complain as I would, nor cry out as the cause
it self requires. For, withholding that which he ought to distribute, he
stopped the conduit and cut of the pipes, that conueighed such liquor to Phialo
as was necessary. Whereupon the poor gentelma^ perceiving himself in danger of
death, because he was dry; and unable to strive with the mighty, because he
was weak; removed himself to a moister soil, and leaving Sienna, came unto
Venice, where after the death of his father, he withered as fast, as he bloomed
before in the time of his life. And Philotimo a noble gentleman of a quick wit
and a ripe judgment, which ever delighted in the company of Phialo, was
pluckte from the University, and sent to Ferara, to serve in the Court, not
long before the death of Phialoes father, where though he had cast his
Philosophers head, and seemed so bathed in Heraclitius floode, that he was
almost changed to an other nature, yet in all his ruff showing the sparks of a
noble mind the higher he sat, the lower he looked, the farther he saw him self
from Sienna, the more he renewed the remembrance of Phialo; And forgetting no
courtesy in the Court, enquired so long for his old friend, that hearing at
the last both of the untimely decease of the father from life, and the
unfortunate departure of the Son from his Book; with dropping eyes distilled
into tears, and a sorrowful heart resolved into blood, he withdrewe him
self presently from the Court, and posted to Venice as fast as he could.
Being entered the City, and very desirous too seek out his friend, suddenly
he espied Phialo coming from the Rialto with a Merchant of England: and
stepping too them both with many courtly greetings broke of their talk. Phialo
rejoicing more in his old friend, whose affection he knew; than in his new
acquaintance, whom he never tried, with a Vibaccio took his leave of the
Merchaunt, and brought Philotimo to his lodginge. When they were entered, both
set, and the door shut, Philotimo, with a stern look, and a troubled mind
began thus.

They which are sick of a burning fever, toss and turn from side, to side,
to seek rest: but in the end they increase the fit and open a gapp to their
own peril. I stand in doubt Phialo whither I might rightly compare thee to
those that are vexed with this disease, because that remoouing thy studyes and
changing thy pastute, whilst thou desire to be every where, thou art no
where; and like a graffe planted in many grounds, will become baraine. Has
thy father wasted his treasure on thee in Sienna, that thou should mispend
thy time in Venice? Have thy friends hoped so long for a plentiful harvest,
that they should he constrained to gather weeds? Have I sounded the Trumpet
with thy commendations, to begin this vain skirmish with a false Alarm? Have
thou from thy youth bin trained up in learning, yt after thou have given a good
soape to the paile, thou should kick it down curstly with thy beeles? Is this
the end of our travel? the fruit of thy study? Oh, how much better had it
been for thee never to have ripened, then so soon to have rotted? I perceive
now that all is not Gold in thee which glistereth, every hooked nose does
not argue a Conqueror; nor every fine wit a stated Philosopher. Thou make thy
self but an empty Barrel, yeeldinge to the ears of thy friends a sharp
sound, and nothing else. Thou have promised much, and performed little: thou
said thou would bury thy self in Philosophy, but thou live here in
Venice a college of Curtezans. Orat. pro Caelio.
Tully thinks it an invincible Bulwark and sufficient purgation for M.
Caelius, that he could have no acquaintance with wicked Clodia, because he was
given to his book, and had made a learned Oration in the Senate house, which
could not be done without great study. And where the mind is so busied, all
sportes are tedious, all delights irksome, all company loathsome: As if he
should say: He that loyters not, loves not; he that loves not, is no companion
for Clodia, Therefore to gather an argument of the contrary, because thou
spendest thy time in this Town, I may well conclude that it is impossible for
the^ to profit in Learning, which seek to be fostred in such a stews.
Venus her self when she passed Eurota, cast away her Comb and her brush, her
Glass and her Liepot, and took up a Iauelin. And if thou desire to pass by
Eurota, or grow up in knowledge, shake of this City as Venus dregs; take up
thy tools and return to Sienna; settle thy self and slip no more; A rolling
stone gathers no moss, and a running head will never thrive.

Phialo thoroughly netteled with this strange kind of greeting, scratcht many
times where it ytched not, and bustlinge very often with profers to speak,
stopped sudenly; not unlike to a young colte, which at the first prick plungeth
as though he felt no ground, but when he has champed a while on the bit, and
chafed a little in his own grease; stands still, and begins to find a better
pace. Thus Phialo vexed with the fresh remembrance of a new grief, angry with
Philotimo for his tauntes, yet considering at last to what end he spoke,
when he had sufficiently chewed his cudde, and sweat as he sat, recovered him
self with this reply.

Signior Philotimo, your self is as welcome to me in Venice, as your words are
unwelcome to mine ears. You admonish me as a friend, and duty ^indeth me to
thank you for your good will: Nevertheless, since you make your Plaster so
sharp, and apply it to my wound in an ill time, for the one I cannot but accuse
you of rashness; for the other I am forced to reprove you of ignorance; meaning
hence forth to take you as I find, which is other wise then I thought, a bad
Apothecarie, and a worse Physician. Plutarch forbids you to rebuke your
friend either in mirth or in misery: in mirth; because it straiteneth the
senses, choketh the heart, stops the passage of the spirits, and ouercasteth
the mind, with a cloud of sorrow. In misery; because we have more need to be
restored, tha^ brought low; to be strengthened, than weakened; to be comforted,
than corrected; to be raised up, than hurled down. When the flesh chafes, the
wound pricks; the sore shootes, when the body shakes; the disease grows, when
the mind greeues. Therefore Crates the philosopher which was dogged of nature,
and in all his rebukes as overthwart, as Diogenes, taunting bitterly; when he
saw Demetrius Phalereus in his banishment live porely at Thebes; softened his
speech, gave him fair words, and friendly comfort smoothly disputing of the
fruits of exile, and approouing by reason that there could be no wretchedness
in such a life. Insomuch that Demetrius who fearing at the first to be
vpbraided, and looking for a peale that should not like him, would have
shunned his company, contrary too his expectation finding such sweetness in
his talk, rejoiced greatly in his conference, and began to be sorye, that he
met him no sooner. But Euctus and Eulaeus, the friends of Persa, when they saw
him failed by the Romans, and so overthrown in the battle at Pydna, that he
was forced to turn his back, rated and checked him in the midst of his
sorrows, till sobbing at the heart, for his ill fortune; and moved to wrath,
by the bitterness of their rebukes; as one overwhelmed with a double grief,
he slew the^ both. And trust me Philotimo mourning here solitary for my fall,
seeing my self teinted, where I should be anointed; burnt, where I should
be balmed; cut, where I should be closed; I stand almost at utter defiance
with thy freendshippe, and am presently ready as a man desperate, little
esteeming which end goes forward, to abandon thy company, to forsake Venice,
to forswear my country, to set the hares head to the goose gybblettes, and
all that I have at a mumme chance. Better had it here for Euctus and Eulaeus
by the example of Crates to give heavy Persa a lenitiue in his overthrow, to
assuage his grief; then a sharp corosiue, to augment his pain: And a
friendlier touch had it ben of thee, perceiving me drounde in mine own
tears, to streatch forth thy hands, too save me half dead; then too
thrust out thy tongue, to kill me quick. Had they told Persa, that Fortune
rules in feats of arms, and victory in war is ever uncertain, that
Phillip, at one pushe lost all Macedon; Antiochus, Asia; the Carthaginians,
Lybia; that Julius Caesar when he had subdued all France, made a conqueste of
England, returned into Italy, and triumphed in Rome, was s^ayne in the Senate
house among his friends; that Fortune is painted with feet and wings,
because she comes running, and departes slying, that this days glory was but
a proppe to the Romans, to set them higher, that too morrow, their fall might
be the greater; they had encouraged Persa too renew the battle, and kept
themselves harmless. And I am persuaded that if thou had played the good
Nurse, which seeing her child catch a knock, steps to it presently, not
with threatninges, nor rods, nor rebukes, but with gentle entreaty takes it
up; dandles it often in her lap; and with many a sweet song, rather
giving it a soft ^eate, then a hard stripe, lulles it a sleep to ease the
pain; thou had cured my sorrow, quenched mine anger, and woone me for ever
to be thine. Thou little considerest whether I fell wantonly by mine own
folly, or was sudainly ouerturned by unruly lubbers; thou co^demnest my leuitie
not regarding my necessity; thou have forgotten that he is forced to go whom
the devil drives; and that need makes every man to trot. If you have not
heard of Chrysogono (I mean not him which thrust Sextus Roscius out of his
farms in Ameria; but him which defeated me of my living in Sienna, and drove
thy poor Phialo out of Hetruria) let this be sufficient to stopp thy mouth
that it is he, which being an Abbote in Ferara, clean contrary too his
profession, because he is holy; and to the oath he took at the death of my
father, who trusted him farther then he deserved; enjoys that by force
which is none of his: it is he which should rarather help, then hurt;
rather give, than take; rather feed then famish; rather clothe the naked, then
strip them of all to the bare bones: It is he, which stuffing his bags with
the fruits of Learning, allows not Philosophers to touch money; but with a
full ^orge commends fasting: To be short, Philolotimo it is even he, which
keeps that back that should be my maintenance in Sienna; yet art thou so
frantic, to bid me return thither again in haste, and follow my study,
as if thou should charge me to fight, without weapons, climb without
ladders, mount without wings. Have thou not read that Ex nihilo nihil fit,
Nothing does lie in childbed of Nyfles? How would thou then have me to
apply my Book, when the mean as I told thee is taken away?

Philotimo beholding his friend wistly, the more he delighted in his talk, the
more he lamented the loss of his time; and woondring at the pithynesse of his
speech, which in all his conference never used a waste word, egged him on to a
farther discourse in this manner.

I remember Phialo, that Plato gives hearty thanks to Nature, for making him
rather a reasonable creature, then a brute beast; a man, then a woman; an
Athenien, then a Theban; and chiefly for giving him life in the time of
Socrates. Whose example has humbled me often before God, with duetiful thanks
to his divine majesty, for fashioning of me to his own likeness, giving me a
mind to conceive, and a tongue to speak, when he might have made me a dumb
beast; for making me rather a man, then a woman that is, a Lord, then a slave;
an Athenien, than a Theban; a Tuscan, rather then a rude Bergamaske; and last
of all, for yielding patte of thy studyes to me, which like a young Socrates,
applyest all thy knowledge too reforming of manners. Therefore as thou haste
already begun, approving me by strong arguments, to be both brainsicke and
unskillful in my proceedings, for dealing so roughly with thee, at such an il
time, go forwards, good Phialo, and show me as well what I ought to follow, in
rebuking my friend, as thou have declared what I shall fly, that through mine
own ignorance, I offend no more. I never resorted to thee yet since our first
acquaintance, but ere I departed, I carried some lessons away worth the
noting.

Not so sir (quoth Phialo) It is hard to draw water in a dry soil, or fish
out any skill from an empty pond. Socrates affirms himself to know nothing:
and trust me I se no reason why Plato, which is accomted a great Philosopher,
and a searcher of wisdom, Socrates able to teach nothing because he knew
nothing.
should rejoice so much to live in his time, which was not able too teach him
any more then he knew. If he judge the person more luckie then the man was
learned, or think it sufficient to virtue, to have been a student in those
days, he little considers that Alcibiades and Critias were both Scholars too
Socrates, yet the one a Traitor, the other a Tyrant. It is not the place we
are borne in, that makes us learned; nor the name of our master that leads
us to virtue.

Thus can I not devise with my self, Philotimo, what it is that should move
thee too triumph so much in thine own conceit, because thou art rather an
Athenien, then a Theban; a Tuscan, then a Bargamaske, as though all were
learned, that came from Athens; or all ignorant, that dwelt at Thebes; or all
Courtiers, that are bredde in Tuscanie; or all Carters, that are borne in
Bargamaske. But most of all I wonder how thou can possibly suck any
fruit from my studies, which are very small, because I have loytered; and
stenderly grounded, through want of ability. Since thou have likened me to
Socrates, whose Nihil scio is confirmed by Arcesilas, Zeno, Empedocles,
Anaxagoras, and the whole rabble of them which pulled out our eyes, that we
might not see: and taught us to wander in the dark, giving no credit to
their senses, but doubting continually whether Snow were white, or the Crow
black, I might ripp up that controversy of the Academikes and the
Peripatetikes, and show thee by reason, that I know nothing, to drive thee off
from the thing which thou longest to hear. Which if I should do, and dote in
those things that I daily see, I am fully persuaded, when I call for a Book,
Philotimo would presentlye give me a Brickbatte, to make me distinguish a
Stacioners shop, from a Stone wall. Therefore acknowledging my self to be
made of a soul, and of a body, the one derived from Heaven, the fountain of
Knowledge; the other from Earth, the seat of ignorance; I am driven too
confess that I neither know all things, which belongs too GOD; nor am
ignoraunte in all things, which is proper too Beasts; but am perfect in some
things, unskillful in other, which life is only peculiar to man. This
doctrine is taught by Aristotle, approved by Foxius, laid open by Tully, and
soundely discoursed by Lactantius. Whose arguments, Philotimo, I will not
allege, because I see the ignorant which never read them will not understand
them; the learned which know them already, will not regard them. And thy
self I perceive art more desirous to hear such things, as are profitable to
reform manners; than subtle, to stir up discention in schools. The greatest
thing that at this time thou desire to know, is only this: Which way thou
might behave thy self to rebuke thy friend in his fault without offense. A
busy province no doubt for a simple wit, and such a burden as Hercules
might refuse. There are many good Scholars and grounded Philosophers in Sienna,
whose shoulders would better become this task: yet seeing all men to look for
greater things at their hands, because of their knowledge; than they are
willing to show, Want of reward, the death of learning.
when they are flightly rewarded; they had rather content them with a private
life, then take so much pain, for so little thanks. But if I (which may not
compare with them, neither in learning, for I am young; nor in judgment, for I
am raw) chance to swerve in my pen through want of reading; lay the fault
to my youth, and pardon my folly, I desire no more recompense for my travel: A
little stream, serves to drive a light Mill; and a lea^e fee is fit for a
lazy Clarke. Therefore since thou requirest, whose friendshipp I cannot forget;
thou commaundest, whose authority I will not resist; I mean to prosecute
that which I first began, not as chefest of al men, that with greatest
gravity, but chosen by thy self, that with smallest ieoperdie, might show my
mind; nor yt thou shall find me as plentiful as Amaltheaes horn, to yield thee
what fruit soever thou crauest; but that in this vacant time, wherein your
affairs are little, my business less; you from the Court, I from the
University, and both idle; the day slipe not away without some profit.

Diogenes thought it necessary for us in this life, to have either good
friends or great enemies; they never cease to exhort us to virtue, these are
still searching for a hole in our garments. Therefore when one perceiving the
Greeks to be subdued, and the Carthaginiens utterly overthrown, boldly
pronounced that the Romans were safe; Nay, quoth Scipio Nascica, now is the
time of our chiefest danger, because we have left us neither friends a broad,
whom we should follow; nor foes, of whom we should stand in fear. Whereby
thou may see, Philotimo, how requisite it is for us in these days by one
means or other to be told of our faults. Every man is desirous, if he have a
blot in his paper, or a botch in his verse, or a stain in his cote, or a spot
in his face, to hear of the same, yt for his own credit he might amend it. We
are al willing to dress our selves by a glass, that nothing about us stand
awry, yet are we also blind of affection, so blunt of condition, so waywarde
of mind, and so waspish of nature, that we cannot abide to hear of any
wrinkle, in our behavior; but if any man friendly admonish us of such^
deformities, we are straight at daggers drawing, we flinge out of company, we
challenge the field, and for his good will we reward him with hate. To avoid
such a braule, and to keep thy friend, to show him his vice, and to save thy
self to rebuke him for his manners, and ye^ win his heart; I have already
given the^ a Cave at, forbidding thee flatly to reprehend in joy, or in sorrow;
in mirth, or i^ misery; in pleasure, or pain. And that I may the better
imitate the course of nature, which runs a priuatione ad habitum, from
killing, too quickening; from death, unto life; I will first remove the
blocks out of thy way that thou stumble not, and showing thee what turnings
betwixt this and thy iournyes end must be left, to keep thee still in the
right way, I think it best to unfold unto thee as plainly as I can, what
thou shall fly in reproouing thy friend, that I may the easier teach thee
hereafter what thou shall follow. As our friends are not to be rebuked when
they are pleasant, nor Company: because we loath to Aristomenes the
scholemaister of King Ptolome saw the king sleep before certain Ambassadors,
and with rebukes awaked him in their presence, he gave occasion to flatterers
to pick a thank in his Majesty's quarrel, who incensed him so far with the
remembrance of that reproach, that they caused him streighte to enforce his
Master, to drink his last draught in a Cup of poison. Dion.
Tiberius which succeeded Augustus in the Empire of Rome, and withhelde the
legacy which Augustus by Testament had given to the people, perceiving one
round a dead coarse in the ear, called the man, and demanded the cause why he
did so; To whom the fellow replied before them all, that he willed the soul
which was fleeting from thence, to an other world, to certify Augustus that
the commons of Rome were yet unpaid. Whereupon the Emperor charged him
presently to be slain, that he might carry the news and do the errande him
self, which knew best how the case stood. Because Pythagoras sharply
rebuked his friend in company, Pl^^.
a young man presently cast a halter about his neck, meaning either to bridle
his tongue, or to thrattle him; By which the Philosopher ever after amended his
fault, and learned in such places, to use other talk. And Plato perceiving
Socrates too charm his friend rashely at an open Table, showed him that it
had been the point of a wise man, to have done that in secret: Very well,
quoth Socrates, had it not been as wise a part, for thee to have told me
this in secret? The like method has the holy Ghost set down in the Book of
God, willing us if we see our brother offend, to draw him aside, and
admonish him gently: if that prevail not, then to rebuke him before witness:
but if this will not serve, by order of law to appeal to the Judge.

In Choler; because we are persuaded Dion.
from an ill mind then a well meaning. Vespasian hearing Demetrius reuyle him,
told him this: Thou have provoked me already Demetrius to kill thee, but it is
not my fashion to slay any Curr because he barketh. Had not that Prince with
greater wisdom governed his hands, than railing Demetrius ruled his tongue,
so lauishe a mouth had cost him his life. We are willed which are christians,
to reform one another with the spirit of meekenes, which is likened to a Dove,
and the Dove has this property, it lack^ a gall; so must we in revealing the
faults of our friends, be clean void of Gall, of bitterness, of anger, of
malice.

In a Bravery: because he which seeks to win glory by other men's vices, is
no more to be regarded, then a common quacksaluer, which trudgeth from City
to city, with a box full of drugs, to proclaim in the market what sores, or
what sickness, he is able to cure, and by this dancing ^inde of gesture with
the proud Pharisee justify himself to his own shame.

Continually: because it is irksome to be ever rubd on the gaul, too much of
one thing is good for nothing. The Surgion does not always tormente his cure,
for troubling the wound, and making his patient refuse remedy. The master is
not ever whipping his Scholar, or casting the offense he commits in his teeth,
for dulling his wit, hardening his heart, and forcing him utterly too abhor
his Book. He that continually wipeth the face to make it clean, may chafe of
the skin and disfigure it more. Therefore I may well like the man which at
no time cease too rebuke, too a pestilente whilewinde, that gathers
together nothing but clouds, and drives all the dust in the streets on a
heap; or to a Raven, whose property is ever to seize upon carrion; or to the
Sow, that is ever wrooting among weeds.

If our selves be naught: because it is Plut.
which had any botch about their body: Much more are their lips to be sealed
up, which have never a clear corner in their souls. Seneca was ill thought on
for inueighing against lewdness, and loved Agrippina; for mislyking of
authority, and was an Emperors master; for dispraysing the Court, himself a
Courtier; for speaking against flatterers, and fawnde upon Queens; for
condemning of riches, himself being wealthy; and for rebuking excess, when
himself had five hundred stools in his house of one fashion, Dion.
al headed with Cipres, and footed with Yuory. Salust wrote many things
against spoylers of cou^tryes, and robbers of provinces, yet when Caesar
appointed him to govern Affrike, he polled the people as fast himself. Thus
may we not minister remedy to others, when our selves are full of the like
corruption; lest we be commanded as hypocrites, ere we take away the mote from
our brothers sight, to remove the beam from our own eyes; Or as diseased
Physicians, to help our selves. For he that is fallen, cannot pull up his
friend; nor he that is wicked, give any good counsel to offenders.

These are the rocks, Philotimo, which thou must shun in rebuking thy friend,
if thou desire to utter thy wares, and bring thy ship to a safe harbor.
Peradventure there may be more added by riper wits, which my self have not
read, or not remembered; And since time will not serve me to search them out, I
had rather content my self with these, then coin any more without
commission, lest I chance to pass my lymites as far as Priamus, which was
registered to be the father of fifty Children, and but xvii. of them lawfully
begotten. He that will not be run a ground in his passage, must tarry the
tide ere he take Boat; The sayler that is loathe to be driven beyond his
reach, must wait till he carry the wind in a bag; The Merchant that wishes to
make a hand of his goods, must watch opportunity to open his Shop; And if
that inreprouing the abuses of thy friend, thou forsake those dangerous shelues
which I have showed thee, and art come to Anchour, very desirous to be unladen,
thou must choose a fit time to discharge thy conscience: for the need of the
chapman rayseth the market, and the occasion which they them selves give that
are to be chide, shall fetch out thy counsel at a good rate.

Such a time did Solon pick out to rebuke Craesus when he showed him his
treasure: A tempore^
such advantage Demaratus took of king Philip, to tell him of the debate
betwixt him and his Queen. For when the king asked him how the Greeks did
agree within themselves: It is very well done my leege (quoth Demaratus) for
your majesty to demand how quietly the Atheniens and Peloponnesians do live
abroad, when you and your Queen are at discord at home. Such an occasion
Diogenes caught at the first bound, who being taken in the tents of the same
Philip (which then determined too war with the Greeks) and brought in his
presence, the king asked presently, if he were a spy: yea, said Diogenes, a
spy, that has already discovered thy rashenes, which neither constreined by
force, nor provoked by injury, art come hither, to hazard thy life, thy glory,
thy power, thy possession, thy Crown, thy Kingdom, and all that thou have, in
own hour. Such opportunity was not forslewed by Bato the ringleader of the
Rebels in Dalmatia, Dion.
for coming too the Emperor too entreat of peace, when Tiberius first
questioned with him, why he arose in Arms? Because (answered he) you sent us
neither shepperds to regard us, nor dogs too defend us, but Woolues too
devour us.

Some times because the wind is not ever in one quarter, we must ship out our
^ares, and further our course, either by the person of our selves, A personae.
Quinque modis.
which rebuke, or of him which is rebuked, or of his fellow, Of our person: when
we confess our selves to have had the like vice, and amended it; to have been
in like danger, and escaped it. So Jupiter and Juno falling at variance for
matters belonging too Venus sportes, thought Tiraesias, who had been both a
man and a woman, fittest of all; to take up the controversy, and to conclude
for them both, which of the two, the man, or the woman, was greatest wanto^.
Of the person of him whom we rebuke: when the party himself of his own
accord confesses one of his lightest faults; so is the example of Philotimo
the Physician too be followed, which told his patient, that showed him a
chapte finger, that he fostered a greater disease then that, and should take
some Physic for his hot liver. Of his fellows: Ammonius accustom to
rebuke his scholars. For understanding one day that some in the school had
played the gluttons, he commanded his servant to beat his own son, and
turning his face too them that deserved it, told them, that such a wagge could
never dyne well without sauce too his meat. Of his friends: whom he might to
reverence for their good will and After this fort Plato reprehended Dionysius,
for thrusting him out of the Court, without cause. And having obtained audience
of the King, he began first to reason in the person of an enemy. If thou
knew Dionysius, that any of thy fooes had arrived in Sicily to do thee hurt,
and wanting opportunity failed of his purpose, would thou let him escape
without revenge? No, said Dionysius, for I punish the intent as well as the
deed doing. Then Plato disputing with him pretily a contrariis, descended
straighte into the person of a friend and replied thus; If any of your friends
for the love that he bears you, come hither to Sicily, to do you good, but
has lost his labor, because your self has not given him leave, will you
turn him away without reward? Dionysius demanded who it was that had taken
such pain, and was so lightly regarded: Plato yet covered himself and said,
it was Aeschines, whose eloquence was abie too reform the manners of those
that embraced his company: It is even he that has traveled far, and passed
the Seaes in danger of life to teach thee Philosophy, and is not esteemed.
Whereupon the King greatly delighting in the boldesse of his spirit, embraced
him again, brought him into the Court, and delte very bountifully with him
and Aeschines. Orat. pro. Caeli^
So likewise Tully nippes Clodia in the person of her little brother. It
moves us as much too amend our manners, and saves the rebuker without hurt,
when our vice is laid open to us in the person of such, as by affinity of
blood we are bound to like. By which means I have heard, that one Fulco, a
bold Bishopp, which was Ambassador in Engande in the time of King Richard
the first, King Richards three daughters banished the Court.
and perceiving very great abuses in the Court, boldly stepped to the King,
and told him, that he had three arraunce Whoores to his daughters, for whom
if he speedily provided not marriages, it would turn his majesty to shame,
and his Court too reproach. The first of them he termed to be Pride, the
second Covetousness, the third Luxury. The good king hearing the names of
his strange daughters, entered into a deeper consideration of their natures;
and the next day called his Council together, to get them husbands. When
he had opened the talk of the Bishop to the Peers of his Realm; he
presently gave Pride to the Templers, Covetousness to the Cisterttan Monks, and
Luxury to the ruffling Prelates of the Church. Sometime if we suppose all
those deformities to be in an other, which abound in the party whom we
reprove, naming no body, but leaving the matter doubtful, and indifferent to
be applied by the guilt^e conscience it self, it is very forcible. So Tully
plays with Clodia in the same Oration for Caelius, which I cyted before. If
any widow have set her doors wide open to Bawdry, and yielded her self a
common Curtezan, refusing not to feast among those whom she never knew, if she
do this in the city, in gardens, in common meetings: To be short, if she
behave her self so not only in gesture, but in attire and company; nor in
gloating of her eyes, and lavishness of speech, but in embracinges, in
kissings, in bathinges, in banquetes, whereby she is judged as impudent as
whoorish; If, I say, a young Nouice have stumbled by chance into her company,
tell me Lucius Herennius, whether thou term him a lecher or a lover? Such a
fellow as has sought to robb her of her honesty, or to reaue her of that she
was willing to loose? I forget my iniuryes Clodia, I shake of the remembrance
of my sorrow, I ouerskippe thy cruelty to my friends in my absence, do not
think these things which I have uttered, to be spoken of thee; yet give me
leave to ask thee a question, because our accusers have sifted the crime out
of thee and allege thee for witness: if there be any such woman as I late
described unlike to thy self in life, or in lewdness, with whom a young man
has a little been conuersaunt, whether thou think it so heinous a matter? If
thou be not the same woman, as I wish; what is it that can be objected to
Caelius? but if other men apply, and say thou art she, why should we fear
that offense which thou regardest not? Nevertheless since you may well perceive
that Cicero used this going about the bushe, rather to check her bitterly,
then reform her friendly; to taunte her in the Senate, than teach her in
secret; and to touch her nearest, when she least looked for it; I will let
slip, and com^ to the person of his enemies whom we are willing to
reprehende. For he that rebukes in this manner, remooueth the blame from him
self, and turns it to him in whose person he speaks; which I will show
thee, Philotimo, by a very familiar example. Signior leraldi, a Magnifico in
this City, whom thou know well, since my coming to Venice, invited me
diverse times to his house. One day especiallyas we sat at dinner, he began to
move talk of Samarcho ye Lawyer: from him he descended to his Son, which at
this time enjoys my room in Sienna, demanding of me, how I lyked his wit:
So, so, Sir, said I, and shook my head. Then Ieraldi told me, that within
these few days the young man came from the University to visit his friends,
the father requested Ieraldy too Supper, that he might see this toward youth.
When they were set, Sir, quoth the wise Father to the witty son, you have
Phialoes place, but I hope you will not prove such an vnthrist as Phialo; whereat
the manerly puppie began to pou^. Credit me, said Ieraldi, I stood in doubt
whether I should blame the Father for speakinge without book, or condemn the
son for his ill nurture: but you may see, Phialo, how good it is for you to
walk warely, that the mouths of your enemies may be stopped: This pretty kind
of rebuke so far fetched, caused me to thank the Magnifico for telling me what
he heard, and to storm at Samarcho, for reporting so il of me without ground.
I would not have him to count his Chickens so soon before they be hatched, nor
tryumphe so long before the victory: These are rath days, it is honey moon
yet, if he see his son swim, let him thank GOD which has made him able
too hold him up by the sin. There is yet small judgment to be given: the
green blade that appears first, and shootes highest, is soonest bitte with a
black froste. As too much drought has caused thy Phialo to shed his leaves:
so too much moisture may choke up his graffe, and both wither for company. But
to leave them, I will cast about to the place where I struck sail, and
return to my purpose as fast as I can. When thou have watched thy time and
caught thy friend solitary, unfolded thy mind in any of these persons which I
have rehearsed, the thing it self many times will accuse the man, though thou
hold thy peace. The thing it self, (...).
says Tully, will cry out, though I be mute. And Plato prouounceth that the
life it self rebukes Speusippus. Think not, Oration: pro Rose: Amer.
says Tully, that as you have heard in old tales, the wicked are chased and
affrighted with the firebrandes of furyes, every man's own tretchery and his
own fear troubles him, every man's own fault torments him, and pricks him,
their own conceit, and their own consciences ever gnawe them. Where the man
is so scourged, and feels so many witnesses in himself, thou shall have the
less need to show it him. Ab (...).
Otherwise if thou see him alofte, and fear that he will be carried away with
pleasure to forget himself, thou may then take occasion by his present
state too warn him: Speusippus wrote unto Dion in his chiefest pomp, exhorting
him not to look too high, because he was a gallant Gentleman, and much made
of amongst women, but to have a care that Sicily be well governed with
equity, maintained by Justice, and beautified trimly by good laws. The same
Plato which could not be persuaded too prescribe any orders of life to the
Cirenenses, because he thought their prosperity would not suffer them to take
the bitte, judged it necessary to bid Dion beware of his comely personage and
flourishing days, for pride at one time or other will have a fall.

And because that sore eyes may not view the light, without a scarf; I think
it necessary for thee, in making thy friend acquainted with his fault, too use
a shadow; which may be done by tempring thy speeches with commendations. The
Physician is more desirous too cure his Patient by sleep, then by Rubarbe; by
comfortable meats, than foraine drugs, by the Cooks help, than the
Apothecaries shop. The Fencer entering the List to come too blows, gives a
flourish with his weapon too move delight, and in all the conflict bends his
body with a comely grace. The Surgeon coming too the member that must be
cut, bolstereth it up with soft pillowes, muffleth his Patients eyes with a
clout, and touches the ^yle as tenderly as he can. So shall it behooue thee in
reforming thy friend, and purging the humor which hurts him most, too take
away the bitterness of thy Lozinge, with sweet Syrops, commending him for
that he has done well, avoiding comparisons, because they are odious, accepting
his excuse, if he chance to reply, lessening his fault as much as you may,
cooling his mood, with a few praises, as the Smith does his Iron too knit it
the straighter, and make it strong. By reckoning up too them that which was
done well, we make them ashamed, of that which is il.

Fie Pandar vvhers thy bovv and fethered flight,
Which make thee bear the pryre from every vvight?
Thus are they cheeflie too be won with fair means, by the example of the
Physician: or gently too be entreated at the first, and then gaulled, as you
see by the Fencer, and the Surgion: or too be first heated, and fashioned,
then cooled, and calmed, as a Smithes Iron, or a lazy Pandar. For the Mason,
after he has stryken a deep gashe with the Chysel, in too his work, leaves
it not rough, for being deformed, but smootheth it over, with finer tools, to
make it show beautiful to the eye: He pareth away whatsoever is rugged, for
spi^^ing his woork; And we must shave of all that, with a smooth tongue,
which we left sharp, with a rough taunte, for spoiling our friend.
Therefore it is tolerable sometimes to purge him aloof, and post the fault
over to another, as the only cause of that offense. So Tully excuses
Atracinus, for accusing of Caelius, imputing the fault to his zeal, who was
willing to have all amended; or to compulsion, as though he were forced to it
by other; or to his youth, which was easy to be brybed. Wherein I may liken
his practice to the countrieman, which sows Onions and Garlike, near to his
Roses, that they might draw the gross and sour moisture into them selves, and
so make the flowers a great deal sweeter. This might be handled, Philotimo,
more at large, but a beck is as good, as a Dieu guard, and a word enough,
too a wise hearer. The Atheniens were one day desirous to have some new piece
of work, and setting two notable Carpenters before them, to know which was the
best: the one having a quick wit, and a ready tongue, reasoned of many things
belonging to building, and discoursed his art with apt words and sentences
orderly placed, which lyked them well: The other being the better workman, and
the worse Orator, more skilful in his toles, than in his tongue; told the
Atheniens, that all which his fellow had vtterrd in words, himself was able
to show in deeds. And since we both study to counsel our friends when we
see the^ swerve, which no doubt will be a profitable piece of work, because I
have according too my small skill in Rhetorike, drawn out the frame with a
few words, I would have thee presently to put it in practice: which if thou
do, avoiding that which is to be fled; pursuing that, which is to be followed
not chiding thy friend in joy, for ouerthwarting; nor in sorrow, for
oppressing; nor in company, for troubling; nor in choler, for vexing; nor in
bravery, for vaunting; nor always, for discouraging; nor when thy self art
worse for scorning: but grounding thy arguments on the person, or on the fault,
or on the time, so seasoning and spiring thy talk with sweetness, that it
slip down ^pace without chewing; and touch him at the quick, without
molesling; thou shall profit him pleasure his friends, not hurt thy self,
reform vice, advance virtue, and give a good push, to the profession of a
young Divine.

Believe me, said Philotimo, if it be the property of a cunning Painter, to
give life to a huge beast, in a narrow paper; of a toward Soldier, to turn a
great horse, in a little compass; and of a good scholar, to couch many things,
in a few words: for declaring of matters so rough, aptly; so confused,
orderly; so redicus, breefely; I may well call thee a new Protagenes, a
second Alexander, and the very hatchet of Demosthenes. And though I cannot
commend thee sufficiently in thine own presence, without suspicion of
flattery: yet dare I not withholde the Garland from thee, which thou
deseruest, for doing thee injury.

Very well, answered Phialo, because you are a Philosopher, and a Courtier, in
the one, you attribute that unto me, that is due to your self, which is
Socrates floute: in the other, I find you very frank of good words, which is
proper to the place wherein you live. Epist^ ad Tho. Archiep. Ebor.
Therefore give me leave to say that too you, which Erasmus wrote of Henry the
eight, a victorious King of England. I am very glad, says he, and have
wonderful cause to rejoice in heart, that I am so highly commended of so
famous a Prince, but much more should I be bound to his majesty, if
aduauncing my estate, his highness vouchsafed to confirm that which he
avouches. I speak not this to compare you to King Henry, or my self to
Erasmus, for there is odds. Yet since it has pleased you to tickle mine ears
with so high praises, I should ever account my self your debtour, if you would
as well further my studyes with your helping hand, as you have lifted them up,
with a glosing toling. For many thought Eras. not to be so learned, because he
was bare: And every man will judge me to be but a Duns, when he sees me a
beggar. Yet that worthy Prince which never suffered virtue to depart empty
ha^ded, stayed up the fame of Erasmus with his liberality: and I trust, when
soever you commend me again, you will open your lips and your purse together.

With this Philotimo began to smile, and taking poor Phialo by the hand, led
him to the Table, where they both placed them selves to supper: which no doubt
was passed over with little talk, because they had tyered them selves before,
both being desirous to busy their teeth and their tounges otherwise. The
Supper once ended, Phialo began to take his leave for that night, and
withdraw himself to his own lodging, for withholding Philotimo from his
rest, who could not choose but be weary after such a journey. But the noble
Gentleman taking so great pleasure in the conference of Phialo, that he had
altogether forgotten his former travel, suffered not his friend to depart
from his side, requesting him earnestly to keep him company, till he returned
toward the Court. Phialo easy enough to be entreated of so great a friend,
stayed, and spent the greatest part of the night with him in talk.

The second Book, A Canuazado too Courtiers.
THe next day Philotimo was very desirous too vsite leraldi, and stirring
somewhat the earlier, that he might both thank him for his courtesy toward
Phialo, and spend the time in some argument till dinner approached, he set
forward with Phialo to this Magnificoes house, where they sound the grave
father very hard at his Book. They had no sooner embraced him, and he given
courteous intertainment to them, but Philotimo told him he was sorry, that it
was his chance to come to his house at such a time, as might rather hinder his
studyes then pleasure him any way.

No Sir, said Ieraldi, except you judge me to be a Cato, whose eyes were
continually fixed on his Book, his mind as much busied in Civil gouernmente.
That which I read, is only to shun Idleness, when I lack such good
company. My learning is small, my judgment as slender in matters of weight:
therefore have I chosen such a book to peruse, as rather delights me with
pleasant conceits, than troubles my wits with construing of things beyond
my reach. Behold Philotimo it is only a discourse which lively discribeth the
image of a Courtier, fitter for you to profess, then for me to read. Here is
a sweet style, pure phrase, little affected and many good precepts to be
learned. But you know how easy a thing it is to cut a garment, by an other
man's pattern, too build when the foundation is laid to our hands; or to add
more of our selves to those things, which are already invented by other. Though
the writer of this discourse have done well, yet in my opinion he saw far,
and perceived not all; he wrote much, and let somewhat slip that better
deserved to be touched. We see in this body of ours, that one foot steppeth
beyond the other; with the hand we reach farther than we stride; with the
tongue, we sound farther than we strike; with the ear, we do hear beyond
our voice; the sight of our eye, peerceth beyond our hearing; and the cast of
the mind, outstrips them all. So shall you find in the body of every common
wealth, not every thing so absolute in one particular member, but something may
be wished for, which it wants; Every man in one point, or other, passing
his fellow, and himself as much inferior to them, as they are to him, whom
he exceeds. Tullie was eloquent, but fearful too speak; Crassus bold, but
very broad mouthed; Menestheus in courage gives place to Stenhelus,
Stenhelus to Diomed, Diomed too Ajax, and he too Achilles. Agamemnon was said
too be a wise Prince, yet glad many times to be counseled by Nestor.
Eurition shot best for Aeneas games, Virgil.
but Acesta carried away the Prize, because he delivered his arrowe with so
cunning a loose, that it caught fire as it flew, and consumed to cinders.
Andromacha and Penelope were both chaste, and both loyal too their Husbands,
yet Penelope deserved the greater praise.

The feet of Thetis were as brighte as silver, but the ankles of Hebe, cleerer
the^ Cristall; The arms of Aurora, as ruddy as the Rose, but the bres^es of
Juno, as white as snow; Minerua was wise, but Juno was welthie, and Venus in
beauty stained them both. Iewelles are all precious, but not all of one price,
nor all of one virtue, nor of like perfection. The Adamant of nature draws
Iron, but the stone Hematites does stop blood. The Carbuncle in darkness
shines like fire, but the Topase is holp with the light of the Sun. Thus may
you perceive, that all Rivers have not their course into one Sea, all fruit,
does not grow upon one tree, all fish, is not taken in one stream, all
fashions, are not cut out of one cloth, all laws, are not made by one Solon,
al Countries, are not governed by one Prince, al knowledge, is not found in one
head, nor all Images hewed out of one block. But one enjoys that which
another wants, and the same lacks that, which another has. The Moon and the
Stars do govern the night, but the Sun receives the day to his charge;
Neptune rules the seas, but Aeolus the wyndes; Cupid shootes arrows, but
Jupiter thunderbolts; Tibullus writes wanton sonets of love, but Homer the
bloody destruction of Troy; And the Author of this Book which you took me
perusing teaches a Courtier too tell a fine tale, but I hope you would have
profit his Country.

For my part, aunsweared Philotimo, I dare not meddle in this case, for marring
of that which I cannot amend, and since my luck serves me so ill, I am
contented, with the loss of a single stake, to post over my game to the hands
of Phialo, who has read more than I, and Plays with advantage upon sure
cards.

You know, answered Phialo, that it is not for me, to teach gesture in the
presence of Roscius, to touch the stringes in Apolloes hearing, nor to describe
a courtier before Philotimo. Yet if I might draw you down the pattern of a
Courtier, I would have him too be in spirit a Cyrus, (...) Courtier.
in temperaunce, an Ageselaus, ^ wit a Themistocles, in experience a Philip,
in boldness a Brasidas, in tongue a Pericles, in friendeshippe a Ionathas, in
Wisdom a Solomon; excercised in arms, skillful in Books, liberal in
gifts, lowly in Pomp, valiant in fight, in Victory merciful; and too
say all at once, in his whole life a true Christian, that rather seeks a
Kingdom in Heaven, than a Scepter on earth, an immortal Crown, than a
vanishing wreath; the glory of GOD, than his own praise. Yet since my Courtier
is as hard too be found in Italy, as Tullies Orator, which never spoke;
Aristotle's bliss, which was never tasted; the Phoenix of Arabia, that was
never seen; or the Castles which Mathematicians build in the Air without
tools; I will only give you three or four Notes, which I think very
requisite in a Courtier, because I se them but slenderly handled by other.

Let a young Gentleman resort too Ferara, you shall have more ready too
profer him Paris Harp, then Achilles lance, nyce Doctrine, then manly
Discipline, Too subdue these affections, and too make choice of every thing
that lies before you; too consider the end why you are called too that place,
and too discharge your duty when you are there, you ought, Philotimo, to be
learned, to be liberal, to abhor flatterers, and chiefly of all to further
Religion, which is the Sacrifice that God looks for at your hands. Alexander
was a Captain to the Greeks, a Lord to the Barbarians, and a Philosopher too
both, he taught the Hircans too marry, the Arachosians to plough, the Sogdians
too succor their parents, the Persians to refrain their mothers bed, the
Scithians to burye their dead bodies, and the Indians too honor the Grecians
gods. He was in birth a Prince, in life a Philosopher, in troubles a soldier,
in peace a Scholar. Thou art not sent to the Court, Philotimo, to lay the
flower of thy youth, in Ladies laps, but to learn the state of thine own
Country, and the conditions of foreign Realms, that thou may the better
be able to serve thy Prince.

When Ambassadors came out of Persia to Philip of Macedon, Alexander his
son, being then but a child, asked them nothing of their masters high
Orchardes, or golden groaues, or what music he loved, or what dauncers he
liked, but how many men at arms he was able to make, if need required, what
kind of place he chosed to fight in, after what order he planted his battle,
what justice he ministered to his subjects, and by what kind of laws be
governed his Country. Learning in Court.
Learning has been thought so necessary in the Court, that Darius had
always rather see one Zopyrus at his Elbowe, then a hundred Babylonia^s. And
when he was presented with a fair Pomegranate, he wished to have as many
learned men continually about him as there were little grains within that
apple. When Dionysius embrased the doctrine of Plato, the Nobles and Gentlemen
so gave their mind to knowledge, that every corner in the Court was full of
triangles. It is necessary that they which look unto many, should see much,
and since the whole weight of the common wealth lies in the neck of good
Courtiers it were too be desired, that none should come there, but such as
are wise.

O Philotimo, how many young Gentlemen are there now in Tuscanie, which never
dream of these matters? but having stabled their horse for amoneth in Sienna,
though they never tasted the sweetness of knowledge, by lothing the travel,
yet trudge they to Ferara, to live in the Court. Wherein I may say they are a
great deal more fruiteful than Hares, A quick childbed.
for they are reported to conceive, to go proud, and to litter their liuerets
at one instaunt. But these wexe great with learning, before they conceive it;
and deliver their burden forty weeks at the least before it is begotten. If
they take the Court over their heads as a hoode for the rain, or a cloud for
their ignorance, thinking that a little spark there, should shine like a
flame, and every fly swell as big as an Eagle, they perceive not that
unskillful woorkemen setting a puppet upon high pillars, too make it seem
huger; show every fault of it the playner. That they which would not be seen,
must not hide them selves on the top of an hill, and that such as are placed
in Princes Courts, are subject to the ear and eye of every man: where they
cannot once stumble in behavior, without shame, nor trippe in their speech
without rebuke. Where the foundation is weak the frame tottereth, where the
root is not deep the tree falls, where the knot is loose the string
slippes, where the water is low no bessell rides: and upon little learning the
life of a Courtier cannot be builded, because the foot is not able to bear
up the head.

Thou art utterly deceived, Philotimo, if thou think it should fare with thee,
as it does with the Sun, the nearer he mounteth up to the Pole, the slower
he mooues: and the higher thou set thy self in the Court, the lesser thou
iudgest thou ought too study.

Thou art not called to this life too sleep out thy days in a Trunk with
Clearchus, or to join with Domitian too catch Flies. In empty Vessels it
passes our cunning too find where they leake, till we pour in Liquour; I
fool bewraieth himself if you give him a Swoorde; the Oule is blind, when
she comes too light; the loyterer which has effeebled his mind with pleasure
and sloth, and nouseled himself in the fogge of ignorance, holds no water
in princes Courts, plays like a fool with the shadow of authority, like a
Bastard Bird shuts his eyes at the blase of Nobility, brightness of
honor, and knowledge of many matters. Homer in setting out the picture of
Agamemnon, likeneth his eyes and his head to Jupiter: By which I gather that a
Courtier ought too see so far, that his sight may reach from the East too
the West, and that his wisdom may shape out a new a Minerua. Minerua bredde in
Jupiters brane.
From the Court in all ages has learning been maintained, and men of excellent
knowledge received too the service of princes. So was Solon advanced by
Craesus, Demaratus by Philip, Calisthenes by Alexander, Plato by Dionysius, and
Seneca by Nero: But if Courtiers begin too despise knowledge, and thrust their
Philosophers out of the gates, all wisdom, al nurture, all good manners, al
government, all honor and honesty goes too wrack. Plato had not been one
hour out of Dionysius favor, but every one of his lessons was turned too a
daunsing trick, every Gentleman's Pen set a work with the praise of his
Mistress; and every Geometrical figure drawn in the botome of a Boule of
Wine. When such things happen, not only the court is defaced, by want of
discipline; the country deformed, by foul disorder; the learned discouraged,
for lack of countenance; good letters banished, by discontinuance; but the
Courtier, himself though his hair glister like the locks of Smerdia, A
Courtier without learnning.
though his eyes peerce the Marble wall, though his tongue be as soft as silk,
or as sweet as honey, though his personage have stolen away all that nature is
able too bestow, yet he is no better then a deep stream, bright in the
top, and black in the botome; A kings Idol, sound with out, and finely
gilded, hollow within, and filled with Lead; a great Canon, that gives
amonstrous crack and shootes but paper; a fair ship fraught with Balist, and
the shape of a man stuffed with straw.

Isocrates thought it as necessary for Gentlemen, Oration ad Demo^^cum.
to practice the good qualities of their parents, as too inherit their
lands; for Nobility, riches, quarteryng of Coats, and such like ornaments,
are lanternes unto our posterity, which neither suffer their virtues, nor
their vices to be hid.

The ancient house of Sylla, the noble Roman was almost decayed, and utterly
forgotten by the sloth of his progeny, till himself renewed it by learning and
virtue. Salust.
Curious knottes show well, when they re pounced, but a great deal better,
embrodered in silks; and both are best on a Ladies back. Costly stones shine
bravely, when they are cut, but brauer when they are set in Gold, and both are
most beautiful on a Princes finger. Learning has some grace in a mean
person, greater praise in a Noble mind, and both are most glorious in the
court. Therefore give me leave, Philotimo, too entreat thee as a servant, too
admonish thee as a friend, too command thee as Philosopher, that serving the
Duke of Ferara in his court, thy skill be as clear, as thy honor is bright, thy
manners as comely, as thy personage, thy virtues as noble as thy parentage, thy
life, as unspotted as thy blood. Oh how many great men have I read of in
histories, and seen in Italy, which having no knowledge in the course of the
heavens, or the power of GOD; in the weakness of man, or slipper hold of
prosperity, at the least smile of fortune, have swelled in pride, and forgot
themselves, as though she were never able too frown, or their floorishing
days could never change? Clitus, because he took three or four ships at
the Sea, called himself Neptune. Demetrius, for one good success in all his
affairs, termed him self Jupiter, sufferyng no foreign Peers too come to
him of Embassage, but holy interpreters to demand Oracles. Lysimachus,
because be invaded the borders of Thracia, and conquered a Moulehil, said he
touch Heaven with the poinct of his Lance, if he had stepped but one Inche
further, I believe he would have vaunted that he had let Jupiter blood in the
heel. Clearchus of Heraclia did bear a Thunderbolts, and called one of his
children by the name of Thunder: Dionysius forgetting the doctrine of Plato,
affirmed himself to be the son of Apollo; and Julius Caesar disfiguring
himself to pass secretly into Afric, when the wind was against him, and the
master (...) too return back, hid him go forwards, for he carried Caesar,
as though the name of an Emperor, the title of a King, or the shadow of a
Courtier, mauger the Seas, were sufficient to pass. But that Courtier that
co^sidereth, the Sun too arise in the East with a fiery garlande, and fall in
the West with Eclipse of his light, that learneth by the Oracle of Apollo, Dion.
to know himself, and acknowledge his maker in the same; shall easily find that
his state is uncertain, and stay himself better by the fruit of knowledge.

And it behooves a Courtier too be learned, Liberality in Court.
because he lives in the place that thirsts for skill: so should he be
liberal, because his God has blessed him with plenty: For moisture is not
given unto Springes, that it should remain still in the place where they
breed; but be conveyed by Conduites too sundry corners, to the watering of
every dryer soil, and the comfort of all that inhabit where. Plato thinks
that nature at ye first was delivered of two daughters, Natures two daughters.
Plenty, and Poverty, to this end, that the one needing might crave that she
lacked, the other abounding, supply all that wanted. Aristotle's appetitus ad
bonum is nothing but this, (...). 1.
that God has given a Paradise to all things in their kind, and naturally
ingraffed in them a desire, too seek it out. The Court is the treasure-house
of preferment.
And I persuade me that all power, all prefermentes, all offices, all the
riches of every country is locked up in the court as the fittest Treasury,
that every man by service should fetch his desert, and beg the thing there,
that he has need of. This ought the Courtiers of Ferara to consider, that
they have the keys of the Cheste to distribute, and we are borne poor too
fly unto them; that they are sweet Springes, we barren soyles, unable too
yield any fruit without their deaw; they, the heirs apparent to Plenty,
we, the offspring of Poverty; that we by the will of GOD, and the laws of
Nature, having recourse unto them for succoure, might with submission
acknowledge them our Lords, and our selves their vassailes: them our good
Patrons, and our selves their beademen: whereby they loving us, we honoring
them, they delighted in giving, we co^forced in taking, both in one might ever
agree.

I speak not this to maintain idle beggars or lazy Philosophers, but too
teach every man first to dig his own ground till he come to the Clay,
Plato.
then if he find not sufficient liquour, to request some friendship at his
neighbors well. After this sort when my self was pulled from Sienna, through
want of ability, having nothing after the death of my father to shore up my
studies, I wrote certain Rapsodia to a Courtier in Ferara, hoping to find
some favor with him, because it was told me, that he was learned, but I lost
my labor, and at his own request and my charges, daunsed attendaunce certain
days at the Court, without thanks. At the last remembering with my self, what
Antigonus said to a good scholar, with presented him a Pa^phlee in praise of
justice: Thou art unwise to give me a book of justice, when thou see me
delight in sacking of Cities, I began to surmise, that the sauce which I made,
was too sharp for his diet, and the herbs which I brought, too strong for his
nose. Therefore as closly as I coulo, I came to Venice, not once resorting,
Philotimo, unto thee, nor any man else which I know in Ferara, my hap was so
bad, and my heart so big. Courtiers were wont in old time to rejoice in these
Epithites. And were called (...), men bountiful, valiant, merciful, Plu.
and mighty. In so much that me seeing Archestratus in great poverty, write
much, and get nothing, told him that if he had lived in Alexanders time, for
every line in his book he would have given him a kingdom. Among all the
notable praises of Sylla, Salust.
I find it set down, that he was so liberal, that he always rather desired
to give, then to take, and if he had received a present of a friend, as a
pledge of goodwil, he thought it due de^^, til the value were returned with
advantage.

Peradventure the Courtiers of Ferara have learned of Tully, Courtiers apt
scholars to Tullies precepts
that to give any thing of their own, pulls somewhat away from the main
stake, and draws the spring of liberality dry; by which means bounty
stoppes the passage of liberality, like the Pelican, which is said, in
succouring her young to wound herself; and the Adder that gives life to her
brood, by her own death. For the more they let out and distribute abroad, the
less they have in their Coafers at home. Therefore practizing with Tullie, to
give that continually, which they give willingly, they put their hands in
their purses, and pull out nothing. Yet the same Cicero in the name of
Theophrastus, commendes Hospitality, Orat. pro Mar. Marcello.
thinking it very plausible in great men, to set their doors open to gay
guestes, to entertain foreign Princes very sumptuously, and reward them
richely, by which they confirm their own safety, increace the number of their
friends, and fill their Chestes higher with a privy gain. Following the
countriemans custom in this, which doungeth his ground, franckly casts his
seed in the furrows, to have it restored in harvest with Usury. This is it,
which Cicero says, we should give of our own to them that are fit. And what
are they, but such as are able to make us amends? wherein he neither regards
the nature of bounty, nor knows what belongs to a benefit. For he is not
liberal that gives to take, Aristotle.
because liberality consists in giving much, and receiving little: neither
may that rightly be termed a benefit, Lactantius.
which at any time is returned again. Thus Cicero measuring a Courteris
liberality by private commodity, like a blind Philosopher gropes at high
noone, A strange inchauntment.
and treads awry. I have read of an herb which is called Eryngium, and some
writers affirm, that if any Goat chance to take up a leaf of the same in
her mouth, presently her self and all the whole heard, as they were
inchaunted, does stand still, not moving one foot either forward or backwarde,
till the Heardman himself come and pull it away. And I think that some
doting Philosopher which led the Dance, has caught this Eryngium between
his teeth and bewitched the whole rabble of them that followed; with whom
Tullie himself stands in a trance, not knowing which way to turn him in
moral virtues. For sometime he exhorts us too have greater regard to our
gain than our honor, to a glosing bounty, then a true liberality. And
sometime again he teaches us all too be single hearted, which is for our
honor, not to pretend one thing and perform an other, which is hypocriste.
Therefore let us bring out the truth as a skillful heardman to tear this
enchaunted Herb from his mouth.

Lactantius deuideth the office of justice into two parts, Lib. 6. de vero
(...). cap. 10.
the one joined with God which is religion; the other linked to man, and that
is courtesy. The first I will handle when I shall see occasion; the last
falls so full into my hands, and so sit for my purpose, that it may not be
rashely ouerskipped. For GOD which has given to brute beasts both strength and
weapons too defend themselves, bard them of reason; Man borne to do good.
but sending man naked and weak into the world, he lightened his mind with
the Lamp of knowledge, planting such inward remorse in his heart, that
seeing the image of himself in another, acknowledging presently his own
weakness, and deeply considering that we have all one maker, GOD; one
Father Adam; one Nurse, the earth; he should love him unfeignedly, embrace him
with courtesy, frankely streatch out his hand to succeour him, and set foot
by foot unto death to defend him. He that performs not this which Nature
exacteth, and duty challenges, is rather too be held for a beast, then a
man; because he shows not the love of the heart, the affect of the mind,
the touch of conscience, the force of piety, the fruit of that courtesy
which GOD has engrassed only in man. Therefore Tullie flatly reprooueth
himself, when he says that Man obeying but Nature, can never be
hurtefull unto man. But too see another oppressed, and not too succor him, is
too hurt him; too perceive him in need, and not too geeue him relief, is too
deny it him; to find him in danger, and not to save him, is to kill him.

Aristotle and all Philosophers ever dreamed, Man's society according to
Philosophers.
that men at the first, raunging the woods for their food, as beasts for a
pray, having neither speech nor conference, nor company together, but
clothing their bodies with the leaves of Trees; couching their heads in Caves
of the Earth; perceiving their neighbors torn many times and devoured with
beasts; they which escaped the danger ran unto other, craving succor by
signs. Thus gathered together, they proffered to speak, invented names for
every thing, and so grew to society. Yet seeing themselves, although they
were many, unable to withstand the assault of devouring beasts, because they
were naked, they consulted together too build them up walls, to inuiron
themselves with greater surety; and to rest in the night, with more
security. Othersome are persuaded that it was not the cruelty of beasts, nor
the peril of their lives, nor the death of their fellows, nor the fear of
themselves, that drew them together: but the hate of that solitary life, and
desire of company; the lyking, that each one conceived of the other, the love
and friendship, that passed betwixt them, the want of ability and the will to
profit: the likeness of Sex, and the care to multiply: joined hands and
hearts in perpetual amity. Definition of Courtesy.
If we be borne to love, to like, and to help one an other, L^net. 6. de
cu^tu. cap. 11.
it is our duty too know one an other, and embrace with courtesy: For
Courtesy is the friendly affection which we bear to a man, because he is that
which we are. In that this affection is friendely, it must not be grounded on
hope of game, lest it prove rather a liefcope of commodity, then a knotte of
amity. True Love.
So, many times we love brute beasts, making much of the Ox, for his hide;
the Weather, for his fell, both for the profit of their carcass: But true
love is painted naked, because it should have nothing to give, nor so much as a
pocket to receive. In that this affection is borne to another, because he is
that which we are, that is, a man; how bye so ever we look, in the Court,
or how much soever we have in wealth, we ought too confess that we may be
that which an other is, that is, poor.

Therefore it behooves us too do that to other in need, which we wish too be
done to our selves in necessity. Who is it which sticking in the mire would
not call for help? living in poverty, would not seek relief? in the paws
of the Lion, would not cry for delivery? By this you may see, that he which
denies succor to other, refuses hereafter to be comforted; which helps not
his brother in misery, thinks he shall never have need himself. If the
Courtiers of Ferara were not of this mind, they would not show themselves
Faulkeners in holding so fast. The old Nosce teipsum is good for them, Let
them learn in time to know themselves. Many great Princes have flourished a
while, and withered away as they had not been; many high personages have in the
end left their seat and lepte at the cushion, lost their bags, and looked
for the stringes. Priamus for all his happiness in his youth, saw his Cositrie
sacked with graie hears, and his children murdered before his face. All the
riches of Craesus were the Persians pray. Antigonus the great king of the Jews
was deposed by Antony, made Captive at Rome, and scourged with rods. Cyrus
the Conquedor was once in his days glad of a cup of water. Annibal that ran
like a woolfe over all Italy, was hunted to death in his own Country. Dion.
Crassus which was so rich, that he thought him a beggar that was not able
with his own revenues yearly too maintain a whole army of fighting men, was
ouerthrown by the Parthians at the last, who to satisfy his greedy desire of
wealth, powered plenty of moulten gold down his throat. Marius a mean man by
virtue became a Consul in Rome, and after his pomp was driven by Sylla too
hide his beade in a Marishe among flagges. I could tell thee, Philotimo, how
Decebal us turned the great river Sargesia an other way, and digging a deep
hole in the gulf, cast in his treasure, covered it strangely with huge
Stones, returned the Stream too his course again, and killed the workmen, to
keep it secret, yet his own friend Bicilis bewrayed it to the Romans, who
overcame him in fight, spoiled him of al, and fisht out his money by the same
policy that himself had buried it. But it is not my drifte to ouercharge thy
memory with many histories. Consider with thy self that being a noble
gentleman and a Courtier, thou art as much subject too a foil, as greater
than thy self have been before thee. When the Kings fisher lays her eggs,
the seaes are calm till they be hatched, when gallants breed in Princes
courts, Fortune smiles til they be hartened; but as soon as the weather begins
to bluster, the highest mast, is first rent, the largest sails are quickliest
torn; the greatest mark is soonest hit; and the Fishers nest is borne away.
Remember, Philotimo, thou art a man having with us the same maker, same Father,
same Nurse, and receiving of Nature, a soft heart to be taynted with pity;
of Fortune, a full Purse, to distribute too such as stand in need; if thou
perform it not, thou show thy self as unworthy too be cured when thou
art hurt, as thou are unwilling to bind up thy brothers wounds. Therefore
shake of that Iewishe liberality of Cicero, which is plain Usury, tread the
Precept of Plautus under thy feet, which would not have thee relieve the
miserable, because thy benefit is lost, and prolongeth their life, to a
farther wretchedness; think with thy self that thou may fall, and succor
them that are down already; Do not for get that thou may be captive, and
help to redeem the thrall from bondage; if thou judge that thou may be
slain in field, bury the carcasses of thy fooes; though thou see thy
benefits perish here, thou shall find them again in an other world. The
hand of the poor is the alms box of Christ. Look whatsoever thou geuest to
them, shall be registered for thee in the book of Life, and deeply ingraued in
the gates of heaven.

I know, Philotimo, that where much blood is drawn, the body is pale; where
many leap over, the hedge is broken; where diverse do suck, the Nurse is dry;
where every man draws, the water is troubled; where sundry Flies bite, the
gaul is great; where every hand fleceth, the sheep go naked; and where al men
that list to beg are rewarded, the treasure of a Monarch is soneconsumed. Many
drones grating on Courtiers purses, eat up the honey from such as deserve it.
But if their honors would follow the examples of Cyrus and Archelaus, such as
gape still for Gudgeons would soon be choked. Cyrus living in the Court of
Cyarexes, ^^^phon.
and having a great banquet provided for him, distributed it too those that had
taught him somewhat, either to ride or to darte, or some such like quality,
but Sacas the Cuphearers share was least, because the nice gentleman was good
for nothing, but to fill Wine with two fingers into the Kings Bowl.
Archelaus perceiving an old soker iogge him on the elbowe, and pull him by the
fleeue as he sat at Supper, requesting to have a cup of Gold; caused it
straight to be given too Euripides: and turning his face to the bold beggar,
told him, that he was worthy to crave it, but Euripides to have it. Oh that
our Courtiers of Ferara wholde remember this, and when such unprofitable
Leaches suck at their flesh, bestow the thing which they beg upon the
learned. Otherwise for my part (though I be an ynche and a half, behind the
best, yet an ace, at the least, before the worst,) I shall shortly be driven
too stop bottelles with my books, and buy me a wallet.

The Romans because they had received some hurt by fire, thought it good to
hold a candle before the Devil, and give unto Vulcan the honor of a god, but
shut him out of the City. And trust me if I thrive no better by my simple
travel than I have done yet, I will reverence the Muses as long as I live,
but banish then my study for fear of afterclaps.

Cleanthes lived in such a miserable time, Poor Philosophers.
that he was glad to turn his Philosophers Gown too a Millers coat, and
grind for his living; Mycillus as little regarded as he, learned of his wife
too beat Wool; Diogenes as beggarly as either of both, A strange kind of
begging.
iumpte at a Cruste, and fed upon Rotes; And seeing himself obtain so
little when he requested, accustomed too crave such things as he needed, of
deaf Images, that knowing them, not to understand his necessity, through want
of hearing; nor to be moved to pity, for lack of humanity, the repulse that
he took, might grieve him the less. Hard bones steeped a time in Ashes and
Vinegar may be easily cut with a VVeauers woofe; Iuory is softened with barley
Growte; somekinde of water eats into steel, but it was never my fortune with
any confection to perce the heart of a stony Courtier. Thucidides thinks it no
shame for any man to confess his need, but they (I mean those of Ferara,
whom I have tried, and speak it too thee, Philotimo, whom I trust,) if
Philosophers catch them by the Elbow, say, they presume; if they show them
their poverty, judge the^ impudent; and turn them of with some pretty delays,
from morning to evening, from early to late, from childhood to manhood, from
manhood, to middle age, from middle age to dotage, from dotage too death,
sending them post, from Ferara too Florence, from Velona to Venice, from
Caraia to China, from the middle of the earth, too the man in the Moon. Let
Gentlemen come to seek recompense, whose ancestors have wasted their lands,
and lost their lives in the Princes quarrel; they say with Antigonus that it is
their fashion to reward men for that which they do them selves: Let a scholar
approach and demand a penny, they answer, that a courtier disdaineth to give
so little; if he ask a pound, Philosophers ought not to take so much: thus
neither giving much to the learned, for hindering their study; nor little, for
shaming of themselves; nor rewarding their Soldiers, when they are dead; nor
regarding their children, in whom they live; Tully has taught them to lock
up their Chest, vt id semper dent, quod libenter dant; which is indeed,
neither one thing nor other. Wherein I might say that the very Heathens have
gone beyond them, which guided only by moral verrue, thought it their
duties to spend all their time in doing good.

In the court of Persia they had a crier every morning to call them up, and
warn them to look very diligently unto that which with Mesoromasdes gave them
in charge; And what was that, but to honor their God, to govern their country
with good Jaws, to keep of the enemy from invasion, and to reward every man
for his virtue? The three Graces.
The Court ought to be the palace of the three graces: the first is called
Aglaia, of her brightness, or beauty, and that is Honor: The second
Euphrosyne, of her modesty or wisdom, and that is Learning; the Third
Thalia, of gentle entreatie, which is the very Goddnesse of courteous
entertainment. And Seneca brings the^ in daunsing a round, Lib. de
benefitiis. 1.
hand in hand, with smiling faces, that they might ever be giving with a
cheerful cou^tena^ce. Whereby you may gather how beautiful a thing it is in
Courtiers, to be liberal, which is one of the pillars of their glory. For
their nobility comes of their progeny, their wealth is the harvest of Fortunes
flattery, their victories are the fruits of their Soldiers valiancie: The
first, may quickly be blotted with vice, the next, may wither as fast with
adversity; the last, is attributed too more then themselves; and all are
subject to sudden change. But the praise of a benefit, the report of
courtesy, the glory that shines in the works of mercy, is all their own,
not left them by their ancestors, nor lent them by fortune, nor common to
other, still sounding their renown with a golden Trumpet, building them up such
Trophies, such Triumphs, such Idols, such Momuments, as neither wind shall
shake, nor wether beat, nor water rot, nor fire consume, nor Foes deface, nor
force diminish, nor clouds darken, nor time it self shall be able to devour.

I have set you down two of those points, Philotimo, which I ever wished to
be in a Courtier, Lerning and Liberality: Flatterers too be driven from Court.
The next is, to beware of Flatterers. For they with Polypus, with Proteus, with
Chamelions alter themselves into many shapes, many shadows, many colors.
Sometime they make themselves glasses of your conditions. Alcibiades at Athens
did hunt and hawk, and behave himself pleasantly in company: At Lacedaemo^ he
shaued his head, put on the robs of a scholar, and lived solitary: In Thracia
he bore up his sword like a soldier, in Tisapherne he lived like a wanton
Lover, ever cutting his cloth too the fashion of them with whom he was
conuersaunte.

But Plato was the same man in the Court, that he was in the University; al
one with Dion and Dionysius. The flatterers of Alexander carried their heads in
their bosom, because he went stouping; of Dionysius, made them selves blind,
when his sight was gone; of Plato, spread out their shoulders, because his were
broad; of Aristotle, tript in their tongues, because he stammered. The cunning
fouler, is clothed in feathers; the crafty raunger, in Deares skins; the
Angler, shadoweth himself with a Rock; the flatterer ducks in a Friars Weed,
for his own advantage. If thy nose be flat, they say thou art lovely; if it be
hooked, the^ art thou kingly; if thou be black, they affirm thou art manly; if
thou be fair, then art thou heavenly; if thou be deformed, they make thee
beautiful; if crooked, straight; if feeble, strong; if little, great; if
dwarfish, monstrons; if thou be but a hoppe on my Chumbe, as high as three
hersloues, or stand on a Moulehill to look into a mustarde pot, they call thee
a giant. When thou runnest, thou art Pegasus; when thou wrestlest, thou art
Hercules; when thou fightest, thou art Mars; when thou speak, thou art
Mercury; when thou singest, thou art Apollo; when thou frownest, thou art
Saturn; when thou chidest, Jupiter himself begins to thunder. The Sicilians
ouerturned their own state, when the^ soothed up Dionysius cruelty, by the
name of justice; the Aegiptians corrupted their common wealth when they called
Ptolomees faint heart the fear of gods. The Romans gelded the good government
of their country, when they flattered Antonius, turning his quaffing to
myrthe, and his lust to friendship. When Caesar triumphed in other men's blood,
his Parasites said, he was half a god. When Caligula spoke like a fool in the
Senate, Domitius gave him the prize of eloquence, and Vitellius affirmed that
he had laie^ with the Moon. Anaxarchus perceiving that Alexander for murdering
of Clitus, began to be troubled in his conscience, told him straight, that he
had done well, because a king is the image of God, and whatsoever God does,
proceeds of Justice. When Tiberius the Emperor came to the Senate, a
sycophant presently started up and accused him there, for having a care unto
his duty; O Caesar, said he, though heretofore none durst tell you your fault,
I am forced at this time to show it my self; you regard not your self, you
weary your mind with many cares, and wear your body with infinite labors,
never resting by day, nor sleeping by night for our sakes. These kind of
people in short time, are able to make great men forget them selves. Therefore
it shall be good for Courtiers to sif^e them thoroughly, to distinguishe them
cunningly, and last of all willingly, to shake them off.

Maximus Tyrius, blaseth their Properties in three points: In Use, in End, in
Affect of the mind: In Use, they are altogether unprofitable, and like the
Ape, which being unable to keep the house as a dog; to draw, as the Ox;
to carry, as the Horse; is driven by gesture to move delight: As by fetching a
friske or two over the chain, or imitating that which they see in us, to
procure laughter. Such a fellow was Antiphon, whom Dionysius slew; and
Timagines, whom Caesar banished the Court; For neither of them both, applied
their mind to give counsel, but behaved them selves like common Iesters,
seeking only to make those Princes merry. Unskillful Painters, when they
cannot express the beauty of things, botche it out with wrinckles and wartes,
and store of freckles: And flatterers, when they cannot perform the office of
a freende, huddle it up with ridiculous gesture. The End of their study is to
profit them selves: No vermin breed, where they find no warmth; no Vultures
stoop, where they smell no pray; no flies swarm, where they see no flesh; no
Pilgrim creepes, where there is no cross; no Parasite lurkes, where he
finds no gain. In Affect of the mind, they are wonderful hypocrites, having
a continual co^bat, and a pitched feeld betwixt their words and their
thoughts, their tongues and their hearts, many times exercising the wrastlers,
craft, who boweth his body to catch other on the hip; or the Fencers quality,
which counterfeites a kind of lying open, to take his adversary at more
advantage. Such, affirm all those vices which they see in other, to be in
them selves, and like unto them that tame wild beasts, frame their behavior
to every thing, that they perceive them do, til by little and little they bring
them close to their own bente. Mardonius the Captain, flattered Xerxes so
long, that he caused all Asia to take armor, covered the seas with abundance
of ships, by which the king took a very great overthrow, was driven by
flight to save him self, and the Sycophant was one of the first that was
slain, they which give so much credit to flatterers, They which ^^edite
flatterers are compared to brazen pottes.
make them selves no better than brazen pottes, be they never so large of
moulde, or weighty of metal, they are easily borne about by the ears. It were
better for thee, Philotimo, in thy courting, to ride a rough Colte without a
bridle, than sweet lips with a soft saddle: the one, if thou sit not fast,
will not spare to cast thee, but teach thee the better to look to thy self:
the other, whatsoever thou do will never molest thee, but bloster thee up in
thine own folly. Alexander was angry with Crisson, for giving him leave to
outrunne him in course. One told Menedemus, that he was highly commended by
Alexinus; But Menedemus answered, that he did ever dispraise Alexinus.
Antist^^^us Hercules, charged his sons, not to believe such, as they saw^ too
busy in lifting them up. I will not deny, that Virtue by praise is deeper
rooted, but flatterers come as little at virtue as they can. The mind is
divided into two parts; the one is partaker of reason, which enclineth to
virtue, and leanes to wisdom, the other is ^ue fellow unto Sense, which
cleaues unto vice, and loves to be rickled. This part is evermore scratcht by
flatterers, who stand with their hands full of fuel, to increase our fire,
and are ready with their mouth to blow the coals: they creep so far into
your bosom by privy en^^^^hing, that I may compare the^ to queasie meats; if
you keep them in your stomach, they make you surfeite; if you cast them up,
they streine every string of the heart at departure. Therefore resist them
Philotimo, at the first, and if you perceive them to begin with commendation
of your qualities to currie favor, tell them with Pindarus, that thou have
already rewarded their travel, because thy life does not make them liars.

The last and chiefest thing, Religion in Court.
which I judge to be necessary in Courtiers, is religion, which I showed thee
by Lactantius, to be the first thing that is required in the office of Justice:
And Justice is the pillar of Princes Courts. Com. in Eth. li. 3. cap. 13.
But Foxius agreeing with Aristotle, affirms Religion to be the mother of
Justice, and all other virtues: So that neither true justice may stand without
religion, nor religion without justice. The name which the Greeks have given
to religion, (...)
shows it to be the right worship of God: If this be corrupted, Justice
perishes; And if Justice shrink, this goes to the wall. Therefore, al
Philosophers going about too decipher a good common wealth, begin with
religion, acknowledging a divine nature chiefly to be worshipped. Alexander
made no wars against strangers for the riches of India, ye dainties of
Media, the wine of Chalidon, or the fishes of Hyrcanie; but to bring al nations
to the obedience of his laws, and worship of his Gods. Ptolomaeus
Philadelphus, a learned Prince, thought Religion so necessary in his Court and
country, that he entertained the seventy Interpreters with great courtesy,
which were sent unto him from Eleazar the high priest, and after they had
instructed him seventy days, he returned them back with rich rewards. But
because these were Heathens, which never came nere the mark, though they
desired to cleave the pin. I will go more roundly to work, and bring God
himself to plead his own cause.

Princes are the Images of God, and are called gods in sundry places of ye
scriptures, yt they might execute his will upon the earth. Al honor, all power,
al pessessio^, all authority, is ye gift of God, it is his work that Princes
rule, and their courts flourish. Therefore David wills the^ al to kiss the
begotten son of God, (...).
which is, to embrace religion and throw them selves down at the feet of
Christ. It is impossible, for the hen to forsake her chicken, or the mother,
the child of her own womb: yet if the one or the other be so unnatural too
leave their own, Esaias. 49.
God will never forget his. In token whereof he has promised by the mouth of
his prophet, to make princes the fathers of his Church, and their courts, the
very nurceries of religion. Paul exhorting Timothe to pray for kings and
great men, 1. Tim. 2.
that we may live quietly and godly under them, seems by those words to
attribute the patronage of the Gospel to the Court. If God do shine brightest
in his ministers, Ministers.
whose tongues are the trumpettes of his will; to tread down them,
dishonoreth him; to stop their mouths, eclipseth his glory; to shoulder
them out, displaceth him; to pinche them, nippeth him; to strike them, wounds
him; to rail at them, reuileth him: All which inconveniences quickly grow,
where the Courtier like a good Ajax, does not hold out his buckler, Iud. vlt.
to cover Ulysses. Joshua calling the rulers of Israel together before his
death, charge them, because the Lord has given them lands, which they never
purchased; Cities, which they never built, Vineyardes, which they never
planted; to serve him in holiness and truth, which is religion. And when they
had confessed the Lord to be their God, vowing obedience unto him, he
presently registered their promise in the book of God, and erected a dumb
stone for a witness of their belief, to cry vengeance against them, if they
slipped the collar. Doutles the bringing up of Joshua with Moses, Iosu. 1.
was a good mean to make him a captain to Gods people, whose word was
appointed to be his direction. If courtiers borowe this clue, of a godly
Theseus, to match with Chimaera and bear up their swords with Joshua in the
Lords quarrel, Jordan shall dry for their armies to pass, their spies shall
be harbored in the midst of Jericho, the Sun shall stop to give them
victory, and all shall prosper that they take in hand. Because the weapons of
ministers are prayers and tears, and the Church has no authority to compel,
it is the duty of Princes by good laws and statutes to establish religion,
and force every man to live in order. Where this is foreslewed, the wrath of
God is kindled against the Court, and his plague lights on the whole
country. Solomon had no sooner forgotten God, and fallen to Idolatry, but God
swore that he would tear the crown from his head, disherite his son, and
deliver his kingdom to a stranger. Run through the scriptures, you shall
find them very sharply scourged, which went about to supresse Religion.
Jeroboam stretches out his hand against the Prophet, and it withers. Ahab
robbed God of his honor, empriprisoned his messengers, and was slain with an
arrowe; Azahia, for flying to strange gods is threatened death, and his
soldiers consumed with sier from heaven; Herod, forgetting religion and
dishonouring God, is eaten with worms. I have often wondered with my self,
Philotimo, knowing Princes to be placed in their chair by God, how they dare
suffer any wickedness, in the Court, which represents the throne of his
heavenly Majesty: how they can possibly blaspheme with that tongue which is
given the^ to honor him, how they presume with that hand to murder his
shepherds, which they have received to fight for religion? In that we have
abundance of worldly blessings, we are earthly; in that we frame our selves to
the worship of God, we are made heavenly. The eyes of brute beasts are
turned down to the earth, to seek nothing but meat for their bellies: The
countenance of man is lifted to heaven, to behold the glory of God in his
works, which has made al things for us; us, for him self, that we might
acknowledge his goodness in the same, and honor him for it all the days of our
life. If we do not this, we spend our time in beholding the earth, we seek
nothing else but to garnish our bodies, or pamper our flesh, which makes us
like unto savage beasts. Then what is the glory of a Courtier without
religion? What is his government without godliness?

If thou will prove a good Courtier, Philotimo, depart from Ferara, the pit of
Ignorance: the storehouse of greedines; the palace of Flatterers; the slewes of
Idolatry, and travel to England, where thou shall find a country, so
governed with good laws; a people, so instructed in the fear of God; a
church, so reformed in religion; a Court, so learned, so liberal, so virtuous,
so godly, a Debora, so victorious over Sisara, so thankful to God, so
dreadful to the wicked, so beloved of the good, so just in judgment, so many
years quiet, that thou will dout whether thou should think her Majesty
fortunate, in obedient subjects, or pronounce the whole land to be blessed,
for so good a prince. By this little shadow of a courtier, which, as time will
serve, I have roughly drawn, cunning workmen may gather the breadth of his
body. You may see by this, that he ought to be learned, because it is
necessary for them to know many things, which govern many, and to bridle
them selves when they sit so high, the one confirmed, by the examples of
Alexander, of Darius, of Agamemnons eyes and head, of Craesus, of Philip, of
Dionysius, and all those which received Philosophers into the court to be
instructed by them: The other laid open in Clitus, Lysimachus, Clearchus, and
Caesar, which traveled to fight for renown in other countries, but never
sailed into them selves, to boult out the power that God has over them, and to
confess their own weakness which stand at his check. To be liberal: by the
comparison of a spring, the end of wealth, the daughters of nature, the
doctrine of Plato, the society of man, the need that themselves may have ere
they die, as Craesus, Cyrus, Antigonus, Crassus, the manner of Cyrus and
Archelaus, the day peale of the Persians, the property of the Graces, and the
glory of bounty passing nobility of birth, honor in Court, riches of
Fortune, or conquest in field. To banishe all Flatterers for their apishe
imitation, their unprofitable friendship, their study of gain, and their
hypocrisy. Last of all to seek the aduau^cement of religion, by the duty of
a prince, by the examples of Alexander and Ptolome, by the image of God, the
footesteps of Joshua, the authority of scriptures, and the happiness of England,
which enforteth me here through want of skill in describing the beauty of that
Court, to shut up my lips: as the banquished painter, who finding him self
unable lively to set out the sorrows of Niobe, was driven to wrappe up her head
in a cloud.

Truly said Ieraldy, In my simple judgment, you have showed your self a
very good workman. Alexanders counterfeite.
For Alexander desired to have his picture cut in brass, and wrought in such
metal by none but Lysippus, because none but he, did labor to express his
Lio^s looks; others spoiling him quite of the shape of a soldier, blased the
rolling of his eyes, and his amorous gesture. Diverse have painted the Courtier
in smoothe speech, witty replies, comely behavior, excellent daunsing, which
are like to the wanton gloses of Alexander, but thou have cast his Idol with
perfecter metal, in a good mould, and carved him out the face of a man. And
Man of an old Poet is called (...), Man, according to old Poets and
Philosophers.
which signifies brightness, according to your Etymology of one of the Graces:
Some Philosophers thought the substance of the mind to be a light, because it
is fearful in the night, it is troubled with darkness, it shunnes it as a foe,
and is comforted again when the day peepes. Learning is often compared to
light; Ignorance contrary, likened to darkness; In so much that when our
Readers have opened to us, the thing that we doubted, we say that they have
given us a great light; when any thing passes our capacity, we say, it is
intricate, dark, and obscure. Thus if a Man be light, his mind light,
learning light, and if it be necessary, that Simile semper appetat simile,
like rejoice evermore in his like, what can be more natural than the brightest
minds, to borrowe most light? the greatest Courtiers, to prove best Clerks?
Thou have rightly required them to be liberal, because the bounty of the
Courts is the Sunneshine of knowledge, without which Philosophers wyther away.
Thou desire the^ farther to aba^don flatterers, which like unto moothes eat
such holes in their garments, as cannot be seen. till the nappe of their cloth
be worn away. Last of all, thou think it necessary next unto God, for
Courtiers with authority in statutes and armor in field to maintain the
liberty of religion, confirming thy purpose by holy scriptures, wherein thou
show the practice of a good Captain, which furnishes the rerewarde with his
best soldiers, to renew the fight, when the first retire, and knitte up the
skirmishe with a canuazado. What is so common in this world, Orat. pro. Roscio
Amerino.
as breath to the living? graves to the dead? Sea to the Sayler? Shore to his
wrack? Then what sharper punishment than this could the Romans devise for such
as had wilfully murdered their parents, to enclose them quick in a lethern
sack, and cast them into the River Tiber? So they live, while they may, that
they draw no comfortable spirit from the heavens; so they die, that the earth
disdaineth to cover their carcass; so they floate, that they touch no water; so
at last they are driven by tide to the shore, that they are not suffered to
rest on the sand, but are robbed of all these benefits at once. And what is
so necessary in the Court, as learning to government? regard too friendship?
Wealth too Nobility? Religion too authority? Then tell me, Philotimo, what
greater plague can be powered on Courtiers, for killing their parents, by
despising their laws, and loathing their Precepts, then so too rule when they
list, that they borrowe no advice from the top of knowledge? so too bury
themselves in the depths of Security, that never a true friend may come at
their Coffin? so to swim in abundaunce, that they feel no store? and in the
end so strangely to strike with the Swoorde, that it never be grounded on the
word of GOD? but to be spoiled of all these ornaments at once? The first
corrupted with ignorance, the other with flattery, the next with greediness,
the last with the want of the true woorshippe of GOD. These reasons enforce me
too agree with you, Phialo, but me thinks Sir Philotimo stands in a Trance,
as though he were blasted with change of weather.

Philotimo smyling told him again that he was not blasted, for he never
knew Philaoes breath too be so stormy, but was rather amazed at his craft,
which according to his own precepts in the Method of rebuking, could touch
him so near and draw no blood. ^eery beating
Aristotle says that the Tyrrhaeni, when their servants offended, accustomed
to beat them to the sound of Instruments, that the pleasure of the one might
help too mitigate the pain of the other.

And Phialo, quoth he, has whypped me so pleasantly, that I am sorry my
punishmente was no longer. Whereat all three laughed heartily, and perceiving
Dinner brought in too break of their talk, they fell too their victualles.

After they had dyned, Ieraldi accompanied the two Gentlemen into the City,
too show Philotimo, the Galleys that were then newly rigged, and launched,
ready too encounter the Turk. Thus taking their Gundolet, they passed for
pleasure too and fro the streets where with wonderful content Philotimo
beheld the bravery of the City, so long with his eyes, that Fancy slypt down
in too the Corners of his heart. For at a glimse he espied such a Sun
aloft, as dazeled his eyes with the blaze of her light.

Therefore pulling his hat somewhat over his forehead endeavoring closely to
steal a look, he began too turn his head at one side, and roll up his eyes
too the Window again.

Ieraldi quickly perceiving the bente of his Bow, and notying the Level,
descried his mark, geuyng privy advertisement of the same too Phialo. Both of
them cunningly dissembled the matter for a while, and were very well pleased
too see the Hawk fly; wherein I marvel, whether was greater, the delight of
them that sprung such a Partridge without Spaniels; or the danger of him that
soared so high with wings of wexe.

At the last Ieraldi seeing his feathers to scortch so fast, that the smoke
arose, cast out the lure to make him stoop. And catching Philotimo by the
sleeue, asked him, how the manner of their building pleased his eye? So well,
quoth Philotimo, that in my opinion the cunningest workmen in Italy may trusse
up their tools, and though they think well of their painted sheathes, be
glad too come hither for a pattern. Were this City the Town of Ephesus, I
would judge yonder Palace, for the beauty and brightness of the same, to
be the chief Temple of Diana.

I cannot blame you, said Phialo, you have taken the pattern of such a frame,
as Art may imitate, but never be able to express. Therefore I pray you
remember the speech your self used to me concerning this place, take heed
that to prove your words true, you make not your self an open President.
Venus the Goddess of this City was bredde in the Sea, and beats a Froth,
close up your eyes, and gaze no more, you know not what trouble such Comets
threaten.

Oh sir, answered Philotimo, Himeraeus the Poet did write against Helen, but at
last he was glad too recant his sayings. Anacreon for one discourtesie to
Cleobulus in his childhood, requited him with a thousand good words when he
grew too age. How much is Venus fairer then Helen? comelier then Cleobulus?
whose goddeship if rashly I have blasphemed, neither the Presents of Oracles,
nor ye treasure of Ganges, nor the horses of Troy, nor the Virgins of Lesbia,
nor the revenues of my land, nor the iewelles of my Chest, nor the offering of
my blood, but only the tongue that has wounded her credit, can appease her
anger. Therefore since I have not subscribed, I will revoke, ex nudo pacto non
oritur actio, bare words are no lawful bargains.

Dissemble not with your friends, quoth Ieraldi, Poetical fictions will not
beat out your folly, nor the querkes of the law excuse such Apostasy before
god. Signiora Polyphile, whom you beheld, is daughter unto a dear friend of
mine, if her behavior were answerable to her beauty, or her life to her face;
she might be a Paragon for a greater person. She is properly learned, she has
a smoothe tongue, and she is very subtle in disputation. I have often assayed
too win her from loosnesse of living, and save her soul: But I find her so
fraught with Philosophy, and full of shifts, that I carry away the woorste
end of the staff. Therefore let me crave your co^panyes aagaine too morrow, I
will send for her home to my-house too dinner, and try hom she is able to match
with you, Phialo. I like your weapons and order of fight so well, that I have
no doubt you will overcome.

Certes, said he, I was never Leontinus Gorgias scholar, too dispute any
question on the sudden, yet if I may have the truth on my side, little study
shall serve me too wrestle with women. Thus bringing Ieraldi back to his house
with many great thanks for their entertainment, they took their leave till,
the next day.

What either Ieraldi did in their absence or they when they were returned too
their lodging, is the least part of my meaning too touch, because I have
taken this only upon me, too show the fruit of Phialoes conference among his
friends.

The third book, the defense of the Curtezan, and her overthrow.
WHEN the day was come, according too their promise, Philotimo and Phialo want
to the house of Ieraldi at dinner time, where they found the gentlewoman, and
him in sober talk, Ieraldi entertained them friendly, and requested Signiora
Polyphile to do the like, who behaved her self so demurely in presence, that
they could not judge her counterfatte, by stamp, or by sound. Therefore
Philotimo, boldly stepte somewhat nigher and like a young Courtier, ministered
talk on so small acquaintance, as far as he might, with honor and modesty.

But Phialo keeping himself aloof, as one that had taken a Crow too pull,
stood at one side, till Ieraldi had placed them all at the Table. During the
time of the Dinner, Philotimo dypt not his finger so often in the dishe as he
fastened his eyes upon Polyphile. Ieraldi perceiving the gentleman come to his
bias, told her, that Philotimo was deeply bound unto her, whose countenance
seemed too feed him better than any of those dishes that were brought too the
table. To whom the Gentlewoma^ with blushing cheeks and a soft speech replied
thus. Nutriens simile nutrito.
You know, Sir Ieraldi, that Philosophers are always of this opinion, that the
thing which nourishes, must ever be like unto that which is nourished; and the
nourished thing, to the nourisher. Therefore the Chameleon which lives by
air, has nothing within but lights and loungs. Then if this Gentlema^s
stomach agree better with my face, then with your cheer, my sauce than your
^reate, there must needs be a Sympathy, between his lyking and my looks.
And what are the looks of a woman, but shadows? on which if this Gentleman
feed so fast, I shall take him henceforth for a shape without substance.

It were strange, said Philotimo, too hear shadows speak, or to see shapes
without substance move of them selves. But since you have showed your self a
philosopher, give me leave by Philosophy to make you an answer. Strabo and
Pli.
Some writers hold this opinion, that there lies a kind of people at the
river Ganges, which are called (...), men without mouths; These are nourished
with the savor of flowers. Lacrtius.
Democritus for sorrow of his sisters mishap, going about too famish
himself, was relieved three days with the smell of new bread. Oribasius
protests that he knew a Philosopher in his time, which lived a while by the
sent of honey, Cureus.
And Melanctho^ is said to affirm that a Lecher in Germany, condemned too
pine unto death for his offense, was sustained a long time in prison, with the
smoke of broiled meats, to prolong his days in greater misery. Sundry
Philosophers take peper in the nose and fall out with Aristotle, for standing so
stifely in his own conceit, that he will not have men to be nourishe with
odoures. For Hippocrates and Galen boldly pronounce, Aphoris.
that the patient consumed is soonest restored again by savors. What force
there is in shadows, you may perceive by those that gaze upon excellent
pictures so long that they have no mind to their vitailes, but are filled with
delight:: by reading fine books we forget our selves and let go our commons.
When we are busied in pleasant pastimes, the night ouertakes us, we know not
how; then judge me no more to be but a show, because I have dived so well with
your shadow, which is beter to me then the savor of flowers, the smell of new
bread, the sent of sweet honey, the smoke of roast meat, the view of fair
pictures, the books of my study, or the pleasure of sportes. Hippocrates
dividing the body men three parts, the first gross and earthly, our bones and
flesh; the second liquide and watrie, our blood and humors; the third,
subtle and ayrie, which is our spirits; affirms the last too be maintained
by savors. And it shall be sufficient for me to say, that these dishes before
us, do nourish my body, but too look upon you, quickens my spirits, and
(...) my mind. If this will not serve to persuade you that I am somewhat more
than a shape; try when you please, you shall find me a substance.

At this Polyphile began to smile, Ieraldi and Phialo laughed in their sleeves
till their hearts tickled. At last every thing being taken away. Philotimo
renewed his talk again, and told them, that if they judged him to be rebuked
for his amorous gloating, they were al to blame, which, quoth he, I will show
you as well as I can.

The skillful that behold the Image of Minerua, commend not the picture but
the Paynter; we extol not so much the taste of our meat, as the Cooks
cunning that seasoned it well; no man esteems his coin for the stamp, but
for the right metal when it comes to the touch. And I wonder not so greatly at
the beauty of this gentlewoman, as at his workmanship that made the moulde,
neither do I like her sweet face; that glistereth without, but love her good
qualitties, that shine within. The Sun does not only comfort our hearts
with his light, Beautiful faces are virtues buddes.
but foster our grai^e in the Earth with his warmth. Rivers are clear and
fair to behold, but they water the soil and make it fruitful; Tree^ are
bethwackt with blossoms in spring, but those are the tokens of fruit to come.
Thus when I do gaze on a comely body, I behold with mine eyes the Garden of
Virtue. The Mariner no sooner espieth his Mark, but he knows that he draws
very near the land; Ulysses reioysed in the smoke of Ithaca, but it was for
the love he bare to his country; The Hunter singleth the fairest Dear, but
for the good meat he finds it to yield; And Socrates followed the brightest
countenance, because he knew it to be a true sign of Modesty. Mores animi
sequuntur temperatura corporis.
Philosophers hold that the disposition of the mind agrees with the
constitution of the body: whereby they judged deformed creatures to have some
spot or other in their conditions; writing many books of Zopirus doctrine, who
took upon him by looking in our face to tell us our faults. But where the
lineaments are all of just proportion, every part of the body wroughtout of
wax, and the face so beautiful, that Venus her self might blushe for shame;
who is so rude, so ignorant, so sottishe, so vnleatned, to says, that sweet
waters are distilled of weeds, Fine Cambrik made of hemp, English cloth spunne
of hair: That straight personages have crooked manners, fair faces foul
vices, good complexions il conditions? does not one Doctor tell you, that that
which is beautiful is not hurtful, nor slippery, Max. Tyr.
nor sinful, nor wretched? That love is a virtue, an art, a just judge? A
virtue, in seeking the thing that is good: an art; in gathering the substance
by the shadow: and a perfect judge, in discovering the mine, by the color of
the earth, boulting the truth, when he hears the Plea, discerning the party,
when he sees the person. Cyrus loved Aspasia for beauty, and the use of her
body; Pericles for learning and the light of her mind, the one her paramour,
rejoicing in plea sure; the other her scholar delighting in virtue. Hiperides
the orator used the company of many fair women, as Phryne, Myrrhine,
Aristagora, Eleusine, And when Phryne was accused for lewdenes in Athens, and
almost condemned, he used no other defense in her cause, but speedily tore of
her uppermost garment, closed her naked Breast too the Judges, showed them the
comelines of her body, as though it were impossible, that so proper a piece
should have a fault: Whereupon the Judges marking her well, and considering
vprightely, that so green a branche, must bewray good sapp; so gallant buddes,
a glorious tree; so bright a shadow, a blasing substance; so amiable a visage,
lovely behavior; so perfect a creature, absolute manners; acquitted her by
sentence, and let her go. O worthy beauty, O learned Judges, O notable
virtue, O noble Justice! What is he, that would not rather loose his robes,
his seat, his authority, his office, than falsely suspect thee, or call thee to
the bar; rashly accuse thee, or give out his verdite against thy majesty.

Anytus and Melitus the whippes of Socrates, in all that ever they declared
against him, never cast in his teeth that he was beauties bloodhounde;
Aristophanes flouting him on the stage, though he called him brabler, carper,
and cauiller, never laid in his dishe, that he loved to look upon glistering
faces. Had either of them thought it to be a deformity, they had rung him that
peale as long as their Clappers had been able too wag. Beware Sir Ieraldi, and
you friend Phialo, that you rob not beauty of her honor, nor spoil her of her
ornaments, lest the day come, wherein you be enforced to turn your rippetes, to
change your copy, to lay your hands under her feet to please her, or to
look upon that, that you should not behold, or to love the thing that nature
forbids you to desire. Narcissus disdayning the beauty of a Nymph, pined
away for his own shadow: Augustus that stopped his ears to Cleopatra,
suffered the vanities of Bathillus: Alexander that refused to look on the
Ladies of Persia, whilst they lived, lamented their loss with tears when
they dyed: Xerxes that pulled away his eyes from the Virgins of India, the
damsels of Media, the women of Caria, the dames of Lydia, the wives of Ioniu^,
the faces of Helespo^t: despised grapes, and gathered thistles; lothed honey,
and eat gall; fled them, and followed Amastris his dauther in law.

Thus when you perceive the blindness of those, that knew not the softest
threedes to twist silk, the fairest face to cover virtue; And when you
consider the danger of those that desired not to learn it when they understood
it not, blame me no more for beholding this gentlewoma^, it is not the lantern
of her beauty, that gives light, though she be glass; but the candle within,
that makes her shine, to the comfort of all that use her well.

Ieraldi seeing Philotimo in such an heresy, told him that he little thought
too have taken up his Arrowe so far from the mark; he requested their
company to exhort Polyphile to a better life, not to give her a veil to hide
her (...).

Why, said the Gentlewoman, is it your fashion, to wink on the Eawe, and wurry
the Lamb; to feast your friends, and beat them with the spit? Did you draw me
so craftily with meat to the stake, to see me baited by these Philosophers?
yet since it is your pleasure, too try what I can allege for my self, which
live as I list, and serve my lust; you shall hear that reason fightes on my
side, therefore neither of these gentlemen ought to open his mouth against me,
my face has already musled the one, my tongue shall seal up the others
lips. Minerua was said to stand with Menelaus in the midst of his peril,
and drive every dart that was thrown at him, to the bulk of his Buckler;
causing a skarlet sweat too to run down his body like streams of blood,
whereby his enemies were ever deceived: And I doubt not but Venus her self will
strike in this quarrel for my defense, rebating the edge of mine enemies
swoordes, blearing their sight with the shadow of blood, when the uppermost
part of my skin is not rased. This has caused many too chase us so far,
thinking us wounded when we took no hurt, that they have not been able to
recover them selves. What are all the arguments of the Stopckes? have they not
labored so much against us, to weed ^ut affections, that they pull up the
cockle and Corn together? Have they not so rashly inueighed against pleasure,
that they leave no place for honest delight? have they not so studied to drown
vice, that they quench out the sparks of every virtue? have they not so tied
our life to their own imagination, that nature in nothing must be followed? O
Ieraldi, oh gentlemen, when I enter into consideration of this little world,
which is in our selves, when I hear the voice of Philosophy cry out against
them, and the trumpet of nature proclaim them traitors, how can I but seek my
wonted delights, or gape after pleasure, the food of this life. Nature has
taught us, in plentiful orchardes, to taste every tree, and chose the best: in
pleasant fields to slip, off the fairest of every stalk: and are not we think
you, placed in this world to try every gallant, and take what we like. This is
the race we ought to run, this is the mark we ought to shoot at, this is the
end which Nature sends us out too seek. Little children are no sooner borne,
but they sprawle to this, crowing pertely when they obtain it, crying and
bellowing when they find the contrary. In riper age every man toyleth for some
profit, and profit is pleasant when it is gotten. Does not any man think you
rather desire to tread the smoth ground, than the rugged stones; to sail in a
calm, then in a storm; to live in quietness then in trouble? and what is this
to be counted but pleasure? you will say peradventure that it is so, but the
happiness that we are bound to seek, must be won by virtue, and desired for it
self. What if I show you that pleasure is such? All that we do, all that we go
about in this life, is to purchase pleasure, which I think sometime to be felt
in torment: as Caius Marius, that suffered the knottie flesh to be cut from
his leg with intolerable pain, not changing his countenance, because he
hoped for ease to come. Thus the pain that we suffer to shun a worse grief,
is very high pleasure. Let us suppose some one or other to be grievously
oppressed with anguish of body and mind, neither remembering any pleasure past,
nor hoping for any to come hereafter, can there be any greater misery?
Contrary, to him in whom all pleasures of body and mind abound, which
delights in that he has tasted already, rejoices in that which is before
him, and hopes for the like or greater to come, can there be any thing more to
be wished? can there be any sweeter felicity? Lovers disdayned and dashed out
of countenance, when they neither taste of relief, nor see any hope of grace
at all, say that they feel in them selves a hell, but he that obtayneth the
joys he desired, affirms himself to swim in Heaven: whereby I gather, that
hell is a sorrow, sorrow misery, heaven a pleasure, and pleasure happiness.
Vices are to be fled because of torment; and is not virtue to be sought for
pleasures sake? we like of Physic, not for the art, but for the end; the end
is health, which eases our pain and brings pleasure: we delight in
seafaring, not for the cunning of guiding ships, but for the commodity which
it breeds: and commodity is handmaide to lady Pleasure. What think you of
every virtue in general? is not wisdom a knowledge of things to be followed,
when they are good; to be eschewed, when they are naught? If they be good,
they are pleasant, if naught the^ are they yrksome. Wisdom reformeth our
manners, orders our life, rules our country, resists our enemy, takes up
discord, planteth agreement, turns out malice, brings in friendship, and
knitteth us together in love and amity. O what a delight, what a pleasure is
this? Temperance is a virtue which teaches us by reason how to bridle
affections and too govern our selves in the midst of our pleasures. Fortitud
consists in yielding our necks too dangers yok^, bearing our burden without
grudge, and gaging our heads too the Hatchet without groan: which is done,
either that our selves by this might live in quiet, and reckon up too our
friends with infinite joy, what pykes we have passed, what perilles we have
valiantly overcome: So Aeneas comfort his Soldiers with this, Hac olim
meminisse tuuabit: We shall delight to think on these troubles an other day:
or to deliver our country and purchase fame which tickeleth our hearts in
sharpest anguishe when we conceive what pleasures shall grow to our friends by
our death, and what honor we shall have among succeding ages. Thus Scaeuola
presented his body to the fire. Curtius hurled himself into the gulf, and
Iphigenia was contented to be sacrificed. Justice regarding the common weal,
gives to every man his own, whose duty is to minister law for the
maintenance of right, and suppressing of wrong. By taking no wrong, we escape
the jaws of sorrow and misery, by enjoying our own, we live in pleasure.

These four are the springes whence every virtue begins too flow; Pleasure
the Sea, too which they run, and where all of them jointly do end their
course. Rhethorike, Logike, Philosophy, Music, all Arts, all Sciences, are
referred too this, that they might profit, and bring us pleasure. How
triumphs the Orator, when he sees the Client delivered by his tongue? how
laughes the Logitia^, when he perceiues his enemy driven to a blank? how smiles
the Philosopher to himself, when he has sifted the secrets of hidden causes?
How leapes the musition, when he beholds men ravished with his melody? The
beasts of the earth, the fishes of the Sea, the fowls of the air, the Son,
the Moon, the course of the Stars, the four Elements, the whole world was
made for our use, and this use is the root of al our pleasure; Our speech is
given us too increace acquaintance: acquaintance makes us delight in company,
which banisheth sorrow, heaviness, disqu^etnesse, solitarines: all which if we
shun, we live in pleasure. Our eyes present every delectable shadow to the
mind, but when they view any ougly shape, any monster, any enemy, that may
hurt us any way, or diminishe our pleasure, our hair sta^ds, our heart throbs,
our body shakes, our sense fayles, our limbs stiffen, out wits faint, nature
her self starts up affrighted, and swells against it, til she find it
removed out of our way. The like may be said of hearing, smelling, taste, and
touch. Do not our ears draw us too mirth, drive us from mourning? Do not our
nosthrils teach us to walk in sweet gardens, shun the foul streets; to smell
to the Rose and burn the Hemlock? has not our taste sufficiently instructed
us to like of sweet meats, to loath bitter potions; to take the pomegranat,
and leave the crab? are we not warned by outward feeling (which is natures
thief scout against our enemies) to clap handswith pleasure as a perfect
friend; to shun the contrary as a fooe? Too this end have we received hands,
too thrust away every thing that would hurt us, and to pull to us all that we
see might pleasure us. To this end has nature made us feet, to fly from the
thing that might displease us, and to follow whatsoever shall most delight us.
Therefore were the kings of Persia judged happy, because they spent the Winter
in Babylon, the somer in Media, the Spring in Susa: seeking continually too
live in those places, that were most pleasant. This persuades me fully and not
without ground, yt no man which has any wit, any learning, any manners, any
curtesis, any feeling of nature, or prick of conscience, any fear of the
Gods, or spark of grace; seeing all virtues, al arts, al actions of this life
amed at pleasure, as their end, the world made to maintene it, every part of
the body to desire it, and nature her self too abhor the contrary, can deny
a life so led, to enjoy perfect happiness. Then what misliketh Ieraldi in
Polyphile? what can these Gentlemen rebuke in me? I live agreeable to nature,
that is, in pleasure. Where I look I like, where I like I love, what then?

When love commaundes, we must receive the check,
He rules and every God obayes his be^ke.
Polyphile thus ending her Apology, each giving place to the other to reply,
they were every one tonguetied, Philotimo looking upon Phialo, Phialo on
Ieraldi, he upon both, and she on them al. But Ieraldi perceiving Phialo dumb,
broke silence, asking him whether he had taken in the flagge of defiance
again, or as utterly vanquished, yielded himself this Gentlewomans prisoner,
because he withheld his speech so long, seeming rather to give ground then to
resist.

Sir answered Phialo, these arguments are couched together briefly; but they
were never so quickly gathered as they have been uttered: Therefore I think
it my duty too consider the longer of them before I reply: for questions are
sooner propounded then they can he answered, demanded in few words, scant
absolved in many. When one asked Zeuxis, why he was so long in drawing a
counterfaite: he said indeed that he was long, but because he would have it
continue long. I have all this time withdrawn my self, too beethinke me the
better what to speak, and to work my colors in perfect Oil. Where the
enemy comes in a coat of Steel, it is good for a Soldier to whet his
swoorde. The wrastler many times changes his place, but he does it too
seek out footing. Horatius fighting alone too three, turned his back to sever
his foes, and afterward slew them one by one, If you see me go back, it is
but too choose a place too fight in: persuade not your self that I mean to
fly, for the Ram retyreth, that he might give the greater shocke. I am not
so affraide of their reasons, as astonished with their folly, which build up
their Fortresses on bryttle ground seekinge too wash the face of a black
Moore white, whose color no soap will take away, or too make a silk purse of
a Sowes ear that when it should close, will not come together.

Sir Philotimo is so bewitched with this Gentlewomans looks, and doteth so
much in Socrates love, that he thinks it impossible to find dustie corners in
gallaunt houses, counterfeit stuff, in a fair stamp, Wooden Swoordes in
Iuory sheathes; apishe deformities in cloth of Gold. They which have
travailed Germany, find that their best VVines grow on the hardest rocks, I
have seen black earth bear a white flower, the unprofitable Thorn carries
as trim a blosome as the Apple. Thus ought we not to judge our Gold by the
color; nor the qualities of women, by their faces. When any one of you sees
me wear a fair shoe, no man knows where it wringes me, but my self; none
feel the hardenesse of the flinte, but he that strikes it: none are able to
judge of women's qualities, but such as try them. If you behold the virtue of
this Gentlewoman by her cou^tena^ce, why do you not the like in goodly
pictures, for they are beautiful? Have you not learned that the substance of
the mind, cannot be discerned by outward sense? Solus animus de animo
iudicas.
or that nothing but a mind, can at any time be arbiter of the mind? then
how is it possible, sir, for you, with the sight of your eye, which reaches
no farther then her face, to take an Anatomy of her conceite^? When virtue
woorketh, I grant you then she is known by her deeds as the tree by the
fruit: for when we perceive the Magistrate too give unto every man his own,
we say he is just; and when you have seen this Gentlewoman govern her
steps by the line of virtue, say she is modest. Give not the praise of a
judge to his Scarlet gown, nor the commendation of women, to the color of
their cheeks. The Bay is ever green, but without fruit, only presenting a
sweet sauoure to our nosthrills; the gaye Platan tree spreedes a broad leaf,
and yeeldes nothing else but a shadow for Epicures. Argeus hearing some commend
the beauty of other men's wives, told them that they ought not so rashly to
shoot their boltes: for such should be known too none, but their husbands.
Crates beholding the golden Idol of a strumpet set up in Delphos, said it was
done to nourish the wa^to^nes of the Greeks. Therefore I beseech you, Philotimo,
to leave the praise of this Gentlewomans face too such as are best acquainted
with her conditions. And if you perceive that Nature has bestowed some cunning
upon her moulde, think it is done, but to flatter the Venetians with her image.

Mustering together the examples of Pericles and Aspasia, Hyperides and his
barlottes; and I wot not whom; you are like unto him that wauing and tottering
in a great preace, leanes unto them too stay himself, which are borne too
the ground as fast as he. The Son shows greatest, when we behold him
through a cloud: he that looks through a piece of read glass, judges
every thing that be viewes to be read: And Physicians to the likeness of this
affirm, that corrupt vapors mounting from the body up too the head, and
distilling again, from thence to the eyes, when they have there mingled
themselves with the watrye crystal, which receives the shadows of things to
be seen, make all things appear of the some color, which remains in the
humor that ouerspreads our sight, as if it be melancholik, every thing seems
black; if it be flegmatike, white; etc. Philotimo troubled with a suffusion.
Then think not, Philotimo, but you shall be deceived, if you behold the
manners of women through the cloud of their beawtie, the glass of their
bravery, or the gross humors of fancy that bleare your eyes. If you do but
imagine that every fatre face has fair conditions; because that Gratior est
pulchro veniens e corpore virtus,


Virtue shines brightest in a galla^t face, Somnium Vigilantis.
you bewraye that Eclipse in your wayning judgment, Cureus de Sens. lib. 1.
cap. 36.
which Philosophers have called The waking man's dream; for that, many times
does happen thus: Men thinking very earnestly of their friends, or any thing
else that they have seen, or read, when they are drowned in the bottom of
this conceyte, the mind plodding continually on the sa^e, this vehement
combat of imagination seareth the spirits, which give such a pushe unto
common sense, Lovers dreams.
that it flows too the eye, and planteth the Idol of the thing imagined before
our sight. Thus are Melancholicke lovers in the midst of their dumps deceived
with the shadow of their Ladies, persuading them selves for the time, that they
view the party, whom fancy enforced them but too dream on. Thus Geometers
deeply considering of their proportions, believe sometimes that they see them
lively drawn out in the air. And thus you coining to your self a Phaenix of
Arabia, that is, virtue at no time separate from beauty, suddenly judge that
you see it in Polyphile. You aledge for your purpose, that the qualities of the
mind, agree with the constitution of the body, which being thus construed
that where choler abounds, we are testie; where melancholy, mad and
furious; or that tender co^plexions, are very melch hearted; I will not deny it:
but too say that where there is never a wemme in the cloth, there can be no
deformity in the wearer; where the body has no spot, the mind is utterly
void of blurre, I mayt not allow it. Therefore throw down the love of
Socrates, whose heastes are no laws, whose words are no Oracles, whose
authority is no privilege for your folly. Too believe whatsoever Philosophers
hold, or snatch it up for a Square too fashion our life, is too credit every
thing, to examine nothing, nor at any time to judge uprightly; but as brute
beasts. too follow the heard, not whither our duty wills us to go, but whither
soever the foremost leads.

Phialo then turnyng himself too Polyphile, desired her to give him leave as
freely too aunsweare her, as he had already replied too Philotimo: For (said
he) I am not of Herodotus mind, that thinks women to lay aside honesty, when
they put of their Garments, and though you may seem in the eyes of chaste
beholders, both too cast away the attire of a sober matrone, and too put on
the shape, of a monstrous Epicure; yet I hope too touch you so near before I
leave you, that you shall be enforced to strike Sail to the truth. All your
defense consists in the inclination of our nature, which you say has framed
every thing for our delighte, and taught us her self like a cunning
Schoolemaistresse, to fetch our full swindge, in wanton desires. You judge us
condemned by her, too taste every dish and feed upon that that likes us best.
But do not you know that a great River cut into many Creekes, is made
shallowe? that love dispersed into many Streams, runs low? think not that
little Infants as soon as they are shot into the world, seek after pleasure,
when they cry for a teate; but crane food, as instructed by nature too
nourishe themselves.

You abuse the word Pleasure very much, when taking it sometime in one
Sense, sometime in an other. Now fleeting above, then diuing to the bottom,
and with the Hedgehogge, never abiding that quarter, where the wind blows, you
are able too draw the simple awrye, and make them angle for butterflies in a
dry ditch. We must not fight loosely as the wild Scythia^s, which sail out
on the suddayne with terrible showtes; brandishe their Darts, with invincible
courage; and daring not tarry the cheifest brunt, presently squatte themselves
in their boggs. It shall be my practice in this quarrel too define the same
pleasure which you maintain, that finding by this, where the field is
pitchte, I may bring my force to your maine battle. Definition of Pleasure.
Pleasure is a sweet tickeling of Sense, with a present joy. Being a tickling
of the sense, you may see that to have no disquitnesse, cannot be pleasure:
For stocks and stones feel no trouble at all, yet I think you will not say
that they live in pleasure. To be cured of anguishe cannot be this, because it
is no other wise then a delivery from pain. In that it is bredd of a
presentioy, it neither consists in remembrance of pleasures past, because
they are fled; and cannot be felt: nor in hope of any such like to come,
because we taste them not yet, and they may be prevented. What pleasure ca^ you
find, if being in Russia in ye middle of winter with a needle in your hand never
a thread about you, you remember strait you had clothes on your back, and were
warm enough in Venice, in the middle of Summer? What avails it, if thirsting
now, you call to your mind that you drunk yesterday? or presently ready too
famishe for hunger, you persuade your self there will be corn in Harvest?
Again if pleasure be the tickling of sense with a present joy, what delight
had Marius in the Surgeons knife? Sceuola in torments of the fire? Curtius in
the botome of the Gulf? or Iphigenia in the Butchers Axe? Forsooth sir, say
you, I meant, that for their friends sakes, they conceived a pleasure in their
minds; alas then, say I, you must not dream of Chaulke when you speak of
Cheese. That which other enjoy belongs not toe us, and when we are dead, the
praise that is given us, never comes too our ears, except you assure your
self. that with Seleus our souls shall forsake us a while in a Trance, and
after they have compassed heaven, too learn some news, be blown intoo our
bodies again through a Squirte. But you trifle in this, let us shake up, our
kenell a little better.

Wisdom, Justice, al virtues, all Arts, all that we do in this life,
leuels, say you, at nothing but pleasure. Can you make such a hotchpotche of
vice and virtue, that each with the other shall both agree? that contraries
shall nestle together in one body, one part, at one instant? The pleasure that
is got by virtue is an honest delight of the mind, rejoicing in nothing but
that which is good: Virtue ameth not at pleasure.
yet is it not that which virtue see. keeth, for the countryeman sows his
Grain too reap the fruit, though he gather the flower, that grows up with
it: And we exercise virtue not for pleasures sake, but to do good; refusing not
the pleasures that spring up with it, as flowers with corn, and follow it
continually as a shadow the body: neither do they please us because they
delighte, but delighte because they please. Your lovers whenever you frown,
descend into hell; when you smile, are carried with wings in too heaven; yet
neither of them both are out of Venice, Poets sain Jupiter to have two barrels
in heaven, the one of weal, the other of woe: which he disperseth abroad at
his pleasure: If your beauty have drawn Jupiter from heaven in a shewre of
rain, compelling him by love too resign his office unto you, that opening the
barrelles of bliss and bale, you might govern the lives of men as you list,
torment and relecue, scourge and release, set up and throw down whomsoever
you will, O Goddess worthy of a God, and Juno of thy Jove.


These are the frantike inventions of Heathen writers, with if they be wrought,
will not hold the hammering. You must not think your sweet face to make you
perfect, nor believe whatsoever your suitors speak. Because that they say, they
burn, will you think their bodies are set on fire? if they dream of your
hew, that it is heavenly, is there no hoe, but you will shine in your
brightness among the stars? These are Hyperbolees to flatter you, with they
commonly speak in the midst of their passion, when their wits are a
woolgathering. All our actions by your opinion are directed to pleasure. Tell me
ge^tlewoma^ what you think of other nations. The Parthia^s are taught from
their youth to shoot and too darte, the Heluetians too follow the march of the
dru^me, the Germans to ride and toss a great steed, the Lacedaemonians to
receive their skin full of stripes: is this for pleasure? I do not remember
that ever I delighted to be horst, over the form when my self was a boy; if
you find any such pleasure in stripes, I would you were married to so^e man of
Thracia where by the custo^ of the country they beat their wives too this day.
What ca^ be so fond as to seek that in this life with we ought to shun? To be
ouerruled by that which beco^es us to master? to be servants to pleasure that
should be our slave? too make that our bliss, which Cooks, which Physicians,
which women may give, and which fortune at witch may take away? Aristippus was
iump of your opinion, seeking only sweet meat for his belly, and a Saint for
his bed: wherein if we follow the print of his feet, No differeuce between
man and beast.
I find that we differ not from savage beasts. They know each other as well
as we, they understand themselves likewise as well as we, they seem too
talk, they seem too laughe, when pricking up their ears, lowing, neying and
fawning they express their joy; they seek to their sex for some increase,
which is a token of mutual love, they follow that which they know will
profit them, they fly from the thing that they find to hurt them; whereby
they do show some sparks of reason, making a difference between good and
evil. So subtle are they, that we find them many times too crafty for us;
so wise that they gather in Summer, too serve them in VVinter; so cunning, that
the Spider in her web, the bird in her nest, may seem too give us
instruction of building; so civil, so obedient, that we are no more diligent
to serve one prince, then every heard is ready too follow one leader, every
swarm of bees, to honor one king. Elephantes are reported to be so courteous,
that they bring strayed passengers into their way; so witty, that they
understand the speech of those people with whom they live; so skillful, in the
moving of the heavenly bodies, that by bathing them selves in running waters,
they bewray the approach of the new Moon; so merciful, that one of them in
Rome catching a boy yt had pricked his nose with abodkin, took him up
presently with his snowee, shoke him aloft to put him fear and laid him down
softly again with out hurt; Dion.
last of al, they seem so attached with knowledge of God, that eighteen of
them being ^^ine at a triumph in the Theater of Rome, the rest, by running
about the place with a pitiful rore, mournfully tossed their snoutes up too
Heaven, as though they accused the cruelty of man, or cried for revenge of
their fellows blood.

By what Cognizance then shall we be known from beasts? (...) est, quisque.
Plato did not think a man to be a reasonable creature, consisting of a soul
and a body, but a reasonable soul, using the body as his bondslaue. Ask
Aristippus why we are borne? he will say for pleasure; Demand Anaxagoras, his
answer shall be, that we might look upon heaven; the one follows that, which
is common to us with brute beasts; the other robs blindemen of their
commodity, because they are not able to see the stars. The difference
between man and beast.
Therefore taking the opinion of Plato, That every man's self is but his soul,
let us acknowledge from whence we came, that is, from God, the giver of life;
And sath we have received this benefit at his hands, it is our duty to show
our selves thankful by serving him. He has made us, he has redeemed us,
he, has sanctified us to his own self, whatsoever we are, we are the
work of his hands, the image of himself, we are altogether his, and not
our own. This is the mark we must bear in our forheades, to be known from
blockishe and brute creatures: they seek for nothing but that with is earthly,
we must desire the thing that is heavenly; they are sensible bodies, we
reasonable souls; they serve their bellies; we our God. O Poliphile, Women's
pride.
where is the life which you require? what is become of Sabina, which never
dreaming of this, but drowned in wantonness usually bathed her self in the
milk of five hundred she Asses, to preserve her beauty? How is Galeriaes
sight daseled with the pomp of this world, which scorned the golden palace of
Nero, as not curious enoughe, too shrowde her carkase? Beware you seek not so
much to pranke up your self, that you forget God. Cleopatra was thought of
some writers not to be slain with venomous snakes, but with the same bodkin
yt curled her hear Bridle the wantonness of your speech, Xiphilinus. Women's
behaniour.
and the ouerlashing of youthful days. Posthumia was accused of lewdenesse,
because she was seen but to be merry in company, and although she had very
well cleared her self, Minutius returned her home with this clause, that her
tongue should never be worse then her thought, her gesture no wantonner then
her life. The women of Calcedon never showed unto strangers any more then one
cheek; the wife of Hieron was acquaynted with no bodies breath, but her
husbands; the women of Egypt did wear no shoes, because they should never
be gadders abroad; the Damselles of Beotia that day they were married, had
the Axeltree of their coaches burnte at their doors, that wanting the mean to
carrye them out, they might learn by the same too abide at home. Lysander
refused the rich Garments that were sent out of Sicilie to his daughters,
because he feared such a present would be a greater spott to their minds, the^
an ornament to their bodies, disfigure them sooner than become them.

Behold the sweet cups that have made you drunk, are kept from their
lips that intend to be modest. You use your Glass to turn up your locks,
that you might please the gazers eye; other stand tooting in them to this
end, that if they be fair, they blemish no iotte of the same with vice; if
they be foul, they amend it with virtue. You, like the moon, shine brightest
of all, when the Sun is away; they glister most in their husbands presence;
you are a glass for every Gallant, smiling with them, mourning with them,
frowning with them, and what cheer soever you perceive in their face,
representing the same in your hollow looks; they only rejoice and weep with
them, with whom they are grown into one fle she, you are a shadow to every
lover, moving with them, from place too place, and cleaving to no particular
body; they like true geometrical lines, are never pulde from their bodies but
by death, never seen abroad without their stay, never found in the streets
without their husbands. You, make your belly, your God; your lust, your
heaven; your pleasure, your bliss; and hunt greedily for such delights, as
though they be drawn with a twine thread, cannot be kept with a Cable rope,
for they houer like feathers in the wind, and are blown away like chaff with every
blast. So dangerous a sea is our delight, that in every calm we fear a
storm, in every storm, we are swallowed quick; in every case, we look for
pain, in every pain, we pine to death, in every peace, we dout a broyle, in
every broyle we go to the pot. Philip winning the garland at the games of
Olimpia, when tyding was brought him too increase his joy, that the same day
Parmenio his Captain had foiled his enemies, and his Queen was delivered of a
young prince, cast up his hands unto heaven, desiring God to dash those
pleasures but with some little mishappe. How vain was the bliss of Scabius
Apicius, which after his long and delicate fare, casting an account of his
substance, to see how much he had spent on his belly, sinding, no more then
two hundred and fifty thousand groates left, flew himslfe that he might not die
for hunger? What pleasure had Vitellius in all his banquettes, when casting up
his gorge as soon as he had eaten; he was said too be sustained with the
passage of his meats? You esteem this life for a wonderful pleasure and a
great felicity, yet Caracalla shauing his bearde, glutted at his boorde with
the dainties of Antioche, cried out that he took very great pains, suffered
the assault of many perilles, and rebuked the Senators for their idleness.

Is it not against nature too lay such weight on her neck, that she sink
under the burden? to alter her course, contrary to kind? to wish for roses in
Winter? snowwater in Summer? artificial gardens on the top of our houses? To
seek a new hunger when we are satisfied? to provoke thirst again when we have
drsik? to devise such cookery of our selves as shall make us to feed at al
seasons? to quaffe every moment? too snort at high Noone? to banquet at
Mydnight? Nature in every Treature else shows her self too be her own
bulwark: and because that near is our Coat, nearer our skin, we love our
friends well, but our selves better; every thing is committed too the custody
of it self. Mark how the seed does tender it self, when it creeps first
out of the ground in a soft blade, how it afterward stiffeneth to a stalk,
how it hardens the ear; how it locketh up every grain in his husk, and
sends out prickles to keep of small birds from devouring the same. When the
foale is cast, it never leaves sprawling till it arise to shift for it self.
Children are no sooner on tiptoe, but they reach to the wall to stay themselves
up for breaking their face, if they trust to their feet before their time.
Shall we seek our own safety when we are green, and surfeite with pleasures
when we are gray? can we creep too a stay too lift our selves up, and not
lean to the same when we are alofte? Do we cherishe our selves when we are
grass, and yield too our enmies when we are corn? When nature is served we
suck no longer, whilst we are young; and shall we chocke our selves with
variety of dishes when we are old? Leave the Epicure at his table, let it be
furnished with all manner of Cates, Let Ganimedes fill him the Cup, let Beauty
send out her daughters to bear him company, let Apollo tickle his ears with
the Lute, let the Muses be charged to sound in the service, and the Graces
themselves to wait on his trencher, let him hear nothing, but too delight
him; touch nothing, but too please him; see nothing, but to ravish him; Is this
the happiness that you commend? are none but the Birds of this fether in
bliss? how wretched are we then, that never came near it? They pamper them
selves with a little ease, we accustom our bodies to labor and toil; they
cannot abide the sting of a flea, we bear of the stripes of our enemies
clubbe; they, like to fat Oxen, are soonest field, we graze without hurt on
the bleakest cliffs; To be short, Polyphile, Harpies shall sweep the meat
from their trenchers, Heaven shall thu^der out plagues against them, death shall
finishe their joys in anguish, when nothing shall happen too us unlooked for.
If you place not your pleasure in your dishes, nor in your Music, nor in your
wayters, nor in the beholding of your guestes, for What booteth it to gaze,
Ovid.
and not enjoy?


But to have the use of that that your eye likes and your heart loves, I grant
you may joy in the company of men, but I judge they have little delight in you.
In some countries the bride is crowned by the Macro^s with a garland of prickles,
and so delivered unto her husband, that he might know he has tied himself to
a thorny pleasure. Ulysses wept for the death of his dog, but shed never a tear
for his wives sorrow. Women better lost then found.
Domitius buried three wives with a dry handkercher. Sophocles being asked
what stomach he had to a fair woman, said, none at all, for he was delivered
out of such prisons, and had shaken those fetters of from his heels. Had there
been any great felicity in your acquaintance, I doubt not, but you should
have ^in more esteemed. Think not, signiora, that I speak this too impair the
love that every man ought too bear too his wife, but too give you too
understand, that the way to Heaven is not strewde with rushes, nor the end of
toil in lovers joys, nor the cradle of ease in Ladies laps. My self have
always been so affected to pleasure, that I have judged the daunces of Venus
school, to be as dangerous as the Mermaides songs, which draw us from the
coast we are bound to seek, which make us forgette from whence we came; that
forsaking our country, our Parents, our friends, our acquaintance, haling
into a wrong road, casting our Ankees before we sound, selling our
commodities, our ships, our selves for a drop of honey, which at the first
taste, is changed to poison, we might cleave to the rocks and be turned to
stones; Listen to vanity, and be laden with vice; stick fast in sin and be
swallowed in death, the fittest reward of such a life.

It is not my meaning too shriue you gentlewoman, but as a Philosopher to
exhort you if you have not fallen, to stand fast; if you be down, to recover
your footing as soon as you may, and look to your steps that you fall no
more. The Mariner always so guides the helm that he keeps the sail in the
winds nose; the Player so beats his part too him self at home, that he
gives it right gesture when he comes to the scaffolde; the painter so te^pers
his colors to shadow his work, and behaueth him self with such regard, that
keeping a quick eye to his pattern, a steady hand to his frame, he might
finish his task with greater praise. Our life is a ship, saved at sea and lost
at shore; a common play, brought to the stage as a gasing stock, every man
sees our smallest faults; A curious picture hard to draw, and quickly spoylde
with quiuering joints. Wherefore it is necessary for us to mark well where the
wind blows, that we be not sunck; to have a care too discharge our parts, that
we not shamed; to be so wary and circu^spect in our doings, that we mar not
all that we take in hand. Weak brains are not too be charged with made
Wines; nor feeble minds, with inchaunted delights; they overthrow us too our
discredit, these bewitch us to our destruction.

We ought not to stand upon slippery banks, when our steps are uncertain in
dry ground. So tickle is all the stay we have here, that we cannot move
without reelinge, nor gather up our feet without falling. Take heed, signoria,
how you stand, Two paths.
and whether you walk. There are but two paths laid open before us, the one
smooth and broad, ouerspred with the beauty of many flowers, watered with the
deawe of sundry springes; sounding delight with variety of byrds glimmering
with the bright beams of the sun; and this is pleasure, which we ought not
too follow for ambling to the Devil: the other, narrow and craggie, hard and
loathsome, dark and terrible, and this is trouble, whom we should not fear,
because he drives us too heaven on a trotting horse.

Demetrius contrary to your opinion, thought none in the world so miserable as
those, that had never fasted of any (...) A good father never suffers his
son to be idle, but exercyseth his body in labor, his mind in (...) lays
the greatest weight, upon those wits, that he lyketh best, because he is sure
they are able too bear it. God is a father and a Schoolemaister unto us, if
he have not traueled your body, too make you sweat; nor read you long
Lectures, to busy your wits; It is a plain case, and a strong argument,
that he neither loves you as a Father, nor lykes you as a Master; nor
accountes you his child, nor makes you his Scholar. Non est molle virtutis
documentum:
Seneca.
Virtue can sleep without a pillowe. Scaeuola sought for his joy by fire,
Fabritius by poverty, Rutilius by exile, Regulus by torments, Socrates by
poison, Cato by death. They which inhabit the cold Countries, find delight
in the frozen Snow, pursue the wild beasts for food in the Mountains, and
chalk up their lodging in that place, where night compels them. They
regard no poverty: for they live no barer then they were borne; they force no
sorrow, for if it be long, custom in them has made it light; if it he
short, they soon forget it; they fly no death, for either in that they end
their toil, or enter into a better life; they despise Fortune, for she cannot
rob them that have naught too loose, and no weapon she has, can wound the
mind. If you think these people in misery, because they rowse not their bodies
in Beds of Down; they surfeite not with our daintyes of Italy, but with
Hippolytus follow Dianas chase, you are out of your wits.

Ovid in the person of Phoebus to Phaeton appoints away for us to trace
before we can bring our selves to rest, in which I read of no pleasure at all.

The first is steep, which scarce with freshest (...)
My steedes do climb: the middle stands aloft,
From whence when I both seats and land behold,
I shake and tremble in my troubled breast.
The last does fall, and needs a straighter bit,
And such as in my vva^rie couch beneath
Lost bedlong down I come, dame Thetis dreedes.
Such is the path that we are willed to tread, so bolte upright, that the
hottest youth finds his hands full enough too scale it, the top so high when
we are up, that we shiuer to see what danger we have past, and our heads are
gyddie with looking down. The last so deep, that if we slip, we break our
necks, and never leave rolling till we drop in to the grave. In youth we had
need of props, because we mount; in middle age, when we are aloft our pleasure
is dashed with a great fear* perceiving so many dangers behind us, which we have
escaped; so many before us, which are to come; In gray hears, we begin to
drop, and every foot we stir is a steep too death. Beside the steep rise,
tickle hight, perilous downfall of our passage, there are many monsters in our
way.

Thy feet shall tread upon the horned Bull.
The Tropikes and the ghostly Lions head.
Thus find we not in any part of our life, one spare place too wring in a
little pleasure. How happy is the life of them that overcome? The best
Sayler, is known in sorest storms; the brauest Soldier, in greatest peril;
the purest Gold, in hottest fire; the blessedst people, in deepest trouble.
The house is not builte, til the Timber be hewed, nor happiness woonne, till
we be hackt.

Flatter not your self in the joys of this world, which are Fancyes hooks,
to catch fools. Ulysses bound himself too the mast, that he might sail
beyond them, you must girde up your loins, or wrestle til you sweat, before
you can carry the prize away. Rich Cobblers, have black Thumbes; good
Carpenters, hard hands; Thriftie Playsterers, dirtie clothes; profounde
Students, pale faces; fat Scholars, thin cheeks. Difficilia quae
pulchra, we obtain no true pleasures without pain. They that will have the
Nut, must break the shell; that will eat the Apple, must climb the tree; that
will come too the Mine, must dig the Earth; that will travel the Sea, must
pass the sand; that will conquer their foes, must fight the field; that will
get the goal, must run the race; that will wear a Crown, must win the
same. The seed of the Lord and the Corn of his Harvest, suffers all
weathers in open field, and when it is grown too perfect rypenesse, it is cut
with the Sith, beaten with the Flayle, tostt with the Fan, bruised with the
Stone, parcht with the heat of a Fiery Oven. Thousands are the pikes that
must be passed, before we can enter the gates of rest. Isaac was dearly
beloved of GOD yet many times vexed, driven out of Chanaan with hunger,
troubled with his neighbors, barde of his water, grieved with the discord of
his sons, and the violence offered unto his wife.

The children of GOD hung up their Harpes on the Willow trees, sat down and
wept at the waters of Babylon. Many are the examples that I might allege out
of the Scripture, too show you that GOD brings none unto him by pleasure,
but whips them with sorrow till their hearts groan, that when they have
rensed their couche with tears, the smoke of their sighs might arise up
like Frankensence into his nostthriles.

Consider, Signiora, that you were not made suddenly by the running attil^ of
little Moates in the air, but fashioned out with the hands of God. By which
you may know as I have told you already, that you are not your own, but his
that framed you; if you be not your own, deny your self; if you be Gods, fly
unto him; cast of ye wanton desires of this life, seek for no pleasure in
these days, if you wish to avoid torment in the world too come. Lasie people
pine to death; reward is theirs that labor hard: If you strive with this
body and master sin; encounter the Devil and win the field; charge your
foe stoutly, and hold up your swoorde to the later gasp; you shall find
such grace, such mercy, such pleasure, such joy, as neither eye has seen,
nor ear has heard, nor flesh has felt, nor thought conceived, nor
Phialoes tongue is able too rehearse.

When Phialo had thus ended his talk, and beheld Polyphile to see how his
Medicine began too work, Philotimo told him that Aesope makes the Lion
too chase the Heart, but the Heart being swifter of foot quicly got out of
the Lions sight, and lodged him self in the thickest brakes: the Lion
following still met with a sheepehearde; of whom he demanded whether he
had seen the Heart or not; the poor sheaphearde said no, and pointed too the
thicket where the Heart lay. Even so did he like a timorous swain, for fear
of Ieraldi whom he knew too be pleasures deadly foe, deny the delight he
has seen, with his tongue and glaunsing deceitfully too Polyphile, look upon
Venus with his heart. Wherein he showed him self a cunning sculler that rows
his Bote forward, though he have turned his face too the stern; And though
he spoke his pleasure against pleasure, withdrawing his head from
Gentlewomans lappes, yet he followed them backwards, as the Bargemen in
England, that row up too London, with their faces to Grauesende.

Trust me, said Ieraldi, I have seen children which beholding meat at the
Table, and durst not crave it for fear of the Rod, have told their fathers,
they would eat none of that; which was but a crafty kind of begging And it
may be, that Phialo cries out against women, because he loves them, but I do
nor believe it. There is no cause why he should double before me, though I
be severe, I am no Lion; neither deo I pursue wild wantons too death, but too
amendment; Notwithstanding where the root is rotten, the Stock can never be
new graffed; It is a hard matter too make an old Dog receive the Collar,
or too bryue that corruption out of the flesh, which is bredde in the bone:
Polyphile has run so long untied, that I fear liberty has eaten a hole in
her heart, and her stomach will not suffer her now too bend. Those qualities
are seldom lost, which are got by long practice, and grown to a habit.

You are too prejudicial sir, said Polyphile, where the husbandman seeeth
many weeds, he takes the Soil too be fruitful, if it be tylled:
wheresoever you see any vices grow, there is ground for virtue, if it be
labored. Forspeake me not I pray you, I am not so bad as you report, though I
be worse than I would I were, if after this tyllage, you find me barren, or
return too my vomit, then say, that the root of grace is clean decayed, and
virtue in me will never budde. God has appointed Mary a time too repent, and
Polyphile to forsake her wicked ways. Had I been sooner dyeted, I had been
sooner reclaimed; sooner called, I had sooner come. I feel such a combat in
my self, such a terror of the just judgment of GOD, and such a comfort
again if I run to him, that I am constrained hear too stay my self, and
resort no more too the Epicures Table, least surfe^ting sooner than I (...) I
cast up my meat the way that it came and lick up my gall with a loathing
stomach. Therefore I thank you signior Ieraldi for your cost, which provided
all this cheer for my sake; you sit Philotimo for your company, whose looks
were the fountain of all this talk; and you good Phialo whose Philosophy
has pulled me out of the jaws of death. As long as I live I acknowledge my
self to be your scholar, and hold me your dettour, which if you remain any
time in Venice you shall perceive: No more Polyphile, that name I abhor,
Theophile now newly christened by thee.

Ieraldi rejoiced too hear these words, and wished a Gospel on that mouth,
wherewith they arose: and Ieraldi taking Philotimo aside, requested him
earnestly to procure some friendship for Phialo in the Court, that he might
be restored to Sienna again. Philotimo ready enough to do that without
entreatie, desired Ieraldi to harbor Phialo, till be heard farther news: for
the next day he intended to return toward Ferara, and promised that it
should not be long ere he wrote ehym an answer. Ieraldi soon granted
soosmall a Boon: and whilst he discovered to Phialo their intent, Philotimo
stepped too Theophile too take his leave, in whose eyes he perceived the
matter stand too seee good company break so soon.

Stephan Gosson.

Coelotegitur, qui non habet vrnam.
An Apology of the School of Abuse, against Poets, Pipers, Players, and their
Excusers.
Seneca. Vitia nostra, quia amamus, defendimus; and malumus excusare, quam
excutere.
A Captain that served Cyrus, being one day desirous to show his Prince sport
in trayning his men, divided them al into two equal parts, giving bucklers
and wasters to the one, appointing nothing but cloddes of hard earth to the
other; When they were separated far a sunder, and a sign given to them both
to fight, the dirty Champions that stood a loofe, paulted the buckler bearers
on the shinnes, and the head, receiving no bur^ again for the time, because
they kept them out of the others reach: But when the battle began to join,
their turfes were too brittle toward a blow, the sorest strypes lighted on
their own shoulders. Such is the skitmishe of our players, who perceiving the
truth to stand on my side as an armor of proof; and finding them selves
vnappointed for the field, keep a far off, biting me in corners, casting
out libels, which are but clay, and rattle on mine armor, or tippe me on the
shinnes, without farther hurt. But if they take up my glove, and enter the
List; set down their opinion, and subscribe their names; I will gather in to
them as fast as I can, and teach them to know the weight of my clubbe. I
understand they are all in a fustian fume, they run to and fro, with a nettle
in their noses, and lashe out their heels as they had caught the brimse, which
is a plain token, that the gawle is rubbed, the canker touched. They have eaten
bulbief, and threatened highly, too put water in my woortes, whenever they
catch me; I hope it is but a copy of their countenance, Ad di^m fortasse
minitantur, Shrewde kyne shall have short horns: If they be chafte, they may
be walk, if they be rough, they may be calmde; if they be hot, they may be
coolde; I am not so childishe to take every bushe for a monster; every shadow
for a bugge; every man for a devil, that daunceth in his coat. The wind
blustereth about the hills, yet can not remove them from their place; The Sea
beats upon the rocks, yet every billowe tugges in vain; With thick shot
the air is darkened, yet never a bullet sticks in the Sun. They may wrestle
with me and rore, and rail, yet truth is steady and cannot be stirde, hard,
and cannot be brook with wash; high, and clear, and cannot be hurt. If I
give them a Pil to purge their humor, they never leave belking till it be up,
wherein you may perceive what unruly patientes I deal withal, how unwilling
they are to receive remedy, when their disease has gotten the upper hand,
how ill good cookerie agrees with their queasie stomachs, and how they had
rather suffer destruction to overtake them, then seek any mean to save their
souls. It is the property of honey though it be sweet, to torment those
parts of the body that are infected, and such as are troubled with ye Kings
evil, never taste it, but they judge it to be gall. Therefore I wish them all that feel me sharp, to consider whether it be to those that are sound, or to
such as I find do norish filthe. My School of Abuse, has met with some
enemies, because it corrects vnthristy Scholars; Demosthenes orations smelt
of sampe oil, because his candle burnt brightest, when thieves were busiest.
They that are grieved, are Poets, Pipers, and Players: the first think that I
banishe Poetry, wherein they dream; the second judge, that I condemn
Music, wherein they dote; the last proclaim, that I forbid recreation to
man, wherein you may see, they are stark blind. He that reads with advise
the book which I wrote, shall perceive that I touch but the abuses of all
these. When we accuse the Physician for killing his patient, we find no fault
with the Art it self, but with him that has abused the same. Therefore let
me hold the same proposition still, which I set down before, and drew out
of Tully, that ancient Poets are the fathers of lies, Pipes of vanity, and
Schools of Abuses. Jupiter which was but a mortal man and almost a paticide,
that for greediness of the crown, drove his own father Saturn, out of his
kingdom, though he were a cruel tyrant, an unnatural child, an usurping
Prince, an abominable leacher, as wicked a wretch as ever lived, by Poets is
made the king of gods. Venus a notorious strumpet, that lay with Mars, with
Mercury, with Jupiter, with Anchises, with Butes, with Adones, that taught the
women in Cyprus to set up a Stews, too hyre out them selves as hackne^es, for
gain, and that made her self as common as a Barbars chair by Poets is placed
for a goddess in heaven. Al these whom the Poets have called gods and
goddesses, for the most part, were bastardes begotten in adultery, or very
lewd livers, which had no sooner defiled their beds, but they were snatchte
up to the skies and made stars, in so much that Juno cries out in Seneca,
Tellus colenda est, pellices coelum tenent; Lets dwell in earth, for heaven is
full of whores. what stuff is this? wantons in heaven? and a double divinity
of he gods, and she gods? If it be so, I hope they will grant me, that in that
place nothing ought to be vain; if nothing be vain, they must live together
by couples like man and wife, or hold the public weal of Plato, and make
every thing common. If they live together in lawful marriage, give them houses
to the^ selves for lawful increase, that all which they do be not seen in the
market; if they have houses, let them have lands, it is no reason they should
be poorer then we, and if they have land, either let it be fruitful of it
self, or give them whippes in their hands, and send them like swaynes to
plough and ^arte. Because they are gods, they never die; because they are
married, they daily multiplte, for none can be so fruitful as they, thus never
dying, and ever increasing, some of them in time shall be driven to dwell in
the air, some in the water, some in the earth, some in hell when house rome is
scant, for heaven will not hold so great a company. If they be fruitful, what
is the reason that Jupiter gets no more children* does ^ee wax old, or is
Juno barraine (...) afeard to gleane any longer of other (...) corn, least he
be robbed of his own harvest? Considers he now (...) good turn requires
another? that he which strikes with the sword, shall be beaten with the
scabbarde? If they make all common, what are they better then brute beasts? So
gross are the errors, so great the abuses, so horrible the blasphemies we
find in Poets, that we may rather judge them monsters of nature, then men of
learning. Whilst they make Cupide trumphe in heaven, and all the gods to
match bound like ^^^serable captives, before his chariot, they belie God,
and be witch the reader with bawdie charms.

Whilst they enclose the power of their Gods in what compass they please,
giving Heaven to Jupiter, Hell too (...), the Sea too Neptune, they forgett^^
earth, and leave it too the rule of none (...) al. Whilst they make many gods,
they overthrow every God. For if their gods be of equal power, no one of them
ca^ do any thing without his fellow, and so none of them al may be called a
god, because God is perfect and almighty. Being perfect, he can neither be
increased nor diminished; being almighty, he has no need of the help of
other. What a confusion have Poets brought, when thinking little, yt whatsoever
is divided may be destroyed, they set all the gods together by the ears, some
fighting for Troy, some for the Greeks, some for Aenaeas, and some for Turnus?
Saturn who^ they affirmed to be god of time, was a varlet that gelded his own
Father, afterward thrust out of his seat by his son Jupiter, he was
constrained to save himself by flighte, and a great while lived obseurely in
Italy. Apollo was a buggerer, and Schoolemaister of perjury; Mars a murderer,
Mercury a thief, Castor and Pollux, whom they report to be twins grown in
one body, when they were rauishers of other men's wives, never met within one
pair of sheets. Flora a curtezan that got infinite sums of money by sin,
and gave all to the Romans when she died, by Poets is honored for a goddess
of flowers. Thus making gods of them that were brute beasts, in the likeness of
men, divine goddesses of common harlots; they rob God of his honor,
diminishe his authority, weaken his might, and turn his seat to a stews. By
writing of untruths they are open liers, but if they do feign these frantike
cenceates to resemble some what else that they imagine, by speaking of one thing
and thinking another, they are dissemblers: It is not enough for their friends
to say, Lascina est nobis pagina, vrta proba,
Our verse is wa^to^, but our life is good:
Or, Iuraui lingua, me^tem iniuratam gero. My tongue has sworn, my heart is
free. For players action, does answer to their parts; and Poets discourses
to their manners: yet are many of their Scholars so enchaunted, that like the
superstitious and foolish Egyptians, they had rather lose their lives, then
the Idols of their birds, their beasts, their Ibes, their Adders, their
Dogs, their Cattes, their Serpents, their Crocodiles.

Pypers are very sore displeased because I allow not their new (...), and show
them how far their instruments differ from those that were used in old
times; they say, their music is perfecter now than it was before, but who
shall be judge? Let Ismenias the grau^d fiddler that was taken prisoner by the
Scythians in a battle, utter all his cunning when Antaeas the king is at
supper, he will laugh him to scorn, and swear that his Horse has brayed
sweeter. When Philippe of Macedon took upon him to realon with a new Msition
of his new chordes, and was not able to go through stitche, because they have
ever a crotchet above commons, and add where they list, when they see their
time, God forbid, quoth the piper, that your majesty should be so miserable,
as to know these fantastical toys any better, their effeminate stops are not
worth a straw. Dionysius made such account of their cunning, when they judged
it to be at the best that hearing the notablest Harper which was in those
days, he promised him a talent for his labor, next day when he came to crave
his reward; Dionysius told him that he had it already: For, said he, thou
did but tickle mine ears with an empty sound, and I did the like again
to thee, promising that which I mean not to give, delighting thee as much with
hope of my coin, as my self was pleased with the sound of thy instrument.
Because I would have Dionysius followed, let the^ not think (...) hor^e Music:
if they put on their spectacles, or take their eyes in their hands, and look
better in the School of abuse, they shall find that with Plutarch I accuse
the^ for briging their running into Theaters: that I say, they have wilfully
left or with ignorance lost, those warlike ^unes which were used in ancient
times, to stire up in us a manly motion, and found out new descant with the
dauncers of Sybaris, to rock us a ^eepe in all ungodliness. If they had any
wit, any learning, or experience, they might know that Excellens sensibtle
laedit sensum, their dainty censortes will make us wantens. Aristonicus the
Musition, for his memory with all posterities, had a brazen I doll erected to
him by Alexander, and was wonderfully honored for his art. This was not done
for ^^u^ding Les gua^to spagntola, or inuenting sweet measures, or coining
new daunces, but for kindling his soldiers courage, and hartening them all to
take armor. Such a Musition was Antigenides, whom Alexander had no sooner
heard, but he startled, as though he had been then in battle, and bent
his siste at all them that were in presence: which of our Musitions that are
so perfect, is able with his instrument to make a fresh water soldier run
to his weapons, or enforce the Dolphin in the Sea to save his life, if he
suffer wrack? Which of all their instruments that are so absolute, can
perform that which other have done before? If ancient Musitions have gone
beyond us, where is our cunning? If their instruments have passed ours, where
is the perfectness that our Pipers imagine? why, say they, you play with
antiquities, we build upon scripture: Iubal was father of their harp, but
how many stringes he put to it, or what songs he played they can not tell me.
David did play on the Lute, and the Harp, and used instruments of many
stringes, but to prove these instruments were better, then such as had been
practiced many hundred years before he was borne, Hic labor hoc opus est,
there goes the Hare away. And though I be of Plutarches opinion, that when we
have done or said all that we can, the oldest fashion is ever best; that new
cuttes are the paternes of running heads; strange blocks, the very badges of
fond conceits; yet do I not forbid our new found instruments, so that we
handle them as David did, to praise God; nor bring them any more into public
Theaters, to please wantons. London is so full of unprofitable Pipers and
Fiddlers, that a man can no sener enter a tavern, but two or three cast of
them hang at his heels, to give him a dance before he depart; therefore let
me^ of gravity examine the case, and judge uprightly, whether the sufferance
of such idle beggars be not a grievous abuse in a common wealth.

For my part though I have said more then they will like off; yet set down
less, then they deserve) I mean not too trouble my wits about them: it shall
be enough for me which have no authority to give them a plaster, to lance
the sore friendly and let it run, that in process of time, it may heal of it
self.

Plays are so tolerable, that Lactantius condemns them flatly, without any
manner of exception, thinking them, the better they are penned, or cunninglier
handled, ye more to be fled; because that by their pleasant action of body, and
sweet numbers flowing in verse, we are most enchanted. And Tully a Heathen,
crying out against Poetry, for placing baudy Cupide among the gods, vttreth
these words in the end: De comoedia loquor, quae si haec flagitia non
probaremus, nulla esset omnino; I speak of plays, which if our selves did not
love this filthiness, should never be suffered. If plaiers take a little more
counsel of their pillowe, they shall find them selves to be the worste, and
the daungerousest people in the world, A thief is a shrewde member in a common
wealth, he empties our bags by force, these ransacke our purses by
permission; he spoileth us secretly, these rifle us openly; he gettes the
vpperha^d by blows, these by merry iestes; he suckes our blood, these our
manners; he wounds our body, these our soul; O God, O men, O heaven, O
earth, O times, O manners, O miserable days! he suffers for his offense,
these stroute without punishment under our noses; and like unto a consuming
fire, are nourished still with our decay. Lacon thought it impossible for him to
be good, that was not bitter to the wicked, then how shall we be persuaded of
Players, which are most pleasant to abominable livers? Diogenes said, that it
was better to be a man of Maegaraes Ram, then his sun, because he provides
a sheepherde to look to his fold; but seeks no instructor to teach his
child; he has a care that his sheep be well tended and washed, but never
regards his sons discipline; he forbids the one too run in danger of
the wolf, but keeps not the other from the Devils claws; and if Diogenes
were now alive, to see the abuses that grow by plays, I believe he would
wyshe rather to be a Londoners bound then his apprentice, because he rateth
his dog, for wallowing in carrion; but rebukes not his servant for resorting
to plays, that are rank poison. So corrupt is our judgment in these matters,
that we account him a murderer, whom we see delight in sheading of blood;
and make him a iester, that wou^deth our conscience; we call that a slaughter
house where brute beasts are killed; and hold that a pastime, which is the
very buchery of Christian souls. We perceive not that trouble and toil draw
us to life, ease and idelnesses bring destruction; that sorrow and anguishe
are virtuous books, pleasure, and sport the devils baits; that honest
recreation quickneth the spirits, and plays are venomous arrows to the
mind; that hunters deceive most, when seeming to walk for their delight, they
craftily fetch the dear about; that players counterfaiting a show to make us
merry, shoot their nets to work our misery; that when Comedy comes upon
the stage, Cupide sets up a Spring for VVoodcockes, which are entangled ere
they discrie the line, and caught before they mistruste the snare.

They must not think that I banishe recreation, because I bar them; the
Soldier has as well a time to sleep, as to keep Sentinel; to rest his bones,
as to labor his body. Iron with much occupiying, is worn too naught, with
little handeling gathers rust. Moderate sleep refreshes man, too much
kills him in time. Therefore we must neither be labored too much, for
ouerloading; nor loyter too long, for making our selves unapt to any thing.
Socrates left his study too play with children, but not continually; Cato laid
away his Book and drunk wine, but not immoderately; Scipio put of his armor
and daunced to the Instrument, but not wantonly; Pollio Asinius the great
Orator, never carried in his Study after ten of the clock, nor redd any
letters that were sent him after that hour, what haste soever they required,
but he did not this too give himself leave too go to Plays, There are other
good pastimes to be found, if we be wylling too seek them out.

When Seneca has showed Serenus all that he can to keep the mind quiet, and
too restore it by exercise if it be idle, or by recreation if it be weary; he
gives him this Caveat in the end for a parting blow, that all which he has
set down already, or is able too write if need require, is not of forte and
strength enough, too keep so slender and weak a Houlde, except we enuiron
the same our selves, with a diligent forecast, a daily care. He that thinks
wanton plays a meet recreation for the mind of man, is as far from the
truth as the foolish Gentiles, which believe that their gods delight in
toys; and we which carry our money too Players too feed their pride, may
be well compared to the Bath keepers Ass which brings him wood too make his
fire, and contenteth himself with the smell of the smoke.

It is a great folly in us too seek too live in those places that are healthie
too the body, not fly from those that are hurtful too the soul; and as hard
a matter for him too be cured, that knows not the grief wherewith he is
troubled. Senecaes wife had a she fool called Harpastes, which though she was
suddenly stricken blind, could not be persuaded that she had lost her sight,
but judged the house too be some what dark. In my opinion our Players are as
bad as she, though they do not perceive their own abuses, yet will they not
say they have lost their eyes, but that their lips hang in their light, or
else they are ouerspread with a Cloud; And worse then those that confess
themselves blind, for they, will yield themselves too be led; these, had
rather lie in the Channel, then lean too a guide.

I never yet read of that abuse which found not some too excuse the same, so
wicked and evil disposed are we, that we defend our vices because we love
them, and had rather excuse them, than shake them of. Ocrina caught a privy
clap, and was delivered of Seruius Tullius, yet some of her friends did cloak
the fault, saying that the child was got with a spark of fire; which
peradventure bredde such wings in time, that it flewe out of the Bastardes
head in a flame.

Our players since I set out the Schole of abuse, have travailed to some of
mine acquaintance of both Universities, with fair profers, and greater
promises of rewards, if they would take so much pain as too write against
me; at last like to Penelopees suitors, which seeing themselves disdained of
her, were glad to encroche with some of her maids, when neither of both
Universities, would hear their plea, they were driven too fly to a weak
bedge, and fight for themselves with a rooten stake. Beggars, you know, must
be no chosers, hunger sau^eth every meat, when fishers lay their hooks in
haste, Frogs will make a sauory dishe. It is told me that they have got one
in London to write certain Honest excuses, for so they term it, to their
dishonest abuses which I revealed. It is good for him that will falsify
psctures, not to let them see the lively creatures, that are desirous to view
his work, neither is it convenient for him too present his excuse to any of
those that have read my school, and beheld those abuses in playing places,
least their eyes reprove him for a liar.

How he frames his excuses, I know not yet, because it is done in hudder
mudder. Truth can never be Falsehods Vtsarde, whith makes him mask without a
torch, and keep his papers very secret. I will not deny but something may be
probably disputed in their cause by sharper wits, which is such food as
slaketh your hunger, for a season, yet will it not breed good blood, nor
flesh, nor lively spirits, but blows you up, and makes you swell, and
turns to corruption in the end. Patroclus may iette in Achilles armor, but
he dares not meddle with Peleus Dart. What cloak soever this Excuser wears,
maugre his teeth, he must leave the truth, and strike with a Straw, when he
comes to the field. Let him speak what he list in Players cause, he shall
find them shaken with a woondrous Fever, throw fetherbeds on them, they are
never the warmer, and all his excuses shall stand for perfumes, which faintly
set them upon their feet, that grouell in the dust with the falling sickness,
but cannot deliver them of their disease. If the Excuser be the man that is
named to me, he is as famous a Clarke as Clauitius Sabinus, which was so
troubled with a gross conce^te, and as short a memory, that every minute he
forgote the names of Ulysses, Achilles, Priamus, and such as he knew as well as
the Beggar his dishe, being very familiar with them, and daily conversant in
their company, yet many times he saluted the one by the others name: And
because his mashippe would seem learned, he heyred him servants with great
stipendes, of which, one had Homer without Book, another Hesiod, and nine
Fiddlers heads to make him an Index, of every one of them taking some several
names of his acquaintance, too be remembered. When this Gentleman had got so
profounde a Family, he began very friendly to feast his acquaintance: in
the midst of their dishes, out slew his Poetry, for his Pypers were ready
too round him in the ear, what he should speak; but his luck was so ill, or
his hearing so thick, that he stuck fast continually in the midst of his
verse, and could go no farther.

Crassus had such a roaring throat, that he was constrained when soever he
declaimed to have a piper at his elbow to give him his tune, and keep him in
compass. If it be my fortune too meet with the learned works of this
London Sabinus, that can not play the Poet without a Prompter; nor utter a
wise word, without a Piper; you shall see we will make him to blush like a
black Dog when he is graueled; or to dance you a Galia^de when he takes his
keye. In the mean time my advantage is the greater, that Players have chosen
such a Champion, as when I give the Allarm, winnowes his weapon; when I run
with a staff, charge a Bulrushe; when I spare not to greet them with
poulder and shot, answeares me again with a false fire. I was determined to
send you greater matters, touching the saleable tongue of Curio, but I stay my
hand till I see his book, when I have perusd it I will tell you more. Mean
while, I beseech them to look to their footing, that run ouershooes in all
these vanities, lest they be swallowed without recovery: and wishing to my
School, some thriftyer scholars; to Players, an honester occupation, and to
their Excuser a better mind, I take my leave.

FINIS.
Stephan Gosson.

Coelo tegitur, qui non habet vrnam.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Vinetree, by Thomas Dawson.
1579.


