AN ASTRONOMICALL DESCRIPTION OF the late Comet from the 18. of Nouemb. 1618.
to the 16. of December following.

With certain Moral Prognostics or Applications drawn from the Comets
motion and irradiation amongst the celestial HIEROGLYPHICS.

BY VIGILANT AND DILIGENT observations of JOHN BAINBRIDGE Doctor of Physic,
and lover of the Mathematics.



Lift up your eyes on hie, and behold who has created these things. Isai: 40.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Henry Fetherstone.

1618.

TO THE IMPERIAL MAJESTY of GREAT BRITAINS Monarch JAMES etc.
Most gracious Sovereign,
IT was the counsel of Aristides, (...). To worship GOD with consecration of
Temples, but to honor Noble personages with Dedication of books: following
this advice, I began not long since the description of Great Britains
Monarchy in three Columns, Historical, Panegyricall, and Prophylacticall;
intending thereby to stir up your liege people to a religious admiration of
Gods wonderful Providence in uniting these two famous Kingdoms into one
Monarchy; to a just acknowledgement of our exceeding happiness therein: as
also to an unanimous desire, and endeavor for the absolute Union and
perpetual preservation thereof. In the mean time Heaven it self offered a
fair occasion to manifest the fervent zeal long smothered in my loyal breast
toward your MAJESTY, the late strange, and admirable Comet, which has filled
so many eyes with his rays, and their thoughts with Meteors, or doubts. An
Astronomicall description whereof delineated in a celestial Planisphere, with
some brief touches in the Prognostickes, and Moral applications thereof, I
humbly offer to your princely Excellence, beseeching you to project the beams
of your sweet, and gracious influence both on it, and the Author; that, as
the glorious Sun of Heaven with his resplendence enlightened this (otherwise
obscure) Comet: So your MAJESTY our terrestiall all Phoebus would vouchsafe to
illustrate

Your Majesty's most humble, and loyal Subject. JOHN BAINBRIDGE.

Sereniss. BRITANNIARVM Maiestati XAI^PE COELESTE.
Rex (...) Dijs charissime, Salve Britannis optime: Saluere iussit nuncius
Coeli comatus, regia Spargens Eoi munera. Quacunque transit, sydera Salve
canu^t Rex maxim, Salve Britannis optime. Nec non amoris tesseras Iungunt
saluti nobiles, Hermes potente^ virgulam, Et Libra just pendulas Lances,
aristam floridam Virgo, and Corona^ Gnossiam, Serpens ocellum prouidu^, Fortis
Boots hastulam, Arctusque regno saecula Optat beato plurima. Rex (...) Dijs
charissime, Salve Britannis optime.

I. B. Errata.
Page 3. l. 31. for head read tail. Page 6. l. 6. put out of Planets. Page 7.
l. 7. for 27. read 30. Page 7. l. 20. for eleventh read twelfth. P. 9. l. 10.
for 18. read 15. P. 14. l. 12. for unfold obscure read unfold this obscure.

DEO OPT: MAX: SACRUM.
Augustiss: Brittanniarum Monarchae Franciaeque regi IACOBO 1.

Foelix noui anni auspicium et D: Astronomiae tandem instaurandae Symbolum

fecit vouitque Ioh: Bambridgius Med: Doctor.

Cometae qui effulsit Anno 1618 descriptio a 18 Nou: ad 16 December.


An astronomicall Description of the late Comet, or blazing-star.
I Hope there be none so far more precize then wise, as to think it
unlawful to look on this celestial Sign with other then vulgar and
poreblinde eyes: (which were still to maintain ignorance mother of devotion.)
Or if any such there be, I shall meet with them in the closure of this
Treatise, and therefore without further tedious Prologue;

May it please you to suruay this celestial Planisspheare, whose lineaments
are optically proiected How the Planisspheare is delineate.
upon a plain touching the Ecliptique in the twentieth degree of the
dodecatemory of Libra, the eye being placed in the center of the Sphere, from
whence all the great circles do appear right lines, as they are in the chart
protracted. Which thing is of special use in our present business (as you
shall anon perceive) for which cause I preferred this new manner of proiection
(though to my greater pains) before any other in common practice.

The Ecliptique.
The lowest line of all is the Ecliptique line, from which the Sun (as other
Planets do to some few degrees) never strayeth.

Parallels of latitude.
The crooked pricked lines be parallels of latitude from the Ecliptique toward
the Articke Pole thereof: the space betwixt every two lines is five degrees.

Circles of longitude.
The other right lines falling down perpendicular on the Ecliptique be circles
of longitude; beginning at the fifth degree of Virgo, and so forwards to the
fifth of Sagittary: the spaces be also five degrees: by these two kind of
lines, it is easy to find the longitude and latitude of any star in the
chart, and also of the Comer.

These circles of longitude do in the Sphere concur in the pole, but this
proiection in plano does keep them parallel, or at a continued equal distance
each from other.

Aequinoctiall line.
From the beginning of Libra toward Capricorn, is extended the aequinoctiall
line, to whose intersections with the Ecliptique when the Sun comes, the
nights and days be equal; as always in all places of the earth under the
same.

From this line, toward each Pole, is counted the declinations of Stars, the
greatest part of this Planispheare is on the Arcticke or Northern side: but
these things are plainly remonstrate to the eye in the chart, and therefore I
will make no further explanation Pictured Constellations.
of them; neither of the Constellations emblematically pourtrayed according to
the mystical Hieroglyphics of ancient Sages.

The stars places.
The place of each particular star is correspondent to the most accurate
observations of the illustrious Prince William late Lant Grave of Hessen, and
that tresnoble Dane Tycho Brahe, of whose admirable Vranicall instruments many
honorable witnesses are still suruiuing.

But it (for whom all this preparation is made) is the late Comet, whose
delineation is taken from mine own vigilant and diligent observations with
Geometrical instruments, especially the Radius, or How the Comet was observed.
Crosse-staffe, eternized by the heroike Poet: Descripsit radio totum qui
Gentibus orbem,
Tempora quae messor, quae curuus arator haberet.


Who with his Jacobs staff suruay'd the ground,

Did measure times, and all the Heavens round. The first occasion and
particular manner of which observations with the scrupulous and punctual
places (of the Comet) from them by necessity of sphericall triangles deducted,
I leave to my Latin Cometography, which (if these labors find acceptance at
home) I will adorn for Franckfurt: of whose more curious and ample
demonstrations, this little chart is a true Synopticke Epitome; wherein may at
once be seen the Comets place, as it daily appeared in the concaue surface of
Heaven: the The Cometary line.
line of his proper motion (appearing in the Heavens to be the arch of a
perfect great circle) crosses the Ecliptique in the 15 degree, with or
thereabouts of Scorpio, running through the Constellation of Libra, overthwart
Arctophylax, along the extent of Amongst what Constellations.
his left arm by the tail of Vrsa mayor, toward the Pole Arctick, but a
little more Southward.

This Cometary line cutteth the Aequinoctiallline Inclination to the
Aequinoctiall.
in the 8 degree almost of Scorpio, and 15 of Northern latitude: making with
it an angle of 81 degrees 23 toward Libra and the Pole Arctick. If this angle
had heene right 90 degrees, the line of the Comets motion would have run into
the very Pole, but making some inclination toward Libra, it fell (as I said) a
little Southwards from the Pole.

To the Ecliptique.
This line also and the Ecliptique (toward Capricorn and the North)
comprehended an angle of 116 degrees. So that the Pole of the Comets proper
motion was about 15. degrees of Aquarius* with 25 degrees of Northern latitude.

The Comets motion in this line.
The motion it self (reckoned in this line) from my first observation on
Wednesday morning the 18 of November, to Wensday the 16 of December when I last
saw the Comet, amounted almost to 73 degrees in 28 days: which is not 2
degrees one A little swifter at the first.
day with another: but the Comets apparent motion at the first was somewhat
swifter, though not much, and in the end a little slower.

I have for the further remonstrance hereof graduated the Cometary line;
beginning at the intersection To find it by the Planispheare.
with the Aequinoctiall both ways: and by the Comets place set down the time.

Here I would have those who rank Comets amongst inconstant Meteors, to take
special notice Note there gu'arity thereof.
of this Comets constant regularity, for that the inequality of his motion was
not only little, but ordinate, successively decreasing sensim sine sensa, by
so little and little, that it could not be perceived, but by comparing many
days observations.

Scarce one fourth part of the Moons motion.
Let them also observe that his motion in this line was scarce at the swiftest
one fourth part of the Moons celerity: but of this anon.

I will also propound to Masters in Astronomy this Comets exact and direct
description (by his apparent In one exact great circle.
motion) of a great circle without any deuiations. What was the true line of
his motion in the aetheriall Ocean? What inclination it kept to this our
habitable Orb? By what Primum Mobile this Comet (keeping so just a line) was
whirled about the Astronomicall propositions cocerning the Comets motion.
earth every four and twenty hours?

These considerations be only fit for those who have been rapt up above the
elementary regions of vulgar Schools: and slept not in Parnassus, but Olympus,
under the spangled canopy of Urania; I can hardly keep within the sphere of
this little Treatise, and scarsely refrain from the Samian Philosophy of
Aristarchus in the earths motion, were it not I feared another Aristarchus his
broach: and that I must reserve these mysteries for a more learned language.
Wherefore to prosecute our present description: Upon the inclination of this
Cometary The Comets motion in Longitude and latitude.
circle or line to the Ecliptique and Aequinoctiall, depend the Comets places
and motion in longitude, latitude, right ascension and declination, as appears
in the Planispheare; wherein is manifest, that the Comets motion of longitude
was continually retrograde, Continually retrograde.
contrary to the order of the signs, from the middle almost of Scorpio,
through Libra into Virgo* which retrogression has been noted in many other
Comets, as I shall elsewhere relate; but the cause of their retrogression has
laien hid in the mystical cabinet of Astronomy. It were vain to affirm But
not from Saturn.
Saturn now also retrograde in his Acronichiall opposition in Gemini, to hale
back this Comet by the hair after him (as simple Astrologians conceit) for
that these planetary retrogressions and stations* of Planets be but (...),
appearances; the Planets still making progress in their own circles, (as is
well known to them who are well versed From whence was caused his
retrogression.
in the Labyrinths of Astronomy) but this Comets retrogression depends on the
inclination of his true line in the aetheriall Regions, which though it
appeared to us circular in the concaue of Heaven, yet in it self was right:
but I may not break Pythagorean silence.

This retrograde motion being referred to the Ecliptique in longitude was
(contrary to the motion Slower in the beginning.
in his proper circle) slow in the beginning, and much swifter in the end;
which is caused from the great inclination of the Cometary line to the
Ecliptique, which plainly appears in the Chart, by which you shall easily
find the Comets place in longitude and latitude for any day of his term.

Comets declination from the Aequinoctiall.
The Comet also every day changed his parallel of declination (mounting
continually Northwards) and therewith his vertical passage over the Earth.

The common sort, at his first appearing, thought him to be over Spain,
making I know not what prognostics thereof: but their eyes deceived them, Was
not at first over Spain.
they aimed many thousand miles too short: At my first observation he declined
twelve degrees toward the South, making his diurnall gyre over that
terrestiall circle wherein lie Noua Guinea, the Isles Timor and Iaua in the
East, the north part of St. Laurence, Mozambique in Africa, the middle of
Brasilia, and Peru Over what place.
in the west. About the twenty two of November it entered the aequinoctiall
plain over the Moluccas, Malaca, Sumatra, Abassia, St. Thomas, Guiana; every
day ascending higher toward our Pole Arctick, about the 30. entering the
Tropic of Cancer, afterward passing over all the regions of the earth, even
over the utmost limits of the British Empire.

How to know over whose head it was eueryday.
By the Comets declination is easy to know over what place the Comet was every
day vertical: for if his declination be equal to the Latitude, or Poles
elevation, (which may be known by Tables or Mappes) then of necessity did the
Comet pass over head in that place. The middle of Spain lies in forty
degrees of Latitude from the equinoctial When over Spain.
northward; but the Comets declination was not so much, till about the sixth of
December; and therefore could not be vertical to them before that time.

Over London.
About the eleventh of December his declination was fifty one degrees and
half, and therefore passed over London in the morning, and so hasted more
Northwards even as far as the Orcades.

The Comets declination may be had in the chart by the line of his motion being
graduated on both sides the aequinoctiall: for the distance from the
aequinoctiall is (with a little correction) the declination: for from one
degree to twenty, the distance is within a few minutes the declination: but
from To find the Comets declination by the planisphere.
twenty degrees to forty substract one fourth part of a degree, from forty
to fifty substract half a degree, and from fifty to sixty substract one
degree from the Comets distance (from the aequinoctiall) and there remains his
declination, which whether it were South or North the Plani-sphere will show.

On the third of December his distance in his own line from the aequinoctiall
was 30. degrees 40. min. from whence 15. min. subtracted there remains 30.
degrees and twenty five minutes the declination.

The alteration of his rising.
By reason of this mounting Northwards, the Comet did every day rise sooner
then other, withal changing his azimuth, or point of compass (in his rising)
from South-east and by East toward the north until at length it made
continual abode above our Horizon.

Seen after Sunset.
I may not forget that the Comet in the later part of his period was North-west
after sunne-set, which gave occasion to some not skillful in Astronomy to
affirm a second Comet. But from the beginning I foretold (which was no great
matter to do) that if the Comet continued awhile, it would advance near to
the tail of Vrsa mayor, and be seen in the evening after the Sun.

The Comets blazing stream.
Now are we come to that from which Comets, or Blazing-stars are denominated;
the tail, or rather the blazing stream, which in this Comet was very
remarkable, and is truly pourtraied in the planisphere, as it appeared in the
heavens, being always in opposition to the Sun, or extended in length
according to a right line issuing from the Sun Always in opposition to the
Sun.
through the Comets body. For plainer remonstrance whereof I specially invented
this new manner of proiecting the Sphere in plano, and have caused the
Elipticke to be protracted to the beginning of Capicorne, and in it the Suns
place exactly noted on several days of the Comets apparition, also from the
Suns Center proceed right lines through the body of the Comet which do
precisely show the true prospect of his bushie locks.

The 27. of November in the morning the Comets hair was spread over the fair
star Arcturus betwixt the thighs of Arctophylax or Boots. Now the
planispheare does show that a right line drawn from the Sun then in the 15
degree of Sagittarie through the Comets body (...) approach the said Star. So
the last of November about midnight following the Comets bush ouer-shadowed a
star of the third light in the left hinder knee of Vrsamaior. Which does
manifestly appear in the planispheare by a line extended from the Sun (then
in 19. degrees of Sagittarie) through the Comets body; the like may be seen in
other places.

In-sooth this Comets forelock was a better Ephemeris for the Suns place then
many in great request.

The bushie locks not of the same matter with the Comets head.
Hence is detected the gross ignorance of those writers who never or seldom
cast up their eyes toward those glorious lights, but only delighting in
solitary contemplation do much busy their wits in searching the cause of
Cometary streamings; affirming them to be of the same matter (but more rare and
thin) with the head. Which with many other absurdities may be refuted by this
present observation; which does (...) by geometrical and lineall necessity
certainly demonstrate that the What it is.
Comets tail is nothing else but an irradiation of the Sun through the
pellucide head of the Comet. For though the Sunne-beames be not of themselves
conspicuous in the pure aerie or aetheriall regions, yet passing through the
Comets more condensed substance and there by refraction recollected and more
nearly united they did not only illustrate the Comet it self, but also a
long tract beyond him.

According to the refraction and recollection of the Suns beams, so was the
illustration and illumination of the Comet; which appeared to us How the Comet
varnihed.
more or less as the Comet was nearer or farther from the earth: and these be
the true reasons why the Comet (which at first was illustrate with a bright
resplendence) did every day more and more loose his radiant luster till at
length it appeared like a faint shadow, and quite vanished out of our sight:
for neither could the Sun beams be any longer united by refraction in the
Comets now dissolute and sluide substance, neither could that little glimpse
(if any were) be perceived, being so far remote from the earth, as shall be
anon remonstrate.

By the same reasons did the Comets streaming bush also by little and little
vanish away, and so much the rather, by how much the Sun rays were there
always more dissipate then in the Comet, and those locks ever less relucent
then the head.

The forelockes dilatation from whence.
The dilatation of the Comets fore-locke was caused by a second refraction of
the Sun beams, by which refraction they were brought to an intersection,
after which they began again to diverge, or display themselves in that form
which appeared in the heavens, and is delineate in the planispheare.

The exceeding length of it.
This dilatation was nothing so strange, as the extent in length, being
sometimes more then 45. degrees, and namely the 1. of December, ouershadowing
the left hinder knee of Vrsa mayor.

Though in the end the Comet did as it were wind up this long hair about his
head.

Some have doubted, if this long stream of light had touched the earth,
whether it would have caused any combustion? Surely no: Indeed the Sun beams
may by reflection or refraction be so It had no burning quality.
concentred and united, that (though it were through a piece of ice framed into
a burning glass) they shall easily set any combustible matter on fire; but
that happens only in the center of union, or concourse of the recollected
beams: but this Comets locks being diverged, or displaied rays, could have
no such power though they had touched the earth.

Many strange conclusions may be drawn from the Suns irradiation through the
Comet.
From this one observation of the Suns irradiation through the Comet many
more strange and excellent conclusions may be collected, which neither my
leisure will suffer me to examine particularly, neither can these pages well
contain them.

Wherefore now I will tie up this Comets radiant locks with admiration of that
glorious lamp, wherewith He that inhabits the light inaccessible does
illustrate, and enlighten this whole world. (...). Psalm. 19. He has set The
wonderful light of the Sun.
his Tabernacle in the Sun, and it as a Bridegroom comes out of his
chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to run a race; his going forth is from the
end of the heaven, and his circuits unto the ends of it; and there is nothing
hid from the heat thereof. This is the true (...), the only harth of
inquenchable fire, which so many thousand leagues often warmeth the earth,
enlightneth these refulgent bodies, and with them this new Planet.

I have at large showed the Comets places as they appeared in the surface of
Heaven, both in his own circle, and also referred to the Ecliptic, and
Aequinoctiall; The Comets distance from the earth.
but there is another place of more difficult inquisition, and greater
admiration, and that is the Comets distance from this our habitable Orb.

Common schools treading the wrie steps of that great and witty, but often
mis-leading Peripateticke, The error of Aristotle and his followers.
would confine this, and other Comets within the higher region of the air;
neither could his palpable error in the place of Galaxia (or the milkie-way in
Heaven) acknowledged by most bring them into suspicion of the like deuiation
from the high aetheriall region of Comets into the Elementary valleys of
Meteors; where, and with whom to place this Comet were to hide so glorious a
candle under a bushel, and not to set it in a candlestick, that all in the
house may see; to set a beacon not on an hill, but in a dale, especially if we
consider that the highest How high the air is from the earth.
region of the air (by the Optickes demonstration from the time of twilight)
is not many above 50. english miles from the earth.

The Comets place about the Moon argued from the rigularitic of his motion.
Wherefore I may justly use the Lacedemonian (...), walk not in the errors of
those wandering Philosophers. Let this Comets regular and ordinate motion (for a
month together) never deuiating from one right line, keep you in the way of
verity.

2 From the quantity thereof.
This very reason alone many ages ago persuaded divine Seneca, and in our
Fathers days that ingenious and subtle Cardane to place all Comets above the
elementarie regions, wherein only inconstant and momentany Meteors make their
sickle vagaries.

The analogy also observed in the stars betwixt their distance from the
earth, and their motion about the same, does eleuate this Comet above the
Lunary regions, his proper motion being scarce at any time the fourth part of
hers.

This argument was sometimes accounted a firm demonstration, before that
conglomeration of solid orbs was with the Aries or engines of Astronomicall
observations battered and demolished: neither is it yet rejected by those who
well deserve the first place in the restoration of this celestial Art; for
though those Babylonian walls be ruinated, yet is the analogy of motion and
distance still preserved. God has created all things in weight, measure and
number.
It was the saying of divine Plato, (...), God is the great Master of
Geometry, having created all things in weight, measure, and number, as holy
writ does witness. The most accurate and refined Astronomy does confess and
profess, that flow Saturn is farthest from the earth, and swift Luna nearest,
the rest intermediating in their motion, according to their distance from this
little terrell, for whose use especially those vast planetarie globes were
created.

3 From infallible demonstration by parallax.
But that abstruse and admirable (...), most irrefragable and infallible
remonstrance drawn from the parallax does place this Comet farther beyond the
Moon, then she is from the earth, yea many times her apogaeall or greatest
distance. But because this huge distance may seem strange to many (being as I
have showed contrary to the long received opinion of common Philosophers) and
the doctrine of parallax to most no less unknown, then the word it self; I
will for their better satisfaction, with as much breuity and perspicuity as I
can, unfold obscure, but sure argument.

Parallax (in Astronomy) is a commutation or changing of any Planets or Comets
true place (pointed out by a line drawn from the Earths center through the
Planets, or Comets) into another place appearing to our eye on the superficies
of this terrestrial speculatorie. Or parallax, is the difference of these two
places.

This commutation or difference arises from that (...), reason, or (to use the
vulgar term, though here improper) proportion, which the earths semidiameter
(or thickness from the center to his superficies) has to the planets or
Comets distance from the earth: for if this semidiameter hold any sensible
proportion to the distance, it is not possible that the eye upon the earth
should see the Comet or Planet in the same place which it has in respect of
the center, but there will be a parallax, commutation, or difference more or
less according to the distance. So the Moons perigaeal or shortest distance
being not much more then fifty two semidiameters of the earth, falls into a
notorious parallax (or difference of her true and apparent place) and that of
one degree and 6. minutes, for the proportion of one to fifty two, or 1/52
part is very sensible: but the Sun being remote when he is perigeall, no less
then 1100^ Semidiameters from the earth (by all Astronomers consent) has very
little parallax of 3 m. for the proportion of 1 m. to 1100(...) is very little,
or nothing: but according to the more accurate and late observations of
Keplerus (Mathematician to two Emperors) the Sun being 1800(...) Semidiameters
of the earth from it, shall have but 2 min: of parallax: But the upper Planets,
Jupiter and Saturn, are so exceedingly remote, that the earths semidiameter
can cause in them no parallax at all, much less in the fixed stars, which are
almost infinitely remote from the earth, retaining their mutual distances and
situations (in what place of the earth soever they be observed) yea from their
first creation, being set by the Almighty, as so many marks, whereunto the
terrestrial inhabitants might refer the seven Planets, or any other celestial
light, as Comets and new Stars.

For the better understanding of this parallacticall discourse, I must entreat
you to examine this following Diagram.

Diagram of parallax.
diagram of Parallax

Where o, l, is the earths semidiameter, 1, 2, 3, be three Planets or Comets
diuersely remote from the earth, and all in one line from o, the earths center,
which refers them all to one place in v, amongst the Euplication of the Diagram.
fixed Stars: but the eye being on the earths superficies in l, does cause a
parallax or change of place, more or less, as they be distant from the earth:
for 1 the nearest to the earth does from l appear in a, making a great
parallax, the angle v, 1, a, or more plainly the arch v, a, which (in the
eighth Sphere) is equal to the angle, but the 2 being further from the earth,
does from l appear in b. having v, b, less parallax, then the former: but 3
being yet further from the earth, does from l appear in c, having v, c, but a
little parallax.

Parallax greatest in the Horizon.
Any of these parallaxes are greatest when the Planet is in the Horizon, as 1
is, the other being a little above: but in the Zenith or Vertical point over
our heads, there can be no parallax at all, for then the line from the Center
does run into the line from the Superficies, making one line. as you see z,
l, o. So that the parallax does from the Horizon upwards continually decrease,
and at length Nothing in the Zenith.
vanish away in the Zenith.

So much less as the Comet is farther from the earth.
By this which has been said is manifest, that the farther any visible thing
is from the earth, the less parallax it must needs have: but the finding of
the parallax is not so easy; Hic labor, hoc opus est: this requires more then
ordinary skill in Astronomy.

To find the parallax.
There be two special ways to find the parallax: The one is by two
observations made at one time in two remote places of the earth, for if the
Comet does in both of them appear in one and the 1 By observations in two
diverse places at one time
same place amongst the fixed stars, then cannot the earths semidiameter have
any proportion to the distance of the Comet: but if the Comet does appear
diversely amongst the fixed stars, then has it parallax more or less
according to his distance from the earth. In the former Diagram let L be
London, R be some other remote place, 1 the Comet, which from L will appear
amongst the fixed stars in A, but from R it will appear in V: so that the
difference is A. V. very much, because 1 is near the earth: Let there be also
another Comet 3 which from L will appear in C, but from R in V, the difference
V C very little, because 3 is very far from the earth. I At London.
have been very diligent in observing all the Comets places amongst the fixed
stars, that so hereafter comparing them with those which appeared in other
countries, the true parallax of this Comet may be known, which I dare say by
this trial will prove 2. In one place by two observations in one night.
little or none. In the mean time I have not neglected the second way of
finding the parallax, which is by comparing two apparent places of the Comet in
one and the same night, one place being near the Horizon, and the other near
the Zenith. For the difference of these two places will manifest the parallax:
where regard must be had of the stars proper motion in the interuall of time,
which is very easy to perform. There be many kinds of observations, by
altitudes, declinations, ascensions, etc. which are very difficult, and
perplexed with diverse species of parallaxes, besides refraction. And therefore
An easy and certain way to find the parallax.
omitting them, I will acquaint you with an easy and most certain way to
search forth any Comets parallax, and that without error of 5 or 6 mi. which is
nothing to 66 mi. of the Moons parallax. This is by observing the Comet a very
little over or under some star near the Horizon, and afterward the same
night near the Zenith or vertical point. For if the Comet (having parallax)
near the Horizon appear a little under the star, it will toward the Zenith
appear near, yea (it may be) eclipse the star, or be a little above him,
which is plain by the Diagram, for the Comet 3 appearing from l in c under the
star v will in z the vertical point be in conjunction with him, and eclipfe
him from your sight. Here the Comet is supposed to have no motion, besides that
from the primum mobile: but if he have any, as this Comet had, it is easy to
make allowance for the same, especially being so little in 5 or 6 hours
betwixt the two observations. As for refraction Refraction here no hindrance.
near the Horizon, it cannot bring any encumbrance, for that it does as well
eleuate the Star, as the Comet.

An observation of the Comets parallax.
The night before the third of December, about one hour after midnight, I
observed the Comet not yet 10. degrees above the Horizon, under two little
stars of the fourth light in the girdle of Arctophylax. The distance of these
stars is but 50. min. which served as a ready and certain measure, whereunto
I might compare the distance of the Comet from them, for the more perspicuous
distinction whereof I used the Telescopium or Trunke-spectacle.

The Comet appeared from the uppermost star (which was directly in his way)
the distance of the two stars, and moreover part thereof, in all one degrees. 6.
min. Toward morning, the Comet being mounted 53. degrees above the Horizon,
the Comet appeared from the said star a little more then of the two stars
distance, about 36 mi: so that in 5. hours the Comet was come but 30. minutes
nearer to the star; no more then his proper motion in that time (according to
former and following nights observations) required. Wherefore removing this
proper motion, he would have appeared at both times a like distant from the
star; and therefore had none or little parallax. For suppose the Comet to
have had as much parallax as the Moon (in her perigaeon) which is (in 10.
degrees above the Horizon) 65. min. and in 53. degrees. of altitude scarce 40. m.
the difference is 25. m. and so much should the Comet by alteration of his
parallax have appeared nearer the star at the second observation, then at the
first, to which if you add his proper motion in the mean space, it will be 55.
m. and so the Comet should have been but part of the 2 stars distance from the
upper star; whereas he was more then, which is a notorious difference, and
could not escape the sight; and therefore had not so great parallax as the
moon, Found much less than the Moons parallax.
and by necessary consequence was above her, *yea many times her distance from
the earth, which I might easily confirm by the like observation the night
following, when the Comet had overtaken the star more then a degree; but
especially by my observations the nights preceding the 10. 11. and 12. days,
when the Comet was very near unto a little star in the left arm of
Arctophylax, at the first under him and after above, and also by his distance
from another obscure star (which I found by the Telescopium 15 mi. above the
Comet: this little star I could find in no globe nor map, but only in the
excellent Vranimetria of that diligent and industrious Beyerus. By diligent and
curious noting the Comets distance from these stars, first near Not above 6.
m.
the Horizon, and afterward toward the Zenith in the same nights, I dare be
bold to conclude that this Comet had not 6. minutes of parallax (for within
these limits I may confine the incertaintie of my observations) and therefore
more then 600. semidiameters of the earth distant from it.

Proved also from prospect of the Comets forelocke.
How strange so ever this may seem, yet is it enforced from most certain
demonstration parallacticall. Which may moreover be confirmed from the prospect
and irradiation of this Comets forelocke. Which if the head had any notable
parallax, must of necessity have twice so much, and so could not appear in
one line with the Comet, and the Sun as I have formerly demonstrated.

But least the Reader not acquainted with Mathematical demonstrations, should
think it a novel position, yea (...), a strange uncouth and never heard of
opinion to elevate Comets so far above the Elementary, yea lunary regions. I
must relate unto them that besides those famous new stars, the one in
Cassiopaea 1572. and the other in the foot History of new stars, and Comets
far above the Moon.
of Ophiuchus 1604. both which lasted more then a year, and that in Cygnus
continuing many years; all three from all places of the earth appearing in one
and the same position amongst the fixed stars, (an argument of their huge
distance above the Moon) besides these and that new star noted by Hipparchus
2000. years almost since, diverse excellent Mathematicians of this age, have by
certain remonstrances showed many Comets farther above the Moon, then I
affirm this to be. Amongst, others, that second Hipparchus, Tycho Brahe in the
Comets 1577. 1580. 1582. 1585. 1590. could not with all his admirable,
sumptuous, and exquisite Vranical engines find the least parallax, no not of
one minute; and therefore justly affirmed them far beyond the Moon: yea, which
is most remarkable, and caused no small admiration, and delight in the Heroicke
Lantgraue of Hessen, as it pleased him by letters to signify to Tycho*
Rothmannus the Lantgraues Mathematician, observing the Comet in 1585. agreed
with Tycho in the place thereof to a scruple, (at one and the same instant) and
yet the one was remote from the other almost 300. English miles, the distance
betwixt Cassels, and Vrani-burge, which punctual agreement had been impossible
if the Comet had not been exceedingly remote beyond the moon. I must also
remember that Albumasar 1000. years almost since observed a Comet above the
sphere of Mercury.

This Comet 600. semidiameters of the earth from it.
Wherefore it is no such strange distance from the earth that I assign to this
our Comet, 600. semidiameters of the earth; which is but of the Suns distance.
I might justly account this Comet higher, but I will keep within the limits
of my observations.

And for your better satisfaction, reduce this distance into english miles,
allowing (by the statute How many English miles the earths semidiameter is.
of 25. Elizabethae) 5280. foot to a mile; and 3834. of these miles to the
earths Semidiameter, therein following the late ingenious and painful
measurations of Willebrordus Snellius. Wherefore the Comets How many miles the
Comet was from the earth.
distance from the earth was uot less then 2300000. english miles, whereas the
Moon (when she is nearest) is little more then 200900. miles.

The irradiation also of this Comets stream, (though in the end it seemed very
short) was sometime How many miles the forelocke extended.
extended to a wonderful length, more then 2000000. miles, which is nothing to
the Suns ejaculation of his beams upon the earth, more then 6900000. miles.
From the Comets distance does necessarily follow the vast globositie of his
body, How many miles the Comet was in thickness.
though to us his diameter seemed but a few minutes, which being no less then
4. minutes will extend to 2668. miles, which is almost of the earths diameter,
and therefore the Comets bulk was at least 1/27 of the whole earth; and not
fully twice greater How much the globositie thereof was, compared to the Earth,
Moon, and Sun.
then the Moon; but the Comet compared to the Sun was scarce 1. to 8000. so
little is this great Comet in respect of that glorious lamp; and yet the Sun
but a point to the immense sphere of fixed stars; and all this less then
nothing in comparison of that infinite Circle, Cuius centrum est vbique, The
infiniteness of the Almighty.
circumferentia nusquam, The center of whose presence, and prescience is every
where, and his limits no where: That great (...), and Creator, who has
measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, meeted out heaven with a spanne,
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, watghed the mountains in
scales, and the hills in a balance. O Lord when I consider the Heavens, the
work of thy fingers, the Moon, and the Stars, which thou have ordained,
what is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that thou
visitest him?

The Comet* was not compact of exhalations.
This Comets huge distance from the earth, and vast magnitude will cause to
vanish all these smoakie exhalations which by common opinion being by the
caelestiall light attracted from the earth into the higher regions of the air,
are there condensed, and by motion set on fire, continually burning in the
form of a Comet, until all the material be spent. But this Comet was far
above the highest ascent of gross and sulphurous exhalations, his quantity
more then could be caused by a great part of the earth turned into smoke, his
motion too regular, and his durance too long for such wandering, and soon
vanishing exhalations.

Those Philosophers, who still walk in the way of the Gentiles, are afraid to
induce generation, or any other mutation into the heavens, rather choosing to
follow their blind guide (who denied the world to have any beginning, or
ending) then to believe the infallible truth of sacred Scripture.

Others have been scrupulous to conceit any creation since that first Saboth.

What was the Comets materials.
But whether this Comet and the like were caused by efficacy of nature (the
ordinary power which God has put into all his creatures) compacting the liquid
aetheriall substance, or whether by the immediate power of the worlds Architect
(qui dixit, and facta sunt, mandauit, and creata sunt: Spoke and they were
made, commanded and they were created) a new matter was presently created:

I will not here curiously dispute* either of these ways does acknowledge a
celestial matter, and divine providence.

It were vain to refute those who have imagined The Comet not made of Galaxia.
Comets, and new stars to be made of the Galaxia, or milkie way; for so
before this day would all that milk have been turned into curds; neither is
that way any whit more condense then the rest of the The Comet not made of
Galaxia
heaven, but only an irradiation of innumerable stars close together, as the
Telescopium does ocularly demonstrate.

Neither shall I need to reprove those ancient Philosophers, who (in the
dawning of Astronomy) thought Comets to be (...), a co-apparition of Not a
co-apparition of planets.
Planets seeming to touch one another; or (as our simple vulgar still do) some
planet, especially Merc. Nor morningstarre.
or Venus appearing after a long latitat under the Sun beams; or some fixed
star disguised (I know not how) with borrowed locks. Not much unlike to some
late writers, who suppose Comets to be stars Not created from the beginning.
from the beginning created, but hidden in the deep abyss of heaven, and at
certain times descending lower, become visible to the earth.

But whatsoever was the material of this Comet, howsoever compact, and
dissolved, I am enforced in conclusion of this Astronomicall part, to lie
prostrate A religions conclusion.
at the Almighties power in the globositie thereof, to admire his wisdom in
the motion, and adore his goodness in the present apparition.

MORAL PROGNOSTICS or Applications of the late Comet or Blazing-Starre.
Tu Jupiter me ducito, and Fatalitas.
Great God, that do all future things effect,
Inspire my thoughts with truth, my pen direct.

IT now remains (with my readers friendly censure) to point a Mercuriall
finger in the Prognostics, especially the moral applications of this new
Comet, by divine providence set on the high Olympian Mount, to some the Herald
of wrath, but to others the joyful Ambassador of peace and mercy; the place
and body thereof far surmounting the region, and no less excelling the
matter of common Meteors, the signification also does as much transcend their
effects, This Comet a sign of more then elementarie alterations.
being not so much a cause (as they be) of elementary alterations, as a
colestiall sign of greater consequents* There be not yet lacking some, who
erect Chancels to the blind Goddess Chance, sacrificing to that abominable
Idol, not without impious contumely of the omnipotent God, and vile contempt
of his power and providence in the fabrique and regiment Against Epicurean
chance.
of the world. These true -- Epicuri de grege p^rci,
filthy and brutish swine, (...) whose God (as the Apostle says) is their
belly, wallowing in the mire of voluptuous sensuality, little regard the
apparition of these new celestial signs, taking more And neglect of these
celestial signs.
care to frizle and brisle their superfluous hair, than of this Comets blazing
locks. These Epicurean pigs in stead of sober Elegies, grunt forth their
wanton Ditties,

Viuamus mea Lesbia, atque amemus,
Rumoresque senum seueriorum
Omnes vnius aestimemus assis:
Soles occidere and redire possunt,
Nobis cum semel occidit breuis lux,
Nox est perpetuo vna dormienda.
Come Lesbia, let us live and love;
What though grim Sires us reprove?
A doyt for all their wise advise,
The Sun may set, and eftsoons rise,
But when our wastfull blase is past,
Dark night with us for aye will last.
Procul, procul o prophani:
Deus! En Deus!
Away, away profane, irreligious wretches: it is God, it is God omnipotent,
and omniscient, to the God does appear in these signs.
wicked most fearful and terrible, to the repentant most gracious and
merciful, that appears in these celestial signs. I might easily fill a
volume with verses of holy enraged Poets, who have sounded a loud alarm of
these blazing stars; yea and confirm their propheticke lines with particular
histories of the strange mutations ensuing these presages Mutations ensuing
them.
both in Church and Common*weale. Let that Epiphonema of Manilius to Augustus
Caesar suffice:

Nunquam futilibus excanduit ignibus ether:
The earth in vain did never gaze,
When Comets in the sky do blaze.
If any evil follow, we our selves are in fault.
But I list not to be an ominous Scrich-owle: I had rather be the Halcyon of
calm serenitie, which doubtless I shall be if our selves hinder not.

Ne mirere graueis rerumque hominumque ruinas:
Saepe domi culpa est, nescimus credere coelo.
Marvel not if strange ruins men do grieve:
The fault's at home, heaven we not believe.
My dear Countrymen, Heaven forbid that I should be to you a Cassandra, but a
Calchas. Will you have my lines the comfortable rays of Phoebus, more true
then those Delphicke Oracles? Will you not have this Comet an unfortunate
Helene, and woeful messenger of tempest? Then cast over board sleepie
disobedient Ianas; let no rebellious transgressions, no sinful fugitives lurk
and snort in your Cabines.

Sin being banished, these signs need not be feared.
Prevent the divine anger with timely and serious repentance, then dare I say
to you with Jeremiah, fear not the signs of heaven, at which the heathen are
dismaide.

Charlemaines fearfulness.
Indeed Charlemaine did religiously answer in this very case; That he feared
not the sign, but the great and potent Creator thereof; yet I suppose that
jealous fear wrought much in the Emperors feeble spirits, ready of themselves
to vanish through age.

Vespasians answer concerning a Comet.
It was more courageously replied by Vespasian (as Dion reports) when the
apparition of a Comet was thought to portend his death. No, said he, this
bushie star notes not me, but the Parthian King, (...). For he has the
Comets locks, I am bald.

The wicked have only cause to sear.
And insooth those Gorgons heads, whose snakie hairs of filthy and loathsome
sins affright earth, and provoke heaven, have only or special cause to
suspect these caelestiall signs; but others that can be content to cut off
these monstrous and vicious locks, yea prefer the baldness of Innocence
before Comets rays of divine favor to the godly.
the curles of Iniquity; need not to fear, but rather hope, that these new
Stars be to them the rays of divine favor, and goodness.

God only knows what this Comet does signify in particular.
What this Comet does in particular signify is not possible to declare without
an (...) or divine inspiration.

-- Nouit Deus omnia solus
Quae sunt, quae fuerint, quae mox ventura trahantur.
God only knows, and none, but He
What is, what was, and what shall be.
The Star which led the Wisemen to Christ.
Yet to descend somewhat lower then Universalities: That blessed Star, which
conducted the Magi to Christ's poor, but sacred nurcery (of whose incarnation,
and happiness to mankind thereby that Star was an heavenly Harbenger) does
enforce me often to think that those many new stars and Comets, which have
been more this last Century Comets signify the light of the Gospel.
of the world, then in many ages before, did amongst other things signify that
glorious light of the Gospel, which has lately illumined the whole world.

Five Comets in 10. years about the preaching of Luther.
About the preaching of Luther were at least five Comets in ten years, after
which followed the happy departure of Germany, England, and many other
Northern parts from the spiritual Babylon. This new Comet does give us hope,
that the rest of Christendom before long will follow; and so at Sybillaes
prophecy against Rome.
length shall be verified the Prophecy of Sybilla upon occasion of these new
stars.

(...)
Rome shall again become a forlorn and desert village, or sheep-coat.
The Comet 1558* a good sign to the Protestants.
Did not our Fathers find the Comet in 1558. to be a sign of much happiness
to the persecuted Protestants in England, and Germany? yea did not that
admirable new Star in Cassiopaea 1572. and The new Star 1572. and the*
Comet 1577.
that remarkable Comet 1577. plainly from heaven remonstrate, that howsoever
the Evangelical Churches in France, and the Low Countries might be for a time
greiuously afflicted, yet maugre Satan, and all his hellish Furies they should
at length flourish, and triumph over their cruel adversaries. Besides The
Gospel has shined amongst the Jndians.
these regions of Europe, a blessed light has in this age shined to another
world, which did long fit in most fearful darkness; I mean the East and
West Indies. I am verily persuaded that the new Star which appeared so long
from September The late new Stars in Ophiuclius and Cygnus.
1604. to January, 1606. in the foot of Serpentarius, having coincidance with
the great conjunction of the three superior Planets, and that other so many
years in Cygnus, does promise (being with this present Comet conformed) a more
clear illustration of those remote regions with the resplendent light of
salvation: according to our Saviors Oracle; The Gospel shall be preached
through the whole world.
Praedicabitur Euangelium hoc in vniuerso terrarum orb: And this Gospel shall
be preached throughout the whole earth. Which gives us hope, that his other
gracious promise shall shortly be accomplished. And Jerusalem shall be trodden
down by the Gentiles, Calling of the Jews.
until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled. Which certainly shall precede
the second coming of our blessed Savior; Fore runners whereof (he says)
shall be signs in the Sun, Moon, and Stars.

To draw nearer home, not by the rules of vulgar Against vulgar Astrology.
Astrology, whose precepts I esteem no better then (...), Phantasticke
dreams (as Metrocles said of his books, which he consecrated to Vulcan) but
directed by these celestial Hieroglyphickes, in which I may say as the Poet
long ago:

Sapientibus per ambages fata eloqui;
Fatuis magistrum prorsus esse inutilem.
The Fates by winding riddles Wisemen teach,
In vain to fools though never so plain you preach.
Moral application of the Comets motion amongst the constallations.
Directed (I say) by this Hieroglyphicke doctrine, as by a sure Cynosure, and
conducting Pole-starre: I dare boldly affirm, that this Comet being followed
in his Emblemated motion is to great Britains Majesty, and Monarchy, Signum
foelix, faustum, This Comet followed in his motion a happy sign to great
Britain.
and fortunatum: An auspicious sign of great honor and happiness.

About the 17. of November, the Comet was in conjunction with Mercury, supposed
by the ancients The Comets conjunction with Mercury.
the Messenger, and Interpreter of Heaven, Patron of Arts and traffic: this
fortunate meeting was near the Ecliptique on this Northern side; as if Royal
Phoebus had sent him to entertain this new Ambassador with joyful embraces,
and honorably to receive him into these arcticke regions: yea, as it were to
give him some special charge from the great Monarch of the Starrie Empire. And
here (me This Comet brings us hope of good from the East Indies.
thinks) the East Indies do by these two Legates present great Britain with
her odoriferous and healthful spices, her precious Jewels, and other oriental
riches.

The Comets passage through the constellation of Libra.
The place of this congresse is most remarkable, amidst the balance of Libra;
which the Comet passing through does withal, as it were from Heaven, proclaim
to Prince and people: -- discite iustitians moniti.


Commends Justice and Equity unto us.
Justice by learned Politicians is divided into Geometrical, or distributive,
and arithmeticall or correctiue Justice; and both of these does this heavenly
Ambassador commend to mortal men, especially the Inhabitants of these British
Isles. And for the first does tell them that Cyclopicall Anarchy is dangerous,
Distributive Justice.
and no less is Anabaptisticall (...), or equality: And thanks be to God our
Church, and Commonweal are well rid of these saucie Mates. Equality
dangerous.
But this Messenger of Heaven does warn us of Pride of apparel.
another proud parity, which begins to affront all degrees in sumptuous, and
presumptuous apparel, with strange, and inconstant fashions; a disorder much
reproved by God himself, and withstood in well governed Commonweals.

The other is correctiue Justice, an indifferent and equal administration of
right to all. When the Laws be not as Anacharsis said, like Spiders webs,
which the great Hornets break through, but the silly flies are entangled; when
the Widow and fatherless are protected, and the poor man's cause gratis
pleaded; where the scant measure (so abominable to God) is made up; where
there is no wicked balance (which he will not justify) nor secret bags of
deceitful waights.

Exhortation to equity.
Wherefore my Countrymen, do justly one with another, and show mercy; so shall
you be more acceptable to God, then if you offered a thousand Hecatombs, or
ten thousand rivers of oil. Behold, behold this celestial Messenger from
Heaven does bring you an even poysing balance, and equal waights, receive and
use them, so shall it be the sign of good to you and yours: o excellent
Justice.

Te duce si qua manent sceler is vestigia nostri,
Irrita perpetua soluent formidine terr as.
Thee being Guide, if sinful steps appear,
They now don out, shall free the world from fear.
Pauca tamen suberunt priscae vestigia fraudis.
It may be yet some little stain,
Of the old Deceit will still remain.
O would it were no worse, o that we were so purged of this deceitful
iniquity; then might we with cheerful eyes behold this Ambassador from
Heaven, and with joyful hearts receive his message.

But least we should without waighing their worth, neglect these golden
balances of right and equity, the Comet does another way again, and again
enforce the necessity of this excellent virtue of virtues.

(...)
(...)
Iustitia in sese virtutes continet omnes.
To Justices most gracious Court
All other virtues do resort.
The Comet by spreading his hair over Virgo does enforce his commendation of
Justice.
Which this Star would blazen forth by displaying his golden locks over the
skirts of Virgo, that just Astraea, which last of all the virtues forsook the
earth, polluted with so many vices.

Vltima coelestum terras Astraea reliquit.
Justice last of all the Gods did fly,
From earth polluted with Impiety.
But this Sydereus nuncius does as it were entreat her to return with her
flourishing spike, and advise us to give her content, least as in former times
our corrupt manners make her weary of the earth. From Libra the Comet posting
over the aetheriall The Comet presents a crown to the Prince, and a spike of
plenty to the people, for reward of Justice.
plains camposque liquentes, at length comes near to Ariadnes crown, which
he takes to him for a princely reward of Justice, reserving the Virgins spike
for the people. O all preserving Justice, fructificas solum and firmas solium:
Thou fructifiest the ground, and establishest the throne! Blessed are they that
do justice at all times (says the royal Psalmist) (...)


The just man's seed shall never perish, but flourish like the Palm Tree.

With these rich presents the Comet enters the celestial The Comets long
residence in Arctophylax.
mansion of Arctophylax (mighty guardian of the Northern Bears) where
finding gracious welcome, he makes a long residence.

Great Britain governed with the scales of Justice, florisheth with her spike
of plenty.
It is Great Britains royal Court, which divine Astraea does illustrate with
her gracious and healthful rays, it is this fortunate Island that is governed
with her scales of justice, and enriched with her spike of plenty. The worlds
great Monarch has crowned Her Imperial Diadem united, and preserved from
Heaven.
his Majesty with the Imperial Diadem of all the British Isles; and by this
his Ambassador does promise him a long and happy possession thereof, and to
his posterity for ever. As for his enemies, he has and will cloth them with
shame, but on him and his shall his crown flourish in this life, and an
immortal crown of glory in the heavens.

Two Protectors of Crown and Spike.
But I may not forget two associates of Justice, (and with her sure protectors
of this Crown and Spike) which this celestial Legate does together with them
present: the one a jewel of inestimable Serpents eye of vigilancie.
value, (...), a sharp piercing eye of vigilance and circumspection, wherewith
the subtle serpent did congratulate his passage by: the other an enchanted 2.
An Achillean spear.
Achillean spear in the hand of Arctophylax, to defend our Arcticke Bears,
and offend all barking currs and savage wolves; as the Serpents eye will watch
the crafty foxes.

Serpents types of wisdom.
Serpents both in sacred and humane writings are the symboles or types of
wisdom and prudent vigilancie. Yea, without this Serpents eye, strength is but
an one-eyd Polyphemus, mole sua ruens, destroying himself with his own
corpulencie.

Neuer'more need of the Serpents eye.
Never was there more need of circumspection, then in this faeculent and
tartareous age, wherein many are so far from Numa's erecting a Temple to
Fidelity, that they come nearer to these perfidious Spartans, (...)
Who have neither altar, faith, nor oath.
Or if they have any religion at all, the chief articles there of be
equivocation, fraud, perjury, treachery, assasinations, and murders: against
whom there is Epicharmus his counsel.
no other but that Epicharmian provision;

(...)
(...)
Be watchful, and remember to suspect;
These be the arms which wisdoms self protect.
His Majesty's searching eye of wisdom preserved the whole Kingdom.
And in sooth had not our wise and learned Solomon with this Serpents eye
searched into the secret vaults, and dark cauernes of that hellish
gunpowder-treason, de Britannia actum esset, there had been a sudden unexpected
end of Great Britains glory.

Lions Symbol of magnanimity coupled with Serpents.
With these winding Serpents the ancient Sages coupled Lions the symbol of
magnanimity, neither may they be separate, but conjoined do complete a royal
guardian and protector. Which is excellently typed forth by those who first
reduced the stars into symbolicall constellations, placing Virgo in the midst
of Libra and Leo. I will not follow the allegory in Great Britains royal
Lions, having done it elsewhere; but apply the present emblem traced in this
Comets motion, which with the Serpents eye joins a defensive and offensive
weapon in the hand of Arctophylax. Let none here expect from me an Alarm; no,
my panegyricall part of Great Britains Monarchy will show our singular and
vnparallelled happiness in this gracious peace. (...)
said the high-soaring Poet; Inexpert thoughts are vain and light. Dulce
bellum inexpertis, was the royal motto of Englands greatest warrior, and
France's terror, Edward the third.

Excellence of peace.
It is an ill peace which I would not prefer before the most glorious war;
and with Martian the Emperor, Dum liceat in pace viuere, non licet arma
sumere: Whilst we may live in peace, we may not take up hostile arms.

War to be remembered in peace.
Yet for all this, would I not counsel to deliver up our arms to our enemies,
as the foolish shepherds sometimes did their dogs to the wolves.

Oh how are we degenerate from the generous spirits and warlike meditations of
our victorious ancestors! Nimia foelicitate mergimur in voluptates:
Voluptuousness hinders warlike meditations.
Our overmuch felicity has almost drencht us in voluptuousness.

Et patimur long ae pacis mala, saeuior armis Luxuria incumbit.
We feel the breeding evils of long peace;
Now riot worse then wars begins to increase.
I will not ask where are the bows and arrows wherewith our fathers
conquered France, and releened Spain: but where are our Muskets? Are they not
turned into Tobacco pipes? Where are our English valor and courage? Are they
not with that outlandish weed vanished into smoke? May I not Muskets turned
into Tobacco pipes.
say as it was sometimes said of those degenerate Milesians, (...): The English
were once valiant and warlike. Who may not from these smoakie parents fear a
fumish generation, whose courage may perhaps be soon inflamed, but sooner
quenched? Like as Florus describes the old French; whose first assault (says
he) was mayor quam virorum, The effeminate valor of the old French.
more then for men; but presently minor quam foeminarum, less then for women.
Or as Julius Celsus reports of them, their courage was hasty, but effeminate,
and unable to resist. And in sooth what other can we expect from this fumish
age, then a furious, but soon exhaling rage, rather then courage? Rage rather
then courage.
I might justly take up a Satyricke, and sharp reproof of this degenerate
custom. But this noble City gives us better hope, and (though not forgotten
in Great Britains Panegyricke, yet here also) enforces me to a just Encomion
of her Civil Censure and Martial discipline. London (if any) may assume that
brave Motto, Encomion of London.
Tam Marti, quam Mercurio.
being not only the rich staple of trade and traffic, but also the complete
armorie of all Martial accoutrements. Her flagge has waued with all the four
winds, in the frozen North, torrid South, odoriferous East, and hopeful West.
Her Cross has been advanced against Turk and Infidel, and her Dagger died
in the blood of domestic Rebels, and foreign enemies. Her worthy Citizens,

Pacis bellique ministri,
Who serviceable are,
In peace, and also war,
Her military discipline.
do not only by thousands in their yearly gallant musters, rejoice their
City, and strike a secret terror into their enemies, but also by their
voluntary and private Martial meditations (each other week) Her voluntaries.
give a goodly testimony of their generous spirits, serviceable skill, and
good affection to their King and Country. Truly these noble minds, and warlike
exercises, do well deserve from the Commons imitation, and from the State
encouragement. Thus much (if not too much) of Arctophylax his spear, and the
Comets emblemated motion amongst the Coincidence of this Comet with the Syned
at Dort.
celestial Hieroglyphics. I may not forget the coincidence of this celestial
messenger with the present Synod at Dort, divine providence actually with the
rays of this new Comet dispelling those foggie mists which began to
ouer-shadow the glorious light of Evangelical verity. Neither may I omit that
Comets do often appear, that the works Comets often appear that the works
of God may be manifested.
of God may be made manifest in them (as our Savior said in another case) or
as S. Paul, that by these visible things we may know the invisible; God by
these new celestial blazons laboring to eleuate our dejected eyes and base
cogitations, from earth to Commendation of Astronomy.
the contemplation of his power, wisdom, and goodness in these glorious
lights most apparent: Coeli enarrant gloriam Dei, The heavens declare the
glory of the Lord, says the royal Prophet. How often is he rapt up in the
contemplation of the stars? Yea does not God himself (expostulating with
Job) make mention of the celestial Hieroglyphics, the sweet influence of the
Pleiodes, the bonds of Orion, Mazzaroth, the sons of Arcturus, and the
crooked Serpent.

S. Paul reproving the Athenians blind devotion (...), to the unknown God,
does refute them by testimony of their own Poet; (...), for we are also his
offspring: the very words of Aratus the Greek Poet, and in that very poem,
wherein he at large deciphereth the emblematicall configurations of the
stars. Certainly if S. Paul were now again on the earth, and should to some
allege this Astronomicall Poet, they would not fail with the Athenians to
say, (...), He seems to be a setter forth of strange Gods; or exclaim with
Festus, (...): Paul thou art beside thy self, too much learning does make thee
mad. But these mad Ignoramus must be cured with Hellebore, and not with
words. More commendable was the endeavor of Hipparchus, who upon occasion of a
new star was Endeavor of Hipparchus in Astronomy.
stirred up to such admiration, that he attempted (a more then humane act) to
number the stars unto posterity, to measure their distances, and set forth
their respective situations, yea to leave the heaven it self as it were an
inheritance to all men, if any in future times would be found to understand so
rare a complot. But how few in so many after ages (two This divine Art
neglected and destitute of Patrons.
thousands of years) have taken possession of this heavenly heritage? How few
Caesar's and Alphonses have patronized this noble science? I cannot but bewail
this great neglect. But I hope this new Messenger from Heaven does bring happy
tidings of some munificent and liberal Patron to these rauishing (but
impouerishing) studies, by whose gracious bounty the most recondite mysteries
of this abstruse and divine science shall at length be manifested.

Now for a final closure to this impolished discourse:

Conclusion.
Whatsoever evil this new Comet may presage, the sign be to them that hate
us, and the interpretation thereof to our enemies: But whatsoever good it can
promise, the God of Heaven (who there placed it) confirm them all to his
royal Majesty, and Great Britains Monarchy.

AMEN.
From my house in London near All-hallowes in the Wall, this last of December.
1618.

