A GVIDE TO GO TO GOD: OR, AN EXPLANATION of the Perfect Pattern of Prayer,
The LORDS PRAYER.

By WILLIAM GOVGE, B. in D. and Minister of Gods Word in Blackfriars LONDON.

ISA. 30. 21. This is the way: walk in it. AT LONDON, Printed by G. M. and R.
B. for Edward Brewster, and are to be sold at his shop near the great North
door of St. Paul's Church, at the sign of the Bible. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RIGHT Worshipful, and other my much respected
Parishioners, Inhabitants in Blacke-Friers London, All needful Prosperity in
this world, and eternal Felicity in the World to come
I DESIRE (my much honored and entirely beloved Parishioners) so long as the
Lord of life shall preserve me in the Land of the living, I desire to go on
in promoting your spiritual edification every way that I can, privately,
publicly, by prayer, by preaching, yea and by printing too. Behold here an
evidence thereof. What privately I first digested in mine own meditation, and
then publicly delivered by word of mouth, whereof in the open Church you heard
your children and servants examined, Deus est nobis summum bonum. Neque infra
remanendum nobis est, neque vltra quarendum. Alterum euim periculesum, alterum
nullum est. Aug. de Mor. Eccl. Cath. l. 1. c. 8
and for a blessing whereupon many prayers by us all jointly and severally have
been poured out before God, is now through Gods gracious providence so
published as it may be reuiewed so often as you please. Well accept it: for it is
A GVIDE TO GO TO GOD. God is the highest, and chiefest Good, below which we
may not remain, beyond which we cannot attain. To place our rest in any thing
before we come to God is dangerous. Oratione intramus coelestem illam curiam in
qua Rex regum stellato sedet solio etc. Bern. Sermon. de 4. modis Orand. Oratione
praesentamus nos quasi saci^ ad faciem cum Deo loquentes. Ibid.
To attain to any rest beyond God is impossible. This therefore, is that
proper place whether the soul well enlightened and rectified aspireth, as all
hot light things aspire to the high hot Region. The means whereby we men on
earth have access to God in Heaven, is Prayer. By Prayer we enter into the
Court where God sits in his Majesty, and we present out selves before him
speaking unto him as it were face to face. That therefore which instructs us
to pray aright, directs us to God. This does the Lords Prayer: And nothing
can do it better. For this end, To teach us how to pray, it was first
prescribed. It is not only a most absolute prayer in it self, but also a
perfect pattern for other prayers. And in this respect the only way wherein we
can go to God. Full of matter is this form of Prayer, but few the words
thereof. Such fullness of matter in so few words make it to many as the
prophecy of Christ was to Candaces Eunuch, whereof he said (to him that moved
this question, Understand thou what thou read?) How can I except I had a
guide? A guide therefore is needful for many to direct them in this way to go
to God. Lo a Guide at hand. This Explanation of the Lords Prayer is offered to
you for that purpose. But as a Guide that directs a Traveler in his journey
to the Kings Court, makes not the way better, but shows him how to order his
travel in that way: so this Guide, this Explanation, adds nothing to the
Perfection of the Prayer, but only helps you in the use thereof. The many
particulars which minister just matter of ardent supplication, hearty
gratulation, deep humiliation, and conscionable observation of our ways, are
in this Explanation distinctly set out. Thereby you may see how rich a Cabonet
the Lords Prayer is: how full of most precious jewels, useful for the soul of
man. The Excellency of this form of Prayer is set forth in the first Section
of this Explanation. Whatsoever is therein performed is the fruit of my
affected Retiredness, and suspected Idleness in the country. So many, so
continual are my employments in the City, so many interruptions from my
studies day after day are there caused, as I never yet could find any leisure
to set down distinctly such points as by Gods assistance were uttered out of
the Pulpet. Whatsoever has hitherto been published by me, has in my retiring
time been prepared for the Press. This benefit of a few weeks absence in the
year from my charge (there being in that time a good supply made by my
Reverend Brethren) may gain a sufficient dispensation with those that are not
too supercilious; which I hope you, my Parishioners, will not be. For I have
ever found such true love, such good respect, such kind usage, such favorable
acceptance of all my pains in every kind, as I have just cause to bless the
divine providence for bringing me to this place. The Lord God so bless all my
labors unto you all, as we may have al just cause to bless him one for
another, and to continue mutually and heartily to pray one for another. Do ye
so: So will do

Your careful Pastor Church-Court in Blackfriars WILLIAM GOVGE.
London, 17. Febr. 1625
OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, and the Power and the Glory, for ever. Amen.

A Table of the several and distinct points handled in this Explanation of the
perfect Pattern of Prayer, as in order they follow one another.
PREFACE.
. 1. OF the Excellency of the Lords Prayer. Page 1 2. Of the several branches
of the Lords Prayer. 5 3. Of the preparation to Prayer. 6 4. Of the means to
prepare us to prayer. 7 5. Of praying to God alone. 7 6. Of Gods goodness and
greatness jointly considered together. 8 7. Of this title Father applied to
God. 10 8. Of instructions which the title Father applied to God import. 11 9.
Of the prerogative of Gods children to speak to him face to face. 13 10. Of
their duty who have free access to God. 14 11. Of the parties comprised under
this particle ( OUR.) 15 12. Of applying Gods fatherhood to our selves. 16 13.
Of Gods impartial respect to all his children and sufficiency of blessing for
all. 18 14. Of their mutual duties which say ( Our Father.) 19 15. Of the
Saints participation of one another Prayers. 21 16. Of Gods being in heaven.
22 17. Of the direction which Gods being in heaven gives us for manner of
praying. 24 18. Of the direction which Gods being in heaven gives for the
matter of Prayer. 28
1. PETITION.
. 19. OF the manner of handling every Petition. 30 20. Of the name of God and
of the things comprised under it. 31 21. Of Gods making known himself. 33 22.
Of Hallowing. 34 23. Of the creatures hallowing the Creator. 35 24. Of the
excellency of holiness. 35 25. Of the extent of man's desire to have Gods name
hallowed. 36 26. Of man's disabilitie to hallow Gods name. 36 27. Of the force
of this word ( thy) in the first Petition. 37 28. Of man's honoring God,
because God honors him. 38 29. Of Saints honoring God, because they are
sons. 38 30. Of preferring Gods honor before all other things. 39 31. Of
aiming at Gods honor in all things. 40 31. Of the p^rticulars to be prayed
for under the first Petition. 41 32. Of the particulars for which thanks is to
be given under the first Petition. 44 33. Of the duties required by reason of
the first Petition. 45 34. Of the things to be bewailed in regard of the first
Petition. 46
2. PETITION.
. 35. OF Gods kingdom what it is and what be the kinds of it. 47 36. Of Gods
reigning over rebels. 48 37. Of the kingdom of Grace and Glory. 49 38. Of the
difference betwixt the kingdom of Grace. Glory. 50 39. Of the Churches
government. 51 40. Of the increase of the Church. 52 41. Of the Churches
imperfection. 52 42. Of man's disabilitie to come unto God. 54 43. Of the force
of this word ( THY) in the second Petition. 54 44. Of Gods power to make his
kingdom come. 55 45. Of the best means and fittest persons to hallow Gods
Name. 55 46. Of the spiritual blessings to be craved for the whole Militant
Church. 56 47. Of praying for the outward temporal estate of the Church. 59
48. Of the extent of our prayer for the good of the Church after our time. 60
49. Of praying against evils that annoy the Church. 61 50. Of the things to be
craved for particular Churches that we know. 61 51. Of praying for the Churches
whereof in particular we are members. 62 52. Of things to be desired for the
Church Triumphant. 64 53. Of the things for which thanks is to be given by
reason of the second Petition. 66 54. Of the duties required under the second
Petition. 67 55. Of the things to be bewailed under the second Petition. 68
3. PETITION.
. 56. OF the will of God here meant and doing it. 71 57. Of the extent of our
desire to have Gods will done. 73 58. Of the rule of our obedience to Gods
will. 73 59. Of practicing Gods will. 74 60. Of man's disabilitie to do Gods
will. 75 61. Of the force of this word ( THY) in the third Petition. 75 62. Of
preferring Gods will before all others. 76 63. Of praying only for men in
earth. 77 64. Of the meaning of this phrase ( in heaven.) 77 65. Of the manner
of following a perfect pattern. 78 66. Of the matter of Patience which the
inhabitants of heaven have. 79 67. Of well doing go^d. 80 68. Of propounding a
perfect pattern before us. 81 69. Of aiming at more then we can attain to. 82
70. Of the order of the third Petition. 83 71. Of the honor done to God by
doing his will. 84 72. Of showing our selves to be Gods subjects by doing his
will. 84 73. Of particulars which we are taught to pray for in the third
Petition. 85 74. Of the things to be prayed for in the direction of the third
Petition. 89 75. ^f the distinct heads of the manner of doing Gods will in
heaven. 89 76. Of the things for which thanks is to be given in the third
Petition: and in the direction annexed to it. 91 77. Of the duties to be
observed by reason of the third Petition. 92 78. Of sins against Gods will
revealed by his word. 95 99. Of sins against Gods will manifested by events.
96 80. Of sins against the manner of doing good. 97
4. PETITION.
. 81. OF the meaning of the word ( Bread.) 98 82. Of the Arguments alleged for
spiritual food to be meant by ( Bread) answered. 99 83. Of praying for
temporal blessings. 101 84. Of men's right to the things of this world. 101 85.
Of sundry blessings arising from this particle ( OUR.) 103 86. Of the meaning
of this word ( Daily.) 104 87. Of desiring no more then is needful. 105 88. Of
covetousness, ambition, and voluptuousness. 106 89. Of Gods giving temporal
blessings. That he gives them. How he gives them. 106 90. Of the instructions
taught us by asking bread of God. 108 91. Of Gods free-giuing the things of
this world. 108 92. Of praying both for our selves and for others. 109 93. Of
praying for others outward welfare. 110 94. Of resting contented with our
present state. 111 95. Of seeking things which concern our own good as well
as the glory of God. 112 96. Of the principal end of this life 113 97. Of
plasing the Petition for temporal blessings before those for spiritual. 114
98. Of rising from temporal to spiritual blessings. 115 99. Of sundry
particulars comprised under the general words of the fourth Petition. 116 100.
Of the extent of our Prayers for the temporal good of others. 117 101. Of the
things for which by virtue of the foruth Petition we ought to give thanks.
118 102. Of the duties required by virtue of the fourth Petition. 120 103. Of
the sins whereof the fourth Petition shows men to be guilty. 122 104. Of
neglecting the welfare of others, and of sundry branches of improuidence. 123
105. Of carking too much for this world. 124.
5. PETITION.
. 106. OF sins styled debts and of the kinds of debts. 126 107. Of Christ's
Active righteousness imputed to us. 128 108. Of man's subjection to sin. 129
109. Of falling into sin daily. 131 110. Of the difference betwixt Gods
absolution, and man's apprehension thereof. 132 111. Of Popish Indulgences for
sins to come and shriuing in Lent. 133 112. Of neglecting to seek discharge
of sin till Easter, or till a day of visitation or death. 134 113. Of the
woefulness of the debt, of sin. 135 114. Of every sin being mortal, yet
not equal. 136 115. Of the distinction of venial and mortal sins. 137 116.
Of duties to be observed because every sin is mortal. 141 117. Of the many
debts wherein we stand bound to Gods instice. 142 118. Of the appropriation of
sin to our selves. 144 119. Of Gods free and full discharge of man's debt. 145
120. Of the concurrence of Gods mercy and justice in the discharge of man's
debt. 145 121. Of man's disabilitie to discharge his debt. 147 122. Of Popish
satisfaction. 148 123. Of Humiliation, and Abnegation. 150 124. Of the
remissiblenesse of sin. 151 125. Of Gods Prerogative in forgiving sin. 152
126. Of Papists blaspheming in giving men power to forgive sins. 153 127. Of
confession of sin to God and Man. 153 128. Of confessing sin to God, and
seeking pardon of him. 155 129. Of going to God for Pardon. 155 130. Of Gods
free and full discharge of sin. 156 131. Of Merit of Congruitie. 158 132. Of
Popish Satisfactions for sins remitted. 159 133 Of the comfort that arises
from Gods free and full discharge. 159 134* Of praying for the pardon of our
own sins especially. 160 135. Of praying for pardon of others sins. 161
136. Of man's forgiving another. 163 137. Of speedy forgiveness. 169 138. Of
constant forgiving. 171 139. Of dealing with man as we desire God should deal
with us. 172 140. Of the several kinds of debts whereby we be come debtors
to men 174 141 Of making satisfaction for wrongs done to man. 175 142. Of
departing from our right. 177 143. Of forgiving all sorts of Debtors. 178 144.
Of forgiving our own debtors. 180 145. Of the force of this Particle ( As) in
the condition annexed to the Fifth Petition. 181 146. Of true and unfeigned
forgiving one another. 183 147. Of forgiving one another freely. 184 148. Of a
full forgiving one another. 186 149. Of requiring proper debts. 188 150. Of
going to Law. 190 151. Of Magistrates punishing wrong. 192 152. Of imitating
God in forgiving wrongs. 193 153. Of praying without revenge, and of praying
for revenge. 196 154. Of assurance which our forgiving gives of Gods forgiving
us. 198 155. Of revenge which reuengefull persons bring upon themselves. 201
156. Of deprecation against evil. 203 157. Of taking care for our spiritual
welfare. 206 158. Of doubling our care for the good of our souls. 208 159. Of
blessings which pardon of sin brings. 210 160. Of the precedence of
justification before sanctification. 211 161. Of graces to be prayed for in
regard of the pardon of our sins. 213 162. Of graces to be prayed for in
regard of the pardon of other sins. 215 163. Of the graces which are to he
prayed for by reason of the condition annexed to the Fifth Petition. 216 164. Of
the things for which thanks is to be given by virtue of the Fifth Petition. 218
165. Of the things for which thanks is to be given by virtue of the condition
annexed to the Fifth Petition. 220 166. Of duties required in regard of desire
of pardon of our own sins and others. 221 167. Of duties required by reason
of our profession to forgive others. 222 168. Of that matter of humiliation
which the Fifth Petition affords. 223
6. PETITION.
. 169. OF the sum and several parts of the Sixth Petition. 227 170. Of
Temptation and Tempters. 228 171. Of the kind of temptation here meant. 231
172. Of man's subjection to temptation. 231 173. Of leading into temptation. 233
174. Of being in power of temptation. 233 175. Of Gods leading into temptation.
233 176. Of freeing God for being Author of sin. 235 177. Of man's disabilitie
to resist temptation. 237 178. Of Gods ouer-ruling power in temptation. 238
179. Of the restraint of the power of Tempters. 239 180. Of the extent of our
desires for others freedom from Temptation. 240 181. Of that subjection
wherein Saints are to temptation. 242 182. Of the freeness of man's will in
sin. 143 183. Of the extent of this word ( Evil) 246 184. Of Evil, the only
thing to be prayed against. 247 185. Of the respects wherein Satan is styled
the ( evil one.) 249 186. Of the many ways of delivering from evil. 249 187.
Of that hope of recovery which remains to them that fall. 250 188. Of God
the only deliverer. 251 189. Of Sanctification accompanying Justification. 253
190 Of men's pronenesse to sin after forgiveness. 255 191. Of man's answering
Gods mercy by duty. 256 192. Of anoiding temptations. 257 193. Of calling on
God for all things. 258 194. Of general points for which we are taught to
pray in the last Petition. 259 195. Of the particulars for which we are to
pray by virtue of the first part of the last Petition. 260 196. Of the
particular for which we are to pray by virtue of the second part of the last
Petition. 264 197. Of the things for which we ought to give thanks in the last
Petition. 267 198. Of the particulars for which thanks is to be given by
virtue of the first part of the last Petition. 268 199. Of the particulars for
which thanks is to be given by virtue of the last part of the last Petition.
269 200. Of the duties required in the last Petition. 270 201. Of duties
required in the last Petition in regard of others. 274 202. Of the matter of
humiliation gathered out of the last Petition. 276
REASONS OF THE PETITION.
. 203. OF pressing Prayer with weighty Reasons. 281 264. Of taking grounds for
faith in Prayer from God himself. 282
GODS ATTRIBVTES.
. 205. OF appropriati^g* Gods Attributes to himself. 285 206. Of Gods having
all things at his command. 286 207. Of the absolute Supremacy of Gods
Sovereignty. 286 208. Of Gods being King only. 287 209. Of the duties due to
God by reason of his Kingdom and comfort thence arising. 288 210. Of Gods
power what it is. How far it extends. 289 211. Of the difference betwixt
Gods absolute and actual power. 291 212. How power is proper to God. 292 213.
Of the Duties due to God by reason of his power. 293 214. Of the comfort
arising from Gods power. 294 215. Of Gods glory. What it is. 295 216. Of the
incomprehensiblenesse of Gods glory. 295 217. Of the means of manifesting Gods
glory. 296 218. How glory is proper to God. 297 219. Of man's giving glory to
God, and taking glory from God. 298 220. Of duties due to God by reason of his
glory. 299 221. Of the ways whereby others are brought to glorify God. 301
222. Of those who are to set forth Gods glory. 302 223. Of the chiefest enemies
of Gods glory. 303 224. Of Eternity, to what things it is applied. 303 225. Of
the duties which arise from Gods Eternity. 307 226. Of immutabilitie: to what
thing it may be applied. 308 227. Of the differences betwixt the Immutabilitie
of the Creator and Creatures. 311 228. Of the duties which arise from Gods
Immutabilitie. 312 229. Of Gods Kingdom. How it works confidence in Prayer.
313 230. Of Gods power. How it strengthens faith in Prayer. 314 231. Of Gods
glory. How it sets the soul for obtaining her desire. 315 232. Of Gods
unchangeable Eternity. How it makes us rest on God for obtaining our desire.
316 233. Of the special relation which the several Petitions have to Gods
Kingdom. 317 234. Of the special relation which the several Petitions have
to Gods power. 318 235. Of the special relation which the several Petitions
have to Gods glory. 319 236. Of the special relation which the several
Petitions have to Gods unchangeable Eternity. 320 237. Of the necessary use
of this clause, Thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever.
321
PRAISE.
. 238. OF adding Praise to Petition. 324 239. Of praising God. How it is done,
326 240. Of the things for which God is to be praised. 327
AMEN.
. 241. OF the meaning and use of Amen being prefixed before a Speech. 330 242.
Of the use of Amen being added to a speech. 331 243. Of the duties which Amen
added to a speech imply. 334 244. Of the ground of faith whereby we may expect
the obtaining of what we pray for. 337 245, Of setting Amen in the last place.
339
A GVIDE TO GO TO GOD: OR, AN EXPLANATION OF THE PERfect Pattern of Prayer,
THE LORDS PRAYER.
. 1. Of the Excellency of the Lords Prayer.
THose two things which are of greatest weight to commend unto our diligent
consideration, the reading or hearing of any thing, do after an especial
manner commend the Lords Prayers: The Author and the Work it self.

Two things in an Author make his work to be esteemed 1. Eminency of place.
2. Excellency of parts.


The work of a King is honored, because it is the work of a King, even for
his place sake.

The work of a great Scholar is admired for his learning sake, though in his
estate he be never so mean.

Two things also in the Matter or work it self do commend it 1. The
perfection of it. 2. The profit that may be got by it.


If an Art be accuratly handled, and so perfectly set out, as nothing can be
found defective, and yet no superfluous redundancie therein, every good Student
will be sure to have it, and will diligently study it. Or if a work that may
bring much profit to such as carefully use it, be published, he will be
thought careless of his own good that uses it not.

When all these meet together, an excellent Author and a worthy Work: an
Author to respected for eminency of person, and excellency of parts: a work
to be regarded for the absolute perfection of it in it self, and for the
necessity and utility of it to us, they are as a fourefold twisted cord, to
draw our minds thereto, and to bind them thereon.

Such an Author is the indighter of this Prayer, The excellency of the Lords
Prayer.
and such a Work is the Prayer it self. This title, The Lords Prayer,
implies as much. The Lord is the Author. Prayer the Work.

By the Lord is meant that one Lord Jesus Christ, 1. The Author of it.
by whom are all things, 2. Cor. 8. 6.
and we by him. The eminency of whose person is such, as he has a name given
him above every name. Phil. 2. 9.
No Monarch on earth, no Angel in heaven to be compared unto him.

In regard of the excellency of his gifts, Ioh. 3. 34.
God gave him not the Spirit by measure: for it pleased the Father that in him
all fullness should dwell. Colos. 1. 19.
For he is the only begotten Son that is in the bosom of the Father, John
1. 18.
and knows what is the will of the Father, what most pleasing and acceptable
to him; and what suites he is willing to grant unto his children. God would
have many things to be spoken and heard by the Prophets his servants, Multa per
Prophetas seruos suos dici Deus voluit and audiri: sed quanto maiora sunt qua
filius loquitur? Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 1.
but how much greater are the things which his Son utters?

For the Work none so heavenly, none so profitable as Prayer, And among
Prayers none to be compared unto this, whether we consider the Matter contained
in it, or the Manner of setting it down.

The Matter is every way sound, 2. The Matter of it.
complete, and perfect. Every word in it has its weight. There is not one
superfluous word in it that could be spared. Nor is it any way defective.
Whatsoever is lawful, needful, and meet to be asked in Prayer is therein
contained: yea whatsoever is to be believed or practiced by a Christian is
therein employed. Nihil omnino praetermissum est quod non in precibus nostris
coelestis doctrina compendio comprehenditur. Cypr. loc. cit.. 5.
No particle of any good Prayer commended in the Scripture, or at any time by
any person well conceived, but may be found couched in this. In this form are
comprised all the distinct kinds of Prayer: as Request for good things,
Deprecation against evil, Intercession for others, and Thanksgiving.

The Manner of setting down the things contained in this Prayer is answerable
to the Matter. 3. The manner of expressing it.
By it we are taught how to begin Prayer, in what order to set every Petition
that we make, and how to conclude our Prayer.

The order therein is as admirable as any other point. 4. The order observed in
it.
Though the things comprised in it are innumerable, yet are they all couched
under so few words, as they may easily be remembered.

In a word, The perfection of it.
nothing any way pertinent unto Prayer is omitted in this form: and nothing is
set down therein which is not pertinent unto Prayer. It may therefore be fitly
styled a Catholicall, and a Canonical Prayer. Catholicall, in that it
compriseth the substance of all warrantable Prayers in it. Canonical, in that
it is the Canon or Rule to square and frame all prayers by it.

Is not this then a fit subject for the greatest that be, Too much pains
cannot be taken about it.
in dignity, in learning, in judgment, in wit, or any other excellency to
exercise their meditation thereon? Can too much pains be taken to open and
discover the rich treasure contained therein?

Are not they ungrateful to the Author of it, and injurious to themselves, who
lightly esteem it?

What may we think of Papists that suffer not the vulgar people to learn it
in their own mother tongue? Papists abuse it.
Indeed they suffer, yea and enjoin them to tumble it up and down, and to
mumble it again and again, as it were by tale upon their beads in an unknown
tongue, whereby they make it a matter of mere babbling.

What also may we think of Anabaptists and such like Schismatickes as forbid
people to use it at all? Anabaptists use it not.
Of all prayers this without all contradiction is the most perfect, so as if
any form at all may be used, then this most of all.

Object. 1. Argument of Anabaptists.
It is so profound and deep as it is impossible for any to fathom the depth
of it.

Answ. It will not thence follow, that it is not to be used at all. Many of
those Petitions which Christians in their own form of Prayer do make, imply
more matter, then in the time of uttering them they are able to conceive. Who
can comprehend the infiniteness of Gods glory? May we not therefore pray as
Christ did, John 12. 28.
Father glorify thy name? Who can understand his faults? Psalm. 19. 12.
Shall not a sinner therefore ask pardon for all his sins?

Who can in the time that Amen may be uttered, think of every particular
point, that in a long Prayer has been mentioned by way of Petition or
Thanksgiving? May not therefore Amen be said at the end of our own or another
Prayer, if it have been long?

Assuredly, a general apprehension of more particulars then can be distinctly
conceived at once, is acceptable to God: or else many approved Prayers recorded
in Scripture were not acceptable. No man can in particular express all things
that are needful and meet to be mentioned in Prayer: it is therefore very
requisite that after we have particularly and expressly mentioned in our Prayer,
such things as we conceive to be most needful and behoouefull, we should use
some such general words and phrases, as may include all other needful and
behoouefull things. In which respect the common custom of concluding our own
Prayers, with this perfect form of Prayer prescribed by the Lord, is very
commendable.

2. 2. Argument of Anabaptists.
Object. This clause ( After this manner pray ye) implies rather a plat-forme
to frame other Prayers by it, Math. 6. 9. (...).
then an express form to be used word for word.

Answ. That phrase may imply as well the very form prescribed as a like form.
But Luke uses a phrase which puts this doubt out of doubt. Luke 11. 2.
(...).
It is this, When ye pray, say. What should they say? Even the words following:
Our Father which art in heaven, etc.

Quest. Other forms of Prayer may be used.
What need any other form of Prayer be used, seeing this is so absolutely
perfect?

Answ. To show that we take a particular and distinct notice of the things
which we pray for. On which ground both Christ himself, and the Apostles also,
to whom this form in special was prescribed, used other forms which are
expressed in the Scripture.

By comparing these two forenamed places of the two Evangelists together, Math.
6. 9.
we may well gather that both this very form may be used: Luke 11. 2.
and that other form also may be framed answerable to this.

Behold, Gods goodness in teaching us to pray.
here the goodness of God, who is not only ready to hear us in his Son,
but also by his Son has taught us how to call upon him Does he no^ herein
show himself a Father indeed? Quanto effi^acius impetramus quod pe^mus in
Christi nomine, ^i petamus ^psius orat^one? Cypr. de ora^. Dom.. 1
Is not this a great motive to provoke us with boldness to go to the Throne
of Grace? How much more effectually may we obtain what we ask in Christ's
name, if we ask it in his form of Prayer?

That we may be the better directed, and the more encouraged to call upon God,
and that by this excellent form here prescribed, we will distinctly consider
the several branches thereof.

. 2. Of the several branches of the Lords Prayer.
THE Lords Prayer being (as we have heard) a most perfect pattern of Prayer,
The sum and parts.
it contains both the Circumstances appertaining to Prayer, and also the very
Substance of Prayer.

The Circumstances are two. One precedent, which is the Preparation thereto, in
the Preface. The other subsequent, which is the Ratification thereof, in the
last Particle Amen.

The Substance of the Prayer consists of two parts.

1. Petition.

2. Thanksgiving. S. August. sometimes and some other ancient Writers, and most
of the Papists, and some of our later Dimnes divide the Lords Prayer into seven
Petitions: making two Petitions of the two clauses in the last Petition.

But the usual division of it into twice three, is the most naturel, and it is
observed by Tertullian, Cyprian, Ambrose, Cyril, Chryso^tame, Bernard, and
other ancient Fathers, who though they do not express any distinct number of
Petitions, yet they so handle them, as the number of six^ may easily be thence
gathered. For they make but one Petition of these words, Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. The modern Orthodox Expositors of
Scripture, do most of them expressly set down the distinct number of six
Petitions. * As for that argument which is taken from the correspondencie of
the number of Petitions to the seven graces of the Spirit, it is but an idle
conceit. For there are many more graces of the Spirit then seven. Of the
diuiision of the last Petition out of which they raise the seventh* See. 269.




The Petitions are six in number: Aug. in Enchir. cap. 115. and in ^^b 2 de
Sermon Dom. in monte lib. 2.
all which may be reduced unto two heads. 1. Gods glory: 2. Man's good.

The three first Petitions aim at Gods glory: as this Particle THY, having
relation to God, shows. Tertul. contr. Marc. lib. 4. Et de sug. in pers.
Cy^il. Hier^s. catech* mis^. 5. Cyp^^^^ Orat. Dom. Ambr. de Sacram. l. 5. c. 4.
Ch^y^. in Mat. 6. Hom. 20.


The three last Petitions aim at Man's good: as these Particles, OUR, US,
having relation to man, imply.

Of those Petitions which aim at God^ glory: The first desires the thing it
self: the second, the means of effecting it: the third, the manifestation of
it.

Of those that aim at Man's good, Bern. in Quadr. sermon. 6.
the first desires his temporal good: the two last his spiritual good,
Calvin. Instit. l. 3. c. 20.. 35.
and that in his Justification and Sanctification.

In the form of Praise three things are acknowledged: Vrsia. Expli^. Catech.
par. 3.


1. Gods Sovereignty, Daneaes de Oaat. Dom. c. 9.
Thine is the Kingdom.

2. Gods Omnipotency, Musc. Comme^t. in Mat. 6.
and Power.

3. Gods Excellency, Gual. Hom. 88. in Mat. Piscat. Anal. Euang. Mat. Alijque
Comment* in Mat. 6. and Expos. Orat. Dom.
and Glory.

All these are amplified by the perpetuity of them, for ever: which notes our
Gods Eternity.

These are the several parts and branches of the Lords Prayer, which with the
Lords help shall be more particularly opened, and that by way of question and
answer for the better perspicuitie. Omni^o congruit vt tot sint Petitiones
Dominicae orationis quot sunt dona Spiritus S. Bella^. de bon. oper. l. 1. c. 5.


. Of preparation to Prayer.
Q. What is first to be considered in the Lords Prayer?

A. The preface prefixed before it, in these words, Our Father which are in
heaven.

Q. What general instruction thence arises?

A. Preparation is needful unto Prayer. For this Preface is purposely prefixed
to fit and prepare our hearts to Prayer. To this very purpose tends this
direction of the wise man, Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart
be hasty to utter any thing before God. Eccles. 5. 2.
He there rendereth a weighty reason thereof, taken from Gods Eminency, God is
in heaven, a most high and glorious God. Men do not rashly enter into the
presence of a King on earth. They will, Genesis 41. 14.
as Joseph did, change their raiment: yea they will think before hand both of
the matter which they intend to move, and also of the manner of propounding
their suite. Should we not much more come preparedly into the presence of the
King of Kings?

To the Eminency of his Person before whom we come, 1. Tim 6. 15.
I may well add the Excellency of the work which is done. No other work is
more excellent then prayer. If preparation be requisite unto any work, then
most of all unto Prayer.

. 4. Of the means to prepare us to Prayer.
Quest. HOw does this Preface teach us to prepare our selves to Prayer?

Answ. By describing and setting forth God.

Quest. What is thence taught us?

Answ. His person on whom we call to be d^ly considered.
A due consideration of his person to whom we pray is an especial means to
prepare us unto Prayer. They who duly weigh the Majesty of a king above other
men, will with better respect approach his presence. I find it usual with the
Saints, whose prayers are recorded in the Scripture, to be ample in setting
forth the glorious properties of God in the beginning of their prayers, for
which purpose note the prayers of 1 King. 8. 23.
Solomon, 2. Chron. 20. 6
Iehosaphat, 2. King. 19. 6.
Hezekias, Ier. 32. 17.
Jeremiah, Dan. 9. 4.
Daniel, Nehe. 1. 5.
Nehemiah Math. 11. 25.
Christ, and the Acts 4. 24.
Apostles.

Meditation hereof is an especial means to thrust out of the heart all bye
and base thoughts, and to make the soul soar a loft, and fly up even into
heaven; yea when a man's Spirit is dull, it will exceedingly quicken it, to call
to mind Gods excellent attributs and great works, and to ponder them
seriously.

The neglect hereof is one cause of that little devotion which is in many men's
hearts, Qui accedit ad deum per orationem, non perpensa apud animum sublimitate
potentiae ad quam accedit, turpibus and sordidis petitionibus maiestatem
dedecorat imprudens, Greg. Nyss. ds Orat.
while they are praying unto God. Yea he that comes to God in Prayer, and does
not duly weigh that surpassing excellency before which he approaches, does
unawares dishonor the divine Majesty with vnme^te and unseemly suites.

. 5. Of Praying to God alone.
Quest. TO whom may that description noted in the Preface of the Lords Prayer
be applied?

Answ. To God, and to God alone. None else can be called Our Father in heaven.

Quest. What learn we thence?

Answ. God only is to be prayed unto. See more of this point in ^he whole
armor of God, concerning Prayer. Treat. 3.. 5.
This Prayer is in that point defective, if any Saint, Angel, or other creature
be to be called upon. Good warrant we have both from light of Gods word, and
also from light of nature to call upon God: but no good warrant any way, to
call upon any other.

. 6. Of Gods godnesse and greatness jointly considered together.
Q. HOw is God described in the foresaid Preface?

A. By his goodness, and by his greatness.

Q. What is thence inferred?

A. Gods goodness and greatness are both to be thought on when we pray to
God. Read the Prefaces of the Prayers before quoted. 4. and of other like
Prayers in Scripture, and ye shall find those two properties of old usually
joined together. The heathen by the light of nature observed these two to be
the most principal attributs of God, and thereupon styled him Optimus Maximus.
The one of these shows how ready God is to hear: the other how able he is to
help: so as these are two strong pillars to support our faith.

A due consideration of them both together, Mixture of faith and fear.
is an especial means to preserve in us a blessed mixture of Confidence and
Reverence: both which are necessary, because the place before which we present
our selves in Prayer is a throne, at the footstool whereof we must with all
reverence fall: and a throne of Grace, to which with all confidence we must
approach. And thus shall we be kept in the golden mean, betwixt two dangerous
extremes, the gulf of despair, and the rock of presumption: by either of
which Prayer is made altogether, fruitless. For God turns not to the
doubting mind, James 1. 6, 7.
and turns from the proud heart: Iam. 4. 6.
so as both must needs return empty from God. John 5. 10.
And no marvel: for he that believes not makes God a liar: Psalm. 10. 4.
and the proud thinks there is no God.

Learn therefore by the forenamed meditation on Gods Goodness and Greatness
to preserve this sovereign temperature of faith and fear. Gods goodness set
before his greatness.
On Gods goodness first let the eye of thy meditation be fixed. For Christ
teaches us to say, Our Father, before he puts us in mind of Gods glorious
place in heaven, which order he observed when he himself prayed, saying,
Father, Math. 11. 25.
Lord of heaven and earth: In this order the Apostle styles him, Ephesians. 1. 17.
The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Father of glory.

I deny not but that there may be good use of setting Gods greatness before
us, and that it may in Prayer be first expressed, as it is in the Prayers of
Daniel, Dan. 9. 4.
Nehemiah, and other Saints: but it must be by such as have a steadfast faith in
Gods goodness: Nehe. 1. 5.
and at that time also must Gods goodness be in their minds, as it was in
Daniels: for so soon as he had said, O Lord God, great and fearful, he
immediately adds, which keep covenant and mercy, etc. The brightness of
Gods greatness would utterly dazell the eye of man, if first, immediately, and
only it should be fixed thereon.

This direction is of singular use to us, base, sinful, wretched creatures,
who cannot but be astonished at the thought of Gods greatness, power, justice,
jealousy, and other like attributes.

Hitherto of such general instructions as the Preface of the Lords Prayer
teaches. The particular branches shall in order be handled. The first whereof,
concerns Gods goodness in this clause ( OUR FATHER) wherein we are to
consider First, the relative title given to God ( FATHER) Secondly, the
correlatiue particle ( OUR) whereby a particular application of that general
relation is made. In handling the title, we will declare: First the thing it
self here attributed to God, which is PATERNITIE or FATHERHOOD. Secondly, the
manner of expressing it in the vocative case, and second person: as if more
fully it had been thus said, O THOU OUR FATHER.

. 7. Of this title Father applied to God.
Q. Father a title proper to God.
IS this title Father proper to God?

A. Yea, most properly it appertains to him. For it is the true and proper
title of him that gives a being to that whereof he is called a Father. They
therefore among men that under God are instruments of the being of others, who
bring children forth into this world, are most usually called Fathers. But it
is God only that does truly and properly give a being to things: Math. 23. 9.
whereupon Christ says of him, There is but one your Father, 1. Cor. 8. 6.
which is in heaven: and the Apostle to like purpose, There is but one God,
Ephesians. 4. 6.
the Father: and among other unities he reckons this, One God and Father.

Now God is styled Father both in relation to his Son the second person in
Trinity, Whose father God is.
and also in relation to his creatures. In the former respect it can be applied
only to the first person in Trinity, John 3. 16.
whose only begotten Son the second person is: and that by reason of his
eternal generation, Prou. 8. 24, 25.
and of the hypostaticall union of his two natures in one person. Luke 1* 35.
In the latter respect it may be applied to all the three persons in Trinity.
John 1. 14.
For not only the first, Math. 28. 19.
but the second person also is expressly called Father: and we are said to be
borne of the Spirit, Isa. 9. 6.
which is a work of paternitie. John 3. 5.
All the three persons then are included under this title Father: And Prayer
may be made to them all jointly as one in substance, and to any of them
expressly by name, yet so, as when one only is named neither of the other be
excluded. For the Father is always to be called upon in the name of the Son
by the assistance of the Spirit. Romans 8. 26.
Else we know not what to pray as we ought.

This one God distinguished into three persons, Job 38. 28.
is said to be the Father of his creatures, first generally, as he has given a
being to them all: secondly specially as he has set his image on some of them
above others.

His Image is set on his creature two ways.

1. By that excellency wherein he created them.

2. By renewing an excellency in some of them after their fall.

By reason of that primarie excellency, Luke 3. 38.
Adam and Angels are styled sons of God: Job 1. 6.
for in regard of those divine qualities, and that glorious estate wherewith he
adorned them above other creatures at the beginning, they are said to be made
after the Image of God.

The Image of God, which is a kind of divine excellency, is renewed only in
some of the sons of men: and that in a civil and spiritu^ll respect.

In a civil respect, as they have dignity and dominion given to them over
others: as all Magistrates and Governors, in whom there is a resemblance of
Gods Sovereignty: in which respect they bear Gods Image, Psalm. 82. 6.
and are styled Gods, and Sons of the most High.

In a spiritual respect, Romans 8. 15, 16.
as God through his grace has adopted some to be his sons: and by his Spirit
begotten them anew. Ioh. 1. 12, 13.


Though out of the fatherhood of God here meant, that relation which the first
person in Trinity has to the second, may not be excluded (for they who
apprehend not God to be a Father of Jesus Christ, cannot in faith, and with
comfort call upon him) yet it has especial relation to his creatures, who
say, Our Father, and among them to sons of men since their fall, who say,
Deum patrem esse voce propria consitentes de condition serui^^ in adoptionem
fi^io^u^^ nos profitemur ascitos.
Forgive us our trespasses: and among the sons of men to such as are adopted
of God, and borne anew after his Image, who only in truth say to God, Hallowed
be thy name, etc. Thus we who with our own voice confess God to be our
Father, do profess our selves to be taken from servile condition into the
adoption of sons.

Many other more magnificent titles might have been attributed to God, (...).
Isa. de Orat. Cap. 18.
but none more pertinent to Prayer then this title Father, Christ therefore
usually in his Math. 11. 25. John 12. 27. John 17. 1. Math 26* 39. Luke 23. 34,
46.
Prayer used it.

. 8. Of the instructions which the title, Father, applied to God import.
Q. What instructions may be gathered from this title Father, applied to God
in Prayer?

A. 1. God is to be called upon in the mediation of Christ. In Christ only is
God a Father: Galat 4. 4.
and in Christ only are we adopted, and borne again. 1. Pet. 1. 3.
Out of Christ God is a terrible Judge, and a consuming fire* This title
therefore includes Christ, and faith in him. 1. Pet. 1. 3.
Thus Saint Peter first had an eye to Gods fatherhood in relation to Christ his
only begotten Son, and then in relation to the Saints his adopted sons.

2. They only have this privilege to approach by Prayer into Gods presence,
who can in truth call him Father: which none can do but they that believe in
Christ. For as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the Sons
of God, even to them that believe in his Name. John 1. 12.
To them only will God reach out his golden Scepter of Grace, Ester 5. 2.
as Ahashuerosh did to Hester. 1* Cor. 1. 2.
They therefore by a kind of property are said to call upon God. Acts 9. 14.


3. Prayer must be made in confidence of Gods fatherly love. Attolle ^culos ad
patrem, qui te per lauacrum genuit, qui te per filium redemit, and dic Pater
noster. Aug. in Sermon. 28 de verb. Dom.
How shall they else call him Father? Gal. 4. 6.
Because ye are sons (says the Apostle) God has sent forth the Spirit of
his Son into your hearts crying Abba Father. Now the ground of this
confidence rests only in Gods Fatherhood. For here are no other motives,
either from our selves or from others. But Math. 7. 11.
Paternitie promises all blessings.

4. There is ground of returning to God after we have gone from him. For a
father is ready again and again to receive. Luke 15. 18. etc.
I will rise and go to my FATHER, says the Prodigal: and when that Father saw
his son yet a great way off, he had compassion. After that David had justly
banished his son Absalom, 2. Sam. 13. 39.
he longed to go forth unto him. As Fatherhood promises all blessings, so all
forbearance. It makes one ready to give, and forgive. A fathers love is of
all others most constant and immutable. Psalm. 103. 13*
Though he be provoked to correct, Heb. 12. 5, 6.
yet will he not forget to love.

5. There is sufficient encouragement against every thing, 1. King. 19. 12. 13.
that may any way dishearten us from approaching into Gods presence: whether it
be excellency in God, or infirmity in our selves. A father will lay aside in
his childs presence, Quando patrem deum dicimu^, quasi filij Dci agere
debemus. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 8.
whatsoever may dishearten him.

6. They who call on God must bear a child-like affection to him. For they who
with their lips call God Father, and in their hearts respect him not as a
Father, do apparently mock him. On this ground says God to his people: Mal.
1. 6.
If I be a Father where is mine honor? 1 Pet. 1. 17.
and Saint Peter, If ye call him him Father, pass the time of your soiourning
here in fear. Quum praeceperi^ vt in oratione patrem tu^m dica^, nihil aliud
quam per diuinum vitae institutum. te coelesti patri si^^lem esse iubet. Greg.
Nys. lib. de Orat.
This child-like affection will provoke us to seek both his favor and his
honor: how to be accepted of him, and how to please him. This answerable
disposition is a maine end of the relation betwixt God and us. And when he
commands thee in prayer to call him Father, this he wills thee, that by a
divine course of life thou should be like thy Father.

Thus much of the title Father. The manner of expressing it follows, in the
vocative case and second person.

. 9. Of the prerogative of Gods children to speak unto him face to face.
Q. What does the manner of expressing this title Father, in the vocative case
and second person import?

A. 1. A dignity of Gods children. 2. A duty of Gods children.


Q. What is that dignity?

A. Such a familiarity with God, as face to face to speak to him. For this
title, Father, is so set down as directed to God himself in his own
presence. David does excellently set forth this privilege, Psalm. 38. 9.
where he says, Lord I power my whole desire before thee. All have not this
liberty: as an evidence where of they have not ability thus to come into Gods
presence, They upon whom God powers the Spirit of grace, Zach. 12. 10.
he powers also the Spirit of supplication: but upon no other. It is therefore
a gift appropriated to the Saints, to call upon God in faith: by which Acts 9.
14.
style they are described. Others may use this word, 1. Cor. 1. 2.
and with their lips say to God, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
o Father: but their supposed prayers are but mere iip-labour. At the best
their inward desires are but wishes. Now there is a great difference betwixt
wishing and praying. Differences betwixt wishing and praying.
A wish may intimate some sense of that which a man wants, and some desire of
having it: but small care in using the means to get it, and less faith in
obtaining it. But the faithful prayers of the Saints argue Sense, Desire,
Care, Faith and all. Balaam could with and say, Number. 23. 10.
Let me die the death of the righteous. Like to whom were they that said, Psalm.
4. 6.
Who will show us any good? But David goes directly to God, and thus expressly
prays to him, LORD life thou up the light of thy countenance upon us. We know
that any man may in any place wish and say, I would the King would grant me
this or that suit: but at all times to have a free access to the Kings
presence, and to say unto him, O my Liege I beseech thee grant me this suit, is
a great privilege, appertaining only to Kings favorites: and so much the
greater when there is assurance of prevailing by this free access: as there is
assurance by that free access which Saints have to Gods presence.

This is little considered of them, who make all their prayers rather by
exhortation unto Prayer, then by express Petition, in the third person, thus,
Let us pray that God would do this or that: which argues too light an esteem
of the forenamed privilege: and is a declaration of what ought to be done,
rather then an actual performance thereof.

. 10. Of their duty who have free access to God.
Q. What is the Duty that is expected of such as have the forenamed free
access to God?

A. That in Prayer especially their heart be struck with a due respect of Gods
presence. Reuetence in Prayer.
For then they stand face to face before him. This follows as a just
consequence from the foresaid dignity. When dutiful children or loyal
subjects stand in the presence of their Father or Sovereign, they will
manifest all the due respect they can: especially when they make a suit to
them. Should not we the children and subjects of God do it much more?

. 17.
When we come to speak of the glory and greatness of God, we shall have
further occasion to press this point.

Thus much of the relative title Father. The correlatiue is noted in this
particle OUR. In handling whereof first we are to consider in general the
parties which are comprised under it: and then more particularly, the person,
and number wherein it is expressed.

. 11. Of the parties comprised under this particle OUR.
Q. Whom does this correlatiue particle ( OUR) set out?

A. Mortal men that live on earth.

Q. What is hereby given to be understood?

A. The love of God, and honor of those mortal men.

Q. How is Gods love set forth?

A. By vouchsafing to be a Father to such base wretches. Gods love to man in
vouchsafing to be called Father by them.
There is an infinite disparitie betwixt God and man. God is a Lord of
incomprehensible Majesty, and perfect purity. Man in regard of the mould
whence he came, and whither be must return is but dust: Quanta domini
indulgetia, quan^a circa nos dignationis cius and bonitatis vbertas, qui sic
nos voluerit orationem celebrare, vt Deum patrem vocemus! Cypr. de Orat. Dom..
8*
and in regard of the corruption of his nature is worse then the brutest beast,
and most unreasonable creature. May we not then on this ground with an holy
admiration say, Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us,
that we should be called the sons of God! Who durst call God Father, if
Christ had not warranted us so to do.

Q. What is the honor that is hereby done unto the sons of men?

A. The greatest that can be. For what greater honor then to be the Kings
son? 1. Ioh. 3. 1.
David thought it a great matter to be Saul's son in law (yet was Saul but a
King on a small part of the earth, An honor to call God father.
and David was then anointed to be his successor.) What is it then to have
the King of heaven to be our Father? 1. Sam. 18. 18.
This is far more then to be an Angel, who is but a messenger and servant.
Heb. 1. 14.
Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who
shall be heirs of salvation?

Herewith may all they who have this honor vouchsafed unto them, 1. Cor. 4. 13.
uphold themselves against that vile esteem wherein the world has them. What
need they care for the worlds despising of them, 1. Ioh. 3. 1.
who have God to be their Father? For this cause the world knows us not,
because it knows not our Father.

This of the parties whose Father God is. The manner of applying Gods
fatherhood by the first person OUR follows.

. 12. Of applying Gods Fatherhood to our selves.
Q. What do we acknowledge by this correlatiue particle OUR, as it is the
first person?

A. That God is not only the Father of Christ, and of other men but our Father
also: Math. 26. 39.
as if one praying alone, and for himself should say as Christ did, John 20.
28.
O my Father: and, as Thomas said to Christ, my Lord and my God.

If it be objected, that that which is uttered in the plural number is not
particularly applied to ones self: I answer, that though it be not applied to
ones self only, and alone, yet it may be to him jointly with others. Though I
believe God to be a common Father of many (which the plural number implies)
yet that hinders not, but that I may reckon my self in that number: and so
make the application to my self. Thus much is fitly axpressed in this speech
of Christ, John 20. 1^.
I ascend to my Father, and to your Father. Here he acknowledges God to be a
common Father of others (in these words your Father) and yet makes a
particular application thereof in these words, my Father.

Q. What instruction arises from this application of Gods Fatherhood to our
selves?

A. A particular persuasion of Gods fatherly affection to our selves is then
especially requisite when we pray unto him. Math. 26. 39. -- 27. 46.
We cannot in truth say unto him, our Father, without such a persuasion.

The benefits of that particular persuasion are great and manifold. Benefits of
a particular perswas^on of Gods fatherly mind.
For

1. It distinguishes the sound faith of true Saints from the counterfeit faith
of formal Prosessors and trembling faith of Devils. 1. It is a note of true
faith.
They may believe that God is a Father, but they cannot believe that God is
their Father, Iam. 2. 19.
and therefore they believe and tremble.

2. It makes us more boldly to come to the throne of Grace. 2. It ministers
boldness.
When the prodigal child knew not to whom to go (though he could not be
ignorant that there were many fathers in the world) he, Luke 15. 18.
remembering that he had a father of his own, said, I will go to my MY Father.

3. It makes us to rest upon God more confidently for provision for all things
needful, 3. It works confidence.
and protection from all things hurtful. Quid non det filijs petentibus, cum
hoc ipsum ante dederit vt filij essent. Aug. de Ser. Dom. in mon. lib. 2.
For this particular relation of Gods fatherhood to us, shows that God takes
an especial care of us, to whom the promise of Gods care especially belongs.

4. It does much uphold us in all distresses. 4. It vpholdeth in distress.
With this particular persuasion did the Jews uphold themselves when they
seemed to be forsaken. Isa. 63. 16.
Yea herewith did Christ uphold himself in his greatest agony. Math. 26. 39.
-- 27. 46.


5. It strengthens our faith in all the properties and works of God. 5. It
strengthens faith.
For to believe that it is my Father that has made all things, and does
continue to uphold and order them: that it is my Father that is the fountain
of all blessing, and gives what he will, to whom he will: that my Father is
every where present, knowing all the necessities and extremities of every one:
that the mighty, merciful, wise, provident God is my Father: to be truly
persuaded hereof must needs minister much comfort at all times, in all places,
whatsoever our present condition be. But otherwise, to know that by God the
whole world is ordered, that his eyes are in every place, that he is
omnipotent, just, wise, true, etc. and not to apprehend him to be our Father,
cannot but much strike our hearts with much terror, and make us to fly from
him, as Adam did, Genesis 3. 8.
when he heard the voice of God in the garden.

6. It affords much comfort against our manifold infirmities. 6. It brings
comfort.
For it assures us that God will take no advantage against us for them: but
will rather accept of our poor endeavor: and when we cannot pray as we
should, he will put desires into our hearts, and words into our mouths. A
child's own father will accept of any manifestation of his mind and meaning:
yea and say to him, Do thou not mean this? would thou not have that?

7. All that can be said of Gods fatherhood will bring no comfort to a man, 7.
No comfort without it.
unless he can apply it to himself. Children do not go to a man for the
things they want, because he is a Father of other children: but because he is
their own father.

As the manner of expressing the correlatiae particle OUR in the first person,
whereby he that makes the Prayer is included was obseruable: so is it also in
the plural number, whereby it is extended to others?

. 13. Of Gods impartial respect to all his children: and sufficiency of
blessing for all.
Q. Why is the application of God fatherhood set down in the plural number,
OUR?

A. To show that God is a common father of all the Saints: God the Father of
all Saints.
even of the whole Church, and of every particular member thereof. Ephesians. 4. 6.
As there us one God, so that one God is father of all. To which purpose is
that emphaticall interrogation of the Prophet, Mal. 2. 10.
Have we not all one Father? Wherefore not only the whole Church in general,
or public assemblies, but every particular Saint is taught to say, Our Father.

Q. What does this teach us?

A. 1. Gods respect to us.

2. Our duty one to another.

3. The privilege of Saints.

Q. How is Gods respect manifested?

A. 1. By his impartial favor to all alike.

2. By the abundance of blessing which he has, even sufficient for all.

1. Concerning Gods impartial respect, God carries an equal respect to all.
Christ here teaches all, of what degree soever, to say to God, Our Father.
God then is the Father of all: and as a father he carries himself toward
all. Psalm. 86. 5. -- 145. 14.
He is good, and merciful, and of great kindness, to all that call upon him.
He vpholdeth all that fall. Acts 10* 34.
In this respect especially is he said to have no respect of persons. (...).
That title therefore which notes out an only son on whom all love is cast,
Math. 3. 17.
and by a property is attributed to Christ the only begotten Son of God,
(...).
that very title is attributed to all the Saints, to show, that though they be
many, Ephesians. 5. 1.
yet so impartial is Gods affection to them all, and to every of them, as if
they were all but one only child of God. Heb. 12* 23.
On which ground they are all called Firstborn, Romans 8. 17.
Heirs, Reave. 1. 6.
Kings, and such other names as do set forth an equal respect of God unto them
all. 1. Cor. 12. 12.
Yea they are all one Body, and one Spouse of Christ the Son of God. Ephesians.
5. 3^.
If the ground of this impartial respect be well weighed, the truth of it will
more clearly appear. For it wholly rests in God himself, and proceeds
from his free grace, and mere mercy: and not from any gifts or parts that are
in the Saints. If it did depend on any thing in the sons of men, then might
it be partial, as the love of earthly parents is.

2. God has abundance of blessing for all.
Concerning the abundance of blessing which this our common Father has, it
appears to be sufficient for all, in that Christ directs all to go to him,
and that for others as well as for themselves: and not fear to put him in mind
that he is the Father of others as well as of our selves, and that he has
others to bless as well as us. So as God is not like Isaac, Genesis 27. 33. etc.
who had but one blessing, and having therewith blessed one son, could not
bless the other. Psalm. 36. 9.
He is as a springing fountain which ever remains full, and continues to
ouer-flow, though never so much be taken out of it. Men that are very charie in
keeping standing ponds private to themselves, suffer springs to flow out in
common for others. Thus does Gods Fatherly bounty flow out to all that in
faith come to partake thereof. Did not Saints know and believe as much, they
would urge and press all the evidences they could of Gods Fatherly respect to
them in special (as Esau did to Isaac, Genesis 27. 32.
saying, I am thy son, thy first borne, bless me, my father) rather then
make mention of his common fatherhood.

. 14. Of their mutual duties which say OUR FATHER.
Q. What are the duties on our part to be performed by reason of Gods common
Fatherhood?

A. All make themselves equal.
1. Great ones must make themselves equal to them of the lower sort. Though in
outward privileges they be greater then other Saints, Romans 12. 16.
yet ought they as brethren to respect the meanest, because God is their Father
also. Who greater in the Church then Apostles? yet they accounted, and called
the meanest their brethren: which they learned of Christ their master, Math.
23. 8.
who expressly told them, that they were all brethren. Yea Christ himself
(though he were head and Lord of all) was not ashamed to call them brethren.
Heb. 2. 11.
Is it not intolerable arrogancy to scorn to account him thy brother, whose
Father God is, as well as thine? Such insolent persons cannot in truth say, Our
Father.

2. Mean ones must be content in their estate: All content in their estate.
and that because God is their Father, as well as the Father of the greatest.
Though in some outward respects they be meaner then others, yet in the greatest
prerogative, which is to be a child of God, they are equal to the greatest.
Galat. 3. 28.
There is neither bond nor free, but all are one in Christ Jesus. A ground of
great contentment.

3. Saints must take occasion of praying together. Pray together.
So shall they most fitly say to God, Our Father. This is the rather to be
noted, because Christ has promised his presence after au especial manner,
Math. 18. 19.
Where two or three agree together.

4. Saints must pray one for another. Pray for one another.
For Christ has so ordered this Prayer, as thereby in using it, we are put in
mind one of another. Pacis doctor atque vnitatis magister singillatim noluit
precem fieri, vt quis cum precatur, prose tantu^ precetur. Cypr. de Orat, dom..
5.
The teacher of peace and master of unity would not have Prayer so singly
made, as when one prays, he should pray only for himself. By this mutual
intercession of one for another, as we acknowledge God a common Father,
according to the scope of this phrase, Our Father: so we profess him to be the
fountain of all blessing, able to help all: even others as well as our
selves: which is a great honor done to God. And we do also hereby profess
that we are willing and desirous that others should partake of the same
blessings that we crave for our selves: of which mind was that Prophet that
said, Would God that all the Lords people were Prophets: Number. 11. 29.
and that Apostle that said, Acts 26. 29.
I would to God that all that hear me were such as I am. Note every of the
Petitions which we are taught to make for our selves, and ye shall observe
every blessing craved for our selves, to be craved also for others, as these
two words, us, OUR, expressed in every of them does plainly show.

There is a double bond to bind us hereunto: one of love, the other of
justice. Christ notes it to be the duty of love to pray for others: Math. 5.
44.
and the Apostle notes duties of love to be a due debt. Romans 13. 8.
Herein lies a maine difference between Faith and Love. Faith is as an hand
closed, grasping all for it self. Love is as an hand opened ready to
communicate what it has to others. Whereas therefore in our Belief, in the
singular number each one says, I believe, in Prayer each one says in the
plural, Our Father, give us, forgive us, deliver us.

5. Pray in love.
Saints must pray in brotherly love, and with hearts and minds united. This
phrase, Our Father, puts them in mind of a brotherly affection one toward
another. To this purpose may be applied that consequence, which on such a
ground the Prophet infers, Mal. 2. 10.
in these words, Have we not all one Father? Why do we deal treacherously
every man against his brother?

. 15. Of the Saints participation of one another Prayers.
Q. What is that privilege of the Saints that is gathered out of this phrase,
Our Father?

A. They mutually partake of the benef^is of one another Prayers. For it may
well be taken for grant, that this form being prescribed by Christ, Publica
est nobis and communis oration: and quando oramus, non pro vno sed pro toto
populo oramus, quia totus populus unum sumus. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 5.
they in whom the Spirit of Christ is, do accordingly use it: and so pray for
all whose Father God is. For this is a public and common Prayer: and when we
pray, we pray not for one, but for the whole Church, because we are all one. A
great privilege this will appear to be, if the benefit of Prayer be rightly
discerned. And a great comfort it must needs be to such weak ones, as cannot
pray as they desire. The privilege of the Communion of Saints, in nothing more
appears, then in the mutual participation of one another prayers.

Q. May not God be called upon in the singular number thus, My Father.

A. A Saint may say to God, my Father.
Yes: in private by one alone he may, so did Christ. Saint Paul also did in
such a manner give thanks unto God. Yea thus we are directed by the Prophet to
call upon God, Math. 26. 39.
and to say, My Father. Phil. 1. 3.
Yet may not one so apply in particular Gods Fatherhood to himself, ler. 3. 4,
19.
as to appropriate it to himself: nor yet to be unmindful of others in his
prayers, contrary to the scope of expressing this relation in the plural
number, OUR. This form is not set down to bind us so strictly to the words
or syllables, as never to swerue from them: but it is set down rather to teach
us what to aim at in the manner and matter of our prayers.

Q. May this form ( Our Father) be used by one alone?

A. One alone in Prayer may say, Ou^ Father.
Yes. So did Daniel, even then when also being alone he used the singular
number. O our God, says he, hear the Prayer of thy servant. Dan. 9. 17, 18.
And in the next clause, o my God, incline thine ear. In regard of that
particular affiance which he had in God, he says, my God: and in regard of his
respect, even when he was alone, to other children of God, he says, Our God.
For our love to the brethren, and our persuasion of their union in Christ, must
be manifested to God when we are alone as well as in company.

Thus much of Gods Goodness. It remains to speak of his greatness.

. 16. Of Gods being in heaven.
Q. HOw is Gods greatness set forth?

A. By his mansion place which is in heaven. A mansion place is an usual
means of greatness or meanness. When we see a little thatcht ruinous cottage,
we imagine that he is a poor mean person that dwells there. Thus Eliphas
sets out the baseness of men, Job 4. 19.
who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust. But if we see a
fair and stately Palace, we think that he is a great personage that
inhabiteth there. Great Nebuchadnezzar did thus set out his own greatness,
Dan. 4. 30.
Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the kingdom, and
for the honor of my majesty? Yea if beggars see but a fair porch before the
door of an house, they conceit that one which can spare them something there
abides. To our capacity therefore the Lord ( who dwells in the light that
no creature can approach unto) is pleased thus to set forth his greatness* 1.
Tim. 6. 16.
glory, and magnificence.

Many do so pervert this description of Gods greatness, as thereby they much
impeach the excellency of his Majesty. For

1. God is not circumscribed in heaven.
Some thence infer that God may be circumscribed, and compassed in a place:
which is contrary to his infinite greatness, Ier. 23. 23.
by reason whereof he is said to fill heaven, and earth: to have the heaven for
his throne, Math 5. 34, 35.
and the earth for his footstool: to be every where, Psalm 139. 7, etc.
so as none can withdraw themselves from his presence: 1. King. 8. 27.
yea to be so incomprehensible, as the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot
contain him.

2. Heaven hinders not Gods sight.
Others thence infer, that he is so high as he cannot see the things below:
Job 22. 12, 13, 14
which Eliphas notes to be the mind of the profane in his time, who say, Is
not God in the height of heaven? How does God know? Can he judge through the
dark cloud? Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not: and he
walks in the circuit of heaven. But this conceit is directly contrary to
that omniscience and perfect sight of God, which the holy Ghost thus sets
out: Psalm. 102. 19.
Out of heaven does the Lord behold the earth. Prou. 15. 3.
The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good.
Heb. 4. 13.
There is not any creature that is not manifest in his sight, Gods providence
on things below.
etc.

2. Others thence infer, that thought it be granted that God sees the earth,
and all things done thereon, yet he orders them not: Apud Cicer. lib. 5 de
Not. Deorum, Cotta negat Deu^ curare singulos homines, aut civitates, aut
nationes.
which was the conceit of many Philosophers: A conceit directly contrary to
that excellent discourse which God himself had with Job, and to the evidences
of Gods providence extending it self to the smallest things, as to all kind
of creatures, even to little sparrowes: to the hairs of our head: and to the
grass of the field. Job 38. and 39. and 40. and 41.


But to let pass all such false, erroneous, absurd, and blasphemous
collections, Math. 10. 29, 30. and 6. 30.
know that this placing of God in heaven is not properly, God said to be in
heaven.
but comparatively, and respectively to be taken: and that to give us occasion
to conceive something of Gods excellency, 1. To make our souls soar up.
which is in truth inconceivable, and incomprehensible.

Q. Why is God thus set forth? Cum deum dicit esse in coelis a terris abducit
ornatem* etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 20. in Mat. 6.


A. 1. To make our souls ascend as high as possibly can be when we pray unto
him. Above heaven our thoughts cannot ascend. Therefore he is said to be in
heaven, which is the highest place of all. Psalm. 123* 1.
I lift up mine eyes to thee who dwell in heaven, says the Psalmist.

2. To distinguish God from earthly parents: 2. To put difference between God
and earthly parents.
and to show that he is far more excellent then they: even as heaven is
higher then the earth: and things in heaven more excellent then things on
earth. No Kings or Monarchs, though they should rule from one end of the earth
to the other, can be like to our Father which is in heaven. Psalm. 113. 5.
Who is like to the Lord our God who dwells on high?

3. To show that he is free from all earthly infirmities: 3. To show Gods
immutabilitie.
and from that changeableness whereunto things on earth are subject. In heaven
there is no corruption, dim^uution, or alteration. Much less can there be any
such thing in him, who is the chiefest of all in heaven; Iam. 1. 17.
and with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning.

4. To set him forth in the most glorious manner that can be. 4. To declare his
excellency.
As Kings are most glorious in their thrones, so is God in heaven, Math. 5. 34.
which is his Throne. In heaven it is, where the Angels behold the face of God:
Math. 18. 10.
and where thousand thousands minister unto him, Dan. 7. 10.
and ten thousand thousands stand before him. In heaven is Christ set at the
right hand of the Throne of Majesty. In heaven it was where Saint Paul heard
unspeakable words, Heb. 1. 3. and 8. 1.
which it is not lawful (or possible) for man to utter. 2. Cor. 12. 4. (...).
In a word, in heaven truly and properly are the things which eye has not
seen, 1. Cor. 2 9.
nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man.

5. Because his glory is most manifested as in heaven, 5. To show whence his
glory most shows it self.
so from heaven. For from heaven especially the glory of his power,
providence, justice, mercy, and other attributes is declared. The heavens
declare the glory of God. From heaven did God cause judgment to be heard.
Psalm. 19. 1. -- 76. 8.
From heaven the wrath of God is re^ealed. From heaven did the Lord behold the
earth, Romans 1. 18.
to hear the groaning of the prisoners, Psalm. 102. 19, 20.
etc. From above is every good giving, and every perfect gift. Iam. 1. 17.


. 17. Of the direction which Gods being in heaven gives us for the manner of
praying.
Q. Does this description of Gods greatness give us any direction for Prayer?

A. Yes. Both for the Manner and Matter of Prayer.

Q. No image of God to be conceived i^ prayer Exodus 20. 4.
What direction does it give for the Manner of Prayer?

A. 1. That in Prayer we conceive no Image of God. For whereunto can he, who is
in heaven, be resembled? It cannot but much impair the surpassing excellency
of Gods glorious Majesty, to be likened to any creature: and that much more
then if a great Monarch should be said to be like a toade, or viper. Often and
earnestly has God forewarned his people to take heed thereof: Deuteronomy. ^. 15.
etc.
and much contested against them for it. Isa. 40. 18 etc.
This one point of palpable idolatry, if there were no other, is enough to
keep us from communion with Papists.

2. No carnal thing to be conceived of God.
That we conceive no earthly or carnal thing of God who is in heaven. To
think that God deals hardly with us, misiudgeth our intents, Job 10. 4.
accepts not our good deeds, respects persons, or any such thing, Job 34.
18, 19.
is to conceive a carnal thing of God. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art
wicked? or to Princes, ye are ungodly? How much less to him that is in heaven,
that accepts not the person of Princes?

3. God not to be measured by man's reason.
That we measure not God, his word, nor works by the last of our reason. He
is in heaven: we on earth. This therefore is to measure things heavenly with an
earthly measure, which is too scantie. Isa. 55. 9.
As the heavens are higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your
ways says the Lord. This is to be noted especially against such as in their
distresses, when they can see no ordinary means of help, think God himself
cannot help: as the Israelites that said, Psalm. 78. 19.
Can God prepare a table in the wilderness? and like the Prince that said, 2.
King. 7. 2.
Though the Lord would make windows in heaven, could this come to pass? This
also is to be noted against such as utterly despair of mercy, Genesis 4. 13.
as Cain, Judas, and others. Math. 27. 5.


4. Goodness of earthly parents transcendently applied to God.
That we apply all the goodness of earthly parents to God after a
transcendent, and supereminent manner. For as the heaven is higher then the
earth, so great is his mercy, etc. If ye being evil know how to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven,
Psalm. 103. 11.
give good things to them that ask him? Math. 7. 11.
On this ground have the Saints in former times said, Though Abraham be
ignorant of us, Isa. 63. 16.
and Israel acknowledge us not, yet thou, Isa. 49. 15.
o Lord, art our Father, etc. Can a woman forget her sucking child? yea though
they may forget, yet will not I forget, says the Lord. Psalm. 27. 10.
When my Father and mother for sake me, then will the Lord take me up.
According to this transcendent application of fatherly love to God, we ought to
have our faith strengthened therein. How much comfort may such Parents as are
tender over their children, or such children as have tender Parents, or any
other that know the tenderness of earthly Parents, receive by this
application, if they believe, as they ought, That Our Father which is in
heaven, is as much more tender then fathers on earth, as Heaven is higher then
earth? Yea such as have impotent and unnatural Parents on earth, may uphold
themselves through faith in their Father who is in heaven, being as a Father,
ready, and, as in heaven, able to supply all their necessities.

5. That with all reverence we prostrate our selves before God our Father in
heaven. Reuerendly bow before God.
For this end, first a true fear of God must be planted in our hearts, Psalm.
95. 3, 6.
according to this patheticall wish of God himself, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
O that there were in their hearts a fear of me! Then must this fear be
manifested by beseeming gesture and words, Placendum est diuinis oculis and
habitu corporis, and modo vosu. Cypr. de Orat. dom.. 2.
neither ouer-curious, nor ouer-carelesse. Hereof we have an excellent
pattern in the Lords Prayer, wherein there is admirable art (as we have
showed. 1. Eccl. 5. 2.
before) and yet no frothy curiosity. The wise man, upon the ground here
noted, gives a like direction. His direction is this, Be not rash with thy
mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God. His
ground is this, God is in heaven. As for our gesture, on a due consideration of
the greatness of God, we are exhorted to fall down, Psalm. 95. 3, 6.
and kneel before him. The Publican with all humility carried himself in
Prayer before God: Publicanus humiliter ^r^uit, and exaudiuit orantem qui
humilibus ignoscit. Cypr. ibid.. 4.
and kneel before him. The Publican with all humility carried himself in
Prayer before God: and he who pardons the humble heard his Prayer. To
conclude this point, all the reverence both inward and outward, that possibly
may be, is to be manifested to our Father in heaven, lest his father-hood make
us ouer-bold. Thus shall we in truth say unto God, Mercy is with thee, Psalm.
130. 4.
that thou may be feared.

6. That we make no place a pretext to keep us from Prayer. Pray every where.
For as the heaven, and the Sun therein is every where over us, so as we
cannot withdraw our selves out of the compass thereof: so much more is God in
every place over us, and with us: neither can we withdraw our selves out of the
compass of his presence. We may therefore, yea we ought, (as just occasion and
fit opportunity is offered) pray in any place. We read of the Saints prayers
made in 1. King. 8. 23.
the Temple, in Acts 10. 30.
their own houses, on the Acts 10 9.
house top, in Genesis 24. 63.
the open field, in Luke 6. 12.
a mountain, in Ion. 1. 6.
a ship, in -- 3* 2.
the midst of the sea, in -- 2, 1.
a fishes belly, in Gen 24. 12.
a journey, in 2. Chron. 14. 11
a battle* and in sundry other places. This being so, what need is there of
going on pilgrimage to this or that shrine? Is our Father which is in heaven,
tied to one country, or to one place in a country more then to another? An
heathenish conceit! For the heathen imagined their Apollo, from whom they
received their Oracles to be at Delphi, Cuma, Dodona, and such other particular
places. Pure hearts in Prayer.


7. 1. Tim. 2. 8. 2. Tim. 2. 19. Psalm. 26. 6.
That we list up pure hearts in Prayer. For heaven, where God is on his Throne
of Grace, and whither our souls in Prayer ascend, is a pure, and holy place:
Reu. 21. 27.
into it no unclean thing can enter. Besides, from heaven can God epsy with
what minds and hearts we come before him. Psalm. 11. 14.
His throne being in heaven, his eyes behold, his eyelids try the children of
men. Now he can endure to iniquity, no hypocrisy. Psalm. 66. 18. Ioh. 9. 31.
If we regard wickedness, God will not hear our Prayers. Pro. 28. 9. Isa.
(...) 15.
They are abomination to him.

8. That our Prayers be made with an holy subjection to Gods will: saying as
Christ, Subjection to Gods will in Prayer.
Not my will be done, but thine. God being in heaven has an absolute
sovereignty: his will must, and shall stand, Mat. 26. 39.
whether we will or no. But by our willing subjection we make a virtue of
necessity: Luke 22. 42.
which is a great point of wisdom.

9. Pray in faith.
That in faith we lift up eyes, hands, and hearts into heaven. Our Father on
whom we call is in heaven. Psalm. 123. 1.
But locally in our bodies we cannot go thither. Lam. 3. 41.
Spiritually therefore, with the wings of faith we must fly up thither. Faith
is the eye, hand, and foot of the soul.

10. Effectual Prayer.
That our Prayer be so sent forth as they may pierce the heavens where God is.
This is to be done with extension not of voice, Dcus non vo^is, se^co^^dis
auditor est. Cypr. de Orat. dom.. 3.
but of Spirit. The shrillest sound of any trumpet cannot reach unto the
highest heaven: no nor the strongest report of any canon. But ardencie of
spirit can pierce to the Throne of Grace. Such a Prayer was that which Moses
poured out when God said, Exodus 14. 15.
Why CRYEST thou unto me? The Apostle styles such desires as Gods Spirit
raises in our spirits, Romans 8. 26.
Groans which cannot be uttered.

11. Pray with confidence.
That we pray with confidence in Gods almighty power: believing that God is
able to grant whatsoever we shall ask according to his will. 2. Chro. 14. 11.
As the title Father gave us ground of confidence in Gods fatherly love: so
this placing of him in heaven, gives us as good ground of confidence in his
power. Thus shall we (as Abraham did) Give glory to God, Romans 4. 20, 21.
being fully persuaded that what he has promised he is able also to perform.

12. Pray with courage.
That we pray with courage, not fearing what any on earth can do to hinder the
fruit and success of our Prayers. For our Father to whom we pray, and from
whom we expect the accomplishment of our desire, is in heaven, higher then all.
Daniel without question did well know and consider this ground of confidence,
when notwithstanding the decree made against all that should ask any petition
of any God or man, Dan. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
he prayed three times a day his window being open.

. 18. Of the direction which Gods being in heaven gives us for the matter of
Prayer.
Q. What direction does this placing of God in heaven give us for the matter
of Prayer?

A. It teaches us what things especially to ask.

Q. What are they?

A. Ask of God matters of moment.
1. Things of weight and worth, meet for such a Majesty to give. When
subjects prefer a Petition to their Sovereign sitting on his throne, or
chair of estate, they do not use to make suit for pins or points. This were
dishonorable to his majesty. Shall we then make suit to this highest Majesty
being in heaven, for toys, and trifles? Shall a dice-player pray that he may
win his fellows money? Shall an angry man pray to God that he may be revenged
on him with whom he is angry? Shall any one desire God to satisfy his lusts?
In this respect says S. James, Iam. 4. 3.
Ye ask and receive not, because you ask amiss that you may consume it on
your lusts. For this general direction about the matter of Prayer, we have a
perfect pattern in this platform prescribed by our Lord, wherein is nothing,
but what is of great moment mentioned.

Object. We are there taught to pray for daily bread, which seems not to be
so great and weighty a matter.

Answ. Under daily bread weighty matters comprised.
1. Under bread all temporal blessings are comprised. Now all temporal
blessings jointly considered together, are a matter of much moment, and meet
to be craved of that Lord who is in heaven, Psalm. 24. 1.
and to whom the earth and the fullness thereof belongs.

2. We do not there only crave the thing it self, but a blessing with it. Now
the blessing of the least creature is a weighty matter: more then all the world
can give. Without the blessing the creature it self is nothing. Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
For man lives not by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of the Lord does man live.

3. Though temporal blessings in their kind be comparatively small, See. 96.
yet in their end they are of great worth. Their proper end is to enable us the
better to do that work which God has enjoined us to do, and to honor him in
this world, which the living only can do. Isa. 38. 19.
In this respect we are to crave them not singly, Psalm. 6. 5.
and simply in themselves, but as means to enable us to honor God, and to do
good unto our brethren.

2. Ask things heavenly. Desiderari conueni^ (...) and caquae haben^ur in
caelis. Chrysostom. ^om. 20. in Mat. 6.
From this placing of God in heaven we are taught to crave things heavenly:
which are

1. Such as tend to the glory of God that is in heaven.

2. Such as help us to heaven.

These are the things which Christ especially entendeth, where making a
comparison betwixt our father on earth, and this our Father in heaven, Math. 7.
11.
he says. How much more shall your Father which is in heaven, Luke 11. 13.
give good things to them that ask him? S. Luke expressing the same point, in
stead of good things puts the holy Ghost: whereby is showed what are the good
things which Christ means, namely, such as proceed from the sanctifying
Spirit of God. These heavenly things are most meet for him who is in heaven to
give. To this purpose tends this exhortation of the Apostle, Col. 3. 1.
Seek those things which are above. Well had Solomon learned this lesson: for
when God said to him, Ask what I shall give thee, 1. King. 3. 5, 9.
he answered, Give thy servant an understanding heart: which is one of those
good gifts that come from above.

Object. If the things which we are here taught to pray for be heavenly, how is
it that temporal blessings come in the rank and number of them?

Answ. How earthly things are heavenly blessings. Math. 6. 33.
As appendices, and appurtenanees to heavenly and spiritual blessings: for so
they are promised. First seek the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be added unto you. As when a man purchases mannours and
lands, the wood in hedge-r^wes for fire-boote, plow-boote, and other like
purposes is given in the gross. Or more plainly, when a man buyeth spice,
fruit, comfits, or any such commodities, paper and pack-thred is given into
the bargain. So if thou get heavenly blessings, temporal things, so far as
they are needful for thee, shall be cast in.

3. Ask heaven it self.
From placing God in heaven we are taught to crave heaven it selsfe: that we
may be where our Father is: and where we may most fully enjoy his glorious
presence. Thus did the Apostle desire to depart, Phil. 1. 23.
for this very end that he might be with Christ. And the holy Patriarchs are
said to desire an heavenly country: Heb. 11. 16.
which also the Apostle notes to be the desire of all true Saints. Heb. 13.
14. V^i deus, illic fundamenta habitationis su^ cuique sunt iacienda. Greg.
N^s. lib. de Orat.
Where God is, there must every one lay the foundation of his abode.

Two things there be which will testify the truth of our desire hereof.

1. A studying to enter into that rest, together with a cheerful walking in
the way that leads thereto. Heb. 4. 11.


2. Luke 13. 24.
A cheer and joy of heart when we see any sign of our dissolution
approaching. Luke 2. 29.
Old Simeon and Paul were exceedingly affected in this case. 2. Tim. 4. 6.


Thus far of the Preface. The Petitions follow.

. 19. Of the manner of handling every Petition.
IN handling every of the Petitions six points shall be distinctly observed.

1. The Meaning of the words.

2. The Order and dependence of one point upon another.

3. The particular good things which we are to cr^ate.

4. The particulars for which we are to give thanks.

5. The duties which we ought to endeavor after.

6. The failings for which we are to be humbled.

The three former of these are most proper and natural. For

1. By opening the meaning of the words, the true and full intent of Christ
will be better found out.

2. By noting out the dependence, one point will give much light to another.
For the order is very acurate.

3. By reckoning up the particulars which are to be craved, we may easily
discern what abundance of matter is couched under a few words.

The other three points follow by just consequence. For

1. Whatsoever we pray for, when we have obtained it, we must be thankful for.

2. We must do what we can to get what we pray for, or else we mock God.

3. The want of such things as we ought to pray for, ministers just matter of
humiliation.

These three latter points therefore are to be considered in every Petition as
well as the former.

. 20. Of the name of God, and the things comprised under it.
Q. Which is the first Petition?

A. Hallowed be thy Name.

Q. What is the Name of God?

A. That whereby God is made known. For that is the end and use of a name, to
make known and distinguish that whose name it is. Genesis 2. 19, 20.
Thus did Adam give names to every living creature to make them thereby be the
better known; and to distinguish them one from another. Whatsoever Adam called
every living creature, that was the name thereof: namely a name proper and
peculiar unto it, whereby the nature of it was expressed, and so the creature
made known. Thus whatsoever it is whereby God is made known unto us, may be
comprised under this title Name attributed to God.

Q. How many things are there whereby God is made known?

A. Six things comprised under Gods name.
Six especially.

1. His Nature, 1. His nature. Ioh. 4. 24.
which is a Spirit. Hereby we know him to be invisible, and no way subject to
corporal grossness or weakness. Yea hereby we know that he must be
worshipped in spirit and truth.

2. 2 The distinction of persons. Math. 28. 19.
The Distinction of persons in the holy Trinity. Hereby is Jehovah the true
God distinguished from all false gods. For never came it into the imagination,
or apprehension of any heathenish Idolater to conceive that his God could be
one in nature, and three in persons. Hereby also may we know how to approach
unto the Father, namely in the mediation of his Son by the assistance of his
Spirit.

3. 3. His titles. Vide Hieronym. in epist. ad Martel.
His Titles. The Jews have ten several titles which they apply to God, and
whereby they distinguish him from all creatures. Among the rest Jehovah is the
most proper. For that is applied to none but to God. These two titles, LORD,
GOD, are most usual in our tongue.

That the titles applied to God are properly his Name, is evident by that
answer which God himself gave to Moses, enquiring what he should say if the
children of Israel should ask what the Name of that God that sent him, was.
Gods answer was this, Exodus 3. 14. (...)
say, I AM has sent me to you. By the forenamed titles is God distinguished
from all creatures.

4. 4. His properties.
His Attributes. Of these some are incommunicable, so proper to God as in no
respect they can be attributed to any creature: as eternity without beginning,
simpleness without mixture, infiniteness filling all places, prescience,
knowing all things before all times, immutabilitie not subject to any change,
all-sufficiencie in himself, omnipotency and such like. When we hear any of
these to be attributed to any, we may thereupon infer, surely that is God, or
else they are falsely attributed. Other attributes are indeed communicable, and
in some respects may be applied to creatures, as purity, wisdom, truth,
justice, mercy, and others such like, yet in that they are originally,
infinitely, unchangeably in God, they declare that God to be Jehovah, the
supreme Lord of all. Such as these were reckoned up, when the Lord proclaimed
his Name to Moses. Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7.


5. 5. His word.
His Word. This of all other does most clearly, distinctly, and fully make God
known unto us. Christ speaking of the holy Scriptures thus says, John 5 39.
They are they which testify of me.

6. His works.
His Works. For the invisible things of God from the creation of the world,
Romans 1. 20.
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, Nomen eius
gloria eius. Bern. in Quadragess. Sermon. 6.
even his eternal power and Godhead. Gods works do evidently declare him to
be God, yea to be the only true God, infinitely wise, just, merciful,
powerful, etc. In a word, Gods name is his glory.

. 21. Of Gods making known himself.
Q. What learn we from this mention of Gods Name?

A. God may be known. Though he be invisible, inconceivable, incomprehensible
in himself, and in his divine essence, yet it has pleased him to set forth
himself according to our capacity, as is evident by all those places where
mention is made of his name.

Q. God makes himself known
Why has God taken a name to be known by?

A. 1. To make us respect him.
To work in our hearts a due respect of him. Who will or can respect that
which he knows not? But the name of God is in every respect glorious. It
therefore makes them that know it to respect him.

2. To draw us to him.
To show us how we may draw near unto him, call upon him, trust in him, and
receive from him all needful blessings. If he had no name, or were no way
known of us, how could we seek him, and find him? Thus he has aimed both at
his own honor, and our good, in taking a name to himself. Wherefore we ought
to enquire after the name of God, and to take notice of all those means
whereby he has made himself known to us. That so we may the better hallow
his name.

Thus much of this word Name. About the other word ( Hallowed be) we will first
consider the meaning of it, and then the manner of setting it down: and that
1. Impersonally. 2. In form of Petition.

. 22. Of Hallowing.
Q. What does this word HALLOW signify?

A. Properly to make holy: being all one as to sanctify. But it is diversely
used in the Scriptures.

It is attributed sometimes to things that are to be made holy, and sometimes
to things that are already holy in themselves.

Things to be made holy are hallowed two ways.

1. By setting them apart, or employing them to an holy use. This may be done
by one creature to another. For thus God commands Moses to sanctify or
hallow all the firstborn. Exodus 13. 2, 12.
And to show his meaning herein, he says a little after, Thou shall set apart
unto the Lord all that opens the matrix. Thus do ministers hallow the bread
and wine at the holy Communion.

2. By putting holiness actually and properly into that which is hallowed.
This the Creator only can do to his creatures. The Apostle therefore thus
prays, 1. These. 5. 23.
The very God of peace sanctify you wholly. And this God does by his Spirit,
which is thereupon called the holy Ghost, and Spirit of sanctification. Math.
28. 19.


That which is holy in it self is said to be hallowed by esteeming, Romans 1. 4.
acknowledging, Nos ipsos admo nemus desiderare vt nomen eius quod semper
sanctum est, ^tiam apud homiues sanctum habeatur. Aug. cp. 121. Isa. 29. 23.
and declaring it to be as it is. In which sense says the Lord, They shall
sanctify my name, and sanctify the holy one of Iaakob. To sanctify an holy
one can import no more then (as was said) to esteem, acknowledge, and declare
him to be holy. This is all the hallowing, or sanctifying that can be done to
the Creator. This therefore must needs be here meant.

Q. Why is choice made of (...) sanctificetur.
a word that sets out Gods holiness, rather then any other of his
attributes?

A. Because holiness is in it self an especial excellency, and also the
perfection of all other excellencies. If holiness could be seucred from any of
Gods attributes (which is impossible that it should be: for as soon may God
cease to be God, as to be holy) it might then be said thereof, as it was said
of Israel when the Arc was taken away, 1. Sam. 4. 21. 22. (...)
where is the glory.

. 23. Of the creatures hallowing the Creator.
Q. What learn we from the desire of hallowing Gods name?

A. The Creator may be hallowed by his creatures: otherwise Christ would not
have taught us to make this Petition; neither would there have been so many
exhortations recorded in Scripture to this purpose, as there are*

This is not done by the creatures conferring of any thing upon his Creator,
but only by the Creators gracious acceptance of our acknowledgment of him to
be as he is. Job 22* 2, 3. and 35. 7.
For if thou be righteous what give thou to him? or what receives he at
thine hands? God is so absolute and perfect in himself, as do the creature
what it will, it can no way increase the honor of God, no nor darken and
obscure it. His name is holy in it self, whatsoever we say for it, (...)
or against it. Neither is it needful in regard of the Creator that his name
should be hallowed: but in regard of the creatures it is very needful. For the
creatures hallowing of Gods name makes nothing to the happiness of the
Creator hallowed, Cyril. Catech. mist. 5.
but much to the happiness of the creature hallowing. Vt sanctificetur nomen
dei non deo sed hominibus prodest. Aug. epist. 121.
Should no creature hallow his Creators name, the Creator were not the less
honorable: but the creature that failed therein much more miserable.

Behold here the admirable goodness of God to man, who accepts of that which
is in himself, as given to him by man. Perfectly and infinitely holy he is,
and yet vouchsafes to be hallowed. Ought not this gracious acceptance of God
to move us to desire, and to do the things wherein, and whereby God is hallowed?

. 24. Of the excellency of Holiness.
Q. What is taught us by the express mention of hallowing in this Petion?

A. Gods chiefest glory consists in his holiness. Read the Scriptures
obseruantly, and ye shall find this attribute most usually applied to him. They
who best know how most to glorify God, do resound this one to another, Holy,
Holy, Holy, is the Lord. Isa. 6. 3. -- 40. 25. (...)
Yea by a property and excellency is God styled the Holy one.

Take heed therefore that no thought which may any way impeach Gods Holiness
pass from you: but let your heart give assent, Rev. 4. 8.
and your tongue say Amen to this divine dittie of that heavenly Quire, Holy,
Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty. So acknowledge him to be in all his counsels, 1.
Pet. 1. 15, 16. Fieri dici^ur sancta gloria dei, cum in sanctitate glorisicatur
a nobis. Bern. in Quadrages. Sermon. 6.
words, and works: and for a more evident demonstration thereof, As he which
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, because
it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy?

. 25. Of the extent of man's desire to have Gods name hallowed.
Q. What learn we from the manner of setting down this duty in the third
person indefinitely, thus, hallowed be.

A. Our desire of having Gods name hallowed, must be beyond that which we are
able to do by our selves. The extent of our desire in this respect must reach
to all creatures, in all places, at all times. For this purpose read Psalm.
113. 2, 3, 4. and the whole 148. Psalm. This shows that in this our desire
we simply aim at Gods glory: and that we respect the honor of God more then
the reward that may redound to us thereby. If our desire were restrained to our
selves, that we only might hallow the name of God, not caring whether it were
hallowed by others or no, it might justly be thought that the chief, Exodus 32.
32.
if not the only end of our desire were some recompense which from thence we
expected to our selves. Moses manifested a pure zeal of Gods glory when he
could have been contented to be blotted out of Gods book, rather then Gods
name should be dishonored.

. 26. Of man's disabilitie to hallow Gods Name.
Q. Why is this set down by Petition thus, hallowed be, rather then by
promise, thus, hallowed shall be.

A. Because it is not in our power to do it of our selves. For we are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves: 2. Cor. 3. 5.
Nulla sacit homo bona, quae non deus praestat, vt faciat homo. Arans. Council.
cap. 10.
our sufficiency is of God. God therefore works in man that ability, mind
and will which he has to hallow Gods name: so as in truth it is God that in
and by us halloweth his own name.

. 27. Of the force of this word THY in the first Petition.
Q. TO whom is this particle, THY, to hereferred?

A. To him that is described in the Preface.

Q. What does it note out?

A. 1. A reason of the Petition. 2. A restraint of the Petition. 3. An emphasis
of the Petition.


Q. How a reason?

A. As it has relation to the two properties of him that is described. God to
be hallowed because he is good and great.
He is Our Father, and he is in heaven: a good and a great God; a gracious and
a glorious Lord. Is there not then good and great reason that his name be
hallowed?

Q. How a restraint? God only to be hallowed.


A. By implying that Gods name only is to be hallowed. Psalm. 148. 13.
I am the Lord: Isa. 42. 8.
(says this God:) that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another.
And as God will not, so neither must we give that which is due to him, to our
selves or others: on which ground the Psalmist thus prays, Psalm. 115. 1.
Not unto us, Ezec. 28 2, 7.
o Lord, Dan. 5. 20, 21.
not unto us, Acts 12. 22, 23.
but unto thy name give glory. Tyrus, Nebuchadnetzar, Herod, and many others
have been severely revenged for usurping that glory to themselves which was
due to God.

Q. How does this particle THY, God to be hallowed above all
set out an emphasis?

A. By implying that the name of God is to be advanced above all names. As if
we thus said, Thy name, be hallowed as becomes so great a name, Psalm. 113. 4.
whose glory is above the heavens. Thus this particle THY, directing our heart
to our Father in heaven, makes it to soar aloft, and extends the desire
thereof.

. 28. Of man's honoring God, because God honors him.
Q. What is to be observed about the order of the first Petition?

A. 1. The fit inference of it upon the Preface.

2. The due precedence which it has before all other Petitions.

Q. What learn we from the inference of it upon the Preface?

A. 1. The honor which God vouchsafes to man should move man to seek the
honor of God.

2. Sons of God ought especially to seek the honor of God.

The first of these is a general Doctrine, Digna prorsus ^o qui eum patrem
appellauit oration, nihil omnino prius quam pro illius gloria supplicare. Chrysostom.
in Mat. 6. Hom. 20.
arising from that prerogative which God in heaven vouchsafes to men on earth,
namely, to be their Father. Whence is inferred, as a duty, their desire of
hallowing Gods name. To this end is a like Preface prefixed before the
Decalogue. In that Preface are laid down the favors of God to his people, and
thereupon obedience to all Gods commandments (whereby God is much honored) is
required. This duty of honoring God, upon the forenamed ground of Gods
honoring man, is much inculcated by Moses and the Prophets.

Both Justice and Gratitude require as much. Justice, because it is a due debt.
Gratitude, because it is a rcall acknowledgment of kindness received.

We ought therefore to take notice of those special favors and honors which
God does to us: that our hearts may be the more stirred up thereby to seek his
honor.

. 29. Of Saints honoring God, because they are sons.
THe other Doctrine arises from the particular kind of honor noted in the
Preface, which is, to be sons of him that is in heaven. Because he is our
Father, and we his sons, therefore we especially ought to seek his honor.
Mal. 1. 6.
If I be a Father (says he) where is mine honor? God does most expect it at
his sons hands, as of right he may. For they are honored with the greatest
honor that can be. Can there be a greater honor conferred on sons of men,
then to be sons of God? Consider this all ye that call God Father:
especially, ye into whose hearts God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
crying, Gal. 4. 6.
Abba Father. In filiorum ordinem profecti, pro patris nostri gloria to^um
impendamus affectum, dicentes, sanctificetur nomen tuum. Ab. Isa. de Orat. c.
18.
We that are in the rank of Gods children ought wholly to apply our selves for
the glory of our Father, saying, Hallowed be thy Name.

. 30. Of preferring Gods honor before all other things.
Q. What learn we from the precedence of this Petition?

A. 1. Gods honor ought to be preferred before all things.

2. Gods honor is the maine end whereat all our desires ought to aim.

The order of the Decalogue and the placing of the first commandment before
all the rest, does confirm the former of these instructions: Mat. 6. 33.
so does this exhortation, First seek the kingdom of God. All priorities are
comprised under that particle, First. Ioh. 12. 27, 28.
Both before and above all things is that to be sought. Christ preferred his
Fathers glory before his own life: yea, and before freedom from that bitter
agony whereunto he was brought, being our Surety* For thus in his prayer he
reasons about that point: What shall I say? Father save me from this hour.
Bnt for this cause came I unto this hour. Father glorify thy name. And then
he rests, as in that which above all he desired. This mind by the same Spirit
was wrought in Saint Paul, who counted not his life dear: Acts 20. 24. -- 21.
13.
but was ready to dye for the name of the Lord.

Q. Is Gods honor to be preferred before our eternal salvation?

A. 1. These two cannot stand in opposition. Our salvation stands with Gods
honor.
The more we seek Gods honor, the more we help forward our salvation: and
the more we seek our salvation aright, the more we advance Gods honor.

2. If they could stand in opposition, Gods glory to be preferred before our
salvation.
then without contradiction Gods honor should be sought rather then our own
salvation. On which ground Moses made this transcendent Prayer, Exodus 32. 32.
If not, blot me I pray thee, out of thy book which thou have written.

Gods glory is of all things the most excellent, Eccl. 7. 1.
and precious. If a man's name be better then precious ointment, Pro. 22. 1.
and great riches, What is Gods? He primum fieri petionus quod maximum, vt
nobis gloriae illius innotescat sanctitas illibata Bern. in Quadr. Sermon. 6.
Now the more excellent a thing is, the more it is to be esteemed, and
preferred. Besides by seeking and setting forth Gods honor, we seek and set
forth our own. For as it is in it self an honorable thing to honor God, so
God that can and will perform it, has said, Them that honor me will I
honor. Is there not then good reason to desire above all other things that
Gods name be hallowed? 1. Sam. 2. 30.


. 31. Of aiming at Gods honor in all things.
THat Gods honor is also the maine end whereat all our desires ought to aim,
is evident by that pertinent exhortation of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. 31.
Whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of God. Phil. 1. 20.
This was his rejoicing, that the Lord should be magnified in him, Romans 9. 22,
23.
whether it were by life, Ephesians. 1. 6.
or by death. God himself makes his glory the end of all his counsels and
actions. Pro. 16. 4.
But that end which he aims at we also must set before us. As for this end, it
is the highest, chiefest and best end whereunto any thing can be referred. It
is the end of this first Petition, and of all the rest: for the perfection of
Gods kingdom, and subjection to his will tend directly to his glory. As for
the other three Petitions, though in the matter of them they concern our good,
yet in the manner of seeking our good, namely of God, they make to Gods glory.
For in the fourth Petition Gods providence in the things of this life is
acknowledged: in the fifth his mercy in pardoning sin: in the sixth his power,
in keeping safe from all assaults.

This may serve as a touchstone to try the soundness of a Religion. Our
religion gives more glory to God then popery.
In opposition betwixt diverse religions, mark which comes nearest to this
mark, nnd most tends to this end. If the religions of Protestants and of
Papists be well touched with this touchstone, and equally poised in these
balances, it will easily be found that the reformed Religion is much more
sound then the other. For one maine difference betwixt us and them in all our
controversies, is this, that we take away from man all manner of glorying in
himself, and give the glory of all to God. But they rob God to give to man
matter of trusting unto himself, and unto others like himself, and of
boasting in himself and others. Instance the controversies we have with them
about the authority of the Church above the Scriptures, The power of Popes and
Priests, Adoration and Invocation of Angels and Saints, Their intercession, The
inherent virtue of Sacramtes, Man's free will to good, Works of satisfaction
and supererogation, Merit of works, Indulgences, Pilgrimages, and many other
like these.

This also may serve as a touchstone to try particular actions. The more they
aim at this end the better they be. Though a work seem otherwise never so
good, yet if Gods glory be not the end of it, it only seems to be good, as
that which seems to be what it is not. To give alms, to pray, to fast, are
works in the general matter and substance of them good, yet in these Christ
censured the Pharisees, Math. 6. 1. etc.
and warned his Disciples not to be like them: and that because they missed of
this end. Let us therefore in all things aim especially at Gods glory.

. 31. Of the particulars to be prayed for under the first Petition.
Q. Unto how many heads may those particulars which in the first Petition we
are taught to pray for, be referred?

A. Unto three especially. For we are taught there to desire:

1. Such graces in our selves as may enable us to hallow the name of God.

2. Such graces in others as may enable them thereto.

3. Such an ouer-ruling providence in God, as may direct every thing thereto.
Particulars prayed for in regard of our selves.


Q. What are the graces which we desire for our selves to the foresaid end?

A. Such as are requisite for every power of our soul, and part of our body to
make them fit instruments of hallowing Gods name: as

1. For our understanding, 1. Knowledge of God.
we desire knowledge of God: that (as the Apostle prays) God would give to us
the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him. Ephesians. 1. 17.
This we may the more confidently pray for, Ier. 31. 34.
because it is absolutely promised; and we ought the more earnestly to desire
it, because it is the groundworke of all other graces. Before the understanding
be well enlightened, neither can the will be made subject to God, nor the heart
set upon God, nor any other power of soul or part of body be serviceable to
him. Mat. 6. 22, 23. expounded.
The light of the body is the eye: that is, the understanding in man, the
little world, is as that great light the Sun in the great world. If therefore
thine eye be single thy whole body shall be full of light. If the
understanding be well illuminated and do clearly discern the truth, the whole
man throughout will be well ordered. But if thine eye be evil, thy wholebody
shall be full of darkness. If the understanding be blind, the whole man must
needs be out of order. The knowledge here desired, How God is to be known.
ought to be a particular and distinct understanding of all the things whereby
God is made known unto us: as of his Nature, Persons, Titles, and Attributes:
yea also of his Word whereby all these, together with his whole will are
plainly revealed: and of his ordinances, wherein and whereby he is worshipped:
and finally of his works, whereby his wisdom, power, justice and mercy, are
evidently made known. 2. Acknowledgment of God. Reu. 4. 11.
Yea further we ought to desire that knowing God to be the only true Jehovah,
we may acknowledge him to be worthy of all honor, as the celestial spirits
do.

2. For our Will, 3. Subjection of our will to Gods
we desire a through and full submission of it to God, as to our sovereign
Lord. Hereof we have a worthy pattern in Eli, 1. Sam 3. 18.
David, and Christ himself. Hence will follow Patience under all crosses, 2.
Sam. 15. 26.
as laid upon us by God. Math. 26. 39.
Contentment in our estate, 4. Patience.
as appointed to us by God. Thankfulness for every blessing, 5. Contentme^t.
as bestowed upon us by God, and other like virtues, 6. Thanfulnes.
which as they have respect to God do make much to the hallowing of his name.

3. For our Mind and Will jointly together, 7. Faith.
we desire Faith, whereby we give all due credence to the truth of Gods word,
and believe in him. Ioh. 3. 33.
This is a great honor done to God: for he that receives his testimony, has
set to his seal that God is true. Under this head is comprised affiance in
Gods mercy, 8. Affiance.
wherein the glory of God does most brightly shine forth: Psalm 108. 4.
(for his mercy is great above the heaven: 9. Confidence.
) Confidence in Gods power, Romans 4. 20.
whereby Abraham gave great glory to God: 10. Trust.
Trust in Gods providence, a point much pressed by Christ: Math. 6. 25. etc.
Persuasion of Gods divine wisdom, whereby all things are turned to the glory
of Gods name: 11. Persuasion of Gods wisdom.
and other virtues of the like kind, whereby Gods name is also much hallowed.

4. For our Heart we desire that it may be wholly set upon God: 12. Love.
and that he may be made the object of all our liking affections, 13. Joy.
to love him with all our heart, 14. Delight.
with all our soul, 15. Care.
with all our mind: 16. Zeal.
to joy in the holy Ghost: to delight in his word: to care how to please him:
Math. ^2. 37.
and to be eaten up with a zeal of his glory. And on the other side we desire
that our disliking affections be set on that which disliketh him, Romans 14. 17.
as to hate sin and obstinate sinners which are hateful to him: Psalm. 119.
77.
to fear his displeasure: 1. Cor. 7. 32.
to grieve at his offense: Joh 2* 17.
and to tremble at his judgments. Psalm. 139. 21.


5. For our Speech, Psalm. 119. 120.
we desire to mention the name of God, as we have occasion, Psalm 102. 9, 10.
with all reverence: yea and to take all occasions of speaking of the glory of
his name: 2 Chro. 34. 27.
for in this respect especially is our tongue, 17. Sanctified speech.
by an excellency, called glory. We desire therefore (when in truth, Deuteronomy.
28. 58.
righteousness and judgment it may be done) to swear by his name: Psalm. 45.
1.
to call upon his name; to praise his name: Psalm. 57. 8.
to declare his name to others, and to instruct them therein, Ier. 4 2.
that so the name of God may be the more hallowed: Psalm 50. 15, 23.
yea above all to use our glory, Psalm. 22. 22.
our tongue in maintaining the truth of God, 1. Pet. 3. 15.
and in making a just Apology when question is made thereof.

6. For our life and outward actions, 18. Holy life.
we desire that they be holy, just, Math 5. 16.
and blameless, that men may see our good works and glorify our Father which
is in heaven. Ioh. 15. 8.
Herein (says Christ) is my Father glorified, 2. Cor. 8. 19.
that ye bear much fruit: and S. Paul notes works of mercy to tend to the
glory of the Lord.

Q. What graces do we desire for others to the hallowing of Gods Name? Like
graces desired for others.


A. All those which we are to desire for our selves: that Gods name may be
hallowed by others as well as our selves: which we are to desire, not only for
our children, families, kindred, neighbors, countrymen, or such as we are by
outward bands bound unto, but indefinitly for all of all sorts: whereof we have
a worthy pattern in the 67. Psalm. Thus shall we show that in this our desire
we aim more at Gods glory, (which is the maine scope of this Petition) then
at the good of such as are any way dear unto us.

Q. What things do we desire that God by his ouer-ruling providence would turn
to the hallowing of his Name? Pray that all things may make to Gods glory.


A. Every thing whatsoever: as

1. The virtues of his Saints, 1. Cor. 8. 1.
whereby else they may be puffed up.

2. The peace and prosperity of his Saints, 2. Chro. 26. 16.
whereby else they may be drawn away from God.

3. The failings and folly of his Saints, Genesis 50. 20.
as he did turn the envy of Joseph's brethren to the accomplishment of his
word.

4. The troubles and crosses of his Saints, Phil. 1. 20.
that they sink not under the burden of them.

5. The wicked plots and practices of his enemies, Acts 4. 24. etc.
and of the enemies of his Church.

6. All that all creatures do; Psalm. 148. and 150.
that thus in all places, at all times, in and by all things, the Name of God
may be hallowed.

. 32. Of the particulars for which thanks is to be given under the first
Petition.
Q. TO what heads may those particulars, for which by reason of the first
Petition we ought to give thanks be, referred?

A. To the same that the particulars which we ought to pray for, were referred:
which are

1. All things whereby we our selves are enabled to hallow Gods Name: whether
in our soul, as the Ephesians. 1. 3.
gifts and graces thereof: or in our body, as Isa. 38. 19, 20.
health, strength, agilitie, and dexterity to any thing that makes to that
end: 1. Tim. 1. 12.
or in our calling, 1. Chro. 29. 12, 13.
whether it appertain to Romans 1. 8.
Church, Commonwealth, or family: or in our outward estate.

2. All things whereby others are enabled to hallow Gods Name: 1. King. 10. 9.
and that in their soul, body, calling, or estate.

3. All events that any way make by the ouer-ruling providence of God to the
hallowing of his name: as

1. All manner of blessings bestowed on his Churches and children. Psalm. 147. 1
etc.


2. Judgments executed on his or their enemies. Exodus 15. 1, etc.


3. Providence manifested in and upon any creatures. Psalm. 145. 1, 15.


. 33. Of the duties required by reason of the first Petition.
Q. TO what heads may the duties, which by reason of the first Petition we are
bound unto, be referred?

A. Unto two especially. One whereof respects our selves. The other
respects others.

Q. What are we bound unto in regard of our selves?

A. To make the best use that we can of all the means which God affords to
enable us to ballow his Name, by giving us knowledge of God, bringing our wills
in subjection to him, drawing our hearts unto him, and breeding and increasing
any of the forenamed graces in us. For this end we ought

1. So to behold the creatures, Behold God in his creatures.
and meditate on them, as we may discern the stamp of God in them, and the
evidences which they give of his wisdom, Job 42. 5.
power, justice, mercy, providence, etc. By this means did God bring Job to a
more full knowledge, and a more reverend respect of his divine Majesty then he
had before. Psalm. 8. 1. etc.
David also by this means had his heart even ravished with an holy admiration
of God.

2. To take more distinct notice of God in and by his word. Know God by his
word.
The Scriptures are they that testify of God. Ioh. 5. 39.
And because for our help the Lord has ordained and sanctified the preaching
of his word (a powerful means to breed and increase in us all those graces
whereby we may be the better enabled to hallow Gods name) we ought diligently
to attend to it. Speak of Gods glory.


3. To take all occasions of stirring up our glory (as David styles our
tongue) to speak of, Psalm. 57. 8.
and to spread abroad the glory of Gods name: Psalm 40. 9, 10.
yea and to be willing to open our ears to them that are ready to speak of
the same subject: and by our mutual conference to minister more and more
matter thereabouts.

4. To order the whole course of our life, Honor God by thy life. Col. 1. 10.
so as it may be worthy of the Lord, and a means to bring honor to his name.
Math. 5. 16.


Q. What are we bound unto in regard of others? Bring others to honor God.


A. To do our uttermost endeavor to draw on others to hallow Gods name: Psalm.
34 11.
For this end we ought

1. Psalm. 22. 22.
To instruct such as are ignorant of God in the knowledge of God. Acts 18. 26.


2. To draw them to set their whole heart on God, Deuteronomy. 6. 4, 5.
by commending to them the greatness and goodness of God, so as they may be
enamoured therewith.

3. To encourage them to all good works whereby God is glorified.

. 34. Of the things to be bewailed in regard of the first Petition.
Q. What are we to bewail in regard of the first Petition?

A. 1. Whatsoever is any way defective and wanting to the honor of God, so as,
if it were more complete, God might be more honored thereby: As the elder
Jews which had seen the first Temple built by Solomon, Ezr. 3. 12.
when they saw the foundation of the second Temple laid, wept with a loud
voice, because that latter Temple was not so fair as the former. Thus if the
brightness of the Gospel shine not forth so brightly, as it has done
formerly, or if any other way the glory of God be obscured, it ministers just
matter of much humiliation.

2. Whatsoever brings dishonor to Gods glorious name, as All manner of
sins committed against any of the four commandments of the first Table*
under which head may be comprised:

Psalm. 10. 4. and 14. 1.
1. Atheism: which is an utter denying of God.

2. Ignorance of the true God; Gal. 4. 8.
This makes men transfer the honor of God upon others. 2. These. 1. 8.
Against such therefore will Christ come in flaming fire.

3. Errors of God. As when the unity of his nature, ^rinitie of persons,
perfection of power, mercy, justice, wisdom, truth, or any other attributes
are denied: or when God is in any mean respect Psalm. 50. 21. 1. Sam. 15. 29.
made like to man, or to any other creature.

4. 1. Sam. 2. 30.
Light esteem of God: as when he is not trusted in, feared, loved, obeyed with
all the mind and might.

5. Mal. 1. 10.
Neglect of due worship: or yielding false or careless service to him.

6. Deuteronomy. 28. 58. ler. 23. 10.
Undue using of his Name, as abusing the same by rash swearing, for-swearing,
blasphemy, etc.

7. Psalm. 119. 136.
Profaneness, and all manner of impiety.

8. 1. Sam. 8. 7.
Contempt of his image in such as he has set over us. These and such like tend
directly to his dishonor.

To this head may be referred all such sins as make men attribute to others,
or arrogate to themselves that which is due to God. Base flattery and foolish
admiration make some to deifie others: as the Acts 12. 22.
Tyreans did Herod. Selfe-conceipt, pride and arrogancy make others to deifie
themselves:^ l Ezekiel. 28. 2.
as Tyrus did.

3. Dan. 9. 5. etc. Ier. 9. 1, 2. 3. 2. Sam. 12. 14, 16
The sins of others, especially of such as prosesse themselves members of the
Church, which cause the name of God to be blasphemed.

4. The evil events which follow from any of the troubles that befall the
Church: as 2. Tim. 4. 16.
fear of man more then of God, denying the truth of God, and Apostasy.

5. All the advantages that enemies of God and of his Saints do any way get.
Psalm. 10. 13. -- 42. 3.
Their insultations, and cursed exprobrations, and that against God himself.

. 35. Of Gods kingdom: what it is, and what be the kinds of it.
Q. Which is the second Petition?

A. Thy kingdom come.

Q. What is the kingdom of God?

A. That estate where as a King he rules. For that is a kingdom where a King
reigns and rules. Where God therefore reigns, there is his kingdom.

Q. How does God reign as a King?

A. 1. By his absolute power he reigns over the whole world.

2. By his special grace he reigns over his Church.

According to this different manner of Gods reigning is his kingdom
distinguished. For

1. He has an universal kingdom, Gods universal kingdom. Vbique, regnat,
vbique, imperat, vbique, maiestas eius. Bern. de verb. Isay. Sermon. 5.
called his kingdom of power: because by his absolute and supreme power he
ouer-ruleth all creatures whatsoever, or wheresoever they be In regard of this
universal sovereignty of God, the Scripture says, His kingdom rules over
all. For who has resisted his will? And thereupon he says unto God, Psalm. 103
19.
How terrible art thou in thy works? Through the greatness of thy power shall
thine enemies submit themsel^es to thee. Romans 9. 19.


2. He has a peculiar kingdom, Psalm. 66. 3.
called his kingdom of Grace, Gods peculiar kingdom, his Church.
whereby he reigns over a select people culled out of the world, which
voluntarily yield obedience unto him. The company of this people, is in one
word the Church: and it is a society chosen of God, Sane secundum
praedestinationem nunquam Ecclesia electoric penes deum non suit. Bern. super
Cant. Sermon. 78.
redeemed by Christ, called and sanctified by the holy Ghost, which has been
in all ages of the world, some in heaven, others on earth spread over the face
thereof far and near: in which respects it is styled the holy Catholic
Church. This is properly the kingdom of Christ, in, and by whom the Father
reigns. For it is said, that a kingdom was given to the Son of man: Dan.
7. 14.
Of whom says the Father, I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion: Psalm.
2. 6.
whose people shall be willing in the day of his power. Psalm. 110. 3.


Herein lies a maine difference betwixt Gods manner of government in his
universal, and in his peculiar kingdom, that the worlds subjection is forced,
Psalm. 66. 3. -- 110 3.
but the Churches subjection is free.

. 36. Of Gods reigning over rebels.
TOuching that universal kingdom of God over all creatures in all places,
seeing there are many which rebel against God and say, Psalm. 2. 3.
Let us break his bonds asinder, and cast his cords from us: Luke 19. 14.
We will not have him to reign over us: and thereupon walk according to the
Prince of the ^re, Ephesians. 2. (...)
the spirit which works in the children of disobedience: and seeing the
devil is the god of this world, a doubt may be made, how God can be said to be
their King, and Gods kingdom thus universally extended over the whole world.

Answ. 1. Rebelion of subjects takes not away the right of a Sovereign. Psalm.
2. 1, 6.
Christ therefore notwithstanding the tumult of people is said to be a King.

2. None can do any thing at all without his permission. Instance the
arch-rebell of all, Job 1. 11. -- 2. 5.
of all, Satan, in the case of Job. Instance also the many plots and practices
of the wicked, which in all ages by an ouer-ruling hand of God have been
disappointed and made void.

3. God can, 2. King. 19. 28.
when and as it pleases him restrain them, as he restrained Senacherib: yea
and beat them down, and utterly destroy them, Exodus 14. 28.
as he destroyed Pharaoh and his whole host.

4. Satan to whom the forenamed rebels are subject, is but Gods executioner:
1. King. 22. 2^.
he is one of the number of Gods servants, though of his guilty and reprobate
servants. Satan vnus de numero seruor (...) est, licet reorum iam, atque
reproborum, Chrysostom. hom. 20. in Mat. 6.
So as even in that power, which Satan has over them, God shows himself to
be their King.

Q. Is this universal kingdom of God here meant?

A. No further then that God would order it to the good of his peculiar
kingdom, which is here principally intended.

. 37. Of the kingdom of Grace and Glory.
Q. HOw may the peculiar kingdom of God be considered?

A. 1. In the beginning, and progress of it.

2. In the consummation, and perfection of it.

In the former respect it consists of a mixture of evil persons with good
ones: Kingdom of Grace.
and of evil qualities, in those good persons, with good ones: Math. 13. 24.
-- 47.
in regard of which mixtures it is resembled to a field wherein grow tares with
wheat: and to a drawnet which gathers of all sorts: Mar. 4. 26.
and to corn which arises with straw and chafe, as well as with sound and
solid grain.

In the latter respect it consists only of such as are every way perfectly
good: Kingdom of glory.
and therefore said to shine as the Sun, Math. 13. 41, 43.
which has no darkness, Reu. 21. 27.
nor any speck or spot in it. In the former respect especially, it is called a
kingdom of Grace: and that:

1. In opposition to those who never were, Why the kingdom of grace is so
called.
nor ever shall be of it: and therefore are objects of Gods severe justice and
revenging power: Ier. 10. 25.
but in it grace reigns.

2. For distinction from those who are translated out of it into heaven. Romans
5. 21.
For by reason of the many temptations and imperfections whereunto the Saints
on earth are subject, thy stand in need of much more grace then the Saints in
heaven, who are just and perfect. Heb. 12. 23.


In the latter respect it is called a kingdom of Glory, Why the kingdom of
glory is so called.
and that by reason of the Place, where it is, and of the Persons, which are of
it.

1. The Place where it is, is the most glorious place of all the world: even
the highest heavens.

2. The Persons, both King and Subjects thereof are decked with unspeakable
glory. The King does there manifest his glory more then any where else: as
brightly as can possibly by the creature be discerned. The Subjects there
partake of as much glory as they are capable of: and that in soul and body:
so as they are all glorious within and without.

. 38. Of the difference betwixt the kingdom of ^^Grace. Glory.
THis kingdom of Grace, and of Glory, is but one and the same kingdom:
distinguished into two parts, which differ in six circumstances.

1. In Time. The kingdom of Grace is now present while here we live. The
kingdom of Glory is to come.

2. In Place. This of Grace is on earth: that of Glory in heaven.

3. In Condition. This is continually warfairing against many enemies: in which
respect it is styled the Church militant; That triumphs over all the enemies:
in which respect it is called the Church triumphant.

4. In Order of entering into them. This is to be entered into, and passed
through before we can enter into that. The Priest was to enter through the
Sanctuary into the Sanctum Sanctorum.

5. In the manner of Government. This is governed and ordered by many
subordinate means, as Magistrates, Ministers, and sundry ordinances. That
immediately by God himself.

6. In Continuance. This has a date, and is to come to an end. That is
everlasting without end.

. 39. Of the Churches Government.
Q. What learn we from this title, kingdom, here applied to the Church?

A. Gods Church is a well governed estate. Psalm. 122. 3.
Therein is a King: a just, wise, and potent King. No King is or can be like to
him. He can, not only restrain and subdue his enemies, but also change their
hearts, and link them to his subjects. He can make the Wolf dwell with the
Lamb, etc. Isa. 11. 6. etc.
Therein are righteous laws, excellent privileges, and all things requisite
for a well ordered polity, all tending to the good of the subjects. For it is
the estate whereof God takes most care. Exodus 19. 5.


They therefore that seek to take away order, Order in the Church.
and to bring confusion into the Church, do much dishonor this kingdom and
the King thereof, 1. Cor. 14. 33.
who is not the author of confusion but peace. So do they also who profess
themselves to be members of the Church, Judge 21. 25.
and yet live as if they were without law, in no kingdom, under no government.

This condition of the Church, to be a kingdom (if the King, scepter, laws,
and privileges thereof were well known) would be a strong motive to draw
such, Isa. 11. 10.
as are out of the Church into it: and to retain such as are of it, in it, and
to make them say, It is good to be here. There is nothing worthy to be desired
in a kingdom, but is after a most excellent manner in this kingdom: as,
sufficient supply of all things needful: safe protection against all things
hurtful.

Thus much of this title kingdom. The next word to be considered is, come.

. 40. Of the increase of the Church.
Q. What does this word, come, import?

A. 1. A want of perfection.

2. A progress thereto.

The word, Cui dicitur, veni, nondum perueneral. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 25.
come, is metaphorical. That which is coming is not where it would be: it may
yet go further: and in that it is coming, it does step by step draw nearer and
nearer to that whereunto it would come: otherwise it did not come but stand
still. Hereby then we are given to understand that the kingdom here spoken of
has not yet attained to the highest pitch, Adueniat regn^^ tuum, veniat
vtique, quod perfectain est, and euacuetur quod est ex part Bern. Sermon. in
Not. Mar.
and fullest perfection thereof. Therefore we desire that by degrees it may so
proceed on thereto, as it may at length attain that whereunto it does proceed:
that that which is in part may depart, and that which is perfect may be
accomplished.

Q. To which of Gods kingdoms is this Metaphor to be applied?

A. To his peculiar kingdom, the Church, in both the parts thereof, militant,
and triumphant. In the militant Church it is to be extended to all that in Gods
decree are deputed thereto, whether called or not called. To such as are not
called, that they may be called, and so come into the kingdom of grace. To
such as are called that they may be more and more fitted to come into the
kingdom of glory: so as it may be full and perfect in all the parts thereof.

. 41. Of the Churches imperfection.
Q. WHat doctrine does this desire of the coming of Gods kingdom imply?

A. Gods Church is not yet perfect. This is true of both the parts of the
Church, militant, and triumphant.

The militant Church, whether it be considered in the several assemblies and
congregations thereof (which consist of such as are but hypocrites, as well as
such as are upright) or in the best of those particular persons (which make up
those congregations, and has in them flesh as well as spirit) cannot be
denied to be imperfect: whereupon, as in regard of the mixture of good and
evil persons Cant 2. 2. Dicuutur spinae propter malignitatem morum: d cuntur
fili^ propter communionem sacramentorum.
Christ says of his Church, As a Lilly among thorns, so is my love among the
daughters (Thorns they are called for their wicked disposition, but daughters
for their communion in holy things) so in regard of the mixture of spirit and
slesh in such as are upright; she says of her self, Cant. 1. 4. Posest spous^
cum pulchritudine naeuo non carere nigredinis. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 25.
I am black, but comely. Black by reason of her infirmities, and
imperfections, as well as of her afflictions and persecutions. For with some
comeliness there may be blackness.

The triumphant Church also, though in regard of that part thereof which is in
heaven, it be Ephesians. 5. 27.
glorious, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, yet because the
combat of all that blessed communion is not yet full, and the bodies of them
whose souls are in glory, yet be in the power of death, may be truly said to
be imperfect. For the Acts 3. 21. (...) ab H^sychio, exponitur (...)
times of restitution, or perfection of all things is to come. God will have
his creatures wait for it. Hab. 2. 3.
The vision is yet for an appointed time: though it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come.

Shall now particular Churches, which by the true notes of a Church may be
proved to be true Churches, be denied to be Churches, and forsaken because of
some imperfections therein? They who will abide in no Church but in that which
is perfect, may wander from Church to Church, and find none on earth to abide
in. Were it not for the Churches imperfection there would not be so great need
of this Petition. This is thus noted not to justify any corruption, or
imperfection. For this Petition which implies impersection, enioyneth us to
pray against it. And that which is prayed against must not be patronized: but
rather the best means that can be must be used to redress the same.

As not particular Churches, so nor particular persons must be mis-iudged by
reason of the imperfection of grace, or the corruption of flesh remaining in
them. All here on earth is in part, all is imperfect. Spirits of just men made
perfect are to be found in heaven, not on earth. Heb 12* 23. (...)
They that think themselves perfect are for the most part furthest from
perfection. Let us for our parts be of the same mind whereof the blessed
Apostle was, Phil. 3. 12, 14.
not to think our selves already perfect, but to follow hard after perfection,
and to press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in
Jesus Christ.

. 42. Of man's inabilitie to come unto God.
Q. What learn we from the application of this word COME to the Kingdom of
God?

A. Man of himself cannot come to Gods Kingdom. It must come to him, Isa. 65.
1.
before he can come to it. I was found ( says the King of this Kingdom) of
them that sought me not. Ioh* 16. 44.
For, No man can come unto him except the Father draw him: which made the
Church thus to pray and promise, Cant. 1. 3.
Draw me and we will run after thee.

Man by nature is dead in sum. Ephesians. 2. 1. Non iam captiuos ocul^s extolle^e
in al^um Sponte potest, etc Prosp. de Ingra. c. 40.
Can he that is dead come, till he be come unto, and have life put into him?

Hereby both the free preventing grace of God is commended unto us, and also
all self-conceit in man is removed, and much matter of humiliation ministered
unto him.

43. Of the force of this word THY in the second Petition.
Q. TO whom has this particle* THY relation?

A. Even to him to whom the same Particle had relation in the former Potition.
And it does here import the same things that it did there. 1. A reason. 2. A
restraint. 3. An extent of this Petition.

A Reason, as it is referred both to the Preface, and also to the first
Petition. The kingdom here meant is the kingdom of him who is our Father, who
is in heaven, and whose name is to be hallowed. Great reason therefore that we
should pray for this Kingdom to come.

A Restraint, as it implies that this Kingdom only should be desired to
come. So as, not any kingdom which is contrary to this, and hinders the
coming of this, but every kingdom which is any help to the coming of this,
in that only respect as it is such an help, ought to be desired to come.

An Extent, in that it implies a coming fit for such a kingdom as Gods is:
yea, and answerable to the excellency of him who is the King thereof.

. 44. Of Gods power to make his Kingdom come.
Q. WHat learn we from directing this Petition unto God?

A. It is in the power of God to perfect his Church. He can gather all the
parts thereof together: and bring them all to that measure of perfection which
is meetest for them. Otherwise it were in vain to make this Petition to him.
1. Cor. 3. 7.
It is God that gives the increase. It is he that is able to make grace to
abound. 2. Cor. 9. 8.


Let us therefore ever call upon him to be favorable unto Sion, and to build
up the walls of Jerusalem: Psalm. 51. 18.
and let us in faith depend on him for the good of his Church: and so long as
he remains King thereof not fear what any creature can do against it.
Psalm. 118. 6.


Thus much of the meaning of the words, and instructions arising out of them.
The order and fit inference of this Petition upon the former follows.

. 45. Of the best means, and fittest persons to hallow Gods Name.
Q. Why is this second Petition inferred on the first?

A. 1. To point out the best means of hallowing Gods Name.

2. To show what persons are fittest thereto.

Q. What is the best means?

A. The Church: Psalm. 65. 1.
wherein praise waits for God. For God is known in Judah: Psalm. 76. 1.
his name is great in Israel. No where is God so well known as in his Church.

Q. Who are the fittest persons to hallow Gods Name?

A. Such as are members of the Church. Them therefore does David call upon to
praise the Lord. Psalm. 135. 19, 20, 21.
No other persons can hallow Gods Name aright: for this is a work of Gods
sanctifying Spirit. 1. Cor. 12, 3.
No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

Upon the two forenamed grounds, we ought the more earnestly to pray for the
Church, that so the Name of God may be the more hallowed. Dan. 9. 19.
This moved Daniel to be exceeding fervent in Prayer to God for his Church.

. 46. Of the spiritual blessings to be craved for the whole militant Church.
Q. What are the particular good things which by virtue of the second Petition
we ought to pray for?

A. All such things as concern the good of the Church militant, or triumphant.

In our Prayer for the Church militant we ought to have respect to the things
which concern the whole body, or the several parts thereof, whether they be
more remote, or nearer to us, and so we more especial members thereof.

Q. What are we to pray for in regard of the whole body of the Church
militant?

A. 1. That God would bless it with all needful blessings both spiritual and
temporal.

2. That he would protect it from all manner of evil.

Under the blessings craved for the Church the means which God has sanctified
for the better effecting of them are comprised.

Q. What are the spiritual blessings which we ought to desire for the Church
on earth? Spiritual blessings for the whole militant Church.


A. 1. In general that as God has chosen it to be as his Vineyard and
Orchard, so he would take an especial care of it, having his eye continually
upon it, to plant it, to water it, to fence it, to do for it whatsoever he
himself sees requisite for it. Because we know that God better knows, then
we do, what is good for his Chnrch, therefore ought our desire of the good
thereof to be referred to him, and extended to that knowledge which he has of
it. To which purpose David thus prays, Do good in thy good pleasure unto
Sion. Psalm. 51. 18.


2. In particular we ought to desire both the daily increase of Gods Church on
earth; and also the establishment of it.

For the increase of it two especial things are to be desired, and that
indefinitely without any limitation to any particular place.

1. That where no Church is, Pray that Churches may be where none are Psalm. 67.
2.
God would be pleased to plant one. Such ought the extent of our desire to be
herein, as to pray that Gods saving health may be known among all Nations.
Especially among such as have a particular promise made to them, Romans 11. 25,
26.
as the Jews. Psalm. 67. 4.
On this ground when they were a people, and we none, they prayed for us.

2. That where any foundation of a Church is laid, Pray that Churches planted
may increase.
God would cause the building answerably to be reared up. To which purpose
David in his forenamed prayer adds this clause, Psalm. 51. 18.
Build thou the walls of Jerusalem. This was the maine thing which the Apostles
aimed at in that powerful prayer which with one accord they made unto God.
Acts 4. 24.
On this ground we have just cause to pray for Virginia, and other like
Plantations.

For the establishment of the Church, two things also are to be desired.

1. That such Churches as are built up may be kept from ruin: Pray for
preservation of Churches. 1. These. 3. 10, etc.
and the people thereof from revolt. On this ground we ought to pray for the
Churches now in Europe.

2. That if any breaches have been made, they may be repaired, and such
people as have revolted be restored. Pray for recovery of Churches.
On this ground we ought to pray as for those Churches of Greece, which were
planted by the Apostles, so for all those Churches which having received the
light of the Gospel, Dan. 9. 16.
have returned (...) Popery. Psalm. 80. 14.


Q. Which are the means that we ought to pray for, as sanctified of God for
obtaining the forenamed blessings.

A. They are of two sorts.

1. Outward; Outward means of the Churches good
the sacred ordinances of God.

2. Inward; the sanctifying operation of Gods holy Spirit.

Of outward means there are three especial kinds.

1. The chiefest and most absolutely necessary is the Ministry of Gods Word.

2. The next to that is the administration of the Sacraments.

3. The last, which is also of very good use, is Ecclesiastical government.

By the Ministry of the Word both such as are out of the Church are gathered
into it: 1. The word. Psalm. 45 6. -- 110. 2.
and they also that are in it, are further built up in all needful graces.
That is Christ's Scepter whereby he governs his Church: Mat. 13. 19.
and wherein his statutes, and ordinances, Psalm. 147. 19.
and all the privileges of the Church are contained.

By administration of the Sacraments that grace which is wrought by the Word,
2. Sacraments.
is confirmed, and established. These are Christ's seals to ratify his
Covenant, Romans 4. 11.
and all his promises made unto his Church.

By the Ecclesiastical government well ordered many scandals and stumbling
blocks are removed, 3. Government.
or avoided. Such as are free-hearted and forward are encouraged; such as are
backward and slothful, are pricked on; such as are unruly, and refractarie are
bridled, and kept in compass.

Q. What are we to pray for in regard of the ordinances of God? Pray for free
use of Gods ordinances.


A. That they may be freely and purely exercised. Pray (says the Apostle)
that the word of the Lord may RVNNE; (that is have a free and a speedy
passage) and be glorified, 2. These. 3. 1. (...)
that is, be purely and powerfully preached. That which he applies to the
Word, may also be extended to other holy ordinances of God; which that they may
be freely and purely exercised, Pray for Ministers.
we are to pray both for Ministers, and also for Magistrates. For Ministers
especially, Mat. 9. 38.
that the Lord would send forth laborers into his harvest: Ephesians. 6. 19.
and give them utterance, that they may open their mouth boldly to make known
the mystery of the Gospel: so as Ability, Liberty, and Integrity, are to be
prayed for in the behalf of Ministers. Of all other functions none more
needful, none more useful for the Church: none can less be spared then
Ministers. Wherefore more instant Prayer is to be made for them. Pray for
Magistrates.
Magistrates also, Psalm. 49. 23. (...)
who are promised to be given as nourishers and nurses of the Church, may by
their good government procure much good to the Church, as Mordecai did. We
ought therefore to pray for them: Est. 10. 3.
that God would raise up men of worth, that may feed his people according to
the integrity of their heart, and guide them by the skilfulnesse of their
hands, Psalm 78. 72.
as David did. Where there are none to bear rule, Judge. 21. 25.
every man does that which is good in his own eyes: whence must needs follow
much confusion. And where there are evil Magistrates, people are often drawn to
follow their evil courses: witness this style given to the first King of
Israel, Jeroboam which made Israel to sin. 2 King. 10. 31.
If they will not follow their evil courses, they shall be sure to be
oppressed. For when the wicked bears rule, Pro. 29. 2.
the people mourn.

Q. What ought we to pray for in regard of the sanctifying operation of Gods
Spirit?

A. That it may always accompany all the outward means ordained of God for
the good of his Church. Pray for the power of the Spirit.
For neither is he that planteth any thing: nor he that waters: but God that
gives the increase: which he gives by the work of his Spirit. 1. Cor. 3. 7.
The Spirit gives life. The Apostle therefore prays for them that had heard
the Word of Truth, 2. Cor. 3. 6.
that God would give them the Spirit of wisdom and revelation. Ephesians. 1. 13,
17.
By the operation of Gods Spirit are all Gods ordinances made powerful and
effectual.

. 47. Of praying for the outward temporal estate of the Church.
Q. What are we to pray for in regard of the temporal estate of the Church?

A. All needful peace and prosperity. Psalm. 122. 7, 7.
Though all temporal blessings be comprised in the fourth Petition; yet so
far forth as they tend to the good of the Church, being a means that the
Gospel may be preached, and the Sacraments administered more freely, that
people may be more encouraged to come into the Church, and to abide in the
Church, that Ecclesiastical government may be the better exercised, they
belong to this Petition. Yet because the Church like a Palm Tree does often
better grow, at least in purity, when it is pressed with adversity, we are in
our desire of the outward peace and prosperity of the Church to submit our
desire to the wisdom of God, and no further to desire it, then God sees it
to be needful, and useful for the Church.

. 48. Of the extent of our Prayer for the good of the Church after our time.
Q. HOw far ought our desire for the good of the Church to extend?

A. To present, and to succeeding times, that the Church of God may prosper,
flourish and increase both in our days, and also in the days of our
posterity from time to time, till the day of perfect consummation, which is
the day of the glorious appearing of Jesus Christ. For this end we are to pray
for Seminaries of Ministers, Pray for Seminaries.
Magistrates and Christian people: as Schools of learning, Colleges,
Universities, Innes of Court, and other such like places where youth are
trained up and fitted to be useful members of the Church: yea also we ought
to pray for Christian Families, that in them children may from their infancy
be trained up in piety. In the Scripture there is frequent mention made of
children of the Prophets, 2. Kin. 2. 3, 5, 7. and 4. 1. and 6. 1.
which were trained up under Prophets to succeed them in their functions. And
there were Colleges, and other like places for training up of these. 2 King
22. 14.


Concerning Seminaries, 1. Sam. 19. 18. 20.
we are to desire two things especially.

1. A continuance of them.

2. Gods blessing on them: that they may flourish in good learning, and that
their learning may be seasoned with Grace: for otherwise it may prove more
dangerous then commodious to the Church of God.

This extent of our desire for the good of Gods Church after our time, shows,
that therein we aim more at Gods glory, and his Churches good, then at any
private benefit to our selves.

. 49. Of praying against evils which annoy the Church.
Q. What are the evils from which we ought to pray that the Church may be
protected?

A. The dominion of sin, of Satan, and of all evil men which are Satan's
ministers and instruments.

These have kingdoms: Romans 5. 21.
for sin reigns, and that unto death, where it finds entertainment: and
it makes men servants unto it self. Romans 6. 17.
Satan also is the god and Prince of this world. and as a Prince he rules and
works in the children of disobedience, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ioh. 14. 30.
All tyrants, persecutors, and such like enemies of the Church, Ephesians. 2. 2.
being in authority, are the deputies, and Viceroys of sin and Satan: using
the uttermost of their power to bring men into subjection under sin and
Satan: the chiefest of these is Antichrist. The kingdom of all these is
contrary to Christ's kingdom: and the standing of them hinders the coming of
Christ's kingdom: and in that respect are we to pray that they may be weakened
and demolished. Yea we are to pray that euerything which causes offense in the
Church may be removed: Math. 13. 41.
for which we have an express promise.

These are the suits which we ought to put up for the Church indefinitely: and
for such parts thereof as we never knew, saw, or heard of.

. 50. Of the things to be craved for particular Churches which we know.
Q. HOw ought we to pray for particular Churches whose estate we know?

A. We ought to frame our prayers according to that we hear, see, or
otherwise know of any. As

1. If any especial blessing be bestowed on any, Col. 1. 9, 10.
to pray that it may be continued and increased.

2. If any mischievous plots be practiced against any, Est. 4. 16, 17.
to pray that they may be prevented. Acts: 2. 5.


3. If ministers or other members of any Churches be surprised, Heb. 13. 19.
to pray that they may be delivered.

4. If persecution be raised against any Church, Acts 4. 29.
to pray that either that fire may be quenched, 1. Pet. 5. 10.
or else that sufficient courage and strength may be given to such as are
persecuted to hold out, and endure the uttermost trial.

5. If any noisome weeds of Idolatry, Gal. 5. 12.
heresy, schism, or the like, sprout up in any Church, to pray that they may
be rooted out. To sharpen our prayer herein, we ought often to call to mind that
which in this case is promised by Christ, Every plant which my heavenly Father
has not planted shall be rooted up. Math. 15. 13.


This is that true use which we are to make of the knowledge that we have of
the estate of any of Gods Churches.

. 51. Of praying for the Churches whereof in particular we are members.
Q. HOw ought we to be affected toward those particular Churches whereof we
are more immediate members?

A. 1. Our prayers ought to be more particularly applied to them.

2 They ought to be more earnestly extended for their good.

To give some instances of the particular application of our prayers in this
kind.

1. We ought by name to pray for the Churches in the land wherein we live: Pray
by name for our own Churches.
as the Jews in special manner prayed for Sion and for Jerusalem. Psalm. 74.
2. and 137. 5, 6.
Thus we of England ought in particular and by name to pray for the Churches
therein: yea because Scotland and Ireland are under the same government that
we are, by name to pray for those Churches also.

2. We ought by name to pray for the Magistrates that are set over us: And for
our own Magistrates and Ministers.
as for the Kings Majesty, so also for inferior Magistrates. And for the
Ministers of Gods word in the said dominions. 1. King. 1. 37, 47 Psalm. 72. 1.


3. We ought more especially to pray for the City, Psalm. 132. 9.
Town, And for the places of our abode.
or Parish where we live. Jeremiah exhorted the Jews when they were in
captivity to pray unto the Lord of the City where they abode. Ier. 29. 7.
Ought not we much more to pray for the City or Parish where we are in our
own Country, and where we freely enjoy the holy ordinances of God? Here we
ought by name to remember the Minister that is set over us; Ephesians. 6. 19.
pray says the Apostle, and for me.

4. Yet more frequently and earnestly ought we to pray for the family where we
are, And for our family.
whether we be the head, or other members thereof. Christ bid his disciples
into whatsoever house they entered to pray that peace might be to it: Luke 10. 5.
much more ought we to desire the good of the family where we have our
continual abode. We ought by virtue of this Petition to pray that our family
in particular may be a seminary and nurcerie of the Church: yea that it may be
a Church (as the houses of Philemon, Aquila, and Priscilla were) which they
are, Phile. 2.
when morning and evening sacrifices of the calves of our lips are constantly
offered up therein: Romans 16. 5.
and other duties of piety meet to be performed in a family, are there
conscionably observed. Such ought every ones desire to be for his own family,
that if piety should be banished out of the Land or Parish where he lives,
Ios. 24. 15.
yet it should find harbor in his house: which was the holy resolution of
Joshua.

5. Finally, And for our own persons.
because every ones person is most near to himself, every one ought most of
all to pray for himself, that his person may be a fit temple for the holy
Ghost: 2. Cor. 6. 16.
and though the house where we live be an impure and impious place, no member
of any true Church, yet that he himself may be as Joseph was in the house of
Potiphar, Genesis 39. 2.
a faithful member of the true Church, a free-hearted subject of the kingdom
of God: and for this end every one ought to pray that in his person he may be
sanctified throughout, and his whole spirit, and soul, and body, be kept
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. These. 5. 23.


This is that true and proper use which we are to make of those bonds whereby
we are outwardly linked one to another, that as we are more nearely knit one to
another, so more specially and instantly to pray that they to whom we are in
outward bonds linked, may with us be fast knit to the body of Christ, and as
true members thereof may beautify and honor it: Col. 2. 19.
and that all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and
knit together may increase with the increase of God.

Thus we see how our desire ought to be ordered for the militant Church. It
ought in general to be extended to the whole body wheresoever: more
particularly applied to the several parts of it, as we have any notice
thereof: and more earnestly extended for such parts as we our selves are more
nearely knit unto.

. 52. Of the things to be desired for the Church triumphant.
Q. What are we to pray for in regard of the triumphant Church, the kingdom
of glory?

A. The full perfection, and consummation thereof. Whereunto tend these
particulars following.

1. That we which live in this kingdom of Grace, 1. Pray to be fitted for
heaven.
may be fitted and prepared for that kingdom of Glory: that we may be
presented as a chaste and pure Virgin to our Husband Christ. 2. Cor. 11. 2.
Such a prayer did the Apostle use to make for the members of the militant
Church. 1. These. 5. 23.


2. That we may be loosed, and be with Christ in that glorious place. 2. Pray
to be in heaven.
For the gathering of such into the kingdom of Glory, Phil. 1. 23.
as belong thereunto helps forward the consummation of it. Hoc optamus vt
finem nostris faciat malis and nos assumat in regnum. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 126
How we may pray for death. Votum affectus magis quam effectus.


Object. How can this desire of being dissolved stand with the unchangeable
decree of God concerning the appointed time of man's death?

Answ. This kind of prayer rather shows what we could desire, if the will of
God were so, then what we would whether it were Gods will or no. Neither is it
made to alter Gods determined purpose, but to manifest our longing desire after
that which God in his eternal counsel has purposed for us. Thus did many of
the faithful Israelites, Math. 13. 17.
that lived long before the Messiah was exhibited, 1. King. 19. 4. Jonah 43.
desire to see him. An absolute desire of present death (as was the desire of
Eliah, and Jonah) is not warrantable, but a longing after death to be in the
kingdom of Glory (as was the desire of Paul) is very commendable. Phil. 1. 23.


3. That the number of those whom God has ordained to 3. Pray for
accomplishing the number of the Elect.
make full the body of Christ, may be accomplished. For there is a certain
number ordained unto eternal life, Romans 8. 29, 30.
till that he be full, the kingdom of Glory cannot in all the parts thereof
be consummate.

4. That the signs which in Gods word are foretold to go before the coming
of Christ may accordingly fall out: 4. Pray for the signs of Christ's coming.
that by the sight of them we may be the more erected to look for the glorious
appearing of Christ. Math. 24, 29, etc.
There are signs foretold; these therefore must be prayed for. 5 Pray against
enemies of the Church.


5. That all the obstinate enemies of the Church which any way hinder the full
and perfect consummation thereof may be destroyed: and those not only wicked
men, and cruel tyrants, and persecutors, but also death, and him that has the
power of death, 1. Cor. 15. 15.
the devil. The destruction of these is promised: so as there is good ground
to pray for it.

6. That the bodies of all the Saints which from the beginning have slept, 6.
Pray for the resurrection.
may be raised from death, to be united to their souls, 1 These. 4. 16.
and brought unto the kingdom of Glory. For this is absolutely promised.

Object. This is to pray for the dead.

Answ. Not for this or that particular friend departed whose estate we
certainly know not: How prayers to be made, or not to be made for the dead.
but in general for all the true members of Christ's celestial body: nor to
obtain that for them which was to be obtained in the times of their life,
remission of sins: nor yet to alter their final estate, the doom whereof
passed upon them at the moment of their dissolution: but only as their
resurrection is a degree to the perfecting of the kingdom of Glory, we being
taught to pray for the full perfection of that kingdom, pray indefinitely for
the resurrection of the Saints which is a degree thereto.

7. That Christ would come in his glory to judgment: 7. Pray for Christ's
coming. Reu. 22. 17. 20. Mat. 13. 41, 49. and 25. 32. etc.
and make a perfect separation betwixt the elect and reprobate. For so much is
foretold and promised.

8. That all the members of Christ's mystical body being glorified with him,
8. Pray for the full glorificatio^ of the Church.
He may deliver up the kingdom to God the Father, that God may be all in all.
For so much is also foretold. 1. Cor. 15. 24, 28.


. 53. Of the things for which thanks is to be given by reason of the second
Petition.
Q. FOr what are we to give thanks by virtue of the second Petition?

A. Every thing that makes to the good of Gods Church, whether directly, by
blessings bestowed on it, or consequently, by restraining or ouer-throwing the
enemies of it, ministers just matter of thanksgiving. We are therefore to be
thankful in the behalf of the Church, in these cases following, and others
like to them.

1. Acts 11. 18.
When Churches are planted where none were before. Thus the Jews glorified
God, when they heard that the Gospel was embraced of the Gentiles.

2. When such Churches as are planted do thrive and prosper. For this did S. 2.
These. 1. 3.
Paul give thanks in the behalf of the Thessalonians.

3. When good Magistrates are raised up. In which case the Queen of Sheba
blessed God for setting Solomon on the throne of Israel. 1. King 10. 9.
Much more are we to bless God for good Ministers of his word: and that not
only when they are first raised up, but also when being restrained by
sickness or any other means, 2. Cor. 1. 3, 11.
they are again restored.

4. 1. These, 1. 2, 8.
When the Gospel has a free passage, and sounds forth from one place to
another.

5. 1. These. 1. 5.
When the ministry of the word is in power, and fruitful among the Saints.
Col. 1. 6.


6. Psalm. 147. 12, 13, 14.
When the Church has rest, peace, and prosperity.

7. When such as are persecuted stand steadfast in the faith: and are not
terrified with any oppositions against the truth, 1. These. 3. 8, 9.
nor drawn to deny the same.

8. Psalm. 124. 6.
When the Church is delivered from any plots of the enemies against it.

9. Est. 9. 17.
When vengeance is executed on the enemies of the Church. Exodus 15 1.


10. When Seminaries of the Church, as Schools of learning, Colleges, and
Universities do prosper.

11. 2. Ioh. 4.
When piety is planted in families: especially in our own.

12. Phile. 4.
When private Christians grow in Grace: especially if withal they edify one
another.

13. Congratulemur, vt dignum est, patri nostro: qus a and pium est defunctum
plangere Malachiam, and pium magi^ Malachiae congaudere viuenti. Bern. Sermon. in
trans. Mal.
When Saints that have given undoubted evidence of their perseverance in the
true faith, depart out of this life. Though that loss which the Church on
earth may have of them, minister matter of mourning; yet in that the triumphant
Church is increased by their departure, it is matter of thanksgiving.

14. When we see the time of our 2. Tim. 4. 6.
own departure to be at hand.

15. When we observe any of those Luke 21. 28.
signs to fall out which Christ has foretold of the end of the world, Pro
fidelibus defunctis debemus gratias agere. Idem de mod^ been viu. Sermon. 70.
and of his glorious coming unto judgment.

. 54. Of the duties required under the second Petition.
Q. What duties are we to endeavor after by virtue of the second Petition?

A. Every one ought according to the estate and condition wherein he is, to do
what lies in his power to help on the coming of the kingdom of God, and
that both in himself, and in others also. For which end these particulars
following are carefully to be observed.

1. They who are out of the Church must come into it. If they be in the
kingdom of darkness, they must not abide therein. This is especially to be
observed of them to whom the light of the Gospel appears, and discovers
their darkness. To such it is said, Ephesians. 5. 14.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light.

2. They who are in the Church must walk worthy of their calling. Ephesians. 4 1.
To such it is said, Ye were once darkness but are now light, walk as
children of light. Ephesians. 5. 8.


3. They who being of the Church are among such as are out of it, must labor
to win them. Saint Paul went so far he rein, as he became as without law, 1.
Cor. 9. 21.
that he might gain them that were without law. To show that this is a common
duty belonging to every member of the Church, 1. Pet. 1. 1, 2.
Saint Peter exhorts women so to carry themselves toward their husbands, as
if any obey not the word they may without the word be won by the conuer
sation of their wives.

4. 1. These. 5. 11.
Fellow members of the Church must edify one another: and hearten, Heb. 10. 24.
encourage, and provoke one another unto good works, and to stand steadfast in
the faith.

5. Romans 15. 1. and 14 13.
They who are strong must bear with the weak: and every one take heed that
they lay no stumbling block before any to make them fall: 1. Cor. 8. 9.
nor give any offense.

6. Genesis 17. 12.
If any be parents of children, they must be careful to bring them to be
incorporated into the Church by the Sacrament of Baptism, and that while they
are infants: and as they come to any years of discretion, Ephesians. 6. 4.
to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: Pro. 22. 6.
that thus, when they are translated into the triumphant Church, they may leave
their children behind them true members of the militant Church; and that
successively generation after generation.

7. Philem. v. 2.
If any be householder, their care must be to make their houses (as the houses
of Philemon, Romans 16. 5.
Aquila, and Priscilla were) Churches of God. And in this respect take upon
them the faithful endeavor of Abraham, Genesis 18. 19.
and settled resolution of Joshua.

8. Ios. 24. 15.
They who are Ministers must take heed to all the flocks whereof the Holy
Ghost has made them ouer-seers to seed the Church of God: Act. 20. 28.
and do all things unto edifying. 1. Cor. 14. 26.


9. They who are Magistrates must maintain true religion in their dominions,
and cause all that are under their jurisdiction to stand to the covenant of
God. 2. Chro. 34. 33.
Yea they ought to be so watchful over the Lords vineyard, as to suffer
neither wild boar to root it up, Cant. 2. 15.
nor foxes to make any havoc therein. They must suffer neither professed
enemies, nor running seducers to harbor therein.

. 55. Of the things to be bewailed under the second Petition.
Q. What are the things that we ought to bewail by virtue of the second
Petition?

A. All such things as any way make to the disadvantage or disparagement of the
Kingdom of Christ. As

1. 2. Cor. 4. 4.
That great sway which Satan has in the world, whereof he is the god: Ephesians.
2. 2.
and works in the children of disobedience: and that all the world
worshippeth him. Reu. 13. 3, 4.
For all Infidels, Idolaters, Heretics, Schismatiques, hypocrites and profane
persons are his vassals: and these are they with whom the world is filled.

2. Mic. 7. 1.
The small circuit of Christ's Kingdom. The Prophet thus brings in the Church
her self bewailing her small number, Woe is me: for I am as when they have
gathered the summer fruits: as the grape gleanings of the vintage.

3. Math. 13 25, etc.
The mixture of Satan's subjects with Christ's in that small circuit. For where
the Lord of the field sows good seed, the envious man sows Tares: which
makes the servants of the Lord to complain.

4. The many clouds which obscure the light of the Gospel. I mean the clouds
of error, superstition, humane traditions and such like, whereby the clear
light of the Gospel is hindered from shining forth in his full brightness.
Christ himself complains, that the Word of God is made of none effect
through the many traditions of the Jews. Mar. 7. 13.


5. Psalm. 50. 13.
The spoils of the Church made by open enemies: whereof David much
complains: so do also other Prophets.

6. Cant. 1. 2.
Treacheries of false-hearted brethren. The Church complains that all her
friends dealt treacherously with her: and Christ complains that his own
familiar friend in whom he trusted, Psalm. 41. 9.
which did eat of his bread, lift up his heel against him.

7. Vnsaithfulnesse in Magistrates: suffering such as bear no good will to the
Church to creep into it, lodge in it, and work mischief against it. Neh. 13.
4, etc.
This did good Nehemiah much complain of. Much more cause of complaint there
is, when Princes in the Church are roaring Lions, Zeph. 3 3.
and her Judges are evening Wolves.

8. Unfaithfulness in Ministers: when they are insufficient, idle, corrupt in
doctrine or life: whereby the edification of the Church is much hindered. Isa.
56. 10.
The Prophets often complain of such. ler. 23. 14, 17.


9. Desolation of Seminaries: as of Schools, Colleges, Universities, and such
like. 1. Sam. 22. 22.
David lamented the destruction of the City of Priests which was a Seminary.
The coming of the Kingdom of God is much hindered by the desolation of
Seminaries. So also is it as much, if not more, hindered by corruption in
Seminaries. If fountains be poisoned, can wholesome streams be expected to
flow from thence? In corrupted Seminaries more vassals of Satan, then true
subjects of Christ are bred and brought up.

10. Disorder of Families. When piety finds in private Families little or no
entertainment, if it be not clean thrust out of doors: and such
licentiousness used, as houses are rather made sties for Satan, then Churches
of God, great cause of mourning is given. Ier. 7. 18.
Jeremiah complains that husbands and wives, parents and children, were all
given to wickedness.

11. Professors unworthy walking. It is means to keep such as are not of the
Church from entering into it, when they see such as profess themselves to be
of the Church, to walk as children of darkness, and to turn the grace of God
into wantonness. Phil. 3. 18.
Saint Paul does bitterly complain of such.

12. Reproaches cast upon the Saints. Sarah when she beheld Ismael scoffing at
Isaak, Genesis 21. 9. 10.
was exceedingly moved thereat. So was David at Michols scorning of him for the
manifestation of his zeal. 2. Sam. 6. 20.
Some weak members of the Church may be discouraged thereby; and in that
respect it is a matter to be lamented.

13. 1. King. 19. 10.
Persecution raised against the Church. This did Eliah much bewail: yea it
made him weary of his life. A free passage of the Word, and a free use of other
holy ordinances of God is much hindered thereby: and many are thereby brought
to deny the faith: and therefore it is to be bewailed.

14. 2. Tim. 4 16.
Timorous backesliding of Professors. This did S. Paul complain of in his
time. Much does this tend to the discouragement, and disadvantage of the
Church: and much to be lamented.

15. 1. Cor. 1. 11. and 11, 18.
Scismes, sects, and dissentions in the Church. These do much hinder the
growth of the Church: yea they often cause greater desolation then open
oppositions of professed enemies.

16. Repugnans fit vt quaeramus inseculo diu viuere qui petimus regnum dei
velociter advenire. Cypr de Orat. ^ dom,. 14.
Too much love of life in this world, and fear of death. If men might live as
long they would, how slowly would Gods Kingdom come! That we who desire the
kingdom of God to come speedily, should seek to live long in this world,
implies contradiction.

. 56. Of the will of God here meant, and doing it.
Q. Which is the third Petition?

A. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

Q. What is here to be considered.

A. 1. The Thing desired.

2. The Manner of performing it.

The substance then of the Petition is in these words, Thy will be done in
earth. In the words following is a direction for the better performing of that
which is desired. Of these two points therefore we are to speak in order. And
first of the Petition, that sets out the rule which in all things we ought
to set before us: namely, the will of God.

Q. How does God will a thing?

A. 1. Ephesians. 1. 11.
By ordaining and deternining it.

2. Romans 12. 2.
By liking and approving it.

By this differing manner of willing things, Gods secret and revealed will.
may Gods will be distinguished into his Secret Counsel, and Revealed Word.

The former of these is that Sovereign, absolute will of God, by which all
things are, and without which nothing can be. For Ephesians. 1. 11.
He works all things after the counsel of his own will: Psalm. 115. 3.
And has done whatsoever he pleased. Romans 11. 34.
For who was his Counselor?

The latter is styled Gods good and acceptable will: Romans 12. 2.
whereby he manifests what is pleasing unto him. Gods revealed will here meant


Q. Which of these is here especially meant?

A. His revealed Word: as is evident by these reasons.

1. The revealed things of God belong to us and our children for ever, Deuteronomy.
29. 29.

2. Gods revealed Word is that rule which we must lay before us, Non vbique
sicut potestas, sic voluntas eius bona, and beneplacita, and persecta. Ber. de
verb. Esa. Sermon. 5.
and the mark whereat we ought to have an eye in all things. Psalm. 119. 9.

3. This will of God may be resisted, and is much resisted, by the sons of
men. For says Christ, How often would I, etc. And ye would not? Math. 23. 37.
Gods good and acceptable and perfect will is not every where as his power is.

There is therefore great need that we should pray to have this done. Non vt
Deus faciat quae vult sed vt nos facere possimus quae deus vult. Cypr. de Orat.
dom.. 11.
Not that God would do what he will, but that we may be able to do what he
will. As for Gods secret co^nsell (as it is kept secret) it cannot be here
meant, as appears by these reasons.

1. Deuteronomy. 29, 29.
Secret things belong unto the Lord our God.

2. Pro. 19. 21.
The counsel of God shall stand: it cannot but be done: so as we need not pray
that it may be done.

3. A desire may be made contrary to Gods secret will without sin. Instance
the desire of David to build a temple for the Lord: which desire both Nathan
the Prophet of the Lord, 2. Sam. 7. 3.
and God also himself approved, and yet it was the determined purpose of God
that David should not do that which he desired. 1. King. 8. 18.


Yet if the foresaid counsel of God be made known either extraordinarily by
special revelation, How Gods counsel is to be yielded unto.
or ordinarily by events (for events do declare the determined counsel of
God) then ought there to be yielded thereto a willing submission: which
submission is commended in the examples of Job 1. 21.
Job, 1. Sam. 3. 18.
Eli, 2. Sam, 12, 22, 23.
David, 2. King. 20. 19
Hezekiah, Act. 21. 13.
Paul and other Saints. And thus does this phrase ( be done) import both
obedience to Gods Word, and also subjection to his work: or a willing yielding
to whatsoever God says or does. It is a phrase both of action and passion. Of
action in relation to Gods Word. How Gods will is done.
Of passion in relation to his guiding providence: and imports patience and
contentment even in such things as cross our own minds: in which sense said
Paul's companions, when they heard his resolution to go to Jerusalem where the
Prophet had foretold that he should be bound, Act. 21. 14.
The will of the Lord be done. In regard of Gods secret will, Cum diuinus fiat
voluntas tuae, nobis ab illo prccamur ipsum obedientiam. Aug. epist. 121.
we pray that nothing which God does, displease us: and in regard of his
revealed will, that nothing which we do, displease him. Obedience therefore to
God is here principally prayed for.

. 57. Of the extent of our desire to have Gods will done.
Why is this desire set down impersonally, thus, be done?

A. Non dixit fiat in me, vel in nobis voluntas tua, sed prorsus vbiq,
terraerum, etc.
To show the extent of our desire. If it had been expressed in the first person
(thus, Let us do) our desire might seem to be appropriated to our selves. If
in the third person (thus; Let men do) it might seem to be posted over to
others from our selves: Christ. in Mat. 6. Hom. 20.
but this indefinite phrase, be done, may indifferently be referred to our
selves and all others whatsoever they be.

. 58. Of the rule of our obedience, Gods will.
Q. What learn we from the express mention of Gods will in this Petition?

A. Gods will is the rule of our obedience: so as, if such a question as the
People, Luke 3. 10. 12, 14
Publicans, and Soldiers propounded to John, Luke 18. 18.
or the Ruler to Christ: or the Jews to the Apostles, be moved, Acts 2. 37.
and it be demanded what is to be done, in a word out of this Petition, Ephesians.
5. 17.
this answer may be given, Gods will. This is it which often* we are enjoined to
understand, Romans 12. 2.
to prove, to practice: and which is so much pressed in the 119. Ephesians. 6. 6.
Psalm. And that not without just cause. Gods will the ground of goodness.
For Gods will is the very ground of goodness. Whatsoever is willed of God is
good: and therefore good, because it is willed of God. Where the Apostle
prays for the Hebrews, that God would make them perfect in every good work;
Heb. 13. 21.
by way of exposition he adds this clause, To do his will.

They who make Decrees of Councels, No sufficient rule but Gods will.
Traditions of Elders, Statutes or Canons of men, or any other thing besides
Gods Word their rule, have but a Leaden rule, which may be bowed this way or
that way. What may we then think a man's own reason, will, lust, appetite or
humor to be? and yet do many make these the rules of their obedience.

For our parts let us thoroughly acquaint our selves with Gods Word, Be
acquainted with the Word. Psalm. 1, 2.
and therein exercise our selves day and night. Let us make it our Counselor,
to be resolved thereby in all doubts: our guide to be directed thereby in all
our ways: our Light, to be enlightened thereby through the darkness of this
world: our Touchstone to prove and try all things thereby. And let us have it
in as high account as ever David had it. Psalm. 119. ver. 72, 103.


. 59. Of practicing Gods will.
Q. What does this phrase ( be done) teach us?

A. Nothing is sufficient without practice. I say nothing, because neither
knowledge of Gods will, nor a good disposition thereto, nor profession thereof,
without doing it, is any thing. All these are in their kind needful: for
practice without knowledge can not but be very preposterous: without a good
disposition, merely hypocritical; and without a free profession, too too
timorous; so as knowledge of Gods will is as light to give direction unto
practice: a good disposition thereto is as salt, to season it: a free
profession is as wine to make it quick and cheerful. But yet all those
without practice are as nothing. He that knows his Masters will and does not
according to it shall be beaten with many stripes. Luke 12. 47.
He that has a good mind and disposition to Gods will, and yet does it not,
condemns himself in that which he allows: and he that makes a fair
profession of it, but yet does it not, is like to that Figgetree which Christ
cursed: Math. 21. 19.
and he has this doom denounced against him by the Judge of all, Depart from
me thou worker of iniquity. I may therefore well say to them that know, like,
and profess Gods will, Blessed are ye if ye do it. The benefit of practice,
1. Ioh. 2. 4.
But without doing, all is in vain. For

1. There is no truth of Grace, where there is no practice of Grace.

2. Deuteronomy. 6. 1.
Doing of Gods will is the maine end of revealing Gods will.

3. The benefit of all consists in practice: For by it, is Ioh. 15. 8.
God most glorified: our 1. These. 1. 7.
fellow-Saints stirred up to an holy emulation: 1. Pet. 3. 1.
they which are without or won, or -- 16.
made ashamed: and we our selves 2. Pet. 1. 10.
assured of our Election before the world, and salvation after the world:
gaining also thereby 1. Tim. 5. 10.
a good name while we live, and Prou. 10. 7.
a blessed memorial after we are dead.

If these motives be not sufficient to move such as know the will of God to
add practice thereunto, and to do it, I know not what can be sufficient.

. 60. Of man's disabilitie to do Gods will.
Q. Quare precamur vt a Deo bonum nobit animi propositum contingat? Quia
infirma est ad bonum humana Natura. Greg. Nys. de Orat.
What are we taught by desiring this of God that his will be done.

A. 2. Cor. 3. 5.
Man is unable of himself to do Gods will. Ioh. 15. 5.
Without me (says the Lord) ye can do nothing. Phil. 2. 13.
It is God that works in us both to will and to do. As for man, take him as
he is of himself, and it will appear that Genesis 6. 5.
every imagination of the thought of his heart is only evil continually. And
by the weakness of this corruptible body we are held back from bringing our
wills to yield unto, and agree with Gods will. Is it then possible that of
himself he should do that which is so pure and perfect as the will of God
is? Ipsa corruptibilis huius infirmitate corporis praepedimur ne voluntas
nostra diuinae valeat coberere. Bern. in Quadr. Sermon. 6.


On this ground we see that there is just cause

1. To deny our selves, and Prou. 3. 5.
not to lean unto our own wisdom, will, conceit, or any natural ability.

2. To call upon God to Cant. 1 3.
draw us, that so we may run after him: and wholly to depend on him for his
preventing, assisting, and perfecting Grace.

3. To use such Col. 3. 16.
means as God has sanctified to enable us to do his will. Uses of the
knowledge of man's disability.


4. To Romans 11. 36.
give the praise of all that ability we have to do Gods will unto God, who
works in us hoth the will and the deed. Vt fiat in nobis voluatas deiopi. ^
est voluntate De^ i-ope cius Cyp', de ^rat. Dom. 11.


5. To 1. Cor. 15. 10.
use and employ the said ability to the glory of God.

. 61. Of the force of this word THY in the third Petition.
Q. TO whom has this Particle THY in the third Petition relation?

A. To the same person to whom it had relation in the two former Petitions: and
it imports the same things in this Petition that it did in the other two,
namely, a Reason, Restraint, and Emphasis.

A Reason, because it shows that the Will here mentioned is the will of Our
Father who is in heaven, whose name is above all to be hallowed, and whose
kingdom is before all to be preferred.

A Restraint, because it implies that his will only is to be done.

An Emphasis, because it intimates an advancing of Gods will above all others.

. 62. Of preferring Gods will before all others.
Q. What then does this Particle THY teach us?

A. Gods will is to be preferred before all others. This Genesis 39. 9.
Joseph, Dan. 6. 10.
Daniel, and -- 3. 18.
his three Companions, the Acts 5 29.
Apostles and many others well observed, when they refused to yield to man's
will against Gods: and 2. Sam. 15. 26.
David, Act. 21. 13.
Paul, and Mat. 26. 39.
Christ, when they submitted their own wills, Si filius obaudiuit vt faceret
patris voluntatem, quanto magis servus obaudire debet, vt saciat domini
voluntatem. Cypr. loc. citat.
to Gods, in such things as if it had been the will of God, they could have
desired to have been otherwise. Among others, the example of Christ is to be
observed, because he was a Son, and we are but servants. If the Son
yielded to do the will of his Father, how much more ought the servant to yield
to do the will of his Master.

Both the supreme Sovereignty of God, and also the absolute perfection of his
will require as much. Docemur semper ad Dei, non ad nostram respicere
voluntatem, quia in nostra voluntate aliquotiens contaria suut: in domini autem
voluntate vita est semper and bonitas. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 126
As for our own and other men's will they are subject to much error, and often
prove very pernicious.

This is especially to be noted of such as can be content to do Gods will so
far as it is agreeable to their own humor, or crosses not the will of those
men whom they are loath to offend. But if in these cases they refuse to do Gods
will, they have it not in that high account that here they are taught to have
it, and they come very short of the extent of this Petition, whereby we are
taught always to have one eye on Gods will, and not on our own. For in our
will there are many contrarieties, but in the Lords will there is always life
and goodness.

. 63. Of praying only for men in earth.
Q. Who are comprised under this phrase in earth?

A. Sons of men inhabiting in earth. Job 4. 19.
In this phrase there is a double trope. Metony^ia subiecti. Synec doc he
generis.
First the Place is put for them that are therein. Secondly, a general is put
for a particular. For there are sundry sorts of creatures that live on earth:
yet only the chief and principal of them are meant: even they who have the
dominion over all the rest. Now Men are here thus set forth, because while they
live on earth they are most backward to do Gods will.

Q. What instruction may be raised from this phrase in earth?

A. Men while they live in this world need our prayers. All the directions
given in Scripture to pray for any, all the promises made to prayer, all the
warrant that is given for performing this duty, is restrained to prayer made
for them that live in earth. And they are to be prayed for:

1. Because they are subject to manifold infirmities.

2. Because they may reap benefit by our prayers: which they that are taken
from earth can not do. For they that are translated from earth to heaven are
made perfect: so as they need not our prayers. And they that are cast down
from earth to hell, are implonged into such irrecouerable misery, as they can
reap no benefit by our prayers.

Let us not therefore offer up so precious incense as prayer is, in vain, for
such as can reap no benefit thereby. But in faith let us pray for them that
are in earth.

. 64. Of the meaning of this phrase in heaven. The inhabitants of the highest
heavens, not the hosts of the middle heaven are here meant.

Q. Who are comprised under this phrase in heaven?

A. The glorious Angels and glorified Saints with Christ their head.

Some think the middle heaven to be here meant, where the Sun, Moon, and
other Stars are placed: and that partly because the creatures in that heaven do
constantly keep that course wherein by the will of their Creator they were at
first placed; and partly because they are visible, so as that constant course
of theirs according to the will of God, may be seen by men on earth. But
howsoever that constancy of theirs may be a witness against our manifold
aberrations, and sweruings from that course wherein our Creator has set us:
yet in that they have no understanding to take notice of the will of God, nor
do what they do by any free, Hoc oramus vt dei volunt^s sicut in coelestibus
facta est creaturis, siat etiam in terrenis: vt sicut Angelus sic and. homo,
etc. Bern. in Quadr. Sermon. 6.
willing choice, but by a natural motion from which they can not swerue, we
must ascend higher then that heaven, even to the highest heaven of all, where
the forenamed Angels and Saints are, who in all things by a most free and
willing choice do perfectly fulfill the will of God.

Q. How can they whom we see not to be a pattern for us?

A. By the word we may know what is done by them. For God has thereby
manifested how they do his will.

. 65. Of the manner of following a perfect pattern.
Q. HOw can we do Gods will as they do it, seeing they in all points do it most
perfectly: and it is impossible for us to attain to such a perfection?

A. 1. In such a manner as they do, may we also do Gods will, though not in so
complete a measure. A candle gives light in an house, even as the Sun does
in the world: in such a manner, not in so great measure. There may be in
quality and likeness a comparison betwixt things that are in quantity and
measure very unequal. In this respect they who have hope in Christ are said to
purify themselves even as he is pure.

2. All the Saints even on earth have the beginning of that heavenly perfection
wrought in them: 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
which beginning the Apostle styles The first fruits of the Spirit. Romans 8.
23.
Now we may be confident of this very thing, Phil. 1. 6.
that he who has begun a good work in us, will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ: 1. Cor. 1. 8.
that we may be blameless in that day.

3. Our desire and endeavor may and must be beyond our ability: Phil. 3. 13.
as shall be proved by and by.

. 66. Of the matter of Patience which the inhabitants of heaven have.
Q. HOw can there be a sufficient pattern where there is no trial of
Patience, as in heaven there is none? For the Angels and Saints in heaven are
not subject to any crosses that should try their patience.

A. This pattern is especially for active obedience.

2. Those heavenly Spirits do many things which they would not but for the will
of God. When it is the will of God, the Angels do willingly descend from heaven
to earth, Genesis 28. 12.
sometimes to bring glad tidings to the Church, Reu. 14. 6, 19.
and sometimes to execute vengeance on sinners. Yea the souls of the Saints
which have been taken out of their bodies and carried into Abraham's bosom,
that place of joy and bliss, have been contented at the will of God to leave
their glory, Mat. 27. 53.
and to return again into their bodies, even as Ioh. 6. 38. Ioh. 11. 44.
Christ came down from heaven, not to do his own will, but the will of him
that sent him: and as his soul Luke 23. 43.
after it had been in Paradise -- 24 5, 6.
returned into his body in earth. Now heaven, Paradise, and Abraham's bosom is
a place of such glory, and so conspicuously does the brightness of Gods
glory there shine forth, as the celestial spirits would never be willing to
depart out of it, but to do the will of their Lord.

3. There is a compassion in them for the afflictions of the Church in earth.
For the Saints in earth and in heaven are fellow members of one and the same
body: in which respect there cannot but be some sympathy and fellow-feeling
of their fellow members afflictions: even as Mat 25. 42. etc.
there is in the head of that body Jesus Christ. The maine reason why the Reu.
6. 10.
souls of the Martyrs, departed, desire vengeance on the enemies of the
Church, is for those Saints sake who were living, and so subject to their
tyranny and cruelty. It is said that there is joy in the presence of the
Angels of God, Luke 15. 10.
over one sinner that repents. Why not then compassion also over the Church
that is afflicted?

4. The Saints in heaven through patience inherit the promises. Heb 6. 12.
( For through many afflictions men enter into the kingdom of God) and therein
we are exhorted to be followers of them. Acts 14 22. Sancti similes nobis
^^^cre passibiles, and ipsi peregrinationis huius and exilij d^ploraucre
molestias, etc. B^^^. infest. o^^. Sanct Sermon. 1.


5. With patience they expect the resurrection of their bodies, and perfect
consummation of that glory which is ordained for the whole body of Christ,
and all the members thereof. When it was told the souls of the forenamed
Martyrs deceased, that they should rest until their brethren should be
fulfilled, they were silent, and patient: they replied not again.

Thus then we see that in heaven there is a pattern of patience. Reu. 6. 11.


. 67. Of well doing good.
Q. What learn we from this direction ( as it is in heaven) added to the
Petition?

A. Good things are to be done after a right manner. So much is noted in the
sum of the Moral Law, as Mat. 22. 37, 39 In sacrificijs quae Abel and Cain
primiobtulerunt, non munera eorum deus, sed corda intue batur vt ille placeret
in munere qui placebat in cord. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 18.
Christ has set it down. The good things enjoined are to love God, and our
neighbor. The manner of loving God, is to do it with all the heart, etc. The
manner of loving our neighbor is to love him, as our self. If the Scriptures
be obseruantly read, we shall find them as copious in prescribing the right
manner, as in pressing the maine matter of any du^ie: and in declaring Gods
approbation of the one more then of the other. Take for example the first work
of piety recorded to be done after man's fall. In the sacrifices which Abel and
Caine first offered, God did not behold the offering, but the heart, that he
might please God in his offering, that pleases him in his heart. The offering
declared the work: the heart the manner of doing it.

For 1. Pet. 2. 15.
Gods will is manifested in the manner as well as in the matter. Yea if a good
thing be euilly done, God will say, Isa. 1. 12.
who required this at your hands? For a good thing is Isa. 66. 3.
clean perverted, and made evil by an evil manner of doing it.

It is therefore very requisite that we 1. Cor. 11. 28.
examine good things even by the manner of doing them: and not think it
sufficient that the thing we do is for the matter and substance of it lawful
and warrantable. As many (if not many more) transgressions are committed by
failing in the manner of doing good things, as by doing things which are simply
evil.

. 68. Of propounding a perfect pattern before us.
Q. What are we taught by the kind of pattern set before us?

A. The pattern which we follow must be perfect: such a pattern is the
example of those that are in heaven. Heb. 12. 23.
They are spirits of just men made perfect. Like patterns cannot be found on
earth, except the pattern of Christ in the days of his flesh, Phil. 2. 5.
Heb. 12. 2.
which is also set before us.

Q. How are examples of Saints on earth to be followed, if our pattern must be
perfect?

A. No Saints example that ever lived on earth for the time of his abode on
earth, How Saints on earth are to be followed.
is made a pattern in all things without exception to be followed. But their
examples are set before us to be imitated.

1. In such particular good things as they did well. Thus Gal. 3. 7.
Abraham in believing Gods promises; Nom. 12. 7.
Moses in being faithful in Gods house; the lam. 5. 10, 11.
Prophets in long suffering; Job in patience; other Saints in other particular
graces are made patterns.

2. 1. Cor. 11. 1.
So far forth as they followed a perfect pattern we must follow them.

We are very proane to follow imperfections: The danger of setting imperfect
patterns before us.
as a stream where a breach is made, will leave the channel to run in that
breach: and by striving to run therein will make the breach greater and
greater: so we, where we see any defect in the pattern, are ready not only
to fail by that defect, but to be far worse. Math. 23. 15.
A Proselite made by a Pharisie, proved twofold more a child of hell then the
Pharisie. We are, by that corruption of nature which is in us, proane to swerue
from the pattern which is set before us, even where the pattern it self is
good and right. How much more shall we swerue when the pattern is defective?
Yet Phil 3. 15.
by a perfect pattern we shall be kept the nearer, and held the closer to
perfection.

It is therefore a point that much concerns us to make choice of our
pattern: Choice to be made of our pattern.
and not to be beguiled with glorious titles of Antiquity, Universality,
Multitude, and Consent of men on earth. Perfection was never found in these:
much less in some few, or single men that are blinded and puffed up with
honor, wealth, power, or any such earthly pre-eminence. Yet how does the whole
world almost follow such, and make them their only pattern?

. 69. Of aiming at more then we can attain to.
Q. What learn we from setting those who are in heaven as a pattern before
those who are in earth?

A. Such perfection as in this life cannot be attained to, may be aimed at. For
it is not possible for any on earth to be so perfect as they who are in
heaven: yet must we aim at their perfection, and endeavor after it. For
Christ exhorts to be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect. Mat. 5. 48.


1. Thus shall we the better discern how far short we come of perfection, and
of that integrity which is requisite for all those that stand in Gods glorious
presence. On this ground says Job, Job 9. 2.
How should man compared unto God be justified?

2. Thus we shall be the more humbled, and brought to say to God as Job did:
Job 40 4. -- 40. 6.
Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hands upon my mouth.
I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

3. Thus shall we be brought to a through and utter deniail of our selves: and
from all self-conceipt and confidence in our own righteousness: Psalm. 143. 2.
and to pray unto God not to enter into judgment with us.

4. Thus shall we be the more stirred up to put forth our uttermost ability:
Phil 3. 13, 14.
as it is in the Proverb, He that will shoot high must aim at the Sun, a
mark far beyond his reach. A man that shoots at a mark within his reach
may shoot short for want of putting out his full strength.

Little do they regard these helps, Their folly who make sinful men their
pattern.
who set the examples of mortal, weak, sinful men before them: and think
all is well if they be any thing better then the worser sort of people; as that
Pharisie who said. Luke 18. 11.
O God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publican. Hence is it that they are so far from
judging themselves for many of their sins, as they are ready rather to
justify themselves when they are reproved, and to say, Do not such and such
men the like? What sin almost might not be justified if the pattern of men
on earth, yea of the best, were a sufficient plea and pretext? Have ye not
heard of Noah's drunkenness, David's adultery and murder, Lots incest Salomons
idolatry, Peter's denial of Christ, and other like sins committed by other
like men? By such patterns men are many times made to stumble in the way
wherein they should walk, if they be not clean turned out of it.

The pattern here propounded by our Lord stirs us up to covet earnestly,
Seek to excel. 1. Cor. 12. 31. -- 14. 12.
the best gifts, and to seek to excel.

By this pattern in heaven set before us, Reproof of profane scoffs.
the common scoffs of profane Libertines (vpbraiding such as endeavor to
follow this direction, with the nicknames of Angels on earth, and young
Saints) are wiped away. How can those tauntes be imagined to be otherwise made
then in derision of this direction? which assuredly he that gave this direction
will not suffer to pass unrevenged.

. 70. Of the order of the third Petition.
Q. TO which of the former Petitions has this third Petition reference?

A. To both of them.

To the first as a manifestation of the truth of our desire to hallow Gods
Name. For no such evidence can be given thereof, as a true and through
subjection of our selves in all things to the will of God. Then is Gods Name
most hallowed, when his will is best done. Of all places, in heaven is Gods
Name most hallowed, because there his will is best done: for which end Christ
does here set them in heaven before us for a pattern therein.

To the second Petition has this reference as a reason of our desire thereof.
For the subjects of Gods kingdom are they that most readily and faithfully do
the will of God. We therefore desire that Gods kingdom may come, that there
may be the more to do the will of God.

. 71. Of the honor done to God by doing his will.
Q. What doctrine arises out of that relation which this Petition has to the
first?

A. Gods honor is most advanced by a faithful subjection to his will. Ioh.
17. 4.
Thus does Christ prove that he glorified his Father on earth, namely, by
finishing the work which he gave him to do.

For by our forwardness to do Gods will we acknowledge both the greatness and
also the goodness of God. We acknowledge that he is the supreme Sovereign who
has power to require this and that to be done: and withal we acknowledge that
what he declares to be his will is most good. For these are the motives which
are of force to draw us on to do any ones will: the Sovereignty that he has
over us that wills this or that: and the equity of that which he wills.

We ought therefore hereby to be the more stirred up to do Gods will: because
thereby his Name is hallowed.

. 72. Of showing our selves to be Gods subjects by doing his will.
Q. What doctrine arises out of the relation which this Petition has to the
second?

A. They are the truest subjects of Gods kingdom, who are readiest to do his
will.

Hence was it that the Psalmist where he showed that God had set up his Son a
King, infers these exhortations, Serve the Lord, Psalm. 2. 6, 11, 12.
Kiss the Son, etc. And again upon a like ground he says, Psalm. 110. 3.
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power.

The Word of God (which is that will of God that is here especially meant) is
the Scepter of his Kingdom, and the law thereof. All the Statutes and
Ordinances of his Kingdom are comprised in his Word; they therefore that do
it must needs be his best subjects.

This then is a true trial of our spiritual estate: Mat. 12. 49, 50.
whether we be indeed of his Kingdom or no. Psalm. 40. 8.
If we delight to do his will, and his law be in our hearts, then have we
good assurance in our own souls, and give good evidence to others that we
are true members of his Church, true subjects of his Kingdom. But if there be
nothing but a bare profession, we are like to the Fig Tree that cumbred the
ground: Luke 13. 7.
or like to those who said they were Gods people, but indeed were the Synagogue
of Satan. Reu. 2. 9.
Gods Kingdom comes not by professing and saying, but by performing and
doing Gods will. Math. 7. 21.


. 73. Of the particulars which we are taught to pray for in the third Petition.
Q. What are the particulars for which by virtue of the third Petition we
ought to pray?

A. 1. Such as concern the Petition it self.

2. Such as concern the Direction added thereto.

Q. To how many heads may the things which concern the Petition it self be
referred?

A. To four especially. Which are these,

1. The Rule it self, in this word WILL.

2. The Restraint of it, in this Particle THY.

3. The Extent of it, in this phrase BE DONE.

4. The Place where it is to be done, IN EARTH.

Q. What desire we in regard of the Rule?

A. 1. Knowledge of Gods Word. Psalm. 119. 16.
For in and by Gods Word is his will revealed: Col. 1. 9, 10.
and knowledge thereof is the ground of true obedience. Give me understanding
(says the Psalmist) and I shall keep thy Law: Psalm. 119. 34.
yea I shall keep it with my whole heart. Desire of obedience without
knowledge is very preposterous. An ignorant man's practice is like a blind man's
wandering in by-ways. How can it otherwise be, but that such should fall into
many dangers.

2. A Conformity of our wills to Gods: or a readiness in our will and heart to
yield to whatsoever we shall know to be Gods will. Psalm. 27. 8.
When God said to David, Seek my face, his heart answered, Psalm. 119. 36.
O Lord I will seek thy face. For this was his prayer, Incline mine heart unto
thy Testimonies. It is a proper fruit of sanctifying knowledge to draw the will
to embrace as good that which the understanding discerns to be true.

3. Strength of Memory to hold fast Gods Word, and that in the good directions
and sweet consolations, in the precepts and promises thereof. Psalm. 103. 17, 18.
Where the Psalmist says, that the mercy of the Lord is upon those that
remember his commandments, to do them, Does he not imply that to remember
Gods Word, is an especial help to the doing of it. Things not remembered are
as not known. The Apostle notes this to be the cause of the Hebrews fainting
in their troubles, Heb. 12. 5.
that they forgate the direction and consolation of the Word.

4. Life of Conscience, both to cheer us up in doing the will of God, and also
to check us when we swerue from the same, and not to suffer us to be quiet
till we turn to it again. For these are the proper functions of a conscience
quickened and sanctified. The Apostle notes that they who give themselves over
to transgress, 1. Tim. 4. 2.
have their conscience seared with an hot iron: the life of it is taken away.

5. Love of Gods Word: that our hearts be so set upon it, as we make it our joy
and delight. This made David so forward, as he was, to do the will of God:
for Gods Word was his love, Psalm. 119. 97, 174, 162, 103, 72, 27.
longing, joy, delight, more sweet then honey, more precious then thousands of
gold, or silver. This reason of doing Gods will he himself rendereth in these
words, My soul has kept thy testimonies, for I love them exceedingly. Love
sets all the power of a man's soul, and parts of his body on work to
accomplish that which is loved. But unless our heart and affections be set
upon Gods Word, very hardly shall we be brought to do it, because it is
contrary to our natural and corrupt will.

6, Renouation of our outward parts, that they may be made instruments in
their several functions, to execute Gods will: that thus as there is a
readiness to will, 2. Cor. 8. 11.
so there may be a performance also: 1. These. 5. 23.
and for this end to pray that we may be sanctified as in our whole spirit,
Phil. 2. 13. (...)
so in body: and that he would work in us both to will and to do. All the
former without this are nothing. This is the maine and principal thing here
intended. Voluntatis vocabulum generaliter omnes virtutes inse comprehendit ac
quae singulatim per bonum intelliguntur, in voluntate Dei omnia anim
aduertuntur. Greg. Nys. de Orat.
The other are but preparations and helps thereunto.

Here I might take occasion to reckon up all those virtues which in Gods Word
are enjoined to us. For Gods will compriseth under it all those virtues: yea
whatsoever may truly be thought to be good, is comprehended in the will of
God. But it is sufficient thus in general to have pointed at this head.

Q. What desire we in regard of the Restraint of the forenamed rule in this
word THY?

A. A distinct understanding of the excellency and perfection of Gods will:
Psalm. 119. 18.
that so we may addict our selves wholly to it: Pro. 30. 5, 6.
nor taking from it, Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
nor adding to it. Had we indeed as good an opinion, and as high an esteem of
Gods will as David had, we would cleave as close to it as he did.

2. A right discerning of the vanity and corruption of the creatures will,
especially when it is not agreeable to Gods, but swerueth from it. Psalm 94 11.
In this respect it is said, The Lord knows the thoughts of man that they are
but vanity: Job 5. 13.
and, He takes the wise in their craftiness. If we could truly, and thoroughly
discern as much, would we be so blockish as to prefer the will of any man
before Gods?

3. A denial of our own will: a point which the wise man much presses, Pro.
3. 5, 7.
in these and such like prohibitions: Lean not to thine own understanding: Be
not wise in thine own eyes. Seldom or never are selfe-conceited men brought
to yield simple obedience to Gods will. They will be so inquisitiue into the
ground and reason thereof, that if they be not satisfied therein, their own
will, Pro. 26. 12.
and not Gods shall be done. There is more hope of a fool then of such an one.

4. Mortification of the flesh. Gal. 5. 17.
For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, so that we cannot do the things
that we would. When we would do the will of God, Romans 7. 28, etc.
yea, and delight in the Law of God after the inner man, we shall find the
flesh warring against that Law of the mind, and bringing us into captivity to
the law of sin. This made Saint Paul with so bitter an exclamation to say, O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

Q. What desire we in regard of the extent of the forenamed Rule? (be done.)

A. 1. An accomplishment of whatsoever God has determined. That what God
wills to be done may accordingly be done, whether the creature will it or
nill it. For we ought to believe that God wisely wills all things to the
best: and thereupon to desire that his counsel and purpose may stand: and even
from our hearts to say, Act. 21. 14.
The will of the Lord be done. 2. Sam. 15. 26.
Let him do as seems good to him.

2. A contented submission to every thing which God brings to pass. Hereof
we have worthy patterns in the examples of Job 1. 21.
Job, 1. Sam. 3. 18.
Eli, 2. Sam. 16. 10.
David, 2. King. 20. 19.
Hezekiah, and other Saints. We can not be ignorant that events do declare
the determined purpose of God. When such and such a thing is fallen out, we may
then conclude that God had so and so purposed it. For as Gods Word declares
his approving will, what he would have: so events declare his peremptory will,
what he will have. Our submission therefore to Gods will is tried in both.
This is to be applied to all manner of crosses, and losses, whether of goods
children, or other friends, to death it self, or to any other thing, that may
seem bitter to us.

Q. What desire we in regard of the place here specified for doing the will of
God, In earth?

A. 1. Grace well to use the time of this mortal life. For the time while we
abide on earth is Ioh. 9. 4.
the day wherein we may work, and Gal 6. 10.
the time of doing good. Ioh. 9. 4.
Christ took the advantage of the day; and 1 Phil. 2. 5.
we ought to be of the mind of Christ. Thus shall we show that we have as
great respect to Gods honor, as to our own happiness: and as great a desire
to do the work appointed, as to receive the reward promised.

2. Universal subjection to Gods will throughout this world. For this
indefinite phrase, in earth, shows that our desire ought to be extended to
all that are on the face of the earth. We pray not that Gods will be done only
in our own house, or in our own country, or in the countries near adjoining
to us, but in earth. 1 Psalm. 67. 2, etc.
All the graces therefore before mentioned to be craved for our selves, must
also be craved for every member of the militant Church.

. 74. Of the things to be prayed for in the direction of the third Petition.
WHat are we taught to pray for in regard of this direction, Quid est aliud
dicere, Fiat vol^^tas tu^ in coelo sicut in terra, quam vt sint homines similes
Angelis, etc. Abb. Isa, de Vrat, c. 20.
as it is in heaven.

A. In general a conformity of the Church militant to the Church triumphant.
That, though these two parts of Gods Church be in one place distant one from
another, yet they may be of like mind and disposition toward God and his
will. In this respect we are said to be partakers of the heavenly calling: and
our conversation to be in heaven. Heb. 3. 1.


2. In particular such a manner of obedience as is performed by the Saints and
Angels in heaven. Phil. 3. 20.


. 75. Of the distinct heads of the manner of doing Gods will in heaven.
Q. TO how many heads may their manner of obedience be reduced?

A. To six especially: which are these that follow.

1. Sincerity. 1. Sincerity.
Whatsoever those heavenly spirits make show of, Reu. 14. 5.
they do it from the heart. In their mouth is found no guile; for they are
without fault before the Throne of God. -- 21. 27.
None that makes alye can enter into that pure place. -- 22. 15.
They are without, whosoever love lies. All in heaven shine as the Sun. They
are transparent: Mat. 13. 43.
there is no cover for hypocrisy. This sincerity did David desire where he
prayed that God would take from him the way of lying: Psalm. 119, 29, 36, 80.
and incline his heart to his Testimonies, and let it be upright in his
Statutes.

2. Integrity: 2. Integrity Reu. 14. 4.
which is an universal subjection to every part of Gods will. The heavenly
spirits follow the Lamb whether soever he goes. In all places they attend
upon their Lord, and always behold his face, Mat. 18. 10.
to know what his will is that they may do it. They are therefore by a kind
of excellency said to do his commandments, Psalm. 103. 20
hearkening to the voice of his Word. Never was there any stop or stay in any
that ever entered into heaven at any thing that God willed to be done. This
integrity also did David desire, where he said, Oh that my ways were directed
to keep thy Statutes! Psalm. 119* 5, 6.
then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to ALL thy commandments:
Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
yea this did God himself earnestly desire for his people.

3. Alacrity. 3. Alacrity.
There is nothing wherein the heavenly spirits show more cheerfulness then in
doing Gods will. It is music and melody to them. In which respect they are
said to have harps, Reu. 15. 2.
as a sign of their cheerful mind and disposition. Ioh 4. 34.
While Christ lived on earth, it was his meat to do the will of him that sent
him. Did he not then do it with cheerfulness? For this alacrity does David
pray, where he desires God to quicken him. Psalm. 119. 37, 88.


4. Sedulitie. 4. Sedulitie.
The heavenly Spirits are both diligent, and also quick and speedy in
executing the will of the Lord. Isa* 6. 2.
They are thereupon said to have wings and to fly. Was not he of that mind
who said, Psalm. 119. 60.
I made haste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments? For this end does the
Church desire Christ to draw her, Cant. 1. 3.
that she might run after him.

5. Ardencie and zeal. 5. Ardency.
The heavenly Spirits in regard of their zeal are said to be a flaming fire.
Psalm. 104. 4. (...) combussit. Inde (...)
In which respect the title Seraphim is given unto them: for it is an Hebrew
name taken from heat and burning. Isai. 6. 2.
There is nothing that does more heat and inflame their love, and delight, then
Gods will. When they know that God wills this or that, they are all on fire
till it be done. Psalm. 119. 20. -- 32.
This zeal was in him that said, My soul breaks for the longing that it
has to thy judgments always. And his expectation to have his heart enlarged,
shows that he prayed for his holy zeal. Reu. 3. 19.
Be zealous therefore.

6. Constancy. 6. Constancy.
The heavenly spirits serve God day and night. Reu. 7. 15.
They wax not weary of doing Gods will. As the good Angels still keep their
first estate: so the glorisied Saints ever abide in their estate. Psalm. 51. 12.
and 119. 116.
None of them have yet, nor ever will fall away. This did he pray for, who often
called upon God to stablish him. This constancy is the grace of all graces. It
sets the crown on all their heads: and brings men to the fruition of the
fruit of all: Reu. 2. 10.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life,
says he who can make good what he says.

. 76. Of the things for which thanks is to be given in the third Petition, and
in the direction annexed to it.
Q. WHat are the particulars for which we are to give thanks by virtue of the
third Petition?

A. I. All those graces whereby we are enabled to do the will of God. Ephesians.
1. 3.
As.

1. Illumination of our minds, whereby we may understand what is the will of
God. 1. Cor. 14. 5.


2. Subjection of our will unto Gods. 2. Cor. 9. 13.


3. Happiness of memory to keep in mind the will of God: Psalm. 119. 52. 61.
that we forget it not, after we have once known it.

4. Faithfulness of conscience to cheer us when we do Gods will, 1. Tim. 1.
12.
and to check us when we transgress it.

5. Setlednesse of heart and affections upon Gods will. Psalm. 40. 8.


6. External obedience in the several parts of our body thereto Romans 6. 17.


7. Power over the flesh that draws us from the will of God. Romans 7. 24, 25.


II. All events of what kind so ever, be they losses or other crosses, minister
matter of Thanksgiving: for they are comprised in the number of those ALL
THINGS for which we must give thanks. Ephesians. 5. 20.
For this (says the Apostle) is the will of God: 1. These. 5. 18.
a reason very proper and pertinent to our purpose. Thus did Job bless God for
taking away, Job 1 21.
as well as for giving.

Q. What matter of thanks does the direction added to the third Petition
afford?

A. We ought to be so much the more thankful, by how much the more heavenly
our obedience is: as when it is sweetened with Sincerity, seasoned with
Integrity, quickened with Alacrity, enlarged with Sedulitie, inflamed with
Ardencie, followed and crowned with constancy. The more excellent the graces
be wherewith we are enabled to do Gods will, the more matter of praise do
they afford. This was it that moved David to bless and praise God again and
again, 1. Chron. 29, 10, 13, 19.
that he and his people offered according to the will of God willingly in
uprightness of heart, and with joy.

. 77. Of the duties to be observed; by reason of the third Petition.
Q. What duties ought we to endeavor after by virtue of the third Petition?

A. 1. We ought to search the Scripture that we may know the will of God. 1.
Search the Scripture.
For in them is the will of God contained. This is that searching, Prou. 2, 4,
5.
to which knowledge and understanding is promised. And for our better help
herein, we ought diligently to frequent the Ministry of Gods Word: as it is
noted* of the conuetted Jews, Act. 2. 42.
that they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine: whereby is declared
that they were diligent and constant hearers of the Apostles, and also
faithful professors and practisers of their doctrine. The former was the cause
of the latter. The preaching of the Word is a great help to bring us to do
the, will of God: and that in a double respect. First, because the will of God
is thereby the more clearly, distinctly, and fully opened unto us. Secondly,
because it is a means sanctisied of God to breed credence to the truth of that
which is revealed, and a^siance therein: yea, and to bow our will, heart, and
affections to yield thereto, and to be settled thereupon. In this respect says
the wisdom of God, which is especially set forth in the preaching of his
Word, Pro. 8. 33.
Blessed is the man that hears me: watching daily at my gates, waiting at the
posts of my doors.

2. We ought to hide Gods Word in our heart, 2. Remember the word.
we may not carelessely let it slip. So will all the fruit and benefit of our
reading and hearing be lost, Psalm. 119. 11.
as meat, or physic that is vomited up so soon as it is taken. Heb. 2. 1.
But by retaining Gods Word in mind and memory, we shall be provoked the more
to do Gods will, and kept from transgressing it: to which purpose the Psalmist
says, Psalm. 119. 11.
Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. Col.
3. 16.
Wherefore let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.

3. We ought often and seriously to meditate on the excellency of Gods will, 3.
Meditate on Gods word.
to draw our hearts the more to it. Whose heart was ever more set upon Gods
will to do it then Psalm* 119. 5, 20.
David's? and who did more -- 97, 99, 148.
meditate on the excellency thereof, then he? It was his meditation day and
night. The many Psalm. 19. 7. etc.
excellent properties and effects which he does attribute thereto: and the many
Psalm. 119. 72, 103, 127.
sweet and precious things to which he does prefer it, do show how excellent
he accounted it to be.

4. 4. Vow.
We ought by solemn vow and oath Psalm. 119. 1^6.
to bindour selves to do Gods will. This is an especial means to keep our
words, thoughts, 2. Chro. 15. (...), 14, 15.
and actions within the compass thereof. For sacred vows, Neh. 10. 29.
and oaths are as Tutors and Schoolmasters, which will often put us in mind
of that which we have vowed: and when we are about to start therefrom they
will restrain us, and hold us in.

5. We must keep our own will from rebelling against Gods. 5. Avoid
rebellion.
There is naturally in our will an antipathie and contrary inclination to Gods.
Romans 7 23.
It is very prone to oppose and resist the will of God. As therefore we hold in
headstrong horses with bit and bridle, so must we hold in our own will: no
way yielding unto it, but rather crossing it, when it rises against Gods. This
is an especial branch of denying our selves. Math. 16. 24. Enitendum vt sit
nobis cum di^ vna voluntas: and quaecunque ei placent, placean^ etiam and
nobis. Bern. in Quadr. Sermon. 6.


6 We ought to endeavor that our will may be one with Gods (as Christ's was,
who sought the will of his Father in all things. Ioh. 5. 30.) and that
whatsoever pleases God, may please us: so shall the will of God be done by us
indeed.

7. We must lay it down as a rule not to be altered, 7. Prefer God before
man.
and as an inviolable law to obey God rather then man. For there is no
comparison betwixt them. Yet is our foolish and corrupt heart ready to yield
to such things as they who are over us, Acts 4. 19.
or from whom we may expect any advantage, will have to be done, yea though it
be expressly against Gods will. But the forenamed settled resolution will be an
especial means to keep us, as it kept the Apostles, Acts 5. 29.
from preferring man's will to Gods. Thus this block being removed out of the
way, we shall much more readily do the will of God.

8. We ought steadfastly to believe that all things are ordered by God: 8.
Believe Gods providence.
and that most wisely. This is the best means that can be prescribed to bring
us to a contented submission to Gods determined counsel and will manifested by
events. Rom 11. 36.
He that believes that as God is a Lord of absolute sovereignty doing what he
will (will or nill the creature) so he is a God of unsearchable wisdom, Math.
10. 29.
and infinite goodness, ordering all things to the best, Ier. 51. 15.
will not grudge against that which God does. For he well knows that as there
is a necessity of yealding to his will, because it cannot be resisted, so
there is also great equity therein, because it cannot be bettered.

9. We must ever be striving to do the will of God more and more: 9. Press
forward.
better and better. This duty arises from the pattern here set before us.
While we are on earth we cannot attain to the perfection of them who are in
heaven. Phil. 3. 13, 14.
We must therefore forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth
to those things which are before, press toward the mark for the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. And as we were taught before to desire the
best gifts, and therein to seek to excel, so for this end we must stir up the
gifts of God in us, 2. Tim. 1. 6.
and to the uttermost put forth that spiritual strength which the Lord is
pleased to bestow upon* us: wisely observing both what is to be done, and
after what manner it is to be done.

10. We ought, 10. Pron^ke others.
as much as in us lies, to provoke others to do the will of God. For we pray
not only for our selves, that we may do it, but for others also, that it may
be done every where through the earth. Our endeavor must be answerable to our
desire. Therefore Ministers, Magistrates, Parents, Tutors, Schoolmasters,
Governors of families, and all that have authority and charge over others,
must most especially look to this: because they have best means to cause
others to do the will of God. Thus shall they the better discharge that charge
which is committed to them, and also much better accomplish the extent of that
which is here desired: 1. These. 5. 11.
in which respect even private Christians must also provoke one another
hereunto. Heb. 10. 24.


. 78. Of sins against Gods will revealed by his word.
Q. What are the things which we ought to bewail by virtue of the third
Petition?

A. Both transgressions against the Petition it self, and also against the
Direction added thereto. Against the Petition are all manner of sins both
against the revealed word of God, and also against the manifested works of God.

Sins against the revealed word of God to be bewailed by virtue of this
Petition are such as these. Sins against the word of God.


1. Ignorance of Gods will revealed by his word. 1. Ignorance.
Is it not a lamentable case that the Creator should be careful to reveal his
whole counsel so far forth as is requisite for the happiness of his
creatures, and yet the creature be careless in taking notice thereof? Ier. 5.
4.
This was a thing whereof the Prophets much complained. And it is a matter for
which we that live under the bright light of the Gospel have great cause to
complain. Hos. 4. 6.
Never was there more means of knowledge: yet very small is the measure of
knowledge whereunto many have attained. Quo pacto voluntatem dei praeuiam
sequar, vbi ignoro ^am. Bern, in Quadr. Sermon 6.
How can it be thought that such as know not the will of God should do it? Can
he that knows it not, follow it as a guide?

2. Obstinacy of our will against Gods. This may be in such as know the will
of God. Christ complains of the Jews obstinacy against the good will of God
made known to them. 2. Rebellion of will.
The not doing of Gods will is hereby much aggrauated: Math 23. 37.
and in that respect the more to be bewailed. Luke 12. 47.


3. Slipperinesse of memory, whereby the will of God made known is forgotten.
By this the benefit of knowledge is lost. Ier. 2. 32.
God much complains hereof: and Hos. 4. 6.
threatens for this to forget their children.

4. Deadness of Conscience, which is the cause that men go on in sin
greedily and securely. The Apostle complains that men have their conscience
seared with an hot iron: 1. Tim. 4 2.
who being past feeling, give themselves over to lasciviousness, Ephesians. 4. 19.
to work all uncleanness with greediness.

5. Hatred of Gods word, which is that light that shows the good will of God.
Pro. 1 29.
Wisdom complains of these. There is no hope that such should do the will
of God: for Ioh. 3. 20.
Eueryman that evil does hates the light. Whereupon God thus expostulateth
with such an one, Psalm. 50. 16.
What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, seeing thou hate instruction?

6. Actual transgressions. These did David much bewail. Psalm. 119. 136.
They are directly contrary to that which is desired in this Petition. Yet
without hoe are these every where, by all, of all sorts committed. O what cause
have we to be humbled for our own sins, for the sins of others that are
under our charge, for the sins of our families, for the sins of the Parish,
Town, City, or Nation where we live and for the sins of the times wherewe
live! In this respect we have as great cause, as ever Jeremiah had, Ier. 9. 1.
to wish and say, Oh that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of
tears, that I might weep day and night for the ^ransgressions which are daily
committed against the will of God.

. 79. Of sins against Gods will manifested by events.
Q. What are the sins, against Gods manifested works, which we ought to
bewail?

A. 1. Inward discontentednesse. Sins against the worker of God.


2. Outward impatiencie.

The former is the cause of the latter. 1. Discontentednesse.
It is noted of the Israelites that first they tempted God in their hearts
(namely by their discontentednes at that provision which he had made for them)
and then it is added, 2. Impatiencie.
that they spoke against God: of both which the Psalmist there complains.
Psalm. 78. 18. -- 19.
When that which God causes to fall out, any way crosses our desire, as when
children or others whom we love are taken from us, when sickness, pain,
penury, or any other cross is laid upon us, then we grow discontented in our
minds, we mutter with our mouths, and bewray much impatiencie in our actions,
and many times spare not to blaspheme the sacred Name of God, and to say, as
that profane King did, 2. King. 6. 33.
Behold, this evil is of the Lord: what should I wait for the Lord any
longer? Who has not cause in this respect to be much humbled for the
bitterness of his own and other men's spirit, out of which much gall is
oftentimes spit into the very face of God himself?

. 80. Of sins against the manner of doing good.
Q. What are failings against the direction which we ought to bewail?

A. Isa. 1. 11. etc.
An evil manner of performing good things: as when they are performed

1. Isa. 29. 13.
Hypocritically, in show and appearance only, and not in truth:

2. 1. Sam. 15. 13, 14.
Partially, or by halues: so far as seems good to our selves, but no
further.

3. 2. Cor. 9. 7.
Grudgingly, as if it were done more by compulsion then by any free disposition
of will:

4. Ier. 48. 10.
Negligently, and carelessly, without heed-taking, or such respect as beseems
so weighty a matter.

5. Reu. 3. 16.
Luke-warmly, without any fervor of affections:

6. Reu. 2. 4.
Inconstantly, as if we repented of that good we had done, and thereupon refuse
to hold on therein.

Hitherto of the three first Petitions which concern the glory of God. The
three other which concern our good are next to be handled.

THE FOVRTH PETITION.
. 81. Of the meaning of this word BREAD.
Q. Which is the fourth Petition?

A. Give us this day our daily bread.

Q. What points are here distinctly to be considered?

A. 1. The Thing desired, Though our English do otherwise place the words of
this Petition, yet in the Original Greek and in the usual Latin ^orme they
are set down in this order. (...) Panem nostrum quotidianum da nobis body.
BREAD.

2. The Property which we have therein, OUR.

3. The Kind of it, DAILY.

4. The Giver of it, OUR FATHER IN HEAVEN.

5. The Ground of asking it, GIVE.

6. The Parties for whom it is asked, US.

7. The Time limited for it, TO DAY.

Q. What is meant by BREAD?

A. All manner of temporal blessings. Under bread all temporal blessings.
For bread in his most usual and proper acceptance signifies an especial
kind of food whereby our bodies are nourished. Quandorogamus panem
quotidianum, quicquid nobis propter carnem nostram in terris necessarium est
postulamus. Aug. Him. 42 in l. 50. Hom. Why bread is put for all temporal
blessings.
Yet so as by a Synecdoche 1. One kind of food is put for all other kinds:
2. One means of refreshing our bodies for all other means: 3. One temporal
blessing for all sorts of temporal blessings. For there are so many temporal
blessings whereof in this world we stand in need, as it would have been too
tedious to have reckoned up every particular by name. Wherefore Christ contents
himself to mention only one kind ( Bread) which is of all the most usual.
Every one, poor and rich, in all places, use bread: and so have they done in
all ages, whether they live on flesh, P^ae^ibis omnibus cor homin^^ confirmat
panis. Bern. Sermon. in can. dom.
fish, butter, cheese, roots, herbs, or any thing else, they must withal
have bread. Nothing can be less spared. For as food, of all other temporal
things is the most necessary, so bread, of all other kinds of food. Where
Psalm. 104. 15.
other things refresh a man, this strengthens him: and has therefore very
fitly the style of Psalm. 105. 16.
staff attributed to it. The want of no temporal thing brings a man to such
distress as the want of Bread: Genesis 41. 54, 55.
which especially causes famine, whereupon by a kind of property it is called
Amo. 8. 11.
a famine of Bread. Under this title, Bread, are comprised meat and drink;
yea, food, raiment, sleep, physic, and other things needful for our bodies,
Panem cum dicit omnia quae corpori necessariae sunt comprehendit. Greg. Nys. de
Orat.
even for preserving, or recovering the health and strength of them: and such a
competent estate also, as is meet for the place wherein God has set us, for
the charge of children and others which he has committed to us, and for that
function and work which he has appointed for us: together with peace, and
all manner of prosperity. In a word, whatsoeue* is needful and useful for
man's temporal estate in this world, is here comprised under this one particle
BREAD. And Genesis 3. 19.
most usually in Scripture is it put for Deuteronomy. 8. 3. 82.
temporal blessings. See. 82.
If at any time it be put for Spiritual food, 2. Sam. 3. 29.
there is some circumstance or other that necessarily implies as much, Job 15.
23. -- 27. 14.
and plainly demonstrateth that there it can not be meant of corporal food.
Psalm. 37. 25.
But there being no such circumstance in this Petition, Pro. 12. 11. -- 20. 13.
-- 31. 14.
it is safest to take it in the literal, usual, and proper sense. If it be
not here so taken, this form of Prayer is defective, Ier. 44. 17.
and compriseth not in it all things requisite to be prayed for. Ezec. 16 49.
For it is most requisite to pray for temporal blessings, as shall. 83.
afterward be proved.

. 82. Of the Arguments alleged for Spiritual Food to be meant by Bread,
answered.
THey certainly mistake the meaning of this Petition, who in this place apply
this title BREAD to Christ Jesus the Spiritual Manna, which is that Ioh. 6. 33.
Bread of God that comes down from Heaven, and gives life unto the world.
Though in the sixth of John, Bread be taken in that mystical sense; yet is it
not in that place singly and simply used, but with such a description as
plainly points out the mystical meaning of it, as Ver. 33.
Bread of God, Ver. 50.
Bread from heaven, Ver. 35.
Bread of life, Ver. 51.
Living Bread, Ver. 33.
Bread that gives life to the world, which Christ expressly applying to
himself, says, Ver 48.
I am the Bread of life. In that place therefore it cannot but be mystically
meant. But here in this Petition there is no such circumstance to point out any
such mystery. Of the attribute (...), whereby some think that more then
ordinary earthly bread is meant, See. 86.

Where the double article (...) is pressed to prove as much, It is well known
that such articles do often redound: or are used merely for grace of speech. But
it may be granted, that here it implies some emphasis, and yet no such
mystery as is pretended to be included therein.

Of the order in placing it before justification and sanctification See. 97.




The chiefest arguments alleged for that mystical interpretation are these.

1. Arg. If Bread be not here put for Christ, then the chiefest good thing that
possibly we can desire is left out of this prayer.

Answ. 1. Christ as the very foundation, and root of every good thing, is
included in the first clause of this prayer. For in Christ is God our Father.
Ephesians. 5. 23.


2. Christ being the Head of the Church, he is expressly prayed for in the
second Petition.

2. Arg. Temporal blessings are promised as additaments to the kingdom of
God. Math. 6. 33.
They need not therefore by name be prayed for.

Answ. That follows not. So they be not preferred before the kingdom of God
and his righteousness, they may expressly by for name be prayed for. Beside the
warrantable practice of Genesis 28. 20.
Iaakob, Pro. 30. 8.
Agur, and other Saints, the Apostle commands to Iam. 5. 14, 15.
pray for such as are sick, that they may be healed.

Others observing that temporal blessings may not be excluded, apply this
title Bread, Cypr. de Orat. dom.. 13.
both to spiritual and also to corporal food. Greg. Nyss. de Orat.
But this is to confound things of far different kinds in a form where Christ
does very accuratly distinguish things that differ one from another.

As for Papists who apply this to the Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, Aug. in Enchir. cap. 115.
they infer thereby that the Lord should teach his disciples to pray for that
which was not then instituted, Rhem. Annot. on Mat. 6. 11.
and whereof they were utterly ignorant.

. 83. Of praying for temporal blessings.
Q. What are we taught by the mention of BREAD in this Prayer?

A. Temporal things are to be prayed for. Beside the warrant of this Petition,
and of Genesis 28. 20.
other prayers of Saints guided therein by Gods Spirit, Pro. 30. 8.
we have express Psalm. 50. 15.
precepts, Iam. 5. 14. 15.
and promises, whereupon to ground our faith in this case. On these grounds the
Saints that have called upon God for temporal blessings, have also. 101.
given thanks to God the giver of them. For

1. These are 1. Tim. 4. 4.
good things in themselves.

2. They are very needful and useful. Needful (as means sanctified of God*)
for preserving our being in the world, which like a Lamp would soon be
extinguished if continual supply of new oil were not added thereto. In which
respect they who bestow the things of this world, on such as want them, are
said to Romans 12. 13.
contribute to their necessities. Useful they are for enabling us the better
to do the work which God appoints to us.

3. The want of them is a great hinderance to the work of our calling, to
works of charity and piety, and Pro^. 30. 9.
a temptation to injustice.

Herein then the goodness of God in affoording to us every thing needful for
body as well as for soul, and for this present life, as well as for the life
to come, is evidently set forth: and hereby we may and ought to take the more
notice thereof.

. 84. Of men's right to the things of this world.
Q. HOw is bread said to be OURS?

A. In regard of a just and true right that we have thereunto: Spiritual
right to the things of this world.
which right is twofold: spiritual and civil. The spiritual right is proper
to the Saints that believe in Christ. For Genesis 1. 28, 29.
that right which God gave to Adam unto all things under heaven, -- 3. 17.
was forfeited by sin. But Christ the Lord and heir of all, uniting them
that believe in him as members of his mystical body, thereby gives them a Ius
i^ re.
new right to all that Adam lost. On this ground the Apostle says to the
faithful, c 1. Cor. 3. 22, 23
The world, things prefent, and things to come are yours. Of which right he
gives this reason, Ye are Christ's.

The civil right is that which is agreeable to justice and equity, Ius ad rem.
and that in the courts of men. Thus children have a right to the inheritance,
Civil right to the things of this world.
and portion which their Parents leave them: which right Naboth had to the
Vineyard which Ahab unjustly coueted. 1. King. 21. 3.
Thus they who bona fide purchase a thing have right to it, Genesis 23. 16, 17,
etc.
as Abram to the field of Ephron, and the Cave in it. Thus have men a right to
that which they by Gods blessing on their honest diligence, in their lawful
calling get: Genesis 30. 40.
as Jacob had to the party-colored sheep, which his uncle as wages allowed to
him. Thus that which is given to a man by the owners thereof he has a right
unto: Job 42. 11.
as Job had to the gifts which his friends bestowed upon him. And sundry other
ways there be agreeable to justice and equity, whereby we have a right to
the goods of this world before men.

Now both the forenamed kinds of right must concur to make a thing truly
and properly a man's own. They that are not Christ's, have no right to any thing
at all before God: but are usurpers of whatsoever they possess and use. Unto
the unbelieving is nothing pure. Tit. 1. 15.
They that are Christ's, though they have a right to all things, yet they may
possess and use no more then what they can justify to be theirs before men,
and that in justice and equity. Their general right in Christ is to give them
liberty to hold and occupy so much as God by the hand of his providence shall
reach out unto them. Tu da panem. i. ex justice laboribus cibum adipiscar. Nam
si Deus iustitia est, non habet a Deo panem, qui exre fraudulenter and unjust
parta cibumhabet. Greg. Nyss. de Orat.
Justice is this hand of Gods providence. That which unjustly is gotten, can
not properly be said to be given by God. It is with Saints as with an only
child and heir while his father lives: though he have a right to all that his
father has, yet may he not possess and use any more then his father allotteth
to him.

. 85. Of sundry lessons arising from this particle Ours.
Q. What are we given to understand by stiling bread Ours?

A. Two things especially.

1. The Saints have in Christ a true right to the things of this world. The
right of Saints to temporal things.
They who are taught to say, Our Father in Christ (which all the Saints, and
none but Saints can do) are also taught to say, Tit. 1. 15.
Our bread, (For to the pure are all things pure.) which is a good motive to
draw us unto Christ, that so we may with good conscience use whatsoever the
Lord by his providence shall bestow upon us.

2. We may not desire that which is another. That which is another, not to be
coueted.
For we are here taught to pray for that which we may call ours. Now we justly
so call nothing, but that whereunto we have a civil, as well as a spiritual
right. The Moral Law expressly forbids to covet that which is another.
Exodus 20. 17.


By this word of property, All things not common to all.
Our, the Anabaptisticail conceit of a community of all things is evidently
refuted. And we are taught to rest contented with that portion which the Lord
is pleased to allot us as our own. Contentment.


. 86. Of the meaning of this word DAILY.
Q. WHat is meant by this word DAILY?

A. Ordinary and usual bread, whereof we do every day stand in need, (...).
This word is very ambiguous. The vulgar Latin translates it
supersubstantialem, as if (...) were put for (...). Which many following do
expound this Petition of that bread of God which came down from heaven, even
Jesus Christ. Whereof see. 82.

Others make the notation to be (...), ad substantiam, q. d. (...), bread
helpful to our substance, or fit and meet to nourish us. Thus is it answerable
to that phrase used by the Wiseman, Pro. 30. 8. (...) Panis praescripti, vel
demensi mei (i) mihi praescriptus, aut mihi suctentando idoneus. The Syriack
Translater of the New Testament seems to follow this sense, who thus
expresses it, (...) panem necessitatis nostrae, that which we have daily need
of. Others derive this word (...) from (...), the participle of (...) adsum,
vel supersto, vel subsequor, whence the morrow is called (...) scil. (...),
Thus it signifies bread needful for the present, panem advenientem, as Saint
Augustine acknowledges the Greek word to signify, though he translates it
supersubstantialem. Sermon, 18. de verb. Dom. Latinus hunc panem quotidianum
dixit, quia Graeci dicunt advenientem. And in Enchir. c. 116. Panis quotidianus
ideo dictus est, quia hic est necessarius. The common Translation of the word,
quotidianum, daily, may well stand with either of the two latter notations.
Answerably to the common Translation: Saint Cyprian terms it diurnam cibam,
daily food. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 14.


being fittest for our substance, to preserve soul and body together, and to
nourish and cherish us here in this life. Thus it imports the very same thing
that the Wise man sets out under this phrase, Pro. 30. 8.
Bread of my allowance, or convenient for me. This word is thus here used to
distinguish the food here meant, from that which Ioh. 6. 27, 33, 35. -- 4. 14.
coming down from heaven endures to everlasting life, whereof whosoever
eats shall never be hungry, or thirst again: and to prescribe a mean to
our desire.

. 87. Of desiring no more then is needful.
What instruction are we taught by this word DAILY? Quaerere iubemur id quod
satis sit ad naturam corporis conservandam, panem da ad Deum dicentes, non
luxum etc. Greg. Nyss. de Orat.


A. Our desire must be for no more then is needful for us. On this ground the
Apostle advises to be 1. Tim. 6. 8.
content having food and raiment. Thus was the desire of Genesis 28. 20.
Iaakob, Pro 30. 8.
Agur, and other Saints moderated. 1. Tim. 6. 9. Things needful.
Superfluity is very dangerous. It is Satan's bait whereby he allureth and
beguileth many: his snare whereby he catches and houldeth them fast: his
hook whereby he pulls them down, and drowneth them in perdition.

Q. What may be accounted needful?

A. 1. That which very nature requires: as meat and drink to feed the body,
and clothing to keep it warm: Lam. 4. 4, 5.
without these the body cannot but pine away and perish.

2. That which is meet for the estate wherein God has set us: as fit
instruments for Artificers: books for scholars: ammunition for Captains, and
other Soldiers: yea also for public persons, and for men of great birth,
place, and dignity, such sufficiency as is fit for the same. Thus much the
Wiseman intends under this phrase Prou. 30. 8.
Gine me not poverty. A man may have to sustain nature, and yet be poor.

3. That which is requisite for the charge committed to us. As if a man have
wife, and children, that which is m^et for them, as well as for himself, may
justly be accounted needful: so for others of his household and kindred lying
on his charge. 1. Tim. 5. 8.
The Apostle pronounces him worse then an Infidel that provides not for his
own, and specially for them of his own house. It behooves us therefore to
pray for so much as may be sufficient for them for whom we ought to provide.

4. That which is apparently needful for the time to come. 2. Cor. 12. 14.
Fathers ought to lay up for their children. Genesis 41. 48, 49.
When Joseph foresaw seven years Famine to come, he laid up great plenty of
corn before hand.

. 88. Of Covetousness, Ambition, and Voluptuousness.
Contrary to the forenamed moderation of our desire is Covetousness, Auarus
homo similis est inferno. Sicut infermus nunquam dicit, satis est, ita auarus
nunquam satiatur, etc. Bern. de modo been viuen. Sermon. 44.
which like to hell can never be satisfied. For by abundance this desire is
increased; so as the more it is filled, the less it is satisfied. Hereof our
Lord advises to Luke 12. 15.
take heed and beware. For as it is an insatiable sin, so also a devouring
sin; as Pharaohs lean Kine devoured the fat ones, so Covetousness deuoureth
all Gods blessings and graces, Genesis 41. 4.
it Math. 13. 22. Ezekiel. 33. 31.
choaketh the Word, and makes hearers thereof unfruitful. It so intangleth
men with the things of this world, as it makes it Luke 14. 18.
easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of God. No sin more bewitcheth a man, drawing his
heart from God the only true ground of confidence, Mar. 10. 25.
and making him trust in vanity which is plain Col. 3. 5. Ephe^ 5. 5.
idolatry. Yea it is truly styled. 1. Tim. 6. 10.
The root of all evil. For it so blinds man's mind, and hardens his
heart, as he makes conscience of no sin: no not of denying God, and
renouncing true Religion: nor of perjury, and blasphemy: nor of profaning
and breakiug the Sabbath: nor of rebellion against Superiors, and neglect of
inferiors: nor of murder or any other unmercifulness, nor of oppression,
deceit, falsehood, or any other evil.

Contrary also to the forenamed moderation of desire, are Ambition or
affectation of worldly honors and promotions, which like a wind make a man
fwell above that which is meet, but yet fill him not: and Voluptuousness, or
an eager hunting after earthly pleasures and delights, wherewith he uses to
be sooner wearied then contented.

. 89. Of Gods giving temporal blessings. That he gives them. How he gives
them.
Q. OF whom are we taught to ask bread?

A. Of our Father which is in heaven. For all the Petitions of this Prayer are
directed to him.

Q. What is thence to be gathered?

A, Psa. 102. 19 20
The Lord in heaven is the disposer of all things on earth. For Genesis 14 22.
Psalm. 24. 1.
he is the possessor of heaven and earth. c The earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof. He therefore gives the earth and the things thereof to whom
he will. We neither have them of our selves, nor can have them of any other
but of God. Whatsoever the means of getting them be, they are but the hands of
Gods providence, whereby he gives us what we have.

Q. How does God give bread, and the things here comprised under it?

A. 1. By causing them to be brought forth. How God gives temporal blessings.
For God at first made every thing that is fit for man's use: and he continues
still to cause the earth, sea, and other like means to bring forth all things
needful for man. Psalm. 104. 14.
I will hear, says the Lord, I will hear the heavens, Hos. 2 21, 22.
and they shall hear the earth, and the earth shall hear the corn, and the
wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Iezreel. God is there set forth as the
d first mouer, A Primus Motor.
and the highest orderer and disposer of all secondary means, whereby things
meet for man are brought forth.

2. By bringing them to us, so as we may partake of the use of them. Hos* 2. 8.
Thus says God to Israel, I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, etc. It is the
same God to whom the Psalmist says, The eyes of all things wait upon thee,
Psalm. 145. 15.
O Lord, and thou give them their meat in due season.

3. By giving them a blessing. Such a blessing does God give to the things
which are brought forth, and brought to us, as by virtue thereof they nourish
and cherish us. This blessing is in Scripture styled Leu 26. 26. Isa. 3. 1.
the staff and stay of bread. This is that Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
Word of God by which man lives. By this man thriueth. For Prou. 10. 22.
the blessing of God makes rich. Whence this proverb has been raised, Give
me Gods blessing, and cast me into the Sea. In regard of this blessing they
who have abundance have need to make this Petition. For Luke 12. 15.
a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses, e Hag 1. 6. Psalm. 127. 1, ^.
without Gods blessing nothing can do him any good.

4. By sanctifying them to us. This is done 1. by accepting our persons in
Christ, and accounting us pure. Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all things are pure. 2. By giving us in Christ a right to what we
have. 1. Cor. 3. 22, 23
All things are theirs who are in Christ. 3. By giving us a warrant out of the
Word for enjoying and using the same. 1. Tim. 4. 5.
It is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. 4. By giving us grace well to
use what we have. By virtue of this grace. Phil. 4. 12.
Saint Paul was instructed both to be full, and to be hungry; both to abound
and to suffer need.

Though in the three first respects, namely, by causing things fit for
creatures to be brought forth, by bringing them to his creatures, and by giving
a nourishing virtue to them, God may truly be said to give bread to all sorts
of men, good and evil: yea to all sorts of creatures, reasonable and
unreasonable: yet in the last respect, namely by sanctifying it, he gives
bread to the Saints alone.

. 90. Of the instructions taught us by asking bread of God.
IN that we are directed to ask bread of our Father in heaven, we are taught
thereby:

1. 1. Chron. 29. 11, etc.
To acknowledge him the giver thereof.

2. Psalm. 145. 15.
In all want to fly to him.

3. Psa. 147. 12, 13.
To give the praise of all we have to him.

4. Prou. 3. 9.
To honor him with our substance,

5. Hos. 2. 5.
To ascribe nothing that we have to any false gods, as the idolatrous
Israelites did.

6. Deuteronomy. 8. 17.
Nor to our own power, as Dan. 4. 30.
proud Nebuchadnezzar.

7. Act. 24. 2, 3.
Not to other men, as flattering Tertullus.

. 91. Of Gods free-giuing the things of this world.
Q. ON what ground do we ask bread of God?

A. Merely on the free grace of God. This word GIVE does import as much. For
what is more free then gift.

Q. What does Christ hereby teach us?

A. All that we have comes from the free gift of God. Romans 11. 35.
For who has given to him first? We neither can deserve any thing of God: nor
repay any thing to him. Well, did Iaakob understand this lesson, Genesis 32. 10.
which made him acknowledge himself less then all Gods mercies, and unworthy
of the least of them.

We ought hereby to be stirred up to more thankfulness, 1. Chro. 29. 13, 14,
15.
as David was. For the freer a gift is, the better it is: the more acceptable
to him that receives it, and the more worthy of praise to be rendered to him
that gives it.

. 92. Of praying both for our selves and for others.
Q. What persons are comprised under this particle V s?

A. All they whose Father God is. For OUR in the Preface, and V s in the three
last Petitions, import the very same persons.

Q. What learn we from this manner of expressing the parties prayed for in the
first person, and plural number, V s?

A. In Prayer we must be mindful both of our selves, and of others also. It is
usual with the Saints so to express their desires, as they show thereby they
have respect to themselves, and to others too. Sometimes therefore having in
the singular number prayed distinctly for themselves, they add thereto
Petitions for others: as where David thus in particular prayed for himself,
Keep my soul, Psalm. 25. 20, 22.
and deliver me, he adds, Deliver Israel, O God, etc.

For our selves we must especially pray on these grounds.

1. Every one is nearest to himself. And this is the tenor of the law, Math.
22. 39.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. If then thou prayest for any,
ought thou not much more for thy self?

2. Every one (if at least he be not blinded in his mind) best knows his
own needs, and is most sencible of his own wants, according to the Proverb,
The foot best knows where the shoe most pincheth. Not unfitly to this
purpose may this principle be applied, what man knows the things of a man,
save the spirit of a man which is in him. Who can beter know when a man is
hungry or thirsty, or what he best rellisheth, then himself?

3. Every ones prayer is most effectual for himself. No faithful prayer made
for ones self will God reject: but Moses and Samuel, Ier. 15. 1.
or Noah, Daniel, and Job may pray for others, and yet deliver but their own
souls. Ezekiel. 14. 14.


See the whole Armor of God on Ephesians. 6. 18. Treat. 3 36.
Of praying for others see before in. 14. the fourth duty.

This of the general Doctrine gathered out of this particle v s, being common
to the three last Petitions made for man's good. The persons here intended are
further to be considered in a more particular relation to this fourth Petition.

. 93. Of praying for others outward welfare
Q. What does the mention of others besides our selves, in this Petition for
temporal blessings, teach v s?

A. We must as truly desire the outward welfare of others, Ier. 29. 7.
as our own. This precept of the Prophet, Seek the peace of the City, and
pray unto the Lord for it, is very pertinent to this purpose. For by peace he
means especially outward prosperity. So does the Psalmist, Psalm. 122. 6.
where he says, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: for he adds, Peace be
within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. This might easily be
exemplified by a particular enumeration of all those temporal blessings which
we may pray for in our own behalf, applied to prayers for others.

Others are of the same mould whereof we are, and subject to the same
infirmities: they are supported and sustained by the same means that we are:
and they stand in need of temporal blessings as well as we. These therefore
must be prayed for in their behalf.

This is the rather to be noted, because many who can be well content to pray
for others spiritual welfare, fail exceedingly in praying for their
temporal welfare: which arises from too much love of themselves, and of this
world. Men ordinarily are so addicted to this world, as, if it were possible,
they would wholly have it to themselves. They desire not therefore to have it
much communicated to others. As for grace they observe it to be as communicable
as light. No man has the loss by the abundance of another. It rather
increases by communication and participation. They care not therefore how much
others have thereof. But the things of this world are of another nature. The
more of them is given to some, the less remains for others. This makes many
the less forward to pray for the temporal estate of others. Let these two
pestiferous roots, Love of our selves, and love of this world be rooted out of
our hearts, and the forenamed duty of praying for the temporal welfare of
others will be much more readily, and heartily performed.

From hence by necessary and just consequence it follows, Others to be
relieved with the bread that we have.
that we ought to succor one another with the goods of this world, according
to the rule of love, which is, our brothers necessity, and our own ability.
For what we pray for in the behalf of others, we must to our power endeavor
to do for them. This is also the rather to be noted, because many who are
ready to minister spiritual comfort to others, as to instruct them, to
encourage them, to strengthen them in grace and godliness, and by Christian
reproof to pull them out of the way of perdition, yea and to exhort others to
be merciful and bountiful in distributing to the poor, are very backwards
themselves to give of the goods of this world which they have, Iam. 1. 26, 27.
and 2. 14. etc.
to such as need. Surely such men's religion is vain, and their pretense of
faith and love a mere pretense, 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
the love of God does not dwell in him.

. 94. Of resting contented with our present estate.
Q. WHy is our desire here limited to THIS DAY?

A. 1. We do every day stand in need of the bread which we are here taught to
pray for. For it nourishes but a day. Ioh. 4. 13.
He that on one day eats as much as he can, will be hungry the next day.

2. Our Psalm. 90. 6. Luke 12. 20.
life is but as a day. He that this day is alive Pro. 27. 1. Iam. 4. 14, 15.
knows not whether he shall see the morrow or no: so as we are to account of
every day as of our last day: and accordingly every day renew our prayers. d 1.
These. 5. 17.
This is to pray continually

Q. What especial instruction does this limitation of our desire for the
things of this world teach us?

A. We must be content with the things that are present. For God himself has
said, Heb. 13. 5. Per id quod hodie iubet, intordicit tibi curam de Crastino.
Greg Nyss^^e Orat.
I will never fail thee nor forsake thee. If the promise of him who is able to
supply all our necessities be not sufficient to work contentment, I know not
what can be sufficient.

Cast off therefore all carking distrustfulnesse, and Mat. 6 34. Dicit, Da
nobis hodi^, vt nequaquam illos vlterioris d^ei cura co^tereret. Chrysostom. in Mat.
6. Hom. 20.
take no thought for the morrow. Pray in faith for bread this day, and let the
morrow take thought for the things of it self. He that boasted of his
abundance laid up for many years, when he had not many hours to live, is
branded for a fool. For when his life was even wasted, and gone, his care was
for plenty of provision.

. 95. Cui vila iam decrat, victus abundantiam cogitabat. Cypr. de Orat. Dom..
14. Lege Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 126
Of seeking the things which concern our own good as well as the glory of
God.
Q. What is to be observed about the order of the fourth Petition?

A. 1. That which is common with the Petitions following.

2. That which is proper to it self.

Q. What is it that is common with the Petitions following?

A. The fit inference of such Petitions as concern our good upon such as
concern the glory of God. For as in the three Petitions before this, we are
taught to seek the things of God, so in this and the two following, the things
which tend to our own good.

Q. What learn we from that inference?

A. It is lawful to seek such things as tend to our own good, Things for our
selves may be sought.
as well as such as tend to the glory of God. Can a better warrant then this
platform of prayer be expected? To add other proofs, whereof the Scripture
affoordeth many, were to light candles in Sunshine.

Behold here the good respect that God hears to man. Gods respect to us.
Though he might use us as gally-slaues, and other slaves are used, wholly and
only for his own turn, yet does he not deny us liberty to seek our
selves, and our own good. Yea if the services which we perform to him, hinder
our good indeed, he will that they give place to this: and on that ground he
says, I will have mercy, Math. 12. 7.
and not sacrifice. And again, The Sabbath was made for man, Mar. 2. 27.
and not man for the Sabbath.

Should not this inflame our hearts with zeal of the glory of God? Our
gratefulnes to God.
Should we not hereupon be even eaten up, as Christ was? Ioh. 2. 17.
Most meet it is that Gods goodness to us work gratefulness in us to him.

As in respct of God this requires gratefulness, Providence for our selves.
so in respect of our selves, providence: that we be not careless in seeking
that for our selves, Omnia bonum appetunt.
which God in his care over us gives us liberty to seek. Ordinarily men are
given to seek their own good. Arist. Ethic. lib.
Yea nature inclines every thing to seek that which is good for it self: 1.
cap. 1. and 4.
so as I need not use many words to press this point. Phil. 2 22.
Most fail in seeking their own too much. Yet there are also failings in the
defect, and that both of such as. 157.
neglect their best and truest good concerning their eternal salvation, and
also of such as neglect even their. 103.
temporal estate.

. 96. Of the principal end of this life.
Q. What are the things proper to this Petition, The end of our life to
glorify God.
to be observed about the order of it?

A. 1. The inference of such things as concern this present life, Quia nondum
perfectione gaudentes, non sine magno labor diuinae possumus obtemperare
volunlati, opus est cibo ne deficiamus: opus est, inquam, pane qu^etidiano.
Bern. in Quadr. Sermon. 6.
upon such as concern Gods glory.

2. The placing of things temporal before spiritual.

Q. What are we taught by that inference.

A. The end of this life is to glorify God. For being taught to pray for such
things as tend to the glory of God, we are thereupon taught to pray for
bread, that our life may be preserved to that end. Directly to this purpose the
Psalmist thus prays, Psalm. 119. 175.
Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee. This moved Isa. 38. 1, 2, 3. 18,
19.
Hezekiah to pray for life when he had received the sentence of death, as may
be gathered out of this reason, The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot
celebrate thee. The living, the living he shall praise thee.

Acts 17. 28. Gods glory to be aimed at in nourishing our bodies.
In God we live, move, and have our being. Great reason therefore that our life
should be ordered to his glory.

Let us on this ground set this end before us in sustaining this present life:
and so order it as, when we are to depart, we may say to God, Ioh. 17. 4.
as Christ did, I have glorified thee on earth, etc. Whenever we pray for the
things of this world, we ought to have this end in our minds, 1. Cor. 10. 31,
that whether we eat, or drink, or whatsoever we do, we may do all to the
glory of God.

On this ground also we must be the more watchful over our selves, Life not to
be misspent.
that we mispend not our life, health, strength, or goods on any thing contrary
to that end, as in persuing carnal pleasures, worldly honors, earthly trash,
and such like things. Note for this purpose that item which the wise man gives
to the young man persisting in mispending his precious time, to whom ironically
he says, Eccl. 11. 9.
Rejoice o young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
own eyes. But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee to
judgment.

. 97. Of placing the Petition for temporrll blessings before those for
spiritual.
Q. Why is this Petition for temporal blessings set before the Petitions for
spiritual blessings?

A. Many good and weighty reasons may be given of this order, which will
plainly show that the placing of this Petition before the two following is no
sufficient argument, to prove that by BREAD Christ is here meant. Some of them
are these.

1. This is an express Petition for good, as the three former are: but the two
last are deprecations from evil. It was therefore requisite that all the good
things to be craved should be mentioned before the evils against which we pray.

2. The Lord by placing temporal blessings, whereof we are more sensible,
before spiritual, does endeavor by degrees to raise up in us a desire of
spiritual blessings: which though they be more needful, Ioh. 4. 53.
are less sensible. The Ruler whose son Christ healed, was thereby brought
to believe in Christ.

3. This Petition, being of least consequence, is most fitly put in the
middlemost place. For as matters of greatest weight are first mentioned to
stir up ardencie, even in the beginning of prayer: so other things of much
moment are reserved to the latter places to quicken the spirit, and to revive
ardencie, even in the ending of prayer. This method do the best Orators use in
their Orations. Thus Christ beginning this prayer with the chiefest good thing
of all, the glory of Gods name, ends it with the best good things concerning
men, which is his spiritual good.

4. Though temporal blessings be not in their kind better then spiritual, yet
is man more hardly brought to depend on God for temporal, then for spiritual
things. Witness this prouerbiall speech, God take care for my soul, and I
will take care for my body. Witness also that distrustfulnesse for outward
estate, which is in many Saints that steadfastly trust in God for pardon of
sin, and sufficient grace to bring them to eternal life. In this respect our
faith in God for things of this life, has a pre-eminence and precedence before
faith in God for the things of a better life.

5. The things craved in the two last Petitions are to be obtained in this
life. In this life if pardon of sin, and freedom from Satan's power be not
had, they can never be had. He that dies with the burden of sin lying on his
soul shall never be eased of it in the world to come. This life then being
presupposed for obtaining pardon of sin, and deliverance from evil, it is
meet that it be first prayed for.

. 98. Of rising from temporal to spiritual blessings.
Q. What may we learn from placing, this order of placing, temporal blessing
before spiritual?

A. By our seeking of such things as concern the good of our bodies, we must
be led on to seek such good things as concern our souls. To this end did
Christ preach that excellent Sermon of the bread of life to such as followed
him from place to place to have their bodies fed. Ioh. 6. 26. etc.


Thus shall we make a double use of the temporal good things which God
bestows on us: one to refresh our bodies: another to stir up our minds to
seek the things which may refresh our souls.

Blessed are they which thus use any temporal blessings: and by the sweetness
of them are brought to hunger after the bread and water of life, even for that
meat which endures to everlasting life.

. 99. Of sundry particulars comprised under the general words of the fourth
Petition.
Q. What are the particular good things for which under the general words of
the fourth Petition we pray?

A. 1. Life it self. That, so long as it pleases God, our temporal life in
this world may be preserved. This did Psalm. 21. 4. Isa. 38. 2.
good Kings, Psalm. 119. 175.
Prophets, 2. Cor. 1. 8. etc.
Apostles, and other Saints pray for, being therein guided by the Spirit of
God. For the time of this life is Ioh. 9. 4.
the day to do the work of God: the time of death is the night wherein no man
can work.

1. Ob. 1 King. 19. 4.
Elias, Ion. 4. 3.
Jonah, and other Saints desired death.

Answ. Therein they did not as becomes Saints. That their desire was a fruit
of the flesh, and not of the Spirit: and therefore not to be imitated.

2. Ob. Phil. 1. 23.
Paul with a better spirit desired to be dissolved.

Answ. That was no simple absolute desire of death, but a thing which he could
in regard of his fruition of Christ's presence have desired, if that work which
God appointed by him to be done, had been finished.

2. Health and strength of body. What does the Psalmists Psalm. 88. 3. etc.
complaint of weakness imply, but desire of health and strength? Yea, he Ver.
2, 13.
expressly prays for as much. It is noted as an especial blessing bestowed on
the Israelites when they came out of Egypt, that Psalm. 105. 37.
none were feeble.

3. Means which God has sanctified to preserve life, health and strength, as
Psalm. 145. 15.
meat, Judge. 15. 18.
drink, Gen* 28. 20.
apparel, Psalm. 127. 2.
sleep, etc.

4. Me^^es to recover health, and strength: Leu. 26. 6.
as Physike, and all kind of medi^^^^ Chyrurgerie and all kinds of salues, with
the like. This phrase, Mat. 9. 12.
The s^cke need a Physician, and the 2. King. ^0 7.
direction which Isaiah gives to Hezekiah about the laying of a lump of figs
upon his boil, give warrant for the use of Physic and Chyrurgerie. It
requires learning, skill, observation and experience both to know the nature
of diseases, wounds, sores, and other maladies, and also to know the different
virtue which by the divine providence is given to herbs, roots, drugges, and
other creatures: and wisely to apply fit and proper remedies, to sundry and
different maladies. These things therefore may be prayed for.

5. Psalm. 90. 17.
Good success in our callings, labors and pains to get such means as are
fit to preserve or recover health and strength: Ruth. 2. 4.
and to maintain our estate. For all Psalm. 127. 1, 2,
that we can do is altogether in vain, except the Lord prosper our endeavors.

6. Gods blessing on the things which we possess and use. Without this
blessing a man were as good eat grauel as bread. Therefore for obtaining this
blessing, 1. Sam. 9. 13.
grace, Mat. 14. 19.
(as we speak) uses to be said before meat, and thereby food is said to be
blessed.

7. A divine sanctification of all we have. For 1. Tim. 4. 5.
every creature is sanctified by prayer. See, 89.


8. Freedom and deliverance from all kind of external miseries, as Psalm. 142
6.
oppression, Acts 12. 5. ^
imprisonment, Exodus 2. 23.
bondage, 1. King. 8. 47.
captivity, and other like distresses.

. 100. Of the extent of our prayers for the temporal good of others.
Q. ARe we to pray for no more then is needful for our selves?

A. Yes. What we crave for our selves, we ought to crave for others also. For
the Petition is made in the plural number,

Q. Who are those others for whom we must crave temporal blessings.

A. 1. They who are of our Family. 1. Tim. 5. 8.
It belongs to us to provide for them. We must therefore pray that we may
have sufficient for our selves, and them: and that God would further bestow on
them whatsoever is requisite for them in their places.

2. They who are of our kindred, or alliance, though they be out of our
Family. (...).
That distinction which the Apostle makes betwixt these two phrases, his own,
and them of his house, where he requires a provident care for both, shows
that respect must be had to our own, that is, our kindred, though they be not
of our Family.

3. They which are of our town, parish, or city. That which the Prophet
advises concerning the City where the Jews in their captivity dwelt (which
was to pray to the Lord for it, Ier. 29. 7.
and to seek for the prosperity of it) may be applied to the Parish, Town,
Village, street, or any other such common place. And this reason which the
Prophet renders ( in the peace thereof shall you have peace) may be extended to
all such places.

4. They who are of our Nation. The Psalmist meant his whole Nation, Psalm. 122.
6.
when he said, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. And again, If I forget thee,
Psalm. 137. 5.
O Jerusalem, etc.

5. They who any where live in this world. That all of all sorts may in their
places be maintained, we ought to pray for a continuance of those things which
at the beginning God ordained for the preservation of the world: that, as God
has promised, Genesis 8. 22.
there may be, while the earth remains, seed-time and harvest, and cold and
heat, and Summer and Winter, and day and night: and all other things meet for
man in this world. Yea also according to public extremities, and necessities
must our prayers be ordered, as in time of drought, for 1. King. 18. 42, Iam.
5. 18.
rain: 1. Sam. 12. 18, 19.
when fair weather is seasonable, for fair weather: in time of 2. Sam. 24. 25.
Plague, Joel 1. 14, etc
Famine, Exo. 17. 10, 11.
War, or any other like distress, for succor against those Messengers of
death: that thus so long as God has appointed us to live in this world, we may
comfortably pass over that time of life.

. 101. Of the things for which by virtue of the fourth Petition we ought to
give thanks.
Q. What are the particular good things for which, by reason of the fourth
Petition, thanksgiving is required?

A. 1. Life it self. For every day that is renewed unto us affords matter of
thanks even for that life which is lent us. Thus much does the Psalmist intend
in these words. While I live will I praise the Lord, Psalm. 146. 2.
I will sing praises unto my God while I have any being.

2. Health and strength in that life. Ios. 14. 10, 11.
This is it which Caleb that faithful servant of the Lord acknowledges, and
that to the glory of God, for he ascribes it to God.

3. Deuteronomy, 8. 10.
Sufficient means to preserve these. This Moses gives in express charge to
Israel, saying, When thou have eaten and filled thy self, thou shall bless
the Lord thy God. The Scripture under one blessing compriseth all blessings of
the same kind: so as by virtue of that charge we ought to bless God for
apparel, sleep, and other means of maintaining health and strength.

4, Isa. 38, 9, etc.
Recovery of health and strength. For this did Hezekiah (as a perpetual
testimony of his thankfulness) indight a Psalm of praise, and cause it to
be registered for all ages.

5. Genesis 24. 26, 27.
Good success in our pains. For this does Abraham's servant give express
thanks unto God. Genesis 31. 5, etc.
And Iaakob ascribes that increase which he had to God, which acknowledgement
is a thanksgiving.

6. The extent of Gods providence to our Family, and to such as we ought to
provide for. Iaakob acknowledges thus much, saying, Genesis 33. 11, 20.
God has dealt graciously with me, and I have enough, meaning enough for
himself, and all that belonged to him: and thereupon he erected an Altar in
testimony of his thankfulness.

7. Gods bounty extended to the places where we dwell. Sion was the City of
David, Psalm. 147. 12, etc.
and in Jerusalem was his habitation: he does therefore praise the Lord for
that peace, plenty, safety, and other like blessings which God had bestowed
thereupon. On this ground we are to bless God for such good Governors as he
has set over us, 1 Kin. 10 9.
in regard of the temporal benefits which we receive thereby. Prou. 29. 2.


8. Gods providence in keeping away, or removing any evils, as Psalm. 107. 8, 9.
Famine, Psalm. 91. 2, etc.
Plague, Exo 15 1, etc.
Sword, Est. 9. 23, 24.
Plots and practices of Enemies, with the like.

9 The common blessings which God bestows on the whole world. The
consideration whereof much Psalm. 8. 1, etc, and 145. 1, 14, 15.
enlarged David's heart to praise the Lord. Here therefore we are to take notice
how all the creatures in heaven, earth and sea still continue, as from the
beginning, to be useful unto man. Psalm. 104, 2.
The heavens remain to cover him, and 136. 7, 8, 9.
the Sun, Moon and whole Host of heaven to give him light, and to send him
down a sweet influence: and 139. 7.
the clouds continue to water the earth, and 104. 13, 14, 25, 26.
the earth to feed diverse sorts of creatures which are for man's use: yea and to
nourish sundry Trees, Plants, and Herbs, and they in their kind to bring
forth several fruits: and the Sea to bring forth sundry creatures that are fit
to live therein: and the waters that spring out of the earth to refresh the
creatures thereon. All these, and others like to these, minister much matter of
thanksgiving.

. 102. Of the duties required by virtue of the fourth Petition.
Q. What are the duties after which we ought to endeavor by reason of the
fourth Petition?

A. Prou. 13. 4.
1. Diligence in our calling. This is that means which God has sanctified to
get bread, that is, such things as are needful for our temporal estate. Genesis
2, 15. -- 3. 19.
This was at first enjoined by God to man in his innocent estate: and
afterward again in his corrupt estate: yea it is practiced by unreasonable
creatures, Prou. 6. 6, 7, 8.
who in this respect are set as a pattern before us.

2. Good conscience in getting the things that are needful for us. Thus will
that which we have be OURS; according to that direction of the Apostle to
Christians, that they eat their own bread. 2. These. 3. 12.
Thus also will that which we have be the more sweet unto us. Prou. 15. 15.
For a good conscience is a continual feast. This is the maine thing which the
Apostle intends where he forbids Christians to steal, Ephesians. 4. 28.
and enioyneth them to work the thing that is good. Psalm. 37. 5.


3. Qui diem tibi dat, etiam ea quae ad diem pertinent dat. Greg. Nys. de Orat.
Confidence in God for his blessing: namely both on our pains, and also on the
things which we have gotten by our pains, Ioh. 6. 11.
being persuaded that he which gives the day will give things needful for
the day. Christ's giving of thanks for the creatures which were provided,
gives evidence of his confidence in Gods blessing.

4. Faith in the Lord Jesus, Tit. 1. 15.
for a right to what we have. Thus shall we have a right even before God to
that which we have lawfully gotten before men. And much comfort may we reap
thereby.

5. Faithfulness in nourishing and cherishing our bodies with that which we
have. Eccl. 5. 17, 18.
This is the maine end of this Petition. The Wiseman pronounces them blessed
that eat in time for strength. Eccl. 10. 17.
Yea nature it self draws man hereto. For no man hates his flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it. Ephesians. 5. 29.


6. Temperance in using such things as are most usual and useful for us.
Those are the things which are here styled daily bread. To this purpose tends
this direction of the Wiseman, Put the knife to thy throat, Pro. 23. 2
if thou be a man given to thine appetite. Luke 21. 34.
Thus shall we not be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness.

7. Contentment in that which God bestows on us. Heb. 13. 5.
This clause THIS DAY imports this duty. 1. Tim. 6. 8.
Much quietness will this bring unto the mind. Till this be attained to,
nothing will satisfy a man: but the more he has, the more he will covet.

8. Providence for such as belong to our charge. On this ground we pray in the
plural number, Give Us. The Apostle notes this to be a bounden duty, saying,
Fathers ought to lay up for their children: 2. Cor. 12. 14.
and he lays it so straightly to the charge of Christians, 1. Tim. 5. 8.
as if they fail therein, he accounts them worse then Infidels.

9. Liberality to such as need. The extent of this particle Us reaches to all
of all sorts. Now God gives to some abundance, that out of their store, 2.
Cor 8. 14.
they should minister to such as want. We therefore that pray that others may
have bread, ought, when we have sufficient for our selves and others, Neh. 8.
10.
to give unto them.

10. Joy in the occasions of rejoicing which others have for Gods blessing on
their temporal estate. To that general direction of the Apostle, Romans 12. 15.
Rejoice with them that do rejoice, may this particular be referred. We are
taught to pray for others, as for our selves: We must therefore be answerably
affected to their good.

. 103. Of the sins whereof the fourth Petition shows men to be guilty.
Q. What are the sins contrary to the fourth Petition, that we ought to
bewail?

A. 1. A careless neglect of our own or others welfare. 2. A distrustful
carking for the same.

Q. Who may be accounted guilty of neglecting their own welfare.

A. 1. They who care not what hurt they do to their bodies. Many bereaved of
their wits, or possessed with a devil, care not to thrust Pins, Knives,
Daggers, and such like sharp instruments into their flesh, and to Mar. 5. 5.
strike themselves with stones. If any in their right wits do so, they are
worse then mad men.

2. They who ouer-rigorously punish their bodies. Many blinded with
superstition, and besotted with idolatry, Col. 2. 23.
spare not their flesh. The 1, King. 18, 28.
Baalits cut themselves with knives and lances. Papists tear their flesh with
whips, and sundry other ways macerate their bodies: whereof it may be said,
Who required this? They who being better instructed, do, in performing such
duties as are in their substance warrantable, impair their health and strength
by fasting, watching, or any other kind of not sparing their bodies for duties
of piety, are not free from all blame, but come too near to superstition:
their devotion carries them beyond the bounds of this Petition.

3. They who through too eager a pursuit of what they like, waste their natural
vigor, as Genesis 25. 29, etc
Esau, who followed his hunting till he was faint. Fearful was the issue which
thereupon followed: for it cost him his birthright. All immoderate pains of
mind or body, are aberrations sweruing from this Petition, whether they be of
Porters, Laborers, Husbandmen, Tradesmen, Seafaring men, Students, or any
others.

4. They who by immoderate passion shorten their days. It is taxed, as a fault
in Ier. 31. 15.
Rachel, that she refused to be comforted: from which fault Genesis 37. 35.
Iaakob was not altogether free. If by intemperancy in eating, drinking, or any
other way men bring diseases upon their bodies, or hasten their death, their
sin is much more heinous.

5. They who through niggardliness afford not themselves things needful. This
is one of the great vanities which the Wiseman taxes, that Eccl. 6. 2.
a man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honor, Pecuniae non dominus
sed servus est: custos, non possessor. Bern. super Cant. Ser* 21.
so as he wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives
him not power to eat thereof. Such an one is a servant, not a Master; a
keeper, not an owner of his wealth.

6. They who cast themselves into needless dangers. 2. Sam. 23. 16, 17.
After David had been a means of moving three of his Worthies to hazard their
lives to satisfy his longing, his heart smote him for it. 2. Sam. 2. 14, 15
How fearful was the issue of those twelve couples of young men whom Abner and
Ioab sent to play a dangerous sport? On this ground quarrellers, challengers,
undertakers of single combats, especially on private occasions, but most of
all where the combats are desperate, as with Pistols, or double Rapiers, their
bodies being naked, are condemned.

7. Selfe-murtherers. It is the maine scope of this Petition to desire
preservation of life. How contrary thereunto is it to take away a man's own
life? They were desperate reprobates that in Scripture are noted to have done
so: as 1 Samuel 31. 4.
Saul, 2. Sam. 17. 23.
Achitophel, and Math. 27. 5.
Judas. As for Judge. 16. 30.
Sampson, the thing that he aimed at was to destroy the enemies of the Church,
not himself: and what he did, he did by an extraordinary Spirit: and therein
he was a type of Christ, who by his own death destroyed the enemies of the
Church.

. 114. Of neglecting the welfare of others.
Q. Who may be accounted guilty of neglecting the welfare of others?

A. 1. They who are improuident for such as are under their charge: as
improuident Husbands, Parents, Masters, and other Governors. Math. 7. 11.
Such as are evil, can give good things to their children; what may then be
thought of them that do it not?

2. They who are unmerciful to others that need, Iam. 2 13.
Saint James denounces judgment merciless against such. A fearful doom.
For mercy is the only ground of that hope, which sinners can have.

3. They who envy at the prosperity and abundance of others: as the Genesis 26.
14. -- 30. 1.
Philistims envied Isaak: and Rachel envied her sister. Well says the Wiseman
hereof, that it is the rottenness of the bones, Prou. 14. 30.

. 104. Of sundry branches of improuidence.
Q. HOw is the forenamed improuidence manifested?

A. 1. By idleness, and negligence in a man's calling, whereby he depriueth
himself of the means wherewith he should provide for himself, and his
charge. Pro. 24. 30, 31.
The field and vineyard of the slothful brings forth thorns and nettles,
in stead of Wheat and Grapes.

2. By meddling too much with other men's matters. Such an one is Pro. 26. 17.
as one that takes a dog by the ears: he may get a snap thereby. Therefore
Saint Peter wisely exhorts Christians 1. Pet. 4. 15.
not to suffer as busybodies: a man can have no more comfort in such
sufferings, then in suffering for theft, murder, and such crimes.

3. By following pastimes too much. For Prou. 21. 17.
he that loves pastime shall be a poor man. Much time and money uses to be
spent by such. Fair inheritances have been cast away at Dice.

4. By frequenting lewd company. For Prou. 6. 26.
by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread: and -- 23.
21.
The drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty.

5. By prodigality. Luke 15. 13.
The Prodigal child wasted his substance with riotous living.

. 105. Of carking too much for this world.
Q. Who carke too much for their temporal estate?

A. 1. Profane Worldlings that prefer the things of this world before the
glory of God. They would have the fourth Petition to be first. Such were the
Jews that made Hag. 1, 4.
seeled houses for themselves, while the house of God lay waste: and the Math.
8. 34.
Gadarens that preferred their swine before Christ.

2. Covetous men, whose desire is never satisfied: they are like the things
that can never say, Pro. 30. 15, 16.
It is enough. They who are couetously minded, regard not the limitation of
this Petition, by THIS DAY. Their mind is more on years then days: as his was
that said to his soul, Luke 12. 19.
Thou have much goods laid up for many years.

3. Unconscionable persons, who care not how they get what they have. They have
no respect to this particle of right, OUR. Under this head 1. King. 21. 8. Iam.
5. 4.
all the violent oppressions, and fraudulent circumuentions which any use, may
be comprised.

4. Tit. 1. 15.
Unbelievers, who before God can call nothing their own.

5. Ungrateful wretches, that have neither mind nor time to give God thanks
for the good things they have: like to the Luke 17. 17, 18.
nine Lepers, who being cleansed, never returned to give thanks to Christ. Do
these account their Father in heaven to be the giver of the things on earth?

THE FIFTH PETITION.
. 106. Of sins styled debts, and of the kinds of those debts.
Q. WHich is the fifth Petition?

A. And forgive us our debts, as also we forgive our debtors.

Q. (...).
What is the Sum of this Petition?

A. Justification.

What are the parts thereof.

A. 1. The Petition it self.

2. Et remitte nobis debita nostra, sicut and nos remittimus debitoribus
nostris.
A condition annexed thereto.

The Petition contains the thing which is prayed for.

The condition gives assurance of obtaining it.

Q. How many distinct points are noted in the Petition.

A. Four. 1. Debts acknowledged. The original word which we translate
trespasses, properly fignifieth debts (...).
DEBTS or TRESPASSES.

2. An appropriation of them. OUR.

3. The kind of discharge. FORGIVE.

4. The parties to be discharged. US.

Q. What is meant by DEBTS?

A. Sins. Math. 6. 14, 15 Debitum quid est nisi peccatum? Aug. de verb.
Dam^a^a. 28.
Christ himself declares his own meaning. For immediately after this prayer,
he returns to the condition of this Petition, to urge and press the same
somewhat more forceably: and in the repetition thereof, for debts he puts
trespasses, and that three several times. (...).
Yea Saint Luke setting down this form of prayer, thus expresses this
Petition, Luke 11. 4. (...).
Forgive us our SINS: for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us.
That which by Matthew is called debts, by Luke is called sins. And whereas
Luke in the Petition expresses sins, in the condition he mentions debtors.
Again, Luke 13, 2, 4.
the Lord having occasion twice at one time to inculcate this question, Think
ye that these were sinners above others? First he uses this word (...).
sinners: then this, (...).
debtors. It was usual with Christ to resemble Mat. 18. 24. etc. Luke 7. 41.
etc.
sinners to debtors.

Q. In what respect are we sinners counted Debtors?

A. 1. Luke 17. 10.
As we are servants of God. So we owe obedience. Rom 6. 16.


2. Ezekiel. 18. 4.
As we are sinners against God. So we owe death. Romans 6. 23.


Thus there is a double bond whereby we stand bound as debtors to God. Man a
debtor to God by a double bond.


One is the bond of the Law, whereunto we are tied in a double respect.

1. In regard of the supreme sovereignty, and absolute authority which God
has over us. This is expressed in the Preface before the Decalogue thus, I am
the Lord thy God.

2. In regard of the many benefits which we have all our days received, and
still do continue to receive from him. By God we are what we are: and have what
we have: He created us, He preserves us, He provides for us all needful
things, He protecteth us from all hurtful things. This also is intimated in
the foresaid Preface by mention of one great benefit, Freedom from Egypt, the
house of bondage.

The other bond is the curse of the Law, whereunto we are tied by forfeiture of
the former. Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
For he that performs not the condition of a bond, stands liable to the
penalty of the bond. In regard whereof the Law is called (...). Col. 2. 14.
an handwriting against us.

Adam, even in his innocence, and all we that come from him, are in the former
respect debtors by virtue of our creation. Adam since his fall, and all his
wicked offspring are in the latter respect debtors by reason of our
transgressions.

Q. Which of those debts do we here desire to be forgiven?

A. The latter most especially, whereby we are bound to the Gal. 3. 10.
curse of the Law, which is the penalty of it. This penalty* if it were
exacted, would make us most miserable. There is good cause therefore of praying
to have that remitted. As for the other debt of obedience, we ought to desire
rather ability to perform it, then liberty to be freed from it. Yet
notwithstanding, because it is impossible for us, so long as flesh is in us, to
pay that debt, as it ought to be paid, by consequence we desire a remission of
that debt; namely, that God would not exact of us to be performed by us in our
own persons such exact and complete obedience as the Law requires.

. 107. Of Christ's active righteousness imputed to us.
Q. IN regard of our disabilitie to discharge our debt of obedience to God,
what may be inferred?

A. Imputation of Christ's righteousness is necessary for our instification.
Christ teaches us to desire a discharge of all debts. The Law requires a debt
of perfect righteousness. This we are not able to pay of our selves. But our
Surety being able, did pay it. Mat 3. 15.
He fulfilled all righteousness. By the imputation thereof to us, are we
discharged. Romans 5. 18, 19
For as by one man's disobed ence many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one shall many be made righteous. His righteousness is upon us to
justification of life. In this respect Christ is said to be 1. Cor. 1. 30.
made unto us righteousness: and we are said to be 2. Cor. 5. 21.
made the righteousness: of God in him. This kind of debt is not duly
considered of them, Arg. against Christ active right. answ.
who exclude the active obedience of Christ from our justification. They press
those places which make mention only of the blood of Christ, forgetting the
Synecdoche which is frequent in the Scripture, whereby one member or part is
put for all of that kind. In particular they press this Petition, which
places our justification in remission of sins, not conceiving that under
debts here mentioned, all manner of debts are comprised: and under this word
forgive, all manner of needful discharge. Where further they say, that Christ's
active righteousness: was necessary for himself, they do not duly consider
the dignity of his person by virtue of the hypostaticall union of his two
natures: which dignity exempteth him from all necessity of obedience to the
Law, in regard of himself.

This doctrine of the imputation, Comfort.
even of the Active obedience of Christ, Isa. 64. 6.
brings much comfort to poor sinners, who knowing that all their
righteousnesses are as filthy rags, do thereupon tremble at the thought of the
presence of the righteous Lord. But their faith in Christ his righteousness
imputed to them (in stead of that debt of righteousness which they owed to
God) whereby they are accounted righteous before God, makes them with much
comfort and great confidence present themselves before him.

. 108. Of man's subjection to sin.
Q. What observation does the acknowledgement of debt afford? Nemo sine
peccato. Ambr. in Psalm. 118. S^rm. 16.


A. No man is free from sin. Peccatum habe^ qui clamat ad deum, Dimitte nobis
debita nostra. August. l. de Haer. cap. 88.
As this Prayer, so this Petition therein is prescribed for every one on earth:
which by just consequence implies, that every one is guilty of sin:
otherwise he had no need to pray for forgiveness. But besides this necessary
consequence, the point is in express terms 1. King. 8. 46.
often set down in Scripture. Romans 3. 23.
And every one, whose eyes the god of this world has not blinded, Iam. 3. 2.
and whose heart and conscience he has not hardened and seared, 1. Ioh. 1. 8,
10.
finds it by woeful experience to be too true. Vitium boc, vnde praua
oriuntur desideria, manet in homine. Aug. contr. ^ul. lib. 6. Lex peccati and
remissa est in re generatione spirituali, and ^anet in carne mortali Aug. de
Nupt. and Concup. l. 1. c. 25.
Neither can it be otherwise, because original corruption, the mother and
nurse of sin abides in him so long as any breath and life remains.

Object. They who have their sins forgiven are free from sin. But in this world
many have their sins forgiven.

Answ. Remission takes away the guilt of sin, but not the root of sin.
The law of sin is remitted in spiritual regeneration, and yet it remains
in mortal flesh: otherwise sin could not be propagated in the regenerate,
Iustificatis d^sci pul^s lequebatur. Aug de ciu. dei. l 21. c. 27.
who have their sins forgiven. Therefore this Petition was prescribed even to
the Disciples that were justified.

Just cause on this ground have we to detest the contrary positions of our
adversaries, Presumptuous positions of Papists.
which are these that follow and such like.

1. Whatsoever is truly and properly sin is taken away by Baptisine. Council.
Trid.. 5. Decret. de o^ig. pec.
And to explain their meaning to the full, lest it should be thought that by
taking away sin, they understand no more then forgiving or not imputing
sin, Bellarm. de Bap. lib. 1. cap. 13.
their great Champion adds, that by Baptism all sins are in very deed taken
away, so as not only it is not imputed, Baptismo re^psa telluntur omnia
pecca^a, vt non solum non imputetur, sed (...) si^ quod imputart possit ad
culpam.
but there is not that which maybe imputed for fault or blame. Do they not
hereby show that the truth is not in them? For 1. Ioh. 1. 8.
if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not
in us?

2. That concupiscence which is in the regenerate, is not truly and properly
sin. Answ. What is this, but to hold that the spring of sin is clean dried
up in the regenerate? Council. Trid. ibid. Bellar* de Amiss great. l. 5. c. 7.
If the spring be dry, whence shall any streams of sin proceed?

3. They which are justified are able to keep the whole Law. Council. Trid.. 6.
c. 11.
Answ. If then they do what they are able, what need they ask remission of
sin, Bellar. de Justice. l. 4. c. 10. Loc. citat.
which is a transgression of the Law.

4. The works of just men are perfect. Answ. Perfection needs no remission.
For such works then by their doctrine they need ask no pardon. O presumptuous
and arrogant conceits!

Let the undeniable certainty of the forenamed doctrine, Be humbled for sin.
that No man is free from sin, humble us for that woeful condition wherein we
live, Bonum est homini vt imitetur publicanum, nec tumescat sicut pharisaeus,
qui i^ctauit (...) sua, texit vul^era sua. Aug. hom. 42. in l. 50. Hom.
while here we live. Sight of sin was it that humbled the Publican: whom it
is better to imitate then to swell as the Pharisie did, who braged of his
merits, and covered his wounds. Assuredly this ministers just cause of great
humiliation: and it cannot but force such as have any spiritual sight and
sense thereof to say, as the Leper under the law was wont to say, Leu. 13. 45.
I am unclean, I am unclean: and in horror and dete^station of our selves,
when we think of the presence of the Lord, to say as Peter did, Luke 5. 8.
Depart from me for I am a sinful man, o Lord. Yea to cry out with Saint
Paul, Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

And that those outcries may appear to be effects of true humiliation, Seek
pardon for sin,
rather then of desperation, we ought earnestly and instantly to seek
remission of sin, which is the maine matter intended in this Petition: well
weighing for the point in hand, that 1. Tim. 1. 15.
This is a faithful saying, worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners.

. 109. Of falling into sin daily.
Q. What observation does our daily praying for forgiveness of sin afford?
Docetur peccare se quotidie, dum quotidie pro peccatis iubetur o rare. Cypr. de
Orat. Dom. 16.
For the word, this day, expressed in the fourth Petition, is to be understood
in every Petition.

A. Every day men fall into sin. The Metaphor of Job 15. 16.
drinking iniquity like water, imports as much: for it shows that it is as
ordinary and familiar for a man to sin as to drink, which he does often every
day. Dares any man deny the truth of this doctrine upon his experience? If he
dare, surely his conscience is as seared with an hot iron, or else he lies
against his conscience. For the forenamed original corruption as it remains
in us, so it remains as a spring in us, continually sending forth some salt
and bitter water of sin, more or less.

Many excellent directions may fitly be inferred from this observation. Duties
for redressing the sin whereinto we daily fall.
As

1. To set apart some time every day for examination of our selves: that so we
may the better observe those several sins which every day pass from us. If
they be not observed, they may lie so long festering the soul, as thereby
prove incurable.

2. To humble our souls daily before God. Every day is the fire of Gods
jealousy kindled by our daily sins, whereby he is provoked to come out in
wrath, and to take revenge. Every day therefore must we fall down before him
with broken spirits and humbled souls. This is a means to turn his fury to
pity.

3. To renew our covenant with God every day. For every sin makes forfeiture
of the covenant. The covenant being forfeited, with what comfort can we apply
it to our selves? with what confidence can we plead it before God?

4. To repent daily. Luke 17. 4.
Repentance is a prouiso annexed to a man's forgiving his brother. Quia nullus
est dies in quo (...) possit esse si^e peccato, vna die esse non debet si ne
paenitentia. Aug. in Apoc. Hom. 2.
Much more does God expect it of such as expect forgiveness of him. He that
sins seven times in a day, must repent seven times in a day. As sin
incenseth wrath, so repentance for sin makes God to repent his wrath. Because
therefore there is no day wherein a man is without sin, he ought not to be one
day without repentance.

5. To meditate every day as on the satisfaction which the Lord Jesus once made
upon the cross for our sins, so on the intercession which he continues
daily to make at the throne of Grace. Romans 8. 34.
This gives good ground of assured hope of continual pardon for our
continual sins. For the maine end of Christ's continual intercession is to
make continual application of his all-sufficient sacrifice to our continual
sins.

6. To pray every day for pardon. This we are here expressly taught to do. All
the forenamed points are but preparations unto this. This, if it be performed
in faith, is it that obtains pardon so often as we sin. The daily offerings
which every morning and evening were appointed under the Law, Exo. 29. 38, 39.
prefigured thus much.

7. To watch continually. The more subject and prone we are to fall into
sin, the more needful it is, that with all heedfulnesse we watch against
sin. Satan's sedulitie, the deceitfulness of sin, and our own foolishness
require diligent and constant watchfulness.

. 110. Of the difference betwixt Gods absolution, and man's apprehension thereof.
Ob. GOds forgiveness is full, complete, and absolute. Whom once he
acquitteth, he never calls to account again. His discharge is of sins
past, present, and to come. What need then of those daily duties?

Answ. That which on Gods part is at once fully done, is on our part by degrees
apprehended and applied.
I grant it to be so in the eternal decree and secret counsel: yea and in
that covenant which is made betwixt him and his Son, our Surety. But in the
application thereof to us, and in our apprehension of it by faith, (whereby
only our soul can rest quieted, and assured of it) a proceeding by degrees
must be acknowledged. Though a believer do for the present apprehend a full
discharge of all the sins whereof he does then stand guilty, yet through the
violence of temptation, and the weakness of flesh, he may again and again
make question and doubt of that discharge, especially when he has fallen into
other sins, or returned to the same sins for which he before craved pardon.
Often sinning does much shake and weaken faith. Christ saw it needful to give to
the woman, whom he himself absolved, Ioh. 8. 11.
this caveat, Sin no more. Wherefore for strengthening our weak faith in a
full pardon of all our sins, for new settling of it when it is shaken, for
healing the wounds which are daily made in our conscience by daily sins, for
preventing the advantage which might be taken from our many forfeitures of
covenant, the forenamed directions are daily to be observed.

. 111. Of Popish indulgences for sins to come, and Shriuing in Lent.
Contrary to this branch of this Petition are the blasphemous Indulgences
which by Popes and popish Priests are given for sins to come, See. 126.
and that not only for some particular sins, Vid. Hadrian. in tract. de
Indulg. Nauar. de. Iubil. Cornubens. de Indulg. Ioh. de Turrecr. in Comment. de
Poen. Bell. de Indulg.
whereby they eag on, and embolden men to commit those sins, but also for all
manner of sins, not for a day, or a week, or a month, or a year, but for
many years, yea all their life. And lest they should fear vengeance and
punishment for their sins after this life in Purgatory (with which fiction
they much affright their people) they extend their indulgences far beyond the
times which they themselves do set for Purgatory, even unto Indulgentiae
interdum continent condonationem poenitentiae quindecim, vel viginti millium
annorum. Bellar. de Iudulg. l. 1. c. 9. Auditum sub coelo non legitur quod
little voce depromitur, Date nobis veniam, dum tamen nos in errore manemus.
Gelas. Epist. ad Faust. Council. Trid.. 14 c. 5. 6, 7. 8.
fifteen and twenty thousand years. Are not floodgates hereby wide opened to
all manner of licentiousness? are not men hereby made not only secure, but
also impudent in committing sin? By those indulgences men are taught to say,
Grant us pardon, even while we commit sin. Was ever the like heard?

To the like licentious liberty does their superstitious custom of Auricular
confession, and of absolution thereunto given by a Priest once a year in Lent,
bring men. Yet this is not only by ordinary custom practiced, but by their
great Council at Trent warranted.

. 112. Of neglecting to seek discharge of sin till Easter: or till a day of
visitation, or death
What now shall we say of such among us as put off all serious and through
examination of themselnes, confession of their sins, and renewing of
repentance of Easter, when they intend to receive the holy Communion? Though
they forbear the superstitious practice of Auricular confession, yet they make
as wide a gap for licentiousness, and wickedness as Papists do. For such
commonly make little o^ no conscience of any sin till about Easter time. And
is there not just cause to think that that show of conscience which they then
make, is but a mere show? and that it sauoureth more of fond superstition,
then of sound Religion? Can it be imaginned that such as all the year long let
loose the raines to impiety, and iniquity, can once in the year make a
through examination of their souls, and confession of their sins? Neither
will they have any mind to diue to the depth of such a sea: neither if they
had a will thereto, could they possibly do it. Such men's souls must needs
fester for want of timely and due search thereinto.

Much more desperate must there case needs be, The danger of putting often exa
mination, and repentance too long.
who are so far from a daily, yea and yearly searching of themselves, and
seeking to be discharged of their sins, as all their life long they never
think of any such matter, unless God by some extraordinary judgment bring
them, as he brought Pharaoh, Exodus 10. 16.
generally and confusedly to acknowledge that they have sinned: or unless they
observe death to have seized upon them: at which time if their sins be laid
before them, either their heart is like, 1. Sam. 25. 37.
as Nabals, to die in them, and to become senseless as a stone: or else their
conscience to be, as Judas his conscience was, Math. 27. 5.
was, a rack, or rather an hell unto them, incapable of comfort. For at the
time of death the body is weak, the heart faint, the spirits dull: yea to him
that has not before made his peace with God, the thought of death can not be
but very terrible, a means even to astonish him that is otherwise feeble, dull
and heavy. Satan, that is not ignorant hereof, takes great advantage there at:
and is then most busy to tempt, and most fierce and forward to assault* when
man is least able to resist. And whereas all our hope of standing against Satan
is in Gods help: such as have all their life long provoked Gods wrath, and
used no means to be reconciled to him, can have little hope in the last act to
receive help from him.

. 113. Of the woefulness of the debt of sin.
Q. WHat doctrine does the resemblance of sin to debt, imply?

A. Sinners debtors to God justice.
Sin makes man bound to the revenging justice of God. He that thus prayed to
God, Psalm. 143. 2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, well knew as much.

Every sin is a breach of Covenant betwixt God and man. It makes forfeiture
thereof. As a debtor therefore that has made forfeiture of his bond, stands
liable to the revenge of the Creditor: or rather, as a malefactor that has
transgressed the Law of his Sovereign, is liable to the penalty of the Law:
so a sinner to the just revenge of Gods Law.

Take notice hereby of the horrible nature of sin. Horriblenesse of sin.
It kindles the wrath, it provoke the revenge of the Creator. Who knows
the power of his anger? Psalm. 90. 11.
As his greatness is, so is his anger: Infinite, insupportable. Hence is it
that the creature on whom it lies, lies under it eternally. For he is no way
able to ease himself of that burden. If this were duly weighed, and seriously
thought of when we are tempted to any sin, would we be so foolish, as for a
little momentany delight to run into such a debt as will cast us into that
prison, out of which there is no release, and in which there is torture and
torment, endless and easelesse. We count them miserable that fall so far
into man's debt, as they are never able to discharge it. What may we then think
of such as fall into this debt of sin?

Take also hereby further notice of the necessity of such a Surety as Jesus
Christ is, Necessity of Christ's Suretiship.
God-Man in one person. For such is the debt of sin, as no creature in heaven
or in earth was able to discharge it. If Christ had not undertaken the
discharge thereof, our case had been like to the case of those Angels, who are
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, Jude, verse 6.
unto the judgment of the great Day.

. 114. Of every sin being mortal, yet not equal.
Q. WHat does the penalty whereby sin is made a debt, import?

A. Sin is mortal. Yea because this Metaphor, Debts, being of the plural
number, is indefinitely used, and compriseth all manner of sins under it, I
may further infer, that

Every sin is mortal. For that penalty which is due to these debts, is
death. Instance Genesis 2. 17.
the first sin that was committed. And to show that the like holds in every
sinner, the Prophet without any limitation, reservation, or exception at all,
says, Ezekiel. 18. 4.
The soul that sins it shall dye. If it be a sin, in that it is sin,
deadly it must needs be, be it great or small; in thought, word, or deed. For
Romans 6. 23.
the wages of sin, (even of whatsoever is sin) is death. Being a sin, it
is a transgression of the Law. For these two words, sin, transgression, are
conuertible, and reciprocal terms: one imports as much as the other. (...).
Sin is a transgression. 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
And, (...).
All unrighteousness (or every transgression) is sin. But every transgression
is deadly. For, Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
Law. And all unrighteousness is deadly. For Romans 1. 18.
the wrath of God is revealed against all unrighteousness. And that not
without just cause. For all unrighteousness, every transgression, every sin
is against the good will of God who is of infinite excellency and Majesty, See
my Treatise of the sin against the holy Ghost.. 31.
and in that respect it is of an infinite praultie, and deserves an infinite
punishment, eternal death.

Object. Thus all sins are made equal.

A. Nothing less. For neither does the same kind of punishment make all the
crimes, for which it is inflicted, equal; nor does the same kind presuppose
the same measure of punishment. Robbers and murderers are put to the same
kind of death: yet is murder a more heinous sin then robbery. Besides
among such Malefactors as are put to death, the kind of death whereunto some
are put, is much more terrible, then that whereunto others are put. Will any
thence infer, that all crimes which are capital, are equal? Much more
absurd is the inference of Papists, that all sins are made equal, because
all are made mortal. They themselves do not hold all the sins which they
judge mortal, Mat. 11. 22, 24.
to be equal. There are degrees of torment in hell. Though all such in their
nature and kind (if they be not forgiven) implunge men into death and
damnation, yet not into the same degree of torture.

. 115. Of the distinction of Venial and mortal sins.
Q. ARe then no sins at all Venial?

A. The distinction of Venial and mortal sins rightly and wisely limited,
may safely be admitted, and that in four respects especially.

1. In regard of the order that God has by his Word revealed.

2. In regard of the subject or person in whom sin is.

3. In comparison of one sin with another.

4. In regard of the Churches manner of proceeding against sinners.

1. Concerning the order which by Gods Word is revealed, there is an
irreuocable Decree passed upon the sin against the Holy Ghost, Math. 12. 31.
that it shall never be forgiven. Heb. 6. 4. etc. -- 10, 26, etc.
Howsoever the secret Decree of God be as inviolable against all the sins of
every Reprobate, yet because that determined doom is not revealed against any
one sin but that, of It only it is said, There is a sin unto death. 1.
Ioh. 5. 16.
The sin therefore against the Holy Ghost is mortal. But in opposition to
it, Christ says, All sins shall be forgiven: Mar. 3. 28.
that is, they are remissible, pardonable, and in the respect venial.

2. Concerning the subject, or person in whom sin is, after that by faith the
Elect are ingraffed into Christ, though sin remain in them, yet is it not
imputed to them for condemnation. There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus. Rom 8. 1.
All the sins therefore of true Believers are venial. They shall be
pardoned; but all the sins of unbelievers are mortal: they shall be punished
with everlasting damnation. Ioh. 3. 36.
The wrath of God abides on him that believes not. Quaedam peccata mortalia
in poenitentia fiunt venialia. Mag. Sentent, lib. 4. did. 20.
Besides, the true Believer, though he may fall into many sins, will
impenitently lie in no sin. So as such sins as in another would incur
death, and prove mortal, in him by repentance become venial, and are pardoned.

3. Concerning comparison of sins, it cannot be denied that some sins are
very small, as a by-thought in an holy duty, an idle word, a little tap with
the hand; and that other sins are very heinous, as blasphemy, perjury,
murder, adultery and such like. Therefore comparatively smaller sins may
be styled venial, in relation to heinous and notorious sins, which are
called mortal, in that they do more apparently and more deeply implunge into
death and damnation. Thus all Ecclesiastical Writers, both ancient and modern,
have used this distinction.

4. Concerning the Churches manner of proceeding against sinners, many sins
do daily pass from men, which* though by Ministers they be reproved, and Gods
judgments be denounced against them, yet pass not under the Churches public
censure. These have been called venial. There are other sins which even
before men seem so intolerable, as the Church thinks not the committers of
them worthy to be admitted to the holy ordinances of God, but denounces
against them some public censure of suspention, excommunication, or execration
and anathema, till public repentance be manifested, and satisfaction given to
the Church. Thus because one of the Church of Corinth had committed such
fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, 1. Cor. 5. 1* 5.
Saint Paul delivered him to Satan. These sins worthy of such censure, have
been called mortal.

But as our Adversaries use the distinction of venial and mortal sin, Sin
not veni all in its own nature.
it cannot stand with the forenamed nature of sin, employed under this
Metaphor Debt. They say that many sins are Rhem. annot. on Romans 1. 32.
venial, because they are pardonable of their own nature, and not worthy of
damnation. They give these and such like instances of venial sins: Sudden
motions of lust, B^llar. de Stat. pecl. 1. cap. 3.
anger, and envy: Immoderate laughter, an idle word, deceit in a small thing,
as an halfe-peny, etc. Their great Champian does thus express the meaning of
their Church in this point: Veniale peccalum ex natura sua distinguitura
mortali, ac sinc vlla relatione vel ad Praedestinationem, vel ad miscricordiom
Dei, vel ad statum ren^lorum, est eiusmodi, vt poenam aeternam non mereatur.
Bellar. de Stat. pec. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Venial sin is in its own nature distinguished from mortal, and without
any respect to predestination, or to the mercy of God, or to the state of the
regenerate, it is of that kind, as it deserves not eternal punishment. He
inserteth these phrases ( without respect to Predestination, or to the mercy of
God, or to the state of the regenerate) because orthodoxall Divines have
granted that the title venial, may be applied to sin in regard of Gods
eternal predestination, and purpose to pardon sin, and in regard of the
mercy of God, which is greater then the desert of sin, and in regard of the
regenerate, whose faith gains an absolution for sin. To show therefore,
that he and his heretical Church, whose cause he maintains, goes beyond
the limits of all truth, he rejects the forenamed limitations wherein truth
is bounded: and will have ventall sins to be of themselves in their own
nature not worthy of damnation. In their sense, these two terms, Sin,
Venial, are contradictorie, Sin is (according to the doctrine of the
Scripture) worthy of damnation. V^niall (according to their sense) is not
worthy fo damnation. Romans 6. 23.
To say therefore that sin is venial, is to say that worthy of damnation, is
not worthy of damnation. But I demand, are their venial sins pleasing or
displeasing to God? one of them they must be. A mean cannot be given betwixt
these two contradictorie terms, which is neither of them. They dare not say
that venial sins are pleasing to God. Then do they displease him. If they
displease him they offend an infinite goodness, an infinite excellency, an
infinite Majesty, and in that respect are worthy of an infinite punishment.

As for their own instances of venial sins:

1. The suddennest motions that can be, though no consent should be yielded to
them, are against the first and last commandments. Besides, the perfect Law of
God is spiritual. It requires integrity in the innermost parts, even in the
spirits of men The forementioned thoughts are against spiritual integrity:
and in that respect against the Law: and deserve the curse thereof. Yea further
the secretest and suddennest thoughts, are acts and motions of the soul: as
manifest to God as outward actions of the body. If therefore they be evil,
they are in his sight apparent transgressions. As for motions to lust, though
never so sudden at the very sight of a woman, Math. 5. 22, 28.
Christ accounts them a kind of adultery. And motions to anger he
accounts a kind of murder. But Adultery and Murder are against the Law,
and deserve the curse of the Law.

2. Of idle words, Christ says, Math. 12. 36.
Men shall give account at the Day of Judgment. When the account is taken,
shall idle words at the bar of that Judgment be approved, or condemned? To
say they shall be approved, were much to impeach the perfection of Christ's
purity and justice If then they be condemned, eternal death is their due.
There is then no other penalty to be inflicted. All standing at that Bar, are
pronounced blessed, or denounced cursed.

3. For stealth of an halfe-penny, does the Law which says, Thou shall not
steal, exclude halfe-pennies or no? If no, where is the exception. The words
are indefinite, Thou shall not steal. He that steals an halfe-penny,
steals. In stealing an halfepeny therefore he is a transgressor of the Law,
and guilty of the penalty and curse thereof.

To conclude, God shall bring every work into judgment, Eccl. 12. 14.
with every secret thing whether it be good or evil. The smallest things that
can be imagined are comprised under these phrases every ^orke, every secret
thing. If they be brought to judgment, it is either to be rewarded, or
revenged. If they be good, to be rewarded. For a cup of cold water only given
to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple shall in no wise lose his reward. Math.
10. 42.
But if they be evil, to be revenged. If at the Day of Judgment they be
revenged, surely the revenge is eternal death. But venial sins are evil, not
good. They shall therefore be brought into judgment, condemned, and punished
with eternal death. I speak of sins not repented of: not washed away by the
blood of Christ: of sins as they are in their own nature, in their own
desert. For so stands the controversy betwixt us and Papists.

. 1. Learn to know sin.
116. Of duties to be observed because every sin is mortal.
THe knowledge of the nature of every sin, 2. Avoid sin.
and of the due desert thereof, 3. Be not accessarie to others sins.
ought to make us diligent in searching into the Law of God, that thereby we
may know what is sin (for Romans 3. 20.
by the Law is the knowledge of sin.) And knowing sin, carefully and
conscionably to avoid it: (For Romans 6. 23.
the wages of sin is death: 4. Repent.
) And no way make our selves accessarie to the sins of others (for so Ezekiel.
3. 18.
we bring the blood of others upon our own heads. 5. Search our selves.
) And if we have committed sin our selves, or made our selves accessarie to
the sins of others, 6. Get a discharge.
not to sooth our consciences with the smalnesse thereof, and thereupon remain
secure, 7. Be watchful.
not caring to repent thereof. ( Luke 13. 3.
Except ye repent ye shall perish.) To work the more through repentance we
ought thoroughly to search our selves, 8. Contemn the reproaches of preciseness.
and from time to time strictly to 1. Cor. 11. 28.
examine our thoughts, words, and actions. And as we discern any
transgressions or alterations in any of them, instantly to crave pardon for
them. Yea because we cannot be ignorant that many sins unawares pass from
us, to desire a general discharge of all other sins (which two points are
expressly noted in this fifth Petition.) As we crave pardon for all sins
past, so ought we to be Ioh. 5. 14.
watchful over our selves for the time to come, even so watchful as to 1.
These. 5. 22.
abstain from all appearance of evil: Not 2. Sam. 6. 21, 22 Peccata ignoran
tiae vel negligen tiae melius accusantur vt pereant, quam excusantur vt
maneant. Aug. in Psalm. 105.
regarding the common scoffs against preciseness, as the world terms
Christian, careful and conscionable watchfulness over a man's self. Commonly
the wickeder sort do most justify themselves: Ipsa leuia non contemnantur. De
minutis guttis flumina implentur. Per angustas vimulas insudat aqua, na^is
impletur sentina, and si contemnatur sentina, nauis mergitur. Aug. hom. 42. in
lib. 50. Hom.
and the upright most judge themselves. The upright use to judge themselves for
their very ignorances and negligences. And surely sins of ignorance or
negligence, were better be judged that they may be destroyed, then excused,
that they should be nourished. For Eccl. 12. 14.
every thing must be brought to judgment: and Mat. 12. 36.
of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give an account in the
day of judgment. Let not therefore, the small sins be slighted. Floods are
made with small drops. Water soaketh through small chinks, the ship is therewith
filled, and if the pump be not plied the ship is drowned.

. 117. Of the many debts wherein we stand bound to Gods justice.
Q. WHy are debts set down so indefinitely in the plural number?

A. Iam. 2. 3.
Our debts are many. Our sins are of sundry sorts: Amos 5. 12.
and of every sort there are many in number. First original corruption, which
is the seed and spawne of all sins, is a debt. (...) Cyril. Catech. mist. 5.
Thereby forfeiture is made of that integrity wherein God at first created us,
and which Gods Law, that is spiritual, requires of us. Psalm. 51. 5.
This does David expressly reckon up among those sins and debts whereof he
desires to be discharged. Besides all the sins which in our infancy, and
younger years, even before our calling, which on ignorance or weakness we
committed, are debts: in which respect Heb. 9. 7.
the high Priest offered for the errors of the people. These are so many, as
David was moved thereby to say, Psalm. 19. 12.
Who can understand his errors? Yet because they were debts, even the secretest
of them, he desires to be cleansed from them. Much greater debts are the sins
which we commit after we come to riper years, or after our calling, against
knowledge and conscience, wilfully and presumptuously. Earnestly therefore does
David pray to be Psalm. 19. 13.
kept from presumptuous sins. So many are the sins whereby, as by debts, we
stand obliged to the justice of God, as they cannot possibly be all reckoned
up. But the word DEBTS being indefinitly set down in the plural number
without restraint to any sorts of sins, import all sins.

Q. What instruction does this implying of many sins import?

A. Notice is to be taken of the manifold sins whereby we stand indebted to
God. Take notice of the multitude of sins.
Surely those Saints of old did enter into a deep consideration hereof, who
acknowledged that Ezr. 9. 6.
their iniquities increased over their head, Psa^. 38. 4.
and grew up unto the heavens, and were an heavy burden, too heavy for them
to bear.

By taking through and due notice of our many several sins

1. Our souls will be the more Psalm. 38. 3. 4, etc.
wounded, Isa. 66. 2.
and humbled for them. Math. 11. 28.
The benefit whereof will be, that Psalm. 51. 17.
God will be the more moved with pity and compassion toward us.

2. Our desire of discharge will be the more Psalm. 51. 1.
fervent. Dan. 9. 19.
Whereby the Lord will the rather be moved to grant our desire. Iam. 5. 16.
The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.

3. The Nehe. 9. 17.
long-suffering of God in bearing with so many sins, so many ways committed
against him, and from time to time heaped one upon another will be the better
discerned.

4. The Exo. 32. 31, 32
riches of Gods mercy in forgiving not a few pence, nor yet a few talents, but
Math. 18. 24.
many thousand talents will be the more admired and magnified: and he himself
the more loved. Luke 7. 47.
She that had many sins forgiven, loved much.

Little do they consider the necessity of this doctrine, who never think of
their sins, or of seeking any discharge, but when they have committed some
heinous notorious sin, which brings them to some open shame, and then
acknowledge that sin only, as if, that excepted, they were clean from all
sin. I deny not, but that good use may be made of fastening the mind upon
one principal sin, which seems most horrible to the conscience, and makes
the party most ashamed, and whereby he conceiueth Gods wrath to be most
provoked, as the Israelites, who said, 1. Sam. 12. 19.
We have added to all our sins THIS EVIL: and Ezra, who said, Ezr. 9. 14.
Should we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the
people of these abominations? And David, where he said, Psalm. 51. 14.
Deliver me from bloud-guiltinesse. For by this means our corruption and
vileness will appear in our sight much greater. Yet are we not to rest only
in acknowledgement of such sins alone. If we observe the forenamed
confessions of Ezra and David we shall find many other sins reckoned up.

Let us therefore learn how to set our sins in order before God. To this
purpose we have two excellent helps. One without us. The other within us. That
without us is Gods Law. That within us is our Conscience. Gods Law shows what
is amiss. Our Conscience shows what we have done amiss. Apply thy
Conscience to the Law, and thou shall find thy self guilty of an innumerable
company of heinous sins. These acknowledge: and having acknowledged what
debts thou can call to mind, and in particular craved pardon for them; then
because many sins daily pass from thee, whereof thou take no notice, pray
in general for pardon of all, and say as the Psalmist, Psalm. 39. 8.
Deliver me from all my transgressions. The burden of the least sin is too
heavy for thee to bear, it is sufficient to crush thee down to the place of
the damned. Were it possible to be eased of all but only one, that one
retained would hold thee in everlasting chains under darkness. It is
therefore necessary that a discharge of all sins be had.

Hitherto of the thing acknowledged DEBTS. The appropriation of them in this
word OUR follows.

. 118. Of the appropriation of sin to our selves.
Q. IN what respect are the debts here mentioned styled OURS?

A. As they arise from our selves, and as we are the true and proper cause of
them, even the principal authors and practisers of them. This particle of
relation OUR is here used in another sense then it was in the former Petition.
See. 84.
There bread was called OURS because it was given to us of God, Nemo habet de
suo nisi mendaciu^ and peccatum. Council. Araus. can. 22.
and by that gift we had a right to it. Here sins are called OURS, because
they proceed from us: in which respect nothing is so properly OURS as sin.

Q. What learn we from this application of debts to our selves?

A. We are the proper cause of the sins which we commit. On this ground
says the Prophet, Hos. 13. 9.
O Israel thou have destroyed thy self.

Sin is a voluntary action: and the will of man is free, so as it cannot be
forced to sin: as we shall See. 282.
hereafter more fully declare. Nemo se palpet: de suo Sathanas est. Toll
peccatu^ quod est tuum. Aug. in Ioh. tract 49.
Only hereby learn, that no man has cause cause to sooth or flatter
himself. Of himself man is as bad as may be. Sin being thine, take that
away which is thine own.

The thing acknowledged ( Debts) and appropriation of them ( our) being noted,
the kind of discharge ( Forgive) is to be declared.

. 119. Of Gods free and full discharge of man's debt.
Q. What does this word FOR GIVE import?

A. Freely and fully to discharge a debt. Freely without any satisfaction on
our part. Fully without any reservation of any part of the debt to be exacted
of us: but rather such an acceptance, as if we never had been in any debt at
all.

To forgive, is so to pass by an offense as neither to exact nor to expect any
thing, either in way of recompense, or in way of punishment forit. Both
recompense and punishment are counted a kind of satisfaction, which is directly
contrary to remission. It is noted of the servant whose debt the Lord forgave,
Mat. 18. 25, 27.
that he had nothing to pay: no recompense therefore was given: yet was he not
imprisoned: no punishment therefore was taken. But that servant that imprisoned
his fellow-seruant, forgave not the debt, and yet he received no part of the
debt. For imprisonment is a punishment: and punishment is a kind of payment,
which he that is punished is said Poenas pendere, expendere, dependere, dare,
persoluere, luere. (...).
to pay.

Again, though a man actually exact nothing for a debt, or an offense, yet if
he bear a reuengefull mind, or a grudging heart, he is not thought truly to
forgive. Nay if he be not as good friends with the debtor or offender, as if he
never had had ought against him, he does not truly forgive him, but only to
teeth outward, as we speak. But Gods forgiving is as true, full, and every way
perfect as possibly can be: and therefore as it expects no satisfaction, so
it is accompanied with as gracious an acceptance, as if no sin had been
committed.

. 120. Of the concurrence of Gods mercy and justice in the discharge of man's
debt.
Q. CAn it stand with strictness of Justice so freely and fully to acquit
sinners?

A. 1. It is not against justice that he who has an absolute and supreme power
over all, and is to give an account to none, should freely forgive any thing
which is any way due to himself, whether it be duty or penalty. Exodus 33. 19.
I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy, says this supreme Lord. And
again, Math. 20. 15.
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?

2. Christ our Surety in our stead, and for us has Gal. 3. 13.
endured that penalty which we by sin deserved, and Romans 5. 19.
fulfilled all that righteousness which we owed.

2. Q. Can satisfaction and remission stand together?

A, Yes, in three cases.

1. When Luke 7. 42.
the party forgiven neither does nor can make any satisfaction. Psalm. 143. 2.
Such are we in regard of that debt which we owe to God. No satisfaction
therefore is exacted of us in our own person.

2. When his Son, who forgiueth, makes the satisfaction. Such a Surety have
we, who has made satisfaction for our sins: even Ioh. 3. 16.
the only begotten Son of God, who is true God. So as God has made
satisfaction to God. Romans 8. 32.


3. When he who forgiueth, is no further bound to accept the satisfaction
which he does accept, Heb. 6. 17.
then by his own promise. What other bond can be alleged to bind God, then
that whereby he has voluntarily bound himself. So as all on Gods part is most
free. Freely he gave his Son a ransom. Freely he imputes what his Son
did and suffered, to us. Freely he accepts us in his Son. Freely he
acquitteth our debt. Hereupon Ephesians. 1. 7.
the Apostle joins our Redemption by Christ's blood, Remission of sins, and
the riches of Gods Grace altogether: implying thereby that neither of these
cross the other, but that all of them may and do stand together. Christ's
satisfaction is so far from impeaching the freeness of Gods grace, as it
does the more commend the same. For it is much more grace, and far greater
mercy in God, not to spare his only begotten Son, but to give him for
sinners, then upon his absolute prerogative without any satisfaction at all to
forgive sinners. Christ, the Son of Gods love, is more highly esteemed of God
then any satisfaction can be. But by the satisfaction which the Son of God
has made, there is manifested a perfect concurrence of infinite mercy, and
absolute justice: and the freeness of Gods grace is clearly manifested, and
highly magnified thereby.

. 121. Of man's disabilitie to discharge his debt.
Q. WHat doctrine does this word FORGIVE imply?

A. Man is not able to himself to discharge the debt of sin. If he were,
what need forgiveness? This is the reason why the Psalmist desires God not to
enter into judgment with him, Psalm. 143. 2.
because no man living can be justified in his sight, namely of and by
himself. From Gods forgiving of sin the Apostle gathers, Romans 4. 5, 6.
that man is not justified by works that is, by any thing which he himself
can do.

The recompense which is to be given for discharge of the debt of sin, must
be of infinite value and worth. For sin being committed against an infinite
majesty, provoke infinite wrath, and so becomes an infinite debt. Can a
finite creature, as man is, Mat. 16. 26.
give a recompense of such worth? What shall a man give in exchange for his
soul?

Nay, man has by sin utterly deprived himself of all manner of ability to
do any thing that in any respect might carry any show of recompense. Ephesians. 2. 1.
He is dead in sin: Not sufficient of himself so much as to think any thing
as of himself. 2. Cor. 3. 5.


But if it were granted that man were able of himself to do somewhat, what is
that to God unto whom the recompense must be made? Ioh. 22. 2, 3.
Can a man be profitable unto God? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that
thou art righteous? Or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect?
-- 35. 7.
If thou be righteous what give thou to him? Or what receives he of thine
hand?

. 122. Of Popish Satisfaction.
DEtestable in this respect are many positions of Papists concerning man's
satisfaction for sin, by punishments voluntarily undertaken, Council. Trid..
14 de oper. satisfact. cap. 9.
or imposed by Priests, or inflicted by God: and concerning the merit of works
whereby the guilt of temporal punishment for sin may be removed.

Some of the chiefest of those positions I will set down in the words of their
great Champion: because the very expression of them is a sufficient refutation
of them.

The Council of Trent does teach that God is satisfied three ways, Bellarm.
de Poenit. lib. 4. cap. 4.
By bearing patiently the punishments and scourges which are inflicted by God,
Concilium Tridentinu^ docet tribus modis Deo satufieri, Poen^^ and flagella a
deo immissa patienter ferends, opera laboriosa sponte assumendo, and mulctam
sacerdotum arbitrio iniunctam subeundo.

Satisfactio nostra requiritur, vt iniuria deo facta compensetur, and diuina
iustitiae satisfiat.

Debemus satisfacere per ea bona quae nostra sunt. Satisfactio condigna esse
debet, and eam proportione^ c^ peccato exigere, vt vere per eam offensio
co^pensetur Per opera poenalia vere ac proprie deo satisfit pro reatu paenae
qui post culpam dimissam remanet expiandus.

Accedente gratia dei vere possumus aliquo modo ex proprijs, and ad
aequalitatem, ac per hoc just, and ex condigno satisfacere.

Habemus opera propria and indebita quibus pro iniuria satisfaciamus.


By undertaking of our own accord laborious works, and By undergoing the
penalty imposed by the censure of Priests.

Our Satisfaction is required, Ibid. cap. 9.
that the wrong done to God may be recompensed, and the divine justice
satisfied.

We must satisfy by those good works which are ours. Ibid. cap. 6.


Satisfaction must be worthy, Ibid. cap. 9.
and it must keep such a proportion with sin, as the offense may be truly
recompensed by it.

By paenall works satisfaction is made to God, Ibid. cap. 7.
truly and properly for that guilt of punishment which remains to be expiated
after the fault is forgiven.

Gods grace assisting, Ibid.
we may after a certain manner truly satisfy out of that which is our own,
even to equality, and in that respect justly and of desert.

We have works of our own, Ibid.
whereunto we are not bound, by which we may satisfy for wrong done to God.

Our works as they come from the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us have a
certain infiniteness, Ibid.
and thereby also a certain equality with the wrong whereby we had troubled
God by sinning.

Full remission of sin, Ibid. cap. 15.
so much as concerns all guilt of punishment, Opera nostra vta Spiritu
Christi in nobis habtant procedunt, quandam habent infinitatem, ac per hoc
etiam quandam aequalitatem cum iniuria qua deum peccando affeceramus.

Plena peccati remissio, quoad omnem poenae reatum, premium est bonorum operum
quae satisfactoria dici solent.

Opera laboriosa prosunt ad culpae remissimem, and mortis aeternae liberationem.


is the reward of those good works which are wont to be called satisfactorie.

Laborious works are profitable Ibid. cap. 12.
for remission of sin, and for deliverance from eternal death.

If by these and such like positions, that which is due to the all sufficient
satisfaction of Christ be not attributed to man, let any indifferent reader
judge. Can the things which in these positions are avouched, of recompencing
wrong done to God, of satisfying the divine justice, of a condign, or worthy
satisfaction, of satisfying truly and properly, to an equality, justly,
condignely, and that out of our own works whereunto we are not bound, of a
certain infiniteness of our works, and a certain equality with the wrong
whereby we have troubled God by sinning, of full remission of sin to be the
reward of fatisfactorie works, of the profit of laborious works for remission
of sin, and deliverance from eternal death, Can these things stand with Gods
infinite justice, with man's disabilitie to any good thing, with man's
unworthiness, and with the imperfection of man's best works? Then may light
and darkness in their most extreme degrees, then may the Ark of God, and
Dagon, then may Grace and Works stand together: and yet the Apostle says, If
by grace, Romans 11. 6.
then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace. But if of
works, then it is no more grace, otherwise work is no more work.

They allege for grounds of the worth of men's works that,

1. They come from the Spirit of Christ.

2. Christ gives the virtue of satisfaction to men's works.

3. Man's satisfaction is not for the fault, but for the punishment.

4. The punishment for which man satisfyeth, is not eternal, but temporal.

To these I briefly answer, that

1. Though the work of the Spirit be pure in it self, yet coming from us it
receives a tincture: As water that coming from a pure fountain passes
through a foul channel. Besides, the Spirit works according to the capacity
of the object, 1. Cor. 13. 12.
not all fullness and perfection at the first, but in part, by degrees.

2. For Christ to give the virtue of satisfaction to men's works, is to make
men Priests, and Saviors: which offices are his glory. Isa. 42. 8.
But he will not give his glory to others.

3. The fault being discharged by Christ, the punishment is also thereby
discharged. Sublata causa tollitur effectus.
For the fault is the cause of punishment. Take away the cause, the effect
follows and falls away. As God said to Adam of the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2.
17, 2. Sam. 12. 13.
In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death: so Nathan said
to David, The Lord has put away thy sin, thou shall not die. His sin being
remitted, the punishment was removed.

4. That satisfaction which takes away the greater punishment, by just
consequence takes away the less. If temporal punishment as well as eternal
were not discharged by Christ's satisfaction, it were not complete, but an
imperfect satisfaction.

But howsoever Papists being pressed by our unanswerable arguments, to avoid
them, do use the forenamed distinctions of satisfying for the punishment, and
no the fault, for the temporal, and not for the eternal punishment: yet in
their forenamed Positions they apply man's satisfaction to the recompencing of
wrong dene to God, to divine justice, to remission of sin, and to deliverance
from eternal death; and thereupon they attribute thereunto a certain
infiniteness, and equality to the wrong wherewith by sinning we have troubled
God. O blasphemy!

. 123. Of humiliation and abnegation.
AS the greatness of the debt wherein man stands obliged to God, so also
man's impotencie, and impossibility to discharge it, aggrauateth that wretched
estate whereinto man by sin is implunged, and gives him much more occasion,
and matter of humiliation. If there were just cause to weep much, Reu. 5. 4.
because no man was found worthy to open the sealed Book; how much more cause
of weeping and mourning is there, that no man is able to cancel the Bills and
Bonds whereby we stand indebted to God, or any way to discharge that debt?

Has not man in this respect just cause also to deny himself, and as a
selfe-condemning Debtor and Malefactor to cast himself down before the
Mercy-Seat of God, and to crave mercy and forgiveness, Math. 18. 26.
as that servant in the Parable who had nothing to pay?

. 124. Of the remissiblenesse of sin.
Q. What doctrine does praying for pardon of the debt of sin afford?

A. Sin is remissible. If it could not be pardoned, it were altogether in
vain to pray for forgiveness. Christ would never have directed and incited us
to pray for that which is not possible to obtain. Mat. 7. 7.
He stirs us up to ask, seek, and knock, on these grounds, It shall be
given you, Ye shall find, It shall be opened unto you.

The true reasons hereof are:

1. The free grace of God. Ephesians. 1. 7.


2. The price that Christ has paid for this debt. 1. Pet. 1. 19.


The knowledge hereof does

1. Minister good ground of much comfort to poor sinners that groan under the
heavy burden of sin. Math. 9. 2.


2. Embolden sinners in faith to seek pardon. 1. Ioh. 1 9.


3. Provoke and encourage them to turn from sin. Ezekiel. 33. 11.


Q. What doctrine may further be gathered from the application of forgiveness,
Psalm. 103. 3.
to debts in the plural number? Quia fidelibus oration ista conuemat, and
Ecclesiae regula ipsa testatur, and ipsius erationis exordium. Chrysostom. hom. 20.
in Math 6.


All the sins of the faithful are remissible. I say, of the faithful,
because they who have right to say to God, Our Father, (which the faithful who
are sons of God only have) are taught thus to pray, and because they by the
continual and powerful assistance of Gods Spirit shall be kept from falling
into the only unpardonable sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost.

As the free grace of God, and the price which Christ has paid are the causes,
that sin is pardonable: so the infinite riches of that grace, Numb. 14. 19.
1. Ioh. 1. 7.
and the all-sufficiencie of that price are the causes that all manner of
sins are likewise pardonable.

Let no sin therefore keep us from seeking pardon. Qui orare nos pro
peccatis docuit paternam misericordiam promisit, et veniam secuturam. Cypr. de
Orat. Dom.. 16.
Well note the gracious inuitation of the Lord, Isay 1. 18. He that has taught
us to pray for pardon of sin, has promised fatherly mercy and pardon to
follow thereupon.

Of these two points, that Sin, and that every sin is remissible: See in my
Treatise of the sin against the Holy Ghost.. 5. and 6.

. 125. Of Gods Prerogative in forgiving sin.
Q. TO whom is this Petition for forgiveness of sin directed.

A, To God. For every Petition has relation to the Preface, and to him that is
there described, which is God only.

Q. What may thence be gathered?

A. 1. God has power to remit sins. Debitorum remissio proprium ac peculiare
Dei munus and officium est. Greg. Nyss. l. de Orat. Mar. 2. 7.


2. God only has that power.

As here, so every where in Scripture we are directed to go to God for pardon:
but no where throughout the whole Scripture to any other. The Jews so firmly
held these doctrines as they accounted it blasphemy for any to arrogate that
power to himself.

Every sin, 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
as a sin is a breach of Gods Law: and in that respect committed against him,
though it be also a wrong done to man. Now God being a supreme Lord over all,
who can be imagined to have power to forgive transgressions against him, and
his Law?

1. This Prerogative shows that Christ is true God. Christ true God.
Had not Christ been God, the Scribes had justly accused him of blasphemy for
taking upon him to forgive sin. Mar. 2. 5, etc.
Christ therefore in answering their slander does not deny their principle,
that God only can forgive sin, but by a visible demonstration proves
himself to be the True God, and thereby discovers their mis-application of
that true principle, whereby they denied to him who was true God, his
Prerogative, and in accusing Christ of blasphemy, they themselves were impious
blasphemers.

. 126. Of Papists blasphemy in giving to men power to forgive sins.
2. THe Pope assuming this Prerogative to himself, Bonif. 8. in Extravag.
Antig. Ioh. de Turrecr. in coment. dict. 1. de poenil.
does thereby show himself to be plain Antichrist. For as by his flatterers
there is given to him, so he assumeth to himself a power of granting
Indulgences, Releases and Pardons for sins past, (...) plenaria, ple^iar,
plenissima.
present, and to come: and of these some are full, some more full and some most
full releases. Yea some of these Releases and, Indulgences are often extended to
more years to come, See. 111.
then can be imagined that the world shall continue.

3. The power of absolution which is also given by the Church of Rome is
derogatorie to the forenamed Prerogative of God, and in that respect
blasphemous. For by the. 14. de. Absol. c. 6. Can. 9.
Council of Trent it is decreed, not to be a ministerial declaration, but a
judicial act of forgiving. Whereupon they infer that Vt flatus extinguit
ignem, and dissipat nebulas, sic Absolutio Sacerdotis peccata dispergit.
Bellar. de Poen. l. 3. c. 2.
as wind does blow out a flame, and drive away clouds, so the absolution of a
Priest does put away sin: and that thereby Ibid. l. 4. c. 9.
both the fault, and also eternal punishment is remitted: and that many are
damned because they die before they are absolved of a Priest. What is this but
to make Priests Gods?

. 127. Of confession of sin to God and Man.
THe forenamed Prerogative of God does plainly show that Auricular confession,
Auricular confession.
as Papists enjoin it, is not absolutely necessary. For they hold that a
particular confession of all a man's sins which he can call to mind is
necessarily to be made in the ear of a Priest, Council. Trid.. 14. c. 5. Can.
6, 7, 8.
and that upon pain of damnation. We deny not a necessity of Confession. For
without confession of sin, no remission, Pro 28. 13. 1. Ioh. 1. 8, 9.
no absolution can be expected. But this absolute necessity must be applied
to confession unto God, whose Prerogative it is to forgive sin. Yea further
we acknowledge a necessity of confession to man: and that both publicly and
privately: and both these either upon iniunction by authority, or upon a man's
own voluntary motion. Public confession is to be made of sins publicly
committed, whereby public offense is given, or public detriment and damage
made. In this case Ios, 19, 20.
Joshua enjoined Achan to confess his sin, and he confessed it. Because Act.
5. 8, 9.
Saphira refused to make confession, being required of Peter to do it, she was
suddenly struck with death? Act. 19. 18.
They of Ephesus that had been notorious sinners voluntarily made public
confession of their sins. Private confession is to be made also in three
cases. 1. When one in authority requires it, as 2. King. 5. 25.
Elisha required his servant Gehazi to do it. 2. When Math. 5 24.
private wrong is done, or offense given to one. 3. When a sin burdeneth the
conscience: on which grouud 2. Sam. 12. 13. Iam. 5. 16.
David made confession to Nathan: and Saint James exhorts all Christians to
confess their sins one to another, that so they may receive the more comfort
by mutual prayer and direction. In this case choice must be made of such
persons as are fit to have secrets made known to them, and able to help and
ease a burdened conscience. Such are men of understanding, discretion,
wisdom and experience, yea such as are faithful, and pitiful, and bear a
loving heart toward the party that comes to them for comfort. Among others,
Ministers are in two respects most fit. 1. Because by their daily study and
practice they are most acquainted with the temptations of Satan, dispositions
of people, and consolations of Gods Word. 2. Because by virtue of their
ministerial function, 2. Cor. 5. 18, 20.
being Ambassadors for Christ, and having the ministry of reconciliation
given to them, the patient may with more assuredness apply to his soul the
promises which they pronounce.

But necessarily to tie every Christian, upon pain of damnation, to make
confession of all the sins whereof he knows himself to be guilty, to the
Priest under whose charge he is, be he never so ignorant, or lewd, is
without all warrant of Gods Word, and against common sense and reason.

. 128. Of confessing sin to God, and seeking pardon of him.
5 FOr the maine duty which arises from the forementioned doctrine
concerning Gods Prerogative in forgiving sin, let us not dare to hide our
sin from God, as Genesis 3. 7, 8.
Adam sought to do, but humbly and penitently confess the same, Job 31. 33.
as Psalm. 32. 5. -- 51. 1, etc.
David, and other Saints of God from time to time have done. This duty is to
be done not so much to make our sins known to God (For he knows them
whether we confess them or no) as to show that we our selves know them, Neh.
9. 3.
take notice of them, Ezr. 9. 6, etc.
feel the burden of them, Dan. 9. 4, etc.
are grieved for them, hate them, desire to be freed from them, and truly
repent of them. Thus will God be moved to take pity of us, and to be
merciful to our sins. God is not like man who takes advantage from the
delinquents confession, according to the Proverb, Confess and be hanged, but
rather from thence takes occasion to show mercy. In relation to God, this may
well come into a Proverb, Confess and be saved. For if we confess our
sins, 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins.

. 129. Of going to God for Pardon.
6. GOds Prerogative to forgive sin does further embolden us to go to him,
and to him only for pardon of sin. In that sin is remissible, and may be
pardoned, we have encouragement to seek for pardon. In that it is God that
forgiueth, we are directed to seek pardon of him. I, even I am he, Isa. 43.
25.
that blotteth out thy transgressions, says the Lord. And well we may be glad
that he reserueth this prerogative to himself. For of whom can we with
greater confidence expect to receive this gracious favor then of him, who is
full of compassion, Psalm. 103. 8.
and gracious, slow to wrath, and plenteous in mercy. Ier, 2. 13. Fateor quia
peccaui, and conscientia mea nou sufficit ad satisfactionem. Sed certum est
quod miseri cordia tua superat omnem offensionem. Aug. Medit. cap. 39.
Let us not therefore leave this fountain of living water, and go to broken
cesternes that can hold no water. As we desire to be discharged of the debt
of sin, so let us seek this discharge of him that is able and ready to give
it. Though we can make no satisfaction, yet his mercy surpasses all our
offenses.

. 130. Of Gods free and full discharge of sin.
Q. What doctrine arises from the kinds of discharge implied under the word
FORGIVE?

A. The discharge which God gives is See. 119.
a free and full discharge, It must needs be free, because in man there can be
nothing to procure it. Nay out of God there is nothing to move him to do it.
Isa. 43. 25. -- 48. 9.
I blot out transgressions, says the Lord, for mine own sake. And again, For
my names sake will I defer mine anger. Mic. 7. 18.
He retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy.
Benigniffima Diuinitatis natura liberaliter agit, ignoscit plenarie. Bern. de
Euan. 7. pan. Sermon. 3.
That the discharge also which God gives is full, is evident by the many
Metaphors used in Scripture to set it out: Such are these that follow.

1. I am he that BLOTTETH OVT thy transgressions, says the Lord. This
Metaphor is taken from Creditors, who when they purpose never to exact a debt,
Isa. 43. 25.
will blot it out of their books. After that a Debt is stricken out of a Bill,
Bond, or Book, it can not be exacted: the evidence can not be pleaded.

2 I have put away thy transgressions as a cloud, Isa 44. 22.
and thy sins as a mist, says the same Lord. We know that the clouds which
are driven away by the winds appear no more, nor the mist which is dried up by
the Sun. Other clouds, other mists may arise: but not they which are driven
away and dried up. Thus the sins which God forgiueth return not again.

3. The same Lord says, Though your sins be as skarlet, they shall be as
white as show; Isa. 1. 18.
though they be red like crimson, they shall be as woll. Skarlet and crimson
are double and deep dies, dies in grain, yet if the cloth died therewith be
as the wool before it was died, if it be as white as snow, what is become of
those dies? Are they any more? Is not the cloth as if it had not been died at
all? Even so, though our sins, by reiterating them, by long lying in them,
have deeply seized into us, yet by Gods discharge of them, we are as if we
never had committed them.

4. Ye are washed, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
says the Apostle. By washing the filth of things is clean taken away.

5. Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back, Isa. 38. 17.
says Hezekiah to God. That which a man would not look on, or regard, that he
casts behind his back. The sins which God forgiueth he will have as out of
his sight, which he means no more to meddle withal.

6. Thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea, Mic. 7. 19.
says Micah to the Lord. When a man would have a thing utterly gone, he will
cast it into the bottom of the sea, from whence there is no fetching it
again. So deals the Lord with the sins which he forgiueth.

7. The Psalmist pronounces him blessed whose sin is covered. Psalm. 32. 1.
A thing covered is not seen. So sin forgiven is before God as not seen.

8. The same Psalmist pronounces him blessed to whom the Lord imputes not
sin. Psalm. 32. 2.
A sin not imputed is as not committed.

9. The Prophet says of sin forgiven, Ier. 50. 20.
that it shall be sought for and not found. Is not that fully discharged which
shall never be found, never appear?

10. God himself says, Ier. 31. 34.
I will remember their sin no more. Surely that which God will not remember,
he has fully discharged.

Finally, Romans 4. 6, 7.
the man is pronounced blessed whose sin is forgiven. If the discharge were
not full, how could the party discharged be by virtue thereof blessed?

Forgiveness being an Act of God, it must needs be both free and full. For
whatsoever God does, he does freely for himself, without any former desert,
without expectation of any future recompense. No creature can deserve any thing
at his hands: much less can sinners and rebels. Neither can any creature give
any reward or recompense to him: as he needs none, nor expects any, so he
can receive nothing which is not his own.

. 131. Of Merit of Congruitie.
THe Romans 11. 6. Illis operibusquae ex fide and gratta proficiscuntur fa temur
nos mereri remissionem pec colorum. Bellar. Indic. de lib. concor. Mend. 8.
Idem de Iustif. l. 5. c. 22.
free discharge of God directly excludes all merit of man. For that which is
done for merit is not freely done. Meritum de congruo and condigno Bellar. de
Poenit. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Papists who maintain man's merit, not only for his salvation after this life,
but also for his justification in this life, and for remission of sins,
think to salve up all by a distinction of merit of Congruitie or meetnesse,
and condignitie or desert and worth. They say that merit of condignitie
follows justification: but merit of Congruitie goes before it, and meriteth
and obtains both remission of sins and justification. The whole Armor of
God Treat. 2. Part. 4.. 7. on Ephesians. 6. 14
Of that merit of condignitie I have elsewhere spoken: neither is it pertinent
to this place.

For merit of Congruitie:

1. Though it be taken in the fairest interpretation that can be, yet can it
not stand with free grace, with mere mercy: but it much impaireth the same.

2. When they expound their own meaning, they acknowledge that remission of
sins and justification is due as a recompense or reward to the said merit of
Congruitie. For, say they, To every merit a reward answers: as there is a
merit of Congruitie, so also a reward of Congruitie. Omni merito respondet
merces. Sicut meritum est ex congruo, ita merces ex congruo. Bellar. de Iustif.
lib. 1. cap. 21.
And the merit of Congruitie is rather founded in some dignity of the work,
then in the promise of God. Does not their own exposition of Congruitie make
it a plain condignitie and desert.

3. When God first acquitteth and justifies a sinner, he finds in him no
congruitie, Fundatur meritum de congruo potius in aliqua dignitate ope^s quam
in promissione. Ibid.
to meetnesse to receive mercy, but rather an enemie-like, Romans 5. 10.
and rebellious disposition against him. For when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.
And, God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love, wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead in sin, quickened us.

. 132. Of Popish satisfactions for sins remitted.
GOds full discharge of sin excludes all remainder of punishment to be
endured in this world, or elsewhere by way of satisfaction for the sin
forgiven. For it any satisfaction remain to be done, the discharge is not
full. Derogatory therefore to the absolute fullness of Gods discharge is the
doctrine of our Adversaries in this point. For they hold that after sin is
forgiven, Council. Trid.. 6. cap. 14. and. 14. cap. 12.
there may remain a guilt of punishment to be satisfied for, sometimes in this
life, sometimes in another life, namely in Purgatory, sometimes in both.
Bellar. de Purg. lib. 2. cap. 1. and 9. and de Poenit. l. 4. cap. 2.
But by such punishments for sin, sin would again be called to mind and
memory, to view and sight, to reckoning and account, which cannot stand with
the forementioned Scripture phrases of not remembering, not imputing, covering,
casting behind the back, casting into the bottom of the sea, blotting out,
etc. We deny not but that Saints whose sins are forgiven, may
notwithstanding be punished in this life (as for the fiction of Purgatory it
deserves rather to be hissed at, then by arguments refuted) but withal we
say, that those punishments are neither expiatorie, nor satisfactorie, nor yet
vindictiue for sin. If they were, Christ's expiation, satisfaction, and
suffering might be thought insufficient. The punishments which are inflicted on
them whose sins are forgiven, Dolor medicinalis, non sententia poenalis. Aug.
in Psalm. 138.
are as a medicinable corsiue, but not a judicial revenge.

. 133. Of the comfort that arises from Gods free and full discharge.
THe free and full discharge which God gives of sin, Deus sic ex toto
indulsit, and tam liberaliter omnem donauit iniuriam, vt iam non damnet
vlciscendo, nec confun^at improperando, nec minus diligat imputando. Ber. de
Euang 7. pan. Sermon. 3
is a most sound and sovereign ground of comfort to such as by faith rightly
can apply the same to their own souls. For so freely and fully does God remit
all offense, that neither by revenging it, does he condemn us: nor by
vpbraiding it confound us: nor by imputing it the less love us.

A due consideration of our many heinous sins cannot but astonish us, and
make us ashamed to appear in the presence of God for pardon of them: but
knowledge of the free grace of God, (who of himself, for himself, for his
own names sake pardons sin) and faith therein, emboldeneth poor sinners
to draw near to the Throne of Grace, and to cast themselves down before Gods
mercie-seate for pardon, Dan. 9. 18.
and to say, We do not present our supplications before thee for our
righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies.

Again, knowledge of the desert of sin, how the least sin deserves the
wrath of God, and the least degree of Gods wrath is an unsupportable burden,
cannot but affright the soul of a sinner through the apprehension of any
vindictiue punishment to be endured for sin. What then can remain to
satisfy the poor sinner, but faith in Gods full discharge? The promises of
God being the ground of our faith, good ground we have to believe that
according to the forenamed promises, our sins, which we have humbly and
penitently confessed, and for which we have craved pardon, are freely and
fully discharged. If upon our own true humiliation, and hearty supplication
we did believe this, what comfort, what peace might be brought to our souls
thereby? Let us the efore often meditate on the forenamed grounds of faith, that
our faith thereby may be the more established, and our consciences the more
quieted.

The thing acknowledged, DEBTS,

The appropriation of them, OUR,

The kind of discharge, FORGIVE, have hitherto been handled.

The parties to be discharged, US, are now to be considered.

. 134. Of praying for the pardon of our own sins especially.
Q. Who are comprised under this particle Us?

A. We our selves, and others. The first person includes our selves. The
plural number extends this Petition to others.

Q. What doctrine may thence be gathered?

A. Pardon is to be sought for our own and others sins. Of seeking pardon
for our own sins no question can be made. Holy men of God guided by the
Spirit of God have done this in particular, even in the singular number for
themselves. Put away MINE iniquity, Psalm. 51. 1, 2, 7.
Cleanse ME from MY sin, wash ME, Purge ME, says the Psalmist.

Love begins at home. If any duty of love be to be showed to our selves, then
this especially above all other. For if sin be not pardoned, what can be
comfortable, what can be beneficial and profitable to us?

The application of this point concerns not only such as (through ignorance
of that fearful estate wherein they lie by sin, or a prophaine neglect of
this holy and heavenly duty of prayer) never call upon God for this or any
other blessing, in their own or others behalf: but also, and that more
especially such, as through some violent temptation, and deep apprehension of
Gods indignation against them, are afraid to pray for pardon of their own
sins, and yet can heartily pray for the pardon of others sins. These must
be well instructed in this privilege that is here afforded unto us: and in
that respect which God has to the particular prayer which is made by a
penitent soul in his own behalf. Ezekiel. 14. 15.
God often hears one praying for himself, when he hears him not praying for
others: but we never heard of any accepted for others, that were not accepted
for themselves. Every ones prayer is most available for himself. Let the mind
that such have to pray for others, provoke them to pray first for pardon of
their own sins. For till a man's sins be pardoned, he cannot expect any
blessing on others by his prayers.

. 135. Of praying for pardon of others sins.
THat prayer is to be made for others has been. 14. and 92.
before showed. If for any other blessing we ought to pray in the behalf of
others, then most of all for the pardon of their sins, the greatest blessing,
if the extent of it be well observed, that in this world can be obtained for
them. This was it for which Moses so earnestly prayed in the behalf of the
Israelites: Exodus 32. 32. Job 1. 5.
and for which Job offered up sacrifices in the behalf of his children. That
express precept which the Apostle gives of praying for others, has especial
relation to their sins, as the reason imports in these words, Iam. 5. 14,
15, 16
If he have committed sins they shall be forgiven him.

That reason is a reason of great weight: Iam. 5. 20.
for by obtaining pardon of sin for another, ae soul is saved from death.
What a privilege, what an honor is this to a Christian, that he should be a
means of saving his brothers soul? What a benefit does he thereby bring to
his brother? The Scripture gives us many instances of the benefit of prayer in
this kind: namely, that it has been a means of obtaining pardon for many
sinners: and of preventing or removing many judgments from them. Witness the
Exo. 32. 11. etc
many prayers which Moses made for the Israelites when they had sinned against
God: Number. 14. 19, 20.
and in particular for Number. 12. 13.
Miriam. Witness also 2. Chro. 30. 18, 20.
the prayer which Hezekiah made for the people that came unprepared to the
Passe-ouer: and Job 42. 8, 9.
the prayer which Job made for his friends that spoke not of God the thing that
was right. No doubt but Compare Luke 23 24. with Act. 2. 38, 41. and 4. 4.
the prayer which Christ made on the cross for them that so euilly entreated
him, was a means that many thousand Jews anon after his ascension were
converted, and had their sins pardoned. The like may be said of Act. 7. 60.
Stephens prayer.

Not only to others may much good be brought by a conscionable performance of
this duty, but to our selves also. For our faith in the pardon of our own
sins will be much strengthened thereby. By praying for the pardon of others
sins we shall the better acquaint our selves with the extent of Gods
promises, which are the holy oil to make the lamp of our faith to continue
her light.

Learn we hereby to take notice of others sins as well as of our own. Take
we notice of the public open sins of the times and places where we live, of
those among whom we converse, but especially of those who are under our charge.
And as we observe them, we ought to be humbled for them, to make confession of
them to God, and supplication for pardon of them. Ezra 9. 3. etc.
Hereof we have Romans 14. 19.
many excellent patterns in Gods Neh. 1. 6. etc. -- 9. 16 etc.
word. Dan. 9. 5. etc.


In performance of this duty let our minds be especially fixed on the sins
of those who are under our charge: and to whom we are by some special bonds
linked: as Job who prayed for his Job 1. 5.
children and -- 42. 9.
friends: and Exo. 32. 32.
Moses for the people under his charge. It is meet also to enlarge our prayer,
so as the inhabitants of the Parish, Town, City, and Nation wherein we live
may be comprised therein: as Dan. 9. 7, 8, 9.
Daniel who confessed the sins of Jerusalem, Judah, and all Israel, and craved
pardon for the same Here we ought especially to be mindful of the sins of
our Governors, and Ministers, as Neh. 9. 34.
the Leuits were of the sins of their Princes and Priests. Finally, our
prayers in this respect must be extended to our enemies: for which we have both
the Mat. 5. 44.
precept, and Luke 23. 34.
pattern of Christ, and the pattern of the Acts 7. 60.
first Christian Martyr.

Hitherto of the substance of the fifth Petition. The condition annexed thereto
follows.

. 136. Of man's forgiving another.
Q. Which are the words wherein the Condition annexed to the fifth Petition is
expressed?

A. As we forgive our debtors.

Q. What are the distinct points here to be considered?

A. 1. The Duty required, FORGIVE.

2. The Persons tied thereto, WE.

3. The Parties to whom it is to be performed, DEBTORS.

4. The Restraint thereof, OUR.

5. The Resemblance, As.

In setting down the duty we are to note

1. Wherein it consists.

2. When it is to be performed.

Q. What is the maine duty here required?

A. Mon must forgive one another. Many precepts of Scripture tend hereunto: as,
Mat. 5. 39.
Resist not evil. Romans 12. 19.
Avenge not your selves. Col. 3. 13.
Forbear one another. Forgive one another. Romans 12. 21.
Overcome evil with goodness. And answerable have the practice of the Saints
been from time to time. Instance Genesis 50. 17, 20.
Joseph, Number. 12. 13.
Moses, 2. Sam. 19. 23.
David, Gal. 4. 12.
Paul, and others like them.

This is an especial property of a Saint, Iam. 3. 17.
and child of God, in whom the wisdom that comes from above abides. For
that wisdom is peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits. Hereby a manifest difference is discerned betwixt that Spirit
which comes from above, and that spirit which arises from the flesh: betwixt
a regenerate and a natural man. By nature man is exceedingly proane to
revenge. Heathen hold revenge lawful.
The heathen, who were guided only by the light of nature, discerned not the
excellency and necessity of this grace. Vlcisci te lacessitus potes. Cic. de
Orat.
Their Philosophers, who were their Divines, accounted it not unlawful to
revenge wrongs. Odi hominem and odero: vtinam vlcisci poteram. Cic. ad Attic.
Sophocles in Electra. Euripides in Oreste.
Yea they held it a bounden duty, and a glorious virtue to seek and take
revenge: insomuch as if any notorious wrong were done to a man and he taken
away, before revenge taken, and the suruiuing friends were negligent in
revenging the same, they imagined that the ghosts of the deceased would never
leave haunting and terrifying those suruiuing friends till they had taken
revenge.

Many among us, Man's pronenes to revenge.
that are taught better divinity, do too much nourish this corruption of
nature. If they be wronged by word or deed, they think it dishonorable to put
it up, or pass it over without revenge: which is the cause of so many
chalenges as from time to time are given and taken: and of the many mortal
monomachies, and desperate duells which are daily undertaken: yea and of many
secret plots and practices for doing some notorious mischief, and for taking
away the very life of such as have done them wrong. If such as are able with
better discretion, and more moderation to temper their outward actions, well
observe, and thoroughly try their inward disposition, they shall find this
sprout of corrupt nature, revenge, too deeply fixed in them: yea they shall
find many bitter fruits thence sprouting, in reuengefull thoughts and desires,
wishing many mischiefs to fall upon them by whom they think themselves any
way wronged. What is this but inward revenge? Surely revenge is one of the most
incurable sores of the flesh. It is most hardly subdued and mortified. A good
sign therefore of renewed nature it is to forbear revenge and forgive wrongs:
if at least it be done in truth, from the heart, for the conscience sake.

Far short of the Christians Goal do they come, Evil to be overcome with
goodness.
though they think they go far in the Christians race, who only are mild,
gentle, kind, and courteous till they be wronged, but then are implacable, and
will accept of no reconciliation, till they have taken revenge for that wrong.
They think it a great glory that they can say, I run into no man's debt, I
do wrong to no man, I even have been, and ever will be ready to do all
offices of kindness that I can. But if any abuse me any way and wrong me,
they shall know whom they abuse: and I will make them repent the wrong which
they have done. My friend shall taste of my kindness: but mine enemy shall
know what I am able to do. The pretended goodness of such men wants the
substance of goodness: it has but a show and shadow thereof. That is sound,
solid, pure gold that abides the flaming heat of the fiery furnace. A man's
goodness cannot be proved to be sound till it be tried by the fire of wrong,
or offense. Dogs, Bears, Tigers, Saeuis inter se conuenit vrsis. Iuiuen.
Lions, and the most savage beasts that be, can be quiet, and gentle till
they be stirred and incensed. A Proverb says The Devil is good while he is
pleased. Behold then what kind of goodness it is, whereof such men boast. No
better then the goodness of the most cruel creatures, not the Devil
excepted. Do what you can to a sheep, you cannot make it snarle or bite. Do
but clap a Dog on the back, he will be ready to fly in your face. He
therefore that being provoked is stirred up to revenge, retains his natural
doggish disposition. He that may justly be accounted a Lamb, or sheep of
Christ's fold, and to have the Spirit of the Lamb of God in him, will
recompense to no man evil for evil, but overcome evil with good. Romans 12.
17. 21.
To this height of goodness does the condition of this Petition call us. Non
haec dixisse contentus estsed abundanius oftendere volens, quantum buius rei
curam gerit, idipsum etiam specialiter incul cauit post impletam orationis
formulam, etc. Chrysostom. bom. 20. in Mac. 6.


This duty of forgiving one another being the maine and principal point
intended in this condition added to the fifth Petition, which is the only bie
clause in the whole Lords Prayer, and which Christ thought not enough to insert
in the Prayer, but so soon as he had ended his form of prayer returned to
this point again, and again and again presleth it both affirmatively, and
negatiuely, showing the advantage of forgiving, and the damage of not
forgiving. For a further pressing and enforcing of it, I will endeavor to set
out the Excellency, Utility, Necessity, Difficulty, and Raritie of it.

1. For the Excellency of it, Excellency of forgiving.
it is one of those excellencies wherein God himself glories, that Exodus 34.
7.
he forgiueth sin. Therefore with great Emphasis he says, Isa. 43. 25.
I, I am he that blotteth out thy transgression for mine own sake. And with
great admiration of this excellency says the Prophet, Mic. 7. 18.
Who is a God like unto thee that pardons iniquity? They therefore that
forgive wrongs show themselves like to God in this his excellency. Whereupon
the Apostle having exhorted us Ephesians. 4. 32.
to forgive, adds, as a further motive to press the duty, this clause, --
5. 1.
Be ye followers of God as dear children. Herein man shows himself a God
to man: as on the contrary by revenge, he shows himself a very Devil:
Many, like Genesis 4. 23.
Lamech, boast and glory in taking revenge, as in a matter of great manhood,
whereas in truth it is a part of much baseness, and great pusilanimitie.

2. For the Utility of it, Utility of forgiving.
If this question be asked, What profit is there of forgiving? I answer as the
Apostle did of Circumcision, Romans 3. 1, 2.
Much every way. Thereby assurance of Gods forgiving our sins is obtained.
We are made more capable of receiving mercy from God. We shall have much
quietness in our souls. We shall appear more amiable before men, be the
better loved of them, and receive more kindnesses from them. We shall avoid
many mischiefs whereinto we might implunge our selves by taking revenge, and
which both God and man might bring us unto for taking revenge.

3. For the Necessity of it; Necessity of forgiving.
it is absolutely necessary for Society with men, and Communion with God. In
regard of society with men, there is no living in this world without a mind
willing and ready to forgive wrongs: and that by reason of the wrongs which
others from time to time will do to us, and we to others. We live here among
many and sundry sorts of people, and those of diverse and different
dispositions: some giving offense in one kind, others in another. If we be
forward to take revenge of every wrong, and have not a mind forward to
forgive, we shall never have a quiet mind. Revenge will be as a poison
continually working in our souls, exceedingly disturbing and disquieting them.
And for our selves, flesh is in us all: it abides in the best, so long as they
abide in this world. By reason of the flesh in us we are subject to many
infirmities, whereby sundry offenses are given to others, sometimes on
weakness, and sometimes on wilfulness: sometimes on sudden passion, and heat
of blood, and sometimes again on deliberation and cold blood. By reason hereof
we need that others should bear with us, and forgive us. But if we forgive not
others, how can we look that others should forgive us. 1. Our example in
taking revenge of others, is a pattern to others to take revenge of us. 2. It
is just with the Lord to suffer men so to do, according to that which
Adoni-bezek said, Judge. 1. 7.
As I have done, so God has requited me. Mat. 7. 1.
So much is often expressly threatened. In regard of Communion with God, Luke 6.
37.
there is no hope, no possibility of reconciliation and atonement with God for
such as are ready to take revenge of men. Christ has set it down, as a ruled
case, as an inviolable Law, more stable, and unalterable then the Laws of the
Medes and Persians established by the King, Math. 6. 15.
that, if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly
Father forgive your trespasses. Math. 18. 27, 32, 33, 34.
In the Parable we read that the Lord who forgave his servants debt, recalled
his grant, when he heard that servant would not forgive his fellow servant.

Q. May then that remission which God grants be reuersed?

A. 1. That which hypocrites presumptuously assume to themselves, How remission
is recalled.
without due consideration of the conditions and qualifications of the Gospel,
may. For it is an absolution unjustly taken before it is fully given. 2. That
circumstance in the Parable is noted not simply to declare any reuersing of
Gods grant, but to aggrauate the heinousness of revenge, and Gods hatred of
it, and indignation against it. And it shows that though God in himself be
ready and forward to forgive, and could and would otherwise forgive such a
Debtor, yet if that debtor be hard-hearted to his brother, and forgive not
him, neither will God forgive.

4, For the difficulty of it, Difficulty of forgiving.
wrath and revenge cannot easily be subdued. A combat, and a conquest in that
combat is requisite thereto. The combat must be with our own passions, and
the conquest must be over them, which conquest flesh and blood can never get.
He that rules his spirit is mightier then he that takes a City. Prou. 16. 32.
Passions are exceeding violent, very dangerous and pernicious. In us there is
a great pronenesse to yield unto them. Our flesh is very loath to strive against
them. What hope then is there of any victory over them. Surely there must be
more in us then flesh and blood to subdue them.

5. Scarcity of forgiving.
For the Raritie, or scarcity of it, I may justly in the Prophets sense use
these words of the Prophet, let. 5. 1.
Run ye to and fro through the streets, and see now and know, and seek in
the broad places, if ye can find a man, if there be any that forgiueth wrongs,
and passes by offenses. View the world, observe such as are reputed to have a
generous mind. Among them ye shall find Challenges sent and taken, and
despera^e Combats undertaken for every flight wrong, for every disgraceful
and displeasing word. Enter into the City, go about the Country, mark the
disposition of inhabitants in City and Country, and ye shall find among them
for petty injuries, and ignominious speeches, complaints to Justices, Warrants,
Arrests, Actions, Imprisonments, and suits in Law to the utter undoing of one
another. Innes of Court, Seats of Justice, Universities, Yea, and Pulpits are
full of bittet inuectiues, spightfull calumniations, and reuengefull
defamations for every offense, and that ofttimes when the offense is rather
taken then given. Men, Women, Old, Young, Rich, Poor, Brothers and Sisters,
Fellow-seruants, Neighbors, Friends, all of all sorts, are exceedingly given
to revenge. If the thoughts of men could be ransacked, and the desire of
revenge that therein lurketh be discovered, it would then more evidently
appear that this grace of forgiving wrongs, which is indeed rare in the
excellency of it, is also exceeding rare in the scarsity of it: hardly to be
found any where.

If now the Excelleucy of a thing in it self, if the Utility and benefit
which it brings to them that have it: if the absolute Necessity thereof for
communion with God or Man: If the Difficulty of attaining thereto: If the
Raritie of it, being such as very few attain unto it, be motives to stir us
up diligently and earnestly to seek after it, Motives are not wanting to
stir us up to use all means that may be to suppress revenge, and to work
in us a readiness, and willingness to forgive.

This of the Duty here required. The Time when it is to be performed follows.

. 137. Of speedy forgiveness.
Q. What time is limited for forgiving?

A. The Time present. The word is of the present Tense, (...)
we do forgive, which implies a present performance, and a constant
continuance. The time present has an Opposition both to the time to come, and
also to the time past. He that in the present does a thing puts it not off
to the future, contenting himself with a purpose to do it afterward, as if
it were enough to say, I will forgive: neither does he leave off to do it,
contenting himself that heretofore he has done it, as if it were enough to
say, I have forgiven. But so soon as occasion of doing it is offered, he does
it: and so long as the occasion continues, he continues to do it.

Q. What doctrine may be gathered from the profession of forgiveness in the
time present?

A. We must presently forgive. So soon as occasion of exercising this duty is
offered, it must be put in practice. As the shadow shows it self so soon as
a body appears in sunshine, so must forgiveness as soon as a wrong is
discerned. When ye stand praying, forgive. Mar. 11. 25.
We may not dare to stand up to pray, unless we forgive. Is it not then
requisite that we forgive instantly. To this purpose tends this prohibition,
Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath. Ephesians 4. 26.
His meaning is that we should not harbor heart-burning any whit at all. Non
debuit occidere Sol super iracundiam vestram, and multi soles occiderunt. Aug.
hom. 42. in lib. 50. Hom.
The phrase of not suffering the Sun to go down on a thing, is prouerbiall,
and implies a speedy redress. Contrary hereunto do they who suffer many
suns to set on their wrath.

Revenge is a kind of fire, which if it be not presently quenched, Danger of
delaying to forgive.
will soon prove unquenchable. Nay it is a deadly poison, which if it once
ceaze on the soul will soon destroy it. No fire, no poison of a more
increasing nature then revenge. Instance Gen 4. 5, 8.
the revenge and wrath incensed in Cain against Abel, and in the Math. 26. 4.
Scribes and Pharisees against Christ* It increased to blood. Revenge the longer
it lasts, the stronger it waxes. But forgiveness is the only means to
quench that fire, to expel that poison. Can then forgiveness with safety be
put off?

Assuredly Satan will take great advantage from the least delay. Trial of one
fitted to forgive
Whereupon the Apostle advises to give no place to the devil. But by putting
off revenge, we give much place to him.

Hereby trial may be made of a mind rightly fitted and prepared for this duty
of forgiveness. It manifests it self so soon as occasion is offered. So
soon as the Lord had stricken Miriam with Leprosy for the wrong she did to
Moses, Moses to show how ready he was to pass it by, Numb. 12. 13.
and to forgive it, presently prayed for her.

But the deceitfulness of their heart is evidently discovered, Delayed
forgiveness deceitful.
whose forgiveness consists only in a purpose to do it afterward. That
which is truly purposed, will not always remain a mere purpose: but, so
soon as occasion is given, prove a practice. Many think it time enough to
forgive when they go to the Lords Table: yet it may be that such go to that
holy board but once a year. Si in domibus vestris scorpiones essent aut
aspides, quantum laboraretis vt domus vestras purgaretis and securi habitare
possetis? Irascimini, inueterantur irae in cordibus vestris, fiunt tot odia,
tot scorpij tot serpents, and domum Dei, id est, cor vestrum, purgare non
vul^is? Aug. Hom. 42. in lib. 50. Ham.
Surely that forgiveness which is then intended cannot be sound. Revenge
retained devilish.
It may justly be suspected to be more on vain superstition, then true
devotion. What if they die suddenly before that time, and have no time, no
thought to forgive, can they think it safe to depart out of this worsd with a
reuengefull mind? I would gladly know of such whether they intend to pray
before that time set for receiving the holy Communion. If they do intend so to
do, can they think it well to pray in wrath? Did men know what a Wolf, what
a Tiger, what a Viper wrath and revenge were, they would at the first sight
thereof be startled, and get themselves as far from it, as they could. If
Scorpions and Aspes were in men's houses, what pains would they take to cleanse
their houses, that they might dwell securely? But they keep anger, wrath,
malice, hatred, revenge, which are so many Scorpions, and Serpents, and cleanse
not the house of God, which is their heart. Yea such a perverse disposition
have many, as they use all the means they can to retain, and nourish revenge,
and to keep it in mind and memory. By oath, by imprecation, and other ways
they will bind themselves, not to forgive. They forbear not to say, I may
forget the wrong, but I will never forgive it. Hereby they provoke God to keep
their sins in perpetual memory, and to bind himself to execute vengeance on
them.

. 138. Of constant forgiving.
Q. What other doctrine may be gathered from the profession of forgiveness
in the time present?

A. Forgiveness must be a continued act. It must not, so long as we live, be
reckoned among the things utterly past, and no more to be performed. The time
past has his date. The time to come may have no date at all. The time present
is always in being. God therefore sets out his eternal being and abiding
by the time present, in this Title, I AM THAT I AM. Exodus 3. 14. (...). LXX.
Interpr.
He therefore that in truth says, I do forgive, must never be of another
mind: he must never think of recalling what he has forgiven, or of waxing
weary of forgiving, though never so many wrongs from time to time be offered.
Mar. 11. 25.
Christ says, when ye stand praying, forgive. 1. These. 5. 17.
And his Apostle says, Pray continually. If we must pray continually, and
praying forgive, them must we forgive continually. Math. 18. 22.
Where Christ enioyneth to forgive unto seventy times seven, he intends a
readiness to forgive so often as we are wronged, Synecdoche.
be we wronged never so often. A set and definite number is put for an indefinite.

Constant continuance in a good thing is that which sets the crown upon it,
and makes it not to be in vain. But intermitting, and omitting that which is
well begun, takes away the glory thereof. Revenging after-wrongs, provoke
God to pass by without reward or regard our forgigiuing of former wrongs.

Let us not therefore be overcome of evil: Be not overcome of wrong Romans 12.
21.
but rather overcome evil with goodness. We have need, in regard of that
extent of duty here required, to take unto our selves an invincible resolution.
For while we live in this world, it cannot be but that we shall have wrongs
offered unto us. It is not without cause that the Apostle advises to Let
patience have her perfect work. Iam. 1. 4.
The perfect work of patience consists, as in the truth of it, whereby it is
sound, not fained, so in the extent of it, that it reach to all kinds of wrongs
and offenses, and in the continuance of it, that it endure to the end. The
(...).
notation of the word which the Apostle uses, implies this last branch of
perfection, which is a persisting to the end, even to the end of this mortal
life wherein we shall have use and need of exercising this duty of
forgiveness. We may not therefore so much consider what wrongs and offenses we
have forgiven, as how many more we may hereafter take occasion to forgive: that
by our continual practice of this duty, we may day after day say, I do
forgive.

Thus much of the Duty required. The Parties tied thereto, are next to be
considered.

. 139. Of dealing with man, as we desire God should deal with us.
Q. Who are especially tied to the condition of the fifth Petition?

A. They who call God Father, and crave forgiveness of him. For this Particle
WE in the condition, and the Particles OUR, US, in the Preface, and in the
Petitions, are all of the same Number and Person, and have a mutual reference
to the same persons.

Q. What doctrine hence arises?

A. Saints that crave and expect mercy of God are most bound to show mercy to
man. This did the Lord press upon his servant thus, I forgave thee all thy
debt because thou desiredst me: should not thou also have had compassion on
thy fellow-seruant, even as I had compassion on thee? This also does the
Apostle especially press upon Professors, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.
as these Reasons show, There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are
called in one hope of your Calling: One Lord: one Faith: one Baptism: one God
and Father of all.

By the mercy which Saints, that crave and expect mercy from God, show, both
God that forgiueth them, and Christ, for whose sake God forgiueth them, are
most glorified. The Gospel also and their profession thereof, are most graced,
and honored thereby; yea and the mouths of such enemies as watch for
occasions to disgrace professors of the Gospel, are stopped. Finally the
mutual good of the members of Gods Churches is hereby much promoted.

What great and just cause of complaint is in these respects given, Quarrels of
Professors.
by reason of the teachy, wrathful, reuengefull disposition of many that in
profession of Religion are very forward. Of those who in outward profession
make their houses Gods Churches by the daily exercises of piety therein, This
complaint against quarrels of Professors is not made as an inuectiue against
profession, but against such as abuse profession, and made it a cloak to ^ouer
their hypocrisy.
constantly offering up their morning and evening spiritual sacrifices, who
also by frequenting the house of public prayer, the ministry of the Word,
the Lords Table, and other services of God, make great show of much piety, have
the name of Saints, and seem to expect much mercy from the Lord, of those, I
say, there be many who are full of envy, wrath and revenge, very quarrellous
and contentious, ready to arrest, to bind to the Peace and good behavior, to
cast into Prison, to commence suites in Law, and enter actions of trespass of
defamation, and of other like petty matters upon very slight occasions. The
Prophet foretold the Wolf should dwell with the Lamb, Isa. 11. 6.
and the Leopard lie d^wne with the Kid, etc. But now such as profess
themselves to be Lambs, and Kids of Christ's flock can scarce dwell quietly
one by another. Many Professors are as very firebrarnds as any other. Iam. 1.
27.
Surely their profession and religion is vain. They mock God, they deceive
man, they lie against their conscience, when they say, We forgive. Their sin
is the greater, in that thereby they open the mouths of profane persons
against the Gospel of Christ, and a profession thereof.

Let us who call God, Father, who crave, who expect mercy of God, learn with
what mind to do it: namely, with a mind ready and willing to do for others what
we desire to be done for us. Lift up pure hands without wrath,, thou that
desire God to turn away his wrath from thee. Show mercy thou that crauest
mercy of God. Be bountiful, thou that longest to taste of the sweetness of
Gods bounty. Forbear thy brother, thou that would have God forbear thee.
So deal in every other respect, as thou prayest God to deal with thee. This
is acceptable to God. This well becomes thy profession. This will bring much
comfort to thy soul. Thus shall not thy prayer be made in vain.

The Duty and Parties most bound thereto being declared, The Persons to whom
the duty is to be performed are to be set out.

. 140. Of the several kinds of debts whereby we become debtors to man.
Q. Who are meant by DEBTORS?

A. Such as any way wrong man. For the Apostle joins together these two
phrases, Philem. v. 18. (...).
wronged, endebted. So many ways as one wrongeth another, he becomes a debtor
to him. But one may wrong another (according to those several, distinct heads
of duties which the law enioyneth to be performed to our neighbors) five
ways.

1. In his place or dignity. Herein Numb. 12. 2.
Aaron and Miriam, -- 16. 3.
Corah, Dathan and Abiram became Debtors to Moses. They spoke against that
authority, eminency, and dignity which God had given him.

2. In his Person or life. Herein 1. Sam. 19. 10, 11. etc.
Saul became a debtor to David by persecuting his person, and seeking to take
away his life. Herein also Acts 2. 23.
the Jews were debtors to Christ.

3. In his chastity. Herein 1. Sam. 25. 44
Phalti and Michal became debtors to David, in that ( 2. Sam. 3. 14.
Michal being David's wife) they two as man and wife lived, and kept, company
together.

4. In his goods. Herein Onesimus became a debtor to Philemon, by running from
him, and purloyning his goods, which moved Saint Paul to say, Philem. v. 18.
If he have wronged thee, or owes thee ought, etc.

5. In his good name. Herein 2. Sam. 16. 7, 8.
Shemei became a debtor to David, by reproaching him, and calling him a man of
blood, a man of Beliall.

All these wrongs has God expressly forbidden in his Law: so as they are double
debts. One as transgressions against God. The other as injuries against men.
The later of these kinds of debts is here meant in this condition. Of that kind
are all the forenamed instances.

. 141. Of making satisfaction for wrongs done to man.
Q. What doctrine does this title DEBTORS applied to wrongs do^e to men, imply?

A. Wrong doers must make satisfaction for the wrong which they do. Every wrong
is a debt. But a debt must be satisfied, according to this charge Romans 13. 8.
Owe nothing to any man. Leu. 6. 2 etc. Numb. 5. 7.
God gave to the Israelites an express law for restitution or satisfaction of
that wherein one had wronged another.

By satisfaction, as by a plaster, the wound which is made is healed, and so
wrong becomes to be as no wrong.

The truth of repentance for the wrong which is done, is also manifested by
satisfaction. Luke 19. 8.
Zaccheus hereby gave evidence of his unfeigned repentance. Were it possible to
make satisfaction for the debts wherein we stand bound to God, we ought to do
it. But because by reason of the infiniteness of that debt we are not in any
sort able to satisfy it, Christ, who is able, has undertaken it. He is become
our Surety, He has discharged our debt. So as in regard of our debts to God,
all that is expected of us for satisfaction thereof, is by a true faith to
apply the satisfaction of Christ. But because we may be profitable to man, and
may make some recompense for that wrong we have done to him, we ought in this
case to do to the uttermost of our power what we can. Pollicetur sibi magnae
^wrae fore vt omnia ciuitatibus quae cuiusque, fuissent restituerentur. Cic. in
Ver. Aut vim fieri vetat, aut restitui factam iubet? Idem pro Cecin.
He that is careful to make satisfaction, shows that he is sensible of the
wrong he has done, and would if it were possible, that it had not been done:
which implies a penitent heart.

Besides, common justice and equity requires satisfaction in what we are
able. The heathen by the light of nature well discerned as much; and have given
many good directions thereabout. What a shame would it be for them that have
the light of the Gospel added to that light of nature, more to live in
darkness, and more to love the works of darkness, then they did?

Object. They to whom men are indebted must forgive their debtors. Why then
should debtors think of restitution or satisfaction?

Answ. 1. That duty of forgiveness is required in case that a debtor cannot
through disabilitie, or will not through obstinacy make satisfaction. But it
gives no liberty to him that is able, to be wilful in refusing to do what
he is bound to do.

2. Gods requiring mercy of one, does not justify injustice and injury in
another.

Wherefore let every one look to that especially which belongs to him:
Redress wrong
and observe wherein he has wronged another, to do him the best right that he
can: and that according to the wrong which he has done. If it be a wrong
known, humbly to acknowledge the same to the party wronged. If an inferior
have wronged his superior by any disloyalty, let him be the more loyal for
the time to come. If one under subjection have been rebellious, let him be the
more submissiue and obedient. If one who owed service to another have been
negligent or careless in his business, let him be the more industrious and
diligent. Let him that has any way dealt unmercifully with another, take all
occasions to show the more mercy to him. He that has any way defrauded
another, let him to his uttermost power make full restitution. He that has
impeached the good name or credit of another, let him endeavor to right him
whom he has discredited, in his reputation. And so in other wrongs. Thus will
there be an healing of the wounds that have been made. And this is fruit
worthy of repentance, Math. 3. 8.
which we are commanded to bring forth. Note this all ye that by word or deed
have offended any. Add not obstinacy to injury. Persist not in wrong. That
is to make the sin out of measure sinful. To your sin your judgment shall
be answerable.

As for such, as having done wrong refuse reconciliation when it is offered,
surely they have a devilish spirit. Such were they of whom the Psalmist thus
complains, Psalm. 120. 6, 7.
My soul has long dwelt with him that hates peace. I am for peace, but when
I speak, they are for war. These are firebrarnds in the societies where they
are. More fit to live in hell among devils, then on earth among men.

. 142. Of departing from our right.
Q. WHat other doctrine may be gathered from this metaphor DEBTORS in relation
to the duty of forgiving?

A. To forgive we must part with our right. For a debtor to pay what he owes
is a right, due to the creditor. But a debtor must be forgiven. This cannot be,
except the Creditor let go his right: and forbear to exact that, which, were
it not for this duty of forgiving, he might exact. Saul having showed himself
a professed mortal enemy against David, acknowledged, that David, when he had
him in his power, might have killed him: so as in sparing him, Saul
acknowledged that David departed from his right. 1. Sam. 24. 18, 19.
Thou have showed this day (says Saul to David) how thou have dealt well with
me: forasmuch as when the Lord had delivered me into thine hand, thou killedst
me not. For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go well away? The truth
is, that David was by all law bound to spare Saul's life, and to forbear all
revenge against his person, because he was with his Sovereign: which 1. Sam.
24. 5, 6.
David well knew, and accordingly he professed as much: but -- 18, 19.
in Saul's opinion he departed from his right: which he did in truth in 2. Sam.
19. 22, 23.
Shemeis case. We have a worthy pattern for departing from ones right for
peace sake in the Mat. 17. 26. 27
example of Christ, who though he were able to prove that he was not bound to
pay tribute, yet paid it. So 1. Cor. 9. 15.
S. Paul did forbear to exact that of the Churches which he might have done.

If a man have no right to exact that which he seems to forgive, his
forgiveness is no forgiveness. It is no work of mercy.

The common practice of men, Uttermost of right not always to be stood upon.
in standing to the uttermost for their right, cannot stand with the equity of
that which is here professed, We forgive our debtors. In all manner of wrongs
to a man's place, person, chastetie, goods, or good name, there is a kind of
right for a man to take revenge, and such a right, as it may be, is not
condemned, but rather justified by man's law. What kind of debt then can be
forgiven, if that, which may be thought man's right, be exacted to the
uttermost? Quarrels, contentions, needless but harmefull suites in Law,
disturbances of peace, and other mischiefs for the most part arise from men's
ouerstrict standing to that which they conceive to be their right, from which
they will not yeald one heirs breadth. If the Law give a man advantage against
his neighbor for a reproachful word, for a sudden though light blow, for a
trespass on his Land, for any forfeiture, or the like, that advantage is taken
by many: and therein they think they do what they may do: and yet for all
that, therein they may do much wrong: for often times Extreme right is extreme
rigor. Summum ius summa iniuria.
Learn we more to weigh what Christian equity and charity requires us,
then what conceit of our own right, or extremity of humane Law may egg us
on to do. Thus will peace, unity, amity, and charity be preserved and
contiuned among men.

. 143. Of forgiving all sorts of Debtors.
Q. What doctrine does the expressing of Debtors in the plural number import?

A. All sorts of Debtors must be forgiven. The Debtors here have no limitation.
Forgiveness therefore must have no restraint. Whosoever do offend, friend or
foe, neighbor or stranger, great or mean, rich or poor, inferior or
superior: In whatsoever any do offend and wrong us, in our place, person,
chastity, goods, or good name: yea if one man shall in many offenses, or often
in one offense become a debtor, and in that respect be as many debtors:
forgiveness in all these, and in all other like cases must be granted. Philem.
v. 17.
S. Paul requires Philemon to forgive his inferior, his servant. 1. Sam. 24.
7.
David forgave his superior, his Sovereign. Number. 12. 2, 13.
Moses forgave the wrong done to his place and dignity. Act. 7. 60.
Stephen forgave the wrong done to his person and life. David forgave the wrong
done to his 2. Sam 3. 14.
chastity and to his -- 19. 23.
good name. The forenamed wrong which Philemon was required to forgive was in
goods. Many, many were the wrongs which the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, and
other Jews did to Christ, yet Luke 23 34.
he forgave them all.

Mercy has no stint set unto it. It is as a springing fountain which can
never be dried up. Though never so much be fetched from it continually, yet it
ever remains full. 1 Cor. 13. 4, 7.
Charity is bountiful, it bears all things, (...).
believes all things, hops all things, endures all things. Forgiveness
therefore, being a work of mercy and charity, is of the same nature and
condition.

As for the kind of debts, the greater they be, or the more it goes (as we
speak) against the hair, against our corrupt disposition to forgive them, the
greater is our glory in forgiving them. To forgive a small debt, a small
wrong, is scarce thanks-worthy. He is worse then a savage that can pass by
nothing.

Hereby further trial may be made of the truth of forgiveness, Trial of true
forgiveness.
whether it flow from the forenamed fountain of mercy and charity, or be
forced, and performed on bie respects. If it extend it self only to some
Debtors (whom for kindred or friendship sake, or for hope of recompense, or for
fear of greater mischief, or for some other like bie respects we are willing
to forgive) and not to all sorts of debtors: or to small debts and wrongs (the
forgiving whereof is scarce thanks-worthie) or otherwise if it be drawn dry
by the multiplication of debts: and after some debts forgiven it be no more to
be found, surely it is not true forgiveness: it flows not from the right
fountain and head. By this note of trial may many be found faulty in the
condition here required: the extent whereof as it is to be applied to enemies
who most incense the wrath of man: so to neighbors, who, by reason of the many
occasions of offense through their continual commerce, do most often provoke:
yea and to friends also, from whom offenses are most unkindly taken. All must
be forgiven.

After the Duty required, the Persons tied thereto, and the Parties to whom it
is to be performed, The Pestraint thereof in this word OUR follows to be
handled.

. 144. Of forgiving our own Debtors.
Q. Why is this particle of restraint, OUR, applied to those Debtors whom we
must forgive?

A. 1. To distinguish them from Gods Debtors.

2. To distinguish them from other men's Debtors?

Q. What doctrine arises from this restraint?

A. Every one must meddle with his own debts. Luke 11. 4.
Saint Luke makes this doctrine most clear, Securus huius orationis fiducia
de suis admissis veniam postulabit, quisquis re missus erga suos duntaxat, non
erga domini sui extiterit debito res. Abb. Isaac de Orat. cap. 21.
by showing who are our debtors, namely, Every one that is indebted to Us. He
says To us, not to others. Duly weigh all the places where this duty of
forgiving is pressed on man, and you shall find it limited with this restraint.
Gods word lays no charge on man either to forgive Gods debts, or other men's
debts.

True mercy, charity, patience, and wisdom, is exercised in forgiving our
own debts only: and thereby are these virtues best discerned to be sound and
good.

It is intolerable presumption for man to take upon him to forgive Gods debts,
which are sins: as we have. 126.
before noted. One man may pray to God for such as sin (as Acts 7. 60.
Stephen did) that God would not lay their sin to their charge: and by that
means Iam. 5. 15.
sin may be forgiven: but no man can himself actually forgive any sin.

1. Object. 2. Sam. 12. 13.
Nathan forgave David's sin.

Answ. He only pronounced remission of his sin in the name of the Lord. His
words are express, The Lord has put away thy sin.

2. Object. Ioh. 20. 23.
Christ gives power to his Apostles to forgive sins.

Answ. He gives not them power actually of themselves or in their own name to
forgive: but to declare, to apply in particular, and to assure the conscience
of the penitent believer that God has forgiven him his sins.

As for other men's Debtors, A point of folly to discharge other men's debts
it is the part of a busie-bodie to undertake the forgiving of them. Such
remission may be an occasion of much contention, and thereby a man may bring
himself into needless danger. Pro. 26. 17.
He that passes bie, and medleth with strife that belongs not to him, is
like one that takes a dog by the ears. What gets such an one but a snap
for his pains: Well therefore does the Wiseman brand him for a fool that
medleth, Prou. 20. 3.
namely with other men's matters.

It is further a note of hypocrisy for a man to be forward, A note of
hypocrisy to stir up others to forgive what they themselves forgive not.
and earnest in pressing other men to forgive their debtors, and yet is
himself hard-hearted to his own debtors. They are in some respects like to
those notorious hypocrites, that laid such burdens on other men's shoulders, as
they themselves would not move with one of their fingers. Math. 23. 4.
The hard-heartednesse of these men to their own debtors is so much the more
offensive, and inexcusable, by how much the more earnest they are with others
to forgive. Romans 2. 21, 22, etc.
The Apostles severe exprobration against such as did not themselves practice
that which they taught others, may fitly be applied to these hypocrites.

The last point obseruable in the condition annexed to the Fifth Petition is the
note of Resemblance, As, which remains to be handled.

. 145. Of the force of this Particle As in the condition annexed to the fifth
Petition.
Q. What does this Particle, As, import, whereby the condition is limited to
the Petition?

A. A resemblance betwixt Gods dealing with us, and our dealing with others.
This resemblance consists not in equality, quantity, or measure; but in
equity, quality and manner: that as God according to his surpassing greatness
is merciful, so we according to our poor and mean ability should also be
merciful, though not in such a degree, yet in such truth, and that freely and
fully, as God forgiueth,

This note of resemblance therefore, Difference betwixt the resemblances in the
third and fifth Petitions.
is not here used as it was in the third Petition. For

1. There that from whence the resemblance is taken is more eminent. Here much
meaner. It is there taken from those that are in heaven. But here from us on
earth.

2. There it notes a pattern for doing. Here, an evidence of doing.

3. There it is used for direction, to show what we should do. Here for
imitation, to declare what we endeavor to do.

Q. Does not the manner of setting down this resemblance by way of condition,
import that our forgiving goes before Gods?

A. No. For it has relation to our assurance of Gods forgiving us, not to the
act of forgiving, as it is in God himself: as if more amply we should say,
Lord, by that readiness which thy Spirit has wrought in us to forgive our
debtors, we have an evidence of thy readiness to forgive us, in faith
therefore we crave forgiveness of thee. After this manner reasons the
Apostle in these words, 1. Ioh. 4. 13.
Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of hit Spirit.

To forgive our brother is a fruit of brotherly love. Brotherly love sprouteth
from our love of God. 1. Ioh. 4. 19.
But we love God, because he loved us first. Gods love therefore goes before
our love. And God forgiueth us, before we forgive our brother. But as the life
of a tree which causes the fruit thereof, is discerned by the fruit, so Gods
love in forgiving us, which causes us to forgive our brother, is by our
forgiving of our brother discerned, and thereby also we come to have assurance
thereof.

Object. Saint Luke sets down this clause, with a causall Particle, Luke
11. 4.
thus, For we also forgive, etc. whereby he implies that our forgiving one
another is a cause that moves God to forgive us. (...).
And if it be a cause it must needs go before. For the cause is before the
effect, at least, in order of nature.

Answ. That Particle FOR does not always note the cause, but many times the
effect, especially when the effect is a sign and evidence of the cause. Luke
7. 47.
As, where Christ said of that deeply penitent women, Her sins which are
many are forgiven, for she loved much. That her love is there noted as an
effect of Gods forgiving her is evident by the question going before, Luke 7.
41, 42, 43
and the answer made thereto. The question was this, A Creditor had two
debtors: the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty: And when they
had nothing to pay, he frankely forgave them both. Tell me, which of them will
love him most? The answer was this, He to whom he forgave most. Is not love in
this question and answer, expressly noted to be the effect of forgiveness? In
the same sense, respect and relation is love, used in this application of that
Parable, Her sins which are many are forgiven, for she loved much: Her much
love declares that many sins are forgiven her. Thus is this Particle FOR
ordinarily used as a note of the effect or sign in our common speech: As when
we say, There is fire, for I see smoke. This tree has life, for it sprouteth.
The Sun is risen, for behold sunshine.

. 146. Of true and unfeigned forgiving one another.
Q. WHat doctrines does the resemblance betwixt Gods forgiving and ours import?

A. 1 We must in truth forgive one another. Thus does God: thus may we forgive.
Thus, as we may, must we be like unto God, and forgive, as he forgiueth. If
we do not so, we lie in saying, Forgive us As we forgive. We are expressly
charged, 1. Ioh. 3. 18. (...)
not to love in word, or in tongue, but in deed, and truth. But more
particularly for this purpose, Mat. 18 35. (...)
Christ expressly notes that forgiveness must be from the hearts of men.

Of the benefit of truth, see The whole Armor of God, in Ephesians. 6. 14. Treat.
2. part. 3.. 9.
Truth is a kind of perfection in this and all other duties: the best and
greatest perfection that in this world we can attain unto. It seasoneth and
sweetneth that little that we are able to do, and makes it acceptable to God:
without this season and favor of truth all the show of forgiveness which we
make, is odious and detestable unto God: neither can it bring any comfort to
our own souls. Dimittite vbi Deus videt. Ali quando enim homo dimittit ore,
and tenet in cord: dimittit ore propter homines, and tenet in cord. Non times
oculos Dei? Aug. Hom. 42. in l. 50. Hom.
God is a searcher of the heart. He that would have his forgiveness acceptable
to God, must from the heart forgive. Discouetie of counterfeit forgiveness. 1.
When it is mixed with desire of revenge.
He that forgiueth with his tongue that which he retains in his heart,
forgiueth for man's sake, but respects not God.

How many be there, whose forgiveness if it be tried by this Touchstone of
truth, will be found to be plain counterfeit, and so nothing worth?
Counterfeit forgiveness is far unlike Gods. It cannot be pleaded in prayer:
nor can it give assurance of Gods forgiving us. Yet the forgiveness of most is
no better.

Some think they do very well, if they forbear to take outward revenge,
though they retain an inward grudge, and secret hatred. This may be something
to man, who knows not the thoughts of the heart: but to God, the searcher of
hearts, it is as nothing. And if as nothing to him, to whom (if to any) it is
pleaded in prayer, Sunt aliqui sic donantes iniuriam, vt non vlciscantur,
sapius tamen improperent. Sunt and alij, qui, sileant licet, manet tamen alta
mente reposta, and rancorem tenent in animo: quorum vtique neutra plena
indulgentia est. Bern. de Euang. Sept. pan. Sermon. 3
in what stead will it stand? Surely in no other stead, then to be as a
witness against him, at the judgment seat of God. For when a man outwardly
restrains that which inwardly he retains, his outward forbearance shows,
that in his judgment he disallowerh that which he keeps in his heart. Thus
he is made a witness against himself. Is not his secret corruption the more
aggrauated hereby? and shall not his condemnation be the more increased?

Yet greater shall their condemnation be, who carry a fair face, and make show
of forgiveness, when they retain a full purpose of taking revenge, only they
put it off to some opportunity: as Genesis 27. 41.
Esau put off the revenge he intended against his brother, till the death of
their father. This putting off of revenge till an opportunity, shows that it
is no small revenge which they intend, 2. When revenge is put off to a fitter
time.
as appears by that which Esau said, then will I slay my Brother: and it
implies a settled resolution to do it, though for a time there be something
that hinders them. What is this but settled anger, settled hatred, settled
malice? By these circumstances is the sin made much more heinous.

But what may be thought of them, 3. When a show of forgiveness is made a
means of revenge.
who make pretense of forgiving to be a means of taking revenge: as Ioab did,
2. Sam. 3. 27.
when he took Abner aside to speak with him quietly, and smote him under the
fifth rib: and 2. Sam. 20. 9, 10.
when he took Amasa by the beard to kiss him, and shed out his bowels. And as
2. Sam. 13. 26, 28.
Absolon did, who invited Amnon to a Feast where he caused him to be slain. If
such should use this Petition, they would thereby make a fearful imprecation
against their own souls. A mere show of forgiveness without truth, does
make God to take the greater revenge of them. Let men therefore forgive in
truth, as God does, or not seem to forgive at all.

. 147. Of forgiving one another freely.
Q. What other doctrine does the resemblance betwixt Gods forgiving, and ours,
import?

A. We must freely forgive one another. The word forgive applied to God,
implies as much. We therefore professing to forgive As God forgiueth, must
forgive freely, not on bie-respects, not as forced, not for outward recompense,
or advantage to our selves, but for the Lords sake, for loves sake, and for his
sake whom we do forgive. Where the Apostle before this duty of forgiveness
premiseth kindness and tenderness, Ephesians. 4. 32.
saying, Be kind one to another and tenderhearted, forgiving one another, he
gives us to understand that it must be freely done: which is further enforced
by the pattern of God that he sets before us, in these words, Even as God
for Christ's sake forgave you. That which God does for Christ's sake, he does
most freely. This pattern the Apostle himself exactly followed. For where he
makes mention of his own forgiving another, he says, 2. Cor. 2. 10. (...).
I forgave in the person, or in the sight of Christ, that is, freely, heartily,
approving my self to Christ therein, in whose presence I stood.

A kindness freely done is a double kindness. Much more acceptable to God, 2,
Cor. 9. 7.
who loves him that does what he does cheerfully and willingly: and much
more grateful to him, to whom it is done. Prou. 22, 9.
He that has a good eye, and thereby manifests willingness, and
cheerfulness in that good which he does, Prou. 23. 6, 8.
shall be blessed. But a man of an evil eye, makes the good which he does to
be vomited up.

That in this particular we may indeed do as we profess to do, Motives
freely to forgive one another.
that is, freely forgive others, as God does freely forgive us, let us duly
weigh the excellency of the pattern here set before us, the great difference
betwixt a free and forced kindness, the glory of this kind of forgiving (the
more free it is the more divine it is) the great need wherein we stand of a
free forgiveness (did not God freely forgive us, we could look for no
forgiveness at all) and the great benefit that thereby redoundeth to us: for
that which is freely done brings much comfort to the soul of him that does
it, makes other men the more to commend it, and moves God the more graciously
to accept it, and the more abundantly to reward, Offer forgiveness.
and recompense it.

To show how ready we are freely for the Lords sake, for conscience sake, Seek
reconciliation.
not on bie-respects, to forgive, having to do with such wrong doers as are
stout, and will not ask forgiveness nor seek reconciliation, we, even we that
have received wrong, must offer it, as Gal. 4. 12, etc
Saint Paul did to the Galatians: and 1. Sa 24. 9, etc. -- 26. 18, etc.
David to Saul. The phrases of 1, Pet. 3. 11.
seeking and Heb. 12. 14.
pursuing peace, imply as much. We seek things that are not offered to us: and
we pursue things that fly from us. The Apostle presses this duty on us to the
very uttermost of our endeavor. Romans 12. 18.
If it be possible, says he: as much as in you lies live peaceably with all
men. 2. Cor. 5. 20.
God offers reconciliation to us, and beseeches us by his Ministers to be
reconciled to him. If therefore we will be followers of God, and forgive as God
forgiueth, We must not always stay till he who has done the wrong comes
and asks forgiveness: thus may we meet with such as we shall never forgive,
and so deprive our selves of the glory of this work of mercy

. 148. Of a full forgiving one another.
Q. WHat third doctrine does the resemblance betwixt Gods forgiving, and ours
import?

A. Wrongs must be so passed over as if they had not been done. This is a full
forgiveness, answerable to Gods: who so fully acquitteth us of our sins as
if we had committed to sin at all. Our forgiveness therefore, by virtue of
the foresaid resemblance must extend it self not to some part only, but to
the whole debt or wrong, and that with such a mind, as if no debt had been
due, no wrong done. Where the Apostle, to them, that by starting from the
Gospel which he had taught, had exceedingly wronged his Ministry, Gal* 4. 12.
says, Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am, for I am as ye are, ye have not
injured me at all, does he not fully forgive the wrong, even so fully, as if at
all they had not wronged him. Thus much does the same Apostle require of
Philemon, Philem. ver. 6.
in regard of the wrong which his servant Onesimus had done him. Genesis 50. 17,
21.
So did Joseph and Moses pass over the offenses of their brethren. Numb. 12.
13.
They did so accept and esteem them, as if they had done no wrong at all.

Q. What if by the wrong a man does me, I observe such infirmity, yea and
iniquity to be in him, Direction for carriage of our selves to wrongdoets.
as by experience I find him to be a far other man then at first I supposed
him to be, ought I notwithstanding to make such account of him as I did before?

A. We must put difference betwixt a wrong done upon such an occasion as may
afterward be avoided, and that which is done upon an evil disposition, which
remaining in a man, may be a means to make him continue to do more and more
wrongs. The wrong of the former must be so forgiven, as the wrong doer be so
accepted as if he had done no wrong at all. As for the latter, we are to try if
he may be brought to sight of his evil disposition, and to repentance for the
same. If he be, then ought we to esteem him as if he never had done us any
hurt. But if obstinately he persist in that evil disposition, and be like, on
all occasions, again and again to wrong us, though we do, as we ought, fully
forgive all the wrongs done, and neither take any present revenge, nor keep
them in mind and memory for any future revenge, yet may we in our judgment
esteem him to be such an one as we find him to be. Isa. 5. 20.
( Woe to them that call evil good: that put light for darkness, and sweet for
bitter.) For example, if I find one of whom I have had a very good account,
and thereupon used him very familiarly, to have no command of his tongue, but
on all occasions to be ready to blab out, and blaze abroad whatsoever he sees
or hears, if therein he have wronged me, I may forbear to use him so
familiarly as I did before, and take heed what secrets I communicate to him,
though I fully forgive the wrong that is past. Or if I have accounted one to be
an entire friend to me, but by experience find him to be hollow-hearted, and
maliciously minded against me, I ought wisely and warily to avoid his
society, and to take heed of the snares which he lays for me. 1. Sam. 19. 20.
(For which we have the pattern of David, Ioh. 2. 24.
and Christ) yet so to pass by the wrongs done as if none had been done.

For attaining to this degree of forgiveness, Direction for manifestation of
forgiveness
that our forgiving may be, as Gods, full.

1. Revenge must be purged out of the heart. The heart is the fountain. If
that be cleansed the streams will be clear.

2. Wrong must be put out of mind and memory so far as possibly can be.
Things forgotten are as things not done.

3. No needful kindness must be denied to him that has wronged us.

4. Occasions of doing good to wrong doers must not only be taken, but
sought. Readiness and willingness to do all offices of courtesy and
charity to such as are ready to do all the mischief and injury that they
can unto us, shows that no revenge lurketh in our hearts. Continual fruits
of love cannot issue out of a reuengefull heart.

The several points of the condition annexed to the fifth Petition having been
distinctly handled, for better clearing thereof, sundry questions about proper
debts, suits in Law, and execution of Justice are to be resolved.

. 149. Of requiring proper Debts.
Q. MAy a Christian require debts of money or other like things due to him?

A. He may. For

1. The Law of God gives liberty to a Creditor to take a pledge of the Debtor
for security of paying the debt: Deuteronomy. 24. 10, 11, 12.
in case the debtor be not very poor, and the Pledge such an one as he cannot
spare.

2. Debtors are commanded to pay their debts: Romans 13. 7, 8.
Creditors therefore may take them.

3. God did extraordinarily provide for a poor widow wherewithal she might
pay her debt. 2. King. 4. 7.
Had it been unlawful for a Creditor to require his debt, God would rather
have provided means to restrain him from exacting the debt, then for her to
pay the debt.

Q. How can requiring debts, and forgiving debtors stand together?

A. 1. Forgiveness here professed has respect rather to wrongs done, then to
commodities due. The word, Debtors, is metaphorically by way of resemblance
used. For he that does wrong, makes himself, as a debtor, bound to some
penalty for the wrong he has done. Saint Matthew in his exposition of this
condition uses a word which in relation to man, Mat. 16. 14, 15. (...).
signifies offenses, wrongs, or injuries.

2. It restrains all revenge in exacting due debts. Whatsoever wrong we
conceive to be done us by not paying the debt must so far be forborne, as we
take no revenge thereof. We may not hate, revile, or euilly entreat our debtors
for not paying their debts.

3. It keeps our exacting of debts within the compass of mercy. Which is,
that in case the debtor be no way able to pay the debt, we rather forgive it,
then by hard and cruel means utterly undo him, as by laying executions upon
all he has, or keeping him under perpetual imprisonment.

Object. Luke 6. 35.
It is Christ's express charge to lend hoping for nothing again. How then may
a debt be required, if it may not be looked for again?

A. 1. That, as other like precepts in Christ's Sermon on the Mount, is not
simply, but comparatively to be taken: that we should be so far from the
cruel Usurers mind, who is resolved to have both principal and interest, or,
rather then fail of either, to do what he can in strictest rigor of Law
against principal and surety, we should I say be so far from such a mind,
as not to look for any thing, no not for the principal again.

2. That precept is laid down as a rule of love: and according to the rule of
love to be taken. Now love requires mercy to be showed to him that needs.
The rule of love is, on the one side, my brothers necessity, and on the other,
mine own ability: 1. John. 3. 17.
which the Apostle implies in this instance, Who so has this worlds goods
(there is a man's ability,) and sees his brother has need (here is his
brothers necessity.) On this ground when a man lends, he must be so
mercifully minded, as, if his debtor fall into extreme poverty, and be not
able to pay what he has borrowed, willingly to remit the whole debt, and in
such a case not so much as to look for any thing again.

3. Some restrain that general particle nothing to interest and overplus,
Sentit, opinor, de f^nore quod ex mutu^ redit. Nam in hunc sensum
interpretantur veteres. Erasm in Luc. 6. 35.
as if he had said, Lend, hoping for nothing above the principal; or for
nothing by way of interest. In this sense it makes not against the forenamed
position of requiring a man's due debt: See D. Downam on the 15. Psalm.
interest being no due debt, but forbidden by Gods word.

. 150. Of going to Law.
Q. MAy a Christian by Law exact his due debt, in case his debtor be able, but
wilful, and refuse to pay it?

A. Yea, he may. For public Magistrates and Judges who have power to
determine cases in Law, Romans 13. 1.
are of God. God has appointed them, to force such as are wilful and
obstinate to do that which is just and right, and to give to every one his
own: yea and commanded his people in matters of controversy to stand to the
determination of the Judge. Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9, 10, 11.


Object. S. Paul blames the Corinthians for going to law one with another. 1.
Cor. 6. 1.


Answ. Going to law is not there simply blamed and forbidden, but sundry abuses
thereof. As,

1. Going to unfit Judges (whom the Apostle styles unjust, Ver. 1, 6. (...).
Ver. 2. (...). Ver. 5.
and unbelievers) and bringing Christians before them.

2. Contending about small matters, and mere trifles: even about words, and
light damages.

3. Too much forwardness to Law. When Law is the first remedy that is used
for getting that which a man conceiues to be his right. Many are so forward,
that secretly without any notice given to the party sued, they will steal a
judgment.

4. Doing wrong themselves. Ver. 8.
Even they who went to Law were wrong doers, as the Apostle says, you do
wrong. Many which do wrong to others, complain, and commence suite in Law
against those to whom they do the wrong, to color the wrong which themselves
do, and to get advantage for doing the greater mischief,

Q. In what cases may Christians go to Law?

A. 1. Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
In matters of moment: which are too hard for private Christians to decide.

2. When we have to do with wilful persons, who will be brought to nothing,
but what they are forced unto. Saint Paul having to do with such, Acts 25. 11.
was forced to appeal to Caesar.

3. After all private means that we can think of have been used. So as Law
must be used in the last place, as the last remedy. After one has admonished
a brother secretly, yea and taken the help of some few friends, Math. 18. 15,
16, 17.
and yet he remains obstinate, Christ advises to tell such as are in
authority.

Provided that all suites in Law be made in love. 1. Cor. 16. 14.
Let all your things be done in charity. Many are of opinion that no man can
go to Law in charity. But they are grossly deceived. For,

1. He that justly and rightly goes to Law at least supposes that he has
right on his side, and that the party whom he sueth does wrong in that for
which he is sued. Now to bring a wrong-doer to do right, is a duty, and fruit
of love.

2. Suing in Law has respect only to that particular thing which is in
question. But charity extends it self to all things wherein one may be
profitable to another. The man that in one particular seeks to have from
another that which of right belongs to himself, may in all other things be
ready to do what good he can to that other.

3 The manner of prosecuting a suit of Law may be, as with all equity, so with
much tenderness, mildness, and compassion and so that very particular be done
in love.

4. In a doubtful case questioned in Law a man may be so willing to stand to
the sentence of Law, as to be content either way, whether it go with him, or
against him. Yea if it appear that right be on his adversaries side, to be
glad that the Law has discovered right even against himself. Does not this
show much love? Wherefore though by the Apostles prohibition we are taught, 1.
Cor. 6. 1. etc.
as much as may be, to forbear Law, to suffer some loss, to bear with some
wrong, and in some things to part with our right, yet on the forenamed grounds,
and with the forenamed prouiso, it is both lawful and expedient to seek the
help of Law: the ends whereof are very good, as, To defend the innocent, to
relieve the oppressed, to punish the evil doers, to decide doubts, to
determine rights, and to give every one their own.

. 151. Of Magistrates punishing wrong.
Q. MAy wrong done to a man be punished?

A. Yea, by such as have authority. The Lord has given to Magistrates, and
such as are in authority, the power which of right belongs to them for this
end, Romans 13 4. Deuteronomy. 25. 1, 2.
To punish evil doers. 1. King. 2. 31, 46.
They that have so done have been commended for it. 1. Sam. 3. 13.
They who have been negligent therein have themselves been punished of God.
He to whom the wrong is done may forgive the wrong done, and yet the Magistrate
punish him.

Q. May Magistrates punish wrong done to themselves?

A. Yea also. For the office of a Magistrate may be distinguished from his
person. The wrong is done to his person, the punishment is taken by virtue of
his place and office. The wrong for which Solomon commanded Adonijah to be
slain, and Abiathaer to be removed from the Priesthood was against himself:
Compare 1. King. 17. etc with King. 2. 24, 26, 31.
and the particular occasion which he took of putting Ioab to death, was
conspiracy with Ado^ijah against himself.

Q. How then are Magistrates tied to forgive their debtors?

A. By being restrained from private revenge. In which respect David blesses
God for keeping him from revenging himself with his own hand. 1. Sam. 25. 33.
We must distinguish betwixt public justice, and private revenge. 1. Deuteronomy.
17. 9.
That arises from judgment: Genesis 4. 5.
this from wrath. 2. 2. Cor. 4. 2.
That is accompanied with love: Genesis 27. 41.
this with hatred. 3. Romans 13. 4.
That is done in Gods name: this is a man's own. All private revenge, though no
outward hurt, or wrong be done thereby, is a sin in the revenging party
because of the inward corruption whence it arises. Much hurt may fall on a
delinquent by public Justice, and yet no sin in the execution thereof,
because it may stand with equity, pity, mercy, and charity: and it may aim
at the good of the party punished: yea and turn to his good also. A
malefactor may be accused, condemned, and punished with stripes, fine,
imprisonment, banishment, excommunication, death, or otherwise, and yet the
bonds of mercy and love not transgressed. Thus may suites of law be made, and
wilful or negligent debtors cast into prison, as these are parts of public
justice, and yet the condition of the fifth Petition not be violated, if anger,
hatred, malice, revenge and such like corruptions taint not the foresaid
execution of Justice.

The distinct points of the forenamed Condition having been all handled, The
maine scope and just consequence thereof is further to be considered.

. 152. Of imitating God in forgiving wrongs.
Q. Why is the Condition annexed to the fifth petition?

A. 1. Exemplo ineffabilis misericordiae Dei, nos etiam ad dandam peccantibus
in nos veniam cohortatur. Chrysostom. Hom 20. in Mat. 6. Math. 6. 14, 15.
To move us to forgive one another.

2. To give us assurance of Gods forgiving us.

A strong motive it must needs be, in that all the evidence that we can have of
Gods mercy in forgiving us, arises from our ready mind and forward
disposition to forgive others. If we forgive men, God will forgive us. If we
forgive not men, God will not forgive us. Our Lord therefore enioyneth us to
make this profession, As we forgive, that we knowing and believing Gods
indulgencie and readiness to forgive us, might be moved to do the like for
others; and might not dare to approach to the mercy Seat of God to crave
pardon of him, unless our conscience can and do bear witness for us, that
we are on all occasions ready to grant pardon to such as wrong us.

Q. What doctrine does the first end of the condition added to the fifth
Petition afford?

A. Gods mercy to man is a forceable motive for man to show mercy to man.
Gods pattern a weighty motive.
Therefore Gods practice is often set as a pattern before men. Lege Chrysostom. loco
citato.
Forgive one another as God has forgiven you. Be merciful, as your Father is
merciful. Walk in love, as Christ has loved us. Ephesians. 4. 32.
Be followers of God. Luke 6. 36.
Be perfect, Ephesians. 5. 1, 2.
as your Father in heaven is perfect. Mat. 5. 48.


Two especial things there be in Gods pattern which are of great force to
move us to imitate him.

1. That infinite difference which is betwixt him and us.

2. That infinite debt wherein we stand bound to his justice.

Such is the surpassing excellency of God, Infinite difference betwixt God and
man.
such the brightness of his Majesty, such the absolute supremacy of his
Sovereignty, such the omnipotency of his power, such his all-sufficiencie, as
man compared to God is Genesis 18. 27.
but dust and ashes, Job 40. 4.
vile, Reu. 3. 17.
wretched and miserable: yea Isa. 40. 17.
All nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less then
nothing. What man is, he is of God. God is our Creator, we the work of his
hands. He our Sovereign, Equality betwixt man and man.
we his subjects. Betwixt man and man there is no such difference. All, in
relation to God the high Lord, are fellow servants. Though in a mutual
relation one to another there be some differences, as betwixt Magistrates and
Subjects, Masters and Servants, Parents and Children, yet are those
differences but external, and temporal. External, in the affairs of this
world, for outward order and government. ( Gal. 3. 28.
In Jesus Christ all are one) Temporal, for the time of this world. (After
this life Job 3. 19.
the servant is free from his Master. Mat. 22. 30.
All are as Angels,) yea all children of Adam, as in the points of their
humiliation they are from the same mould, of the same corrupt nature, subject
to the same infirmities, at length brought to the same end, so in the points of
their exaltation, they are all (I speak De generibus singulorum, non singulis
generum. V^ distinguit August. in E^chir. c. 103. and de correp. and Great. c.
14.
of the several sorts and kinds of men not of every particular person) they
are all made after the same Image, redeemed by the same price, partakers of the
same grace, and heirs of the same inheritance. If then God, the Creator of
all, and Supreme Lord over all, who stands in no need of any thing that man
can do, nor can reap any benefit from man, who never wronged any, nor needs
forgiveness, if God forgive man, Ille qui nihil nos laesit, non vult se
vindicare de nobis: and nos quarimus vindicari qui pene quotidie deum
offendimus? Aug. Hom. 42. in l. 50. Hom.
shall not man forgive man, one creature another, one fellow-seruant another,
man who needs man's help, and may reap much good by mutual agreement and
reconciliation with man, who often wrongeth another, and needs to be forgiven
of others, shall not man forgive man, man that daily sins against God? As
the difference betwixt God in relation to man, and man in relation to other men
is beyond comparison: so also is the debt which man owes to God, and that
which one man owes to another. Mat. 18. 24, 28.
In the Parable the debt due to the Lord is said to be ten thousand Talents:
and the debt due to the servant, an hundred pence. Amongst men some difference
there is betwixt Talents and Pence: (...). Cyril. Catech. mist. 5.
and betwixt ten thousand, and one hundred: so that, as in a Parable, that
sets out a great difference betwixt the debt wherein we stand bound to God,
and that which one man owes to another. And this difference does much enforce
the motive taken from Gods example. If God forgive Talents, shall not we
forgive Pence? If God forgive ten thousand, shall not we forgive one hundred?
But this difference is only in a Parable. In truth there is infinitely more
difference betwixt the sins which we commit against God, and the wrongs which
one man does to another, in weight, then betwixt Talents and Pence: and in
number, then betwixt ten thousand and one hundred. Our sins for weight are
infinite, being committed against an infinite Majesty. The penalty due to
them is Gods infinite wrath, the infinite curse of the Law, eternal damnation.
No such wrong can possibly by done to man. As for the number of our sins it
is innumerable. Psalm. 40. 12.
They are more then the hairs of our head. No man can do so many wrongs to us
as we do daily commit sins against God. On these and other like grounds
might the Lord well say to his hard-hearted servant, Mat. 18. 32. 33. (...).
I forgave thee: Should not thou also have had compassion on thy
fellow-seruant, even as I had pity on thee? Considering the great things we
receive for small, let us not be slack to forgive one another. Cyril. loc.
citat. Meditate on Gods pattern.


This pattern of God is duly to be weighed, and often to be meditated on. Good
patterns and presidents as they give good directions, so they are great
incitations, and inducements to stir us up to do a thing: especially when
they are the examples of such as we have just cause highly to esteem. Now who
is more highly to be esteemed, then God? what more worthy pattern can there
be? An high honor it is to be like unto God, and to do as he does. Gods example
is a perfect pattern: and in that respect to be followed: yea so much the
rather because it takes away all those pretenses which men use to allege for
justifying their revenge, and not forgiving such as wrong them.

Their pretenses are such as these. Pretenses for revenge answered.


1. He that has wronged me is a base fellow.

A. What more base to thee, then thou art to God?

2. The wrong done is insufferable.

A. What? more insufferable then thy sins against God?

3. It is not the first time that he has wronged me.

A. Did thou never but once sin against God?

4. He may wrong me again and again if I put it up?

A. Why do thou think so uncharitably of thy brother? But may thou not
sin again and again against God?

5. It beseems not my place and honor to put up wrongs. Quid aduersus cum
tantopere iracundia efferuescis, si quis negligentior, etc. quum te ipsum
inspicere oporteat qualis tu aduersus Dominum fueris. Greg. Nyss. lib. de Orat.


A. Is thy place and honor greater then Gods?

6. I shall be counted a Coward if I revenge not wrongs.

A. Is God so accounted for bearing with sins?

If God do thus, why art thou so much incensed with wrath, when any does any
wrong to thee? Thou should rather behold thy self, how thou have carried
thy self against God. If any thing will make thee forgive, surely this will.

. 153. Of praying without revenge: and of praying for revenge.
Q. What other doctrine does the said end of the condition added to the Fifth
Petition import?

A. Prayer may not be made for pardon, with a reuengefull mind. For we are
bound to make profession of forgiving our debtors, so often as we pray for pardon
of our sins. The charge of lifting up pure hands without wrath tends to
this purpose. 1. Tim. 2. 8.
So does also the charge of leaving the gift before the Altar, and being first
reconciled, Math. 5. 23, 24.
if we remember that our brother has ought against us. (...). Act. 24. 20.
(...).
This phrase, has ought against thee, is a Law term, and implies a suit in
Law, or a difference. So is it used by Saint Paul in his Apology before Felix.
They ought to have been here before thee, and object, if they had ought
against me. So as the reconciliation required, is in a variance, whether we
have done, or received wrong. Satisfaction must be made for the wrong which a
man does. Remission must be granted to the wrong which is done to a man. He
that refuses to do the one or the other, if he say the Lords Prayer, makes a
fearful imprecation against himself, as we shall. 155. Sacrificium Deus non
recipit. d^ssidentis. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 18.
hereafter more distinctly show. Let not therefore that man think that he
shall receive any thing of the Lord. The God of peace accepts not the
sacrifice of him that is at variance.

Object. Is prayer then to be omitted when by a wrong done passion is moved.

Answ. A double sin would so be committed. One by omitting a bounden duty. The
other by persisting in an hateful sin. The only warrantable and comfortable
course in that case, is to subdue passion, to cast off desire of Revenge.
Breach of charity, gives no dispensation for neglect of piety. Christ's charge
is this, Mat. 5. 24. Iubot prius con cordare cum fratre, tunc cum pace
redeuntem Deo munus offerre. Cypr. de vnitat. Eccl.. 11
First be reconciled, then come and offer thy gift. Let this be well noted of
such as forbear to come to the Lords Table because they are not in Charity.
An unchristian practice.

On this ground, as at all times, so especially when we draw near to the
Throne of Grace, we ought to keep a narrow watch, that anger, wrath, envy,
malice, revenge enter not into us. Yea then especially we ought thoroughly to
sift, search, and examine our selves, whether those or any other like evil
qualities have been bred in us, or have entered into us, and still remain
lurking in us. First purge them out before thou prayest. O^e. 6. 6. Ad
sacrificium cum dissentione venientem Deus re^ocat ab altari, etc. Cypr. Loc.
citat.
God prefers mercy before sacrifice. Him that comes to offer a sacrifice
being at variance, God calls from his Altar. Isa. 58. 4, 5.
Them that fast for strife and debate God regards not: -- 1. 15.
neither will he hear the many prayers of them whose hands are full of blood.
Iam. 1. 20.
For the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.

What now may we say or think of such as See the whole Armor of God on
Ephesians. 6. 19. Treat. 3. Part. 2.. 57, 58.
pray for vengeance to fall upon others? Surely their prayers are odious in
Gods sight, and thereby they pull vengeance on their own pates: which they do
much more, that by Prayer, Vow, and Sacrament bind themselves to do
mischief, and take revenge, yea and that upon their Sovereign, and Kingdom
where they live: as Jesuits, and other Papists often do. It is probable that
Luke 13. 1.
they whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices, so did: and that that
kind of punishment as a just recompense was by the divine providence inflicted
on them. Psalm. 109. 17. 1^
As a man loves cursing, so shall it come unto him: as he cloatheth himself
with cursing, so shall it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into
his bones.

. 154. Of the assurance which our forgiving gives of Gods forgiving us.
Q. The first end was A motive to forgive.. 152.
What doctrine does the other end of the condition annexed to the fifth
Petition afford?

A. Man's forgiving his Brother gives assurance of Gods forgiving him. This is
one maine end of adding this condition of our forgiving our brother, to our
desire of Gods forgiving us: as is evident by that causall Particle, FOR, which
Saint Luke sets before it, Luke 11. 4.
thus, For we also forgive. The reference which Christ makes immediately
after this prayer does make the point most clear. Math. 6. 14.
His inference is this, If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you. Does he not thereby imply that by forgiving men,
we gain assurance of Gods forgiving us? On this ground did Nehemiah in his
prayer to God plead the kindness which he had showed to the people of God.
Neh. 5. 19. and 13, 14, 22.


Object. Many Heathen, and other mere carnal men, who could have no assurance
of the forgiveness of their sins, have forgiven many wrongs done to them.

Answ. Carnal men's forgiving is on bie respects.
Their forgiving is no true forgiving, because it arises from bie-respects to
themselves, and not from his brotherly love: much less from conscience and due
respect to God. For if their kind of forgiving be duly weighed it will be
found to be

1. Either in some slight matters which do not much provoke wrath, nor
greatly need forgiveness.

2. Or to some friend, kinsman, or such like person, whom in some outward
respect they like and love. Math. 5. 47.


3. Act. 24. 27.
Or for hope of some recompense, and advantage to themselves.

4. Math. 14. 5.
Or for fear of greater mischief which might ensue if they should manifest
any thought of revenge.

5. Or it may be, by reason of an heavy and dull disposition, which makes them
insensible of wrongs: like him that is brought in thus speaking, Pro. 23. 35.
They have stricken me, and I was not sick: they have beaten me, and I felt it
not.

True Christian forgiving, Iam. 3. 17.
is a part or branch of that wisdom which comes from above, a fruit of that
spirit that resideth in Christ, I^est nobis quasi a natura, magis autem ab
extermineo naturae, affectio quaedam pessima, libids nocendi, vt
inextinguibilis inueniatur in miseris animabus nostris malitiae delectatio.
Bern. in Quadr. Sermon. 6.
an effect of Gods forgiving us. For sons of men are by nature wrathful and
reuengefull. Wrathful, in that they are very soon upon every small and
slight occasion provoked to wrath, as dry Tinder is ready to be fiered by the
least spark. Reuengefull, in that being provoked, they are as it were on fire
with revenge: like Gunpowder, which so soon as it has taken any fire is
instantly all on a flame. The Apostle among other properties of a natural man
reckons these, maliciousness, envy, debate, malignitie (whereby all things
are taken in an evil part) implacablenesse, and unmercifulness. And in
another place to the same purpose he says, we are hateful, and hating one
another. Romans 1. 29, 30.
In regard of this wrathful and reuengefull disposition, Tit. 3 3.
men are resembled to Wolves, Leopards, Bears, Lions, Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8.
Aspes and Cockatrices. Unless this nature be altered it is no more possible
for a man in true brotherly love to forgive, then for one of the forenamed
savage creatures to be quiet, and do no hurt, when they are stirred up and
provoked. Nature must be altered before a wrong can be thoroughly and rightly
passed by and forgiven. This alteration of nature proceeds from an
apprehension of Gods love to us in Christ, and that in pardoning our sins.
For the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, is as fire
that warmeth our hearts thaughing out the hard frost of hatred and revenge, and
making them pliable to Gods heart and affection to us, merciful as he is
merciful, kind, gentle and patient as he is, forbearing wrongs, and
forgiving debts as he does. Hence then it follows, that if our disposition
be inclinable to forgive, and if according to that inclinablenesse we do in
truth actually forgive, we may be assured that God has forgiven us: even as
when we find a cold thing hot, we may infer it has been heated.

Learn hereby how to know, Uses. 1. Trial of Gods mind to us.
Gods mind toward thee, Thou need not to climb up to heaven there to
behold the face of God whether he frown or smile, whether love or anger be
seated in his eyes, but diue into thine own heart, and there observe what is
thy mind toward thy brother. No looking Glass can give a truer
representation of thy face, then thine own heart a demonstration of Gods heart
toward thee. We love, 1. Ioh 4. 19.
because he first loved us: and we forgive because he first forgave us.

Well may we hereby comfort our souls in the day of temptation, 2. Comfort in
time of temptation.
when the conscience is perplexed with doubting of pardon. If thou find in
thy self a readiness to forgive thy brother, thou may conclude that God
has forgiven thee. To strengthen thy faith herein duly weigh the infinite
disparity betwixt Gods goodness and thine. This is as an Ocean that has no
bottom, no bounds: thine but as a drop. If then thou for his sake out of thy
drop of goodness can afford forgiveness answerable to the wrongs done to
thee, Exiguam humanitatem ego exhibui. Non enim amplius capicbat natura. Tua
vero munificentia exiguitate potentiae non prohibetur, quin quantum velis
tantum largiaris Greg, Nyss. lib. de Orat.
may thou not infer that God out of his bottomless Ocean will afford
forgiveness answerable to the sins which thou have committed against him?
When thy conscience is burdened with the heavy weight of thy sins, think of
thy willingness to forgive thy brother, and from thence as from a sign, or
effect, or evidence learn to quiet thy conscience, and settle thy faith, and
in faith say, Forgive me as I forgive: or forgive me, for I forgive. It is
indeed but little mercy that I have showed: for my nature was capable of no
more. But thy bounty is not hindered by want of power. 3. Motive to forgive.
Thou can grant as much as thou will. Thus may the heart be enlarged in
craving pardon, Si D^o pro misericordia atque venia preces oblaturi simus,
co^scientia fiduciam nobis paremus, vt vitam nostram aduoca^am and patronam
huic voci praeficiamus, and vere dicamus Et nos remisimus debentibus nobis.
Greg. Nyss. loc. citat.
and faith settled in obtaining it.

And because this is such an especial means to resolve thy soul of the
pardon of thy sins, be the rather moved to subdue thy passion, when thou art
provoked to cast out wrath and readily to forgive. Seeing it is requisite that
we offer up prayers to God for mercy and pardon, let us by the testimony of
our conscience get to our selves, that we may make our carriage an Advocate to
our prayers, and truly say, We also forgive our debtors. They who feel the
weight of sin would give all they have, and do what possibly they could to
be eased thereof. If thou never felt'st the burden of sin on thine own
soul, enquire after such as are wounded in conscience: and, because things
seen are more sensible, and make a deeper impression, got to them, mark their
agonies and their outcries; thereby judge what an heavy burden sin is, when
the soul feels the burden of it. If once thou feel the weight of it, I
make no question, but that, if Christ should ask thee, as once he asked a
blind man, Mar. 10. 51.
What will thou that I should do to thee, thou would answer, Lord, that I
may be eased of the burden of sin. Behold here how thou may be eased. As
any occasion is offered, Forgive. Thus in doing goodness to man, thou do
the best and greatest goodness to thy self, in that God (whose goodness
infinitely surpasses thine) is moved thereby to do good to thee. This is a
great encouragement, a ground of much comfort to such as can and do forgive
men. Though they have no recompense from man, though they be laughed at for it:
yea though they be worse dealt withal (as Psalm. 35. 12. -- 120. 7.
David was) and more wronged because they are so ready to forgive, yet Gods
gracious acceptance thereof, his merciful dealing with them for it, is
recompense enough.

. 155. Of the revenge which reuengefull persons bring upon themselves.
Q. What doctrine follows as a just consequence from the forenamed condition?

A. Placatum habert Deum non potest qui cum fratre pacem per zeli discordiam
non habet. Cypr. de ^nit. Eccl.. 11
They who forgive not men are not forgiven of God. Bring that which is here
intended by Christ into a true, Logical, Syllogisticall form, and the
consequence will appear to be most just. The form is this. Forgive us as we
forgive others. But we forgive not others. Therefore forgive not us. The
proposition is expressed in the Lords Prayer. The assumption is deducted out of
the inward disposition, and outward practice of the reuengefull person. The
conclusion flows from the Premises by just and necessary consequence. Yet
further to confirm this conclusion, and to show that it is not wrested, let it
be noted how Christ immediately after this prayer, expressly infers as
much in these words, Mat. 16. 15.
If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive you
your trespasses. In the Parable ye find as much verified. For the Lord
delivered that servant, that would not forgive his fellow-seruant, Math* 18.
34, 35.
to the Tormenters, till he should pay all that was due to him. Thereupon
Christ makes this Inference, So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also
unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.

It is Gods usual manner to deal with men according to their dealing one with
another. These prouerbiall speeches import as much, Math. 7. 1.
With what measure you mete it shall be measured to you again. Gal. 6. 7.
Whatsoever a man sows that shall he reap. He shall have judgment without
mercy that has showed no mercy. Iam. 2. ^3.
Dives, Luke 16. 21, 24.
that denied to Lazarus the crummes that fell from his Table, was denied a drop
of cold water to cool his tongue. For man is to man in Gods stead. By our
carriage to man God takes trial of our disposition to him. Whereupon Saint
John says, 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
Who so has this worlds goods, and sees his brother has need, and shuts
up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? For
he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, -- 4. 20.
how can he love God whom he has not seen?

Gods mercy is operative as fire: it warmeth that heart in which it abides,
and works mercy therein. Where therefore no mercy to man can be found, there
is just cause to suspect no mercy of God has been showed. The soul of an
unmerciful man is no fit receptacle of the mercies of God. It abuses, it
peruerteth them.

Behold here the folly of cruel hard-hearted and reuengefull persons, Folly of
reuengefull persons.
who like the unmerciful servant, deny that to their brother which they crave
of God. What can they look for of God Math. 18. 3^.
but such measure as was meted out to the said servant, and to Luke 16, 24. 25.
Dives? They therefore that deal unmercifully with others, do most hurt to
themselves, because thereby they provoke God to deal unmercifully with them.
Consider this O wrathful and reuengefull persons. The time may come when you
will as earnestly desire one drop of Gods mercy, as Dives desired a drop of
water to cool his tongue: and yet you shall have your desire no more satisfied
then his was.

This consequence of Gods retaining their sins who forgive not their
brethren, Motive to forgive.
does much enforce the a forementioned 154.
exhortation to forgive. As there was showed the great advantage of forgiving
others (which is assurance of Gods forgiving them) so here is declared the
great damage of not forgiving: which is a strict exaction of the uttermost
penalty for all that debt wherein we stand bound to Gods justice. He that from
his heart forgiueth not his brother that has offended him, Quisquis in se
delinquen^i fiatri non ex cord dimiserit, non indulgentiam sed condemnationem
deprecatione hac s^^imet impetrabit, suaque prof^ssione semetip sum dirius
iudica^i. Ab. Isaak. de Orat. cap. 21. (...)
by this Petition procures to himself not absolution, but condemnation, and
by his own profession causes himself to be more severely judged. For he
turns his Petition for himself into a fearful imprecation against himself:
and whatsoever his words be, in effect he prays that God would not forgive
him. He turns the sense of this word, Forgive, to be, Forgive not. Is not
this the ready way to pull vengeance upon his own pate for all the sins
whereof in any kind he stands guilty before God? Woeful in this respect is
their plight, whom revenge does so possess as they cannot forgive. How
insensible of their good or hurt are they on whom these motives work nothing
at all! Oh be moved, even for avoiding this great mischief, to forgive: and
take heed that by not forgiving thy neighbor some small and light wrongs
against thee, thou keep thy self from obtaining pardon of thy heinous sins
before God. Cyril. Catech. Mist. 5.


. 156. Of deprecation against evil.
Q. What is to be observed about the order of the fifth Petition?

A. 1. That which it has common with the sixth?

2. That which is proper to it self.

Two things are common to them both.

1. The distinct kind of them both is the same.

2. The general matter

The distinct kind wherein these two last Petitions differ from all the rest,
is Deprecation, that is, Prayer for the remouall of evil. In the fifth Petition
we pray to be freed from the guilt and punishment of sin. In the sixth, from
the power and bondage of sin.

Q. What do we hence learn?

A. Deprecation must be added to Petition. We must be careful as well to pray
against those evils which do, or may annoy us, as for those good things which
may, or do help us, (...) 1. Tim. 2. 1.
This kind is expressly mentioned among the other warrantable kinds of
Prayer: and on all occasions it has been used by the Saints. Accordingly it
may and must be used by us, and that in regard of Gods glory, and our own good.

1. The glory of Gods pity and power is much magnified hereby. Of his pity,
in that by going to him in all our miseries we acknowledge him to be a God of
compassion, moved with our miseries: else could we have no heart to go to him.
The servants of the King of Syria persuade their Lord, being overthrown in
battle to go with sackcloth upon their loins, 1. King. 20. 31.
and ropes upon their heads to the King of Israel, on this ground, We have
heard that the Kings of the house of Israel are merciful Kings. Were we not
persuaded that he to whom we go, is pitiful and merciful, scarce should we
be moved to lay open our sores before him. Well, mark Number. 14. 18, 19.
the prayers of the Saints, and you shall find the mercy, pity and compassion
of God much pleaded in them. Dan. 9. 9.
The glory of Gods power is also magnified by Deprecations, Psalm. 51. 1.
in that he is acknowledged to be for all turns able to do, and able to
undo. Able to do that good for us which he sees to be needful for us: and
able to undo that knot of misery wherewith through our own folly we are bound,
and to break those snares wherewith we are entangled.

2. Our need requires, that being in misery we should be delivered out of it:
or else all the good that can be bestowed upon us, will be but as a show or
shadow of goodness: no sweetness thereof can be tasted: no benefit can be
reaped thereby. Abraham conceiving it to be a great misery to be childlesse,
Gen 15, 1, 2.
when God graciously promised him to be his shield, and exceeding great reward,
he answered, What will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse? This supposed
evil took away the sweetness from that exceeding great reward which was
proffered to him. The Israelites being in grievous bondage, when Moses came to
them in the name of the Lord to comfort them, Exodus 6. 9.
They hearkened not to him for anguish of spirit. All the delights which the
heart of man can desire are as nothing to him that is sick at heart, or
tortured with tormenting diseases, if he be not freed from that sickness, and
eased of that pain.

In what a desperate case may we now think them to be, that, being in misery,
either seek no help at all: or, which is all one, seek help of such as can
afford them no true help.

Of the former sort are

1. Refusers of help in misery.
Such as through a blockish stupiditie, like beasts, lie under that evil which
lies upon them: and seem not to be moved therewith, as those Jews of whom
the Prophet thus complains, O Lord thou have stricken them, Ier. 5. 3.
but they have not grieved, etc.

2. Such as through wilful obstinacy are so far from praying to have the
evil that is on them removed, as by continuing in sin, they bring more and
more evil upon them: like Ahaz, who therefore is thus branded, 2. Chro. 28. 22.
This is Ahaz.

3. Such as through a malicious impudency, when they are pinched and pressed
with the evil that lies on them, blaspheme the Name of God, as the profane
2. King. 6. 33.
King of Israel, and Ren. 16. 8, 9.
they who were tormented at the pouring out of the fourth vial, did.

Of the latter sort are, Seekers of help where no help is.


1. Such as trust to means without God: as 2. Chro. 56. 12
Asa, who sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians: and the Isa. 31. 1.
Israelites who went down to Egypt for help, but sought not the Lord.

2. Such as seek help of such things as have no power or virtue at all to
help them in that for which help is sought: as they, who, being troubled in
conscience and wounded in soul, seek to ease themselves by merry company,
music, gaming, and the like. So 1. Sam. 16. 17.
Saul, when the evil spirit came upon him, must needs have music: and the 1.
King. 18. 26, 28.
Baalites when their request was not granted, Leaped upon the Altar, and cut
themselves with knives and lancers: and Papists to like purposes whip
themselves: yea also they seek to drive the Devil away with holy water, holy
oil, crucifixes, crossing themselves, and other like foolish toys.

3. Such as seek help of him that will take all advantages against them, and
work them the more mischief for trusting to him, even the Devil himself.
All that go to Witches, Coniurers, Sorcerers, and such instruments of Satan,
for help in any need, seek help of Satan: as 1. Sam. 28. 8.
Saul that went to the Witch at Endor: and 2. King. 1. 2.
Ahaziah that sent to Baal-zebub.

All these, and other like helps are no better then a Ezekiel. 29. 7.
reed, whereupon if a man lean it breaks, and renteth his flesh that
leans thereon.

For our part therefore let us take notice of the evils whereunto we are
subject, What evils are to be prayed against, and how, See in the whole Armor
of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18.
and of the remedy warranted and sanctified for removing of them, and wisely
and conscionably use the same.

This of Deprecation, which is the distinct kind of the two last Petitions.
Treat. 3.. 32, 33 etc.
The general Matter of them both follows.

. 157. Of taking care for our spiritual welfare.
Q. What is the general matter nf the two last Petitions?

A. Spiritual. Such as concerns our souls. As in the fourth Petition we
were taught to pray for such temporal blessings as were meet for our bodies,
Post subsidium cibi petitur and ve nia delicti, vt qui a Deo pascitur in Deo
viuat: nec tantum praesenti and temporali vitae, sed and aternae consulatur.
Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 16.
and for our outward estate in this world: so in the fifth and sixth Petitions
we are taught to seek such spiritual blessings as concern the good of our
soul, that he who is fed of God may live in God.

Q. What are we taught hereby?

A. We must take care of our spiritual welfare. Care must be had for the good
of our souls as well as of our bodies. Ioh. 6. 27.
Where Christ moves us to moderate our immoderate care for the things of this
world, he presses us, earnestly to care for our souls. And that not without
just cause. Mat. 6. 33.
For

1. Our happiness consists in the spiritual welfare of our souls. Psalm.
32. 2.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose
spirit there is no guile.

2. Herein lies a maine difference, not only betwixt reasonable and
unreasonable creatures, or civil and savage men, or Professors of true
religion and idolaters, but also betwixt all natural and spiritual men. The
natural man, whether he live in the Church or out of it, minds only the
things of this life. The things of the Spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
which concern his soul and the spiritual good thereof, He receives not;
for they are foolishness to him. Only the spiritual man, who is both in the
Church and of the Church, enlightened and guided by that Spirit which is in the
Church, and in every part and member thereof, well discerning the things of the
Spirit of God, tending to the happiness of his soul, does carefully seek
after them.

The folly of most men is hereby discovered. 1. Reproof.
For their care is wholly and only for the things of this life. They neglect
their souls, as if they had no souls at all to care for, or cared not what
became of them. Their own Proverb verifieth as much against them, which is
this, Let God take care for my soul, and I will take care for my body. A
cursed Proverb. In both the parts thereof it sauoureth rank of Atheistical
profaneness. The latter part implies a desperate casting off Gods care for
their bodies: the former, a presumptuous thrusting of their souls on God,
against that course which he has expressly prescribed.

Let us learn wisdom from this ground of wisdom taught by him that is the
wisdom of God. 2. Advice.
Let us not disioyne the care of these two sweet companions, which God has so
nearely linked together, our body and soul. Let both in their place and due
manner be cared for. Let spiritual things be provided for the soul, which is
a spiritual substance, as well as earthly things for the body which is of the
earth. By that care which nature moves us to take for the temporal good of
our bodies, we ought to be so far from resting therein, as we ought rather to
be raised up thereby to seek how we may procure good to our souls. Surely
Christ by inferring the Petitions for our souls good, immediately upon that
which concerns the good of our bodies, intends thereby, that by sense of
our bodies need we should be made sencible of the souls need.

For this end, let us

1. Take notice of our spiritual needs. Ignorance of need makes men negligent
of providing things needful. Laodicea not knowing that she was wretched, Reu
3. 16, 17, 18
miserable, poor, blind and naked, regarded not the gold that might make her
rich, the white raiment that might cover the shame of her nakedness, and the
eye-salue that might make her see.

2. Prou. 2. 4.
Enquire after the means of help. -- 4. 5.
The wise man does often much press this duty of seeking and searching after
the things that are needful and useful. -- 8. 5.


3. Conscionably and carefully use the means which are afforded for help.
This was the counsel which Christ gave to the forenamed Church of the
Laodiceans, to buy gold tried in the fire, and white raiment, Reu. 3. 18.
and to anoint her eyes with eye-salue.

. 158. Of doubling our care for the good of our souls.
Q. WHy are there two Petitions for our spiritual good?

A. 1. The things concerning our spiritual estate are far more excellent: as
the soul is more excellent then the body, Things of the soul most excellent.
and as things concerning eternal and heavenly happiness surpass such as
concern only a temporal and earthly contentment. Mat. 13. 44, 45, 46.
The Merchant that sold all that he had to buy the treasure hid in the field,
and the pearl of price, was not ignorant hereof.

2. They are more absolutely necessary. Things of the soul most necessary.
We may want the temporal things of this world, and yet not be miserable. God
can turn that want to our advantage. Luke 10. 42.
But the want of spiritual blessings makes us extremely miserable. True
happiness consists in the fruition of these. Yea the happiness of our
temporal welfare consists in our spiritual welfare. No benefit, no
comfort can be received from all that this world affords, unless sin be
pardoned and we freed from the power thereof.

3. We are by nature more dull and backward to seek after things spiritual,
Man careless of his soul.
then temporal. These are visible, and the sweetness of them is more
sensible, sooner discerned, and more easily tasted. The other being invisible,
are more insensible. So as we have more need to be the more earnest in seeking
of them.

Q. What are we taught hereby?

A. Our care for spiritual things must be double. With much more earnestness
must we seek spiritual then temporal blessings. It is of spiritual good
things that Christ says, Mat. 6. 33. (...).
First seek, etc. Both before and above all other things seek them. First,
does not only note out the order, but also the manner of seeking. 2 Pet 1. 10.
(...).
Of spiritual blessings it is That Saint Peter says, Rather give diligence,
or give the more and greater diligence to make them sure. Our mind must with
the utmost of our endeavor, even with full bent be carried that way.

A due consideration of this point does manifest the 2. Pet. 1. 9.
blindness, and aggrauate the folly of them who prefer temporal before
spiritual blessings: Mar. 5. 17.
like to the Gadarens, who made more account of their swine then of Christ.
Into this ship of fools may they well be thrust

1. Who put of the time for seeking the good of their souls, Who prefer
things temporal before spiritual.
but will loose no time for advancing and increasing their temporal estate.
They who put off their providing of oil till the hour wherein the Bridegroom
came are styled foolish Virgins. Mat. 25. 2, etc.


2. Who put bie the opportunities that by Gods providence are afforded for
doing good to their souls. As Felix, who when by Paul's preaching his heart was
so smitten as he trembled, Acts 24. 26, 27.
said, Go thy way for this time: and yet watched all opportunities for a bribe.

3. Who so eagerly pursue the things of this world, wherein they take delight,
Genesis 25. 29, etc.
or from whence they expect profit, as they neglect the care of their souls.
Such an one was profane Esau, who followed the profits and pleasures of the
field till he fainted, and then sold his birthright for a mess of pottage.

4. Such as seek the spiritual things of their soul, but so loosely and
carelessly as if they cared not much for them. These are like the Lukewarm
Laodiceans who can expect nothing but to be spued out of the mouth of Christ.
Reu. 3. 15, 16.


Let us be otherwise minded: and for that end,

1. Well discern betwixt things that differ. Direction.
Till the understanding be thoroughly informed in the difference of matters, and
know which are the more excellent, the will cannot incline it self to one more
then to another. This therefore does the Apostle pray for in the Philippians
behalf, Phil. 1. 10. (...) vt dignoscatis quae discrepant. Psalm. 4. 6.
To discern things that differ.

2. Wisely prefer^e the more excellent. As David, who, when others said, Who
will show us any good? (meaning temporal goods) thus prayed to God, Lord lift
thou up the light of thy countenance upon us?

3. Stir up the gift of God. 2. Tim. 1. 6.
That desire, that love, that delight that in any measure is in thee toward
the spiritual good things of thy soul, nourish, and increase, that they
neither decay nor die in thee.

4. Help the weakness of nature. Mat. 26. 41.
When the spirit is ready, the flesh will be backward. Romans 7. 21, 23.
And when one would do good, evil is present with him. A law in the members
warreth against the law of the mind. This often makes us dull, heavy and
sluggish. Wherefore (as the wise man advises) when the iron is blunt, Eccl.
10. 10.
put to more strength.

Hitherto of the general matter common to the two last Petitions.

. 159. Of the blessings which Pardon of sin brings.
Q. What proper thing is to be considered about the order of the fifth Petition?

A. 1. The inference of it upon the fourth.

2. The Precedence of it before the sixth.

Q. What doctrine does that inference afford?

A. By pardon of sin the things of this world are made true blessings. All
the things which in this prayer we are taught to crave, are so to be craved as
blessings. But sin is as deadly poison to daily bread: while it remains
upon us unpardoned, nothing that this world affords can be a true blessing:
for sin brings a curse upon every creature that we use: Deuteronomy. 28. 16, etc.
but pardon of sin takes away that curse, and so makes all that we use to
be true blessings. Psalm. 32. 1.
That man therefore is pronounced blessed whose transgression is forgiven.

Learn hereby in the use of all temporal blessings to seek for pardon of
sin. It is one end of Grace before meat (according to the 1. Sam. 9. 13.
Math. 14. 19. Luke 24. 30. Acts 27. 35.
ancient and commendable custom of Gods people) to have the curse taken away
from the creatures we use, and to have them turned into a blessing. Do the
like, crave pardon of sin, before thou go about the work of thy calling,
before thou take a journey, before thou go to any recreation though thou
know it to be lawful and meet, before thou go to bed, when thou risest
up, in all things, at all times seek remission of sin. Never think thy
self well or safe, no not in thy greatest abundance or best prosperity till
thou have assurance thereof. Genesis 4. 7.
Sin not remitted lies as a bondage at the door, and keeps all Gods
blessings from entering. Lam. 3. 44.
Sin, like a cloud, hides from us the bright Sunshine of Gods favor.
Sin like the accursed thing which Achan stole, Ios. 7. 11. etc. 2. King. 4.
40.
makes us a prey to our deadliest enemies. Sin, as the wild gourdes,
brings death with it, and that into such things as are otherwise wholesome,
Dan. 5. 5, 6.
and good. Sin, like that handwriting which on a wall appeared to
Bel-shazzar, in the midst of our greatest iolletie, will change countenance,
trouble thoughts, loose joints, and make knees to smite one against another. Is
there not then great and just cause in all things at all times to seek pardon
thereof?

This of the Inference of the fifth Petition on the fourth.

. 160. Of the precedence of Justification before Sanctification.
Q. What Doctrine does the precedence of the fifth Petition before the sixth
import?

A. Justification goes before Sanctification. For the former of the two last
Petitions concerning our spiritual good sets out our Justification, the
latter, our Sanctification. This precedence is to be applied rather to Order,
then to Time. For at that very moment that Christ pardons sin, he
conueigheth his Spirit into us whereby sin is mortified. S. Paul therefore
where he sets down these two together, sets Righteousness before
Sanctification.

Justification causes Sanctification: 1. Cor. 1. 30.
in which respect the Apostle says that we are sanctified by faith in Christ,
Acts 26. 18.
that is, faith uniting us to Christ, by whom we are justified, receives grace
for grace, a further grace to sanctify us.

Sanctification declares Justification: Iam. 2. 24.
in which respect Saint James says, that we are justified by works: that is,
declared so to be. As by virtue of our Justification we are presented
blameless before God: so by virtue of our Sanctification we are declared to
be righteous before men.

As the cause therefore goes before the effect, and as the effect follows
the cause, so are Justification and Sanctification in their order one to
another.

1. This order affords one sound argument against Justification by works.
Romans 3. 28. -- 11. 6.
All good works are parts of Sanctification. If by the merit of them we be
justified, Sanctification must go before Justification.

2. This order proves our Justification to be free. Romans 3. 24.
Because in order of nature it goes before any good thing that we can do.

3. It also demonstrateth the precedence of faith before acceptable repentance,
in order of nature. Faith is the instrument of our Justification, Repentance a
principal grace of our Sanctification.

4. It lays down the ground of pardon of sin: Psalm. 51. 1.
which is, nothing in our selves, but the mere free grace of God, which is to
be pleaded for obtaining pardon.

Thus much of the Order of the fifth Petition. The particular good things to be
craved, are next to be declared.

. 161. Of graces to be prayed for in regard of the pardon of our own sins.
Q. What are the particular good things for which we are taught to pray by
virtue of the Fifth Petition?

A. 1. Such as concern the Petition it self.

2. Such as concern the condition annexed to it. The things which concern the
Petition it self have respect to the pardon both of our own, and of others
sins. For we are taught to say in the plural number and first person,
Forgive US OUR trespasses.

Q. What are the things that concern the pardon of our own sins to be
prayed for?

A. 1. Knowledge of the nature of sin: how horrible a thing it is: into what
a woeful plight it brings the creature, making it a debtor to the revenging
justice of God. Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 16, etc.
For this end does the Law distinctly set down the curses which by sin are
pulled on man.

2. Knowledge of a man's own sins. How he himself being guilty of sin is a
debtor to God: and in that respect in a most woeful estate. This did David well
know when he said, I know mine iniquity: and Job who said, Behold, I am vile.
Psalm. 51. 3. Job 40. 4.


3. Sense of the burden of sin. All the knowledge that can be had of the
horriblenesse of sin, and of the multitude and heinousness of the sins
whereof we stand guilty, will not sufficiently move us to be eased of the
burden of them, till we feel the weight thereof lying on our own souls, and
even oppressing them. This made David so earnestly desire God not to rebuke him
in anger: For of that earnest suit he rendereth this reason, Mine iniquities
are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me. Psalm.
38. 1, 4.


4. A broken heart, and contrite spirit. A man may feel the heavy burden of
sin, and yet not seek to be eased: but lie under it as a beast: or as one
that despaireth of all help. But if the heart be truly broken, and touched to
the quick with the sense of sin, it will not let a man rest till he have
obtained pardon. Psalm. 51. 17.
In that Psalm where David most earnestly craves pardon, he shows that he
had a broken heart.

5. Humble confession of sin. For this Petition is a plain acknowledgement
thereof. Without Prou 28. 13.
confession there is no hope of pardon: but 1. Ioh. 1. 9. Psalm 32. 5.
promise of pardon is made to him that confesses his sin.

6. Earnest desire of pardon. That we may be freed from the guilt and
punishment of sin. To confess sin and not to desire pardon, is but to put
in an evidence against our selves. This is that which is most distinctly
expressed in this Petition: and which has ever been performed by all the
Saints.

7. Knowledge of Gods free grace and rich mercy. Without this, though a man
never so much feel the burden of sin, he has no sure ground, nor can have
any heart to seek pardon. It appears that David was well instructed therein,
Psalm. 51. 1.
in that he does so much plead and press it.

8. Understanding of the sacrifice of Christ. What that sacrifice was; 1. Pet.
1. 19.
the pure and precious blood of the Son of God. By whom it was offered up;
Heb. 9. 14.
by himself through his eternal Spirit. For whom; even for us 1. Tim. 1. 15.
miserable sinners. To what end; to be 1. Tim. 2. 6.
a ransom for our sins: that so satisfaction might be made to Gods justice
for the same. This sacrifice added to God^ mercy shows how perfectly Gods
mercy and justice meet together in man's Redemption. No marvel then that 1.
Cor. 2. 2.
Saint Paul desired to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified.

9. A right discerning of the perfection even of the active obedience of
Christ, and of the end thereof: how he Math. 3. 15.
fulfilled all righteousness: and how Romans 5. 19.
we are made righteous thereby. Thus we may see how the debt of obedience which
we owe, and are not able to perform, is performed by our surety, and we by
reason thereof are accepted as righteous.

10. An high esteem of Christ. For Christ, the great things that he has done
and suffered, and the many great benefits which issue from thence are not for
hogs, that as vile things will trample them under feet. Phil. 3. 8.
Saint Paul accounted all things but loss and dung in comparison of Christ.

11. Hungring and thirsting after Christ and his righteousness. Luke 1 53.
These are they that shall be satisfied and filled; Math. 5. 6.
and in that respect are blessed.

12. Faith in the pardon of sin. All the forenamed points without this, Ioh.
5. 24.
will but aggrauate a poor sinners misery. This is it that brings a quietus
est, Luke. 7. 50.
a full discharge with it. In the disease and distress of the soul through
sin, Christ will say as he did to such as were afflicted in body, Math. 8.
13. -- 9. 22.
As thou have believed, so be it unto thee: Thy faith has made thee whole.

13. Peace of conscience. Romans 5. 1.
This follows faith, and gives good evidence to the soul of the discharge
thereof from sin.

These are especial graces, that respect the pardon of our own sins.

. 162. Of graces to be prayed for in regard of the pardon of others sins.
Q. What things in regard of the pardon of others sins are to be prayed for?

A. 1. Compassion by reason of them. Considering the woeful plight where into
sin brings men, our bowels ought to be moved thereat. Mar. 3. 5.
It is noted of Christ that he grieved for the hardness of the Jews hearts.
Was there not great compassion in him that thus prayed for others, Exo, 32. 31,
32.
Oh this people have sinned a great sin: yet now if thou will forgive their
sin: and if not, blot me out of thy Book. This compassion will make us as
earnest for the pardon of the sins of others as of our own.

2. Humiliation for them. Ezr, 9. 3.
Good Ezra was so dejected and humbled for the sins of others, as he rent
his garment and Mantle, and plucked off the hair of his head, and beard, and
fell down astonished.

3. Confession of them. It was usual with the Saints to confess unto God the
sins of others. For which purpose the confessions of Exodus 32. 31.
Moses, of Ezr. 9. 6, 7.
Ezra, of Neh. 1. 6.
Nehemiah, of Neh. 9. 16, etc
the Levites, of Dan. 9. 20.
Daniel, and of others are worthy to be observed. Humiliation and confession of
others sins is an evidence of an holy zeal of Gods glory. Fear of the just
vengeance of sin may make us humble our selves for our own sins, and
penitently confess them to God. But to be so affected for others sins, as it
shows a brotherly fellow-feeling, so an holy indignation against sin, as it
is a sin offensive to the divine Majesty.

4. Supplication for the pardon of them. This is the maine duty expressly
taught in this Petition. It is an especial means of obtaining pardon for
others sins. But it is not in our own power to do it? Zac. 12. 10.
It is a gift of the Spirit, and a gift promised. We may therefore, yea and we
must pray for it. And having it, then say to God as Moses did, Number. 14. 19.
Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people: and as Christ did, Luke
23. 34
Father, forgive them: and as Stephen did, Act. 7. 60.
Lord lay not their sin to their charge.

These are principal graces to be prayed for, by virtue of the maine
Petition.

. 163. Of the graces which are to be prayed for by reason of the condition
annexed to the Fifth Petition.
Q. What graces are to be prayed for by virtue of the condition annexed to the
Fifth Petition?

A. In general, such a mind to our brother as we desire God to bear to us.
This Christ implies under this one word merciful, where he says, Luk* 6. 36.
Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is also merciful. Hereby as in a
Looking-glass shall we set out Gods mind to man, and 1. Pet. 2. 9.
show forth the praises of God: yea and Luke 7. 47.
gain good evidence of Gods good mind to our selves.

In particular, such graces as follow.

1. Love. This is a duty that has been required 1. Ioh. 3. 11.
from the beginning: and it is the Math. 5. 44.
ground of all goodness, kindness, and forgiveness. Ephesians. 4. 32.
Where the Apostle exhorts to forgive, he adds this direction, -- 5. 2.
walk in love, showing thereby that love will make men forward to forgive.

2. Meekness. 1. Pet. 3. 4.
This is in the sight of God of great price. It is of special use to keep a
man from being provoked, and from desire of revenge. Christ being of a meek
spirit, -- 2. 23.
when he was reviled, reviled not again. Moses being commended for a very
meek man, Numb. 12.
this is given as an evidence and proof thereof, that he was not provoked to
wrath by the wrong which Aaron and Miriam did him.

3. Compassion: or, to use the Scripture phrase, bowels of mercies. Col. 3. 12.
(...).
This makes us pity such as wrong us. And because in doing wrong to us, we
know they do themselves the greatest hurt, a compassionate spirit will work in
us more pity toward them, then revenge against them: and in that respect to
pray for them even when they are wronging us, Luke 23. 34.
as Christ and Stephen did. Acts 7. 60.


4. Long-suffering. That does the Apostle add to the forenamed meekness,
Col. 3 12.
and bowels of mercies. This keeps a man from being overcome with multitudes
of wrongs. God himself is said to be a God of long-suffering, Psalm. 103. 8.
in that he continues to pass by many wrongs time after time, without
executing judgment and revenge upon the doers thereof. In regard of the many
wrongs whereunto, while we live in this world, we are subject, long-suffering
is necessary.

5. Power over wrath. Hereby though it do so fall out that anger be stirred up
in us by the injuries of wicked men, yet by holding it in, as it were with bit
and bridle, we may be kept from excess, and from sin, according to this
intimation of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 26.
Be angry but sin not. Herein lies a maine difference betwixt natural men,
and men regenerate. Because in natural men there is flesh only, when anger is
kindled, it burns more and more. But because in men regenerate there is
spirit as well as flesh, Gal. 5. 16, 17.
by that spirit the lusts of the flesh are suppressed and quenshed: 1. Sa. 25.
32, etc.
as is evident in the case betwixt David and Nabal.

6. Forgetfulness of wrongs. That we suffer not them to abide continually in
our mind and memory. Thus does God deal with trespasses committed against
him. I will remember their sin no more, says he. Ier. 31. 34.
It is a part of the renouation of memory, to let slip, forget, and not to hold
and retain evil things, 1. Kin. 11. 14. etc
and in particular revenge. Remembrance of wrongs, increases desire of
revenge. But forgetfulness thereof causes fullest forgiveness.

7. Readiness to forgive. Ephesians. 4. 32.
This is the maine thing intended in this condition. All the other graces
before mentioned are but preparations hereunto.

8. Truth in the act of forgiveness. 1. Ioh 3. 18.
Herein lies the liuelyest, and best resemblance betwixt Gods forgiving and
ours. This is especially intended in this Particle of resemblance, As.

Hitherto of the good things which by virtue of the Fifth Petition, and the
condition annexed thereto, are to be prayed for.

. 164. Of the things for which thanks is to be given by virtue of the Fifth
Petition.
Q. WHat are the particular good things for which by virtue of the Fifth
Petition we are to be thankful?

A. 1. Such as concern Gods forgiving us our trespasses.

2. Such as concern our forgiving other men their trespasses.

They which concern Gods forgiving us, are such as follow:

1. Gods free grace, In that for his own sake, without any desert of ours he
passes by and pardons our sins. In this respect does the Prophet magnify
him, Mic. 7. 18.
and say, Who is a God like to thee, that pardons iniquity, etc. He
retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy.

2. Gods rich mercy: In that notwithstanding our many, foul, and heinous
sins, the spring of his grace is not dried up, but he is pleased to forgive
them all. This incited Paul to make known his thankful mind to God. 1. Tim.
1. 12, 13, 14, etc.


3. Gods long-suffering, In that he has not taken that advantage against us,
which we from time to time have given him: but rather by his patience has led
us unto repentance. Psalm. 103. 8.
The person that duly considers how many just occasions he has given to
God to cut him off, and to give him his portion with the damned and Devils in
hell, being brought to some assurance of the pardon of sin, cannot but
heartily bless God for his good and great patience toward him.

4. Christ Jesus. Math. 1. 21.
He it is that saves people from their sins. This is the greatest matter of
thanksgiving that ever was, or can be given to sons of men. Luke 1, 46, 47.
The Virgin Mary therefore at her first conception of him, Luke 2. 10.
magnifyeth the Lord. The Angel that first brought the news of Christ's Birth,
proclaims it to be a glad tidings of great joy. -- 14.
Yea a Quire of heavenly spirits sang praise thereat, saying, Glory to God in
the Highest.

5. The obedience which Christ yielded to the Law. For our sakes it was: 1.
Cor. 30, 31.
unto us is he made righteousness, that we might glory in the Lord.

6. The ransom which he paid for us. Among many other blessings for which the
Apostle gives thanks, Col. 1. 12. 14.
the blood of Christ by which we have forgiveness of sins, Heb. 9. 12.
is one. And well may it be one. For by it eternal Redemption is obtained.

7. The Intercession which Christ continues to make for us. Romans 8. 34.
Herein does the Apostle after an holy manner triumph, which is an especial
kind of glorifying God. Great cause have we so to do. For hereby all the
virtue and efficacy of Christ's sacrifice, is applied to us.

8. The Gospel, whereby all the forenamed blessings are revealed. Col. 1. 3,
5, 6.
Expressly does the Apostle give thanks for this. All the rich treasures of
the mystery of Godliness would be of no use to us, if by the Gospel they
were not opened to us.

9. The Sacraments, whereby remission of sins is sealed up, Acts 8. 39. --
16. 33, 34.
and so ratified and assured unto us. When the Eunuch, and the Iayler were
baptized, they rejoiced: which being done spiritually in the Lord, it includes
a praising of God. And to show that the holy communion is a matter of
thanksgiving, the Apostle styles it, 1. Cor. 10 16. (...).
the cup of blessing: And from the Primitive times of the Church under the
Gospel it has been called the Eucharist, (...) Grata beneficij recordatio.
that is A grateful commemoration of a thing.

10. Sight, and sense of sin, and sorrow for the same. These are preparing
graces, needful for such as expect pardon of sin. 2. Cor* 7. 9.
The Apostle rejoiced and thanked God for these graces in the Corinthians. Luke
7. 47.
They are evidences of remission.

11. Understanding of the mysteries of the Gospel. The Gospel is a light that
reuealeth those mysteries. But what is light without sight? A blind man in the
brightest sunshine receives no benefit by the Sun. The Apostle therefore
that preached the Gospel to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1. 4, 5.
thanked God that they were enriched in all knowledge.

12. Faith in the Lord Jesus. Luke 7. 50.
By it pardon is obtained. Concerning it thus says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 15,
16.
After I heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, I cease not to give thanks for
you.

13. The fruits of faith, as a quiet conscience, a joyful heart, and
comfortable spirit and such like. 2. Cor. 1. 4.
These being kindly wrought, give evidence of our discharge of sin.

14. Means and evidence of pardon given to others. As we pray for the pardon
of others sins, so we must be thankful for the evidences which we see
thereof. In this respect the Church of the Jews glorified God for repentance
to life granted to the Gentiles. Acts 11. 18.
This their repentance was an evidence of Gods mercy in pardoning their sins.

These are good things for which God is to be praised by virtue of the Fifth
Petition.

. 165. Of the things for which thanks is to be given by virtue of the
condition annexed to the Fifth Petition.
Q. What are the particular good things for which thanks is to be given to
God by reason of the condition annexed to the Petition?

A. 1. All the evidences of Gods indulgences toward us in pardoning our
sins. For to this end is our profession of forgiving others here expressed:
where therefore there is such an evidence, as we may boldly make profession
thereof, we ought to be thankful for it. Thus does S. Paul give thanks, as
for faith in the Lord Jesus, Col. 1. 3, 4.
so for love to all the Saints, an evidence thereof.

2. The means whereby we are kept from taking revenge. Thus did David bless
God for sending Abigail to keep him from auenging himself with his own hand.
1. Sam. 25. 32, 33.


3. The alteration of our wrathful and reuengefull nature. We could not in
truth make this profession, Romans 6. 17.
We forgive, if our nature were not altered. 1. Tim, 1. 13.


4. That measure of brotherly love which we have. 2. These. 1. 3.
Without love all show of forgiving is but a mere show.

5. A spirit of meekness, Iam. 3. 17.
and patience. These and other like graces make us ready and willing to
forgive. This Spirit comes from above: Ephesians. 1. 3.
and is one of those spiritual blessings for which God is to be blessed.

6. An heart seasoned with truth. 1. Chro. 29. 13, 17.
By virtue thereof we are emboldned, even in relation to Gods forgiving us, to
say, As we forgive.

Hitherto of the matter of Thanksgiving which the fifth Petition affords.

. 166. Of Duties required in regard of desire of pardon of our own and others
sins.
Q. What Duties are we to endeavor after by virtue of the fifth Petition?

A. Both such as concern the Petition it self, and also the Condition annexed
to it.

In regard of the Petition we ought

1. To acquaint our selves with the Law of God. This is needful because 1.
Romans 3. 20. -- 7. 7.
By the Law is the knowledge of sin. See the whole Armor of God. in Ephesians. 6.
16.
Thereby therefore we shall know what sinners we are, and in how great need we
do stand of pardon. 2. 2. King. 22. 19. Acts 2. 37. -- 24. 26.
By the Law is man's soul humbled, Treat. 2. part. 6. 20.
pricked and broken, and thereby prepared to seek pardon. 3. By the Law man is
stripped of all selfe-conceipt. Romans 3. 19.
Every mouth is stopped and all the world made guilty thereby.

2. To be well instructed in the Gospel, and in the promises thereof, as Luke
1. 4.
Theophilus was. For 1. Acts 26. 18.
by the Gospel the grounds of pardon are revealed. 2. Romans 10. 8. Ephesians. 1. 13.
By it faith is wrought. 3. Romans 10. 15. Ephesians. 6. 15.
By it the conscience is quieted.

3. To partake of the Sacraments. For Romans 4. 11.
they are seals of our discharge.

4. To confess our sins to God. For 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
if we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins.

5. To ask pardon. This is the duty here expressly set down.

6. To believe pardon. For Mar. 1. 15.
faith is a duty required of all to whom the Gospel is Preached.

These are duties that concern the pardon of our own sins.

Duties required in regard of the extent of this Petition for the pardon of
others sins as well as our own, are these that follow.

1. To take notice of the sins of others, That so we may the better discern
what great cause there is to pray for them. For this end they which espied the
great sins of the Jews, told Ezra thereof. Ezr. 9. 1.


2. To make known to other men sinning, their sins. Thus may they be brought
to be humbled and to find mercy for them; as David was humbled and found mercy.
2. Sam. 12. 7, 8.


3. To make confession of them to God, Exo. 10. 6.
As Ezra, Daniel and others did, and procured pardon.

4. To pray for pardon for them, Dan. 9^
As the forenamed Saints did. For by a faithful and feruant prayer of the
righteous, if one have committed sins they shall be forgiven him. Iam. 5. 15,
16.


These duties the Petition it self requires.

. 267. Of Duties required by reason of our Profession to forgive others.
Q. What Duties are required by virtue of the Condition annexed to the fifth
Petition.

A. 1. To take notice of Gods merciful dealing with us. For this is the ground
of the kind of profession here made, As we forgive. Genesis 50. 20.
Joseph taking notice of Gods good providence toward him, made him the more
kind to his brethren.

2. To follow God in his goodness. Ephesians. 5. 1.
A point expressly enjoined by the Apostles. They that do not imitate God,
cannot make this profession, As we forgive.

3. To put on such graces as may make us ready to forgive. These are Bowels of
mercies, Col. 3 12, 13.
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one
another, etc. Without these a man will not be brought to forgive wrongs.

4. To put away reuengefull passions. Col. 3. 8.
As water extinguisheth sparks of fire, so a reuengefull humor puts away
all good motions and intentions of forgiving.

5. To accept of all means of atonement offered, 1. Sam. 25. 35.
As David accepted to the means which Abigail used to pacify his wrath. This
will bring us to forgive.

6. To offer reconciliation, Genesis 13. 8.
as Abraham did. There are some of so crabbed a disposition as they will never
be reconciled, though they be the wrong doers, except they be sought unto.
Except therefore we seek to them, there will be no reconciliation: and if
there be no reconciliation how can it be thought that we can say in truth, We
forgive?

7. Not to yeald to such as incite us to revenge. 1. Sam. 25. 8, 9.
Hereof we have a worthy pattern in David. 2. Sam. 29. 21, 22 23.
If we hearken to such as stir us up to revenge, we may be brought even
against our own mind and disposition to take revenge.

8. Actually to forgive. Col. 3. 13.
This is it which we plainly profess. We mock him, who will not be mocked,
and the truth is not in us, if we utter this condition, and do not indeed
forgive.

9. To make peace betwixt others. For we profess in the plural number of
others as of our selves that WE forgive; we must therefore endeavor that
others may so do. And herein shall we be blessed. Mat. 5. 9.
Blessed are the peacemakers.

Hitherto of the Duties which both the Petition it self, and also the
Condition annexed thereto require.

. 168. Of that matter of Humiliation which the fifth Petition affords.
Q. What are the things to be bewailed by reason of the fifth Petition?

A. 1. Such as are against the Petition it self.

2. Such as are against the Condition. Eccl. 7. 29.


Against the Petition are such as these. Infinitas rations mali quibus
implicatur homo, fateatur a se ipso proficisci, deploret, abdicet^, Trem. and
lun. in hunc. loc.


1. Adams sin. Thereby did man first come to be endebted to the revenging
justice of God. On this ground the wise man thus complains, Lo, this only
have I found, that God has made man upright: but they have sought out many
inventions.

2. The guilt of Adams sin. This justly is imputed to us, because he was a
public person, and did bear in his loins all that shall come from him to
the end of the world. This therefore does the Apostle complain of, where he
says, By the offense of one, Romans 5. 18, 19.
judgment came upon all men to condemnation. And, By one man's disobedience
many are made sinners.

3. The many offenses of our forefathers. By them are we the more deeply
endebted to God. Nehe. 9. 16, 17.
These therefore do the people of God bitterly bewail.

4. Original sin: even that corruption of our nature wherein all are
conceived and borne. This contains in it the seed and spawne of all sin.
And so desileth us throughout as in every power of soul and part of body we
are made loathsome, odious, and abominable in Gods sight. This therefore does
David with much compunction of heart acknowledge. Psalm. 51. 5.


5. All our actual sins. These are plain, palpable debts: which the most
ignorant that be cannot deny to be so. Under the burden of these the Saints in
all ages have much groaned. The more in number, or the more heinous they have
been, the more grieved and perplexed the Saints have been for them. Mark
David's bitter complaint in this kind. Psalm. 38. 3, 4.
There is no rest in my bones because of my sin. For mine iniquities are gone
over my head: as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me.

6. Our accessarinesse to the sins of others. Thus we add to the heap of
our own debts, the debts of others, whereby the heap is made much greater.
Psalm. 51. 14.
The blood, which David with much grief acknowledges, was that which at his
appointment Ioab had caused to be shed. 2. Sam. 2. 29, etc.
By his direction he made himself accessarie thereto. 1. Sam. 3. 13.
So Eli by his too great indulgencie and lenity toward his wicked sons,
made himself accessarie to their sin, and liable to judgment for the same.

7. Our disabilitie to discharge our debt of obedience. God gave us power at
first to fulfill all righteousness. But now there is, while we live in this
world, Romans 8. 3.
an impossibility thereto. Of this does Saint Paul thus complain, Romans 7. 18.
To perform that which is good I find not.

8. Ignorance of the Gospel. By the Gospel the only means of discharging
our debt is revealed. How then can they be discharged who know it not. In this
respect does the Apostle with great grief thus set forth the doom of such
ignorant persons: If our Gospel be hid, 2. Cor. 4. 3.
it is hid to them that are lost, etc.

9. Hardness of heart. This makes men senseless both of the burther of sin:
and also of Gods wrath and vengeance against sin: which makes God to think
of greater and greater vengeance. When Christ observed hardness to possess
the hearts of the Jews, Mar. 3. 5.
he mourned for it.

10. Infidelity. This makes all the means of pardon prepared and offered on
Gods part, to be void on our part. In regard of this, Isa. 53. 1.
the Prophet thus complains, Who has believed our report?

11. Evidences of Gods wrath upon us. These are signs of the debt of sin
lying on our account, as not discharged. This was the ground of the Prophet
Ieremiahs Lamentation. Lam. 1. 1. etc.


12. Gods wrath on others: especially for our sin. We that pray for the
discharge of others sins, have cause to mourn when we see the wrath of God
lying on them for sin: especially if we our selves have been any cause of
procuring it. This humbled David, 2. Sam. 24. 17.
and made him say, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but these
sheep, what have they done? Let thine hand be against me, etc.

These are things to be bewailed by reason of the fifth Petition.

Against the Condition vices to be lamented are such as these,

1. The teachinesse of our nature: whereby it comes to pass that passion is
soon stirred up: and every small wrong makes us think of revenge. Genesis 37.
4, 18, 19.
Small was the occasion that Joseph's brethren took to execute revenge upon the
youth.

2. The violence of our passion. If passion be once moved (as soon it is
moved) it is very ready to exceed and to grow into extremity. 2. Tim. 3. 3.
(...) immites.
Among other natural corruptions of men the Apostle reckons this, that they
are fierce. How fierce was Saul against David?

3. Our Implacablenesse. 1. Sam. 20. 30.
After men are once provoked, they are hardly pacified again. This is another
corruption of natural men reckoned up by the Apostle, Romans 1. 31.
that they are implacable. Though the Debtor in the Parable fell down at his
Creditors feet, (...) qui nullas (...) admit tunt implacabiles,
irreconciliabiles.
and besought him, saying, Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all, Mat.
18. 28, 29, 30.
yet he would not: But after he had laid hands on him, and taken him by the
throat, he cast him into prison till he should pay the debt.

4. Our insatiableness in taking revenge. No revenge seems sufficient to a
reuengefull spirit (such are all our spirits by nature.) So much does the
Apostle imply in this description of natural men, Romans 3. 13, 15, 16.
Their throat is an open sepuchre; the poison of Aspes is under their lips;
their feet are swift to shed blood; destruction and misery are in their
ways. Est. 3. 5, 6.
Haman, only because Mordecai refused to bow unto him, Thought it a light
matter to lay hands on Mordecai alone, but thought to destroy all the Jews
throughout the whole kingdom.

To these vices, Eradicariaut extirpari a cordibu^ nostris omnino non poterit
malitia donec in mundo fuerimu^. Bern. in Quadr. Sermon. 6.
Teachinesse, Fierceness, Implacablenesse, Insatiableness in revenge, we are
all by nature exceeding prone. Few there be that, as occasions are offered, do
not some way or other manifest as much. Very hardly, if it all, will all
maliciousness be rooted out of us, while flesh remains in us. These vices
therefore afford us much matter of grief and humiliation, and that both in
regard of our selves, and of others also.

Hitherto of the Fifth Petition.

THE SIXTH PETITION.
. 169. Of the Sum and several parts of the sixth Petition.
Q. Which is the sixth Petition?

A. And lead us not into temptation: Some distinguish these words, And lead
us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil, into two several Petitions:
making the subject matter of the one to be malum futurum, tuill to come, and
of the other, malum praesens, evil present, and already fallen out. But this
distinction in this place cannot hold. For the latter branch respects evil
to come, as well as evil present. And the discretiue particle (...), but,
shows that they are not, as the other, distinct Petitions; for then would the
last clause have been distinguished from the former, as the former is from the
fifth Petition, and the fifth from the fourth, thus, AND deliver us from evil,
Many of the ancient Fathers (following the old Latin translation) leave out
this last clause, and that because they conceive (as Saint Augustine expresses
their mind and meaning) it belongs to the former concerning temptation:
whereby they imply, that if both the clauses were expressed, they would make
but one Petition. Yet are they not to be taken as a repetition of one and the
same point, but as two distinct parts and branches of the same general matter:
and so do most of the ancient Fathers and later judicious and Orthodoxe Divines
take them. See. 2.
But deliver us from evil.

Q. What is the Sum of this Petition?

A. Our Sanctification. For as the former did set out our Justification, so
does this our Sanctification: under which two heads all our spiritual good to
be expected in this world, Ideo quippe ait, Sed libera, non ait, Et libera,
tanquam vnam petitionem esse demonstrans. Aug. in Enchir. cap. 16.
is comprised.

Q. Of how many parts does this Petition consist?

A. Of two. The first is in these words, And lead us not into temptation:
which imports a preventing of evil feared. The other is in these words, Quod
ille in vltimo posuit, Sed libera nos a malo, iste non posuit, vt
intelligeremus ad illud superius quod de tentatione dictu^ est pertinere. Aug.
ibid.
But deliver us from evil: which implies a Recovering from evil fallen out.
So as our desire in this Petition is, that God would be so far from giving us
over, like a just and severe Judge, into the power of the executioners of his
wrath, as rather, like a pitiful and merciful father, if at any time we be
ouer-taken by them, he would rescue and deliver us.

Q. What points are to be considered in the first part?

A. 1. The Matter whereabout it is made, Temptation.

2. The Action which is prayed against, Lead not into.

3. The Person to whom the deprecation is directed.

4. The Parties on whose behalf it is made. Us.

. 170. Of Temptation, and Tempters.
Q. WHat is Temptation?

A. In general it is a proof or trial: as the (...) in Piel probare. Inde
(...) probatio, tentatio. (...) conatus. Inde (...) and (...). Et inde (...)
tentatio.
notation of the word in both the original languages does show. David
therefore joins these two words together, Psalm. 95. 9. (...)
tempted, proved: which the Heb. 3. 9. (...)
. Apostle translateth by two distinct words, whereof one signifies to tempt,
the other to prove. And another Apostle applies the word commonly put for
temptation to that proof and trial which is made by fiery persecution (1.
Pet. 4. 12.) Think it not strange (says he) concerning the fiery trial,
which befalls you (...).
for temptation: which is to try you.

Temptation then generally or indefinitely considered is of an indifferent
nature: nor simply good, nor simply evil: but good as it is well used: evil
as it is ill used. It is therefore in Scripture attributed to Exodus 16. 4.
God, from whom nothing but that which is good can come, and to the 1. These. 3.
5.
Devil, from whom proceeds nothing but that which is evil: and also to men
who sometimes are guided Reu. 2. 2.
by the Spirit of God, and sometimes Mat. 22. 18.
by the spirit of Satan.

Temptation, when it is attributed to God is to be taken in the best sense: and
that to prove, discover, and make known what is in man: as Moses said to
Israel, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. (...)
Thou shall remember the way which the Lord thy God led thee to tempt thee (or
to prove thee) to know what was in thine heart. Quod scriptum est, tentat vos
dominus deus vester, vt sciat si diligatis cum, illa locutione positum est, vt
sciat, pro eo quod est vt scire vos faciat. Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in monte. lib. 2.
Not as if God were ignorant thereof (for he understands our thoughts afar
off. Psalm. 139. 2.) but that he might make known to them what indeed was in
them. Now God by tempting men makes known, sometimes such graces as are in
them: (so he Genesis 22. 1, 12.
tempted Abraham:) and sometimes such corruptions as lurk in them: so he 2.
Chro. 32. 31.
tempted Hezekiah. Neither of these temptations can be thought to be unjust, or
any way evil.

Temptation when it is attributed to Satan is always to be taken in the worst
sense that can be: for his temptations in his intent are as bad as may be. The
Devils are Man 1. 2.
unclean, Luke 8. 2.
evil spirits. Ephesians. 6. 12.
Spiritual wickednesses: Math. 1^ 19.
Satan is the wicked One. He ever tempts men to sin: endeavoring by his
temptations to draw men in to sin. And because he never cease so to tempt,
by a kind of property he is called (...). Math. 4 3. 1. These. 3. 5.
the Tempter. For he tempts sometimes immediately by himself (so Math. 4. 3.
he tempted Christ) sometimes mediately by his Messengers (for a 2 Cor. 12. 7.
Messenger of Satan was sent to tempt Paul) His Messengers are of several
sorts. Some with Syren-Songs, and Dalilah delights lull men asleep (as Sampson
Judge. 16. 19.
was lulled) and bewitch them (as the Gal. 3. 1.
Galatians were bewitched:) Others with thundering threats, and boisterous
buffets terrify men, as Ioh. 3. 2. -- 9. 22. -- 19 38.
many of the Jews were kept from making open profession of Christ by reason of
the terrible Edicts that were made against such: and 2. Tim 4. 16. Quocuaque me
vertam nulla us quam securitas est. and quae mulcent, and quae molestant limeo.
Bern. Quadr. Sermon. 6. Malleus caelestis opificis factus est, malleus vniuersae
ter^ae. Terit electos ad eorum vtilitatem: reprobos conterit in
corumdomnationem: Bern. Sermon. in Trans. S. Mal.
many Christians forsook Paul by reason of the fierce persecution raised
against him. Hence has risen the distinction of temptations on the right hand,
and on the left hand. All enticing allurements to wickedness being counted
temptations on the right hand: and all violent discouragements from goodness
being counted temptations on the left hand. Thus does Satan, as he thinks may
most make for his advantage, either insencibly like a wily Serpent wind
himself into men, or violently like a roaring Lion, bear all before him. Not
unfitly is he called the Creators maule: his maule for the whole earth. He
knocks the Elect for their profit, he knocks down the Reprobate unto their
perdition.

Temptation attributed to men must be examined according to their different
kinds, and accordingly censured.

Men tempt God, Themselves and other men: all which may be well or ill done.

They may tempt God well, by making proof of his power and truth, for
strengthening of their faith, when they are called to an extraordinary work
(as in this case Judge. 6. 36, etc.
Gideon did) or have some extraordinary promise made unto them (as in this
case 2. King. 20 8, etc.
Hezekiah did) or have some special warrant: in which case because Isa, 7. 11,
etc.
Ahaz refused to tempt God, he is blamed.

Men may euilly tempt God by presuming too much, when they have no good ground
and sufficient warrant for their presumption (as the Math. 4 6, 7.
Devil would have had Christ to have done: and as the 1. Sam. 4. 3.
Israelites did when they carried the Arc into the Army) or by an undue
doubting, and despairing of Gods help in time of need (as the Exodus 17. 2.
Numb. 14. 22.
Israelites often did in the Wilderness.) Both these ways did the Israelites
tempt God after the Spies returned from searching the Land of Canaan. For first
through despair they Numb. 14. 1, etc.
thought of returning back again to Egypt: and being blamed for that, they
fell into another extreme, and -- 44.
presumptuously would needs go against the Canaanites without the Arc, and
without Moses their guide.

2. Men tempt themselves well, when they search and examine themselves to find
out the secret corruptions of their souls, or the truth and strength of grace
in them. 2. Cor. 13. 5. (...).
Hereunto they are expressly exhorted. But they do euilly tempt themselves,
when by presuming too much upon their own strength they cast themselves into
unnecessary dangers (as Mat. 26. 35, 58. Ioh. 18. 18.
Peter did) or when by the inward corrupt motion of their own soul they are
entised and drawn unto any evil, Iam. 1. 14.
Every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own last, and entised.

3. One man tempts another well, when on just ground they assay to find out
some excellency in them ( 1. King. 10. 1. (...)
to which end the Queen of Sheba came to Solomon to tempt him) or else some
hidden corruption in them; thus the Church of Ephesus Reu. 2. 2. (...).
tempted them which said they were Apostles, but were not: and so found them
liars. But euilly does one man tempt another, when he enticeth him to sin (
Genesis 39. 7, 10.
whereunto Joseph's Mistress tempted him) or when he assayeth to ensnare him, and
to bring him into any danger. Luke 20. 20, 23
Thus the Ministers of the Pharisees tempted Christ.

These are the several kinds of temptation mentioned in the Scripture.

. 171. Of the kind of temptation here meant.
Q. What kind of temptation is here meant?

A. Temptation unto sin, whether it arise from Satan, our selves, or other
men.

Q. Is temptation to sin simply evil?

A. No: not in the party tempted, if he yield not thereto, but resist it: Math.
4. 9.
For Christ, who was free from all sin, Petimus ne alicui tentationi vel
consentiamus decepti, vel cedamus afflicti. Aug. Epist. 121.
was tempted unto sin.

Q. Why then are we taught to pray against it?

A. The principal thing against which we are here taught to pray is the power
of that temptation, as is evident by this Particle 173.
into. Yet great cause there is why we should also pray against the very act of
temptation, that at all we be not tempted to any sin, both because the act it
self is evil in them that tempt to sin, and also because by nature we are
as prone to yield to every evil whereunto we are tempted, as dry Tinder is apt
to be set on fire by every spark that falls upon it: Genesis 6. 5.
For Every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is only evil
continually. Herein lies a maine difference betwixt the quality of Christ's
humane nature, and ours. His was so perfectly pure as no temptation could
fasten upon it. It was to temptation as a sea of water to sparks of fire,
which soon extinguisheth them. Ours is as dry Tinder, yea as dry Gunpowder.

. 172. Of man's subi^ction to temptation.
Q. WHat observation may be gathered from the mention of temptation in this
deprecation?

A. Men in this world are continually subject to temptations. Romans 7. 21.
This complaint of the Apostle, ( I find a law that when I would do good,
evil is present with me: and, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?) verifieth as much: so also does woeful experience
in all men. If there be a man that finds not this true in himself, his case
is desperate: for either he is deprived of all spiritual understanding and
sense, that he is not able to discern a temptation: or his whole course of
life is so full of temptations, and he such a slave to them, they so frequent
on him, and he so free toward them, as he cannot see the wood for trees. He
cannot tell when he is tempted, because he is never but tempted. Temptations
are not as enemies to him to be resisted: but as his best friends to have the
best entertainment that he can afford unto them. Thus a man accounting
temptations to be no temptations may in his own imagination be free: but
indeed no man is free.

See the whole Armor of God Treat, (...) part. 5.. 13. on Ephesians. 6. 15.
This is thus ordered partly by Math. 10. 29.
Gods wise providence (to 2. Cor. 12. 9.
manifest his own divine properties, to Job 1. 8.
make known the graces which are in his children, to Mat. 26. 34.
discover their weaknesses, to 2. Cor. 12. 7.
prevent secret corruptions, and to Reu. 14. 13.
declare a difference betwixt this present life, and that which is to come) and
partly by the Job 1. 7.
malice of Satan, both to Job 1. 11.
deface the image of God in men, and also to 1. Pet. 5. 8.
bring them to eternal destruction. For he is a professed enemy both of Gods
glory, and also of man's salvation.

A due consideration of this our condition in this world to be so subject unto
temptations may well move us to Ephesians. 6. 10, 11 See more of this direction in
the whole Armor of God.
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might, and to put on the whole
armor of God, that we may be always well prepared to stand against all
temptations. Yea also ( Mat. 26. 41.
according to Christ's direction) to watch and pray that we enter not into
temptation: and ( 1. Pet. 5. 8.
according to Saint Peter's direction) to be sober and vigilant: (for Satan
takes great advantage both from intemperancie, and also from security:
witness Genesis 19. 33.
Lots Incest for the one: and 2. Sam. 11. 2, etc.
David's Adultery and murder following thereupon, for the other) and because of
the continual danger wherein we are by reason of the manifold temptations
whereunto we are subject while we are on earth, we ought to aspire after
heaven, and to say with the Apostle, Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man, that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?

This of Temptation. The Action deprecated is, Lead not into.

. 173. Of leading into.
Q. WHat is meant by leading into? Non hac Sonat Ne nos inducas in tentationem,
quasi non permittat nos aliquando tentari, sed ne permittat in tentatione
positos superari. Ab. Isa. de Orat. Dom. c. 23.


A. Giving of one over to the power of that whereunto he is brought. In this
sense the Psalmist making by divine instinct imprecation against a reprobate
enemy, says, Set a wicked man over him, to do with him at his pleasure. Our
English makes a manifest difference betwixt UNTO and INTO, which is worth the
noting in this place. The latter implies a degree further then the former.
Psalm. 109. 6. (...) Cyril. Catech. Mist. 5.
A man that cannon swim, may be led unto a deep poole and yet be safe
enough; but if he be led into it he is in great danger of drowning, except he
be pulled out again. They who translate it, Cast us not into temptation, do
well express the sense.

. 174. Of being in the power of temptation.
Q. WHen are men in the power of a Temptation? Ne^^s (...) in tentationem. Aug.
de (...) Dom. in mont. l. 2 Qui Orat, ne no^ induc as in tentationem, Orat ^t
mon Peccet. Aug. Epist. 95.


A. When thereby they are brought into sin. For sin is the downfall of the
soul into the tempters pit. It is therefore in the Greek styled (...).
a slip or a fall. The word most properly signifies the very act of falling.
The Apostle says of covetous men, that 1. Tim. 6. 9. (...).
they fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction. The first sin which
Adam committed, whereby he apparently sell into Satan's snare, is often termed
Romans 5. 15. (...)
afall. In regard of this power which temptation has over a man, Saint James
says, Iam. 1. 14.
Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts.

The Action being declared. Quicunque tentatione vinciti^ peccatum ipse
committit. Aug. hom. 42. (...) l. 50. Hom.
The Person to whom it is directed is to be considered. The Person is he to
whom all the other Petitions are made.

. 175. Of Gods leading into temptation.
Q. HOw can God be said to lead into temptation?

A. Both in regard of them that tempt, and of them also that are tempted. In
regard of them that tempt, by permission and instigation. Nihil contra no^
(...) potest nist Deus ante permiserit. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 19.
Nor Satan nor any other, be they never so mighty or malicious, can tempt a
man, except God permit them (instance Jobs case: yea instance the case of the
Swine into which unclean Spirits entered, and forced them into the Sea.) And
when they are permitted, they cannot go beyond those limits which the Lord
appoints to them: Job. 1. 12, etc.
instance again the case of the said Job. Mat. 5. 12, 13.
This made much to the glory of Job. Job 1. 12.
Besides this permission, -- 2. 6.
the Lord does also make them which tempt men, Po^estas Satanae dupliciter
aduersus nos datur. vel ad gloriam cum probamur, vel ad (...) cum delinquimus.
Cypr. loc. citat.
Executioners of his wrath and justice: and in that respect may be said to 1.
Kin. 11. 14, 23
instigate and stir them up. For 1. King. 22. 19, etc.
God deals with obstinate sinners as Judges do with convicted Malefactors.
They give them over to the power of the Hangman. Now God has many
executioners of his wrath. The chief of all is the Devil. Among others may
be reckoned up man's own lusts. In this respect therefore it is said of the
Gentiles, that Romans 1. 24, 26
God gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own heart: and
again, that God gave them up unto vile affections.

In regard of them that are tempted God may be said to lead them into
temptation, partly by leaving them to themselves, Homines sine gratia nullum
prorsus sieve cogitan do, sieve v^len^^ out a^ando sieve agendo faciunt bonum,
Aug. de Cor. and Gra. c, 2.
and partly by withdrawing his grace from them. Man in regard of spiritual
strength is as weak as water which cannot uphold it self but runs all
about: without grace he can neither think, will, affect, nor do any good. If
therefore he be left to himself, how can he stand against a temptation. 2.
Ch^o. 32. 31
God leaving Hezekiah, he soon fell. Yet Gods grace is able to establish us
against all temptations, even the most violent that can be. 2. Cor. 12. 9.
My grace is sufficient for thee, says God to Saint Paul, when a Messenger of
Satan was sent to buffet him. Now in that God permits and instigateth
Tempters to tempt men, and withdrawing his Grace which is sufficient for them,
leaves them who are not able to stand of themselves, he is said to lead them
into temptation

. 176. Of freeing God from being Author of sin.
Q. CAn God be an Author of sin?

A. No verily. It is the greatest blasphemy that can be to avouch, or conceit
any such thing of God. There is no one thing so contrary to another, not white
to black, not darkness to light, not death to life, as sin to God. That
which is said of lying, may more generally be said of sin, Heb. 6. 18.
It is impossible (and that in the most strict and absolute kind of
impossibility that can be) It is impossible that God should sin, Why it is
impossible that God should be accessarie to sin.
or be a cause, or Author of sin. This we ought to believe and profess, 1.
because his supreme and absolute power is such as it ought not to be called
into question. Is it fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? and to Princes, ye
are ungodly? Job 34. 18, 19.
how much less to him that accepts not the person of Princes, etc? 2.
because the perfection of his purity is such as it admits no mixture. 1.
Ioh. 1. 5.
God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. Iam. 1. 17.
3. Because he is the original fountain of all goodness: Iam. 3. 11.
so as if this principle ( does a fountain send forth at the same place sweet
water and bitter?) be infallibly true of any fountain, it is without
contradiction most true of this original fountain. On these and other like
grounds, we may well know that God has power to give, withold, or withdraw
what he will, and when he will: and to support or forsake whom he will: and
that he is not bound to that law which he has set to his creatures, nor to
give an account to any. Yea we ought to acknowledge God to be as most pure in
his nature, so most just in all his counsels, words and works: and if we
cannot fully and clearly understand how the forenamed actions concerning
leading into temptation can be attributed unto God, and yet God freed from all
accessarinesse to sin, to lay our hands upon our mouths, and to ascribe it
to the shallowness of our own apprehension: but no way to charge God with
folly or sin. Among the Principles which without all gaine-saying ought to
be believed, this is one of the prime, Psalm. 5. 4.
that the Lord is a God that has no pleasure in wickedness: he can no way be
accessarie thereto. But besides this absolute sovereignty and perfect purity
of God, other particular reasons of Gods dealing with men in this kind may be
given, and those so clearly just and equal, as any one, but such an one as is
blinded in his mind by the god of this world, may discern the justice and
equity thereof. For

1. Where God permits Tempters to tempt men, The ends of all Gods actions
most just,
it is for good and just ends, as to try and prove men's faith, courage,
wisdom, patience, and other like graces, all which were by this means proved
to be sound and great in Job: Deuteronomy. 13. 3.
or else to discover their weakness and secret wickedness, that they may
neither be too secure, nor ouerbold and selfe-conceited. By this means and
for these ends was Mat. 26. 33, etc
Peter's weakness discovered.

2. Where God bids, God sends tempters as a just Judge.
sends or instigateth Tempters to tempt men, as in the cases of 1. Kin 22, 20.
Ahab, of the Romans 1 24, 26.
Gentiles, and of 2. These. 2. 11, 12.
Antichristians, it is as a just judge to punish former transgressions, so as
these Tempters are therein executioners of Gods justice.

3. Where God leaves men to themselves, and withholdeth his assistance, God
withholds his assistance to make man know himself.
it is to give evident demonstration that man without God is nothing: no more
able to stand of himself then a child that is newborn. Now there is great
need that man should be evidently convicted hereof, 2. Chro. 32, 31.
lest he be too presumptuous of his own strength, and neglect God.

4. Where God with-draweth his Spirit, or any grace from man, Mat. 4. 25.
it is as a just punishment for abuse thereof. In this respect God took away
his Spirit from Saul. Mat. 25, 28.
Compare 1. Sam. 10 9. and 11. 6. with 1. Sam. 16. 14.

To conclude this point, God turns all to good.
so far is God from being any way accessarie to sin by leading into
temptation, as contrarily he turns the evil thereof unto good. 2. Cor. 4. 6.
For as at first he brought light out of darkness, so ever since by his
Almighty power, unsearchable wisdom, and perfect purity has he brought
good out of evil. Good to himself, by making the glory of his justice in
punishing, of his pity in succouring, of his power in supporting, of his
faithfulness in delivering, of his wisdom in catching the subtle in their
own craftiness, and disappointing their plots and practices, and of other his
properties to shine forth the brighter. Good also to his Saints, as Joseph said
to his brethren, Ye thought evil against me, Gen 50. 20. (...)
but God meant (or disposed) it unto good. Thus though the temptation be evil,
yet God is good even in leading into temptation.

. 177. Of man's disabilitie to resist temptation.
Q. WHat doctrines does praying unto God, not to lead us into temptation,
teach us? Frustra rogantes deum dicimus, ne nos inducas in tentalionem, si hoc
in nostra posi tum sit potestate. Aug. Epist. 89.


A. 1. Man is not able of himself to stand against temptations. If he were,
what cause of fear had he to be lead into temptation? The Prophet well knew
this, who said, Ier. 10, 23.
O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himselfe^it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps: and the Apostle, who said, 2. Cor. 3. 5.
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing of our selves. If man
cannot direct his steps, nor of himself think any thing, can he withstand all
tempters, and keep himself from all temptations?

This disabilitie is come upon us by sin, which has deprived us of all that
spiritual strength which God at our first creation gave us. How man came to be
disabled.
For Eccl. 7. 31.
God made man righteous, even Genesis 1. 27.
after his own image: by virtue whereof man had power to remain steadfast in
that estate, and to withstand all Tempters, so, as not to be overcome with any
temptation: only that power was left to his own power and free will: which he
abusing, voluntarily yealded to the temptation of Satan, and deprived himself
of all spiritual strength and life: and now by nature is Ephe. 2. 1.
dead in sin: no way able to resist any temptation further then God does give
him grace and strength so to do. Therefore he says not, without me ye can do
little, but, nothing. Non ait, sine m^ parum, sed nihil potestis facere. Aug in
Job. tract. 81.


Hereby the vanity of such as are presumptuous in their own strength (wherein
Mat 26. 35.
Peter failed too much) and of such as arrogantly boast of any thing that is in
man, is discovered. Romans 11. 18.
S. Paul fore warns Christians to take heed hereof, The folly of presumption.
and very emphatically thus enforces this point, 1. Cor. 4. 7.
what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it,
why do thou glory as if thou had not received it?

Hereby also we are taught both Humiliation for this natural impotencie which
man has brought upon himself: Matter of humiliation.
and Abnegation of all goodness, Quandorogamus ne in tentationem venianius,
admonemur infirmitatis nostrae. Cypr. de orat. Do.. 19.
and confidence in our selves. If Reu. 5. 4.
John saw cause to weep for man's disability to search into the Records of Gods
counsel: how much more cause have we to weep, and to be humbled even in dust
and ashes for our natural impotencie to withstand temptations which are so
dangerous to our soul? and in denial of our selves to say, Romans 7. 18.
I know that in me dwells no good thing.

. 178. Of Gods ouer-ruling power in Temptations.
Q. What other doctrine maybe gathered from this deprecation directed to God?

A. God has an ouer-ruling hand in all temptations. Potens est dominus qui
abstulit peccatum vesti^^ and delicta vestra donaui^, tueri and custodire vos
aduersum diaboli aduersantis insidias. Aug. de verb. Dom. c. 28.
The Lord who has taken away your sin, and pardoned your offenses, can
preserve and keep you from the wiles of your adversary the devil. He can
either keep us safe from all: or he can give us over into the power of every
one. Otherwise there would not be such cause of flying to him in time of
temptation, as in this Petition is employed. But true is that of Saint Peter,
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations: and this of Saint
Paul, God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you
are able. 2. Pet. 2. 9.


As the supreme sovereignty and absolute power which God has over all
creatures does evidently prove the point (For who has resisted his will? 1.
Cor. 10. 13.
If he say to a Tempter go, he goes: or come, Gods power over tempters.
he comes: or do this, he does it.) so the care which he takes of his Church
to provide for it, Romans 9. 19.
to protect it, to keep it safe from all dangers, Mat. 8. 9.
and to bring it to rest and glory in heaven, does show the reason why he
retains an ouer-ruling hand in all temptations. Gods care over his Church.
Though in wisdom he suffer tempters to assault his children, yet he will
order the assault so as it shall not prevail against them, no nor turn to
their damage, but rather to their advantage: for the effecting whereof he holds
the raines in his own hands, to let them loose, or hold them in, as he sees
cause. 2. King. 19. 28.
That which God said to Semacherib, (I will put my hook in thy nose, and my
bridle in thy lips) he does to all the tempters of his Church. This care of God
over his Church the Psalmist does thus excellently set forth in these words,
Psalm. 105. 14, 15
He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea he reproved Kings for their sakes,
saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

Learn we hereby in all temptations, Trust in God* and fear him more then
tempters.
and in all straits, whereunto thereby we are brought, to look unto God, (as
Iehosaphat did, 2. Chro. 20. 12.
when by reason of the multitude of his mighty enemies he knew not what to do,
Qui deo se committit diabolum non timet. Aug. loc. citat.
) and to fear God more then them which tempt us: for on this ground we may
with confidence say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what any Tempter
can do. For there may be sure and safe defense from all those evils which Satan
does plot and practice against us, Heb. 13. 6.
if God deliver us. A cunctis aduersis quae contra nos molitur ini. micus
potest esse fida and firma tutelo, si nos deus liberet. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 19.


. 179. Of the restraint of the power of Tempters.
Q. What third Doctrine does the direction of this deprecation unto God teach
us?

A. The power of such as tempt us is limited. This is evident by the restraint
of the arch-tempter Satan, who sets all on work, Reu. 20. 23.
even he, when God pleased, was bound a thousand years. And though he desired
to have the disciples, See the whole Armor of God Treat. 1. Part. 3.. 22. in
Ephesians. 6. 12.
that he might sift them as wheat, yet could he not, as he desired, prevail
over them. Something he did: but he came far short of his desire.

By this means the Lord gives evident proof that his power extends it
self over the most mighty and malicious enemies that his Church has: Gods
enemies forced to see his power.
and forces them to say, This is the finger of God. Exodus 8. 19.
Yea by this means his Church even in this world is kept safe, The Church kept
safe.
so as the gates of hell cannot prevail against it. For if Satan and his
instruments had power to do what they will, Math. 16. 18.
the whole Church should soon be devoured. 1. Pet. 5 8.
Her adversary the devil, like a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom to
devour.

We all who are members of the true Church, Encourageme^t against temptations.
though even in that respect we are the more tempted and assaulted, have just
cause to rejoice, and to comfort and encourage our selves against the many
temptations of Satan, and other tempters. Though they desire and seek our
utter ruin, yet are they restrained: they cannot at cheiue what they desire
and seek. They are like to a fierce masty dog that is chained, and can go no
further then to the length of his chain. On this ground the Lord gives this
advice, Reu. 2. 10.
Fear none of these things which thou shall suffer: behold the devil shall
cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried: and ye shall have
tribulation ten days, etc. The particular number ( Some of you, not all) The
kind of persecution ( cast into prison, not, put to the sword) and the
determinate time ( ten days not perpetually) do all imply a restraint: and
thereupon he infers his exhortation, Fear none of those things, etc. on the
same ground Christ having foretold his Disciples that in the world they should
have tribulation, John 16. 33.
adds this encouragement, be of good cheer, I have overcome the world.

This restraint of the power of tempters does further minister just occasion of
praising God, Bless God for restaining te^pters.
and saying, Blessed be the Lord: Psalm. 124. 6, 7.
who has not given us as a prey to their teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird
out of the snare of the foulers: the snare is broken, and we are delivered.
Fitly, to enforce the equity of this duty, I may apply to our present purpose,
that which Christ said of the fierce persecution of the Jews, Except the
tempters power were limited, Mat. 24. 22.
there should no flesh be saved; but for the Elects sake it is restrained.

Next to the Person leading, The Parties lead into temptation are to be
considered. They are comprised under this particle us, which being a word of
the plural number includes more them our selves: and it being of the first
person has relation to the Preface.

. 180. Of the extent of our desires for others freedom from Temptation.
Q. What instruction does this particle us, being of the plural number, teach
us?

A. Our desire must be for the spiritual freedom of others as well as of our
selves. Mutuis vaetis nos inuicem foueamus, ^ustodiamus: oremus pro lapsis vt
erigantur: oremus pro stantibus, vt non ad ruinas vsque tententur, etc. Cypr.
Epist. 31. 6
This desire made S. Paul send to know the faith of the Thessalonians, 1 These.
3. 5.
lest by some means the Tempter had tempted them. This also made him 2 Cor.
11. 2, 3
jealous over the Corinthians, and Gal 5. 12. When Tempters preua^le God is
dishonored.
zealous against those tempters that had crept in among the Galathians.

Tempters seek to deface Gods Image in his Saints, which if they do, they
impeach his glory: yea if they get any of the Saints into their snares, they
will Isa 52 5.
continually blasph^me the Name of the Lord, and say in scorn and derision,
Ezekiel. 36. 20. Tempters enboldned.
These are the people of the Lord.

The snares also which tempters lay, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
drown men in perdition and destruction, if they be fast held thereby. And if
they prevail against some; they will be the more bold to set on others, as
Senacherib who by the victories which he had got against other nations was so
fleshed, as he thought God could not deliver Jerusalem out of his hands. Thus
by the advantages which Satan gets against others, 2 King. 18. 33. etc.
we our selves are in great danger.

The zeal therefore which we ought to have of Gods glory, The love we owe to
our brethren, and the care which lies on us for our own safety, require that
we seek others spiritual freedom as well as our own.

When^oeuer thou feel the burden of any temptation, In thy triall^ think of
others.
or discernest the danger thereof, think of others that have the same common
enemies that thou have, and by reason thereof are in the same common condition:
and think not all well enough when thou have found some assistance against
them or freedom from them. Ioh. 17. 11, etc.
Remember how mindful of others Christ was in the hour of his trial and
temptation. Expressly it is said of him, Heb. 2. 18.
In that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted. Though we have not such power to succor, yet according to
our power we ought to have such a mind.

. 181. Of that subjection wherein Saints are to Temptations.
Q. What instruction does the relation of this particle us to the Preface,
teach us?

A. Gods children are not exempted from temptations. They who call God Father,
and who testify their due respect to him, are taught to pray against
temptations, which were not needful to be taught, if they were not subject
thereto. Run through the Scripture, observe the lives of those Saints which
are there recorded, and you shall find the Doctrine abundantly proved. Take
one example, which may be in steed of all. Christ the dearest of Gods
children, the Son of his love, in whom his soul delighted, was often soarely
tempted, both by Mat. 4. 1, etc.
Satan himself, and also by his Mat. 16. 1. -- 22. 18.
instruments. If hereupon it be demanded, what the privilege of Saints over
and above the wicked is in regard of temptation, I answer, very great: both in
that they are assured of 1 Cor. 10. 13.
sufficient strength, so as they shall not be vanquished by any: Romans 8. 28.
and also that every temptation shall in the issue turn unto their good.

The Heb. 12. 5. etc.
love which God bears to his-children, and the fatherly care that he takes
of them, Flagellatum video and emendatum, and alium suspicer quam vnum esse ^x
filys? Bern. Epist. 23.
moves him to prove them, to exercise them, to scour them, to keep them
upright, to make them wise, watchful, and ever well prepared by temptations.
Besides Reu. 12. 4.
Satan's greatest malice is against them.

It is therefore no good inference which many make, that God is angry with
them, and loves them not, that he is not their Father, God is not angry with
all that are tempted.
nor they his children, because he suffers them to be tempted. This was the
inference which the friends of Job made of his trialls and temptations. But
Job. 42. 7.
Gods own censure of their disputation shows the non-consequence thereof.
The truth is, that they who find themselves wholly freed from temptations have
most cause to doubt of Gods fatherly love to them, and care over them. The
Apostle pronounces such to be Heb. 12. 8.
bastards, and not sons. If we well consider the estate of the Church, Si
inagnum illud ecclesiae corpus considerare libet, facile satis aduertimus,
long acrius impugnari spirituale, viros ipsius ecclesiae, quam carnales. Bern
in Psalm. 91. Sermon 7.
we may soon find that such as are spiritual are much more feircely
assaulted then such as are carnal. The more sure Satan is of any, the more
quiet, and secure he suffers them to be. A Lion runs and roareth after that
prey which is out of his clutches: but that which he has brought into his den,
and is sure of, he can suffer to be still, and quiet, till he mean to devour
it. So Satan. Luke 11. 21. (...).
While a strong man armed keeps his Palace, the things which he has, are in
peace. Woe to them that are in such peace within Satan that strong man's palace.

. 182. Of the freeness of man's will in sin.
Q. What may be observed from the relation of the parties tempted to the
action of leading into temptation?

A. Man is not forced to sin. For it is implied that if man yield not, Qui
dueitur vo lens ducitur.
the tempter can have no power over him. He that is led goes along with him
that leads him. lam, 1. 14.
Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts and is entised.
This phrase ( own lusts) implies a voluntary yealding. On this ground are the
exhortations in Scripture made to men to Iam. 4. 7.
resist the devil, and to Ephesians. 4. 27.
give no place to him. Whereby is employed that if we stand against him, Sine
voluntate nullum est peccatum. Aug. Retract. l. 2. c. 15. Naturae human^ nec
substantia erepta est in illa vniuersalis praeuaricationis ruina, nec v^luntas,
lumen decusque vir tutum. Amb. in Luc. lib. 7.
he cannot prevail against us. Many like exhortations are given to withstand,
and not to yeald unto other tempters, as the world and the flesh.

Sin is of the will, which cannot be forced. Though the will by Adams fall
has lost all that liberty and freedom to good which it had by creation, and
by corruption is made a slave to sin: yet as the mind retains
understanding, so the will freedom. For freedom is as essential to the will,
as understanding is to the mind. Indeed Genesis 6. 5.
the corrupt will of man can will nothing but that which is evil: yet the
evil which it wills, it wills freely, and is not forced thereto. Freedom
of will is not opposed to restraint in one kind, but to constraint in that
kind: Liberum arbitrium captiuatum no^ nisi ad pecca^dum valet. Aug. contr.
Epist. Pelag. l. 3. c. 8.
to compulsion and coaction. The will of Dieuls is restrained to evil, they
cannot will good, but evil only: yet the evil which they will they will
freely and willingly: they are not constrained and compelled thereto. Yea Gods
will, which is most absolutely free, Wherein freedom of will consists.
is restrained to one kind, which is good. He has not in his will a liberty
to evil. To will evil is against the perfection of his will. Wherefore though
the will have not a liberty to choose either of the contrary parts, good or
evil, yet a freedom and willingness it retains in that whereunto it
yealdeth: it neither is, The means whereby Satan tempts.
nor can be constrained thereto. All that Satan does or can do, is by some
means or other to move men to yield to that whereunto he tempts them.
Whereupon faith the Apostle, 2. Cor. 11. 3.
I fear lest by any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty,
so your minds should be corrupted, etc. To effect this the old wily Serpent
has many and manifold means. Some inward, some outward.

Inward means are such as delight, or affright men. He works delight by
stirring up their corrupt humors and so inclines their will to his
temptation. Thus he stirred up the corrupt humor of pride in David, and
thereby 1. Chro. 21. 1.
proucked him to number Israel: and the corrupt humor of covetousness in
Judas, in which respect he is said to Luke 22. 3.
enter into him. The means which in this kind Satan uses are drawn to
three heads:

1. Ioh. 2. 16. expounded.
1. The lust of the flesh: which is voluptuousness, whereby the flesh is so
tickled and delighted as it draws the will to any thing. 2. Tim. 3. 4.
Such persons the Apostle styles lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God.

2. The lust of the eyes, which is covetousness. A couetouse man is even
ravished at the sight of wealth. When Achan saw silver, Ios. 7. 21.
gold, and other precious things in Jericho, he coueted them and took them,
though they were accursed. There is not a thing of price which a covetous man
casts his eye upon, but instantly he coueteth it, and so doteth thereon, as
he will do any thing to have it.

3. Pride of life, which is ambition, and vain affectation of the honors and
promotions of this life. This puffs up above their mortal condition, as is
evident in the examples of Est. 3. 5. etc.
Haman, Pan. 4. 27.
Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel. 28. 2.
Tyrus, and Act. 12. 22, 23
Herod. Such, Psalm. 10. 4.
through their pride, will not seek after God.

As by these pleasing temptations Satan allureth so, by inward fears, frights,
and terrors he draws others to yield to him, as Job. 1. 11. -- 2. 5.
he assayed to draw Job: and as he Ioh. 7. 13. -- 9. 22.
prevailed with many of the people in Christ's time.

The outward means which he vfeth are such external objects as he conceiueth
to be agreeable to their humor, and therefore sets them before them, (as
he set before Christ all the Kingdoms of the world and the glory of them:
Math. 4. 8.
) or such as he conceiueth to be of force to terrify them, as are all manner
of troubles and afflictions. Thus it is said that the Devil cast some of
Smyrna, Reu. 2. 10.
into prison. Whether the means which are used to draw men to sin be fair
or foul, by none of them is the will forced: but only moved to yield it self
to the temptation.

This point affords two useful directions. The blame of sin to be laid
upon ones self.
One is in regard of sins past to judge our selves for them, and upon our
selves to lay the whole blame: and not to think it a sufficient excuse to lay
the blame upon any other. Many will say when they are taken in some notorious
sin, The Devil owed me a spite, and now has paid me it, thinking thereby
to extenuate their sin; Genesis 3. 13.
which conceit Eve had, when she said, The Serpent beguiled me. And if any
man have been any occasion of their sin, -- 12.
they will lay the blame upon them, as Adam did upon Eve. But had they been
resolute in their own will, nor Satan, nor any of his instruments could have
made them to sin. They who thus think to shift off sin, do bring the
greater load upon their own souls. For this keeps them from that degree of
humiliation and contrition Isa. 66. 2.
which would move God to pity them. When men in truth lay load on themselves,
Math. 11. 28.
God is ready to ease them. For to such as Labor and are heavy laden Christ
says, Come unto me, I will give you rest. But on such as by the shifting of
sin think to ease themselves, God will lay load. What Math. 23. 13.
loades of woe did Christ lay upon the hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees, who
put off all burdens from themselves? What a load was laid on 1. Sam. 15. 20,
21, 22, 23.
Saul, that by mincing his sin sought to ease himself? and 2. Sam. 12 13
what ease was given to David, that laid the burden of sin upon himself? Vera
confessions, non falsa defensione opus habet. Aug. de Not. and gra c. 53.
Now whether it be safest so to shift off sin, as to provoke God to lay the
burden of it on us, or so to burden our selves as to move God to ease us, judge
you. Is there not now more need of true confession, then false justification.

The other direction is in regard of such sins as we are tempted unto, Be
resolute against yielding to tempters.
but have not yielded unto, that we take courage and boldness to our selves,
and, with a resolved purpose never to yield, resist the temptation. Man's will,
if he stand stoutly, and yield not, is an impregnable fort. Satan must by some
means or other, fair or foul, bring a man to yield up his fort, before he
can enter into it. What stronger motive to resist, to stand out, to hearken to
no parlie, to endure the vtter-most assault, then this? Wherefore in this
spiritual combat against temptations, 1 Cor. 16. 13.
Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit ye like men be strong.

Thus far of the meaning of the first part of the last Petition, and of the
Instructions thence arising. The second part follows.

BUT DELIVER US FROM EVIL.. 183. Of the extent of this word Evil.
Q. Wherein differs the latter part of the last Petition from the former?

A. 1. In that the former part respects especially evil to come, Some
restrain this only to Satan, because in the Greek (...).
an Article is prefixed, which they think restraines the word to one evil
one. But they are deceived that imagine that Article alw ^ies to imply such a
restraint. Sometimes indeed it is used (...). Ioh. 1. 29.
demonstratiuely, pointing at one special one: sometimes (...). Ioh. 1. 20, 21.
discretiuely, distinguishing one special one from all others of the same
sort: Sometimes (...). Mat. 3. 17.
by way of excellency: Sometimes (...). Mat. 12. 35.
(...)nitely mecrely for grace of speech: and sometimes in mere redundancie.
The Article therefore does not necessarily imply that the Devil only should be
here meant. Yet I deny not, but that he may be included among other evils.
The word is of all genders, and may comprise all evils under it. And without
contradiction it is best (where there is no circumstance of restraint, as here
is none) to expound the Scripture in the largest extent: especially in such a
summarie as the Lords prayer is, where so much matter is comprised under so few
words.
to prevent it: This latter euist past or present, to redress it.

2 In that, that notes out the cause of sin, which is temptation, This the
quality and effect of sin, which is evil.

Q. How many things are to be considered in this latter part?

A. 1. The thing prayed against, Evil.

2. The thing prayed for, Deliver.

3 The Person to whom the one and the other is directed.

4 The Persons for whom they are made.

Q. What is comprised under this word EVIL?

A. 1. Satan the principal Author of evil.

2. All other kinds of evil.

Satan is thus in other places styled Mat. 13. 19. 1. Ioh 2. 13, 14.
Evil one: and this word Math. 5. 39. (...).
Evil is often put for every thing that is contrary to good, and that with the
article prefixed before it. Romans 12. 9. (...).
Now as this title good is of a large extent, 2. These. 3. 3. (...).
so on the contrary is Gen 48. 16.
Evil. 1. Ioh. 5. 19.(...).
The greatest evil of all is Man. 7. 23. Acts 28. 21.
Sin. Judgments also for sin, and those both Zeph 3. 15.
temporal and Luke 16, 25.
eternal, are styled evil. In this large extent is the word here to be taken.
And because it compriseth under it all manner of evils, it is fitly set in the
last place.

. 184. Of evil the only thing to be prayed against.
Q. What Doctrine arises from the express mention of evil in this
deprecation? In nouissimis ponimus, sed libera nos a malo, comprehendentes
aduersa cuncta. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 19.


A. Evil is the only thing to be prayed against. Obseruantly mark all the
deprecations mentioned in Scripture, and by a particular induction of them you
shall find this general position abundantly proved. Take one instance which
may be instead of all, because it is the best of all, that which Christ made a
little before his death, I pray not (says Christ to his Father) that thou
should take them out of the world, Ioh. 17. 15.
but that thou should keep them from the EVIL.

Evil is the venime, By evil, things come to be hurtful.
the poison, the sting, that makes any thing to be hurtful. Evil is it that
makes so great a difference, as there is, betwixt Angels and Angels, Men and
Men, Actions and Actions, Temptations and Temptations: some are good some are
evil. No opposits are more directly contrary one to another then good and
evil. As nothing therefore but that which is good is to be prayed for, so
nothing but that which is evil is to be prayed against.

Learn hence wisely to observe what is evil in any thing, Observe what is
evil in any thing.
and accordingly pray against it: yea as it is more or more evil, so more
instantly and earnestly pray against it. Of all evils sin is the greatest:
greatest in the kind and nature of it: greatest also in the effects and fruits
of it. It is the cause of all evil. Nothing but that which is effected or
infected by it, is evil. The devil, the world, wicked men, and other
creatures of God which are styled evil, are infected therewith. All manner of
punishments and pains which are indeed evil, whether temporal, spiritual,
or eternal are caused by it. Of all other evils this ought most of all to be
prayed against. All things also that are causes hereof, or occasions hereto are
to be prayed against, as being in this respect evil. Thus Mat. 26. 41.
temptations, and Pro. 38. 8. Afflictions how they are matter of deprecation
and thanksgiving.
afflictions are to be prayed against: not simply and absolutely: for Iam. 1. 2.
Saint James wills us to account it all joy, when we fall into diverse
temptations: and the Acts 5. 41.
Apostles rejoiced in their sufferings: yea Job 1. 21.
Job expressly blesses God for taking away, as well as for giving. For by the
good and wise providence of God, temporal crosses do often turn to our good
and profit. Psalm. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted (says the Psalmist) Heb. 12. 10.
God chasteneth us for our profit (says the Apostle.) In regard of this fruit
which by the ouer-ruling providence of God, arises out of afflictions they are
indeed matter of thanksgiving, when God does so order them: and therefore they
are not simply and absolutely to be prayed against. Yet because through the
weakness of our flesh they often cause discontent, impatiencie and other sins
(in which respect they are evil) so far forth as they cause any such evil
effect they may be prayed against: at least we must pray that they bring not
forth any sin in us. Thus are we to pray against company keeping, against
feasting, against pleasures and pastimes, and against all other things that are
usual occasions of sin. Yea against the abuse of every good thing. For the
abuse of a good thing is evil. And because wicked men are often made Satan's
instruments of working much evil, we may also pray against all their evil
plots and practices, not against their persons: they are to be prayed for
(except we know them to have sinned against the holy Ghost, or to be utterly
rejected of God, or have some particular warrant, as the Prophets often had, not
to pray for them.) More directly we are to pray against all sp^rituall
judgments, which are not only punishments of sins, but sins themselves,
as hardness of heart, error of judgment, inordinate lusts, despair, and
such like. These are directly evil. Thus are we to pray against eternal
damnation, a dreadful evil. Finally, though Satan be not the only evil
here meant, yet is he an especial and principal evil one. (...) Mat. 13. 19.


. 185. Of the respects wherein Satan is styled the evil one.
Q. HOw is Satan an especial evil one?

A. 1. He is the primarie Ioh. 8. 44.
author of evil.

2. His Ephesians. 6. 12.
disposition is only to evil.

3. His Genesis 3. 5.
temptations are all to evil.

4. His 1. Pet. 5. 8.
continual practice is in evil.

5. All 1. Ioh. 3. 8.
evil doers are of him.

6. He has his Ephesians. 2. 2.
hand in all evils: as may be exemplified in these particulars following.

Job 1. 15, 17.
Outward mischiefs done by men,

Job 27.
Bodily diseases,

1. Sam. 16. 14.
Vexation of spirit,

Job 1. 16, 18, 19
Extraordinary judgments from heaven,

Acts 5. 3, 4.
Evil thoughts of the heart,

1. King. 22. 21, 22.
Evil words,

Ioh. 8. 41, 44.
Evil actions,

Mat. 16. 23.
Disswasions from good,

1. These. 2. 18.
Hindrances of good,

Genesis 3. 5.
Prouocations to evil.

Satan therefore may not be excluded out of the evils here intended, but our
deprecation rather is especially to be directed against him.

Thus much of Evil prayed against. That which is prayed for, is in this word
DELIVER.

. 186. Of the many ways of delivering from Evil.
Q. HOw may one be delivered from evil.

A. 1. By keeping away that evil which is ready to fall upon him. Exodus 14.
13.
Thus were the Israelites delivered from the host of the Egyptians that
eagerly pursued them.

2. By assisting him on whom the evil is fallen, so as he is not overwhelmed,
A malo deus liberat, quando super id quod possumus, non nos permit ^st tentari.
Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 26.
and overcome therewith. For this purpose read Psalm. 69. 14, 15.

3. By altering the nature of the evil, and turning it to a man's good. Thus
Genesis 50 20.
God turned Joseph's abode in Egypt to much good. Herein this Proverb is
verified, I had perished if I had not perished.

4. By taking away the force of the evil: Perijssem n^si perijssem.
as the force of the fire was taken away so as it burned not Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego. Dan. 3. 27.
This deliverance Christ promised to his disciples. Mar. 16. 18.


5. By removing the evil clean away. 2. Sam. 24. 25.
Thus God delivered Israel from the devouring Pestilence.

6. By taking one away from the evil to come. 1. King. 14. 13.
Thus the good son of wicked Jeroboam, 2. King. 22. 20.
thus the good King Josiah, Isa. 57. 1.
thus many righteous men have been delivered.

. 187. Of that hope of recovery which remains to them that fall.
Q. What doctrine may be gathered from praying for deliverance?

A. There is hope of recovery to such as are fallen. For deliverance from
evil presupposes a fail into evil: and prayer for this deliverance implies
that we may be recovered out of it. This is verified as by manifest experience
of many Saints that in all ages have been recovered, Pro. 24. 16.
so by this approved Proverb. A just man falls seven times and rises up
again: which though it be principally intended of affliction, yet may it also
be extended to sin.

The ground of this hope arises from God himself: Reasons.
even from his mercy, 1. Gods pity.
(whereby he is moved to pity his children in all their miseries: Lam. 3. 22.
whereupon says the Prophet, It is of the Lords mercies that we are not
consumed, because his compassions fail not:) and from his power (whereby he is
able to help them whom he pittieth: 2. Gods power.
whereupon says the Apostle, Romans 11. 23.
of the Jews, They also, if they abide not still in unbelief shall be graffed
in: for God is able to graffe them in again.) 3. Gods truth.
And from his truth, for he that is faithful and will do it, 1. These. 5. 24.
has made many promises of deliverance.

This point concerns such as stand, Comfort to feeble.
and such as are fallen. In regard of this hope of recovery they which stand
ought to comfort the feeble minded, 1. These. 5. 14.
who are troubled with fears of utter desertion, as if God were implacable,
and irreconciliable toward them that are at any time overcome by any
temptation. The caveat which Christ gave to Peter, is to be practiced by all
that have any spiritual strength, Luke 22. 32.
Strengthen thy brethren. Yea also they ought in the spirit of meekness to
restore such an one. Gal. 6. 1.


As for those which are fallen, Who fallen, rise again.
they are taught not to despair, but to say as the Spirit teaches them, Come,
let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will heal us: Ose 6. 1.
he has smitten and he will bind us up: and withal not to continue in
Satan's snares, but to do what they can to come out of the same, Reu. 2. 5.
according to that pithie persuasion of the Lord, Remember from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do the first works. Nouatiani paenitentiam salutarem
negant. Aug. Quaest. mixed. Cll. Nouatiani communicarecum e^s noluerunt qui sub
Decij persecutione fidem abnegarant and post a rescipiscentes ad eam redierant.
Niceph. Eccl. Hist. l. 12. c. 28.


As for the rash, and peremptory censure of Nouations on such as fall, it is
the less to be regarded because it is directly contrary to the maine scope of
this latter part of this last Petition. It is not without cause judged heresy
by the Ancients.

Having noted the things prayed against, and prayed for, we are further to
consider to whom our desire herein is to be directed.

. 188. Of God the only Deliverer.
Q. What Doctrines may be observed from directing this part of the Petition to
God? Potens est dominus qui abstulit peccalu^ vestrum, tueri and custod^^e vos
aduersum diabolt aduersantis insidias. etc. Ambr. de Sacra. l. 5 c. 4.


A. 1. God is a deliverer from evil.

2. God is the only deliverer from evil.

Were not God able and willing to deliver, why should this Petition be directed
to him? (But he that has taken away our sins, is able to keep us from the
snares of Satan.) Could any other deliver, why should that other in this
perfect plat-forme be left out? -- 70. 5.


Among other titles, -- 144. 2.
even this Psalm 18. 2.
( Deliverer) is often attributed to God: and Deuteronomy. 32 39. 2 King. 19. 19. Isa.
43. 11.
hereby is the Lord proved to the God only.

Just cause there is therefore that in all evils we should Psalm 50 15.
fly unto the Lord, and call upon him in the day of trouble: and 2. ^hro 20 ^.
when we know not what to do, to fix our eyes upon him: and in faith exspect
deliverance from him. Lam. 3. 26.
It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord. And as we have deliverance from any evil, Psalm. 28 6, 7, 8. Folly
of Papists in seeking deliverance of others then God.
give all the praise thereof to this Deliverer.

Is not their folly hereby evidently discovered, that in their trouble Isa.
31. 1.
Look not to the Holy one of Israel, nor seek the Lord, but look and trust
to such as cannot deliver? Some to Isa. 31. 3.
weak flesh, others 1. Sam. 28. 7. etc
to wicked fiends, Ier. 11. 12, 13.
others to false gods. Much like to these are our adversaries the Papists, who
in several evils have several Saints to fly unto, as in danger of shipwreck
to Saint Nicolas, in time of war to Saint George, In captivity to Saint
Leonard, In infection of plague to Saint Rochus, In fear of fire to S.
Laurence, in travel of childbirth to Saint Margeret, in the fit of an Ague to
Saint Petronil, in toothache to Saint Rombal or Saint Apollonia: and in other
distresses to other Saints. Libera me Domina. Vsq quo, Domina, obliuisceris me,
and non liberas me in die tribulationis? Ad te, Domina, leuaui animam: non
praeualeant aduersum me laquei mortis. In te, Domina, speraui: non confundas in
aeternum. O benedicta, in manibus tuis reposita cst nostra salus. Bonauent. In
Psalt.
Yea in their Ladies Psalter they have turned all the Petitions made to God for
deliverance to the Virgin Marie, thus: Deliver me, o Lady. How long do
thou forget me, and do not deliver me in the time of trouble? To thee, o
Lady, do I lift up my soul, let not the snares of death prevail against me.
In thee, o Lady, have I hoped, let me not be confounded for ever. O thou
blessed Lady, in thy hands our salvation is laid up. Have we not now just
cause to cry out against them, as the Prophet Jeremiah did against the
idolatrous Jews, and say,m Be astonished, o ye heavens, at this, and be
horribly afraid: for my people have committed two evils: they have forsaken me
the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisternes
that can hold no water. 180, 181.

Thus much of the person of whom is sought deliverance from evil. The last
point concerns the parties for whom it is sought. Hereof see.

The meaning of the Petition being opened, the order is next to be considered.

. 189. Of Sanctification accompanying Justification.
Q. What may be observed from the connection of this Petition with the former?

A. Sanctification accompanies Justification. For as the sum of the former
is Justification, so the sum of this latter is Sanctification, and in our
prayer we are taught to join them together, (...).
as this particle AND does import. Read for proof of the indissoluble
connextion of these two, Romans 6. 1, 2, etc. 1. Cor. 6. 11. Ephesians. 5. 25.

The grounds hereof are,

1. The manifestation of mercy and purity in God.

2. The cleansing virtue which accompanies the merit of Christ's sacrifice.

3. The operation of the Spirit immediately issuing from our incorporation into
Christ.

4. The efficacy of the Gospel.

5. The virtue of faith.

All these are evidently set out by the conjunction of Sanctification with
Justification.

1. Justification commends the rich mercy of God in acquitting sinners
freely and fully of all that debt wherein they stand obliged to his revenging
justice. Gods mercy and purity manifested by man's Justification and
Sanctification.
And Sanctification sets out his purity: showing that Exodus 34. 6, 7.
that God which pittieth sinners, will not boulster up sinners in their sins.
His pity moves him to justify them, and his purity moves him to sanctify
them.

2. A merit and a virtue in Christ's blood.
That blood of Christ which is Mat. 26. 28.
Shed for the remission of sins, Heb 9. 14.
does purge our conscience from dead works to serve the living God. This
double use of Christ's sacrifice was manifested by that Ioh. 19. 34.
blood and water which issued out of Christ's side while he was on the cross.
They therefore who are justified, are also sanctified. That spirit which
unites to Christ sanctifies.


3. By the Spirit of sanctification we are united unto Christ: and this spirit
by virtue of that union is conveyed into every of the members of Christ's
mystical body. Romans 8. 9.
Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. But if his
Spirit be in any, it sanctifies them.

4. The grace of God which brings salvation (that is, The Gospel a word of
righteousness.
the Gospel) teaches us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, Tit. 2. 11, 12.
righteously, and godly. That word therefore whereby we are justified gives no
liberty to any licentiousness, but does both direct us in the way of
righteousness, and also gives us ability to walk in that way. Hereby it
appears that the Gospel is as pure and incorrupt as the Law. Difference
betwixt Law and Gospel.
Indeed the Law is so perfect a rule of righteousness as it curses every one
that in the least degree swarueth from it: Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
which the Gospel does not, but offers pardon to the transgressor. Yet does
it no more tolerate, or countenance the least sin, then the Law does: nay
rather it brings the sinner that has gone astray, into the way of
righteousness again, and enableth him to walk in that way, which the Law
cannot do. So as herein the Gospel has an excellency over the Law. But if
the Gospel in showing mercy, should boulster up a sinner in any one sin,
the Law would triumph over the Gospel, yea and condemn it. It is therefore
necessary for justification of the Gospel that sanctification continually
follow justification, as an handmaid her mistress; or rather that, as two
sworn friends and fellows, they always keep company together.

5. Faith purifieth the heart. Faith purges.
For that man which in truth believes his sins to be pardoned, Acts 15. 9.
will not like a swine wallow in the mire. A true apprehension of Gods Fatherly
love works a filial love in man's heart: which love makes him as truly to
desire and endeavor after Sanctification as Justification.

They therefore who boast of their justification and are not truly sanctified,
Reproof of carnal Gospellers.
sever Gods purity from his mercy, and the virtue of Christ's sacrifice from the
merit thereof, yea the operation of his Spirit from the union of his members
unto him: they turn the grace of God into wantonness, and proclaim their
faith to be a fruitless and a liuelesse faith, and in fine give too just cause
to suspect that their pretense of justification is a mere pretense. Evidence
of justification.


Learn we then both to gain sound assurance to our own souls, Iam. 2. 18.
and also to give good evidence to others of our justification by
sanctification. Luke 7. 47.


. 190. Of maens pronenesse to sin after forgiveness.
Q. What may be observed from the inference of the Si^t Petition in the Fifth.
Ne forte in eadem recidamus post acceptam veniam peccatorum, orandus a nobis
idem ipse est, ne nosinducat in tentationem, etc. Bern. in Quadr. Sermon. 6.


A. After pardon men are prove to fall again. Otherwise there were no need for
such as have assurance of the pardon of sin to pray against temptation, or
for deliverance from evil. As woeful experience in all Saints, even the best
that ever lived, does verify the truth hereof, so also the daily sacrifices
which under the Law were appointed. For every propitiatory sacrifice gave the
believer assurance of a full discharge for his sins, yet after one was
offered up, another, and another, time after time was to be offered. Ioh 13.
10. Grace of justification rooteth not out all remainder of sin.
He that is washed needs not, save to wash his feet. His feet therefore need
to be washed. And why should he that is justified need to wash his feet, if he
were not subject to foul them again and again?

The grace of justification does not utterly root out all remainder of sin.
Ne ipsis quidam apostolis licet Sanctificatis de fuit malitiae.
The flesh abides in the best so long as they abide in this world. Witness
Romans 7. 18, etc
the complaint of that justified Apostle Saint Paul. Hilar. apud Aug. l. 2
cont. Iuu. (...)
Wickedness remained in all the Apostles, notwithstanding they were truly
sanctified. Aug. Har. 38.


There were of old a certain Sect called Puritans, who indeed were plain
Heretics, Isidor. Elym. l. 8. c. de her.
and so adjudged by the Church, who professed themselves to be perfectly holy
and pure. Their Heresy is plainly confuted by this Petition. Rhem. on Luke
15. 1. and on Gal. 3.
Yet is it again revived by Familists, yea and by Papists too. For they hold
that some are so righteous in this life as they need no repentance, Ne quisquam
si by puro and immaculo pectore blanaditur. Quia nemo esse sine peccato potest,
quisquis se inculpatum esse dixerit, aut superbus, aut stultus est. Cypr. ap^d
Aug. l. ^. cont. Iul.
but keep the Law of God, and by their righteousness free themselves from the
curse thereof. If these be not Puritans, I know not who be.

For our parts, let none boast of a pure and immaculate heart; Seeing no man is
without sin, whosoever says he is without fault* is either proud or foolish.

Let us even after we have good evidence and assurance of the pardon of our
sin, remain watchful against all enticements and temptations to sin, and
well remember that caveat, which Christ gave both to him that he healed at the
poole of Bethesda, Ioh. 5. 14.
and also to her whom, notwithstanding she were taken in the act of adultery,
-- 8. 11.
he absolved, Sin no more. This caveat does not imply that a man may keep
himself pure from all sin, but that he ought with the best care and
greatest watchfulness that he can endeavor to be so pure. Care therefore
must be taken to prevent sin to come, as well as to seek redress for sin
past: otherwise sin will soon creep upon us again. If Satan be cast out of
a man, he will endeavor to return into the house from whence he was cast out;
Math. 12 43. 44, 45.
and if he find it empty he will soon take his opportunity, and enter with
seven other spirits more wicked then himself. They who take notice of Satan's
subtilty in this kind, do by woeful experience find, that after their most
frequent prayers, strictest observation of the Sabbath, sincerest participation
of the blessed Sacrament, solemnest humiliation of their souls on a day of
Fast, in and by which holy duties, they have obtained great assurance of the
pardon of their sins, and much comfort to their souls, Satan has been very
busy in tempting them afresh, and drawing them to wallow in the mire of sin.
Though therefore Christ himself should say to us at once he did to the man
which was brought on a bed to him, Math. 9. 2.
Be of good cheer, your sins are forgiven you, yet have we no cause to be
careless and secure, but rather to be the more watchful, lest Math. 12. 45.
Opus est nobis quotidiana sanctificatione vt qui quotidie delinquimus, delicta
nostra sanctificatione assidua repurgemus. Cypr. de Orat. dom 9.
Satan by a re-entry make our last estate worse then the first. We have need
therefore of daily sanctification, that we who sin daily may cleanse away
our sins by continual sanctification.

. 191. Of Man's answering Gods Mercy by duty.
Q. What other Doctrine may be observed from the inference of the Sixth
Petition on the Fifth?

A. The mercy of God to man requires duty of man to God. The Fifth Petition
notes out Gods great mercy in discharging our debt: and the sixth, our bounden
duty in avoiding that which displeases and dishonors him: and, by the rule
of contraries, in endeavoring after that which pleases and honors him. It
is said of them, to whom Zac. 13. 9.
God says, It is my people, that they shall say, The Lord is my God.

Equity, and gratefulness require as much. Most just and equal it is that
the goodness of a Sovereign should be requited with all the duty that a
subject can perform: and not to do it, is a great point of ungratefulness.

The unrighteousness therefore, Man's ungratefulness.
and ungratefulness of man to God is too manifestly declared. Though man have
rebelliously risen up against the Lord, and taken part with his enemy, yet
has the Lord graciously offered pardon to man: and notwithstanding his
gracious offer of pardon, man will not be drawn from the enemies side, but as
a sworn Slave continues to fight under his colors. Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
God does much complain hereof.

Let us be better advised: and first Ephesians. 3. 18, 19*
take notice of the kindness of the Lord to us, and then endeavor to Col. 1.
10.
walk worthy of the Lord. Let us therefore be as conscionable in performing
duty to God, as we are desirous to receive mercy of God. That so we may
manifest a true childlike disposition to God, and show we respect him as well
as our selves in our desires and endeauours.

. 192. Of avoiding temptations.
Q. What may be gathered from connection of the latter part of the Sixth
Petition with the former part?

A. For avoiding evil, temptations must be avoided. To this purpose tend the
many disswasions in Scripture from temptations, as, Prou. 1. 15.
Walk not in the way. Refrain thy foot. -- 5. 8.
Come not nigh the door. -- 4 15.
Avoid. Pass away. Isa. 52. 11.
Touch no unclean thing. Ephesians. 5. 11.
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. 2. Cor. 6 17.
Come out from among them.

Temptations to sons of Adam are as fire to dry stubble, Danger of temptation.
dry Tinder, yea and dry Gunpowder. A little spark soon causes a great
flame. Temptation first brought man, even in his innocent estate to evil. If
then corrupt man avoid not temptation, how can he be free from evil? Observe
the great evils whereinto the Saints in any ages have fallen, and you shall
find them to be occasioned by temptations. Genesis 9. 20, 21.
Noah's drunkenness, -- 19. 33.
Lots Incest, 2. Sam. 11. 2.
David's Adultery, 2. Kin. 11. 4.
Salomons Idolatry, Mat. 26. 69, etc
Peter's denial of Christ, were all evil effects of temptations.

Be wise now therefore, O sons of men. You especially that indeed desire to
be free from evil. Meddle not with temptations.
Dally not with temptations: but rather, as Christ Mat. 4. 4, 7, 10.
did, resist them manfully and put them away as far from you as you can. Men
will not bring barrels of Gunpowder near the fire, but lay them in places
far from fire. Shall they be more careful for their earthy houses, then you
for your heavenly souls? Boast not of thine ability to quench the fire of all
temptations. Thine ability in this kind must then be greater then Peter's, or
Salomons, or David's, or Lots, or Noah's, yea or Adams in his innocence. For a
man to cast himself into temptations, and to receive no evil from those
temptations is as great a miracle as the preservation of Shadrach, Dan. 3. 26,
etc.
Meshach, and Abednego in the midst of the hot fiery furnace, was.

. 193. Of calling on God for all things.
Q. WHat may be observed from directing all the Petitions, which any way
concern our good, to God?

A. God is all in all. The fourth Petition sets him out a (...).
Giver of good things. The fifth a (...)
forgiuer of debts. The former part of the sixth, a (...).
preserver from danger whereunto we are subject. The latter part of the sixth,
a (...)
deliverer from evil whereinto we are fallen. On this ground might David well
say, Whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 73. 25.
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

They who know and believe God to be as he is, all in all, cannot but detest
that heathenish and blasphemous distinction of white and black gods: the
former of which they made Bestowers of good things, 1. Cor. 8. 6.
the latter Deliuerers from evil things. But to us there is but one God, the
Father, of whom are all things, and we in him. Of him we ought to seek every
good thing we want. To him we ought to fly for succor against all evil. So
we are here taught: so let us do.

. 194. Of the general points for which we are taught to pray in the last
Petition.
Q. What are we to pray for by virtue of the last Petition?

1. Such things as concern the whole Petition in general: or the distinct
parts thereof in particular,

1. In regard of the whole, we ought to pray for Sanctification. Thus does
Saint Paul pray for the Thessalonians, 1. These. 5. 23.
The very God of Peace sanctify you wholly. As our own happiness moves us
to pray for Justification, in the former Petition, that we may be acquitted of
sin, for which we should otherwise be damned: so the honor of God should
move us to pray for sanctification. 1. These. 4. 3.
For this is the will of God, our sanctification, and thereby is the holy God
much honored.

2. In regard of the manner of setting down this Petition negatiuely, we are
taught to pray for Freedom against the power of sin, Psalm. 19. 13. 13.
as the Psalmist does where he says, Cleanse me from secret faults: keep
back thy servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have dominion over
me. For in sin there is a guilt which makes us liable to Gods vengeance
(this is prayed against in the Fifth Petition) and a power which holds us in
bondage, and makes us such slaves thereto, as we cannot serve God.

3. For this end we are taught to pray for Participation of the power of
Christ's death, and

4. Participation of the Spirit of Christ. For in Christ's death there is
distinctly to be considered a Merit, and a Power. The Merit thereof freeth from
the guilt and punishment of sin. The Power thereof from the dominion, yea and
by degrees from the very act of sin: which in the Saints after the death of
their body shall utterly cease. Of this power of Christ's death thus speaks
the Apostle, Romans 6. 4, 6.
We are buried with Christ by Baptism into death, etc. And again, Our old man
is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should not serve sin. This power of Christ's death is
conueighed into us by the Spirit of Christ. Ephesians. 2. 1.
For we are dead in sin. Romans 8. 11.
But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in us, it
will quicken us. Wherefore that we may partake of the power of Christ's death,
we must pray for participation of the Spirit of Christ. David well knew how
requisite this Spirit was to keep down the power of sin, and therefore
having prayed for pardon of sin, Psalm. 51. 11.
further prays that God would not take his holy Spirit from him.

These are the general things which by virtue of this whole Petition we are to
pray for. We will further note out such particulars as concern the distinct
parts.

. 195. Of the particulars for which we are to pray by virtue of the first part
of the last Petition.
Q. What are the particulars to be prayed for under the first part of the Sixth
Petition?

A. 1. Knowledge of our spiritual enemies. Without knowledge of them, there
will be no fear of them, no desire of help and succor against them, or of
freedom from them. Judge. 18. 28.
The people of Laish not knowing that the Danites were their enemies, or that
they had any purpose to surprise them, were secure, and made no preparations
for their own defense: and so were utterly vanquished. Such ignorance makes
most in the world so secure as they are Experience shows that the more
ignorant any are, the more deeply they are implunged into Satan's snares, and
the faster held thereby. Here therefore we must pray for knowledge of the
distinct kinds of our spiritual enemies: of their number, might, malice,
subtlety, and sedulitie. That we may the better know all these, the Apostle
does largely and distinctly describe them, Ephesians. 6. 12.

2. Sight of the danger wherein we are by reason of them. To know that there
are enemies, pernicious, and dangerous enemies little moves them who see no
danger wherein themselves are by reason of such enemies. 2. Kin. 6. 15.
When Elisha's servant saw the host of Aram that compassed the place where he
was, then he cried out, Alas my Master, how shall we do? Thus will they be
affected that are able to discern the danger wherein they are by reason of
their spiritual enemies. They will enquire what to do. But the danger which
is not seen, is not feared. Wherefore God sends Ministers to people. Act. 26.
18.
To open their eyes that they may come from the power of Satan to God.

3. Wisdom to discern their wiles, their many cunning stratagems, and kinds
of assaults: and to find out where their strength lies: and how they may be
withstood. Thus shall we be kept the more safely from them, that we fall not
into their temptations, Psalm. 119. 98, 99, 100.
and be overcome by them. David who obtained such wisdom undoubtedly prayed
for it.

4. Understanding of our own weakness. How unable we are to stand of our
selves: much more unable to withstand such enemies as we have, Ephesians. 6. 12.
which are not, as we, flesh and blood, but Spirits, Math. 26. 41.
yea Principalities and powers, etc. When the Spirit is ready, the flesh is
weak: how much more weak will it be when the spirit is secure. Such as know
not their own weakness will be so ouer-bold and presumptuous as they will
not fear to cast themselves into temptations.

5. Knowledge of the almighty power of God. Thus does the Apostle expressly
pray in behalf of the Ephesians, that they may know what is the exceeding
greatness of his power toward them that believe. Ephesians. 1. 18, 19.
Knowledge of the enemies power, and of our own weakness cannot but affright
us, and make us faintingly fall into their temptations, unless withal we know
the power of God to be able to make us stand, and to subdue our enemies, and
clean to free us from all their temptations. Knowledge hereof will raise up
our hearts to God in all dangers. 2. Chro. 14, 11.


6. Restraint of Satan's power. This the Angel intended when he said to the
Devil, Jude verse 9.
The Lord rebuke thee. So malicious and audacious is Satan as he will not
stick to assault the best, if the Lord do not restrain him. It is most
likely that he could not be ignorant that Christ was the Son of God, and yet
did he venture to set upon him. Math. 4. 3.
Now when God has given us understanding of his own power, of our own
weakness, and of Satan's might and malice, then shall we see just cause to
pray to God to rebuke Satan.

7. Assistance from God: for though Satan be restrained, yet cannot we stand
of our selves, but shall fall even through our own weakness. Psalm 109. 23, 26.
The consideration of his own weakness made the Psalmist seek help of God.
Romans 8. 31.
For If God be for us, who can be against us? Great reason there is therefore
to seek assistance of God.

8. Confidence and courage in God. This is it which the Apostle intends,
Ephesians. 6. 10.
where he exhorts to be strong in the Lord. For nene of them that trust in
God shall be desolate. Psalm. 34. 22. -- 18. 30.
He is their buckler. He saves them. It is therefore most requisite to pray
for affiance in him.

9. Sufficient grace to bear out assaults when we are tempted. For sometimes
it is needful for us to be tempted. Then our request ought to be that that
which is needful may prove useful and profitable: 2. Cor. 12. 9.
which cannot be without Gods grace. This therefore God gave in the time of
temptation to his Apostle: Primus hostis caro est aduersus spiritum
concupiscens. Hostem hunc crudelissimum nec fugere possumus nec fugare:
circum^erre illam necesse est, quoniam alligatus est nobis. Nam quod est
m^serabilius, hostem nostrum ipsi cogimur sustentare, perimere eum non licet.
Bern. de Euang. 7. Pan. Ser. 3.
teaching us thereby in the like case to pray for the like grace.

10. Power over the flesh. The flesh is a secret inward tempter, whereby Satan
gets great advantage. It continually lusts, and fights against the Spirit.
If it prevail we are gone. Now in that this flesh is ever in us so long as we
retain flesh upon us, who has not cause to pray, and cry as the Apostle did,
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death!
Romans 7. 24. We can neither fly from, nor put to flight this cruel enemy. We
cannot but carry it about with us, because it is bound to us. And which is more
miserable, we are forced to nourish this enemy: destroy it we cannot.

11. Contempt of the world. The world is another tempter, which has sundry
baits of pleasures, profits, and promotions to allure us unto it: and through
five gates, the five senses, it wounds us. Praesens seculum per quinque
portus, quinque, viz. corporis sensus ^aculis suis vulnerat ^e. Et ^ors intrat
per senestras meas. Ibid.
If they be opened, and our hearts attentive to the allurements thereof, we
are in great danger to be ouer-taken therewith: death may enter by those
windows. So as there is great need we should pray as the Psalmist did, Incline
not my heart to covetousness. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity. Psalm
119 36, 37.

12. Patience under all crosses. Crosses are a kind of trial and temptation.
By impatiency we are brought to faint and sink under them which is to be
overcome. This is it which Satan watches for. For so soon as he observes
any to faint and fall, he presently seazeth upon them. Not without cause
therefore did the Apostle Pray for the Colossians that they might be
strengthened with all might unto all patience. Col. 1. 11.
Under this head are comprised Hope, Comfort, Joy and Glory in afflictions: all
to be prayed for: Act. 4. 29.
and withal an invincible courage against persecution for the Name of Christ.

13. Moderation of all afflictions. Though we have some patience, yet if
afflictions increase, they may so try our patience, as to bring it to naught.
For they which have the greatest measure have but their measure: and
afflictions by continuance and increase may exceed that measure: Ier. 10 24.
(...)
which the Prophet well knew when he thus prayed, O Lord correct me, but with
judgment. By judgment is not there meant vengeance and indignation (for it is
opposed to wrath.) In modo Castiga me Iehoua, veruntamen modice. Tremel. and
Iun.
But wisdom, discretion and moderation. Hereby we are kept both from fainting
when we are chastened: and also from murmuring against the rod.

14. Preservation from a reprobate sense. For if we be once given up thereto,
then has Satan fast hold of us. God has utterly forsaken such. Every
temptation is to them as a snare to hold them fast, and as an hook to pull
them down to destruction. Most fitly may that which the Apostle says of them
that will be rich, be applied to such as are of a reprobate sense, 1. Tim. 6. 9.
They fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction. For men of a reprobate
sense are such, as, being deprived of all judgment and conscience, run
headlong into such evils as are against the instinct of nature. Because
blindness of mind, hardness of heart, deadness of conscience, perverseness
of affection, pride, presumption, selfe-conceitednesse, idleness,
carelessness, security and such like vices are forerunners unto a reprobate
sense, we ought also earnestly to pray against them all.

. 196. Of the particulars for which we are to pry by virtue of the second part
of the last Petition.
Q. What are the particulars to be prayed for under the second part of the
Sixth Petition,

A. 1. Recovery from sin being fallen into it. Psalm. 51. 10.
This is one maine point desired in David's penitentiary Psalm, especially in
this phrase, Renew a right spirit within me. Repentance is that grace whereby
such as are fallen recover themselves, as is evident by this advice which
Christ gives, Remember from whence thou art fallen, Reu. 2. 5.
and repent. Repentance therefore is here to be prayed for. Satan is as much
disappointed by repenting of sin, as by not yielding to sin.

2. Dispossession of Satan. Satan is that Evil one that has his finger in
every evil thing. So long as he abides any where, freedom from evil cannot
he expected. If he therefore have really entered into any, Mat. 15. 22.
as he did into the woman of Canaans daughter, we must pray, as she did, to
have him dispossessed. For by prayer and fasting he may be cast out. Mar. 9. 29.
If otherwise he seize on us by putting into us evil thoughts, or stirring up
corrupt humors, or setting before us evil objects, or affrighting us, or
vexing us any way in soul or body, we are taught to pray for deliverance from
him.

3. Alienation of heart from the world. They who have been bewitched by the
world, so as they have loved the same, and have been entangled therein, which
is a great evil, ought to pray to be pulled out of it: and to have their
hearts turned from it, as the heart of Amnon was from Tamar: so that the hatred
wherewith they hate it, 2 Samuel 13. 15.
may be greater then the love wherewith they loved it. This we ought to pray
for in regard of lewd company, unlawful games, undue honors, unjust gain,
immoderate pleasures, or any other like thing wherewith we have been
bewitched. Till our hearts be alienated from the world, we shall never be
thoroughly delivered from the evil of the world.

4. Suppression of all the lusts of the flesh, after they are risen up.
Prevention of them is implied in the former part of this Petition. If that be
not obtained but that the flesh does rise up and lust and rebel against the
Spirit, our desire ought to be, to have those lusts beaten down again, and
we freed from the thraldom of them. Saint Paul reckons up 17. particular lusts
of the flesh together. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
Those and other like to those are all simply evil, such evils as if they be
not beaten down and we delivered from the bondage of them, will bring us to
eternal death.

5. Remouall of judgments. Such afflictions as come from the wrath of God, and
so long as they lie upon us, manifest his indignation against us, are as evils
to be prayed against. In which respect thus prays the Church, Turn us
again, O God: and cause thy face to shine. Psalm. 80. 3, 4.
O Lord God of Host* how long will thou be angry? Such a judgment was that
Plague for the remouall whereof David built an Altar, 2 Samuel 24. 25.
and offered Sacrifice. Among these, spiritual judgments are most earnestly
to be prayed against: such as were mentioned in the end of the last. If the
prevention of them be to be prayed son much more deliverance from them. For
they are doubly evil. 1. As they are sins. 2 As they are punishments of
sins, and effects of Gods wrath. To this head may be also referred all manner
of crosses, as Psalm. 46. 9.
war, Joel. 2. 19.
famine, 2 Samuel 24. 25.
plague, Pro. 30. 8.
poverty, Dan. 9. 17.
captivity, Act. 12. 5.
imprisonment, Psalm. 119. 22.
reproach, 2 King. 20. 3.
sickness, Psalm 38. 1, etc.
pain and such like afflictions for remouall whereof we may pray, as was
showed. 124.
before.

6. A blessed departure out of this world. So long as we are in this world we
are subject to many evils, which lie and press sore upon us. But by death we
are delivered from them all: at lest if our death be in the Lord. For they only
are blessed that die in the Lord. They which die not in the Lord, are not
delivered from evil: but like the fish which leapeth out of warm water into
flaming fire, Reu. 14. 13.
go from the less evil into the greater by many degrees.

Q. May a man then pray for death?

A. Not simply and absolutely, with desire to have the time appointed by God,
prevented, but with submission to the good pleasure of God. Concerning our
departure out of this world two things are here intended. 1. That we be willing
no depart. 2. That our departure be in the Lord. Both these are manifested in
old Simeons swanlike-song: where he shows his willingness to depart, Luke
2. 29.
and his desire to depart in peace. So much also is evident in Saint Paul's
desire. Phil. 1. 23.
I have (says he) a desire to depart. This was not an absolute prayer for
death. It was a manifestation rather of what he could willingly have wished,
Votum affectus, non effectus.
in his own behalf, then of what he peremptorily or absolutely would desire.
Now where he adds, and to be with Christ, he shows what kind of death
he desired. And this we must absolutely desire, that when we dye, we may dye
the death of the righteous, an happy death: which is a final delivery from all
the evil whereunto in this world we are subject.

7. Resurrection of the body. For death in it self is an evil, holding the
body in the grave as in a prison where it rotteth and consumes. The
resurrection of the body is it that makes a man's dissolution to be a blessing.
Thus is his body by death as seed sown in the ground which brings forth an
harvest. This Christ has promised: Ioh. 5. 28.
this therefore we may and must pray for.

8. Absolution at the day of judgment. When our bodies are raised, they
together with our souls shall be presented before Christ's tribunal seat.
There to be condemned for our sins, is a far greater evil then any that
in this world can befall us. And better it were that our bodies should never be
raised, then be raised to condemnation. Often therefore does the Apostle pray
for the Saints that they may be kept blameless unto the coming of Christ. 1
These. 3. 13. -- 5. 23.


9. Aeternall glory in heaven. They who are advanced thereunto are fully
delivered from all evil, and from all fear of all evil. Reu. 21. 4.
In which respect it is said that God shall wipe away all tears from their
eyes: that is, he shall take away all occasions of mourning: therefore by way
of explication it is added, There shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, etc. This was it that the penitentiary thief prayed for in these
words, Lord remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. Luke 23. 42.
Thus we see how this prayer directs us to pray for all things that are
needful for us, from that corruptible bread whereby our mortal bodies are
nourished, to that glory of soul and body which endures for ever. Quando
dicimu^ libera nos a malo, nihil remanet quod vl^ra adhuc debeat postulari.
Cypr. de Orat. Dom.. 19.
For when we say, Deliver us from evil, there remains nothing that further
we may ask.

. 197. Of the things for which we ought to give thanks in the last Petition.
Q. What are the things for which thanks is to be given by virtue of the last
Petition?

A. 1. Every sanctifying Grace.

2. Freedom from the power of darkness.

For both these we have the express pattern of the Apostle: 1 Cor. 1. 4.
In regard of the former he says I thank my God for the grace of God. -- 5.
Under this indefinite word Grace, he compriseth every particular sanctifying
grace. Wherefore he adds, In every thing (that is in every grace) ye are
euriched. -- 7.
And ye are not destitute of any gift. Col. 1, 12, 13.
In regard of the latter he also says, I give thanks to the Father, who has
delivered us from the power of darkness. We heard. 169.
before that San^lification was the Sum of this Petition. But particular
sanctifying graces (whereof nine are reckoned up together, Gal. 5. 22, 23.) are
the parts and members which make up that Sum. Of these therefore we must
take notice, and for these we must give thanks. Now because that Sum is
employed under the negative, we are answerably to give thanks for freedom from
the contrary, which the Apostle styles power of darkness. Under darkness he
compriseth sin, death, devil, and damnation. While we are under the power of
these, we are their vassalls. It is therefore a blessing worthy of all praise
to be freed from them.

Other particulars severally concern the distinct parts of this Petition.

. 198. Of the particulars for which thanks is to be given by virtue of the
first part of the last Petition.
Q. What are the particulars for which the first part of the sixth Petition
requires thanks to be given.

A. 1. Under standing of the law, whereby we know what sin is, when we are
tempted thereto, how fearful a thing it is to yield to such temptations, how
wretched their case is that are left to the power of temptation. Romans 3. 20.
By the Law is the knowledge of sin. That therefore which gives us notice of
so great danger, is a thing praiseworthy: especially if we have understanding
thereof. Psalm. 119. 99, 100
In way of thankfulness does David often acknowledge this.

2. Wisdom to discern our enemies and their assaults. This proceeds from
the former, and goes a degree farther; and in that respect it binds us to
more thankfulness. With thankfulness says the Psalmist to God, Psalm. 119. 98.
Thou thorew thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies.

3. The victory which Christ has go^ten over spiritual enemies. It is in
praise of Christ that the Psalmist says to him, Thou have led captituity
captive. Psalm. 68. 18.
By captivity he means the world, the flesh, sin, death, the devil and
all other enemies of our soul. Were not these by Christ made captives, and so
chained, restrained and kept in, we could not stand against them, they would
soon lead us captives. For our sakes did Christ enter combat with them, and
get victory over them. We reap the benefit thereof: we therefore must give
the thanks to Christ, and say (as the heavenly Spirits do) we give thee
thanks because thou have taken to thee thy great power, Reu. 11. 17, 18.
and have reigned: and destroyed them that destroy the earth.

4. Strength to withstand our enemies. As Christ himself has overcome them,
so by his spirit he gives us power to overcome, 2 Timothy 1. 7.
in which respect it is said, He has given to us the Spirit of power. On
which ground says the Apostle, I thank him who has enabled me. 1 Timothy 1. 12.


5. Resolution to yield to no allurements whether they come from the flesh or
the world. Gratias deo, qui iam harum rerum in vobis glori^ transitoriae
gloriosum est operatus contemptum. Bern. Epist. 23.
A true, settled resolution is a great means to keep us safe. This comes from
God. For by nature our disposition is wholly inclined to the world and to the
flesh. Wherefore as 1. Sa. 25. 32, 33
David blessed God for asswaging his passion, and keeping him from shedding
blood, so we must praise God (whenever our mind is alienated from the world
and flesh) for that alteration of our disposition.

6. Patience to bear out all brunts. Afflictions to our weak flesh are soar
temptations: but by patience we are kept from being swallowed up by them. In
which respect the Apostle saw great cause to thank God for the patience of the
Thessalonians. 2 These. 1. 3, 4.


7. Power in all conflicts to overcome. Such, though they be led unto
temptation, are not led into temptation. It is expressly noted of them that
had gotten victory, that they sang a song of praise. Reu. 15. 2, 3.


. 199. Of the particulars for which thanks is to be given by virtue of the
last part of the last Petition.
Q. What are the things for which the second part of the last Petition
requires thanks?

A. 1. Repentance after sin committed. This is a sure evidence of deliverance
from a great evil. Therefore the Church glorified God because he had granted
repentance. Act. 11. 18.


2. Rescue out of Satan's clutches. If Satan have at any time got any advantage
against us, as he gets great advantage against witches and sorcerers, yea
and against other impudent, and audacious sinners whom he has fast in his
clutches, to be rescued and recovered out of his hands affords just cause of
much thanks: Luke 8. 2, 3.
which Mary Magdalene, out of whom went se^en devils, well knew to be most due,
and therefore in testimony of thankfulness she followed Christ and ministered
to him of her substance.

3. Recovery out of the world. Gal. 1. 4, 5.
The Apostle ascribes glory to Christ for delivering us from this present
evil world.

4. Conquest of the Spirit over the flesh. For by the Spirits conquest, Romans 7.
25.
are we freed from the dominion of the flesh. For this therefore the Apostle
gives express thanks.

5. Remouall of judgments. Judgments and all manner of crosses are in their
kind evils: and remouall of them is a deliverance from those evils:
Whereupon the Saints have been thankful for such deliverances. Exodus 15. 1,
etc.
The Israelites give thanks to God for freeing them from the Egyptian bondage:
1. Chro. 21. 28.
And David for causing the Plague to cease: And Hezekiah for taking away a
deadly disease; Isa. 38. 9. etc.
And the Church for returning her captivity. Psalm. 126. 1, 2.


6. Victory over death. Death in it self is a dreadful evil: the very
e^trance into damnation. But by Christ the sting of it is pulled out, the
nature of it is altered. It is made a gate into eternal glory. 1. Cor. 15. 57.
This is that victory for which Saint Paul gives thanks.

7. Hope of resurrection to life.

8. Hope of eternal glory. These are full and small deliverances from all
evil. Gods promise of these to such as believe, is as a performance of them.
Our hope therefore resting on Gods promise for these affords just occasion of
rejoicing and praising GOD, 1. Pet. 1. 3, 4.
as Saint Peter does, and Saint Paul also. Col. 1. 12.


. 200. Of duties required in the last Petition.
Q. What duties are we to endeavor after by virtue of the last Petition?

A. 1. To abstain from all sin. For this is the maine thing here prayed
against. This is it which makes temptation so hurtful as it is. The more we
forbear sin, the less damage shall we receive from any temptations. Psalm.
34. 14.
Many, Am. 5. 15.
many therefore are the dehortations of Scripture against sin. Romans 12. 9.


2. 2. Cor. 7. 1.
To perfect holiness. For under the avoiding of any evil, an endeavoring
after the contrary good is always in Scripture employed. Yea Isa. 1. 16, 17.
they are very often joined together. 3. Ioh. ver. 11.
Now holiness is perfected both by 2. Pet. 1. 5, 6, 7.
adding one grace to another, and also by 1. Pet. 2. 2.
continual growth in every grace. Ephesians. 4. 15.


These two duties arise from the general Sum of the last Petition.

3. To be jealous over our selves, Heb. 3. 12. -- 4. 1.
fearing lest at any time we should be overcome by any temptation. For we are
not only weak, easy to be overtaken, and overthrown by every temptation,
but also very proane to yeald to Satan's temptations, because they are either
agreeable to our corrupt humor, or else we so fearful, as to think we shall
never stand out against them. This Christian jealousy will make us the more
instantly and constantly to seek help of God.

4. See. 192.
To avoid all occasions of evil. Occasions of evil are temptations to evil.
Should not they then who pray against temptations, avoid them as much as
possibly then can?

5. To withstand beginnings. So did the Apostle when Gal. 2. 5.
he would not give place to false brethren (who were dangerous tempters) no
not for an hour. Thus much also he intends in this exhortation, Ephesians. 4. 27.
Give no place to the devil: which is as if he had said, If Satan at any time
tempt you, yeald not an inch to him, let him get no advantage at all, which he
cannot but get, if at the beginning ye yeald any whit at all to him. Much good
is got by a due observation of this duty, and much wisdom is manifested
thereby. For that evil which in the beginning is easily prevented, Obsta
principijs sero medicina paratur, Cum mala per longas conualuere moras. Ovid.
de Trist.
can hardly, if at all, without very much damage be redressed, after it has
found some entrance. Instance poisonous and pestiferous diseases, fretting and
festering soars, fires, breaches of water, and enemies entering within the
walls of a City.

6. To watch continually. Mat. 24. 42.
This is a duty whereunto in Scripture we are much exhorted: and that not
without cause. For our spiritual enemies are always ready to tempt us,
Turpius eijcit^^ qu^m non admittitur hoslis.
narrowly prying where to get any advantage against us. And soon they will get
too great advantage, if we be not the more watchful. Acts 20. 31.
To show that this duty is fitly inferred out of this Petition, 1. Cor. 16. 13.
Christ expressly joins it with prayer against temptation, 2. Tim. 4. 5.
saying, Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation.

7. To be 1. Pet. 5. 8.
sober and Luke 21. 34.
temperate: where these are not, every tempter will rule as he list. For
intemperancie and all excess blind the understanding, and open a passage to
all manner of evil desires and filthy lusts, and make us unfit to pray, to
watch, to fight, and to defend our selves against our spiritual enemies.

8. To cast off every burden. Heb. 12. 1.
By burdens are meant not only such things as are simply evil in themselves,
but such also as being in their nature good, and may lawfully be used, yet
through our weakness and inabilitie to use them well, prove impediments to us
in our spiritual combat: as the riches of that Ruler whom Christ advised to
sell all that he had, Luke 18. 22.
and to give it to the poor. Thus if honors, offices, recreations, companies
which we frequent, or any worldly thing wherein we delight prove a burden to
us, and make us unfit to resist temptations, yea rather make us yeald to
temptations, we are to cast them off, to avoid and forsake them.

9. To mortify our members on the earth. Col. 3. 5.
The flesh, that is our corrupt nature, Exponded.
which contains in it the mass of all sin, is styled a Row. 6. ^. -- 7. 24.
Body. This body is made up of several particular lusts, and evil motions,
as a body of members. And as a body exercises all functions by the members,
so the flesh executes all mischiefs by particular lusts: and one lust helps
another, as one member another, and as dear are these lusts to the natural
man, as the members of his body. Those particular lusts are therefore fitly
styled members, and they are said to be members on the earth, (...).
1. In opposition to the spirit, and the graces thereof which come from heaven,
and bring men to heaven. 2. In their own condition, which is, as the earth,
base, filthy, corrupt, and vain: 3. In their operation, whereby they make men
grouel and dote on the earth, and the things therein. By mortifying these, the
foresaid Body (which is a dangerous tempter) will in time be deprived of all
strength, and we freed from the danger of the temptations thereof. Be diligent
therefore in searching them out, and having found them spare them not as 1.
Sam. 15. 9. 33.
Saul did the fat beasts: but deal with them as Samuel did with Agag: and Ios.
10. 26.
Joshua with the kings of Canaan.

10. To beat down our body. This is done by forbearing to pamper our selves,
1. Cor. 9. 27.
and to satisfy our carnal desires, that so the flesh may not wax wanton,
and like a pampered jade become unruly: but that we may live within the
compass prescribed and limited by Gods word.

11. To renounce the world. The world is such a tempter, as Iam. 4. 4.
the friendship of it is enmity with God. 1. Ioh. 2. 15.
If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. 2. Tim. 4. 10.
Demas, that old Disciple Demas by embracing the world was brought to renounce
his Christian profession. It is therefore most meet that Gal. 6. 14.
the world be crucified to us, and we to the world: that our hearts be clean
alienated one from another, and that we have no more to do one with another
then the living with the dead. Thus shall we be sure not to be overtaken by
the temptations of the world.

12. To resist the devil. 1. Pet. 5. 9.
This is the only way to escape his temptations. He is like a wolf, which
fiercely pursues and never leaves such as fearfully fly from him: but
flies from such as manfully stand against him. Iam. 4. 7.
So says the Apostle, Resist the devil, and he will fly from you.

13. To put our trust in God. Psalm. 62. 5, 6, 7, 8.
To what end do we else pray unto God?

14. Iam. 5. 8.
To suffer afflictions patiently. All crosses and afflictions are temptations.
Reu. 2. 3.
By a patient enduring of them, we keep our selves from being overcome by
them. See the whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6 15.
Let patience therefore have her perfect work.

The last 12 duties arise from the first part of the last Petition. Treat. 2.
Part. 5.. 16.


15. To avoid that which is any way evil. This we praying against, must
carefully avoid. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
The Apostle exhorts to abstain from all appearance of evil.

16. To return from that evil whereinto we are fallen. Ier. 3. 1.
For they which pray to be delivered from evil, must not lie in evil. All the
exhortations in the Scripture to repent, Reu. 2. 5.
tend to this purpose.

17. To take heed of relapse. A relapse in bodily diseases is dangerous: much
more in the souls disease. It is a doggish trick to turn to his own vomit
again. 2. Pet. 2. 22.


18. To keep the enemy from returning after he is cast out. Mat. 12. 43, 44,
45.
He will seek to reenter. If he get what he seeks, our last estate will be
worse then our first.

19. To stand always armed. Ephesians. 6. 13.
While we live we shall be tempted. Though the tempter be repulsed never so
often, he will still be prying where to get an advantage. Therefore says the
Apostle, Having done all, stand.

20. Be faithful unto death. Reu. 2. 10.
Death brings a final end to all assaults. 1. Cor. 15. 26.
It is the last enemy. He who is faithful unto death, by death receives full
deliverance from all evil. Perseuerantia tantum electoru^ est. Bern. in Sermon.
paru. Sermon. 61.
Perseverance gives evidence of election to life: for it is proper to the
elect.

These six last duties arise from the last part of the last Petition.

. 201. Of duties required in the last Petition in regard of others.
Q. What duties does the last Petition teach us in the behalf of others?

A. 1. To consider one another. Heb. 10. 24.
We ought to take notice of one another spiritual estate, that so we may the
better know how to do good mutually for one another. This is a general duty
whereby way is made unto other duties.

2. To keep others from sin. Thus will they be kept from being hurt by any
temptation. 2. Chro. 28. 12, 13.
The Captains of Ephraim, that stood up against them that came from the war
with sundry captives of Judah, and suffered them not to carry their captives
away, render this reason, Ye intend to add more to our sins, and to our
trespass. Their intent therefore was to keep their brethren from sin.

3. To edify others. 1. These. 5. 11.
They who are well built up in grace, are well armed against all temptations.
This is an especial fruit of love. 1. Cor. 8. 1.
For love edifieth: and that by instruction, exhortation, admonition, and other
like duties.

4. To encourage others against their enemies. What a notable encouragement is
this of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 16. 13.
Watch you, stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, ^e strong. Another
like, but more large encouragement is set down, Ephesians. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13, etc.
By good encouragement life and spirit is put into men: and they are enboldened
like Lions to stand against their enemies. For this, the true grounds of good
encouragement must be laid down: which are Gods presence, Gods promises, Gods
properties, the necessity of standing out and fighting valiantly, the glory
of the conquest, the damages of yealding, the misery of being overcome, with
the like.

5. To strengthen the weak. Luke 22. 32.
This did Christ expressly give in charge to Peter. And this is done not only
by encouragement, but also by Romans 15. 1.
bearing their infirmities, and Gal. 6. 2.
burdens. Thus they which through their own weakness might have been made a
prey to tempters, may be kept safe from them.

6. To keep others from falling from the grace of God. Heb. 12. 15.
The Apostle advises to look diligently hereunto. There is no place of
standing betwixt Gods grace and Satan's snare: he that falls from that,
falls into this.

7. To restore such as fall. Gal. 6. 1.
We may not leave such as are fallen: for we pray that they may be delivered.
Deuteronomy. (...) 4.
The Law teaches to help up a beast being fallen. 1. Cor. 9. 9, 10.
Does God take care for beasts? Or says he it altogether for our sakes? For
our sakes, no doubt, this is written.

8. To save the obstinate with fear. Jude ver. 23.
Though men blinded in mind, and hardened in heart, wilfully give themselves
over to Satan, yet ought we not to suffer them to abide in his clutches. (...).
But as we would snatch, and with violence pull men out of the fire, so ought
we to pull such out of the temptation wherein they lie. 1. Cor. 5. 5.
Thus dealt Saint Paul with the incestuous Corinthian, Si, qui in tentationem
inciderunt, ceperint infirmitate adprehendi, and agant paenitentiam facti sui,
and desiderent communionem, vlique subueniriijs debet. Cypr. episl. 3.. 2.
He delivered him unto Satan for destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit
might be saved. Was not this to save him with fear?

9. To receive the penitent. If a man have been overtaken with a temptation,
and by his repentance manifest a recovery from the same, we ought so to
account of him, as if he had not fallen at all. So S. Paul requires the
Corinthians to receive the forenamed incestuous person: and to forgive him and
comfort him. This is an especial means to make his deliverance firm and
stable. 2. Cor. 2. 7.


10. To pray for others. Iam. 5. 16.
This is the maine duty here intended. See. 180.
This I refer to the last place, because it is a duty which may be performed
when no other can be: even to such as will not accept any other duty, of all
the rest it is the most effectual.

. 202. Of the matter of humiliation gathered out of the last Petition.
Q. What are the things to be bewailed by reason of the Sixth Petition?

A. 1. Our first Parents yielding to the Devil. 2. Cor. 11. 3.
This is the original ground of all that spiritual slavery wherein we are,
and of that need we have so earnestly to pray against temptation.

2. The power, 1. Pet. 5. 8.
malice, subtlety, and sedulitie of Satan. For Satan is the chief Tempter,
who has a finger in all temptations; in which respect the more powerful,
malicious, subtle, and sedulous he is, the more dangerous is temptation. Not
without cause therefore did the divine voice cry, Reu. 12. 12.
Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea, because the Devil is
come down to you, having great wrath.

3. The many stumbling blocks in the world. Math. 18. 7.
In regard of these Christ cries, Heu me, quot obstacula separant, quot
prohibent impedimenta? Bern. In Quadr. Sermon. 6.
Woe to the world. These are so much the more to be bewailed by reason of the
deceitfulness of the world which so bewitcheth many, as it draws them to
those stumbling blocks, and makes them to stumble and fall thereat, as Demas
did. Yea on this ground our love, even too too inordinate love, 2. Tim. 4. 10.
of this world is to be bewailed. Iam. 4. 4.


4. The prauitie of our nature. Genesis 6. 5.
God himself does much complain hereof. This is it that makes all manner of
temptations, much more dangerous then otherwise they would be.

5. Our spiritual blindness. Reu. 3. 17.
By reason hereof we cannot discern the temptations wherewith we are
assaulted, but are easily led into the midst of them, 2. Kin. 6. 18, 20.
as the Aramites were into the midst of Samaria,

6. Our foolish pro^enesse to yield to every temptation, Pro. 7. 7, 8, etc.
as the fish to snatch at every bait. Thus are we often taken.

7. The rebellions of ou^ flesh. This makes us refuse all the means which are
sanctified to keep us from temptation, and to take part with the tempters, and
so to become captives and slaves unto them. Romans 7. 23. 24.
This rebellion, and this thraldom does the Apostle much bewail.

8. Presumption in our strength. Reu. 3. 17.
This is bewailed in the Church of Laodicea. Math. 26. 35.
And not without cause. For it is the cause of many ones fall. Instance Peter,
and the other Disciples.

9. Inabilitie to stand against temptations. Of this weakness of the flesh
does Christ complain where he wills his Disciples to pray against
temptation. Math. 26. 41.


10. Timorousness, 2. Tim. 4. 16.
or immoderate fear of man. This is the cause that by persecution, yea by
threatenings, and reproaches many are drawn from their holy profession.

11. Impatiencie. Many crosses which might easily be borne by a patient
spirit, through impatiencie prove very hurtful temptations.

12. Prouocations of Gods wrath. Our only hope, and confidence of being freed
from temptations, or so helped against them as they shall not overcome us, is
in God. If God then be provoked to wrath, and so moved to deny us his
assistance, and to give us over to the power of Tempters, how can we stand?
Under this head, Act 7. 52, 52.
as all manner of sins, so abusing his mercies, grieuing his Spirit,
despising his Messengers, and such like, are comprised.

These twelve are most directly against the first part of the last Petition.
The other that follow are against the other part.

13. Reu. 2. 4.
Loss of first love.

14. 2 Pet. 2. 18. etc
Backsliding from the truth.

These two, and others like to these are directly contrary to the maine intent
of adding the latter clause of the last Petition to the former: which is
Recovery from evil. If recovery from evil be to be prayed for, is it not a
matter much to be bewailed, that such as are recovered should relapse, and make
Luke 11. 26.
their last estate worse then the first?

15. Mar. 3. 5.
Hardness of heart.

16. Isa. 53. 1.
Infidelity.

17. Ezekiel. 2, 5.
Impenitencie.

These three, and others like unto them, make men incapable of recovery. So
much the more therefore to be bewailed.

Q. What other particulars are to be bewailed, under the last Petition, in
relation to others?

A. 1. Prou. 7. 21.
Enticing others to sin.

2. Ier. 23 14, 17.
Encouraging them in sin.

3. Ezekiel. 34. 4.
Discouraging the weak.

4. Genesis 21. 9.
Scoffing at grace.

By these and such like means men are sorely tempted. Gal. 4. 29.
Now if we ought to pray for others that they be not led into temptation, to
lead others into temptation gives just and great cause of humiliation.

5. Job 19. 13. 14, 15.
Leaving them that are fallen.

6. Luke 7. 39. etc
Rejecting the penitent.

These two branches of unmercifulness are contrary to the desire and duty of
recovering others, intimated in the last Branch of the last Petition, and on
that ground to be bewailed.

Q. What does the inference of this Sixth Petition upon the Fifth show to be
bewailed?

A. 1. A dead and naked faith. Iam. 2. 14, etc.
In the former Petition faith in Christ for pardon of sin is professed. In
this Petition a manifestation of the truth of that faith by forsaking sin,
and by performing all duties of righteousness, is intimated. To profess
faith, and not to declare it by the fruits thereof, is much to be lamented, as
a thing dishonorable to God, disgraceful to the Gospel of Christ,
aduantageable to Satan, and damageable to the souls of such vain Professors.
S. Jude does much bewail them. Jude. verse 4. 12, 13.


2. 1. Ioh. 1. 8
A vainglorious conceit of perfection. Luke 16. 15.
Christ does often vpbraid this to the Pharisees. This Petition is in vain
prescribed to such.

3. Ungratefulness. When they who daily seek mercy of God, take part with the
enemies of God: like Hos. 2. 2, etc.
Israel of whom the Prophet Hosea much complains.

Hitherto to the first part of the substance of Prayer, which is Petition, in
the six branches thereof has been handled. The second follows, which is
Praise.

. 203. Of pressing Prayer with weighty Reasons.
Q. Which is the form of Praise?

A. For thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory for ever.

Q. How are these words to be considered?

A. 1. In relation to the Petitions.

2. Singly by themselves.

In relation to the Petitions this clause respects him who makes the
Petitions to strengthen his faith, and to enlarge his desire. But singly
considered by it self it respects God to whom the Petitions are directed to
set out the glory of his name.

Q. How is the forenamed relation manifested?

A. By this Particle of connection, (...) Quia.
FOR or BECAUSE, which implies a reason of all the Petitions: Not as if God
were drawn by reasons to yield to that which otherwise he would not yield
unto. For what God does, he does of himself, because he will do it. Exodus 33.
19.
I will be gracious (says the Lord) to whom I will be gracious; and I will
show mercy on whom I will show mercy. Ephesians. 1. 11.
He works all things after the counsel of his own will. For our sakes
therefore is this reason added to the Petitions: and that partly to put an
Joel. 2. 13.
edge unto our Prayers, and to sharpen them: and partly 2. Chro. 14. 11.
to put strength unto our faith, and to make us without doubting to expect a
gracious grant of them.

Q. What doctrine may be raised from the addition of this reason.

A. Prayer is to be pressed with reasons. Take a view of the Prayer of Saints
recorded in Scripture, and you shall find this abundantly proved: for example
read the Prayer of Exo. 32. 11. etc.
Moses, Ios. 7. 7, 8, 9
Joshua, 2. Chro. 14. 11.
Asa, -- 20 6, etc.
Iehosaphat, 2 Kin. 19. 15. etc.
Hezekiah and others.

Grounds and reasons of Prayer being rightly ordered demonstrate a necessity
of making the Prayer, and great equity for obtaining the things prayed for: and
in that respect they put life, vigor, and feruencie into the spirit of him
that prays, whereby the prayer comes to be much more acceptable and
available.

I earne we hereby to ponder our prayers before we pour them forth, and duly
to consider what we ask, why we ask that which we ask, what grounds we have
of obtaining our desire, that so we may with the greater feruencie of desire
and sted^astnesse of faith, yea and importunity and constancy hold out: and
that though God seem at first not to hear or regard our prayer. They who know
that their prayers are grounded on good, just, and weighty reasons will Luke
18. 7.
cry day and night unto him, and Isa. 62. 1.
not hold their peace nor rest; They will Exo. 32. 10.
not let the Lord alone, but Genesis 32. 26.
hold him till he bless them.

. 204. Of taking grounds for faith in prayer from God himself.
Q. Whence is the reason, used in the Lords Prayer, taken?

A. From God himself. For the sum of it is a declaration of such things as
appertain to God, and show him to be both able and willing to grant such
suites as are rightly made unto him.

Q. What doctrine does the kind of reason import.

A. In Prayer the maine ground of our pleading must be fetched from God. Well
consider the forenamed prayers of Exo. 32, 11, etc
Moses, Ios 7. 7, etc.
Joshua, 2. Chro. 14. 11.
Asa, -- 20. 6, etc.
Iehosaphat, 2. Kin. 19. 15, etc.
Hezekiah and others like to them, and in them all you shall find Gods
Covenant, truth, mercy, power and other like motives pleaded. In particular
take for this purpose special notice of Daniels powerful prayer, thus
expressed, Dan. 9. 18, 17.
O my God, incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and behold our
desolations, and the City which is called by thy name. For we do not present
our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy great
mercies. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do. Defer not for
thine own sake, O my God: for thy City and thy people are called by thy name.
Here protestation is made against any worth in themselves, and the name and
mercies of God only are pleaded. And that for good reason. For

1. In our selves there can be nothing to plead before God whereby he should
be moved to grant our desire. For who sees not just cause to say fo himself
as Iaakob once did, I am less then all thy mercies, that is, I am not worthy
of the least of all thy mercies: Genesis 32. 10. (...) Psalm. 143. 2.
yea and to cry as the Psalmist did, Enter not into judgment with thy servant:
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.

2. Out of God there can be nothing to move him. For 1. Cor. 4. 7.
who has any thing that he has not received of God? Romans 11. 36.
Of him, and through him are all things. Whatsoever therefore is in Prayer
pleaded before God must be fetched from God himself.

Object. Exodus 32. 13.
Moses in his Prayer pleaded Abraham, Isaak, and Israel desiring God to
remember them. Psalm. 132. 1, 2.
The Psalmist pleads David, his afflictions, his oath, and vow. 1. Kin. 20. 3.
Hezekiah pleads his uprightness and integrity. Isa. 64 9, 10. Psalm. 79. 7.
The desolations of Gods people, and Psalm. 13. 4.
the insultations of their enemies are also often pleaded; and other like reasons
taken from men. -- 38 16.


Answ. -- 44. 13, 14.
The maine force of all these reasons rests in God. -- 80. 6.
For 1 where Abram, Isaak, Israel, and David are named, Gods Covenant made to
them is intended: so as no worth in their persons, but Gods truth in keeping
his Covenant made with them, is pleaded. 2. where mention is made of his
servants Oath and Vow, the honor and glory which by their oath and vow was
couenanted to God, is meant: so as not the worth of the oath and vow, as man's
work, but the matter thereof, which tended to Gods glory, is pleaded. The
praise of God is in this form of the Lords Prayer chiefly intended: and Psalm.
22. 21, 22.
often by the Saints expressed and pleaded in their prayers, -- 79. 13.
to enforce the same. -- 119. 175.
3. Where the integrity and uprightness of any of Gods Saints is produced in
prayer, it is to be considered as an effectual work of Gods Spirit, and an
undoubted evidence of Gods favor; so as no desert of man, but the stamp of
Gods own work, and pledge or seal of his own favor and grace is pleaded.
Besides respect hereby may be had to the truth of Gods Covenant: as in
Hezekiahs case. For God had made a Covenant with David, Psalm. 132. 11, 12.
and confirmed it by oath, that his children, even the fruit of his body, if
they kept Gods Covenant, should sit upon his Throne for evermore. Now Hezekiah
being lineally descended from David, and having endeavored in all sincerity
to keep Gods Covenant, was so sick as he received the sentence of death
before he had a child to succeed him on the Throne of David. 1. Kin. 20. 1, etc.
Wherefore for sparing of his life, at least till he might have issue, and
Gods Covenant thereby be verified, he pleaded his integrity, which was the
condition required of God: he pleaded it, I say, not as a matter of merit, but
as an evidence that the God of truth would make good his own word. Gods truth
and faithfulness therefore is the ground of Hezekiahs plea. 4. Where the
miseries, afflictions, and desolations of Gods people are urged in prayer,
there Gods pity is especially aimed at. For misery is the object of mercy
and pity. That object is laid forth, to give assurance that the God of pity
will afford succor where so fit an object for succor is presented before him.
Yea in this kind of plea, Gods truth, and power is also aimed at. For the
greater the distress is, the more evidently is Gods power manifested in giving
deliverance. And God having promised to deliver his Saints out of all their
troubles, by mentioning any troubles of his Saints unto him, his own promise,
and his truth in keeping promise is pleaded. 5. Where the insultations of
enemies are pressed as a reason, the ground of that reason must needs be the
honor of God, because such insultations make to the dishonor of his great
name. Thus by answering these objections distinctly, the truth of the Doctrine
is made more clear, that the only true ground of a sufficient plea in prayer,
is in God.

The grounds of plea which papists teach and practice must needs be false,
because they are not taken from God. They are these, Intercession of Saints,
Blood of Martyrs, Supererrogatorie works of extraordinary persons, Merit of a
man's own works, and others like to these. What strength can these add to
faith in prayer? What assurance can they give of being heard, when they depend
on man, and have no warrant out of Gods Word?

We that are better instructed, ought to take notice of the things whereby God
has made himself known to us: being comprised under this Title the Sea. 20.
name of God. And when we come to prayer, meditate thereon seriously, that our
faith being grounded on so sure a Rock as God is, and on his promises and
properties, we may with comfort and patience expect a gracious answer, and
blessed grant of our Petitions.

The reason added to the Petitions being generally touched, It is further more
distinctly in the several branches thereof to be handled.

. 205. Of appropriating Gods Attributes to himself.
Q. HOw is God in this reason set out?

A. By his Attributes. For these words, Kingdom, Power, Glory, for ever do
point out four distinct Attributes, of God, which are

1. Psalm. 22. 28.
Sovereignty. Kingdom.

2. Ier. 32. 17. 2. Chro. 20. 6.
Omnipotency. Power.

3. Psalm. 113. 4. Isa. 6. 3.
Excellency. Glory.

4. Psalm. 90. 2* Isa. 57. 15.
Eternity. For ever.

Q. How are these Attributes applied to God?

A. By a special property and excellency. So much does this Particle THINE
and the Article THE import. (...).
As if he had said, Thine and thine only are these. Thine they are originally
of thy self; and that in an infinite measure and degree. 1. Tim. 6. 16.
In the same manner that the Apostle applies Immortality, may these and all
other divine Attributes be applied to God, who only has Kingdom, and Power,
and Glory for ever.

Though this Particle THINE, be but once expressed, yet by virtue of the
copulative Particle, AND, (...).
it is particularly to be applied to every of the other properties.

As for the fourth Attribute, Eternity, intimated in this clause, For ever, it
is so expressed, as appertaining to all and every of the other three. For Gods
kingdom is for ever: (...).
his Power for ever: his Glory for ever: and whatsoever else is in God, is, as
God himself, for ever. Well therefore may this be considered in relation to
other Attributes, as an attribute of them, and simply in it self as a distinct
attribute.

. 206. Of Gods having all things at his command.
Q. What kind of kingdom is here meant?

A. Gods universal kingdom: Of the kinds of Gods Kingdom See. 35.
by virtue whereof he has a supreme and absolute sovereignty in all places,
over all things. So as this kind of kingdom compriseth all kinds under it,
Psalm. 103. 19.
even his peculiar kingdom also, the Church of Christ. In this extent it is
said, His kingdom rules over all.

Q. What does this application of kingdom to God, import?

A. God has all things at his command. Where David applies this absolute
sovereignty to God in the very words which Christ does, 1. Chron. 29. 11, 12.
saying, Thine is the kingdom, O Lord, he adds by way of explication, All
that is in heaven and in earth is thine. Both riches and honor come of thee:
and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all.

It is God that first made all things, and that still vpholdeth, preserves,
Romans 11. 36.
and governs all things. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things.
Genesis 14. 22.
He is the possessour of heaven and earth. All things therefore must needs be
at his command.

On this ground we see what just cause we have to make all the forenamed
Petitions unto God: and of him to ask whatsoever is to be asked in Prayer. For
all are at his disposing. The Psalmist upon his acknowledgement of Gods
sovereignty makes this inference, Psalm. 44. 4.
Command deliverance for Iaakob.

. 207. Of the absolute Supremacy of Gods Sovereignty.
Q. What does the Emphaticall manner of attributing Kingdom to God ( THE
Kingdom) import?

A. Gods is the most supreme and absolute Sovereignty. (...).
THE KINGDOM, that is, that Sovereignty which may indeed, and properly be
called a Kingdom, which is over all, under none, is Gods. Wherefore God is
styled Psalm. 47. 2. Mal. 1. 14.
A great King: 1. Tim. 6. 16.
A King of Kings and Lord of Lords: Psalm. 95 3.
A great King above all Gods: Isa. 6. 5.
The King and Lord of Hosts: A King who has the Mat. 5. 34, 35.
heaven for his Throne: and the earth for his footstool.

God was before all, even eternal. Though the creatures over which he
reigns, were not from eternity, yet had the eternal God an eternal right
of reigning, by virtue whereof he was King over all things that are so soon
as ever they were. And this right he must needs have of himself, and by
himself. For he being an Ier. 10 10. 1. Tim. 1. 17.
eternal King, who could be before him, from whom he might receive a right of
Sovereignty? As he is (...).
God of himself, so is he (...).
Lord of himself: A supreme and absolute Monarch.

This Supremacy of Gods Sovereignty, teaches such as have any Sovereignty to
Reu. 4. 10.
cast their crowns down at the feet of this high Sovereign. Howsoever there
be some who in their Dominions are in all causes, and over al persons supreme
Governors, yet with this limitation, under God. That Sovereignty which they
have is Gods image, by virtue whereof they are styled, Psalm. 82. 6.
Gods. Yet because they are what they are of God, and under God, they are also
styled Ibid.
Children of the most High, Lam. 4. 20.
Anointed of the Lord, Rom 13. 4.
Ministers of God.

2. It teaches us all to advance God above all, and to prefer him before
all, to Luke 12. 4, 5.
fear him, Mat 22. 37.
love him, trust in him, and every way respect him more then all other, and to
obey him rather then any other King or Governor. This is such a ruled case, so
clear and evident, as Act. 4. 19. -- 5. 29.
the Apostles made their enemies Judges thereof. If a King in his Dominions is
to be preferred and obeyed before all subordinate Magistrates: much more God
before all Kings and other Governors thorowout the whole world.

. 208. Of god being King only.
Q. What does the appropriating of Kingdom to God import?

A. Gods is the only Kingdom. This Particle THINE ( Thine is the Kingdom)
imports a property. All other Kingdoms are but parts of his. Romans 13. 1.
There is no power but of God. The powers that be are ordained of God. Dan. 5.
21.
Nebuchadnezzar was forced to acknowledge as much.

This is to be known and acknowledged both to keep us from all base, and
slavish obedience to earthly Governors in things against Gods will: and also
to provoke us readily and willingly to obey them in all lawful things for
conscience sake, Romans 13. 5. 1. Pet. 2. 13.
for the Lords sake. If earthly kingdoms be, as they are, within the limits of
Gods kingdom, parts thereof, subordinate thereto, then no obedience must be
yielded to the Governors of them, but that which may stand with the Laws of
Gods kingdom: so as God the only King may be obeyed therein and thereby. But
in every thing that may stand with the Laws of Gods Kingdom, obedience is to
be yielded to Governors on earth, because their Kingdoms are parts of Gods,
and they Gods Deputies and Ministers. Romans 13. 2.
Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and
they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. These are the grounds
that bind us to obey Magistrates for conscience sake. Not that one man has
power over another conscience; this power is Gods Prerogative: but that God to
whom all men's consciences are and ought to be subject, has ordained the
Powers, and requires subjection to them. So as that which is done for
conscience sake, is done for the Lords sake.

. 209. Of the Duties due to God by reason of his Kingdom, and comfort thence
arising.
Q. What are the Duties which the holy Ghost by virtue of Gods kingdom and
Sovereignty requires of us?

A. 1. To suffer God to Psalm. 24. 7. 9.
enter in, and abide among us.

2. To be willing that he -- 110. 3.
reign and rul^ over us.

3. To be Isa. 6, 2, 5. Dan. 6. 26.
humbled and to tremble at his presence.

4. To Ier. 10. 7.
fear and reverence his Majesty.

5. To Psalm. 22. 27, 28. Zac. 14. 16, 17.
worship him.

6. To Psalm. 47. 6, 7. 1. Tim. 1. 17.
praise and glorify him.

7. To Psalm. 2. 6, 11, 12.
serve and obey him.

8. To Mal. 1. 13, 14.
offer to him the best that we have.

9. To Mat. 5. 34, 35.
^ake heed of profaning or abusing any thing that is his.

10. To Psalm. 149. 2. Zach. 9. 9.
testify our love to him by rejoicing in him.

11. To Psalm. 5. 2.
seek help of him.

12. To Isa. 43. 15. Zeph. 3. 15.
rest and rely upon him.

Q. What is the comfort that arises from Gods soueraignie?

A. Assurance of supply of all things needful, and of protection from all
things hurtful. Assurance, I say, to such as take him for their King, and in
testimony thereof are ready to perform all the forenamed duties. Though God
be a King over all, yet all take him not for their King. Some being (...) qui
sunt (...) absq, vtilitate vel (...) absque iugo.
sons of Belial, without yoke, say, Psalm. 2. 3.
Let us break his bonds asunder, and cast his cords away from us. Luke 19. 14.
We will not have him to rule over us. Yet, will they, nill they, God is their
King. And because willingly they yeald not to him, by force he keeps them
under. To these more terror, then comfort arises from Gods sovereignty. But to
his loyal subjects much comfort must needs arise. For their King having all
things at his command, will he suffer them to want what he knows to be
behoouefull for them? or to be annoyed with any hurtful thing? All the
properties of a good King are in God. But to provide for his subjects, and to
protect them are properties set down by the holy Ghost in the description of a
good King. Psalm. 72, 2, 3, etc.
Shall not God, the best and chiefest of Kings, the only true King, whose the
kingdom is, do those things for his subject?

This of Gods kingdom. The next property is his power. In these words, And
the power.

. 210. Of Gods power. What it is. How far it extends.
Q. What is meant by Gods power?

A. His ability to do any thing. Power attributed to a creature implies that
ability which it has: so it does also applied to the Creator. Now as other
attributes applied to God are his very essence, and as his essence is
infinite, so also is his power, which extends it self to every thing that by
power may be done: according to these Scripture Phrases Genesis 18. 14. ^er 32. 27.
Is anything too hard for the Lord? Luke 1. 37.
With God nothing is impossible. Mar 10. 17.
With God all things are possible. In this respect he is styled Genesis 17. 1.
(...).
God Almighty.

Q. Are all things without exception, within the compass of Gods power? Reu.
4. 8. (...)


A. Not such things as import impotencie, or imperfection. Gods power were not
omnipotent, but rather impotent, if those were within the circuit thereof. Such
phrases therefore as these, Tit. 1. 2.
Cannot, Heb. 6. 18.
Impossible, are, in relation to those things, applied to God.

Some of the particulars, which by reason of omnipotency, God cannot do, are
these.

1. Matters of contradiction: as one thing at the same time to be and not to
be: or one and the same thing to be infinite, and finite. Such things are in
their nature impossible. And God cannot establish them, because they are
against truth, and imply impotencie. For whatsoever is, it is by the power of
the Creator: and by his power it is as it is. If withal it be not when it is,
or be contrary to what the Creator makes it, where is the power of the
Creator? If he himself should be supposed to establish such contradictions,
he cannot be supposed to establish them by his power. The one part is by power,
the other therefore must be, if it could be, by that which is contrary to
power, even by impotencie.

2. Matters of iniquity: All sinful matters. As these are contrary to the
will, purity and perfection of God, so they arise from impotencie of
understanding, will, memory, conscience, affection, and actions. By power it
is that any either do not, or cannot sin. By weakness it is therefore that
any fall into sin. These emphaticall phrases ( Genesis 18. 25.
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Ezekiel. 18. 29.
Are not the ways of the Lord equal? Romans 3. 5.
Is God unrighteous? -- 9. 14.
Is there unrighteousness with God?) do imply an impossibility. So far is
God from sin, as Iam. 1. 13.
He cannot be tempted with evil: neither tempts he any man.

3. Matters of inconstancy and variableness. By power it is that one
remains firm, stable, constant, inviolable, unchangeable. Weakness
therefore causes the contrary. Of the Almighty it is said, Iam. 1. 17.
With him is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. Where it is said, 1.
Sam. 15. 29.
He will not repent, He is styled The strength of Israel: Whereby is employed
that it is of strength that he changes not. On this ground it is also said, 2.
Tim. 2 13.
God cannot deny himself. Tit. 1. 2.
God cannot lie. Heb. 6. 18.
It is impossible that God should lie.

4. Matters of Passion, or suffering, as to be mocked, deceived, oppressed, put
to death with the like. These imply a subjection to a superior power, and in
that respect an impotencie. Wherefore it is said of God, Gal. 6. 7.
He is not mocked. Iam. 1. 13.
He cannot be tempted. The Son of God to make himself capable of suffering,
which for man's redemption was necessary, assumed flesh, 1. Pet. 3. 18.
In which he was put to death. For in his divine nature he could not die, nor
any way suffer.

. 211. Of the difference betwixt Gods absolute and actual power.
Q. Does Gods power actually extend it self to all things that by power may be
done?

A. No: not to bring them into act, or to effect them. Many, many things there
be which God is able to do, that he does not, no^ ever will do. Mat. 26. 53.
He could have sent his Angels to have rescued Christ out of the Jews hands.
-- 3. 9.
He could out of stones have raised children to Abraham. He could have made
more worlds. He could have sent more floods to destroy the world again and
again. He could have redeemed the devils. Infinite are the things which he
could do, but will not do. Well therefore is Gods power distinguished into his
Absolute and Actual power.

Gods absolute power is that whereby he is able to do whatsoever by power may
be done: as is evident by these phrases, Luke 1. 37.
With God nothing is impossible. Mar. 10. 27.
With God all things are possible.

Gods actual power is that whereby he does all things that in his counsel he
determines to do: as it is written, Psalm. 115. 3.
He has done whatsoever he pleased.

Herein lies the difference betwixt Gods absolute and actual power, That his
absolute power extends it self beyond his will, as the forenamed instances
show. But his actual power is bounded within the compass of his will. In this
limitation was he well instructed who said to Christ, Mar. 1. 40.
If thou will thou can make me clean. And they who said of God, Dan. 3. 17.
Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us, etc. Thereupon they all so trusted
to Gods power, as they subjected themselves to his will.

. 212. How power is proper to God.
Q. Why is power by a property with emphasis applied to God thus, (...).
And the power?

A. 1. Gods only is truly and properly power. It is therefore styled Ephesians. 1.
19. (...).
A might of power. So as all power compared to his, is as no power, but very
weakness. His is THE POWER, that which is worthy to be called power, is
Gods. Psalm. 62. 11.
Power belongs unto God.

2. Gods power is beyond all limits. It is (...).
an exceeding greatness of power. To it nothing is impossible. By it all
things were made, Ephesians. 1. 19.
and are vpheld and preserved. By it may all things be destroyed and brought
to naught. The most stable and inviolable course that is set to any creature,
by it may be altered. By it the Sun can be made Ios. 10. 13.
to stand still, or 2. King. 20. 11.
to run back, The Exodus 14. 21.
sea to be divided, The Rock to send forth water, and what not?

3. f -- 17. 6.
All power is derived from Gods. Job 39. 19.
Have thou given the horse strength? says God to man: implying thereby that
God has done it, and none but God. Ioh 19. 11.
Thou could have no power at all (says Christ to Pilate) except it were
given thee from above. 1. Chro. 29. 12.
Power and might are in Gods hand: in his hand it is to give strength to all.

4. All power is subordinate to Gods. This Asa acknowledges where he says, 2.
Chro. 14. 11.
It is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no
power. So as, Romans 8. 31.
If God be for us who can be against us? Psalm. 118. 8.
It is better to trust in the Lord then to put confidence in man. On these and
other like grounds well may it be said to God, THINE IS THE POWER.

. 213. Of the Duties due to God by reason of his power.
Q. What duties are required by virtue of Gods power?

A. 1. To put difference betwixt God and all creatures. In regard of the power
of God the Psalmist says, O Lord God of hoasts, Psalm. 89. 8. etc.
who is a strong Lord like unto thee? And to prove that none is like to God, he
sets out many evidences of Gods power.

2. To fly to God in all time of need, and to seek help of him. Mar. 1. 40.
As that Leper did of Christ, who said, If thou will thou can make me clean.

3. To believe Gods word. For he is able to make it good. Abraham was strong in
faith, Romans 4. 20, 21.
being fully persuaded that what God had promised he was able to perform.

4. To be strong in God. Ephesians. 6. 10.
His power is a power of might. He can give strength to us.

5. To abide contentedly in the estate wherein God sets us. Phil. 4. 11, 13.
So did he who said, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

6. To endure patiently all afflictions. So did the said Apostle, who said, 2.
Tim. 1. 12.
I suffer these things, for I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which
I have committed to him.

7. To carry our selves humbly before God. 1. Pet. 5. 6.
Humble your selves under the mighty hand of God. Gods is a mighty hand: we
must therefore be humble under it.

8. To fear God. Mat. 10. 28.
Fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

9. To fear no creature. Psalm. 118. 6.
The Lord is on my side: I will not fear: what can man do unto me? Dan. 3. 16,
17.
On this ground three of the captives of the King of Babell, faithful servants
of the Lord of heaven, thus answered that King, We are not careful to answer
thee: our God whom we serve is able to deliver us.

10. To praise God. Psalm. 150. 2.
Praise him for his mighty acts. Unto him that is able to do exceeding
abundantly, Ephesians. 3. 20, 21.
be glory, etc.

11. To hope well of such as are weak. Romans 14. 4.
God is able to make them stand.

12. To be bountiful to such as need. 2. Cor 9. 8.
God is able to make all graces abound, etc.

. 214. Of the comfort arising from Gods power.
Q. What comfort arises from the consideration of Gods power?

A. Assurance of the accomplishment of Gods promises. To strengthen the
Prophets faith in the promise which God had made of returning the captivity of
the Jews, God gives him this answer, Ier. 32. 27.
Behold, I am the Lord, the God of all flesh: is there anything too hard for me?

To exemplify this, the holy Ghost puts us in mind of Gods power to
strengthen our faith in these promises following.

1. The alteration of our corrupt nature. Mar. 10. 23. etc.
Though to man it be as easy to make a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle, as a rich man to enter into heaven, yet to God that is not impossible.
For with God all things are possible.

2. The vocation of the Jews. Romans 11. 23.
For God is able to graffe them in again.

3. All needful grace. 2. Cor. 9. 8.
God is able to make all grace abound.

4. Perseverance to the end. No man shall pluck Christ's sheep out of his
hand. Ioh. 10. 28, 29.
For his Father which gave him them is greater then all.

5. Supply of all necessities. Phil. 4. 19.
God that is able will supply them.

6. Assistance in all trouble. Upon this ground that God has a mighty arm,
Psalm. 89. 13, 21, 22, 23.
and strong hand, assurance is given to David of sufficient protection.

7. Deliverance out of all evil. Isa. 50. 2.
For assurance hereof with great emphasis does the Prophet press the power of
God.

8. The resurrection of our bodies. Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.
For assurance hereof the Apostle does much amplify the power of God.

9. Eternal glorification. Phil. 3. 21.
Christ shall change our vile body, that it maybe fashioned like unto his
glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all
things to himself.

Hitherto of Gods Kingdom and Power. The third property is his Glory, set
down in these words, AND THE GLORY.

. 215. Of Gods glory. What it is.
Q. What is meant by Gods Glory?

A. That Excellency which is in him. For the Excellency of a thing, that
which causes it to be in high esteem, and procures a name, fame, and
renoune unto it, is the Glory of it. The (...) In Call. grau^ fuit. (...)
gloriosus fuit. Inde nomen. (...) grauitas, gloria.
Hebrew word signifies that which is weighty and of worth. The (...) fama,
gloria.
Greek word signifies both fame and glory. For glory causes fame. In
Scripture, glory and excellency are put for one and the same thing: and that in
relation both to creatures, and to the Creator: as, where the Prophet speaking
of the glory of the Church, says, Isa. 35. 2.
the GLORY of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the EXCELLENCY of Carmel and
Sharon. The shall see the GLORY of the Lord, and the EXCELLENCY of our God. On
this ground where the excelency of our God is set forth, glory is attributed to
him, and he is styled Act. 7. 2.
God of glory, Psalm. 24 8.
King of Glory, Ephesians. 1. 17.
Father of glory. And his Name, Habitation, Throne and Gospel, because of the
excellency of them, are styled Neh. 9. 5.
a name of glory, Isa. 63. 15.
an habitation of glory, Ier. 14. 21.
a throne of glory, 1 Timothy 1. 11.
a Gospel of glory. Yea for the same end Glory is also prefixed before the
things of God, as Isa. 2. 10.
Glory of Majesty, Psalm. 145. 11.
Glory of Kingdom, Ephesians. 1. 6.
Glory of Grace, 2 These. 1. 9.
Glory of Power.

. 216. Of the Incomprehensiblenesse of Gods Glory.
Q. MAy Gods glory be comprehended by Man?

A. No. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
It is incomprehensible. It is a light which no man can approach unto. For as
all other properties of God are his very essence, so is his glory which is the
excellency of all. When Moses desired God to show him his glory, Exodus 33. 18,
20.
the Lord answered, Thou can not see my FACE for there shall no man see ME
and live. By this answer it appears that Gods glory is his face, and his face
is himself. For these three phrases applied to God, glory, face, me, are all
put for one and the same thing. And that all these are incomprehensible, this
phrase shows, Thou can not see my face. Yet God being willing to gratify
him, so far as he was capable, showed him his Backe-parts, some glimps of his
glory.

. 217. Of the means of manifesting Gods Glory.
Q. HOw is Gods glory manifested?

A. By such means as it pleases him to afford. For means he has afforded in
all ages to that purpose.

THese means have been of several sorts. Some extraordinary, others
ordinary: Some more obscure, others more bright.

Extraordinary means were such particular representations of Gods glory as at
sundry times were showed to sons of men, as Exo. 16. 10.
A brightness in that cloud wherein God was wont to manifest his presence: and
that Ezekiel. 1. 28, 29
Apparition, or vision which was showed to Ezekiel.

Ordinary means were the Psalm. 26. 8.
Tabernacle and the 1 Samuel 4. 21, 22
Arc.

Other more clear and bright means are his Word, Works, and Image.

Both parts of Gods Word, the Law and Gospel do clearly set out the glory of
God. The Law, the glory of his Justice: the Gospel, the glory of his Mercy.
Glory therefore is attributed to them both. The Apostle 2 Cor. 39.
where he styles the Law a ministration of condemnation, attributes glory to
it But the Gospel which he styles a ministration of righteousness, he
affirms to exceed in glory. This is 2 Cor. 3. 18.
that glass wherein with open face we behold the glory of God.

All Gods works declare his glory: As his works of Psalm 19 1. Romans 1. 20.
Creation, and Psalm. 97. 6.
Preservation or providence. But among the works of God, they which are more
then ordinary works of wonder, as all manner of Number. 14. 22. Ioh. 2. 11.
Miracles, Exodus 15. 11.
Extraordinary judgments on the wicked, Psalm. 85. 9.
Extraordinary deliverances of his people, and other mercies. And most
principally that exceeding greatness of his power which he wrought in Christ
when Romans 6. 4.
he raised him from the dead.

The Image of God, which is sundry ways planted in creatures, does every way
set out the glory of God: as Romans 3. 23.
that Image after which man was first created: 2 Cor. 3. 18.
that after which man is renewed: 1 Cor. 11. 7.
that whereby such as are in authority have superiority, dignity, and
excellency above others: and Heb. 1. 3.
that which was set in Christ made man. The most bright and perspicuous
representation of Gods glory that ever was given, was Christ the true, natural
only begotten Son of God, the brightness of his glory, and the express
Image of his Person: of whom Saint John says, Ioh. 1. 14.
we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father. And
Christ of himself says, -- 14. 9.
He that has seen me has seen the Father. For Christis 1 Timothy 3. 16.
God manifested in the flesh.

Of all places heaven is the place where Gods glory is most conspicuously
seen. There the forenamed Son of God abides in his greatest glory: and
there are other means of manifesting the divine glory so far as the creature
may be made capable of enduring the brightness thereof. There it is said that
Act. 7. 55.
Stephen saw the glory of God. There shall all the Saints be Jude v. 24.
presented before the glory of God. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
Now we see through a glass darkely: but there face to face. There Mat. 18. 10.
the Angels always behold the face of God. And there -- 22. 30.
we shall be as the Angels of God.

. 218. How glory is proper to God.
Q. Why is glory by a property with emphasis applied to God, thus, And the
glory? (...).


A. 1. The Fountain of all glory is in God. That which the Psalmist faith of
life, may fitly be applied to glory: with God is the Fountain of glory. Psalm.
36. 9.
All excellencies are in God. Excellency of Majesty, Excellency of Sovereignty,
Excellency of Purity, Excelleney of Power, Excellency of Wisdom, Excellency
of Truth, Excellency of Justice, Excellency of Mercy. He has them all in
himself, through himself, for himself: and that without measure, above
comprehension, even infinitely. Whatsoever excellency is in any creature, it
issues out of this Fountain. The creature has all the excellency, which in
any kind it has, from this Fountain, by participation and communication. All
glory therefore is Gods. They glory which is in himself, and the glory which
is in any creature, is his.

2. The brightness of Gods glory obscureth all other glory. Job. 25. 5.
Behold even the Moon and it shines not: yea the Starr^s are not pure in his
sight. The glorious Angels are said to have wings to cover their faces: Isa. 6.
2.
because the brightness of Gods glory would otherwise dazzle them. Exodus 34. 30.
If Aaron and the children of Israel were afraid to come nigh to Moses by
reason of the shining of his face, how much more may the creature be afraid to
come to God, by reason of the incomprehensible shining of his glorious face.
Where Gods glory shines in his brightness, no other glory can any more be
seen, then the light of a candle in the middst of clear and bright Sunshine.
As the light of the Sun is to the light of Stars, so is the glory of the
Creator to the glory of creatures. None of the Stars have light in themselves,
but receive all their light from the Sun. And so bright is the light of the
Sun, as, when it shines, the Stars are not seen. On these grounds there is
great and just cause to say unto God, Thi^e is the glory.

. 219. Of Man's giving glory to God, and taking glory from God.
Q. HOw is the creature said to Psalm. 29. 1, 2.
give glory to God, or to Romans 1. 23.
take it from him?

A. Not properly, but respectively: namely in respect of the creatures mind,
and the Creators account. For giving glory to God, it is truly said, Ioh. 22. 2.
Can a man be profitable to God as he that is wise may be profitable to
himself? If thou be righteouse what give thou to him? -- 35. 6, 7.
or what receives he of thine hand? But he that does those things which are
pleasing and acceptable to God, has a mind, will and desire, if it were in
his power, to give glory to God: and God does account such a mind, will and
desire, where there is an answerable endeavor, as if indeed actually and
properly glory were given to him. This mind to glorify and praise God is
manifested by an acknowledgement of God, and of all his excellencies, by making
them known, and by an answerable respect and carriage. Where we are exhorted
to give glory to God, Psalm. 96. 3, 7, 9, 10.
these directions are added, Declare his glory among the nations. Worship the
Lord. Fear before him. Say, the Lordraigneth, etc.

On the contrary side, taking glory from God, It is truly said, Job 35. 6.
If thou siunest, what d^st thou against God? But the sinner, especially the
wilful sinner, whose sins are committed directly against the divine Majesty,
has a mind, will and desire, if it were in his power, to rob God of his
glory, and to take it from him, and God does so account of him, as if by him
he were indeed actually and properly deprived of glory. To such he says,
Mal. 3. 8.
ye have rob^ed me In these respects Glory is taken from God, when Psalm. 14. 1.
he is denied to be, or Romans 1 21.
not glorified as God: or when Hos. 2. 5, etc.
that which is due to God is given to others, or Ezekiel. 28. 2.
assumed to ones self. In these and other like respects God is said to be --
20. 27.
blasphemed. To blaspheme, according to the notation of the original word, is
(...) Transfigere nomen Iebou^. Len. 24, 16.
to hurt ones fame: and in the Law a blasphemer is said to strike through the
Name of the Lord. Not that any hurt is properly done to God, or to his glorious
Name, but that, if it could be hurt, they do what they can to hurt it: or
that they hinder the brightness of Gods glory from shining forth to others: as
a man, that cannot take away any whit of light from the Sun, may
notwithstanding by sundry means hinder the Sunshine from others.

. 220. Of the duties due to God by reason of his Glory.
Q. What duties does the appropriating of glory to God import?

A. 1. To Exodus 20, 3.
account him the only true God. It is his chiefest glory to be a God: yea to
be the only true God. Isa. 42. 8.
This glory will he not give to another. It is therefore to be reserved
entirely to him.

2. To advance him above all. Psalm. 113. 4.
The Lord is high above all nations: and his glory above the heavens:
accordingly he must be advanced.

3. To acknowledge his 1 Timothy 6. 16.
infinite perfection* and that in all his attributes. Herein his glory
consists. Such phrases as these, ( Psalm. 147. 5.
His wisdom is infinite: Isa. 40. 18.
There is no searching thereof. Ephesians 1. 19.
The exceeding greatness of his power. Psalm. 108. 4.
His mercy is great above the heavens, and his truth reaches unto the clouds.
-- 36. 6.
His righteousness is like the mountains: his judgments a great deep) Such
phrases as these imply an infinite perfection in Gods properties.

4. To admire his excellency. Glory and excellency is the only true cause of
admiration. Psalm. 8. 1.
The consideration of Gods surpassing glory did even ravish David's heart with
an holy admiration thereof.

5. To adore his Majesty. Adoration is properly due to Glory, Majesty, and
Excellency. When the Ezekiel 1. 29.
Prophet saw the appearance of the glory of God, Reu. 4. 10, 11.
he fell down upon his face: Psalm. 86. 9.
which was the proper gesture of adoration.

6. To 1 Chro. 29. 11, 12.
ascribe the glory of all glory to him. If there be any glory in us, glory of
dignity, glory of wealth, glory of strength, glory of any virtue, Psalm. 115. 1.
we ought to ascribe it to him, who is the Fountain of all glory, from whom we
have all the glory which we have: and not to our selves.

7. Job. 5. 44.
To seek the glory which comes from God alone, even that glory which
warranteth, approves and gives. For glory being Gods, God being the Fountain
of all true glory, that which comes not from him, is but a show and shadow of
true glory.

8. To abase and cast down our selves at the glorious presence of God: as Isa.
6. 5.
Isaiah did. Thus is Gods glory magnified.

9. To justify God and condemn our selves in his proceedings against us, that
God may be glorified. So did Dan. 9. 7.
Daniel in the name of all his people. This was it which Josh. 7. 19.
Iosuah intended when he said to Achan, Give glory to the Lord, and make
confession to him.

10. To praise God in all things. Psalm. 50. 23.
Who so offers praise, glorifieth God. The nine Lepers that being healed of
Christ went away without giving thanks, are said, Luke 17. 18.
not to return to give glory to God.

11. To 1 Cor. 10. 31.
do all things to the glory of God. Gods glory ought to be the Mark whereat
we aim in every thing that we do.

12. To cause others to glorify God. For this end Christ charge us to Mat.
5. 16.
let our light shine before men.

. 221. Of the ways whereby others are brought to glorify God.
Q. HOw may others be brought to glorify God?

A. 1. By declaring the glory and excellency of God. Thus may others come to
knowledge of God: and so to glorify him. The Psalm. 66. 2, 4.
Psalmist having exhorted to set forth the glory of Gods Name, and to make his
name glorious, adds as an effect thereof, All the earth shall sing to thy
Name.

2. By Psalm. 29. 1, 2.
inciting and provoking men to glorify God. This was David very diligent to
do. For it puts a kind of life into men, and quickneth them up the more to
do a duty.

3. By 2 These. 3. 1.
furthering the Word of God, and causing it to have a free passage. The Word is
a powerful means to make men glorify God.

4. By 1 Pet. 2. 9.
showing forth the virtue of God in us. Mat. 9. 8.
Christ by this means drew on multitudes to glorify God.

5. By Phil. 2. 15.
shining as lights in darkness. Thus 1 Pet. 2. 12.
they which speak evil of us, may be this light be brought to glorify God.

6. By converting sinners. When the Gentiles so heard the Word as thereby faith
was wrought in them, Act. 13. 48.
they glorified God. On this ground Psalm. 51. 13.
David voweth to teach sinners Gods ways.

7. By our own repentance. When the believing Jews heard that God had granted
repentance to the Gentiles, Act. 11. 18.
they glorified God.

8. By manifest evidences of entire repentance. Gal. 1. 23, 24.
They which heard that Paul preached the faith that once he destroyed (a clear
demonstration of his sound conversion) glorified God.

9. By works of mercy. 2 Cor. 9. 12, 13, 15.
Saint Paul was hereby stirred up to give thanks to God: And says of such
works, that they are abundant by many thanksgiuings to God: and that many
glorify God for liberal contribution unto them.

10. By fruits of righteousness. Of these it is expressly said, Phil. 1. 11.
they are to the glory and praise of God. Men are made Isa. 61. 3.
trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord that he might be glorified.

11. By all manner of Mat. 5. 16.
good works. They that see them will glorify God.

12. By the measure of grace answerable to the means. Ioh. 15 8.
Herein is my Father glorified if ye bear much fruit, says Christ of such as
were trained up under his powerful ministry.

13. By suffering for the truth of God. For 1 Pet. 4. 16.
God on their part who suffer is glorified.

. 222. Of those who are to set forth Gods Glory.
Q. Who are bound to set forth the glory of God?

A. 1. Psalm. 103. 20.
Angels in heaven. They have best ability to do it.

2. Psalm. 147. 12.
Members of the Church. They on earth have the best means to do it. Such are
comprised under these titles Jerusalem, and Sion, who are often incited to
glorify God.

3. Mal. 2. 1, 2. Psalm. 135. 19, 20.
Ministers of the Word. Their proper and peculiar calling it is to glorify
God, and to teach others so to do.

4. Psalm. 29. 1.
Magistrates. They bear Gods Image: and on earth are Gods.

5. Psalm. 148. 11, 12
All sorts of people. Young men, Maidens, old men, children and others. For all
have just cause so to do.

6. Psalm. 150. 6.
All living creatures. Their life is of God.

7. Psalm. 148. 8, 9.
Senseless creatures also: as Fire, hail, snow, vapors, etc. Their being is
of God.

To conclude, Psalm. 145. 9, 10.
Gods tender mercies are over all his works. Therefore all his works should
praise him.

. 223. Of the chiefest enemies of Gods glory.
Q. Who among men are greatest enemies of Gods glory?

A. 1. Psalm. 14. 1.
Atheists, who say in their heart, there is no God.

2. Romans 1. 23. Psalm. 106. 20.
Idolaters, who change the glory of the corruptible God into an image made like
to corruptible things.

3. Leu. 24. 16. (...) transfigere.
Blasphemers, who strike through the Name of God.

4. Mal. 3. 8.
Sacrilegious persons, who rob God.

5. -- 1. 7.
Profane persons, who despise God.

6. Act. 12. 23.
Proud persons, who arrogate Gods due to themselves.

7. 1. Ioh 5. 10.
Unbelievers, who make God a liar.

8 Romans 2. 24.
Lewd professors, who cause others to blaspheme the name of God.

9. Reu. 16. 9.
All impenitent sinners. Of such it is said, They repented not to give God
glory. For by repentance is God much glorified: and that both by the penitents
themselves, and others.

Hitherto of the three expressed Attributes of God, Kingdom, Power, Glory. The
Amplification of them follows in this clause, For ever.

224. Of Eternity. To what things it is applied.
Q. HOw are the Kingdom, Power, and Glory of God amplified?

A. By their unchangeable continuance. This phrase FOR EVER implies both
Eternity, and Immutabilitie. The phrase in the original, to translate it word
for word, (...). in secula. (...) quasi (...). Arist. lib. 1. de coelo.
is, for ages: The original root ((...)) does properly signify that which is
for ever. Now because an age is the longest usual distinction of time, the
same word that signifies eternity is put for an age. And when there is no end
of that which is spoken of, the plural number indefinitely without any
limitation, thus, for ages, is used to set out the euerlastingnesse of it. But
euerlastingnesse, or eternity is diversely used in Scripture. For such things
are said to be for ever, everlasting, eternal, which have both beginning and
end, which have beginning, but no end, which have no beginning yet an end,
which have neither beginning nor end.

1. The things which having both beginning and end also are said to be eternal
and for ever, 1. Such as have both beginning and end.
are 1. Such as have no set and determinate date. Thus because there was no
date set for that heap which was made of the ruins of Ai, neither was any
time of the reedifying of it known, it is said to be Ios. 8. 28.
an heap for ever. Deuteronomy. 13. 16.
The like is noted of that heap which was to be made of that City where
Idolaters were harbored. 2 Such as are immutable while their date lasts.
Thus Exodus 21. 6.
the things which remained inalterable for the time of a man's life are said to
be for ever, as the service of him whose ear was boared through with a nawle,
by his Master: and the things which endured all the time of the Jews
pedagogie, and polity till the first coming of Christ, as the Exodus 12. 24.
Passover, and other like legal Rites: and the things which are to endure
till the end of the world: as Genesis 9. 16.
the Covenant whereof the Rainbow is a sign, and Eccl. 1. 4.
the earth. All these had their beginning: and they have had or shall have
their end. Yet are they said to be for ever, because no abrogation, or
alteration was to be of them, till their date and end was come.

2. The things which having a beginning have no end, 2. Such as have a
beginning but no end.
are more properly said to be for ever, or everlasting; because these phrases
have especial respect to future continuance. Such are

1. Good Angels, who Luke 20. 36. Heb. 2. 9.
never dye: who Math. 18. 10.
always behold the face of God.

2. Evil Angels, who are Inde, verse 6.
reserved in everlasting chains.

3. The humane nature of Christ: whose A. and. 2. 31.
flesh saw no corruption: and who, even as man, Heb. 7. 24.
continues for ever.

4. The souls of men, Eccl. 12. 7.
which return to God when the body which is but dust returns to the earth.

5. Men's bodies after the Resurrection, when 1. Cor. 15. 53.
This corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality: and when 1. These. 4. 17.
we shall be ever with the Lord.

6. The highest heaven: that place where Christ now abides in his humane
nature, and which is the blessed habitation of the glorious Angels, and
glorified Saints. This is styled 2. Cor. 51.
an eternal house: 1 Pet. 1. 4 (...).
an inheritance incorruptible, that fades not away.

7. Hell: the place of the damned, where their worm dies not, Flos quidam qui
non marcessit, dicitur (...). Flos iste adhiberi solebat coronis. vide Tibul.
lib. 3. El. 4.
and the fire is not quenched (Mar. 9. 44) where their punishment is
everlasting, Mat. 25. 46.

8. All things that remain after the day of Judgment: when there shall be no
more death, Reu. 21. 4.

3. The things which have no beginning but an end, are such decrees of God as
were in time accomplished. The decree was in the purpose of God before all
times, 3. Such as have no beginning but an end.
but performed in an appointed time. Thus grace is said to be given before the
world began. 2. Tim. 1. 9.
The decree of giving it was before the world: yet the decree had his date, and
was accomplished: grace is actually given in the time of this world.

4. The things which have neither beginning nor end are most properly eternal.
4 Such as have neither beginning nor end.
For herein lies a difference betwixt eternity, and sempiternitie or
euerlastingnesse. Eternity looks backward and forward. It never saw
beginning, nor ever shall see end. Euerlastingnesse looks only forward to
that which is to come. That which is properly eternal has his being of and in
himself, Things properly eternal are also immutable.
being supported and sustained by none, and in that respect is immutable. Thus
the phrases which do set out true and proper eternity, do also by just
consequence imply immutabilitie. Wherefore under this phrase FOR EVER here in
the Lords Prayer both eternity and immutability are comprised. The things thus
properly eternal are only God himself and such things as are essential to
him, as his Son, his Spirit, his Properties.

1. God says of himself, Before me there was no God formed, neither shall
there be after me. Isai. 43. 10. Fitly therefore does the man of God say unto
him, From everlasting to everlasting thou art God, Psalm. 90. 2. The proper name
of God (...) Iod Sheuatum innuit futurum: Holem, praesens: Lamed He quiescens
in camets, praeteritum. Omnia igitur tempora in se continet. Nomen istud sacrum
sic explicat Johannes Grace, (...). Vide Bezaean. not. in Apoc. 1. 4. Isa. 96.
(...) Pater aeternitatis
Jehovah does fully set out this property, and immutable eternity. For it
compriseth under it all times, past, present, future.

2. The Son of God is called Father of Eternity, in that, he is eternal
himself, and the author of such things as endure for ever.

3. The Spirit of God in the beginning moved upon the face of the waters,
Hebrai expo^^^^ (...) incubabat sicut gallina ouis suis incubat donec pulli
gignantur.
Genesis 1. 2. He was therefore in the beginning: and if he was in the beginning,
he had no beginning. For he it was that formed the things that had a
beginning: in which respect he is said to move, or (as the Jewish expositors
interpret the word) to sit as an Hen upon her Eggs, till her Chickens be
hatched.

4. All the properties of God are, as these three, ( Kingdom, Power, Glory)
for ever.

His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, Dan. 7. 14. even from generation to
generation, Dan. 4. 31.

His Glory is eternal, 1. Pet. 5. 10.

His righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, Psalm. 119. 142.

His truth is for ever, Psalm. 117. 2.

His mercy is for ever, Psalm. 136. 1.

So also his Counsel, Law, Oath, Covenant and the like, whereof see. 226.

Thus we see that eternity properly taken, Difference betwixt Gods eternity
and creatures.
is proper to God. Howsoever other things are also styled eternal, yet there
is a manifest difference betwixt that which is proper to God, and that which is
common to creatures.

1. Gods Eternity is without beginning. So is no creatures. For by him were
all things created that are in heaven, Col. 1. 16.
and that are in earth, visible and invisible.

2. Gods is without alteration. So is no creature as we shall. 227.
afterward show.

3. Gods is independent. He ever was, and ever remains to be of himself,
and by himself. Creatures have their continuance of God, Act. 17. 28.
and by God. In him we live, and move, and have our being. Romans 11. 36,
Of him, and through him, and to him are all things.

225. Of the Duties which arise from Gods Eternity.
Q. What duties does that Eternity which is proper to God teach us?

A. 1. To acknowledge him to be the only Creator. Ioh. 1. ^2 3.
By the eternity of Christ does S. John prove that he is God, and that all
things were made by him.

2. To seek preservation of him. On this ground the Psalmist thus prays,
Psalm. 102. 24.
O my God take me not away in the midst of my days: thy years are
throughout all generations.

3. To give the praise of continuance of all good to him. It was usual with
the Psalmist to give thanks to God, Psalm. 136.
because his mercy endures for ever.

4. To ascribe eternal glory to him that is eternal. This phrase is frequent
among the Saints, To God be glory for ever and ever. 2. Tim. 4. 18.


5. In our time to serve him. Thus do we what lies in our power to continue
service to the Eternal for ever. If all generations were careful every one in
their time to serve God, the mortality of man would be no hindrance to the
perpetuity of Gods service. Abraham called upon the name of the everlasting
God. Genesis 21. 33.
Because the Lord was an everlasting God, Ahraham was careful in his time to
worship him.

6. To make him known to posterity. This is a further means of procuring an
everlasting name to the everlasting God. For our posterity being instructed by
us, may declare Gods name to their posterity: and so posterity to posterity
throughout all generations. Mark these things (says the Psalmist) that ye may
tell it to the generations following: Psalm. 48. 13, 14.
For this God is our God for ever and ever.

7. To depend on him for our posterity. We are mortal, and shall not ever
live to provide for our posterity. But God remaining for ever we may well
commend such as survive us to his providence, and depend on him for his care
over them. The Psalmist having made acknowledgement of Gods everlasting
continuance, saying thus to him, Thou art the same: Psalm. 102. 27. 28.
and thy years shall have no end, he makes this inference, The children of
thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall be established before thee.

8. To fear him more then creatures. Creatures though never so mighty, and
malicious may die, and we be freed from fear of them. Psalm. 92. 8, 9.
But God ever lives. Thou Lord art most high for evermore, but thine enemies
shall perish.

9. To prefer him before all. To show what just cause there is to prefer
God before all, thus says the Lord of himself, Before me there was no God
formed, neither shall there be after me. Isa. 43. 10.


10. To follow after righteousness.

11. To turn others to righteousness. Dan. 12. 3.


For both these shall shine, Math. 13. 43.
the one as the Firmament, the other as the Stars in the Kingdom of God, for
ever and ever.

12. To hope in death. 1. These. 4. 13, 14. etc.


13. To be comforted for those that die in the Lord. For the eternal God will
raise up both us and others believing in him, to eternal life.

Thus much of Gods Eternity plainly expressed under this phrase, for ever.
His Immutabilitie is also employed thereby.

. 226 Of immutabilitie: to what things it may be applied.
Q. What, besides Eternity, is employed under this clause FOR EVER.

A. Immutabilitie. That which ever remains the same without any alteration is
most properly said to be for ever. Psalm. 102. 27.
Wherefore of God it is said, Thou art the same, and thy years shall have no
end. His immutability and eternity are both joined together.

As eternity, so also immutabilitie is diversely taken in Scripture. For

1. Many things are said to be unchangeable, 1. Things immutable by voluntary
appointment.
because by voluntary appointment they are so ordered: as

1. Sundry Laws and Statutes. Dan. 6. 15.
The Law of the Medes and Persians was, that no Decree, nor Statute which the
King establishes, may be altered.

2. Last Wills and Testaments. Gal. 3. 15.
No man disanulleth a Testament, or adds thereto, if it be confirmed.

3. Sacred Vows of such as have power to make them. Number. 30. 3. etc.
Indeed an husband had power in sundry cases, and with due cautions to disanull
his wives vow: and a father, his daughters vow. But otherwise the Law is strict
in this case, When thou shall vow a Vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not
slack to pay it. Deuteronomy. 23. 21.


4. Things consecrated. Pro. 20. 25.
It is a snare to a man to devour that which is consecrated. Ezekiel. 48. 14.
The first fruits of the Lord might not be sold, exchanged or alienated,
because they were holy to the Lord* consecrated to him.

5. Lawful oaths. Mat. 5. 33.
These must be kept, though they be made to a man's hurt. Psalm. 15. 4.


6. The bond of marriage. Mat. 19. 6.
Hereof it is said, What God has joined together let no man put asunder.

2. Other things by custom become immutable: as

1. Evil practices. Ier. 13. 23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also
do good that are accustomed to do evil.

2. Civil ordinances. Mat. 27. 15.
At the Passover the Governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner
whom they would: thereupon it is said, Of necessity he must deliver one to
them. Luke 23. 17.


3. Sundry things are made immutable by special supportance: as

1. Celestial spirits. Ephesians. 1. 10.
These are the things in heaven which are said to be gathered together in
Christ: by whom they are confirmed and established.

2. The Church militant. Mat. 16. 18.
For the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Psalm. 125. 1.


3. Particular Saints. Romans 11. 29.
They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Sion which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever. (...). ^^^smodi sunt vt eorum ipsum (...) non possit
(...) and (...)


4. The gifts and calling of God. These are without repentance: Such as God
never repents the bestowing of them. On this ground the Apostle thus says of
such as were called and made partakers of the gift of God, Phil. 1. ^.
I am confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in
you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.

4. There are many things which have an immutable nature given them: so as
according to that course which God has appointed, they cannot be altered: as

1. Sundry native properties. Ier. 13. 23.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin? Mat. 5. 36.
or the Leopard his spots? Thou can not neake one hair white or beatke.

2. The earth and the mountains thereon. Eccl. 1. 4.
These abide for ever. Psalm. 125. 1.


3. Seasons and intercourse of times. Genesis 8. 22.
While the earth remains, seed-time, and harvest, and cold, and heat, and
summer, and winter, Ier. 33. 20.
and day, and night shall not cease. Thus says the Lord, If ye can break my
covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, and that there should not be
day or night in their season, Then, etc. Here the immutable intercourse of
those seasons is set down as an undeniable principle.

4. The visible heavens and the host thereof. Ier. 31. 35.
The Lord gives the Sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the Moon
and of the Stars for a light by night: namely, so to abide without alteration.

5. The highest heaven and all therein. Mat. 6. 20.
There neither moath nor rust corrupt, nor thieves break through, nor steal.

5. Some things are essentially in themselves immutable: and so immutable as it
is impossible they should be changed: as

1. God himself. Mal. 3. 6. Iam. 1. 17.

2. Gods counsel. Psalm. 33. 11. Heb. 6. 17.

3. Gods Law. Luke 16. 17.

4. Gods oath. Psalm. 110. 4. Isa. 45. 23.

5. Gods covenants. Ier. 33. 20, 21.

6. Gods promises. Heb. 6. 13, 18.

7. Every word of God. Number. 23. 19.

8. Gods love. Ier. 31. 3.

As God himself is, so are the things which are essential to him, and come
out of him, as those which are before mentioned, and others like unto them,
immutable, inviolable.

. 227. Of the difference betwixt the immutabilitie of the Creator and creatures.
Q. WHerein lies the difference betwix^ the immutability of the Creator, and
of the creaturcs?

A. 1. God has his stabilitie of himself: which is evident by this style
which God gives to himself, I AM THAT I AM. Exodus 3. 14.
Creatures have all that stabilitie which they have of God. Ier. 31. 35.
The Lord gives the ordinances of the Moon, and of the Stars: he has
appointed them the courses which they keep so constantly. Prou. 3* 19.
He has founded the earth, and established the heavens.

2. It is simply and absolutely impossible that Gods stabilitie should be
altered. Heb. 6. 18.
But the most steadfast stabilitie of the creatures may be altered. Jude ver. 6.
Some of the Angles kept not their first estate. The Lord remoueth the
mountains and over turns them in his anger: Job 9. 5, 6, 7.
He shakes the earth out of her place, and makes the pillars thereof tremble.
He commands the Sun and it rises not, etc. In Ioshuahs time the Sun
stood still. Ios. 10. 13.
In Hezekiahs time it run back. Though many creatures never were nor shall
be changed, 2. King. 20. 11.
as the good Angel, yet is it not simply impossible that they should be
changed. He that made them can destroy them. If God in Christ had not
confirmed them, but should leave them to themselves, there might be fear of
their falling.

3. God remains immutable by himself. Mal. 3. 6.
I am Jehovah, says the Lord, I change not. Because he is Jehovah, of
himself, by himself, therefore he changes not. But the creatures are
supported by God, and kept stable and unchangeable by his providence. As the
Lord first appointed them their firm and stable course, so, that they may the
better keep it, he puts under the hand of his divine providence to support
them. Col. 1. 17.
By him all things consist. The immutabilitie therefore which is in any
creature is wholly at Gods disposing, either to confirm, or alter it. So as
immutabilitie properly taken, is proper to God.

. 228. Of the duties which arise from Gods immutabilitie.
Q. TO what duties are we bound by reason of Gods immutabilitie?

A. 1. To put difference betwixt the Creator and creatures: as the Psalmist
did, where in opposition betwixt the Creator and creatures he says, Psalm. 102.
26.
They shall perish, but thou shall endure, etc.

2. To respect God as Saints in former times have done. He is the same God now
that ever he was. Why then should he not be accordingly esteemed. Mal. 3. 4, 5.
6.
This argument taken from Gods immutabilitie does God himself use to provoke
to piety, and to reclaim them from all impiety. 2. Chro. 17. 3. 4.
True Saints have also hereby been moved to carry themselves toward God, --
29. 2.
as their fathers of old have done. -- 34. 2, 3.


3. To trust in the Lord. Psalm. 125. 1, 2.
As the mountains round about Jerusalem stand immovable for the defense and
saferie thereof, So the Lord is round about his people for ever.

4. To believe Gods word and promise. Sarah believed Gods word even against the
ordinary course of nature, Because she judged him faithful who had promised.
Heb. 1^. 11.


5. Confidently to wait for salvation. For this end has God showed to the
heirs of promise the immutabilitie of his counsel, that we might have a
strong consolation, etc.

6. To hold close to Gods word: not to alter it any way. Deuteronomy 4. 2.
Who shall dare to change the inviolable word of the immutable God?

7. To yeald to the counsel of God made known. God in his counsel is
unchangeable. It shall stand: whether we yeald unto it, or repine against it.
On this ground 1. Sam. 3. 18.
the Saints, where the purpose of God was manifested, 2. Sam. 12. 22, 23*
humbly submitted themselves thereto. 2. King 20. 19.


8. To be steadfast, 1. Cor. 15. 58.
constant, and vnnioueable in every good work. Mat. 5. 48.
This is one especial point wherein we must be perfect as our heavenly Father
is perfect.

Some of those particulars wherein we must be immovable and immutable are
these.

1. In our promises. 2. Cor. 1. 17.

2. In our oaths. Psalm. 15. 4.

3. In our vows. Eccl. 5. 4.

4. In our faith and hope. Col. 1. 23.

5. In our profession. Heb. 3. 12. and 13. 9.

6. In all good duties. Gal. 6. 9.

Hitherto of the Attributes here appropriated to God singly and severally
considered by themselves. The relation which they have to the Petitions is
further to be declared.

. 229. Of Gods kingdom. How it works confidence in Prayer.
Q. What relation have the forenamed properties of God to the Petitions of
this prayer?

A. As reasons to enforce them: See. 203.
which they do by giving us assurance of obtaining them: which will more
clearly appear by a distinct application of every particular property to the
Petitions: and of every particular Petition to the several properties.

Q. How does Gods Sovereignty give us assurance of obtaining our Petitions?

A. It imports Gods willingness to hear us. This is a great encouragement
to move us to come to God, and to expect a gracious answer from him. Psalm. 65.
2.
Upon this style given to God, O thou that hear prayer, this inference is
made, unto thee shall all flesh come. Now Gods willingness and readiness to
hear may well be gathered from this clause, Thine is the kingdom, because it
is the property of good Kings readily to open their ears to their subjects
suites, as is excellently set down in the Psalm. 72. 12, 13, 14.
description of that King that was a type of Jesus Christ the King of kings.
But God has all the properties of a good King in him. Yea they are all
originally in him, as in the head, fountain and wellspring. The properties
that are in other good Kings are derived from him. He has them infinitely
above all measure. We may well therefore be assured that the kingdom being
Gods, he being our King and Sovereign, we may boldly present our suites to
him, and confidently expect the accomplishment of our desires. Well did he know
this, that did usually in his Petitions to God, style him King, saying, Hea^ken
unto the voice of my cry, Psalm. 5. 2.
my KING. Thou art my KING O God: command deliverance for Iaakob. -- 44. 4.
God is my KING of old working salvation. Wherefore take due and true notice of
thine estate, -- 74. 12.
whether thou be indeed one of Gods subjects, that so thou may with the more
steadfast faith present thy Petitions to God as to thy King, and plead and
press this argument, Thine is the kingdom.

. 230. Of Gods power. How it strengthenth faith in Prayer.
Q. HOw does Gods power enforce our desire?

A. It shows how able God is to grant whatsoever we desire of him. A King may
be ready and willing to hear his subjects suits, but if withal he be not
able to grant their Petitions, and to effect their desires, what confidence can
they have in calling upon him? when a poor subject thus cried to a mortal
King, 2. King. 6. 26, 27.
Help, o Lord, my King: he answered, If the Lord do not help thee, whence
shall I help thee? What heart can a subject have to go to such a Sovereign?
There may be more hope of help from him that is unwilling, then from him that
is unable. Ier. 32. 17, 27.
Ost therefore is Gods power alleged to strength^n our faith in prayer: 2.
Chro. 20. 6.
and Saints themselves were wo^t to plead it. Neh 9. 32.


Q. 1. Chro. 16. 25.
May we confidently expect to obtain by prayer whatsoever God is abl^ to
grant? 2. Chro. 14 11.


A. Gods power singly by it self no ground of faith.
No:. ^11.
we have before showed that God is able to do many things which he will not
do. Though Mat. 26. 53.
Christ knew that his Father could have sent more then twelve legions of Angels
to rescue him, yet because he also knew that it was the will of his Father at
that time to deliver him into the hands of his enemies, he would not pray for
those legions to be sent. Though God be able at any time to preserve any people
from any judgment, yet when his will is not to deliver them, the prayers of
Ezekiel. 14* 14.
Noah, Daniel, and Job, or of ler. 15. 1.
Moses, and Samuel, shall not be of force for them. 1. Sam. 16. 1.
Samuel prayed for Saul, but was not heard.

Q. How then is Gods power a ground of faith? Gods power and will concurring a
sure ground of faith


A. In that it is joined with his willingness. Therefore it is here added to
his kingdom,. 229.
which we have showed to set out his readiness to hear. They who place their
confidence on Gods power aright, are not ignorant thereof. Instance the Leper,
Math. 8. 2.
who thus frames his Petition, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.
In those things whereof we have evidence for Gods willingness, we may with
confidence rest upon Gods power for the obtaining of them. Wherefore, well
acquaint thy self with Gods Word, and with his promises therein, that thereby
thou may be well instructed in the things which God is willing to grant, and
so with greater confidence trust to his power.

. 231. Of Gods glory. How it setleth the soul for obtaining her desire.
Q. HOw does Gods glory encourage us, with confidence to call on God?

A. It implies a concurring of his will and power together. Gods glory is the
maine end that he aims at in all things. Prou. 16. 4.
The Lord has made all things for himself: namely, to set out his glory. The
things therefore which tend to his glory he will assuredly grant. For they are
none of those things which were. 210.
before noted to import impotencie, or imperfection: and in that regard are
within the compass of his power. But they are the things which God aims at,
and which he has ordained to be done: and in that regard, no doubt can be
made of Gods willingness to grant them. Seeing then that God is able to do
whatsoever he is willing to do: And seeing that whatsoever God is able and
willing to do shall be done: and seeing that the things which tend to Gods
glory God is both able and willing to do, will not this conclusion necessarily
follow fio^ those premises, The things which are asked of God for the glory of
God shall assuredly be granted? How fitly therefore does Christ having prescribed
sundry Petitions, which all tend to the glory of God, teach us to put God in
mind of his glory for strengthening our faith in obtaining them? That this
motive taken from Gods glory, may rightly be used in prayer, and thy faith be
strengthened thereby, be sure that all the Petitions, which thou preferrest to
God, do make to Gods glory. Let them not be to satisfy thy lusts: Iam. 4. 3.
So thou may ask and not receine.

. 232. Of Gods unchangeable Eternity. How it makes us rest on God for
obtaining our desires.
Q. HOw does Gods unchangeable eternity enbolden us in faith to call upon God?

A. It makes us confidently to expect what God has formerly granted: and to
do for us that which he has always done for them that have called on him,
and believed in him. On this ground the Psalmist thus pleads, Our fathers
trusted in thee: Psalm. 22. 4, 5.
they trusted, and thou did deliver them: They cried unto thee, and were
delivered: they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. This pleading of Gods
former dealings implies faith in Gods unchangeable continuing to be the same
God: the same God in our time, that he was of old in our fathers time: the same
God to us, that he was to our fathers. Psalm. 74. 13, etc.
On this ground it has been usual with Saints to call to mind, -- 77. 11,
12, etc
and to make mention of Gods former dealings with others before their time, 2.
Chro. 20. 7.
when they called upon GOD, to strengthen their faith; and to Psalm. 105. 5.
call on others to remember the same. The Prophet rendereth this reason, of
declaring Gods former dealings, to posterity, Psalm. 78. 7.
That they might set their hope in God. Were not the Kingdom, Power, and Glory
Gods FOR EVER, Were not God ever the same God, this argument taken from Gods
former favors, and Gods former works, would be of little force to make
succeeding ages to trust in him. Wherefore that all ages might in faith call
upon God, and with confidence depend on him to be heard and helped: yea that
they who have once been heard and helped might hold on in calling upon God and
seeking help of him every day, even all the days of their life, fitly does
the Lord add this clause FOR EVER, to set out the immutable eternity of God
himself, and of all his properties, as of his Sovereignty, Omnipotency, and
Excellency. Often meditate hereon, that thou may with as strong confidence
call on God as Abraham, David, the Prophets, Apostles, and other Saints have
done: but with this Prouiso that thou endeavor to be such as they were, and so
to call on him as they did: for God for ever remains the same: and casts
his gracious eye upon the same kind of persons.

Thus much of the application of the particular properties of God to all the
Petitions in general. Each Petition shall further be applied to each property.

. 233. Of the special relation which the several Petitions have to the
Kingdom of God.
Q. What particular respects has every of the Petitions to Gods Kingdom?

A. 1. It appertains to a King to have his honor advanced. Math. 5. 35.
The Lord forbids to swear by Jerusalem because* it is the City of the
great King: so as the things of the great King must not be profaned: the King
is dishonored thereby, which he will not brook. The Lord will give strength
to his King, and exalt the horn of his anointed, It is fit for a King to be
exalted, and have his name hallowed. Good ground therefore there is to make
this Petition, Hallowed be thy name, to him whose the kingdom is.

2. It cannot be doubted but that a King will maintain his Kingdom. It
belongs to him so to do. Who should do it, if not he? Zac. 9. 9, 10.
Hereupon the Prophet exhorts Zion to rejoice in the coming of her King: for
coming to his own kingdom, he comes with salvation. Well therefore may
we say to him whose the Kingdom is, Thy Kingdom come.

3. Obedience is most due to a King. Of Christ the King of the Church it is
foretold that All Kings shall fall down before him: Psalm 72. 11.
All Nations shall serve him. Yea we are commanded to serve him, Psalm. 2. 6,
11.
because he is a King. Ought we not then to make to him, whose the kingdom
is, this Petition, Thy will be done?

4. A King prouides all needful things for his Subjects. So much is noted in
the description of a good King, Psalm. 71. 6, 7.
He shall come down like rain upon the mowen grass, and as showers that
water the earth: In his days shall be abundance of peace. May we not now
pray thus, Give us this day our daily bread, to him whose the kingdom is?

5. It is in the power of the highest to forgive. If the King grant a Pardon to
a Traitor, who can condemn him? Christ sitting in judgment, to show what
authority he had to absolve and condemn, Mat. 25. 34, 41.
styles himself King. The KING shall say, Come ye blessed, etc. and He shall
say depart you cursed, etc. Great reason therefore there is thus to pray,
Forgive us our debts, to him whose the kingdom is,

6. It is a Kings Office to deliver his Subjects from their enemies, and from
the evils which may befall them. Fitly to this purpose says the Prophet. Zeph.
3. 15.
The Lord has taken away thy judgments: he has cast out thine enemies: The
King of Israel, even the Lord is in the midst of thee: thou shall not see
evil any more. We have therefore just cause to say, Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil, to him whose the Kingdom is.

. 234. Of the special relation which the several Petitions have to Gods power.
Q. What particular respect has every of the Petitions to Gods power?

A. 1. To have Gods name rightly and duly hallowed requires a divine power.
Psalm. 24. 8.
The Lord strong and mighty, is the King of Glory. Wherefore to hallow Gods
name must be desired and expected of him whose the power is.

2. Gods Kingdom can not be perfected but by almighty power. For many and
mighty are the enemies thereof. Few, and weak are the true members and friends
thereof. They therefore that speak of the glory of Gods kingdom, Psalm. 145.
11.
talk of his power. So as this Petition, Thy kingdom come, is to be made to
him, whose the power is.

3. By a strong hand it is that mortal sinful men are brought to do Gods will.
Mar. 10. 27.
With men it is impossible. To him therefore whose the power is, it is
requisite thus to pray, Thy will be done on earth.

4. All our necessities cannot be fupplied but by a divine power. 2. King 6.
27.
A King was forced to say, If the Lord help thee not, whence shall I help
thee? out of the barn-floore, or out of the wine press? 2 Cor. 9. 8.
But God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always having
all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work. As therefore we
would have our desire granted, so let us say, Give us this day our daily bread,
to him, whose the power is.

5. Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Mar 2. 9.
Thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed and walk?
Both are done by the same power, which is divine, omnipotent. Make therefore to
him whose the power is this Petition, Forgive us our debts.

6. To be able to stand against the assaults of Satan, Ephesians. 6. 10. etc.
is above the ability of flesh and blood. To him therefore whose the power is,
we must pray, Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

. 235. Of the special relation which the several Petitions have to Gods
glory.
Q. What particular respect has every of the Petitions to Gods glory?

A. 1. The hallowing of Gods Name is the chiefest part of his glory. Leu. 10. 3.
I will be sanctified, says the Lord, in them that come nigh to me, and before
all the people I will be glorified. By being sanctified, or hallowed, God is
glorified. In faith therefore we may thus pray, Hallowed be thy name, to him
whose the gloryis.

2. Gods Kingdom is the prime place of his glory. Psalm. 26. 8.
It is the place where his honor dwells. To the Church the peculiar Kingdom
of God it is said, Isa. 60. 1, 2.
The glory of the Lord is risen upon thee: his glory shall be seen upon thee.
Confidently therefore to him whose the glory is we may make this suit, Thy
Kingdom come.

3. The creature cannot better glorify God then by obeying his will. Ioh. 15.
8.
Herein says Christ, is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit. 1. Sam.
15. 22.
To obey is better then Sacrifice. He therefore that prays, Thy will be
done, to him, whose the glory ^s, may be s^re to have his prayer granted.

4. The divine providence in temporal blessings much amplifieth Gods glory.
Exodus 16. 7.
By giving bread to his people in the wilderness God showed his glory. Psalm.
145. 11, 15, etc.
Where the Prophet says, They shall speak of thy glory, by way of
explication, he reckons up many evidences of Gods providence in temporal
blessings, thus, The eyes of all wait upon thee: thou give them their meat
in due season, etc. His glory therefore whose the glory is will move him to
grant this Petition, Give us this day our daily bread.

5. The glory of God is exceedingly commended by pardoning sin. Ephesians. 1. 6,
7.
To the praise of the glory of his grace we have forgiveness of sin. In much
confidence therefore thou may say Forgive us our debts, to him whose the
glory is.

6. Preservation and deliverance of Saints from evil much magnifieth and
sets forth the glory of God. Where the Prophet reckons up many
deliverances which God gave to his people, Isa. 59. 19.
he infers thereupon, They shall fear the Name of the Lord from the West:
Ezekiel. 39. 21.
and his glory from the rising of the Sun. And on the same ground says God
himself, I will set my glory among the heathen. This Petition, Lead us not
into temptation but deliver us from evil, may in faith be made to him whose
the glory is.

. 236. Of the special relation which the several Petitions have to Gods
unchangeable eternity.
Q. What particular respect bane every of the Petitions to Gods immutable
eternity?

A. 1. Gods Name is for ever, Psalm. 135. 13.
and his memorial endures thorowout all generations.

2. His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom. Psalm. 145. 13.


3. Gods will is to be done thorow-out all Ages, by us, by our sons, Deuteronomy. 6.
2.
by our sons sons. We may therefore well make these Petitions. Hallowed be
thy name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done, though they be of everlasting
and immutable matters, to the eternal God whose the Kingdom is, and the
power, and the glory FOR EVER.

4. We every day want bread, so shall we do as long as we live. 1 Chro. 29. 15.
As our Fathers from the beginning of the world have stood in need thereof,
Ioh. 4. 13.
so do we, and so shall our posterity also. For whosoever drinks of this
water shall thirst again.

5. Our Fathers of old to our time have sinned: Act. 7. 51.
so do we all our days: Ezekiel. 9. 7.
so will our posterity for ever.

6. The Devil has been a murderer from the beginning, Deuteronomy 31. ^1.
and ever will be. Job. 8. 44.
There is perpetual enimity betwixt the woman's seed, and his seed. Genesis 3.
15.
We and ours shall be for ever in this world subject to many evils. We
therefore who make these Petitions, Give us this day our daily bread, And
forgiu^ us our debts, And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil, have need to be well instructed in Gods eternity, and immutability. For
in faith we may make the forenamed Petitions concerning our perpetual needs to
him whose Kingdom, and power, and glory is FOR EVER.

Hitherto of the acknowledgement of Gods properties as they have relation to
the Petitions, and are reasons to enforce them. The said acknowledgement is
further to be considered singly and simply by it self.

. 237. Of the necessary use of this clause, Thine is the Kingdom, and the
power and the glory for ever.
Q. WHat does the acknowledgement of Gods properties singly considered import?

A. A form of praise. 1 Chro. 29. 10. 11*
For where mention is made of David's blessing God, it is set down in this
form, Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, etc.
Thus is this clause ( Thine is the Kingdom and the power, and the glory for
ever) the second part of the Lords Prayer: whereby the perfection of that
Prayer is set out. Phil. 4. 6.
For prayer cosisteth of these two parts Petition and Praise. 1. These. 5. 17,
18.
They therefore who wholly omit this clause, and cast it out of this pattern of
Prayer make it an imperfect pattern: as Papists who thoroughout their whole
Liturgy have omitted it. Yea the vulgar Latin tra^slatio^ has left it out of
the text, in that place where it is expressed by S. Matthew: and the Rhemists
english translation does so also. B^llarm* de Bo^. Oper. lib. 1. cap. 6. Certum
est ^a verba non esse de Textu euangeli^^, sed inserta fuisse a graecis.
And the great Champion of Papists, where purposely he undertakes to expound
the Lords Prayer, clean omitteth this clause* and avouches that It is
certain that those words are not of the evangelical Text, but were inserted
by the Greeks. But as diligent searchers into all sorts of greek copies, as
he, have found it, not only in the expositions and commentaries of greek
Fathers, but also in most of the greek copies of the New Testament. And the
ancient Syriack translator, who was none of the greek expositors, has it. Yea
many of the Latin Fathers also make mention thereof, as of a part of the Lords
Prayer, though some of them sometimes in their expositions have omitted it.

Object. Saint Luke has left out this clause. Luke 11. 1. etc.

Answ. The History which Saint Luke records as an occasion of setting down
the Lords Prayer, is not the same which Saint Matthew records, but another.

The occasion mentioned by Saint Matthew was this. The hypocritical Pharisees
got to themselves the name of devout persons by their frequent, and much
praying. But Christ observing their Devotion to be but plain superstition,
discovers sundry of their aberrations both in the manner and also in the
matter of their prayers, and to give his Disciples and others a pattern,
whereunto if they held close, they might sufficiently be directed in the matter
and manner of prayer, he prescribes that form which is thereupon called the
Lords Prayer. It was therefore necessary that this pattern of Prayer should be
perfect, without deficiency, or superfluity.

The occasion mentioned by Saint Luke was this. John the Baptist had declared
to his Disciples what things especially they should by prayer ask of God.
Thereupon Christ's Disciples entreat their Master to do the like for them. On
this occasion therefore it was sufficient for Christ to note out such
principal points as were most behoofull to be asked of God, though he did not
prescribe so perfect a form as that which is recorded in his Sermon on the
Mount. Let it now be well considered, whether they that use the Lords Prayer
as a perfect pattern, have sufficient cause from Lukes not mentioning of this
form of praise, clean to omit it.

Surely as Saint Matthew has recoded this prayer, Christ uttered it, and so is
it to be used of us, when it is used as a form or pattern of Prayer.

. 238. Of adding Praise to Petition.
Q. What does the adding of this last part of the Lords Prayer to the former
import?

A. Praise must be added to Petition. If Psalm. 50. 15. Phil. 4* 6.
express precepts, approved Dan. 6. 10. Col. 1* 3.
practices, precious 1 Samuel 2. 30. Psalm. 50. 23.
promises, gracious Luke 17. 19.
approbations, plentiful 2. Chr. 20. 22.
remunerations, be motives to stir us up to perform a duty, motives are not
wanting to provoke us to praise God: especially to provoke such as have the
Spirit of supplication bestowed upon them: and have a ready mind, and forward
will to present Petitions unto God according to their needs. For

1. Praise is the end of Petitions. We call upon God for such and such
blessings that we may praise and bless God for the same. 1. Chro. 16. 35.
Thus are we taught to pray, Save us O God of our salvation, that we may give
thanks to thy holy Name, and glory in thy praise.

2. Praise makes Petition powerful. For God is most willing and ready to
grant their Petitions, whose heart he knows to be ready and willing to
praise him. To give praise for former benefits is an effectual means to
obtain further benefits. The tradese-man that deals with a chap-man that is
careful to pay for wares formerly received, will be ready to trust him with
more, according to his need. On this direction, Offer unto God thanksgiving,
Psalm. 50. 14, 15.
this inuitation is made, Call upon me in ihe day of trouble, and I will
deliver thee.

3. Praise is a due debt which Petitioners are bound to pay. He that inuiteth
thee to call on him, and promises to deliver thee, requires and expects
this recompense, thou shall glorify me. Psalm. 50. 15.


4. Praise is all that we can return unto God for all his benefits to us.
Psalm. 116. 12, 13, 17.
Where this question was made, What shall I render to the Lord for all his
benefits toward me, this answer was given, I will take the cup of salvation:
that is, I will offer a solemn Sacrifice, wherein and whereby I will show the
deliverances, and preseruations which God has afforded to me. For by way of
exposition he adds a little after, I will offer the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving.

5. Praise is an evidence of that good respect we bear to God. By Petition we
show the respect which we bear to our selves. Luk 17. 13. etc.
The ten Lepers which came to Jesus, and cried, Have mercy on us, showed a care
of their own welfare: only one, who returned to give glory to God, showed his
care of Gods honor.

6. Praise moves God to show good respect to man. For he that thus said, 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Them that honor me will I honor, will perform what he has said.

7. Praise is the greatest honor that we can give to God. For thus says the
Lord himself, Psalm. 50 23.
Who so offers praise glorifieth me.

8. To praise God is the most heavenly exercise that in this world can be
performed. The celestial spirits spend their time therein, Reu. 5. 13. And 7.
11, 12. and. 19. 1. etc.

9. A setting forth of Gods praise, is an especial means to quicken the
spirit, and to make the heart the more ready to prayer, and the more cheerful
therein. When the Psalmists heart was set to Praise the Lord, Psalm. 57. 8, 9.
then he says to his tongue, and instruments, Awake up my glory, awake
Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake early. When the Spirit of a man is
dull and heavy, so as he cannot pray, let him meditate on Gods mercies and
other excellencies, and set himself to praise God, and he shall find a
spiritual vigor thereby put into him.

10. Ingratitude is one of the most odious vices that can be: detestable to God
and man. 2 Timothy 3. 2.
The Apostle reckons it up among those notorious vices that should be in the
world in the last and worst times thereof. Isa. 1. 2, 3.
The Prophet herein makes such as did bear the name of Gods people to be
more brutish then the brutest of beasts, the Ox and the Ass. Nothing more
provoke God to take away his blessing, as he threatened Israel. Hosea 2. 8, 9.
The things which God uses to bestow upon grateful persons, he uses to take
away from the ungrateful. The most memorable judgments that are recorded in
the Scriptures were caused by ungratefulness. Genesis 6. 2. etc.
When God had culled a Church out of the world, who in that respect were called
sons of God, they unmindful of Gods gracious calling, mixed themselves with
daughters of men: which made God repent that he had made man, and thereupon he
brought upon the world that general deluge, wherewith he swept away all but
eight persons. Compare Genesis 14. 16. etc. with Genesis 18. 20, 21. and Genesis 19. 24.
After that God by his servant Abraham had rescued Sodom and the neighboring
Cities from the hand of their enemies, they were not careful to render praise
to God, but continued in their beastly abominations. They were therefore all
burnt with fire and brimstone from heaven. 2. Chr. 36* 16, 17.
Isreal's ungratefulness was the cause of her captivity. This was it that
provoked God to give over the Gentiles to a reprobate sense: Romans 1. 21. etc.
and to give Christians over to Antichristianisme. 2. These. 2. 9, 10, 11.
This caused that Nebuchadnezzar was made as a beast; and that Herod was eaten
with worms. Dan. 4. 30, 31.
This I hope may be sufficient to work some care and conscience to perform
this duty of praise. Acts 12. 23.


. 239. Of praising God. How it is done.
Q. What is it to praise God?

A. 1. To acknowledge God to be what he is. Thus does Moses in his Psalm of
thanksgiving praise God, saying, The Lord is a man of war: Jehovah is his
name. Exodus 15. 3.


2. To attribute to God that which is his: as Christ does in this form; 1.
Chr. 29* 10, 11.
and David, saying, Thine o Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the
glory, etc.

3. To ascribe to God that which is done by him. Thus does Exodus 15. 4.
Moses praise God, by ascribing to him the overthrow of Pharaoh and his host.
So does Psalm. 107. 2, 3. etc.
the Psalmist in most of his Psalms of praise. -- 135. 1. etc.


4. To profess that which God gives to be given of him: -- 136. 1. etc.
as David in his form of praise thus does, 1. Chro. 29. 14* etc.
All things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.

5. To declare to others all the forenamed points concerning God. 1. Chro. 16.
8, 9.
To this purpose says David, Give thanks unto the Lord, make known his deeds
among the people. Sing unto him: sing Psalms unto him: talk ye of all his
wondrous works. And again, I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the
midst of the congregation will I praise thee.

6. To worship God in testimony of all the said points: as is evident by this
exhortation, 1. Chro. 16. 29.
Give unto the Lord the glory due to his Name: bring an offering, and come
before him: worship the Lord, etc.

By all these particular branches of praising God gathered out of the
Scriptures, it is most clear, that by praising and glorifying God, we give
nothing at all to God: but only what he is, what is ^is, what is done, or
given by him, is acknowledged and declared, and God with due respect reverenced
and adored. Which as it directs us how to praise God, so it sets out Gods
goodness in accepting that which is his own, as given to him by us: and also
it discovers the perverse disposition of ungrateful persons, who do as much
as in them lies to withold from God that which is his own, and most due
unto him.

. 240. Of the things for which God is to be praised.
Q. Which are the Principal grounds for which God is to be praised?

A. 1. His Excellency in himself.

2. His Sovereignty above us.

3. His Mercy toward us.

All these show that God is most worthy of all praise.

1. Excellency in any thing is praise worthy: as excellency of knowledge,
excellency of wisdom, excellency of power and strength, excellency of any
virtue, yea excellency of eloquence, excellency of beauty and every other
excellency. It is said of the woman whose excellencies were many, Pro. 31. 30,
31.
She shall be praised: and Let her own works praise her: But. 218.
we have showed that all excellencies are in God. Yea the excellencies which
are in creatures are Gods, because they come all from God. If therefore praise
be due to any, much more to God. That very praise which in any respect may
lawfully be given to any creature, is most properly due to him. Where David
blesses A^igail for her wise advise, he first blesses God that sent her,
saying, Blessed be the Lord which sent thee this day to meet me: 1. Sam. 25 32,
33.
and blessed be thy advise, Act. 12. 23.
and blessed be thou, etc. But because Herod gave not God the glory which was
given to him he was eaten of worms. Besides there are such infinitely
surpassing excellencies in God, as no creature is capable of: as
Selfe-existencie, Etermitie, All Sufficiency, Immutabilitie, Omnipotency,
Vbiquitie, etc. That praise therefore is due to God, Exodus 15. 11.
which may be ascribed to no other. For who is like unto thee, o Lord, amongst
the Gods? Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, 1. Sam. 2. 2.
fearful in praises, etc. There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none
beside thee: neither is there any rock like our God. Great is the Lord, 1.
Chron. 16. 25.
and greatly to be praised. Thus we see how Gods excellency ministers just
and great cause of praising God. If when we are about to praise God, our hearts
were deeply fixed on a due meditation and serious consideration of Gods
excellencies, they would be much quickened unto this heavenly duty of
praising God.

2. Sovereignty makes one to be much praised. Who more praised then Kings?
They are praised for the things praiseworthy in their own persons, and
praiseworthy in their subjects. If in a kingdom there be learned Deuines,
faithful Ministers, just Magistrates, wise Counselors, valiant Soldiers,
victorious Captains, skillful Artificers, industrious Husbandmen, obedient
Subjects, the King is much praised for them all: and it is supposed that his
wise and good government is the cause of all. Besides praise uses to be
proportioned according to the dignity wherein men are. The higher a man's place
is, the more praise uses to be given to him. Kings therefore being the highest
in their Dominions, greatest praise uses to be given to them. But God has
been * 207.
proved to be the most supreme and absolute Sovereign over all, The King of
Kings. On this ground we are thus incited to praise God, Sing praises to God,
Psalm. 47. 6, 7.
sing praises, sing praises to our KING, sing praises: for God is the King of
all the earth, etc. This reason is given of the heavenly Halelu-iah, Reu. 19. 6.
For the Lord God omnipotent reigns. As God by his Sovereignty is the
highest of all, so by virtue of his prudent government, all good things which
are any way praiseworthy, are indeed done. They that have knowledge hereof,
and can in truth of heart acknowledge as much, will assuredly be ready on all
occasions to praise God.

3. Kindness, goodness, and mercy are the things which do most of all
inflame the heart to give praise. They are the most principal object of
praise, for which thanks uses to be given. I will praise thy Name, Psalm. 138.
2.
says the Psalmist to God, for thy loving kindness. Psalm. 117. 1, 2.
And he exhorts all nations to praise the Lord, on this ground, His merciful
kindness is great toward us. After he had thus set out the goodness of God,
Psalm. 145. 8, 9, 10
The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion: slow to anger, and of great
mercy: the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his
works, he makes this inference, All thy works shall praise thee, o Lord: and
thy Saints shall bless thee. Gods mercies therefore, the maine matter of
praise, are to be called to mind, and to be set in order, when we go about to
praise God. These are they, that are of greatest power to rouse up our dull
spirits, to put a spiritual life into us, and to provoke us to praise the
Lord. I have distinctly laid down these in The whole Armor of God, Treat. 3.
Part. 2.. 63.

Now in that the forenamed grounds of praise are only in God, Praise due only
to God.
praise is due to him alone. For

1. Psalm. 148. 13.
His only is true excellency, as was before proved.. 218.

2. Dan. 4, 25.
His Sovereignty only is absolute. As before.. 207. 208.

3. Math. 19. 17.
He only is good. And Iam. 1. 17.
every good thing comes from him.

Idolaters, who give praise to false gods (as Dan. 5 23.
Belshazzer did) and flatterers, who unduly praise men (as Act. 12. 22.
Herod's people did) deprive God of that glory which is due to him. Let such
duly weigh the fearful issue that befell both Belshazzer and Herod.

How far praise may be given to men, is declared in The whole Armor of God.
Treat. 3. Part. 2.. 61.

Hitherto of the Substance of the Lords Prayer. The Circumstance following it
remains to be handled.

. 241. Of the meaning and use of AMEN being prefixed before a Speech.
Q. Meaning of AMEN.
What is the circumstance following Prayer?

A. Amen in his Petitionibus significat, indubitanter a Domiao conferri quod
petitur. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 58.
The ratification of all. This is expressed in this one word AMEN. That Amen
imports a confirmation of that which is said, is evident by Benaiahs answer
to David's direction concerning Salomons crowning. For Benaiah desiring from his
heart that David's said direction might be accomplished and ratified, he
answers thereto Amen: 1. King. 1. 36.
and to explain his mind and meaning more fully, Amen. 1. firmum and statum
esto a Deo. Tremel. and Iun. in ann^l. in hunc loc. (...). Fiat.
he adds, The Lord God of my Lord the King say so too: that is, as other
Translators turn it, ratify it. The Greek Translators thus turn it, Be it
done. The root from whence the word comes signifies as much, as is evident
by this phrase in Salomons Prayer, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thee,
1. King. 8. 26. (...)
be ratified, which thou spakest unto David.

This Particle in Scripture is diversely used.

Sometimes it is prefixed before that which is uttered: and sometimes it is
inferred after it.

It is prefixed before Speeches, The use of Amen being set before a speech.
to show both the certainty and the necessiitie of that which is delivered.
When Christ instructed Nicodemus in the mystery of regeneration, to declare
unto him the necessity thereof, he thus expresses it, Amen, Amen, Ioh. 3. 3.
I say to thee, except a man be borne again he can not see the Kingdom of
God. And because Nicodemus made question thereof in the same manner he does
again repeat it (saying, Ioh. 3 5.
Amen, Amen, I say to thee, Except a man be borne of water and of the Spirit,
he can not enter into the Kingdom of God) to show that it was a true,
certain, sure, infallible point which fell not from his mouth unawares, but
such an one as he durst stand to, yea and pawn his credit thereupon.

Q. What duties does Amen import when it is prefixed before a Speech?

A. Two especially. 1. Attention. 2. Belief.

1. Where the holy Ghost by any note or sign sets out the Excellency,
Necessity, Utility or any other like commendation of a point, he requires
us to give more then ordinary attention thereunto. Math. 24. 1, 2.
When the Disciples showed Christ the glorious building of the Temple, that
they might the better mark what he foretold of the destruction thereof, thus
he expresses it, AMEN I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone
upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

2. Where the Holy Ghost knows us to be backward and hard to believe such
Principles as be of an infallible verity, he uses asseuerations, and
obtestations to draw us on to give the more credence thereunto. Answerably
therefore we must mix faith with our hearing of such points. To this purpose
when Christ observed unbelief, Mat. 7. 20.
and doubting in his Disciples, Mar. 11. 2^, 23.
he used this his note of asseueration, Amen, to move them the more steadfastly
to believe what he said.

. 242. Of the use of AMEN being added to a Speech.
Q. HOw is AMEN added to a speech?

A. 1. By him that utters a speech.

2. By him, or them that hear it.

To 16* 24, 27
It was usual with the Apostles when they made a prayer, 1. Cor. 16. 24.
or gave thanks, 2. Cor. 13. 13.
or pronounced a blessing, 1. Pet 5. 14.
themselves to add thereunto Amen: 1. Ioh. 5. 21.
And as usual it was with the people of God that heard like speeches uttered
by others, Jude, verse 25.
to say Amen: whether it were 1. Kin. 1. 36.
only one, or Neh. 5. 13.
many together. To what kinds of speeches AMEN is added


Many are the kinds and forms of speeches whereunto AMEN is in Scripture
noted to be added, as

1. Romans 15. 33.
Petitions.

2. Neh. 8. 6.
Benedictions and Praises.

3. Neh. 5. 13.
Imprecations and Curses.

4. 1. Ioh. 5* 21.
Exhortations to Duties.

5. Reu. 22. 20.
Declarations of Promises.

6. Reu. 1. 7.
Denunciations of Judgments. What Amen imports being added to a speech.


Three especial things does AMEN import, when it is pronounced after any of
the forenamed speeches.

1. True assent. 1. Cor. 14, 16.
This the Apostle implies, where he directs the Church to pray, read and
preach in a known tongue, for this end, that even the unlearned Hearer may say
Amen, that is, understanding what he hears give assent thereto.

2. Earnest desire. When the Prophet Jeremiah heard the prophecy of Hananiah
concerning the return of the King of Judah to his Kingdom, and the other
Captives to their land, and of the vessels that were taken away, to the Temple,
though he knew that to be a false prophecy, yet to show how earnestly he
desired that it might be so, Ier. 28. 6.
he says thereto, AMEN: and fully to declare what he meant thereby, he
adds, The Lord do so: the Lord perform thy words, etc.

3. Steadfast faith. Reu. 22. 20.
Where Christ makes a promise of his second coming, saying, Surely I come
quickly: the Church, to show her steadfast faith in that promise, says, AMEN,
which imports thus much, Lord, I believe what thou have said: Even so, come
Lord Jesus.

These being the proper ends of saying Amen, By whom Amen may rightly be used.
to manifest Assent, Desire and Faith, it is without contradiction true, that
whosoever says Amen, must understand that whereunto he says Amen. In this
case two things are necessarily to be understood.

1. (...).
The words that are uttered.

2. (...).
the meaning of those words.

If the words spoken be not understood, 1. Cor. 14. 9.
they are as spoken into the air, altogether in vain: and the speaker and
hearer are as Barbarians one to another. No more benefit can be received by
the words of a man not understood, then by the indistinct voice of an
unreasonable creature. But suppose the words be such as in themselves are
intelligible, being English words to an English man, yet if the sense and
meaning of them be not conceived, they are to no better purpose then words of
a strange and unknown language. Words have sometimes a figurative sense and
meaning, which if it be not understood, the proper and true use and benefit of
them is lost. If Christ had not made his Disciples to understand the sense and
meaning of this direction, Math. 1^. 6* etc.
Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces, they
had got no good at all thereby. It is therefore necessary that as the words
themselves, so the proper sense of them be well understood.

Ob. AMEN is an Hebrew word: that language is understood of very few: why then
is it used of all Nations, of all people in all Nations, learned and unlearned?

A. Romans 1. 15.
The Apostles, though they spoke, Why Amen is used of all sorts.
and wrote not in Hebrew, but in Greek, yet they used this Hebrew word: so as
we have an express warrant for retaining this word in another language.

2. Continual use has made it familiar to all persons, of all languages, in
all nations. So as it is every where as a proper vulgar, mother word. Thus
these two Titles Jesus Christ, though the one be Hebrew, and the other Greek,
are made so familiar, as in all languages they are retained.

3. No other one word so fit for the purpose, can in any other language be
invented, as Amen is. Not without reason therefore, and just cause is it, that
it has been made a word of all languages. It compriseth under it whatsoever
is expressed or understood in and by the speech whereunto it is added. These
words, Deuteronomy* 27. 26.
( Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them) had
a large extent: yet the AMEN, which the people were to say thereto, extended it
self as far.

. 243. Of the duties which AMEN added to a speech implies.
Q. What duties are employed by the use of AMEN after a speech ended?

A. 1. Such as concern the Speaker.

2. Duties which Amen requires of such as utter a prayer.
Such as concern the Hearer.

3. Such as concern both Speaker and Hearer.

Three duties especially are required of him that utters the speech whereunto
Amen is added.

1. To speak intelligibly in a known tongue. This is a point much pressed, 1.
Cor. 14. 2. etc. See more hereof in The whole Armor of God* on Ephesians. 6. 18..
87, 88.

2. To sprake audibly, so as they which are to say Amen, may hear what is
said. Deuteronomy. 27. 14.
The Levites under the Law were expressly enjoined to speak to the people
with a loud voice. Accordingly the Levites that were the mouth of the people to
God, and prayed in their presence, Neh. 9. 4.
cried with a loud voice unto the Lord their God. Be a prayer made as
intelligibly as may be, if it be not heard of them that are present, they
cannot with assent, desire, and faith say Amen.

3. To speak disti^ctly: that is, so treatably as hearers may observe every
Petition, and every particular point for which thanks is given. It is
expressly noted of such as instructed the people of God that they did it
distinctly: Neh. 8. 8.
whereby the hearers better understood what was delivered. If Prayer or
Thanksgiving be uttered by a voluble, swift tongue, too fast, hearers cannot
advisedly observe the several branches thereof: so as if they say AMEN, at the
best, it cannot be but to some parts: it cannot be to all the prayer, or
praise that is uttered.

Three duties also are required of them who say Amen to a speech uttered by
others. Duties which Amen requires of such as hear a prayer.


1. To attend diligently to that which is uttered. Neh. 8. 5.
The people that said Amen to Ezra his blessing, are said to stand up, while he
spoke. That gesture implies a diligent attention. If our minds be wandering,
and not attentive to that which is uttered, what assent, what desire, what
faith can there be? And if there be none of these, to what end is Amen said?
Surely it is a plain mockage of God.

2. To give assent thereto. If with the mouth Amen be uttered and no assent
given with the heart, heart and tongue are repugnant, and no better censure can
be given of such an Amen, then that it is the Amen of an hypocrite, which is
odious and detestable to God? 1. Cor. 14. 16.
The Apostle under this phrase ( How shall we say Amen?) implies assent: for a
man may utter this word Amen to that which he understands not: but with
assent of mind and heart he cannot say Amen.

3. To manifest that assent. Deuteronomy. 27. 15. etc. Amen to be uttered aloud by
the whole assembly.
The phrase of saying Amen, often used in Scripture does import a manifestation
of assent. For that which is said and uttered, is manifested. This
manifestation of assent on the hearers part, must be, as the uttering of the
prayer on the Speakers part, See more here of in the whole Armor of God, on
Ephesians. 6. 18. Treat. 3. Part. 2. 83.
audibly. Every hearer in an assembly must utter Amen, as loud as the Minister
utters the prayer. In many places it is put off only to the Clerk. But
herein all should be Clearkes. There is mention made of a celestial sound,
which was as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many
waters, Reu. 19. 6.
and as the voice of mighty thundering, saying, Hallelu-iah. If full assemblies
in our Churches did all of them andibly after a prayer say Amen, so audibly as
the sound of every ones voice there present might come at least to the
Ministers ears, it would be such a sound as is there mentioned, as heavenly
sound: A sound well beseeming a Church. No Echo like to the Echo which makes
the walls of a Church to ring again with Amen. Such a sound would quicken a
Ministers spirits, and put a kind of heavenly life into the people themselves.

The duties which are required both of speaker and hearers by virtue of Amen to
be added, Duties which Amen requires both of Speaker and Hearers.
are these that follow.

1. To know the ground of all that is uttered, that that which is mentioned,
whereunto Amen is to be added, is grounded on Gods Word, and agreeable to his
will. For this is the confidence which we have in him, 1. Ioh. 5. 14.
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us.

2. To have the mind fixed thereon. The mind of the speaker, as well as the
Hearer may be ro^^ng and wandering: especially when a set, prescribed, usual
form of prayer is uttered: or when a prayer is read. Now because the vtterer
of a prayer must say Amen to his own prayer, as well as the hearers, he, as
well as they, and they, as well as he, even all of them must hold their mind
steady thereon; Isa. 29. 13.
else will their heart be removed from God, while they draw near to him with
their mouth: which is an abomination to him.

3. To retain, as well as they can, in memory all that is uttered. For Amen
must be applied to the whole speech, and to every part thereof. Matters well
retained in memory make Amen to come from the heart, and to be uttered with a
goodwill. Psalm. 42. 4.
When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me, says the Psalmist.
That which is forgotten, is as not heard, or not understood, or not attended
unto.

4. To be affected with the prayer. This will make men double their Amen, as
the Jews did when Ezra blessed the Lord. Neh. 8* 6.
All the people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands. Did not
their speech and gesture both declare much affection of heart? Without this
inward affection Amen will be but coldly uttered.

5. To believe Gods gracious acceptance of the prayer. It has been. 241.
before proved that Amen is a ratification of all that which is uttered before
it. But with what heart can that which is not before believed, be after
ratified. Expressly therefore says Christ, Mar. 11. 24.
What thing so ever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive it, And
his Apostle puts this in, Iam. 1. 6.
as a necessary prouiso, to prayer, Let him ask in faith.

. 244. Of the grounds of Faith, whereby we may expect the obtaining of what we
pray for.
Q. HOw may we believe the obtaining of those things which we pray for?

A. By praying for such things as we know to be promised. Gods promises are the
true and proper ground of a sound faith. Whatsoever is supposed to be believed
without a promise, is but supposed, or rather presumed: it is not rightly and
truly believed. Psalm. 119. 49.
The Psalmist having desired God to remember his promise made unto him, thus
says, Upon it thou have caused me to hope, or to trust. The ground then of his
confidence was Gods promise. Of absolute and conditional promises, and of the
use of faith in them, See the whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 16. Treat. 2.
Part* 6.. 75. 76. 77. Of Faith.
Now because Gods promises are of diverse kinds (some things being absolutely
promised, others but conditionally) as Gods promises be made, so must our faith
be ordered. Absolute promises must be believed absolutely: conditional
promises, with submission to Gods wisdom in granting, or not granting what we
pray for. S. Paul having prayed for the Philippians, and knowing that he prayed
for such things as God had absolutely promised, thus manifests his steadfast
faith, Phil. 1. 6.
I am confident of this very thing that he which has begun a good work in
you, Romans 1. 10.
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. -- 15. 32.
But when he desired to come to the Romans, he referred that matter to the will
of God, to be ordered therein, as it should seem good to God. 2. Sam. 15. 25,
26
So did David in his desire of returning to his kingdom, and to the Tabernacle
and Ark of God, when by the treason of Absalom he was forced from all.

Concerning the Petitions of the Lords Prayer they are most of them absolutely
promised: even all of them but the fourth.

1. For hallowing Gods Name, God himself has said, I have both glorified my
Name, and will glorify it. Ioh. 12. 28.


2. For the coming of his kingdom, Christ has said, The gates of hell shall
not prevail against my Church. Mat. 16. 18.


3. For doing his will, this is a branch of the new Covenant which by Christ's
death is made absolute, Ier. 31. 33.
I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. Ez^k.
36. 27.
And again, I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, and you shall keep my judgments and do them.

5. For pardoning sin, this is another branch of the foresaid new Covenant,
Ier. 31. 34.
I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.

6. For not leading into temptation, but delivering from evil, the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 10. 13.
God will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able: but will with
the temptation make a way to escape.

4. For daily bread, Phil. 4. 12.
God can instruct us, both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound and to
suffer need. Yea he can so give, and so take away, as to minister thereby to
his Saints matter of blessing him, Job 1. 21.
as Job did.

Well therefore may we say Amen to all the Petitions of the Lords Prayer: to
those five, which are of blessings absolutely promised, with an assured faith
of obtaining the very things which are prayed for. To that which is not so
absolutely promised (which is the fourth) with such a submission of our selves
wholly to Gods good pleasure, as to believe that God will do that which he in
his wisdom sees to be best for us. That he will give such temporal
blessings as he knows to be good for us: or give us such grace as shall
enable us to bear the want of such things as he denies us. What God denies
to the Prayers of his Saints, he knows that it is good for them to be without
it. He therefore that is well instructed in Gods wisdom, and assured of his
love, will without question think it much better to have that which God
knows to be hurtful, or unmeet for him, to be denied, rather then granted
unto him.

If that which we pray for, be not at the first granted, we ought to persist,
and hold on in praying for it, as Genesis 32. 26.
Iaakob, who said to the Angel of the Covenant the Lord Jesus Christ ( Hos.
12. 4. Of perseuering in Prayer, See the whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 18.
Treat. 3. 141. etc.
with whom by Prayer he wrestled) I will not let thee go, except thou bless
me. And in this perseverance in Prayer we must also wait, and with patience
expect a gracious answer of our humble and faithful supplications ordered
according to the will of God. This is the express charge of the Prophet, Hab.
2. 3.
Though it tarry, wait for it. This is the property of true faith. For Isa.
28. 16. Of waiting, See The whole Armor of God, on Ephesians. 6. 17. Treat 1. Part.
7.. 9. (...). Hope.
He that believes will not make haste.

. 245. Of setting AMEN in the last place.
Q. Why is AMEN set in the last place? (...). Cyri^. Catech mist. 5.


A. 1. To show the extent of it.

2. To show the use of it.

For the extent of AMEN, It must be applied to the whole Prayer that goes
before it, and to every part and particle thereof. Therefore in reciting the
particular curses of the Law, Deuteronomy. 27. 15. etc.
AMEN was expressly added to every particular curse. Though so expressly by an
audible voice it be not always added to every clause of every Prayer, yet the
mind giving assent, and the heart inclining a desire, and mind and heart
yealding faith to the whole and to every part, Amen, after all is uttered is a
testification of as much. Thus then by saying AMEN when all the Lords Prayer is
ended, we show that our assent, desire and faith is extended to praise, as well
as to Petition: and, among Petitions, to such as tend to Gods glory, as our
own good: and, of them which tend to his glory, to that which makes to the
prosperous increase of his Church, as well as to that whereby his Name is
hallowed: yea and to that which tends to the doing of his will, and that in
the manner of doing it, as it is done in heaven, as well as in the matter
thereof: and among the Petitions that tend to our good, as well to them which
concern our spiritual welfare as to that which concerns our temporal
welfare: and of those which promote our spiritual welfare, as well to that
whereby our sanctification is craved, as to that whereby we desire to be
justified: and in that of our justification, of our profession of forgiving our
debtors, as well as to our supplication for Gods discharge of our debts to him:
and in that of our sanctification, both to preservation from Satan's assaults,
and also to recover out of his snares, and full delivery from all evil: yea
in every Petition to others good, as well as to our own. Were Amen placed in
any other place then in the very end of a prayer, even after all is finished,
it could not have so large an extent.

2. For the use of AMEN, It is a recapitulation, or collection into a brief
sum, of all that has gone before, so as it being uttered when the prayer is
finished, it shows that when all particulars have been in special mentioned,
we must as in a general view cast our mind upon them all again, and reuiew
our desire of them: As Solomon did more amply and expressly. For after he had
finished his long, pithy, powerful prayer which he made at the dedication of
the Temple, with a new and fresh desire he compriseth the sum of all, and
thus commends it to God, 1. King. 8. 59.
Let these my words wherewith I have made supplication before the Lord be nigh
unto the Lord our God day and night, that he maintain the cause of his
servant, and the cause of his people Israel, at all times, Prayer must not be
abruptly broken of^.
as the matter shall require. As the Preface therefore prefixed before the
Lords Prayer, teaches us not rashly but advisedly, with due preparation to
come into Gods presence and to pray to him, so AMEN, being added after the
Prayer, teaches us, not abruptly but circumspectly, with due consideration of
all that has been prayed, to depart out of Gods presence, and to break off
Prayer. Whenever we present any Prayer to the the divine Majesty let us so
do. AMEN.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL Index of the most material points that are handled in the
Explanation of the Lords Prayer.
A
ABSOLVTION.
DIfference betwixt Gods* Absolution and man's apprehension thereof. 132 Popish
Absolution. 133
AMEN.
Amen. What it means. 330 Use of Amen set before a speech. 330 Duties of Amen
before a speech. 330 Use of Amen added to a speech. 331 To what kinds of
speeches Amen is added. 331 By whom Amen may rightly be used. 332 Why Amen is
used of all sorts. 333 Duties which Amen requires of such as utter the prayer.
334 Duties which Amen requires of such as hear the prayer. 334 Amen to be
uttered aloud by the whole assembly. 335 Duties which Amen requires both of
speakers and hearers. 335 Amen why set in the last place. 339 Amen must be
applied to every part of the prayer. 339 Anabaptists arguments against the use
of the Lords Prayer. 3. 4 Application of Gods Father-hood. The benefits
thereof. 16
ATTRIBVTES.
Attributes of God do by a property and excellency belong to him. 285
Auricular Confession. 133

B
BLame of sin on man. 245 BREAD. See Temporal.
Bread put for all temporal blessings. 98 Bread when used for spiritual food. 99
What particulars are comprised under Bread. 116

C
CArking too much for the things of this world. 125 CHVRCH.
Church Militant Triumphant. 49
Churches government. 51 Churches increase. 52 Churches imperfection. 53
Blessings for the Church Militant. 56 Evils which annoy the Church. 61
Blessings for particular Churches. 62 Blessings for the Church Triumphant. 64
Duties to be done for the good of the Church. 67 What makes to the
disadvantage of the Church. 69
CONFESSION.
Confession of sin to man. 154 Confession of sin to God. 155 Auticular
Confession. 133. 153
CONTENT. See Needful.
Content with that which is present. 111
COVETOVS.
Covetousness. 106

D
DAily bread. What meant thereby. 104 Daily need. 111 Sin Daily committed. 131
Duties thence arising. 131 DEATH.
Death how prayed for. 265
DEBTES. See Sins.
Kinds of Debts. 127 Woefulness of the Debt of sin. 135 Many Debtes wherein
man stands bound to God. 142 Duties thence arising. 143 Gods discharge of man's
Debt. 145 Man unable to discharge this Debt to God. 147 Kinds of Debts to men.
174 Man to forgive his own debtors. 180 All sorts of them. 178 Debts may be
required. 188
DELIVER.
Deliverance from evil manifold. 249 God only deliverer. 251 Depart from
right. 177 DEPRECATION to be added to Petition. 203
DEFER.
Danger of Deferring repentance, and seeking pardon. 112 DEVIL See Satan.

E
ETERNAL
What things are Eternal. 303 Eternity diversely taken. 304 Duties due to the
Eternal. 307 Eternity of God a ground of faith. 316 320
EVIL.
Evil to be overcome with goodness. 165 Evil to be prayed against. 204. 247
Evil to what extended. 246 The Evil in every thing to be observed. 232 The
Devil an Evil one. 249 From Evil delivered many ways. 249 Graces for
deliverance from Evil. 264
EXCELLENCY. See Glory.
Excellency of God. 295. etc. Excellency makes God praiseworthy. 327

F
FAITH.
FAith and Fear mixed. 8 Faith grounded on Gods power and will. 315. 318 Faith
supported by Gods unchangeable eternity. 316 Faith vpheld by Gods being our
king. 317 What in Faith may be expected by prayer. 337 Fallen recovered. 250
FATHER.
In what respects God is styled a Father. 10 Instructions arising from Gods
Father-hood. 11 The Dignity and Duty of those whose Father God is. 13. 14. 19.
20. Benefits of Gods Father-hood. 16
FORGIVE.
Forgive one another. 163 Forgiveness, useful, necessary, difficult, rare. 166.
etc. Forgive presently. 169 Forgive again and again. 171 Saints most bound to
Forgive. 172 Man must Forgive all sorts of debts to himself. 178 Man must
Forgive his own debtors. 180 True and unfeigned Forgiveness. 183 Free
Forgiveness. 184 Forgiveness to be offered. 185 Full Forgiveness. 186
Forgiveness how manifested. 187 Our Forgiving gives assurance of Gods
Forgiving us. 198 Graces which make men Forgive. 216 222 Means of Gods
Forgiving us. 218. 2^1 After Forgiveness man prone to sin. 255

G
GLORY. See Hallow.
GLory. What it is. 295 Glory of God incomprehensible. 295 Glory of God how,
manifested. 296 Glory how proper to God. 297 Glory how given to, or taken from
God. 298 Duties due to Gods Glory. 299 How others brought to Glorify God. 301
Who to set out Gods Glory. 302 Enemies of Gods Glory. 303 How Gods Glory
setleth the soul for obtaining her desire. 315. 319
GOD.
Gods goodness and greatness jointly considered. 8 Gods Impartiality. 18 How
God is in Heaven. 22 Directions thence arising for prayer. 25. etc. Gods Name.
See Name. 31. etc. God makes himself known. 33 Gods Honor. See Honor. 38
Gods Kingdom. See Kingdom. 48 God gives temporal things. 107 Uses thence
arising. 108 Gods Prerogative to pardon sin. 152 Gods pattern a motive to show
mercy. 193 How God leads into temptation. 233 God no Author of Sin. 235 Gods
ouer-ruling power in Temptation. 238 God to be depended on for all things. 258
Gods Attributes proper to himself. 285 God has all at command. 286 Gods Power.
See Power. Gods Glory. See Glory. Gods Eternity. See Eternal. Gods
Immutability. See Immutable. God to be praised. See Praise.
GOOD.
Good to be well done. 80 Goodness ouercometh Evil. 165 Goodness of God
makes him praiseworthy. 329

H
HALLOVV. See Glory.
HAllowing Gods Name. 34 Man unable thereto. 36 Graces fit to Hallow Gods Name.
42. etc. Duties by reason thereof. 45 Vices contrary thereto. 47 Best means
and fittest persons to Hallow it. 55
HEAVEN.
How God is in Heaven. 22 Directions from Gods being in Heaven for prayer. 25.
etc. Saints in Heaven a pattern of patience. 79 Holiness excellent. 35

I
IMprouidence. Sundry branches thereof. 123 Imputation of Christ's active
righteousness. 128 IMMVTABLE.
What is Immutable. 308 Kinds of Immutability. 309 Difference betwixt
Immutability of God and of Creatures. 311 Duties due to Gods Immutability. 312
Immutability of God a ground of Faith. 316. 320 Indulgences Popish. 133
Ingratitude an odious sin. Cause of many Judgments. 325. 326
JUSTICE.
Justice and mercy meet in God. 145 Justification before Sactification. 211

K
Kindness of God makes him praiseworthy. 329 KINGDOM. See Church.
Kingdom of God. What it is. 48 The Kinds thereof. 49 Kingdom of Grace and
Glory. 50 Kingdom of God universal. 286 God only King. 287 Duties due to God
as he is King. 288 Kingdom of God works confidence in prayer. 313. 317
KNOWLEDGE.
Knowledge of God. 42 Why God is made Known. 33 Prayer in a known tongue. 332

L
LAw, how to be waged, and used. 190 Life of man for Gods glory. 113 Lords
Prayer. See Prayer.
M
MAgistrates how they may punish wrongs done to others and to themselves. 192
Manner of doing good. 80 Manner of doing Gods will. 89 MERCY.
Mercy and Justice meet together in God. 145 Mercy of God to be answered with
duty. 256 Mercies of God make him Praise^-worthy. 329
MERIT.
Merit of Condignity, and Congruity. 158
MORTAL.
Every sin Mortal. 136 Distinction of Mortal and venial sins discussed.
137 Duties, because every sin is Mortal. 141

N
NAME
NAme of God. What it is. 31 Name of God how hallowed. 34 See HALLOVV.
NEEDFVLL.
What may be accounted Needful. 105 No more then Needful to be desired. 105

O
OBEDIENCE.
OBedience ruled by Gods will. 73

P.
PARDONS.
See Forgive. DAnger of neglecting to seek Pardon of sin. 134 Gods free and
full Pardon. 145, 156 Free Pardon stands with Christ's satisfaction. 146 Sin
Pardonable. 151 Pardon of sin proper to God. 152 Popish Pardons. 153 Pardon
to be sought of God. 155 Comfort of Gods free and full Pardon. 159 Pardon of
our own and others sins to be prayed for. 161 Pardon how recalled. 167
Pardon of sin makes the things of this world blessings. 210 Graces requisire
to get pardon of our own finnes. 213 And pardon of others sins. 215 Duties
for obtaining pardon. 221 Patience of Saints in heaven. 79 Pattern must be
perfect. 81 How a perfect pattern may be followed. 78 Gods pattern a motive.
193 Perfection to be aimed at. 82
POWER.
Power of God: what it is, and how large. 289 Power in God absolute and
actual. 291 What things God cannot do. 290 How power proper to God. 292
Duties due to God by reason of his power. 293 Power of God causes much
comfort. 294 Power of God strengthens faith in Prayer. 314. etc.
PRAYER.
Excellency of the Lords Prayer. 1, etc The Lords Prayer may be used. 3, 4.
Mutual participation of one another Prayers. 21 Prayer to be made for men on
earth. 77 Prayer to be made for our selves especially. 109 And for our own
good. 112 Prayer for pardon of our own and others sins. 161 Prayer without
Revenge. 196 Prayer for others spiritual freedom. 241 Prayer to be pressed
with reasons. 281 These reasons are all to be taken from God. 282 No plea in
prayer to God can be taken from man. 283 Prayer cannot obtain whatsoever God
is able to do. 314 Prayer may not abruptly be broken off. 340
PRAISE. See thanks.
Praise to be added to Petition. 324 Ten Reasons to stir up to praise God. 324,
etc. How God is praised. 326 For what God is to be praised. 327 Excellency,
sovereignty and kindness make God praiseworthy. 327, 328 Preparation to
Prayer. 6 Professors Quarrels. 173 Properties. See Attributes. 285 Promises of
God ground of faith. 337 How the Petitions of the Lords Prayer are Promised.
337 Puritans who be. 255

R.
REcapitulation at the end of all the Prayer. 339 Recovery after a fall. 250
REMISSION. See Pardon. REVENGE.
Man prone to Revenge. 164 Pretenses for Revenge. 195 Pray without Revenge. 196
Reuengefull persons pull revenge upon themselves. 201
RIGHT.
Right of man to things of this world. 101 Right to be departed from. 177

S.
SAINTS.
SAints subject to temptation. 242 Sanctification accompanies* Justification.
fication
SATAN.
Means whereby Satan tempts. 244 Satan why styled evil one. 249
SATISFACTION.
Satisfaction by Christ and free remission stand together. 146 Popish
Satisfaction, 148, 159 Satisfaction for wrongs done to man. 175
SIN. See Debts.
Man's sins Debts. 226 Man's subjection to Sin. 129 No man free from Sin.
129 Papists contrary Positions. 130 Sin daily committed. 131 Duties thence
arising. 131 Horriblenesse of sin. 135 Sin mortal. See mortal. 136 Sin
our own. 143, 144 Gods free and full discharge of sin. 145. 156, 159. Sin
remissible. 155 God no Author of sin. 235 Sin a voluntary action. 243
Blame of sin on man. 245 Man prone to sin after forgiveness. 255
SOVLES.
Care for Soul double. 208 SOVEREIGNTY. See Kingdom. See Supremacy.
SPIRITVALL.
Spiritual good (...) be sought. 206 Spiritual things preferred before
temporal by many. 209 Spiritual freedom to be prayed for. 241
SVPREMACIE.
Supremacy of Gods sovereignty absolute. 286 Supremacy of God a cause of
greater praise. 328

T
TEMPORAL. See Bread.
Temporal things to be prayed for. 101 Man's right to temporal things. 101
Temporal things given of God. 107 How they are made blessings. 107 Uses to be
made thereof. 108 Temporal blessings to be craved for others. 110. 117
Temporal blessings a means to stir up a desire of spiritual. 115 Temporal
blessings for which thanks is due. 118 Duties for obtaining temporal
blessings. 120 Who neglect their temporal welfare. 122 Who neglect others
temporal welfare. 123 Carking too much for temporal things 124
TEM^T.
To tempt. What it is. 228 Who tempt. 228, etc. Temptation. Kinds thereof. 229
Man subject to temptation. 231 Leading into temptation. 233 How God leads into
temptation. 234 Man's disabilit^e to resist temptation. 237 Gods ouer-ruling
power in temptation. 238 Tempters power restrained. 239 Means whereby Satan
tempts. 244 Temptation to be avoided. 257 Graces requisite for avoiding
temptation. 259 Duties for avoiding temptations. 270 How others kept from the
power of temptations. 274 How men brought into temptation. 276
THANKS. See Praise.
Thanks for the things whereby God is glorified. 44 Thanks for the things
which tend to the Churches good. 66 Thanks for accomplishing Gods will. 91
Thanks for temporal blessings. 118 Thanks for the means of Gods forgiving
us. 218 Thanks for the graces which make us forgive others. 220 Thanks for
freedom from temptatation. 167 Thanks for recovery out of evils. 269

V
Venial. See Mortal. Unchangeable. See immutable. Universal Kingdom of God.
48. 286.
W.
WELFARE. See Temporal. WILL.
Will of God. What it is. 71 Kinds of Gods will. 71 How Gods will is done. 72
Will of God the ground and rule of goodness. 73 Will of God to be practiced.
74 Man unable to do Gods will. 75 Will of God to be preferred before all
others. 76 Doing Gods will is honorable to God. 84 Graces to enable us to do
Gods will. 85 Six heads of the manner of doing Gods will. 89 Matters of praise
about the accomplishment of Gods will. 91 Duties for doing Gods will. 92 Sins
against Gods will. 95 Will of man free. 243 Will of man an vnpregnable fort.
246 Will and power in God ground of faith. 315 Word of God. See will of God.
World. See Temporal.


